                                                            Fair Division of Indivisible Goods: A Survey∗
                                         Georgios Amanatidis1 , Georgios Birmpas2 , Aris Filos-Ratsikas3 , and Alexandros A. Voudouris4
                                                                 1
                                                                Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Essex, UK
                                               2
                                                   Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering, Sapienza University of
arXiv:2202.07551v2 [cs.GT] 4 Mar 2022




                                                                                       Rome, Italy
                                                               3
                                                                 Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, UK
                                                     4
                                                       School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, University of Essex, UK




                                                                                                   Abstract
                                                         Allocating resources to individuals in a fair manner has been a topic of interest since the ancient
                                                    times, with most of the early rigorous mathematical work on the problem focusing on inﬁnitely divisible
                                                    resources. Recently, there has been a surge of papers studying computational questions regarding
                                                    various diﬀerent notions of fairness for the indivisible case, like maximin share fairness (MMS) and
                                                    envy-freeness up to any good (EFX). We survey the most important results in the discrete fair division
                                                    literature, focusing on the case of additive valuation functions and paying particular attention to the
                                                    progress made in the last 10 years.


                                        1 Introduction
                                        Fair division is concerned with the fundamental task of fairly partitioning or allocating a set of resources
                                        to a set of people with diverse and heterogeneous preferences over these resources. The associated theory
                                        originated in the works of Steinhaus [1949], Banach, and Knaster (see [Dubins and Spanier, 1961]), and has
                                        been in the focus of economics, mathematics and computer science for the better part of the last century.
                                        Most of the classic work on the problem has been devoted to the fair division of inﬁnitely divisible resources,
                                        where “fair” here may have diﬀerent interpretations, with two predominant ones being proportionality
                                        [Steinhaus, 1949] and envy-freeness [Gamow and Stern, 1958, Varian, 1974].
                                            Compared to the divisible setting, the fair division of indivisible resources, referred to as discrete fair
                                        division, turns out to be inherently more challenging. Indeed, it is clear that no reasonable fair solution can
                                        be guaranteed in some cases, e.g., when there is a single valuable item. A typical remedy to this situation
                                        is to employ randomization, and aim for fairness (e.g., envy-freeness) in expectation. A fundamentally
                                        diﬀerent approach to discrete fair division came via the introduction of appropriate relaxations of envy-
                                        freeness and proportionality, originating in the works of Lipton et al. [2004], Budish [2011], Caragiannis
                                        et al. [2019b], Gourvès et al. [2014], which are geared to escape adverse examples. The main notions that
                                        were introduced in this literature were envy-freeness up to one good (EF1), envy-freeness up to any good
                                           ∗
                                            This work is partially supported by the ERC Advanced Grant 788893 AMDROMA “Algorithmic and Mechanism Design
                                        Research in Online Markets”, the MIUR PRIN project ALGADIMAR “Algorithms, Games, and Digital Markets”, and the NWO
                                        Veni project No. VI.Veni.192.153.



                                                                                                       1
(EFX) and maximin share fairness (MMS). Since then, work on the topic has ﬂourished, centered around
fundamental questions about the existence and the eﬃcient computation of allocations satisfying these or
other related fairness criteria.
    More generally, over the past decade, discrete fair division had been in the epicenter of computational
fair division, for several diﬀerent fairness notions and a variety of diﬀerent settings. In this survey, we
highlight the main contributions of this literature, the most signiﬁcant variants of the main setting, as well
as some of the major open problems in the area.

1.1   The setting
For the general discrete fair division problem we consider here, there is a set N of n agents and a set M
of m goods which cannot be divided or shared. Each agent i is equipped with a valuation function vi :
2M → R≥0 , which assigns a non-negative real number to each possible subset of items and is normalized,
i.e., vi (∅) = 0. In this survey we focus on Pthe case where the valuation function of each agent i is also
assumed to be additive, so that vi (S) = g∈S vi (g) for any subset of items S ⊆ M ; vi (g) is used as a
shortcut for vi ({g}). Other types of valuation functions have also been studied and are brieﬂy discussed
but, unless otherwise speciﬁed, in what follows we refer to the additive case.
      An allocation is a tuple of subsets of M , A = (A1 , . . . , An ), such that
                                                                              S each agent i ∈ N receives the
bundle Ai ⊆ M , Ai ∩ Aj = ∅ for every pair of agents i, j ∈ N , and i∈N Ai = M . The objective is to
compute a fair allocation, i.e., an allocation that satisﬁes a desired fairness criterion. As already mentioned,
since the early fair division literature there are two predominant fairness notions, namely envy-freeness
and proportionality. An allocation is said to be envy-free if no agent believes that another agent was given
a better bundle, i.e., envy-freeness depends on pairwise comparisons.

Deﬁnition 1 (Envy-freeness). An allocation A is envy-free if vi (Ai ) ≥ vi (Aj ) for every pair of agents
i, j ∈ N .

On the other hand, an allocation is said to be proportional if each agent is guaranteed her proportional
share in terms of total value, independently of what others get.

Deﬁnition 2 (Proportionality). An allocation A is proportional if vi (Ai ) ≥ vi (M )/n or every agent i ∈ N .

    Is not hard to see that in the additive case, if an allocation is envy-free, then it is also proportional,
but the converse is not necessarily true. Envy-free or proportional allocations do not always exist in our
setting. For example, consider the case of two agents and a single good that is positively valued by both
agents. Since only one of the agents receives the good, the other agent gets zero value and, thus, she envies
the agent with the item and also does not achieve her proportional share.
    Despite this impossibility, one could still be interested in ﬁnding envy-free or proportional allocations
when they exist. Unfortunately, it turns out that the problem of even deciding whether an instance admits
an envy-free (or proportional) allocation is NP-complete, which can be shown via a simple reduction from
Partition [Lipton et al., 2004]. These straightforward impossibility results have led to the deﬁnition of
multiple relaxations of these two notions, tailored for discrete fair division.


2 Envy-Freeness up to One Good (EF1)
The ﬁrst such relaxation of envy-freeness is envy-freeness up to one good (EF1), implicitly introduced by
Lipton et al. [2004], but formally deﬁned by Budish [2011]. According to EF1 it is acceptable for an agent

                                                       2
i to envy another agent j, as long as there exists a good in j’s bundle the hypothetical removal of which
would eliminate i’s envy towards j.

Deﬁnition 3 (EF1). An allocation A is envy-free up to one good (EF1) if, for every pair of agents i, j ∈ N ,
it holds that vi (Ai ) ≥ vi (Aj \ {g}) for some g ∈ Aj .

Example 1. To demonstrate the notion of EF1 (as well as EFX and MMS in Sections 3 and 4 later on), let
us consider a simple example with three agents and ﬁve goods. The values of the agents for the goods are
given in the following table:
                                               g1    g2       g3   g4   g5
                                          a1   15    3        2    2    6
                                          a2    7    5        5    5    7
                                          a3   20    3        3    3    3

This instance does not admit any envy-free or proportional allocations. To see this, observe that in any
proportional allocation, agent a3 must get at least {g1 } or {g2 , g3 , g4 , g5 }. In the latter case at least one
of a1 and a2 will get no goods, whereas in the former case a1 must get at least three of the remaining
four goods and a2 must get at least two, which is not possible. On the other hand, note that the allocation
A1 = {g3 , g4 }, A2 = {g2 , g5 }, A3 = {g1 } is EF1: a2 and a3 are not envious, and the envy of a1 towards
a2 and a3 can be eliminated by the hypothetical removals of g5 from A2 and g1 from A3 respectively.

    There are simple, polynomial-time algorithms for computing EF1 allocations. The ﬁrst such algorithm
is known as Envy-Cycle Elimination, and was developed by Lipton et al. [2004] several years before EF1
was formally deﬁned.

Algorithm (Envy-Cycle elimination). Envy-Cycle Elimination operates in phases. In each phase, it ﬁrst
allocates one of the available goods to some agent that no other agent envies. Then, it looks for cycles
in the current envy-graph (a graph that contains a node for each agent and a directed edge from agent i
to agent j if and only if i envies j), and eliminates them by appropriately reallocating the bundles of the
involved agents. This guarantees that there is always an agent no one envies at the beginning of the next
phase.

While Envy-Cycle Elimination works for any monotone valuations, for the additive case EF1 allocations
can be computed using a much simpler draft algorithm, known as Round-Robin [Caragiannis et al., 2019b].

Algorithm (Round-Robin). Round-Robin ﬁxes an ordering of the agents and, according to this ordering,
it lets one agent at a time choose their favorite available good until all goods have been allocated.

To see why Round-Robin achieves EF1 allocations, consider two agents i and j, such that i comes before
j in the ordering. As i has the chance to pick a good before j in every single round of the algorithm, i
cannot envy j. Of course, agent j may envy agent i. Let g be the ﬁrst good chosen by i. From that point
on, we can see the execution of the algorithm on the remaining goods as a fresh run where now j has the
chance to pick a good before i in every round. So j does not envy i’s bundle after the removal of good g
from it.
    While EF1 allocations are rather easy to achieve, as demonstrated above, Caragiannis et al. [2019b]
identiﬁed an interesting inherent connection between EF1 and the notion of maximum Nash welfare
(MNW).



                                                          3
Deﬁnition 4 (MNW allocation). An allocationQA is said to be a maximum Nash welfare (MNW) allocation
if (a) it maximizes the product of agent values i vi (Ai ), and (b) in case the Nash welfare of all allocations
is 0, it then maximizes the product for the agents with positive value.

In particular, Caragiannis et al. [2019b] showed that MNW allocations are always EF1 and also Pareto
optimal (PO). This result shows that there exist allocations that combine fairness with other desired prop-
erties, in particular with PO. However, it is known that MNW allocations are generally hard to compute in
polynomial time (in fact, it is hard to even approximate them [Hoefer et al., 2021]). Hence, the question of
whether it is possible to eﬃciently compute EF1 and PO allocations was left open. Barman et al. [2018b]
recently made progress by computing such allocations in pseudo-polynomial time. This brings us to our
ﬁrst open problem.

Open Problem 1. Can an EF1 and PO allocation be computed in polynomial time?


3 Envy-Freeness up to Any Good (EFX)
While EF1 is easy to achieve, in many cases it is a fairly weak fairness notion; an EF1 allocation is considered
to be fair for an agent even when a very highly-valued good is hypothetically removed from another agent’s
bundle (e.g., a house or an expensive car). For example, consider agent a1 ’s perspective of the allocation in
Example 1, where the proposed EF1 solution requires the removal of rather valuable goods for the agent.
A very natural reﬁnement of the notion is the stricter relaxation of envy-freeness up to any good (EFX)
that was introduced in 2016 by Caragiannis et al. [2019b] in the conference version of their work but also
somewhat earlier by Gourvès et al. [2014] under the name near envy-freeness. An allocation is said to be
EFX if the envy of an agent i towards another agent j can be eliminated by the hypothetical removal of
any good in j’s bundle.

Deﬁnition 5 (EFX). An allocation A is envy-free up to any good (EFX) if, for every pair of agents i, j ∈ N ,
it holds that vi (Ai ) ≥ vi (Aj \ {g}) for any g ∈ Aj such that vi (g) > 0.

Example 2. Consider again the instance of Example 1. The allocation A1 = {g3 , g4 }, A2 = {g2 , g5 },
A3 = {g1 } is not EFX, since the envy of a1 towards a2 cannot be eliminated by removing g2 (a1 ’s least
favorite good in A2 ) from A2 . Nevertheless, it is easy to modify this allocation to get B1 = {g4 , g5 },
B2 = {g2 , g3 }, B3 = {g1 } which is EFX. Indeed, the envy of a1 towards a3 can be eliminated by removing
g1 from B3 , whereas the envy of a2 towards a1 can be eliminated by removing g4 from B1 ; in both cases
the hypothetical removal involves the envious agent’s least valued good in the other agent’s bundle.

    In contrast to EF1, where the existence is guaranteed via simple polynomial-time algorithms, the ex-
istence of EFX allocations is a challenging open problem. Procaccia [2020] in fact referred to this as “fair
division’s most enigmatic question”. In the past few years, a sequence of works have positively answered
this question for important special cases, centered mainly around two axes: a small number of agents or
restricted agents’ valuations.
EFX for two and three agents: Plaut and Roughgarden [2020] showed that an EFX allocation always exists
and can be eﬃciently computed when there are only two agents. In a breakthrough paper, Chaudhury
et al. [2021b] showed that EFX allocations always exist for instances with three agents and described a
procedure that computes such an allocation in pseudo-polynomial time; computing EFX allocations for
three agents in polynomial time is still an open problem.


                                                       4
EFX for restricted valuations: In [Plaut and Roughgarden, 2020], it was also shown that EFX allocations exist
and can be computed in polynomial time when all agents agree on the ordering of the goods with respect
to their values. For instances where there are only two distinct possible values that an agent may have for
each good, Amanatidis et al. [2021a] showed that EFX allocations exist and can be eﬃciently computed for
any number of agents; later, Garg and Murhekar [2021] showed that this is possible even in conjunction
with PO. In fact, Amanatidis et al. [2021a] also demonstrated an interesting connection between EFX and
MNW allocations for bi-valued instances, by showing that MNW implies EFX. A similar result was later
shown by Babaioﬀ et al. [2021b] for general valuations with binary (i.e., 0 or 1) marginals.
    Here, it is instructive to mention that in the related literature, the requirement that the inequality
must hold only for positively-valued goods in the deﬁnition of Caragiannis et al. [2019b] stated above is
often dropped. This stronger version of EFX is usually called EFX0 [Kyropoulou et al., 2020]. In the case
of binary valuations, a special case of bi-valued instances, the distinction makes a diﬀerence but in more
general settings, the existence and computation of EFX0 allocations can be reduced to the existence and
computation of EFX allocations; see [Amanatidis et al., 2021a] for a related discussion. It is easy to see that
envy-freeness implies EFX0 , which implies EFX, which in turn implies EF1.
    While the aformentioned results are positive ﬁrst steps towards showing the existence of EFX allo-
cations, a general positive (or negative) result still remains elusive. This brings us to our second open
problem, which is one of the most important open problems in fair division.

Open Problem 2. Does an EFX allocation exist for instances with n ≥ 4 agents and unrestricted additive
valuations?

Relaxations of EFX
Instead of focusing on exact EFX allocations, a growing line of work has taken a diﬀerent approach by
aiming to compute allocations that are approximately EFX, for diﬀerent notions of approximation. The
ﬁrst such notion is in terms of multiplicative approximations to the values obtained by the agents.

Deﬁnition 6 (α-EFX). Let α ∈ (0, 1]. An allocation A is α-EFX if, for every pair of agent i, j ∈ N , it
holds that vi (Ai ) ≥ α · vi (Aj \ {g}) for any g ∈ Aj such that vi (g) > 0.

Plaut and Roughgarden [2020] were the ﬁrst to pursue this, showing that 1/2-EFX allocations always
exist, even for subadditive valuation functions, and later Chan et al. [2019] showed that computing such
allocations can be done in polynomial time. The approximation ratio for the additive case was further
improved by Amanatidis et al. [2020] to φ − 1 ≈ 0.618 by combining Round-Robin and Envy-Cycle
Elimination with some appropriate pre-processing. To this end, we have the following open question:

Open Problem 3. What is the best possible α for which α-EFX allocations exist?

     A positive answer to Open Problem 2 would establish that α = 1 in Open Problem 3, but a negative
answer would make the latter open problem very meaningful in its own right. Additionally, as is the case
for all of these notions, the next natural question is whether existence can be paired with polynomial-time
algorithms for ﬁnding such allocations, or whether some kind of computational hardness can be proven.
     Another recent approach is that of relaxing the requirement to allocate all available goods. Clearly,
if done without any constraints, this makes the problem trivial: simply leaving all goods unallocated,
results in an envy-free allocation. However, the objective here is to only leave “a few” goods unallocated
(e.g., donate them to charity instead), or remove some goods without aﬀecting the maximum possible Nash


                                                      5
social welfare by “too much”. On this front, Caragiannis et al. [2019a] showed that it is possible to compute
an EFX allocation of a subset of the goods, the Nash welfare of which is at least half of the maximum Nash
welfare on the original set. Chaudhury et al. [2021b] presented an algorithm that computes a partial EFX
allocation, but the number of unallocated goods is at most n − 1, and no agent prefers the set of these
goods to her own bundle. The latter result was recently improved by Berger et al. [2021] who showed
that the unallocated goods can be decreased to n − 2 in general, and to just one for the case of 4 agents.
Finally, Chaudhury et al. [2021a] showed that a (1 − ε)-EFX allocation with at most a sublinear number
of unallocated goods and high Nash welfare can be computed in polynomial time. This motivates the next
open problem.

Open Problem 4. Is it possible to achieve an exact EFX allocation by donating a sublinear number of
goods?


4 Maximin Share Fairness (MMS)
Besides the two additive relaxations of envy-freeness discussed so far, an extensively studied fairness
notion in discrete fair division is maximin share fairness, also introduced by Budish [2011]. The notion can
be seen as a generalization of the rationale of the well-known cut-and-choose protocol, which is known
to guarantee an envy-free partition of a divisible resource. Here the goal is to give to each agent i goods
of value at least as much as her maximin share µni (M ), which is the maximum value this agent could
guarantee for herself by partitioning the goods into n disjoint bundles and keeping the worst of them. As
such, it is a relaxation of proportionality.

Deﬁnition 7 (MMS). Let An (M ) be the collection of possible allocations of the goods in M to n agents.
An allocation A is said to be maximin share fair (MMS) if for each agent i ∈ N , it holds that vi (Ai ) ≥
µni (M ) = max min vi (S).
          B∈An (M ) S∈B

Example 3. Returning to the instance of Example 1, we can see that µ31 (M ) = 6, since it is not possible
to partition the items into three sets with strictly more value, but 6 is guaranteed by the partition {g1 },
{g2 , g3 , g4 }, {g5 }. Similarly, µ32 (M ) = 7 and µ33 (M ) = 6. Therefore, B1 = {g4 , g5 }, B2 = {g2 , g3 },
B3 = {g1 }, from Example 2, is an MMS allocation, but A1 = {g3 , g4 }, A2 = {g2 , g5 }, A3 = {g1 }, from
Example 1, is only a 2/3-MMS allocation as agent a1 gets a bundle of value 4 = 2/3 · µ31 (M ) (see also
below).

    While it is easy to see that computing MMS allocations or even computing the maximin share of
an agent is an NP-hard problem using a reduction from Partition, there is a PTAS for the latter task
[Woeginger, 1997]. The ﬁrst breakthrough about MMS was that allocations that guarantee it do not always
exist when there are more than two agents [Kurokawa et al., 2018, 2016], yet it is possible to compute
approximate MMS allocations. We say that an allocation is α-MMS, for α ∈ (0, 1], if each agent i is
guaranteed to get value at least α µni (M ). To this end, Kurokawa et al. [2018] showed how to ﬁnd 2/3-MMS
allocations, albeit not in polynomial time. Amanatidis et al. [2017b] matched this guarantee in polynomial
time, as did Barman and Krishnamurthy [2020] with a much simpler algorithm. The barrier of 2/3 was
broken by Ghodsi et al. [2021] who designed an elaborate (3/4 − ǫ)-approximation algorithm. A simpler
algorithm with a slightly improved approximation guarantee of 3/4 + 1/(12n) was proposed by Garg
and Taki [2021]. On the negative side, Feige et al. [2021] recently showed that it is impossible to achieve
an approximation bound better than 39/40. Barman and Krishnamurthy [2020] and Ghodsi et al. [2022]


                                                      6
designed algorithms for computing approximate MMS allocations for richer classes of valuations (such as
submodular, XOS, and subadditive).
Open Problem 5. Is it possible to improve upon the bound of 3/4 + 1/(12n) for additive valuations? Is
there a stronger inapproximability bound than 39/40?
    As expected, by restricting the number of agents or the space of the valuation functions, one can get
stronger results.
MMS for four or fewer agents: When there are only two agents a simple cut-and-choose protocol always pro-
duces an MMS allocation. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst agent partitions the set of goods as equally as possible (thus
the worst set has value equal to her maximin share) and the second agent chooses who gets each of these
sets. As suggested above, the ﬁrst step is computationally hard but producing a (1 − ǫ)-MMS allocation in
polynomial time is still possible. Even though in the general case, the algorithm of Kurokawa et al. [2018]
guaranteed a 2/3-approximation, for three or four agents it guarantees an improved 3/4-approximation.
The approximation factor for the case of three agents was then improved to 7/8 [Amanatidis et al., 2017b]
and later to 8/9 [Gourvès and Monnot, 2019], whereas for the case of four agents the factor was improved
to 4/5 [Ghodsi et al., 2021].
MMS for restricted valuations: It follows by Deﬁnition 7 that MMS allocations exist for instances where all
agents have identical valuation functions. Bouveret and Lemaı̂tre [2016] showed that, unlike with EFX,
the hardest instances for MMS (among all possible instances) are the ones where all agents agree on the
ordering of the goods. They also suggested a simple construction of exact MMS allocations when the
valuation functions are binary. This result can be generalized, as MMS allocations always exist and can be
computed eﬃciently for ternary valuation functions [Amanatidis et al., 2017b] and for bi-valued valuation
functions [Feige, 2022]. Ebadian et al. [2021] showed that this is also the case when there are at most two
values per agent (possibly not common across all agents) and for general instances where the value of each
good is at least as much as the value of all lesser goods combined.
Open Problem 6. Are there other classes of structured valuations for which MMS is guaranteed to exist,
such as when there are only a few (but more than two) possible values?


5 Further Notable Fairness Notions
EFL and EFR: The EFX notion was deﬁned as a more realistic counterpart to EF1, however, as we discussed
in Section 3, it is still unknown if it can always be guaranteed. This has led to the deﬁnition of notions
that lie “in-between” EF1 and EFX. Barman et al. [2018a] deﬁned the notion of envy-freeness up to one less-
preferred good (EFL) according to which an agent i may envy another agent j if either Aj contains at most
one good that i values positively, or the envy of i can be eliminated by the hypothetical removal of a good
g ∈ Aj such that vi (Ai ) ≥ vi (g). They showed that EFL allocations always exist and can be computed
using a variant of Envy-Cycle Elimination. Farhadi et al. [2021] deﬁned the notion of envy-freeness up to a
random good (EFR) according to which the envy of an agent i towards another agent j can be eliminated
in expectation after the hypothetical removal of a randomly chosen good from Aj . They showed that a
0.73-EFR allocation can be computed in polynomial time.
Open Problem 7. Does an EFR allocation always exist?
PMMS and GMMS: Several variations of MMS have also been considered. Caragiannis et al. [2019b] deﬁned
the notion of pairwise maximin share fairness (PMMS) according to which, for every pair of agents i and

                                                     7
j, i’s value for Ai must be at least as much as the maximum she could obtain by redistributing the set of
goods in Ai ∪ Aj into two bundles and picking the worst of them. In other words, instead of requiring the
maximin share guarantee to be achieved for the set of all agents, PMMS requires that it is achieved for any
pair of agents. Despite the apparent similarities in the deﬁnitions of PMMS and MMS, Caragiannis et al.
[2019b] showed that their exact versions are actually incomparable. The main open problem here is the
following.

Open Problem 8. Does a PMMS allocation always exist?

Interestingly, showing the existence of PMMS allocations is at least as hard as showing the existence of
EFX allocations (Open Problem 2), as PMMS implies EFX. For approximate PMMS, the best known result
is 0.781 by Kurokawa [2017].
     An even stronger notion, which implies both MMS and PMMS, is that of groupwise maximin share
fairness (GMMS) deﬁned by Barman et al. [2018a], and which requires that the maximin share guarantee
is simultaneously achieved for any possible subset of agents. Barman et al. [2018a] showed that GMMS
allocations exist for some restricted settings, such as when the agents have binary or identical values.
They also showed that any EFL allocation is 1/2-GMMS, and thus such an allocation can be computed
eﬃciently. The currently best known approximation of GMMS is 4/7 [Amanatidis et al., 2020, Chaudhury
et al., 2021b]. The implication relations between all the aforementioned notions has been used many times
to show that particular algorithms have guarantees that hold for multiple notions at once. We refer the
reader to the paper of Amanatidis et al. [2018] for a discussion of the relations between (approximate
versions of) these notions.

Open Problem 9. What is the best possible α for which α-GMMS allocations exist?

Prop1, PropX and PropM: A line of work has also focused on relaxations of proportionality that are similar
in essence to EF1 and EFX. Conitzer et al. [2017] deﬁned the notion of proportionality up to one good
(Prop1) according to which each agent could obtain her proportional share if given one extra good. An
allocation that is Prop1 and PO always exists [Conitzer et al., 2017] and can be computed in polynomial
time [Barman and Krishnamurthy, 2019]. Aziz et al. [2020] deﬁned PropX which demands that each agent
can obtain her proportional share when given the least positively-valued good among those allocated to
other agents. PropX is rather demanding and it cannot be always guaranteed, even in simple scenarios.
Recently, Baklanov et al. [2021a,b] introduced the notion of proportionality up to the maximin good (PropM)
and showed that such allocations always exist and can be computed in polynomial time.


6 Other Topics
Here we consider other interesting directions like the relation between fairness and eﬃciency, or the pos-
sibility to achieve fairness when the agents are strategic. Finally, we brieﬂy discuss further meaningful
discrete fair division settings.

6.1   Fairness and Eﬃciency
There is a signiﬁcant line of work that considers the question of whether it is possible to simultaneously
achieve fairness and eﬃciency. A common type of eﬃciency is that of Pareto optimality, which, as we al-
ready discussed, can be guaranteed in conjunction with some fairness notions, like EF1 and Prop1. Another
natural goal is to (approximately) maximize some objective function of the values of the agents, such as

                                                    8
the social welfare, i.e., the total value of the agents for the goods they receive. To this end, Bertsimas et al.
[2011] and Caragiannis et al. [2012] deﬁned the Price of Fairness, a measure which, similarly to the approx-
imation ratio for algorithms, measures the deterioration of the objective due to the fairness requirement
(which may refer to any fairness notion).
    The Price of Fairness for EF1 and EFX allocations (only for instances with two agents) was considered
by Bei et al. [2021]. Barman et al. [2020] managed to close a gap on the price of EF1 that was left open in the
work of Bei et al. [2021], and also showed tight bounds for other fairness notions, in particular, 1/2-MMS
and Prop1. Halpern and Shah [2021] showed tight bounds on the Price of EF1 and of approximate MMS
under the constraint of having only ordinal information about the agent values, a typical assumption made
in the context of distortion in social choice [Anshelevich et al., 2021].

6.2   Fair Division with Strategic Agents
Most of the papers mentioned so far, studied the problem from an algorithmic perspective under the as-
sumption that the agents are non-strategic. In the strategic version of the problem, an agent may inten-
tionally misreport how she values the goods in order to end up with a better bundle. This introduces an
additional layer of diﬃculty, as the goal is to produce fair allocations according to the true values of the
agents, while their declarations might be far from truth. This version of the problem has been considered
mostly from a mechanism design without monetary transfers perspective, in which the utility of an agent
is deﬁned as her (true) value for her bundle.
    A ﬁrst direction was the design of truthful mechanisms (i.e., mechanisms where no agent has an in-
centive to lie) that are also fair. Caragiannis et al. [2009], showed that no truthful mechanism for two
agents and two goods can always output allocations of minimum envy. Amanatidis et al. [2016] revisited
the problem for the case of two agents and any number of goods, and showed that no truthful mecha-
nism can always output α-MMS allocations, for α > 2/m. A characterization of truthful mechanisms for
two agents, showing that truthfulness and fairness are incompatible (in the sense that there is no truth-
ful mechanism with bounded fairness guarantees under any meaningful fairness notion) was provided by
Amanatidis et al. [2017a]. This impossibility, however, does not apply to restricted cases. Halpern et al.
[2020] showed that for binary valuations, there is a polynomial-time truthful mechanism that produces
EF1 and PO allocations, and Babaioﬀ et al. [2021a] showed an analogous result with respect to MMS. In
fact, Babaioﬀ et al. [2021a] also showed that for the submodular analog of binary valuations, there is a
truthful mechanism that always outputs EFX allocations.
    More recently, the aforementioned impossibility results led to a diﬀerent direction, where the focus
was shifted to the stable states of non-truthful mechanisms. In particular, Amanatidis et al. [2021b] studied
mechanisms that always have pure Nash equilibria, and showed that every allocation that corresponds to
an equilibrium of Round Robin is EF1 with respect to the (unknown) true values of the agents.

Open Problem 10. Are there mechanisms that always have pure Nash equilibrium allocations with
stronger guarantees than EF1?

6.3   Notable Variants of the Setting
We conclude by giving a brief overview of other interesting settings in discrete fair division and their main
results.




                                                       9
Arbitrary Entitlements
So far, it is always assumed that agents have equal entitlements over the goods. However, there are settings
where the fairness of an allocation must be considered with respect to asymmetric entitlements, e.g., in
many inheritance scenarios, closer relatives have higher entitlements often determined by law. In order
to capture fairness in the presence of arbitrary entitlements, one may generalize existing notions to their
weighted counterparts, like weighted MMS [Farhadi et al., 2019] and weighted EF1 [Chakraborty et al.,
2021], or tweek their deﬁnitions approprietly, like in the MMS-inspired ℓ-out-of-d share of Babaioﬀ et al.
[2021c]. In a recent work, Babaioﬀ et al. [2021b] introduce the notion of AnyPrice share (APS) as the
maximum value an agent can guarantee to herself if she has a budget equal to her entitlement and the
goods are adversarially priced with prices that sum up to 1, and show how to eﬃciently compute an
allocation where everyone gets value no less than 3/5 of her APS.

Group Fairness
In the model we discussed in the main part of the survey, each agent is assumed to be unrelated to other
agents. However, there are applications where it makes more sense for agents to be grouped together (e.g.,
each group might correspond to a family). Several models capturing scenarios along these lines have been
considered in the literature. Suksompong [2018] focused on a setting where each agent derives full value
from all the goods allocated to the group she belongs to, and showed bounds on the best possible approxi-
mation of MMS. Kyropoulou et al. [2020] considered EF1 and EFX allocations in the same setting, as well as
in settings with dynamic group formation; some of these results were later improved by Manurangsi and
Suksompong [2021] using ideas from discrepancy theory. Segal-Halevi and Suksompong [2019] focused
on the case of democratic fairness, where the goal is to compute allocations that are considered fair (e.g.,
satisfying EF1) by a high fraction of the agents in each group. A diﬀerent model was studied by Conitzer
et al. [2019], where goods given to a group are then distributed among its members, and thus the agents
derive value only from the goods allocated personally to them.

Online Fair Division
Our model here is static, as all items, agents, and their valuation functions do not change over time. Online
fair division considers settings where the agents or the goods arrive in an online manner. In the most
common model there is a ﬁxed set of agents, items arrive one by one, and they need to be allocated to the
agents immediately and irrevocably [Aleksandrov et al., 2015, Aleksandrov and Walsh, 2020]. Usually, in
order to bypass strong negative results and show that it is possible for envy to vanish over time or the
allocations to always remain EF1, the values of the goods are assumed to be bounded [Benade et al., 2018,
Zeng and Psomas, 2020] or a limited number of reallocations is allowed [He et al., 2019]. The alternative
model which considers a ﬁxed set of resources and agents who arrive or depart over time has not been
considered for indivisible resources, partially because it is very challenging to achieve positive results
[Kash et al., 2014].

Randomness in Fair Division
Until very recently there were barely any works on randomized algorithms for discrete fair division. This
is partially due to the strong general preference for deterministic algorithms / mechanisms within the
Computational Social Choice community (which is well-justiﬁed in many settings, yet such a discussion



                                                     10
is beyond the scope of this survey), but also due to the nature of the problem itself. On one hand, random-
ness cannot help with achieving ex-post fairness, i.e., fairness in each resulting allocation, for any of the
deterministic notions mentioned herein. On the other hand, achieving ex-ante envy-freeness, i.e., envy
freeness with respect to the expected utilities, is trivial; just allocate all the goods to a single agent uni-
formly at random. Freeman et al. [2020] proposed an algorithm that achieves ex-ante envy-freeness but
is also ex-post EF1, i.e., all the possible allocations it outputs are deterministically EF1. Aziz [2020] gave a
simpler algorithm with the same fairness guarantees that also satisﬁes a weak eﬃciency property. Finally,
in a somewhat diﬀerent direction, Caragiannis et al. [2021] studied interim envy-freeness, a notion which
lies between ex-ante and ex-post envy-freeness.

Subsidies
As we saw in Section 6.2, even in a game-theoretic setting no monetary transfers are allowed in fair division
problems. Indeed, arbitrary payments would signiﬁcantly alter the ﬂavor of these problems and often go
against their motivation. A recent line of work, however, considers the question of whether it is possible to
pay the agents just a small amount of money (subsidy) on top of a given allocation in order to make it envy-
free (when the subsidies are also taken into consideration). Allocations for which this can be done are called
envy-freeable. Halpern and Shah [2019], who introduced the problem, showed that the total subsidy needed
in order to turn an envy-freeable allocation to envy-free is at most (n − 1)mv ∗ , where v ∗ is the maximum
value any agent has for any good. This upper bound was later improved to (n − 1)v ∗ by [Brustle et al.,
2020]. More recently, Caragiannis and Ioannidis [2021] provided approximation guarantees and hardness
results for computing an envy-freeable allocation that minimizes the total amount of subsidies.

Fair Division under Constraints
Depending on the application, some allocations may not be feasible due to various restrictions, such as
connectivity, cardinality, separation, or budget constraints. Such models have recently attracted the at-
tention of the community. Rather than referring to speciﬁc works, we point the reader to the survey of
Suksompong [2021] which discusses this part of the literature in detail.

Chores and Mixed Manna
Beyond discrete fair division of goods that we focus on in this survey, there is a signiﬁcant line of work that
considers similar questions when items can be seen as chores (which are negatively valued by the agents),
or mixed manna (a mixture of both goods and chores). As such settings are out of the scope of our survey,
we refer the reader to the works of Aziz et al. [2022], Li et al. [2021], Aziz et al. [2017], Sun et al. [2021]
and references therein.


References
Martin Aleksandrov and Toby Walsh. Online fair division: A survey. In Proceedings of the The 24th AAAI
 Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), pages 13557–13562, 2020.

Martin Aleksandrov, Haris Aziz, Serge Gaspers, and Toby Walsh. Online fair division: Analysing a food
 bank problem. In Proceedings of the 24th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI),
 pages 2540–2546, 2015.


                                                      11
Georgios Amanatidis, Georgios Birmpas, and Evangelos Markakis. On truthful mechanisms for maximin
  share allocations. In Proceedings of the 25th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI),
  pages 31–37, 2016.

Georgios Amanatidis, Georgios Birmpas, George Christodoulou, and Evangelos Markakis. Truthful allo-
  cation mechanisms without payments: Characterization and implications on fairness. In Proceedings of
  the 2017 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (EC), pages 545–562, 2017a.

Georgios Amanatidis, Evangelos Markakis, Afshin Nikzad, and Amin Saberi. Approximation algorithms
  for computing maximin share allocations. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 13(4):52:1–52:28, 2017b.

Georgios Amanatidis, Georgios Birmpas, and Vangelis Markakis. Comparing approximate relaxations of
  envy-freeness. In Proceedings of the 27th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI),
  pages 42–48, 2018.

Georgios Amanatidis, Evangelos Markakis, and Apostolos Ntokos. Multiple birds with one stone: Beating
  1/2 for EFX and GMMS via envy cycle elimination. Theoretical Computer Science, 841:94–109, 2020.

Georgios Amanatidis, Georgios Birmpas, Aris Filos-Ratsikas, Alexandros Hollender, and Alexandros A.
  Voudouris. Maximum Nash welfare and other stories about EFX. Theoretical Computer Science, 863:
  69–85, 2021a.

Georgios Amanatidis, Georgios Birmpas, Federico Fusco, Philip Lazos, Stefano Leonardi, and Rebecca Reif-
  fenhäuser. Allocating indivisible goods to strategic agents: Pure Nash equilibria and fairness. In Proceed-
  ings of the 17th International Conference on Web and Internet Economics (WINE), pages 149–166, 2021b.

Elliot Anshelevich, Aris Filos-Ratsikas, Nisarg Shah, and Alexandros A. Voudouris. Distortion in social
   choice problems: The ﬁrst 15 years and beyond. In Proceedings of the 30th International Joint Conference
   on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 4294–4301, 2021.

Haris Aziz. Simultaneously achieving ex-ante and ex-post fairness. In Proceedings of the 16th International
  Conference on Web and Internet Economics (WINE), pages 341–355, 2020.

Haris Aziz, Gerhard Rauchecker, Guido Schryen, and Toby Walsh. Algorithms for max-min share fair allo-
  cation of indivisible chores. In Proceedings of the 31st AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI),
  pages 335–341, 2017.

Haris Aziz, Hervé Moulin, and Fedor Sandomirskiy. A polynomial-time algorithm for computing a Pareto
  optimal and almost proportional allocation. Operations Research Letters, 48(5):573–578, 2020.

Haris Aziz, Ioannis Caragiannis, Ayumi Igarashi, and Toby Walsh. Fair allocation of indivisible goods and
  chores. Autonomous Agents and Multi Agent Systems, 36(1):3, 2022.

Moshe Babaioﬀ, Tomer Ezra, and Uriel Feige. Fair and truthful mechanisms for dichotomous valuations.
 In Proceedings of the 35th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), pages 5119–5126, 2021a.

Moshe Babaioﬀ, Tomer Ezra, and Uriel Feige. Fair-share allocations for agents with arbitrary entitlements.
 In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (EC), page 127, 2021b.

Moshe Babaioﬀ, Noam Nisan, and Inbal Talgam-Cohen. Competitive equilibrium with indivisible goods
 and generic budgets. Mathematics of Operations Research, 46(1):382–403, 2021c.

                                                       12
Artem Baklanov, Pranav Garimidi, Vasilis Gkatzelis, and Daniel Schoepﬂin. Achieving proportionality up
  to the maximin item with indivisible goods. In Proceedings of the 25th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
  Intelligence (AAAI), pages 5143–5150, 2021a.

Artem Baklanov, Pranav Garimidi, Vasilis Gkatzelis, and Daniel Schoepﬂin. PROPm allocations of indi-
  visible goods to multiple agents. In Proceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
  Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 24–30, 2021b.

Siddharth Barman and Sanath K. Krishnamurthy. Approximation algorithms for maximin fair division.
  ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation, 8(1):5:1–5:28, 2020.

Siddharth Barman and Sanath Kumar Krishnamurthy. On the proximity of markets with integral equilibria.
  In Proceedings of the 33rd AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), pages 1748–1755, 2019.

Siddharth Barman, Arpita Biswas, Sanath Kumar Krishna Murthy, and Yadati Narahari. Groupwise max-
  imin fair allocation of indivisible goods. In Proceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
  gence (AAA), pages 917–924, 2018a.

Siddharth Barman, Sanath K. Krishnamurthy, and Rohit Vaish. Finding fair and eﬃcient allocations. In
  Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (EC), pages 557–574, 2018b.

Siddharth Barman, Umang Bhaskar, and Nisarg Shah. Optimal bounds on the price of fairness for indivis-
  ible goods. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Web and Internet Economics (WINE),
  pages 356–369, 2020.

Xiaohui Bei, Xinhang Lu, Pasin Manurangsi, and Warut Suksompong. The price of fairness for indivisible
  goods. Theory of Computing Systems, 65(7):1069–1093, 2021.

Gerdus Benade, Aleksandr M. Kazachkov, Ariel D. Procaccia, and Christos-Alexandros Psomas. How to
  make envy vanish over time. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation
  (EC), pages 593–610, 2018.

Ben Berger, Avi Cohen, Michal Feldman, and Amos Fiat. (Almost full) EFX exists for four agents (and
  beyond). CoRR, abs/2102.10654, 2021.

Dimitris Bertsimas, Vivek F. Farias, and Nikolaos Trichakis. The price of fairness. Operations Research, 59
  (1):17–31, 2011.

Sylvain Bouveret and Michel Lemaı̂tre. Characterizing conﬂicts in fair division of indivisible goods using
  a scale of criteria. Autonomous Agents and Multi Agent Systems, 30(2):259–290, 2016.

Johannes Brustle, Jack Dippel, Vishnu V. Narayan, Mashbat Suzuki, and Adrian Vetta. One dollar each
  eliminates envy. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (EC), pages
  23–39, 2020.

Erik Budish. The combinatorial assignment problem: Approximate competitive equilibrium from equal
  incomes. Journal of Political Economy, 119(6):1061–1103, 2011.

Ioannis Caragiannis and Stavros Ioannidis. Computing envy-freeable allocations with limited subsidies. In
  Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Web and Internet Economics (WINE), pages 522–539,
  2021.

                                                     13
Ioannis Caragiannis, Christoc Kaklamanis, Panagiotis Kanellopoulos, and Maria Kyropoulou. On low-envy
  truthful allocations. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Algorithmic Decision Theory
  (ADT), pages 111–119, 2009.

Ioannis Caragiannis, Christos Kaklamanis, Panagiotis Kanellopoulos, and Maria Kyropoulou. The eﬃ-
  ciency of fair division. Theory of Computing Systems, 50(4):589–610, 2012.

Ioannis Caragiannis, Nick Gravin, and Xin Huang. Envy-freeness up to any item with high Nash welfare:
  The virtue of donating items. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation
  (EC), pages 527–545, 2019a.

Ioannis Caragiannis, David Kurokawa, Hervé Moulin, Ariel D. Procaccia, Nisarg Shah, and Junxing Wang.
  The unreasonable fairness of maximum Nash welfare. ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation,
  7(3):12:1–12:32, 2019b.

Ioannis Caragiannis, Panagiotis Kanellopoulos, and Maria Kyropoulou. On interim envy-free allocation
  lotteries. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (EC), pages 264–284,
  2021.

Mithun Chakraborty, Ayumi Igarashi, Warut Suksompong, and Yair Zick. Weighted envy-freeness in
  indivisible item allocation. ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation, 9(3):18:1–18:39, 2021.

Hau Chan, Jing Chen, Bo Li, and Xiaowei Wu. Maximin-aware allocations of indivisible goods. In Proceed-
  ings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 137–143, 2019.

Bhaskar Ray Chaudhury, Jugal Garg, Kurt Mehlhorn, Ruta Mehta, and Pranabendu Misra. Improving EFX
  guarantees through rainbow cycle number. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Economics and
  Computation (EC), pages 310–311, 2021a.

Bhaskar Ray Chaudhury, Telikepalli Kavitha, Kurt Mehlhorn, and Alkmini Sgouritsa. A little charity guar-
  antees almost envy-freeness. SIAM Journal on Computing, 50(4):1336–1358, 2021b.

Vincent Conitzer, Rupert Freeman, and Nisarg Shah. Fair public decision making. In Proceedings of the
  2017 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (EC), pages 629–646, 2017.

Vincent Conitzer, Rupert Freeman, Nisarg Shah, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. Group fairness for the al-
  location of indivisible goods. In Proceedings of the 33rd AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI),
  pages 1853–1860, 2019.

L. E. Dubins and E. H. Spanier. How to cut a cake fairly. The American Mathematical Monthly, 68(1P1):
   1–17, 1961.

Soroush Ebadian, Dominik Peters, and Nisarg Shah. How to fairly allocate easy and diﬃcult chores. CoRR,
  abs/2110.11285, 2021.

Alireza Farhadi, Mohammad Ghodsi, Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, Sébastien Lahaie, David M. Pennock,
  Masoud Seddighin, Saeed Seddighin, and Hadi Yami. Fair allocation of indivisible goods to asymmetric
  agents. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 64:1–20, 2019.




                                                     14
Alireza Farhadi, Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, Mohamad Latiﬁan, Masoud Seddighin, and Hadi Yami.
  Almost envy-freeness, envy-rank, and Nash social welfare matchings. In Proceedings of the 35th AAAI
  Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), pages 5355–5362, 2021.

Uriel Feige. Maximin fair allocations with two item values. Unpublished Manuscript, 2022.                 URL
  https://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/∼feige/mypapers/MMSab.pdf.

Uriel Feige, Ariel Sapir, and Laliv Tauber. A tight negative example for MMS fair allocations. In Proceedings
  of the 17th International Conference on Web and Internet Economics (WINE), pages 355–372, 2021.

Rupert Freeman, Nisarg Shah, and Rohit Vaish. Best of both worlds: Ex-ante and ex-post fairness in
  resource allocation. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (EC),
  pages 21–22, 2020.

George Gamow and Marvin Stern. Puzzle-Math. Viking press, 1958.

Jugal Garg and Aniket Murhekar. Computing fair and eﬃcient allocations with few utility values. In
  Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium on Algorithmic Game Theory (SAGT), pages 345–359,
  2021.

Jugal Garg and Setareh Taki. An improved approximation algorithm for maximin shares. Artiﬁcial Intelli-
  gence, 300:103547, 2021.

Mohammad Ghodsi, Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, Masoud Seddighin, Saeed Seddighin, and Hadi Yami.
 Fair allocation of indivisible goods: Improvement. Mathematics of Operations Research, 46(3):1038–1053,
 2021.

Mohammad Ghodsi, Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, Masoud Seddighin, Saeed Seddighin, and Hadi Yami.
 Fair allocation of indivisible goods: Beyond additive valuations. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 303:103633, 2022.

Laurent Gourvès and Jérôme Monnot. On maximin share allocations in matroids. Theoretical Computer
  Science, 754:50–64, 2019.

Laurent Gourvès, Jérôme Monnot, and Lydia Tlilane. Near fairness in matroids. In Proceedings of the 21st
  European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ECAI), pages 393–398, 2014.

Daniel Halpern and Nisarg Shah. Fair division with subsidy. In Proceedings of the 12th International Sym-
  posium on Algorithmic Game Theory (SAGT), pages 374–389, 2019.

Daniel Halpern and Nisarg Shah. Fair and eﬃcient resource allocation with partial information. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 30th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 224–230, 2021.

Daniel Halpern, Ariel D. Procaccia, Alexandros Psomas, and Nisarg Shah. Fair division with binary valu-
  ations: One rule to rule them all. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Web and Internet
  Economics (WINE), pages 370–383, 2020.

Jiafan He, Ariel D. Procaccia, Alexandros Psomas, and David Zeng. Achieving a fairer future by changing
   the past. In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI), pages
   343–349, 2019.



                                                      15
Martin Hoefer, Marco Schmalhofer, and Giovanna Varricchio. Approximating Nash social welfare in 2-
 valued instances. CoRR, abs/2107.08965, 2021.

Ian A. Kash, Ariel D. Procaccia, and Nisarg Shah. No agent left behind: Dynamic fair division of multiple
  resources. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 51:579–603, 2014.

David Kurokawa. Fair Division in Game Theoretic Settings. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 2017.

David Kurokawa, Ariel D. Procaccia, and Junxing Wang. When can the maximin share guarantee be
  guaranteed? In Proceedings of the 30th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), pages 523–529,
  2016.

David Kurokawa, Ariel D. Procaccia, and Junxing Wang. Fair enough: Guaranteeing approximate maximin
  shares. Journal of the ACM, 65(2):8:1–8:27, 2018.

Maria Kyropoulou, Warut Suksompong, and Alexandros A. Voudouris. Almost envy-freeness in group
 resource allocation. Theoretical Computer Science, 841:110–123, 2020.

Bo Li, Yingkai Li, and Xiaowei Wu.        Almost proportional allocations for indivisible chores.       CoRR,
  abs/2103.11849, 2021.

Richard J. Lipton, Evangelos Markakis, Elchanan Mossel, and Amin Saberi. On approximately fair alloca-
  tions of indivisible goods. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce (EC), pages
  125–131, 2004.

Pasin Manurangsi and Warut Suksompong. Almost envy-freeness for groups: Improved bounds via dis-
  crepancy theory. In Proceedings of the 30th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI),
  pages 335–341, 2021.

Benjamin Plaut and Tim Roughgarden. Almost envy-freeness with general valuations. SIAM Journal on
  Discrete Mathematics, 34(2):1039–1068, 2020.

Ariel D. Procaccia. Technical perspective: An answer to fair division’s most enigmatic question. Commu-
  nications of the ACM, 63(4):118–118, 2020.

Erel Segal-Halevi and Warut Suksompong. Democratic fair allocation of indivisible goods. Artiﬁcial Intel-
  ligence, 277, 2019.

Hugo Steinhaus. Sur la division pragmatique. Econometrica, 17 (Supplement):315–319, 1949.

Warut Suksompong. Approximate maximin shares for groups of agents. Mathematical Social Sciences, 92:
 40–47, 2018.

Warut Suksompong. Constraints in fair division. SIGecom Exchanges, 19(2):46–61, 2021.

Ankang Sun, Bo Chen, and Xuan Vinh Doan. Connections between fairness criteria and eﬃciency for
  allocating indivisible chores. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Autonomous Agents
  and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), pages 1281–1289, 2021.

Hal R. Varian. Equity, envy and eﬃciency. Journal of Economic Theory, 9:63–91, 1974.



                                                      16
Gerhard J. Woeginger. A polynomial-time approximation scheme for maximizing the minimum machine
  completion time. Operations Research Letters, 20(4):149–154, 1997.

David Zeng and Alexandros Psomas. Fairness-eﬃciency tradeoﬀs in dynamic fair division. In Proceedings
  of the 21st ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (EC), pages 911–912, 2020.




                                                 17
