Volume 7, Issue 1, January 2017




Functoriality in Geometric Data (Dagstuhl Seminar 17021)
   Mirela Ben-Chen, Frédéric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Maks Ovsjanikov . . . .                                                               1
Automated Program Repair (Dagstuhl Seminar 17022)
   Sunghun Kim, Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury . . . . . . .                                                            19
Planning and Robotics (Dagstuhl Seminar 17031)
   Malik Ghallab, Nick Hawes, Daniele Magazzeni, Brian C. Williams,
   and Andrea Orlandini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    32
Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures (Dagstuhl Seminar
17032)
   David Hausheer, Oliver Hohlfeld, Diego R. López, Bruce MacDowell Maggs,
   and Costin Raiciu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Randomization in Parameterized Complexity (Dagstuhl Seminar 17041)
  Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström . . . . . . . . 103
From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU): Robust End-to-End
Deep Learning for NLP (Dagstuhl Seminar 17042)
   Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types (Dagstuhl Seminar 17051)
  Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida . . . . . . . . . . 158



   D a g s t u h l R e p or t s , Vo l . 7 , I s s u e 1                                                            ISSN 2192-5283
ISSN 2192-5283

Published online and open access by                    Aims and Scope
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik      The periodical Dagstuhl Reports documents the
GmbH, Dagstuhl Publishing, Saarbrücken/Wadern,         program and the results of Dagstuhl Seminars and
Germany. Online available at                           Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshops.
http://www.dagstuhl.de/dagpub/2192-5283                In principal, for each Dagstuhl Seminar or Dagstuhl
                                                       Perspectives Workshop a report is published that
Publication date                                       contains the following:
June, 2017                                                 an executive summary of the seminar program
                                                           and the fundamental results,
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche         an overview of the talks given during the seminar
Nationalbibliothek                                          (summarized as talk abstracts), and
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publica-         summaries from working groups (if applicable).
tion in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; detailed
bibliographic data are available in the Internet at This basic framework can be extended by suitable
http://dnb.d-nb.de.                                     contributions that are related to the program of the
                                                        seminar, e. g. summaries from panel discussions or
License                                                 open problem sessions.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 DE license (CC BY 3.0 DE).              Editorial Board
                 In brief, this license authorizes each     Gilles Barthe
                 and everybody to share (to copy,          Bernd Becker
distribute and transmit) the work under the follow-
                                                           Stephan Diehl
ing conditions, without impairing or restricting the
authors’ moral rights:                                     Hans Hagen
    Attribution: The work must be attributed to its        Reiner Hähnle
    authors.                                               Hannes Hartenstein

The copyright is retained by the corresponding au-         Oliver Kohlbacher
thors.                                                     Stephan Merz
                                                           Bernhard Mitschang
                                                           Bernhard Nebel
                                                           Bernt Schiele
                                                           Albrecht Schmidt
                                                           Raimund Seidel (Editor-in-Chief )
                                                           Arjen P. de Vries
                                                           Klaus Wehrle
                                                           Verena Wolf

                                                       Editorial Office
                                                       Marc Herbstritt (Managing Editor)
                                                       Jutka Gasiorowski (Editorial Assistance)
                                                       Dagmar Glaser (Editorial Assistance)
                                                       Thomas Schillo (Technical Assistance)
                                                       Contact
                                                       Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik
                                                       Dagstuhl Reports, Editorial Office
                                                       Oktavie-Allee, 66687 Wadern, Germany
                                                       reports@dagstuhl.de
Digital Object Identifier: 10.4230/DagRep.7.1.i        http://www.dagstuhl.de/dagrep
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 17021

Functoriality in Geometric Data
Edited by
Mirela Ben-Chen1 , Frédéric Chazal2 , Leonidas J. Guibas3 , and
Maks Ovsjanikov4

1    Technion – Haifa, IL, mirela@cs.technion.ac.il
2    INRIA Saclay – Île-de-France, FR, frederic.chazal@inria.fr
3    Stanford, USA, guibas@cs.stanford.edu
4    Ecole Polytechnique – Palaiseau, FR, maks@lix.polytechnique.fr


      Abstract
This report provides an overview of the talks at the Dagstuhl Seminar 17021 “Functoriality
in Geometric Data”. The seminar brought together researchers interested in the fundamental
questions of similarity and correspondence across geometric data sets, which include collections
of GPS traces, images, 3D shapes and other types of geometric data. A recent trend, emerging
independently in multiple theoretical and applied communities, is to understand networks of
geometric data sets through their relations and interconnections, a point of view that can be
broadly described as exploiting the functoriality of data, which has a long tradition associated
with it in mathematics. Functoriality, in its broadest form, is the notion that in dealing with
any kind of mathematical object, it is at least as important to understand the transformations or
symmetries possessed by the object or the family of objects to which it belongs, as it is to study
the object itself. This general idea has led to deep insights into the structure of various geometric
spaces as well as to state-of-the-art methods in various application domains. The talks spanned
a wide array of subjects under the common theme of functoriality, including: the analysis of
geometric collections, optimal transport for geometric datasets, deep learning applications and
many more.
Seminar January 8–13, 2017 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/17021
1998 ACM Subject Classification I.3.5 Computational Geometry and Object Modeling, I.4
   Image Processing and Computer Vision
Keywords and phrases computational geometry, data analysis, geometry processing
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.7.1.1



 1      Summary
Mirela Ben-Chen
Frédéric Chazal
Leonidas J. Guibas
Maks Ovsjanikov
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Mirela Ben-Chen, Frédéric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Maks Ovsjanikov


Across science, engineering, medicine and business we face a deluge of data coming from
sensors, from simulations, or from the activities of myriads of individuals on the Internet.
The data often has a geometric character, as is the case with 1D GPS traces, 2D images,
3D scans, and so on. Furthermore, the data sets we collect are frequently highly correlated,
reflecting information about the same or similar entities in the world, or echoing semantically

             Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
             under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Functoriality in Geometric Data, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 7, Issue 01, pp. 1–18
Editors: Mirela Ben-Chen, Frédéric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Maks Ovsjanikov
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
2   17021 – Functoriality in Geometric Data


    important repetitions/symmetries or hierarchical structures common to both man-made and
    natural objects.
        A recent trend, emerging independently in multiple theoretical and applied communities
    is to understand geometric data sets through their relations and interconnections, a point of
    view that can be broadly described as exploiting the functoriality of data, which has a long
    tradition associated with it in mathematics. Functoriality, in its broadest form, is the notion
    that in dealing with any kind of mathematical object, it is at least as important to understand
    the transformations or symmetries possessed by the object or the family of objects to which
    it belongs, as it is to study the object itself. This general idea been successfully applied in a
    large variety of fields, both theoretical and practical, often leading to deep insights into the
    structure of various objects as well as to elegant and efficient methods in various application
    domains, including computational geometry, computer vision and computer graphics.
        This seminar brought together researchers and practitioners interested in notions of simil-
    arity, correspondence and, more generally, relations across geometric data sets. Mathematical
    and computational tools for the construction, analysis, and exploitation of such relational
    networks were the central focus of this seminar.
Mirela Ben-Chen, Frédéric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Maks Ovsjanikov                                   3


 2       Table of Contents
Summary
  Mirela Ben-Chen, Frédéric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Maks Ovsjanikov . . .                  1

Overview of Talks
     Output sensitive algorithms for approximate incidences and their applications
     Dror Aiger, Haim Kaplan, and Micha Sharir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           5
     Joint denoising and distortion correction of atomic scale scanning transmission
     electron microscopy images
     Benjamin Berkels and Benedikt Wirth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         5
     Consistent discretization and minimization of the L1 norm on manifolds
     Alex M. Bronstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     6
     Geometric deep learning
     Michael M. Bronstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      6
     A convex representation for the Elastica functional.
     Antonin Chambolle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     7
     Regularized Optimal Transport
     Marco Cuturi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
     Ollivier Ricci curvature on network data and applications
     Jie Gao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     Model reduction for shape processing
     Klaus Hildebrandt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     Similarity and correspondence problems for 3D shapes in motion
     Franck Hétroy-Wheeler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     8
     Part Structures in Large Collections of 3D Models
     Vladimir G. Kim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9
     Invariants and learning for geometry analysis
     Ron Kimmel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
     Fully Spectral Partial Shape Matching
     Or Litany, Alex M. Bronstein, Michael M. Bronstein, and Emanuele Rodolà . . . . 10
     Efficient Deformable 2D-to-3D Shape Matching
     Zorah Lähner, Michael M. Bronstein, Daniel Cremers, Emanuele Rodolà, and Frank
     R. Schmidt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     Multiscale Methods for Dictionary Learning, Regression and Optimal Transport for
     data near low-dimensional sets
     Mauro Maggioni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      11
     On equilibrium shapes, Michell structures and “smoothness” of polyhedral surfaces
     Martin Kilian, Davide Pellis, Johannes Wallner, and Helmut Pottmann . . . . . .               11
     Smooth Interpolation of Key Frames in a Riemannian Shell Space
     Martin Rumpf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     Reduction and reconstruction of complex spatio-temporal data
     Konstantin Mischaikow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12




                                                                                                        17021
4   17021 – Functoriality in Geometric Data


       Optimal transport between a simplex soup and a point cloud
       Quentin Mérigot, Jocelyn Meyron, and Boris Thibert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       Partial Functional Correspondence
       Emanuele Rodolà, Alex M. Bronstein, Michael M. Bronstein, Luca Cosmo, Daniel
       Cremers, Or Litany, Jonathan Masci, and Andrea Torsello . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       A Selection of Categorical Viewpoints on Shape Matching
       Frank R. Schmidt, Michael M. Bronstein, Daniel Cremers, Zorah Lähner, Emanuele
       Rodolà, Ulrich Schlickewei, and Thomas Windheuser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Towards a Geometric Functionality Descriptor
       Ariel Shamir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
       Regularized Optimal Transport on Graphs: Rank-1 Hessian Updates for Quadratic
       Regularization
       Justin Solomon and Montacer Essid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        14
       Common Manifold Learning with Alternating Diffusion
       Ronen Talmon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       Optimal transport between a point cloud and a simplex soup
       Boris Thibert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       Product Manifold Filter – Towards a Continuity Prior for 3D shape correspondence
       Matthias Vestner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       Physical Graphic Design
       Wilmot Li . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       Data fitting tools in Riemannian spaces
       Benedikt Wirth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       Qualitative and Multi-Attribute Learning from Diverse Data Collections
       Hao Zhang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17

    Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Mirela Ben-Chen, Frédéric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Maks Ovsjanikov                                      5


 3      Overview of Talks
3.1     Output sensitive algorithms for approximate incidences and their
        applications
Dror Aiger (Google Israel – Tel Aviv, IL), Haim Kaplan (Tel Aviv University, IL), and Micha
Sharir (Tel Aviv University, IL)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Dror Aiger, Haim Kaplan, and Micha Sharir


An -approximate incidence between a point and some geometric object (line, circle, plane,
sphere) occurs when the point and the object lie at distance at most  from each other.
Given a set of points and a set of objects, computing the approximate incidences between
them is a major step in many database and web-based applications in computer vision and
graphics. Two important such applications are robust model fitting, where we want to find
models (lines, planes, etc.) that lie near many “interesting” points of an image (or a 3D
point cloud), and point pattern matching, where we are given two sets of points A and B,
and we want to find a large subset A of A for which there exists a rigid transformation which
places each point of A -close to some point of B. Typically, approximate incidences are used
to find candidate transformations (between model and data or between A and B), which
are then tested against the whole input to filter those that have a large match. In a typical
approximate incidence problem of this sort, we are given a set P of m points in two or three
dimensions, a set S of n objects (lines, circles, planes, spheres), and an error parameter  > 0,
and our goal is to report all pairs (p, s) ∈ P × S that lie at distance at most  from one
another. We present efficient output-sensitive approximation algorithms for several cases,
including points and lines or circles in the plane, and points and planes, spheres, lines, or
circles in three dimensions. Some of these cases arise in the applications mentioned above.
Our algorithms report all pairs at distance ≤ , but may also report additional pairs, all of
which are guaranteed to be at distance at most α, for some constant α > 1. Our algorithms
are based on simple primal and dual grid decompositions and are easy to implement. We
analyze our algorithms and prove guaranteed upper bounds on their running time and on the
“distortion” parameter α. Furthermore, we present experimental results on real and random
data that demonstrate the advantage of our methods compared to other methods and to the
naive implementation, commonly used in practice in these applications.



3.2     Joint denoising and distortion correction of atomic scale scanning
        transmission electron microscopy images
Benjamin Berkels (RWTH Aachen, DE) and Benedikt Wirth (Universität Münster, DE)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Benjamin Berkels and Benedikt Wirth
Main reference B. Berkels, B. Wirth, “Joint denoising and distortion correction of atomic scale scanning
               transmission electron microscopy images”, arXiv:1612.08170v1 [cs.CV], 2016.
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.08170v1


Nowadays, modern electron microscopes deliver images at atomic scale. The precise atomic
structure encodes information about material properties. Thus, an important ingredient in
the image analysis is to locate the centers of the atoms shown in micrographs as precisely
as possible. Here, we consider scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), which




                                                                                                           17021
6   17021 – Functoriality in Geometric Data


    acquires data in a rastering pattern, pixel by pixel. Due to this rastering combined with the
    magnification to atomic scale, movements of the specimen even at the nanometer scale lead
    to random image distortions that make precise atom localization difficult. Given a series of
    STEM images, we derive a Bayesian method that jointly estimates the distortion in each
    image and reconstructs the underlying atomic grid of the material by fitting the atom bumps
    with suitable bump functions. The resulting highly non-convex minimization problems are
    solved numerically with a trust region approach. Well-posedness of the reconstruction method
    and the model behavior for faster and faster rastering are investigated using variational
    techniques. The performance of the method is finally evaluated on both synthetic and real
    experimental data.



    3.3    Consistent discretization and minimization of the L1 norm on
           manifolds
    Alex M. Bronstein (Technion – Haifa, IL)
          License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Alex M. Bronstein


    The L1 norm has been tremendously popular in signal and image processing in the past
    two decades due to its sparsity-promoting properties. More recently, its generalization to
    non-Euclidean domains has been found useful in shape analysis applications. For example,
    in conjunction with the minimization of the Dirichlet energy, it was shown to produce a
    compactly supported quasi-harmonic orthonormal basis, dubbed as compressed manifold
    modes. The continuous L1 norm on the manifold is often replaced by the vector l1 norm
    applied to sampled functions. We show that such an approach is incorrect in the sense that
    it does not consistently discretize the continuous norm and warn against its sensitivity to
    the specific sampling. We propose two alternative discretizations resulting in an iteratively-
    reweighed l2 norm. We demonstrate the proposed strategy on the compressed modes problem,
    which reduces to a sequence of simple eigendecomposition problems not requiring non-convex
    optimization on Stiefel manifolds and producing more stable and accurate results.



    3.4    Geometric deep learning
    Michael M. Bronstein (University of Lugano, CH)
          License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Michael M. Bronstein


    Many scientific fields study data that have an underlying structure that is non-Euclidean space.
    Some examples include social networks in computational social sciences, sensor networks in
    communications, functional networks in brain imaging, regulatory networks in genetics, and
    meshed surfaces in computer graphics. In many applications, such geometric data are large
    and complex (in the case of social networks, on the scale of billions), and are natural targets
    for machine learning techniques. In particular, we would like to use deep neural networks,
    which have recently proven to be powerful tools for a broad range of problems from computer
    vision, natural language processing, and audio analysis. However, these tools have been
    most successful on data with an underlying Euclidean or grid-like structure, and in cases
    where the invariances of these structures are built into networks used to model them. I will
Mirela Ben-Chen, Frédéric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Maks Ovsjanikov                             7


discuss “Geometric deep learning”, a class of emerging techniques attempting to generalize
deep neural models to non-Euclidean domains such as graphs and manifolds. I will show
applications from the domains of vision, graphics, and network analysis.



3.5    A convex representation for the Elastica functional.
Antonin Chambolle (Ecole Polytechnique – Palaiseau, FR)
      License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Antonin Chambolle
 Joint work of Antonin Chambolle, Thomas Pock


In this talk, we have described a joint (ongoing) work with Thomas Pock (TU Graz, Austria)
whereR we show how to design convex relaxation to curvature-dependent functionals√   such as
Γ 7→ Γ f (κ)ds where κ is the curvature and f is a convex function, with f (t) ≥ 1 + t2 .
Our relaxation involves a lifting of the curve into the roto-translation group, and is easily
extended as an energy of scalar functions in the plane. We can show that it is tight when
Γ is the boundary of a C 2 set, and that it is a variant of a recent relaxation proposed by
Bredies, Pock, Wirth [1]. It is however strictly below the standard lower semi-continuous
relaxations of the Elastica which have been studied for many years (for boundaries, in the
L1 topology, see for instance [2] and the references therein).
References
1    Kristian Bredies, Thomas Pock und Benedikt Wirth. A convex, lower semi-continuous ap-
     proximation of Euler’s Elastica energy. SIAM Journal on Mathematical Analysis, 47(1):566–
     613, 2015.
2    F. Dayrens, S. Masnou et M. Novaga. Existence, regularity and structure of confined elast-
     icae. ESAIM:COCV, to appear, 2017.



3.6    Regularized Optimal Transport
Marco Cuturi (CREST – Malakoff, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Marco Cuturi


The optimal transport problem, first studied by Monge and later by Kantorovich, has drawn
the attention of both pure and applied mathematicians for several years now. An important
tool that arises from optimal transport theory is the definition of a versatile geometry that
can be used to compare probability measures, the Wasserstein geometry. Because probability
measures are widely used to model social and natural phenomena, the toolbox of optimal
transport has been increasingly adopted in a wide array of applied fields, such as economy,
fluid dynamics, quantum chemistry, computer vision or graphics. The main motivation behind
my work was to design new machine learning methodologies built upon the optimal transport
geometry. The main obstacle to this goal was computational, since optimal transport is
notoriously costly to compute. To avoid that issue, I have proposed 3 years ago a very
efficient numerical scheme to solve optimal transport problems that can scale up to large
scales and use recent progresses in hardware, namely GPGPUs. This breakthrough has
inspired several works in the span of 3 years, in machine learning and beyond, which I tried
to survey in this Dagstuhl seminar talk.




                                                                                                  17021
8   17021 – Functoriality in Geometric Data


    3.7     Ollivier Ricci curvature on network data and applications
    Jie Gao (Stony Brook University, US)
          License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Jie Gao


    In the talk I will introduce our recent work on Ollivier Ricci curvature for graphs and its
    applications in network analysis and graph mining. Ollivier Ricci curvature extends the
    notion of Ricci curvature from continuous setting to the case of graphs. For each edge xy,
    the curvature is defined by comparing the edge length and the optimal transport distance
    from x’s neighbors to y’s neighbors. We show that the Ollivier Ricci curvature exhibits
    interesting properties in real world graphs as those found for the Internet. Backbone edges,
    with negative curvature, connect communities of nodes which are connected by edges of
    positive curvature.



    3.8     Model reduction for shape processing
    Klaus Hildebrandt (TU Delft, NL)
          License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                   © Klaus Hildebrandt
     Joint work of Klaus Hildebrandt, Christopher Brandt, Christoph von Tycowicz, Christian Schulz
    Main reference C. von Tycowicz, C. Schulz, H.-P. Seidel, K. Hildebrandt, “Real-Time Nonlinear Shape
                   Interpolation”, ACM Transactions on Graphics, 34(3):34:1–34:10, ACM, 2015.
              URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2729972
    Main reference C. Brandt, C. von Tycowicz, K. Hildebrandt, “Geometric Flows of Curves in Shape Space for
                   Processing Motion of Deformable Objects”, in Proc. of the 37th Annual Conf. of the European
                   Association for Computer Graphics, 35(2):295–305, Eurographics Association, 2016.
              URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cgf.12832


    The optimization of deformable, flexible or non-rigid shapes is essential for many tasks in
    geometric modeling and processing. In this talk, I will introduce model reduction techniques
    that can be used to construct fast approximation algorithms for shape optimization problems.
    The goal is to obtain run times that are independent of the resolution of the discrete shapes
    to be optimized. As examples, we will discuss methods for real-time elasticity-based shape
    interpolation and the efficient integration of a geometric flow of curves in shape space.



    3.9     Similarity and correspondence problems for 3D shapes in motion
    Franck Hétroy-Wheeler (INRIA – Grenoble, FR)
          License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                   © Franck Hétroy-Wheeler
     Joint work of Jinlong Yang, Aurela Shehu, Jean-Sébastien Franco, Franck Hétroy-Wheeler, Stefanie Wuhrer
    Main reference J. Yang, J.-S. Franco, F. Hétroy-Wheeler, S. Wuhrer, “Estimation of Human Body Shape in
                   Motion with Wide Clothing”, in Computer Vision – ECCV 2016, LNCS, Vol. 9908, pp. 439–454,
                   Springer, 2016.
              URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46493-0_27


    In this talk I focus on moving 3D shapes, represented as sequences of meshes or point clouds
    without explicit temporal coherence. I review two recent works involving human shapes in
    wide clothing. The first work [2] estimates the body shape under the clothing with the help
    of a shape space. The second one [1] tracks the surface of the cloth over time, using the
    assumption that the deformation is locally near-isometric. Both methods involve different
    functoriality tools, namely statistical shape spaces and deformation models.
Mirela Ben-Chen, Frédéric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Maks Ovsjanikov                                            9


References
1    Aurela Shehu, Jinlong Yang, Jean-Sébastien Franco, Franck Hétroy-Wheeler, Stefanie
     Wuhrer. Computing temporal alignments of human motion sequences in wide clothing using
     geodesic patches. 4th International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), Stanford, California,
     USA, 2016.
2    Jinlong Yang, Jean-Sébastien Franco, Franck Hétroy-Wheeler, Stefanie Wuhrer. Estima-
     tion of Human Body Shape in Motion with Wide Clothing. 14th European Conference on
     Computer Vision (ECCV), Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2016.



3.10      Part Structures in Large Collections of 3D Models
Vladimir G. Kim (Adobe Systems Inc. – Seattle, US)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Vladimir G. Kim
 Joint work of Vladimir G. Kim, Minhyuk Sung, Li Yi, Leonidas Guibas, Duygu Ceylan, I-Chao Shen, Mengyan
               Yan, Hao Su, Cewu Lu, Qixing Huang, Alla Sheffer, Roland Angst
Main reference L. Yi, V. G. Kim, D. Ceylan, I-C. Shen, M. Yan, H. Su, C. Lu, Q. Huang, A. Sheffer, L. Guibas ,
               “A Scalable Active Framework for Region Annotation in 3D Shape Collections”, ACM Transactions
               on Graphics – Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2016, 35(6):210:1–210:12, ACM, 2016.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2980179.2980238
Main reference M. Sung, V. G. Kim, R. Angst, L. Guibas , “Data-Driven Structural Priors for Shape Completion”,
               ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) – Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2015,
               34(6):175:1–175:11, ACM, 2015.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2816795.2818094


As large repositories of 3D shape collections grow, understanding the geometric data, especially
encoding the inter-model similarity, their variations, semantics and functionality, is of central
importance. My research addresses the challenge of deriving probabilistic models that capture
common structure in large, unorganized, and diverse collections of 3D polygonal shapes. We
present a part-based model for for encoding structural variations in collections of man-made
shapes, and demonstrate its applications to shape completion, exploration, organization,
analysis, and synthesis of geometric data. Our part based model is trained on collections
of segmented 3D models with labeled parts. To facilitate creation of these data with rich
annotations, we also propose an active tool for acquiring detailed region labels from crowd
workers. Our tool models human behavior and explicitly minimizes human effort.



3.11      Invariants and learning for geometry analysis
Ron Kimmel (Technion – Haifa, IL)
       License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Ron Kimmel
 Joint work of Ron Kimmel, Gautam Pai


In my presentation I discussed the relation between axiomatic understanding of geometric
forms and structures and modern learning by convolutional networks. We focused on planar
curves for which we demonstrated how Cartan’s theorem indicates the sufficient invariants
that could serve as a signature indicating the number of features required for matching curves.
We then suggested a Siamese architecture for training such a network and demonstrated
feature extortion with that network. Relation to curvature were demonstrated. Dealing with
the Euclidean, affine, and similarity groups was presented. As for surfaces, we reviewed recent




                                                                                                                 17021
10   17021 – Functoriality in Geometric Data


     geometries related to equi-affine, similarity, and full affine groups of transformations with
     some recent matching results known for these transformations, for which Gromov distances,
     treating surfaces as metric spaces, were approximated.



     3.12      Fully Spectral Partial Shape Matching
     Or Litany (Tel Aviv University, IL), Alex M. Bronstein (Technion – Haifa, IL), Michael M.
     Bronstein (University of Lugano, CH), and Emanuele Rodolà (University of Lugano, CH)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Or Litany, Alex M. Bronstein, Michael M. Bronstein, and Emanuele Rodolà
      Joint work of Or Litany, Emanuele Rodolà, Alex M. Bronstein, and Michael M. Bronstein
     Main reference O. Litany, E. Rodolà, A. M. Bronstein, M. M. Bronstein, “Fully Spectral Partial Shape Matching”,
                    Computer Graphics Forum (CGF) – Proc. EUROGRAPHICS 2017, Vol. 36(2), 2017; preprint
                    available from author’s webpage.
               URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cgf.13123
               URL http://vision.in.tum.de/_media/spezial/bib/litany-eg17.pdf


     We propose an efficient procedure for calculating partial dense intrinsic correspondence
     between deformable shapes performed entirely in the spectral domain. Our technique relies
     on the recently introduced partial functional maps formalism and on the joint approximate
     diagonalization (JAD) of the Laplace-Beltrami operators previously introduced for matching
     non-isometric shapes. We show that a variant of the JAD problem with an appropriately
     modified coupling term (surprisingly) allows to construct quasi-harmonic bases localized
     on the latent corresponding parts. This circumvents the need to explicitly compute the
     unknown parts by means of the cumbersome alternating minimization used in the previous
     approaches, and allows performing all the calculations in the spectral domain with constant
     complexity independent of the number of shape vertices. We provide an extensive evaluation
     of the proposed technique on standard non-rigid correspondence benchmarks and show
     state-of-the-art performance in various settings, including partiality and the presence of
     topological noise.



     3.13      Efficient Deformable 2D-to-3D Shape Matching
     Zorah Lähner (TU München, DE), Michael M. Bronstein (University of Lugano, CH), Daniel
     Cremers (TU München, DE), Emanuele Rodolà (University of Lugano, CH), and Frank R.
     Schmidt (TU München, DE)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Zorah Lähner, Michael M. Bronstein, Daniel Cremers, Emanuele Rodolà, and Frank R. Schmidt
     Main reference Z. Lähner, E. Rodolà, F. R. Schmidt, M. M. Bronstein, D. Cremers, “Efficient Globally Optimal
                    2D-to-3D Deformable Shape Matching”, in Proc. of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
                    Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2016), pp. 2185–2193, IEEE, 2016; preprint available from author’s
                    webpage.
               URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.240
               URL http://vision.in.tum.de/~laehner/Elastic2D3D/


     In this talk we present an algorithm for non-rigid 2D-to-3D shape matching, where the input
     is a 2D query shape as well as a 3D target shape and the output is a continuous matching
     curve represented as a closed contour on the 3D shape. We cast the problem as finding
     the shortest circular path on the product 3-manifold of the two shapes. Quantitative and
     qualitative evaluation confirms that the method provides excellent results for sketch-based
     deformable 3D shape retrieval.
Mirela Ben-Chen, Frédéric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Maks Ovsjanikov                                              11


3.14      Multiscale Methods for Dictionary Learning, Regression and
          Optimal Transport for data near low-dimensional sets
Mauro Maggioni (Johns Hopkins University – Baltimore, US)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Mauro Maggioni
 Joint work of Mauro Maggioni, Wenjing Liao, Stefano Vigogna, Sam Gerber
Main reference W. Liao, M. Maggioni, S. Vigogna, “Learning adaptive multiscale approximations to data and
               functions near low-dimensional sets”, in Proc. of the 2016 IEEE Information Theory Workshop
               (ITW 2016), pp. 226–230, IEEE, 2016.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ITW.2016.7606829
Main reference S. Gerber, M. Maggioni, “Multiscale Strategies for Discrete Optimal Transport’‘, to appear in the
               J. of Machine Learning research (JMLR).


We discuss a family of ideas, algorithms, and results for analyzing various new and classical
problems in the analysis of high-dimensional data sets. These methods we discuss perform
well when data is (nearly) intrinsically low-dimensional. They rely on the idea of performing
suitable multiscale geometric decompositions of the data, and exploiting such decompositions
to perform a variety of tasks in signal processing and statistical learning. In particular, we
discuss the problem of dictionary learning, where one is interested in constructing, given
a training set of signals, a set of vectors (dictionary) such that the signals admit a sparse
representation in terms of the dictionary vectors. We then discuss the problem of regressing
a function on a low-dimensional unknown manifold. For both problems we introduce a
multiscale estimator, fast algorithms for constructing it, and give finite sample guarantees
for its performance, and discuss its optimality. Finally, we discuss an application of these
multiscale decompositions to the fast calculation of optimal transportation plans, introduce a
multiscale version of optimal transportation distances, and discuss preliminary applications.



3.15      On equilibrium shapes, Michell structures and “smoothness” of
          polyhedral surfaces
Martin Kilian (TU Wien, AT), Davide Pellis (TU Wien, AT), Johannes Wallner (TU Graz,
AT), and Helmut Pottmann (TU Wien, AT)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Martin Kilian, Davide Pellis, Johannes Wallner, and Helmut Pottmann


Pure geometric shape modeling is not sufficient to achieve an efficient digital workflow
from design to production, since it tends to result in costly feedback loops between design,
engineering and fabrication. To overcome this problem, recent research incorporates key
aspects of function and fabrication into an intelligent shape modeling process. In the present
talk, we will illustrate this trend at hand of our ongoing research on shape modeling in the
presence of structural and fabrication constraints. We discuss (i) 2D trusses with minimum
weight (Michell structures), (ii) form-finding for architectural freeform shells and (iii) kink-
minimizing polyhedral surfaces: All these themes are related to the minimization of total
absolute curvature (integral of sum of absolute values of principal curvatures) of surfaces in
various geometries and thus can be computationally treated with the same methodology.




                                                                                                                   17021
12   17021 – Functoriality in Geometric Data


     3.16      Smooth Interpolation of Key Frames in a Riemannian Shell Space
     Martin Rumpf (Universität Bonn, DE)
            License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Martin Rumpf
      Joint work of Pascal Huber, Ricardo Perl, Martin Rumpf


     Splines and subdivision curves are flexible tools in the design and manipulation of curves
     in Euclidean space. In this paper we study generalizations of interpolating splines and
     subdivision schemes to the Riemannian manifold of shell surfaces in which the associated
     metric measures both bending and membrane distortion. The shells under consideration
     are assumed to be represented by Loop subdivision surfaces. This enables the animation
     of shells via the smooth interpolation of a given set of key frame control meshes. Using a
     variational time discretization of geodesics efficient numerical implementations can be derived.
     These are based on a discrete geodesic interpolation, discrete geometric logarithm, discrete
     exponential map, and discrete parallel transport. With these building blocks at hand discrete
     Riemannian cardinal splines and three different types of discrete, interpolatory subdivision
     schemes are defined. Numerical results for two different subdivision shell models underline
     the potential of this approach in key frame animation.


     3.17      Reduction and reconstruction of complex spatio-temporal data
     Konstantin Mischaikow (Rutgers University – Piscataway, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Konstantin Mischaikow


     It is almost cliche at this point to note that high dimensional data is being collected from
     experiments or generated through numerical simulation at an unprecedented rate and that
     this rate will continue rising extremely rapidly for the foreseeable future. Our interest is in
     data associated with high dimensional nonlinear complex spatiotemporal dynamics. The
     focus of this talk is on our efforts to use persistent homology both as a dimension reduction
     technique and a technique for reconstructing structures of the underlying dynamical system.
     I will present some results associated with dynamics of fluid convection and dense granular
     media and will try to highlight open questions.


     3.18      Optimal transport between a simplex soup and a point cloud
     Quentin Mérigot, Jocelyn Meyron, and Boris Thibert
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Quentin Mérigot, Jocelyn Meyron, and Boris Thibert


     In this talk, we are interested in solving an optimal transport problem between a measure
     supported on a simplex soup and a measure supported on a finite point set for the quadratic
     cost in Rd . Similarly as in (Aurenhammer, Hoffman, Aronov, Algorithmica, 1998), this
     optimal transport problem can be recast as finding a Power diagram supported on the finite
     point set such that the Power cells intersected with the simplex soup have a prescribed
     measure.
         We show the convergence with linear speed of a damped Newton algorithm to solve this
     non-linear problem. The convergence relies on a genericity condition on the point cloud with
     respect to the simplex soup and on a connectedness condition for the support of the measure
Mirela Ben-Chen, Frédéric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Maks Ovsjanikov                                             13


defined on the simplex soup. Finally, we apply our algorithm in R3 to compute optimal
transport plans between a measure supported on a triangulation and a discrete measure.


3.19      Partial Functional Correspondence
Emanuele Rodolà (University of Lugano, CH), Alex M. Bronstein (Technion – Haifa, IL),
Michael M. Bronstein (University of Lugano, CH), Luca Cosmo (University of Venice, IT),
Daniel Cremers (TU München, DE), Or Litany (Tel Aviv University, IL), Jonathan Masci
(IDSIA, CH), and Andrea Torsello (University of Venice, IT)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Emanuele Rodolà, Alex M. Bronstein, Michael M. Bronstein, Luca Cosmo, Daniel Cremers, Or
               Litany, Jonathan Masci, and Andrea Torsello
Main reference E. Rodolà, L. Cosmo, M. M. Bronstein, A. Torsello, D. Cremers, “Partial Functional
               Correspondence”, arXiv:1506.05274v2 [cs.CV], 2016.
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.05274v2


In this talk we present our recent line of work on (deformable) partial shape correspondence
in the spectral domain. We first introduce Partial Functional Maps (PFM), showing how
to robustly formulate the shape correspondence problem under missing geometry with the
language of functional maps. We use perturbation analysis to show how removal of shape
parts changes the Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions, and exploit it as a prior on the spectral
representation of the correspondence. We show further extensions to deal with the presence of
clutter (deformable object-in-clutter) and multiple pieces (non-rigid puzzles). The resulting
algorithms yield state-of-the-art results on challenging correspondence benchmarks in the
presence of partiality and topological noise.


3.20      A Selection of Categorical Viewpoints on Shape Matching
Frank R. Schmidt (TU München, DE), Michael M. Bronstein (University of Lugano, CH),
Daniel Cremers (TU München, DE), Zorah Lähner (TU München, DE), Emanuele Rodolà
(University of Lugano, CH), Ulrich Schlickewei (TU München, DE), and Thomas Windheuser
(TU München, DE)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Frank R. Schmidt, Michael M. Bronstein, Daniel Cremers, Zorah Lähner, Emanuele Rodolà,
               Ulrich Schlickewei, and Thomas Windheuser
Main reference Z. Lähner, E. Rodolà, F. R. Schmidt, M. M. Bronstein, D. Cremers, “Efficient Globally Optimal
               2D-to-3D Deformable Shape Matching”, in Proc. of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
               Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2016), pp. 2185–2193, IEEE, 2016; preprint available from author’s
               webpage.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.240
          URL http://frank-r-schmidt.de/Publications/2016/LRSBC16a
Main reference F. R. Schmidt, T. Windheuser, U. Schlickewei, D. Cremers, “Dense Elastic 3D Shape Matching”, in
               Efficient Algorithms for Global Optimization Methods in Computer Vision – International Dagstuhl
               Seminar, LNCS, Vol. 8293, pp. 1–18, Springer, 2014, preprint available from author’s webpage.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-54774-4_1
          URL http://frank-r-schmidt.de/Publications/2014/SWSC14/SWSC14.pdf
Main reference T. Windheuser, U. Schlickewei, F. R. Schmidt, D. Cremers, “Geometrically Consistent Elastic
               Matching of 3D Shapes: A Linear Programming Solution”, in Proc. of the 2011 IEEE International
               Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV 2011), pp. 2134–2141, IEEE, 2011; preprint available from
               author’s webpage.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2011.6126489
          URL http://frank-r-schmidt.de/Publications/2011/WSSC11


While “shape” is an important concept in order to compare, detect and classify geometric
data, the definition of a shape depends very much on the specific application.




                                                                                                                  17021
14   17021 – Functoriality in Geometric Data


        Whether we understand a shape as a mere set, a topological or a metric space drives the
     development of different shape matching approaches.
        In this presentation I talk about a selection of different categorical viewpoints on shape
     and shape matching in order to explore the strengths and weaknesses of these approaches
     from a theoretical and a practical point of view.



     3.21      Towards a Geometric Functionality Descriptor
     Ariel Shamir (The Interdisciplinary Center – Herzliya, IL)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Ariel Shamir


     The American architect Louis Sullivan coined the phrase “form follows function” in archi-
     tecture. However, almost in all areas of design as well as in nature, one of the key aspects
     that define shapes is their functionality. In this talk I will describe several efforts to study
     the functionality of 3D objects by examining their shape and the connection between them.
     First, by trying to learn about functionality from interactions with other objects in scenes,
     then by trying to co-analyze similar shapes and their interactions and lastly, by studying
     movements and motion of shape parts.



     3.22      Regularized Optimal Transport on Graphs: Rank-1 Hessian
               Updates for Quadratic Regularization
     Justin Solomon (MIT – Cambridge, US) and Montacer Essid (New York University, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Justin Solomon and Montacer Essid


     Optimal transportation provides a means of lifting distances between points on a geometric
     domain to distances between signals over the domain, expressed as probability distributions.
     On a graph, transportation problems such as computation of the Wasserstein distance
     between distributions can be used to express challenging tasks involving matching supply
     to demand with minimal shipment expense; in discrete language, these problems become
     “multi-commodity network flow” problems. Regularization typically is needed to ensure
     uniqueness for the linear ground distance case and to improve optimization convergence;
     state-of-the-art techniques employ entropic regularization on the transportation matrix.
         In this work, we explore a quadratic alternative to entropic regularization for transport
     with linear ground distance over a graph. The dual of this problem exhibits elegant second-
     order structure that we leverage to derive an easily-implemented Newton-type algorithm
     with fast convergence. The end result is state-of-the-art performance compared with much
     more involved large-scale convex optimization machinery.
Mirela Ben-Chen, Frédéric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Maks Ovsjanikov                                    15


3.23      Common Manifold Learning with Alternating Diffusion
Ronen Talmon (Technion – Haifa, IL)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Ronen Talmon
 Joint work of Roy Lederman, Ronen Talmon, Hau-tieng Wu
Main reference R. R. Lederman, R. Talmon, “Learning the geometry of common latent variables using
               alternating-diffusion”, in Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis, Elsevier, 2015.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acha.2015.09.002


We consider the problem of hidden common manifold extraction from multiple data sets,
which have observation-specific distortions and artifacts. A new manifold learning method is
presented based on alternating products of diffusion operators and local kernels. We provide
theoretical analysis showing that our method is able to build a variant of the Laplacian of the
hidden common manifold, while suppressing the observation-specific artifacts. The generality
of this method is demonstrated in data analysis applications, where different types of devices
are used to measure the same activity. In particular, we present applications to problems in
biomedicine, neuroscience, and audio analysis.
References
1    R. Talmon, H.-T. Wu. Latent common manifold learning with alternating diffusion: analysis
     and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.00078, 2016.



3.24      Optimal transport between a point cloud and a simplex soup
Boris Thibert (Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann – Grenoble, FR)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Boris Thibert


I will consider in this talk the computation of an optimal transport map between a measure
supported on a simplex soup and a measure supported on a finite point set for the quadratic
cost in Rd. Similarly as in work of Aurenhammer, Hoffman and Aronov, this optimal
transport problem can be recast as finding a Power diagram supported on the finite point
set such that the Power cells intersected with the simplex soup have a prescribed measure.
I will show the convergence with linear speed of a damped Newton algorithm to solve this
nonlinear problem and also apply our algorithm in 3D to compute optimal transport plans
between a measure supported on a triangulation and a discrete measure. This work is in
collaboration with Jocelyn Meyron and Quentin Mérigot.



3.25      Product Manifold Filter – Towards a Continuity Prior for 3D
          shape correspondence
Matthias Vestner (TU München, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Matthias Vestner


Many algorithms for the computation of correspondences between deformable shapes rely
on some variant of nearest neighbor matching in a descriptor space. Such are, for example,
various point-wise correspondence recovery algorithms used as a post-processing stage in




                                                                                                         17021
16   17021 – Functoriality in Geometric Data


     the functional correspondence framework. Such frequently used techniques implicitly make
     restrictive assumptions (e.g., near-isometry) on the considered shapes and in practice suffer
     from lack of accuracy and result in poor surjectivity. We propose an alternative recovery
     technique capable of guaranteeing a bijective correspondence and producing significantly
     higher accuracy and smoothness. Unlike other methods our approach does not depend on
     the assumption that the analyzed shapes are isometric. We derive the proposed method from
     the statistical framework of kernel density estimation and demonstrate its performance on
     several challenging deformable 3D shape matching datasets.



     3.26      Physical Graphic Design
     Wilmot Li (Adobe Systems Inc. – Seattle, US)
            License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Wilmot Li
      Joint work of Wilmot Li, Danny Kaufman


     Advances in digital fabrication technology enable an increasingly diverse spectrum of users to
     create physical artifacts. One emerging fabrication workflow involves the use of traditional
     graphic design (i.e., the design of layered 2.5D vector graphics) as a front end to produce
     physical objects. We refer to this process as physical graphic design. While creating physical
     artifacts via 2D design may seem like a solved problem (after all, there has been decades of
     research and commercial development on graphic design tools), the problem is more involved
     than it initially appears. In this talk, we discuss some of the fundamental challenges of
     physical graphic design, which stem from the complex interplay between design requirements
     and physical/fabrication constraints.



     3.27      Data fitting tools in Riemannian spaces
     Benedikt Wirth (Universität Münster, DE)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Benedikt Wirth
      Joint work of Pierre-Antoine Absil, Pierre-Yves Gousenbourger, Behrend Heeren, Martin Rumpf, Peter Schröder,
                    Paul Striewski, Max Wardetzky
     Main reference P.-A. Absil, P.-Y. Gousenbourger, P. Striewski, B. Wirth, “Differentiable piecewise-Bezier surfaces
                    on Riemannian manifolds”, SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, 9(4):1788–1828, SIAM, 2016.
               URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/16M1057978


     Several computer vision, life science or imaging applications deal with data that can be
     viewed as points in a (possibly high-dimensional) Riemannian manifold. Many of these
     applications require data fitting of different types, for instance to perform statistical regression,
     interpolation, or data compression. Classical approaches to data fitting include computation
     of averages, of inter- and extrapolating curves, or fitting of low-dimensional manifolds. The
     talk presents some numerical techniques that can be employed to this end, in particular
     a nonlinear variational discretisation and different ways to define and compute curves or
     submanifolds in Riemannian spaces. The Riemannian space of (discrete) viscous shells,
     which can be used to model 3D geometries, serves as an example setting. Here, each point
     represents a (triangulated) surface embedded in 3D space. The Riemannian metric on this
     space takes in-plane stretching and bending of surfaces into account,which ultimately leads
     to elliptic PDEs in many of the data fitting problems.
Mirela Ben-Chen, Frédéric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Maks Ovsjanikov                                 17


3.28      Qualitative and Multi-Attribute Learning from Diverse Data
          Collections
Hao Zhang (Simon Fraser University – Burnaby, CA)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Hao Zhang


When dealing with a large collection of data possessing much diversity, it can be difficult, if
not impossible, to properly quantify all pairwise similarities between the data entities using a
single numerical distance to allow a meaningful global analysis. In this talk, I will first go over
a qualitative analysis method we developed for organizing a heterogeneous collection of shapes.
The method turns a set of *quartet* query results into a single categorization tree, where
each quartet query gathers a similarity ranking between data pairs from a data quadruplet
and these rankings are best reflected by the number of “edge hops” in the categorization tree.
Next, I will introduce a new problem which tries to account for the multiple perspectives
people may draw upon when performing similarity rankings. We are interested in how much
one can learn of the different perspectives the human subjects may have used to provide
the ranking results, where the only available information to us is the ranking results. Our
first attempt is to classify the similarity queries, with reasonable confidence, based on latent
perspectives. That is, we never explicitly identify the perspectives or data attributes in the
output (they remain latent) nor do we pre-select a superset of candidate attributes to start
the analysis.




                                                                                                      17021
18   17021 – Functoriality in Geometric Data


             Participants
        Dror Aiger                       Vladimir G. Kim                    Frank R. Schmidt
     Google Israel – Tel-Aviv, IL      Adobe Systems Inc. – Seattle, US   TU München, DE
        Annamaria Amenta                 Ron Kimmel                         Ariel Shamir
     Univ. of California – Davis, US   Technion – Haifa, IL               The Interdisciplinary Center –
        Mirela Ben-Chen                                                   Herzliya, IL
                                        Zorah Lähner
     Technion – Haifa, IL              TU München, DE                       Primoz Skraba
        Benjamin Berkels                                                  Jozef Stefan Institute –
                                         Wilmot Li                        Ljubljana, SI
     RWTH Aachen, DE                   Adobe Systems Inc. – Seattle, US
        Alex M. Bronstein                                                   William Smith
                                         Or Litany                        University of York, GB
     Technion – Haifa, IL
                                       Tel Aviv University, IL
        Michael M. Bronstein                                                Justin Solomon
     University of Lugano, CH            Mauro Maggioni                   MIT – Cambridge, US
                                       Johns Hopkins University –
        Antonin Chambolle                                                   Ronen Talmon
                                       Baltimore, US
     Ecole Polytechnique –                                                Technion – Haifa, IL
     Palaiseau, FR                       Konstantin Mischaikow              Boris Thibert
                                       Rutgers University –               Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann –
        Frédéric Chazal
                                       Piscataway, US                     Grenoble, FR
     INRIA Saclay –
     Île-de-France, FR                   Maks Ovsjanikov                    Matthias Vestner
        Marco Cuturi                   Ecole Polytechnique –              TU München, DE
     CREST – Malakoff, FR              Palaiseau, FR
                                                                            Michael Wand
        Jie Gao                         Helmut Pottmann                   Universität Mainz, DE
     Stony Brook University, US        TU Wien, AT
                                                                            Benedikt Wirth
        Franck Hétroy-Wheeler           Emanuele Rodolà                   Universität Münster, DE
     INRIA – Grenoble, FR              University of Lugano, CH             Hao Zhang
        Klaus Hildebrandt               Martin Rumpf                      Simon Fraser University –
     TU Delft, NL                      Universität Bonn, DE               Burnaby, CA
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 17022

Automated Program Repair
Edited by
Sunghun Kim1 , Claire Le Goues2 , Michael Pradel3 , and
Abhik Roychoudhury4

1    HKUST – Kowloon, HK, hunkim@cse.ust.hk
2    Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US, clegoues@cs.cmu.edu
3    TU Darmstadt, DE, michael@binaervarianz.de
4    National University of Singapore, SG, abhik@comp.nus.edu.sg


      Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 17022 “Automated
Program Repair”. The seminar participants presented and discussed their research through formal
and informal presentations. In particular, the seminar covered work related to search-based
program repair, semantic program repair, and repair of non-functional properties. As a result of
the seminar, several participants plan to launch various follow-up activities, such as a program
repair competition, which would help to further establish and guide this young field of research.
Seminar January 8–13, 2017 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/17022
1998 ACM Subject Classification D.2 Software Engineering, D.2.5 [Software Engineering] Test-
   ing and Debugging
Keywords and phrases Program repair, program analysis, software engineering
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.7.1.19



 1      Executive Summary
Sunghun Kim
Claire Le Goues
Michael Pradel
Abhik Roychoudhury
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Sunghun Kim, Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury


Software engineering targets the creation of software for myriad platforms, deployed over
the internet, the cloud, mobile devices and conventional desktops. Software now controls
cyber-physical systems, industrial control systems, and “Internet of Things” devices, and is
directly responsible for humanity’s economic well-being and safety in numerous contexts. It
is therefore especially important that engineers are able to easily write error-free software,
and to quickly find and correct errors that do appear. Future generation programming
environments must not only employ sophisticated strategies for localizing software errors,
but also strategies for automatically patching them.
    Recent years have seen an explosive growth in research on automated program repair,
with proposed techniques ranging from pure stochastic search to pure semantic analysis. The
Dagstuhl Seminar in January 2017 studies the problem of automated repair in a holistic
fashion. This will involve a review of foundational techniques supporting program repair,
perspectives on current challenges and future techniques, and emerging applications. The aim

            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Automated Program Repair, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 7, Issue 1, pp. 19–31
Editors: Sunghun Kim, Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
20   17022 – Automated Program Repair


     is to broadly discuss and revisit underlying assumptions and methods towards the integration
     of automated patch synthesis into futuristic programming environments.
         Conceptually, applications of program repair step far beyond the general goal of ensuring
     software quality, and the subject is relevant to a broad range of research areas. It is of
     obvious importance in software testing and analysis, because repair goes hand in hand with
     traditional testing and debugging activities. It is relevant to researchers in programming
     languages and systems, e.g., to study language and system-level techniques that integrate
     patch suggestions during development. The topic is relevant to researchers in systems security,
     as repair approaches may be customizable to patching vulnerabilities in both application and
     systems software. Researchers in formal methods may provide insight for provably correct
     repair, given appropriate correctness specifications. Finally, the topic is connected to human
     computer interaction in software engineering, since the repair process, if not fully automated,
     may involve eliciting appropriate developer feedback and acting on it accordingly.
         At a technical level, one of the key discussion topics has been the correctness specifications
     driving the repair process. Most previous work in this domain has relied on test suites as
     partial correctness specifications. While often available, test suites are typically inadequate
     for fully assessing patch correctness. Alternative quality specifications, such as “minimality”,
     could be explored. In addition, heavier-weight specifications, such as assertions, may provide
     stronger functional guarantees, leaving open the research challenge both in how to use them
     and how they may be derived to guide a repair process. Given the appropriate correctness
     specification, the task of repair usually involves three steps: localizing an error to a small
     set of potentially-faulty locations, deriving values/constraints for the computation desired
     at the faulty locations, and constructing “fix” expressions/statements that satisfy these
     values/constraints. Each of the three steps can be accomplished by a variety of methods,
     including heuristic search, symbolic analysis and/or constraint solving techniques. This
     allows for an interesting interplay for an entire design space of repair techniques involving
     ingenuous combinations of search-based techniques and semantic analysis being employed at
     the different steps of the repair process.
         The Dagstuhl Seminar has attracted researchers and practitioners from all over the
     world, comprising participants active in the fields of software engineering, programming
     languages, machine learning, formal methods, and security. As a result of the seminar, several
     participants plan to launch various follow-up activities, such as a program repair competition,
     which would help to further establish and guide this young field of research, and a journal
     article that summarizes the state of the art in automated program repair.
Sunghun Kim, Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury                                         21


 2       Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Sunghun Kim, Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury . . . . . 19

Overview of Talks
     Quality and applicability of automated repair
     Yuriy Brun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     Automatic Tradeoffs: Accuracy and Energy
     Jonathan Dorn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     Deep Learning for Program Repair
     Aditya Kanade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     Prex: Finding Guidance for Forward and Backward Porting of Linux Device Drivers
     Julia Lawall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
     Automated Inference of Code Transforms and Search Spaces for Patch Generation
     Fan Long . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24
     Learning-based Program Repair
     Fan Long . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24
     ASTOR: A Program Repair Library for Java
     Matías Sebastían Martínez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     Combining syntactic and semantic repair
     Sergey Mechtaev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     Antifragile Software and Correctness Attraction
     Martin Monperrus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     Detecting and repairing performance bugs that have non-intrusive fixes
     Adrian Nistor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     Automated Software Transplantation
     Justyna Petke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     Understanding and Automatically Preventing Injection Attacks on Node.js
     Michael Pradel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
     Anti-patterns in Search-Based Program Repair
     Mukul Prasad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
     Semantic Techniques for Program Repair
     Abhik Roychoudhury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     Automated techniques for fixing performance issues in JavaScript applications
     Marija Selakovic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     I Get by With a Little Help From My Friends: Crowdsourcing Program Repair
     Kathryn T. Stolee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     Towards Trustworthy Program Repair
     Yingfei Xiong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
     How Developers Diagnose and Repair Software Bugs (and what we can do about it)
     Andreas Zeller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29




                                                                                                         17022
22   17022 – Automated Program Repair


        Automated Test Reuse via Code Transplantation
        Tianyi Zhang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

     Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
Sunghun Kim, Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury                                   23


 3     Overview of Talks
3.1    Quality and applicability of automated repair
Yuriy Brun (University of Massachusetts – Amherst, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Yuriy Brun


Program repair offers great promise for reducing manual effort involved in software engineering,
but only if it can produce high-quality patches for defects that are important and hard for
humans to fix manually. This talk presents an objective measure of repair quality, identifies
shortcomings in existing automated repair techniques in terms of the quality of the patches
they produce, and tackles the problem of identifying if program repair techniques can repair
important and hard defects.



3.2    Automatic Tradeoffs: Accuracy and Energy
Jonathan Dorn (University of Virginia – Charlottesville, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Jonathan Dorn


Tradeoffs between competing objectives are an important part of software development
and usability. However, the development effort to implement different tradeoffs is time
consuming and potentially error-prone. In this work, we balance competing functional and
non-functional properties via automatic program transformations. We apply multi-objective
search to simultaneously optimize energy consumption and output accuracy of assembly
programs. We find that relaxing the accuracy requirements enables greater energy reductions
within the constraint of human-acceptability. We also find that our search-based approach
identifies better tradeoff opportunities than less general techniques like loop perforation.



3.3    Deep Learning for Program Repair
Aditya Kanade (Indian Institute of Science – Bangalore, IN)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Aditya Kanade


The problem of automatically fixing programming errors is a very active research topic in
software engineering. This is a challenging problem as fixing even a single error may require
analysis of the entire program. In practice, a number of errors arise due to programmer’s
inexperience with the programming language or lack of attention to detail. We call these
common programming errors. These are analogous to grammatical errors in natural languages.
    Compilers detect such errors, but their error messages are usually inaccurate. In this
work, we present an end-to-end solution, called DeepFix, that can fix multiple such errors in
a program without relying on any external tool to locate or fix them. At the heart of DeepFix
is a multi-layered sequence-to-sequence neural network with attention which is trained to
predict erroneous program locations along with the required correct statements. On a set of
6971 erroneous C programs written by students for 93 programming tasks, DeepFix could fix
1881 (27%) programs completely and 1338 (19%) programs partially.



                                                                                                   17022
24   17022 – Automated Program Repair


     3.4    Prex: Finding Guidance for Forward and Backward Porting of
            Linux Device Drivers
     Julia Lawall (INRIA – Paris, FR)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Julia Lawall


     A device driver forms the glue between a device and an operating system kernel. When
     the operating system kernel changes, the device driver has to change as well. Our goal is
     to automate this kind of forward porting, and analogously backwards porting, focusing on
     drivers for the Linux kernel. We propose a three step approach, based on 1) compilation of
     the driver with the target kernel to identify incompatibilities, 2) collection of examples of
     how to fix these incompatibilities from the commits stored in the revision control system, and
     3) generalization of the identified examples to produce change rules appropriate for porting
     the driver to the target kernel. In this talk, we present the tools gcc-reduce that have been
     designed to carry out the first two steps. The third step remains future work. Our approach
     effectively exploits the specific nature of the driver porting problem: the device is fixed and
     so the required changes are in the interface with the kernel, limiting the kinds of changes
     required, and many drivers supporting devices with a similar functionality interact with the
     kernel in a similar way, implying that porting examples are available.



     3.5    Automated Inference of Code Transforms and Search Spaces for
            Patch Generation
     Fan Long (MIT – Cambridge, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Fan Long


     We present a new system, Genesis, that processes sets of human patches to automatically infer
     code transforms and search spaces for automatic patch generation. We present results that
     characterize the effectiveness of the Genesis inference algorithms and the resulting complete
     Genesis patch generation system working with real-world patches and errors collected from
     top 1000 github Java software development projects. To the best of our knowledge, Genesis
     is the first system to automatically infer patch generation transforms or candidate patch
     search spaces from successful patches.



     3.6    Learning-based Program Repair
     Fan Long (MIT – Cambridge, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Fan Long


     Code learning and transfer techniques have been recently adopted by many successful
     automatic patch generation systems to improve patch generation results. This talk presents
     an overview of these two kinds of techniques. A code learning technique learns useful human
     knowledge from a training set of past human patches. The technique then applies the learned
     knowledge either to prioritize correct patches ahead in a patch generation search space or to
Sunghun Kim, Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury                                  25


infer productive mutation transforms to form the search space. A code transfer technique
extracts useful program logic from existing code of a donor program or examples of Q&A
websites. It then converts the extracted logic to a patch for a recipient program.



3.7    ASTOR: A Program Repair Library for Java
Matías Sebastían Martínez (University of Valenciennes, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Matías Sebastían Martínez


During the last years, the software engineering research community has proposed approaches
for automatically repairing software bugs. Unfortunately, many software artifacts born from
this research are not available for repairing Java programs. To reimplement those approaches
from scratch is costly. To facilitate experimental replications and comparative evaluations, we
present Astor, a publicly available program repair library that includes the implementation
of three notable repair approaches (jGenProg2, jKali and jMutRepair). We envision that the
research community will use Astor for setting up comparative evaluations and explore the
design space of automatic repair for Java. Astor offers researchers ways to implement new
repair approaches or to modify existing ones. Astor repairs in total 33 real bugs from four
large open source projects.



3.8    Combining syntactic and semantic repair
Sergey Mechtaev (National University of Singapore, SG)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Sergey Mechtaev


Test-driven automated program repair approaches traverse huge search spaces to generate
fixes. Several search space prioritization heuristics have been proposed to increase the
probability of finding correct repairs. Although existing systems could generate correct fixes
for large real-world projects, they suffer from limitations of the search space exploration
algorithms. First, current techniques may omit high quality patches during exploration,
which results in generation of suboptimal low quality repairs. Second, current techniques are
able to explore only relatively small search spaces and, therefore, fix only a small number
of defects. We propose a synergy of syntax-based and semantics-based patch generation
methods that explicitly generates a search space and semantically partitions it during test
execution. The proposed algorithm is able to efficiently traverse the search spaces in an
arbitrary order. As a result, our technique is the first that guarantees to the most reliable
patch (global maximum) in the search space according to a given static prioritization strategy
and yet scales to large search spaces. Evaluation on large real-world subjects revealed that
the proposed algorithm generates more repairs, more repairs equivalent to human patches,
and find repairs faster compared to previous techniques. Apart from that, the algorithm and
the design of the search space enable our system to traverse the search space faster than
existing systems with explicit search space representation.




                                                                                                  17022
26   17022 – Automated Program Repair


     3.9     Antifragile Software and Correctness Attraction
     Martin Monperrus (University of Lille & INRIA, FR)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Martin Monperrus


     Can the execution of a software be perturbed without breaking the correctness of the output?
     We present a novel protocol to answer this rarely investigated question. In an experimental
     study, we observe that many perturbations do not break the correctness in ten subject
     programs. We call this phenomenon “correctness attraction”. The uniqueness of this protocol
     is that it considers a systematic exploration of the perturbation space as well as perfect
     oracles to determine the correctness of the output. To this extent, our findings on the
     stability of software under execution perturbations have a level of validity that has never
     been reported before in the scarce related work. A qualitative manual analysis enables us to
     set up the first taxonomy ever of the reasons behind correctness attraction.



     3.10      Detecting and repairing performance bugs that have non-intrusive
               fixes
     Adrian Nistor (Florida State University – Tallahassee, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Adrian Nistor


     Performance bugs are programming errors that slow down program execution. Unfortunately,
     many performance bugs cannot be automatically detected or repaired by existing techniques.
     In this talk I will present Caramel, a novel static analysis technique that detects and then
     automatically repairs performance bugs that have non-intrusive fixes likely to be adopted by
     developers. 116 of the bugs found and repaired by Caramel in 15 popular applications (e.g.,
     Chrome, Mozilla, Tomcat, Lucene, Groovy, GCC, MySQL, etc) have already been fixed by
     developers based on our bug reports.



     3.11      Automated Software Transplantation
     Justyna Petke (University College London, GB)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Justyna Petke


     Genetic Improvement is the application of evolutionary and search-based optimisation
     methods to the improvement of existing software. For example, it may be used to automate
     the process of bug-fixing or execution time optimisation. In this talk I present another
     application of genetic improvement, namely automated software transplantation. While we
     do not claim automated transplantation is now a solved problem, our results are encouraging:
     we report that in 12 of 15 experiments, involving 5 donors and 3 hosts (all popular real-world
     systems), we successfully autotransplanted new functionality from the donor program to the
     host and passed all regression tests. Autotransplantation is also already useful: in 26 hours
     computation time we successfully autotransplanted the H.264 video encoding functionality
     from the x264 system to the VLC media player; compare this to upgrading x264 within VLC,
     a task that we estimate, from VLC’s version history, took human programmers an average of
     20 days of elapsed, as opposed to dedicated, time.
Sunghun Kim, Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury                                 27


3.12      Understanding and Automatically Preventing Injection Attacks on
          Node.js
Michael Pradel (TU Darmstadt, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Michael Pradel


The Node.js ecosystem has lead to the creation of many modern applications, such as
server-side web applications and desktop applications. Unlike client-side JavaScript code,
Node.js applications can interact freely with the operating system without the benefits of a
security sandbox. The complex interplay between Node.js modules leads to subtle injection
vulnerabilities being introduced across module boundaries. This talk presents a large-scale
study across 235,850 Node.js modules to explore such vulnerabilities. We show that injection
vulnerabilities are prevalent in practice, both due to eval , which was previously studied for
browser code, and due to the powerful exec API introduced in Node.js . Our study shows
that thousands of modules may be vulnerable to command injection attacks and that even
for popular projects it takes long time to fix the problem. Motivated by these findings,
we present Synode , an automatic mitigation technique that combines static analysis and
runtime enforcement of security policies for allowing vulnerable modules to be used in a safe
way. The key idea is to statically compute a template of values passed to APIs that are prone
to injections, and to synthesize a grammar-based runtime policy from these templates. Our
mechanism does not require the modification of the Node.js platform, is fast (sub-millisecond
runtime overhead), and protects against attacks of vulnerable modules while inducing very
few false positives (less than 10%).



3.13      Anti-patterns in Search-Based Program Repair
Mukul Prasad (Fujitsu Labs of America Inc. – Sunnyvale, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Mukul Prasad


Search-based program repair automatically searches for a program fix within a given repair
space. This may be accomplished by retrofitting a generic search algorithm for program
repair as evidenced by the GenProg tool, or by building a customized search algorithm
for program repair as in SPR. Unfortunately, automated program repair approaches may
produce patches that may be rejected by programmers, because of which past works have
suggested using human-written patches to produce templates to guide program repair. In
this work, we take the position that we will not provide templates to guide the repair search
because that may unduly restrict the repair space and attempt to overfit the repairs into
one of the provided templates. Instead, we suggest the use of a set of anti-patterns — a
set of generic forbidden transformations that can be enforced on top of any search-based
repair tool. We show that by enforcing our anti-patterns, we obtain repairs that localize
the correct lines or functions, involve less deletion of program functionality, and are mostly
obtained more efficiently. Since our set of anti-patterns are generic, we have integrated them
into existing search based repair tools, including GenProg and SPR, thereby allowing us to
obtain higher quality program patches with minimal effort.




                                                                                                 17022
28   17022 – Automated Program Repair


     3.14      Semantic Techniques for Program Repair
     Abhik Roychoudhury (National University of Singapore, SG)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Abhik Roychoudhury


     In this talk, I will first recapitulate briefly the challenges in automated program repair. I
     will then move to discuss semantic analysis techniques for program repair, and position them
     with respect generate and validate approaches to program repair. I will conclude the talk by
     discussing how semantic approaches can be combined with generate and validate approaches.



     3.15      Automated techniques for fixing performance issues in JavaScript
               applications
     Marija Selakovic (TU Darmstadt, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Marija Selakovic


     Many programs suffer from performance problems, but unfortunately, finding and fixing such
     problems is a cumbersome and time-consuming process. My work focuses on JavaScript,
     for which little is known about performance issues and how developers address them. To
     address these questions, I present the empirical study of 98 reproduced performance-related
     issues from 16 popular JavaScript projects. The findings illustrate that developers optimize
     their code with relatively simple code changes and that the most common root cause of
     JavaScript performance issues is the inefficient usage of native and third-party APIs. To help
     developers find and fix performance problems related to API usages, I present an approach
     for finding conditionally equivalent APIs and detecting the usages of an API that can be
     replaced by an equivalent and more efficient alternative for a given input. The approach is
     based on two-phases dynamic analysis of API usages in web applications. In the first phase,
     the analysis detects potentially equivalent methods based on their type signatures and name
     equivalence. In the second phase, the analysis executes these methods with all observed
     inputs, approximates their execution times and derives an equivalence condition. Finally,
     the analysis points to all code locations that can be optimized by using more efficient API
     and suggests a refactoring to the developers.



     3.16      I Get by With a Little Help From My Friends: Crowdsourcing
               Program Repair
     Kathryn T. Stolee (North Carolina State University – Raleigh, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Kathryn T. Stolee


     Regular expressions are commonly used in source code, yet developers find them hard to
     read, hard to write, and hard to compose. Motivated by the prevalence of regular expression
     usage in practice and the number of bug reports related to regular expressions, I propose
     several future directions for studying regular expressions, including error classification, test
     coverage, test input generation, reuse, and automated program repair. The repair strategies
Sunghun Kim, Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury                                   29


can work in the presence or absence of fault localization, and with or without test cases. I
conclude by discussing the potential impact of integrating regex support into automated
program repair approaches.



3.17      Towards Trustworthy Program Repair
Yingfei Xiong (Peking University, CN)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Yingfei Xiong


Many different approaches have been proposed for automatic program repair, but the
precision and recall of current techniques are not satisfactory. This talk will introduce our
work exploring the possibilities of improving precision and recall. First, we did a study
of manual program repair, and the results show that human developer indeed can achieve
high precision and recall under the same setting of automatic program repair. Second, we
proposed two techniques, mining QA site and statistical condition synthesis, mainly for
improving precision. Both techniques achieve a precision of around 80%.



3.18      How Developers Diagnose and Repair Software Bugs (and what
          we can do about it)
Andreas Zeller (Universität des Saarlandes, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Andreas Zeller


How do practitioners debug computer programs? In a retrospective study with 180 respond-
ents and an observational study with 12 practitioners, we collect and discuss data on how
developers spend their time on diagnosis and fixing bugs, with key findings on tools and
strategies used, as well as highlighting the need for automated assistance. To facilitate
and guide future research, we provide DBGBENCH, a highly usable debugging benchmark
providing fault locations, patches and explanations for common bugs as provided by the
practitioners.



3.19      Automated Test Reuse via Code Transplantation
Tianyi Zhang (UCLA, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Tianyi Zhang


Code clones are common in software. When applying similar edits to clones, developers often
find it difficult to examine the runtime behavior of clones. The problem is exacerbated when
some clones are tested, while their counterparts are not. To reuse tests for similar but not
identical clones, Grafter transplants one clone to its counterpart by (1) identifying variations
in identifier names, types, and method call targets, (2) resolving compilation errors caused
by such variations through code transformation, and (3) inserting stub code to transfer
input data and intermediate output values for examination. To help developers cross-check




                                                                                                   17022
30   17022 – Automated Program Repair


     behavioral consistency between clones, Grafter supports fine-grained differential testing at
     both the test outcome level and the intermediate program state level.
         In our evaluation on three open source projects, Grafter successfully reuses tests in 94% of
     clone pairs without inducing build errors, demonstrating its automated test transplantation
     capability. To examine the robustness of Grafter, we automatically insert faults using a
     mutation testing tool, Major, and check for behavioral consistency using Grafter. Compared
     with a static cloning bug finder, Grafter detects 31% more mutants using the test-level
     comparison and almost 2X more using the state-level comparison.This result indicates that
     GRAFTER should effectively complement static cloning bug finders.
Sunghun Kim, Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury                                         31


        Participants
  Yuriy Brun                         Julia Lawall                      Michael Pradel
University of Massachusetts –      INRIA – Paris, FR                 TU Darmstadt, DE
Amherst, US                          Claire Le Goues                   Mukul Prasad
  Celso G. Camilo-Junior           Carnegie Mellon University –      Fujitsu Labs of America Inc. –
Federal University of Goiás, BR    Pittsburgh, US                    Sunnyvale, US
  Jonathan Dorn                      Fan Long                          Abhik Roychoudhury
University of Virginia –           MIT – Cambridge, US               National University of
Charlottesville, US                  Matías Sebastían Martínez       Singapore, SG
  Lars Grunske                     University of Valenciennes, FR      Marija Selakovic
HU Berlin, DE                        Sergey Mechtaev                 TU Darmstadt, DE
  Ciera Jaspan                     National University of
                                                                       Kathryn T. Stolee
Google Inc. –                      Singapore, SG
                                                                     North Carolina State University –
Mountain View, US                    Martin Monperrus                Raleigh, US
  Aditya Kanade                    University of Lille & INRIA, FR
Indian Institute of Science –                                          David R. White
                                     Adrian Nistor                   University College London, GB
Bangalore, IN                      Florida State University –
  Sarfraz Khurshid                 Tallahassee, US                     Yingfei Xiong
University of Texas – Austin, US                                     Peking University, CN
                                     Alessandro Orso
  Dongsun Kim                      Georgia Institute of Technology –   Andreas Zeller
University of Luxembourg, LU       Atlanta, US                       Universität des Saarlandes, DE
  Sunghun Kim                        Justyna Petke                     Tianyi Zhang
HKUST – Kowloon, HK                University College London, GB     UCLA, US




                                                                                                         17022
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 17031

Planning and Robotics
Edited by
Malik Ghallab1 , Nick Hawes2 , Daniele Magazzeni3 ,
Brian C. Williams4 , and Andrea Orlandini5

1    LAAS – Toulouse, FR, malik@laas.fr
2    University of Birmingham, GB, n.a.hawes@cs.bham.ac.uk
3    King’s College London, GB, daniele.magazzeni@kcl.ac.uk
4    MIT – Cambridge, US, williams@csail.mit.edu
5    CNR – Rome, IT, andrea.orlandini@istc.cnr.it


      Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 17031 on “Planning
and Robotics”. The seminar was concerned with the synergy between the research areas of
Automated Planning & Scheduling and Robotics. The motivation for this seminar was to bring
together researchers from the two communities and people from the Industry in order to foster
a broader interest in the integration of planning and deliberation approaches to sensory-motor
functions in robotics. The first part of the seminar was dedicated to eight sessions composed on
several topics in which attendees had the opportunity to present position statements. Then, the
second part was composed by six panel sessions where attendees had the opportunity to further
discuss the position statements and issues raised in previous sessions. The main outcomes were
a greater common understanding of planning and robotics issues and challenges, and a greater
appreciation of crossover between different perspectives, i.e., spanning from low level control
to high-level cognitive approaches for autonomous robots. Different application domains were
also discussed in which the deployment of planning and robotics methodologies and technologies
constitute an added value.
Seminar January 15–20, 2017 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/17031
1998 ACM Subject Classification I.2 Artificial Intelligence, I.2.9 Robotics
Keywords and phrases adjustable autonomy, artificial intelligence, automated planning and
   scheduling, goal reasoning, human-robot interaction, plan execution, robotics, robust autonomy
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.7.1.32



 1      Executive Summary
Andrea Orlandini
Malik Ghallab
Nick Hawes
Daniele Magazzeni
Brian C. Williams
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Andrea Orlandini, Malik Ghallab, Nick Hawes, Daniele Magazzeni, and Brian C. Williams


Automated Planning and Scheduling (P&S) and Robotics were strongly connected in the
early days of A.I., but became mostly disconnected later on. Indeed, Robotics is one of the
most appealing and natural application area for the P&S research community, however such
a natural interest seems to not be reflected by advances beyond the state-of-the-art in P&S

            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Planning and Robotics, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 7, Issue 1, pp. 32–73
Editors: Malik Ghallab, Nick Hawes, Daniele Magazzeni, Brian C. Williams, and Andrea Orlandini
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                  33


research in Robotics applications. In light of the accelerated progress and the growth of
economic importance of advanced robotics technology, it is essential for the P&S community
to respond to the challenges that these applications pose and contribute to the advance of
intelligent robotics.
    In this perspective, a Planning and Robotics (PlanRob) initiative within the P&S research
community has been recently started with a twofold aim. On the one hand, this initiative
would constitute a fresh impulse for the P&S community to develop its interests and efforts
towards the Robotics research area. On the other hand, it aims at attracting representatives
from the Robotics community to discuss their challenges related to planning for autonomous
robots (deliberative, reactive, continuous planning and execution etc.) as well as their
expectations from the P&S community. The PlanRob initiative was initiated as a workshop
series (http://pst.istc.cnr.it/planrob/) started at the International Conference on Automated
Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS) in 2013. The PlanRob workshop editions gathered very
good feedback from both the P&S and Robotics communities. And this resulted also in the
organisation of a specific Robotics Track at ICAPS since 2014.
    The aim of this Dagstuhl Seminar was to reinforce such initiative and increase the synergy
between these two research communities. Then, most of the attendees contributed with
position statements (whose abstracts are available in this report) to present their major
challenges and approaches for addressing them. In general, this involved sharing views,
thoughts and contributions across the following main topics:
    Long-term autonomy / Open world planning, providing an overview on issues related
    to continuous planning for robots with partial information or even incomplete models;
    Knowledge Representation and Reasoning in Planning, with presentations on cognitive
    features and robot planning;
    Challenges in Industrial, Logistics & Consumer Robotics, providing relevant insights
    related to deployment of robots in real world scenarios;
    Human-Robot Planning, with a wide overview on planning solutions for dealing with
    interactions between humans and robots;
    Planning and Execution, discussing issues and challenges related to robust planning and
    execution for robot control;
    Task & Motion Planning / Hybrid planners, with presentations on integrated solutions
    for robot control at different levels;
    Reliable and Safe Planning for Robotics, providing an overview of ISO standards for
    robots and, more in general, investigating the exploitation of formal methods to guarantee
    reliability in robotic applications;
    Technological Issues in Robot planning/Multi-robot Planning, with statements on
    technological issues in (multi-) robot solutions.

    Each session was animated by (i) an opponent, whose role was to be critical about the
position statements and (ii) a moderator, to organise the discussion. Therefore, opponents
and moderators have provided a short summary of the session ideas and discussion in
dedicated Synthesis Sessions to further foster the discussion.
    In addition, two panel sessions have been organised on (i) Evaluation, Benchmarking
and Competitions, discussing the experience in RoboCup@Home and the organisation of
the new Planning and Execution competition (that will be held in 2017), and (ii) Outreach
& Training, discussing about the possible organisation of summer schools and the opening
of new scientific networking initiatives (e.g., a COST action).
    During the seminar, discussions focused on different issues, challenges, possible solutions
and new promising trends over a very wide variety of relevant topics: knowledge representation,




                                                                                                  17031
34   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     modelling issues, the need of incomplete models; cognitive features such as, for instance,
     learning and goal reasoning; human-aware solutions for flexible human-robot interaction;
     adaptive solutions for human-robot collaboration; robust execution capable of effectively
     dealing with failure; integration issues in robotic architecture that, e.g., exploit different
     kind of models and then perform hybrid reasoning; application of formal methods to provide
     verification and validation functionalities to guarantee reliable robotic systems; etc. Indeed,
     addressing the integration of P&S and Robotics for development of intelligent robots entails
     covering a heterogeneous spectrum of problems, often requiring complex solutions that require
     a vast set of knowledge and technologies.
         During the seminar, there was a very high level of engagement and interaction between
     the participants, enabling a lively and productive week. The main outcome of the seminar
     was to share a common understanding of issues and solutions with thorough discussions.
     And the workshop ended with an open discussion on possible follow ups and possible actions
     to create further opportunities for fostering synergies and interactions between the two
     communities.
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                       35


 2      Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Andrea Orlandini, Malik Ghallab, Nick Hawes, Daniele Magazzeni, and Brian C.
  Williams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

Overview of Talks
     Joint Human-Robot Activity is a context and a challenge for pertinent investigation
     in Automated Planning
     Rachid Alami . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
     A Blueprint for the Evolution of Perspectives: Planning Technology as a Basis for
     the Mass Customization of Robots
     Iman Awaad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
     Towards Autonomous Robots via Technology Integration
     Roman Bartak . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
     Robot Planning for the mastery of human-scale everyday manipulation tasks
     Michael Beetz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
     Plug&Play Autonomous Robots
     Ronen I. Brafman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     41
     Planning with ROS
     Michael Cashmore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
     Teach Once Logistics Perspective
     Martin Davies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
     Learning Spatial Models for Navigation
     Susan L. Epstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   44
     Flexible Execution of Human-Robot Collaborative Plans: a cognitive control
     Alberto Finzi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
     Combined Task and Motion Planning is Classical Planning
     Hector Geffner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
     Planning for Long-Term Robot Autonomy
     Nick Hawes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47
     Plan-based robot control
     Joachim Hertzberg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    47
     Flexible Planning for HRI
     Laura M. Hiatt and Mark Roberts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
     Safety Reconsidered – planning for safe human-robot collaboration
     Michael W. Hofbaur . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
     Conditional Planning for Human-Robot Interaction
     Luca Iocchi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
     Rethinking Computational Investments in Planning and Execution
     Gal A. Kaminka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     51
     Cognitive Robotics on the Factory Floor
     Erez Karpas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52




                                                                                                       17031
36   17031 – Planning and Robotics


        Multi-Robot Planning with Spatial and Temporal Constraints
        Sven Koenig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
        Explainable Robotics
        Lars Kunze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
        Probabilistic Planning for Mobile Robots with Formal Guarantees
        Bruno Lacerda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
        Planning for Persistent Autonomy: Where are we struggling?
        Daniele Magazzeni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     57
        Temporal Planning for Execution
        Lenka Mudrova . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     57
        Symbiotic Human Robot Planning
        Daniele Nardi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
        Towards an Integrated Approach to Planning and Execution
        Tim Niemüller and Gerhard Lakemeyer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
        How much reliable are plan-based controllers for autonomous robots?
        Andrea Orlandini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
        Some practical issues for social consumer robots: an industrial perspective
        Amit Kumar Pandey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       61
        Multirobot coordination
        Simon Parsons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
        Knowledge-level planning for Human-Robot Interaction
        Ron Petrick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   64
        Goal Reasoning for Robotics
        Mark Roberts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
        Effective Hybrid Planners for robotics
        Enrico Scala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
        Planning for Open-ended Missions
        Matthias Scheutz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
        Planning with Incomplete models
        Reid Simmons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
        On the Shoulders of Giants: The Case for Modular Integration of Discrete Planners
        and Continuous Planners for Robotics
        Siddharth Srivastava . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
        Persistent, Instructable, Interruptible, Transparent Autonomy
        Manuela Veloso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    71

     Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                    37


 3     Overview of Talks
3.1    Joint Human-Robot Activity is a context and a challenge for
       pertinent investigation in Automated Planning
Rachid Alami (LAAS – Toulouse, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Rachid Alami


Let us consider what should be the planning abilities for a robot that has to share Task and
Space with a Human partner. Planning and more generally on-line deliberation is clearly a
necessary ability since it allows the robot to reason on action and situation consequences, to
anticipate or to act pro-actively.
    This is a task oriented problem. The question can be expressed as “How to perform a
task, in presence or in interaction with humans, in the best possible way i.e. taking into
account safety and efficiency but also acceptability of robot behaviour by the humans and
legibility of robot intentions”.
    The robot has to build and manage “Shared Plans” involving Humans and itself. Besides
the criteri mentioned above, the models should integrate the key notion of predicting and
reasoning about human mental state as well as human preferences. Based on this, the
problem is not only to build a plan for a robot which collaborates with humans but to build
a “sufficiently good” plan that answers satisfactorily, a various levels of abstraction, the
questions: what, who, where, when, how? Our aim is to discuss the issues mentioned above
and illustrate them based on preliminary results that not only give some concrete examples of
human-aware task and motion planning but also how they can fit in a coherent architecture
for a cognitive and interactive robot.



3.2    A Blueprint for the Evolution of Perspectives: Planning
       Technology as a Basis for the Mass Customization of Robots
Iman Awaad (Hochschule Bonn-Rhein-Sieg – St. Augustin, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Iman Awaad


As the field of robotics expands beyond a critical mass with a view to advancing the public
interest, a change in paradigm is needed that transfers the complexity of customizing some
functions from those with deep technical competence to the users – a process of mass
customization.
     Allowing for customization of functionality will enable users to adjust the functions for
which they acquired the robot to their own needs and biases, thus enabling it to serve as an
extension to their own capacity, rather than of what the manufacturer might perceive to be
a standard set of customers’ capacities and needs. This ability to customize the functionality
would inherently necessitate a transparent interaction that explains what the agent is doing
and why, and enables the user to modify behavior by specifying preferences, contexts, and
rules (what to do, what not to do and when). The user’s own explanations may well play
a role in specifying such knowledge. Given that planning technology is responsible for the
decision making process that determines the behavior of the robot (plan-based robot control),
it is perfectly placed to play a central role in this customization process by enabling end-users




                                                                                                    17031
38   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     to directly customize and even create the planning domains that are used by the robots via
     other ubiquitous tools (such as tablets and mobile communication devices).
         This is just one of many aspects that will need investigation in the process of scaling up
     robotic ubiquity, alongside issues such as legal/regulatory implications, embedded cultural
     bias and social acceptance, ethical ramifications, etc. (Looking at the two simple examples
     of diffusion of drones and autonomous vehicles already exemplifies many of these factors).
     One extra point is that now all “parameters of the robot’s autonomy” are defined by the
     manufacturers, some of these parameters would need to be transferred to the customer/user.
     This would apply to aspects that relate to personal/cultural/practical/social preferences.
     (Even McDonalds “localizes”, and offers veggie burgers in Hindu regions. In this case, we
     can’t talk just of regional localization but individual customization, because each household
     has its own individuality and potential preferences for how the autonomy of a robot is
     manifested.) Perhaps, by keeping in mind this goal of enabling the customization (whether
     by learning, or by parametrization, and so on..), we may also find that we as developers
     have created toolsets and modalities that simplify the process of adding and changing the
     functionality of robots. More needs to be done within the community to speed up the
     development process and remove the extensive barriers to entry that currently exist. The
     sharing of best practices, lessons learned, solutions (which should be developed with re-use
     in mind), and even raw data sets would be a start in this direction. The creation of a central
     repository for the various application domains that makes available specifications of planning
     domains, tasks, actions, preferences, agendas, and context, in whatever representations they
     were formulated in is a worthwhile endeavor. Cooperation is important for interoperability
     but also for transboundary regional policy-making (e.g. Uber).
         Finally, we need to be aware of (and exploit) technological innovation that is developing
     rapidly in parallel, and that may or may not accelerate or help shape the trajectory of
     autonomous Position paper for Dagstuhl Seminar 17031 Planning and Robotics (PlanRob)
     robots. For example, in the same way that the community has benefitted from technologies
     that were initially developed for the mobile communications market, we should capitalize
     on the technology (and standards) that have been developed for the Internet of Things and
     other innovations that are yet to appear. Similarly, in the same way that the development of
     selfdriving cars resulted from the cooperation between the community and the automotive
     industry, a similar cooperation with architects and home furnishing companies could go a
     long way in injecting the much sought-after structure in home environments and providing
     (both static and possibly dynamic) knowledge of these objects and environments to the
     planning and acting processes.



     3.3    Towards Autonomous Robots via Technology Integration
     Roman Bartak (Charles University – Prague, CZ)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Roman Bartak


     We share the challenge of developing autonomous robots that can do anything that their
     hardware allows them to do. The ultimate testbed is a robot that can do any task that a
     human can do when remotely controlling the robot. The idea is learning how people are
     performing the task with a robot and then “programming” the robot to be able to solve
     the same (and similar) tasks hopefully in a more general setting. To fulfill this vision one
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                   39


needs expertise in many areas including control theory, computer vision, localization, path
finding, activity planning, knowledge representation, machine learning, etc. Despite progress
in all these areas separately, there are still big gaps between them that prevent efficient
exploitation of research results to build advanced integrated systems such as autonomous
robots.
    Robotics today is very separated from Artificial Intelligence (and activity planning). We
can identify several gaps there such as symbolic vs numeric reasoning and model-free vs
modelbased methods. We believe that different approaches are better for different settings
and hence it is more appropriate to find a way how to integrate them rather than preferring
one approach over the other one to handle all the problems. Activity planning is a symbolic
modelbased approach while robotics is based more on numeric model-free techniques. Many
problems arise from the clash between these different worlds. How can we obtain the symbolic
model necessary to apply planning techniques for a particular robotic hardware? Which
modelling framework is appropriate to provide necessary expressivity and efficiency? How to
formulate the planning goal based on the current state of the system? When (re-) planning
should be initiated? How does the plan convert to executable instructions? How does
the sense-act approach fit the plan-execute approach? Etc. In our research, we develop
model-centric techniques with the focus on planning domain models that are efficient for
problem solving. We use flying drones as a robotic platform because they are “kinetically”
simple (opposite for example to robotic hands) – the drone can only fly and observe. Still,
the drones can solve interesting practical tasks such as mapping, inspection, search, tracking,
delivery etc. Our focus is on software for controlling the drone and for information processing
rather than on hardware, which is a “standard platform”. This is based on idea that current
hardware is advanced enough to perform complex tasks but the weak part is software that
controls it. Hence we believe that AI will play a more significant role in robotics in upcoming
years.
    The first question is what are the symbolic activities to be used in activity planning for
robots. We are trying to identify activities as somehow homogenous behaviors using machine
learning techniques (such as clustering) applied to sensor (and control) data obtained from
a drone when being manually controlled. Currently, we do not use the camera as a sensor,
but it would be very interesting to exploit computer vision techniques as a source of extra
sensor inputs (very rich inputs in this case). The next step is, for such activities, finding
some formal description that can be parameterized (for example flying forward for a specific
distance) and finding a controller for executing such activities. This way we are trying to
bridge the continuous (numeric) world of robots with the symbolic world of planning. Having
the activities, the next step is finding a way of efficient planning with them. PDDL planning
is based on the “flat” structure of activities with no extra control knowledge. Despite a
huge progress in domain-independent planning, PDDL planners are still hardly applied to
practical problems due to efficiency problems. There exist modelling frameworks such as
hierarchical task networks and control rules to guide the planners, but it is cumbersome to
obtain such models. We are going in the direction of recipe-based planning models where the
causal structures of activities can be learnt by observing how the robot solves a specific task
while being controlled by a human (activities need to be detected first from sensor data).
Hierarchical structures seem desirable there to get better flexibility via having reusable tasks
that decompose to simpler sub-tasks. Getting experience from linguistics, namely formal
grammars that can describe hierarchical structures, might be beneficial there thanks to
exiting support tools for formal grammars, for example, allowing one to do formal reasoning
with the models such as verification. This is an active research topic where technology




                                                                                                   17031
40   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     developed for one area (natural language processing) can be exploited in a very different
     area (activity planning). Though we are addressing automated techniques to obtain and use
     the activity models, we also see a big gap in authoring tools for developing control software
     for robotic platforms. Frameworks such as ROS simplified transfer of tools between robotic
     platforms, but using ROS still requires non-trivial knowledge and low-level programming
     skills that makes it hard to program “standard” robotic platforms for specific tasks. We
     believe that the above-described approach of using symbolic activities (directly executable by
     a robotic platform) that are connected via recipes for performing specific tasks can simplify
     development of robotic software. Visual programming languages and systems such as Ozobot
     are good motivation there. They can be used to manually describe recipes (plans) to solve
     specific tasks as well as to visualize automatically-learned recipes. The challenge is how to
     go beyond the models for classical sequential execution of activities to more flexible reactive
     models that are still easy to understand. The major reason for having some formalism for
     activity models is the need to verify such models before they can be used in industrial setting.
     In summary, we see symbolic models as a way to simplify development of robotic software.
     These models need to be tightly connected to control software that is based more on numeric
     techniques. Hence integration of various technologies is necessary there.



     3.4    Robot Planning for the mastery of human-scale everyday
            manipulation tasks
     Michael Beetz (Universität Bremen, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Michael Beetz


     Robot planning can be considered as the reasoning about the future execution of robot
     programs (plans) in order to optimize their performance in terms of achieving their goals
     and efficiency (McDermott). The holy grail of robot (action) planning ever since the Shakey
     project has been to equip robotic agents with human-level (manipulation) action capabilities.
     Unfortunately, the progress along this dimension has been modest at best. I believe that much
     of the lack of progress is caused by the way the research field of task planning abstracts (robot)
     actions (see PDDL). It makes the assumption that reasoning about abstract preconditions and
     effects is sufficient for planning complex manipulation tasks. If we interpret this assumption
     from a probabilistic point of view, we can restate it by asserting that the probability of
     achieving the desired effects of actions is conditionally independent of how the robot executes
     the actions given that the preconditions of the actions are satisfied. This means that our
     robot action planning systems would not change their belief about whether an action is
     executed successfully depending on whether the robot plans to grasp an object with one
     hand or two, which grasp type it applies, and so on. Or, if a fetch action is executed by
     two-year old or an experienced waiter. In contrast our experience with realizing human-scale
     manipulation activities for robotic agents shows that most of the intelligent problem-solving
     capabilities of robots are needed in order to decide how to execute the actions to make them
     succeed, that is to achieve the desired effects of an action and avoid the undesired ones.
         I believe that in order to materialize the impact that robot planning technology can
     have for robotic agents that are to accomplish human-scale manipulation activities, we have
     to extend our representation and reasoning machanisms to include the concepts of motor
     cognition. Motor cognition is a discipline in cognitive psychology of action which is concerned
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                   41


with the learning, reasoning, and planning of how to parameterize and synchronize motions
in order to accomplish actions. I foresee a new generation of powerful robot planning systems
that do not only reason symbolically about their actions but also subsymbolically with their
“eyes and hands”. Today’s disruptive technologies, in particular modern game technology,
physics simulation, data analytics, and deep learning give us the opportunities to pursue this
direction.



3.5    Plug&Play Autonomous Robots
Ronen I. Brafman (Ben Gurion University – Beer Sheva, IL)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Ronen I. Brafman


Robotics today is reminiscent in many ways of personal computing in the early 80s. Some
key industrial applications, various toy applications, and even more difficult to use than DOS.
One of the keys to more powerful computing, and to more useful robotics, is the ability to
easily integrate new software and new hardware without having to configure them manually.
The difficulty in robotics is even greater as new capabilities can interact in complex ways not
only internally, but also externally. Beyond this, we need simple ways of getting robots to do
what we wish, and writing dedicated scripts each time is not a good solution. One of the key
software-engineering challenges for robotics is to facilitate a world in which it is easy and
safe to integrate new capabilities into a robotic platform. We believe AI, and AI planning in
particular, provides some of the key ideas for addressing this challenge.
    We are trying to address this need by developing formal, machine readable and actionable
“robot-capability description language” – essentially, a rich action description language
that replaces semi-formal software engineering formal techniques, and is closely related to
efforts to standardize the specification of web-services. Essentially, we argue that action
description languages should be elevated to the status of function specifications. We are
aware of the existence of formal methods for programming robots that provide powerful
tools for writing code with behavior guarantees. Yet, we fear that these will be confined to
the small community of researchers working on them, as there is a large, and likely to be
growing community of users that are continuously contributing useful robotic code, albeit
one written using standard programming techniques and with standard tools. Providing a
formal specification of the properties of this code seems much easier and more realistic than
rewriting this code from scratch, and amenable, to some extent, to automation.
    If every functional module has an associated formal description of its normal behavior, it
is easy to provide added value services that
1. Monitor its performance and alerts of any abnormal situation,
2. Improve the model based on actual experience,
3. Verifies controllers that combine existing modules, and provides information about their
    probably effects,
4. Combines existing modules automatically,
– and probably additional added value services that would be developed in the future.
    To this effect, we have developed a rich XML-based specification language that contains
four classes of functions: achieve, maintain, observe, and detect, tools for generating monitor-
ing code, and tools for generating automated interfaces between this code and the ROSPlan
system.




                                                                                                   17031
42   17031 – Planning and Robotics


         In our work we continuously discover new desirable features, and we anticipate that this
     will continue to be the case, and hope to join efforts with other in providing the “right”
     specification language and tools that exploit it.



     3.6    Planning with ROS
     Michael Cashmore (King’s College London, GB)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Michael Cashmore


     We are working towards integrating Hybrid Systems Planners with real-world systems. This
     involves a number of challenging and interesting questions. Given real-valued and non-linear
     functions within the planning process, what new kinds of models can be explored?
         In each robotic system there is a decision as to what should be included in the planner’s
     model, and what should be handled by a specialised component. This question, and the
     way in which external planning tools are connected together presents as many interesting
     problems as the modelling decisions themselves.
         All too often the planner is seen by non-experts as a black box. It is expected to produce
     a behaviour that is already scripted. To use a general planner in a robotic system in a more
     interesting way, a large amount of integration takes place around it. Consider the following
     requirements sketch for a planning robot:
         The models used by the system are generated automatically:
            This includes components for state estimation, state prediction, and abstraction.
            These build a model of the current environment in the language of the planner.
            The long-term goals of the robot, are either provided by hand or driven by the robot’s
            motivations.
            A model of the robot’s capabilities are generated from a formal description of the
            hardware.
         The planning takes place at multiple levels of abstraction, starting with long-horizon
         strategic plans, which gradually are refined into short-horizon task plans.
         Plans generated by the planner are executed robustly with some prior preprocessing:
            They are pre-processed into a structure that explicitly contains plan failure conditions
            and causal links (which are not often included in planner output).
            They are also translated into a structure that has some formal guarantees on control-
            lability; or are combined with execution rules. The resultant plan could better be
            described as a controller.
         Even using the most advanced planning techniques for uncertainty, the robotic system
         reliably deviates from the planner’s model. Action or plan failure that occurs as a result
         is detected, and also repaired in a way that does not unwittingly affect other ongoing
         plans and processes.
         The robot interacts with humans and so:
            A component is included for plan legibility, so that a user can understand that the
            robot lives between and outside of scripted and broken behaviour.
            The user is able to modify the long term goals and behaviour of the robot.
            The user is able to interact within the confines of planned behaviour; assisting the
            robot, being assisted, and communicating.
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                    43


    All of the above could arguably be included within the black box of the planning system.
I am interested in exploring which components are essential in any “planning” robotic system,
which are optional, and which can be replaced by equivalent components.
    When engaging in the task of integrating components, the result is often the minimal
functioning system. I am also interested in providing a generic architecture for linking those
essential components that will facilitate the easy use of existing libraries in new systems,
opening up the black box of planning to general (ROS) users.



3.7    Teach Once Logistics Perspective
Martin Davies (Guidance Automation Ltd – Leicester, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Martin Davies


Any repetitive task is ripe for automation. Since the invention of the mechanized weaving
loom in the late 1700’s, the mechanization and subsequent automation of manufacturing
practices has revolved around three steps:
    Firstly, the identification of a suitable process for completing a stage of the manufacturing
process. Requiring skilled humans, throughput is low and cost is high.
    Secondly, process optimization reduces variation and errors. The introduction of jigs,
fixtures, an SOP (standard operating procedure) etc. de-skills the task and reduces product
variance.
    Finally, once the process is tested and rigid, the now dominant cost factor, the human
element is removed. Automation is brought in, increasing profitability and securing market
dominance.
    The concrete example of this is an automotive production line. High numbers of identical
products are manufactured for a number of years with minimal variance. The line consists
of a number of cells, with each cell designed for a specific task. When the product line is
refreshed, the factory is shutdown, the cells are reconfigured and robots within cells are
re-taught via manual operation. They will be re-taught in less than a day and will follow
that teaching for a number of years before being reconfigured. Teach once. Repeat infinite.
    Robotics now is about replacing humans directly in dynamic environments. Guidance
Automation automates and provides scheduling software for forklift automated guided vehicles
(AGV’s) in logistics environments. We are at the “third” stage in the manufacturing process,
but the application of the technology is overly complex and unwieldy.
    Consider now the installation of a fleet of forklift AGV’s. We have to map the environment,
and potentially install some form of navigational aids. We then have to align the map that the
AGV’s will navigate to CAD, enabling us to have AGV’s that can navigate the environment
in a frame of reference common to the existing warehouse management system (WHM).
    Now we have to link all stock locations in the warehouse to physical locations in order to
schedule the AGV’s. This requires mapping and labelling all shelves, which currently may
only be in a human readable format.
    Then there is a large amount of scripting and teaching to be done, determination of
locations to pick and drop pallets. Environmental variance is high, shelves may be at different
heights, scripts cannot be cut and pasted. System operation must be guaranteed without the
requirement to teach every pick location.




                                                                                                    17031
44   17031 – Planning and Robotics


         Finally, we also have to handle the inability to see all objects. Paper hanging down from
     pallets, obscuring shelves and markings. The process is rigid for deskilled human operators,
     but too flexible for robotic undertaking.
         My question is how do we apply the teachings of the manufacturing industry to the
     logistics environment. Should our focus be on robot evolution or is the logistics problem too
     unconstrained to solve efficiently? How can we as robotics experts influence the logistics
     process enabling us to make it teach once.



     3.8    Learning Spatial Models for Navigation
     Susan L. Epstein (City University of New York, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Susan L. Epstein


     Deliberative robot navigation architectures often model the world as a detailed metric map.
     Given a target destination, the robot constructs an optimal plan within the map and then
     executes it. Realistically, however, doors open and close, and people (or other robots) move
     rapidly about. In such dynamic worlds, a map identifies only static obstructions. Thus,
     plan-based navigation requires plan repair and often re-planning.
         Our approach, SemaFORR, is intended for autonomous indoor navigation, where maps are
     unreliable or unavailable, and landmarks may be absent, obscured, or obliterated: complex
     office buildings, warehouses, and search-and-rescue settings. Rather than respond only
     to percepts and known obstructions, we have chosen to learn spatial affordances, spatial
     abstractions that facilitate movement and represent a robot’s experience of the world. Our
     thesis is that spatial affordances learned from local sensing during travel can both support
     effective, autonomous robot navigation and provide a lingua franca for dialogue with a human
     traveling companion. SemaFORR’s spatial affordances include unobstructed areas, useful
     transit points, route segments, doors, and passageways. Together they form a spatial model
     that represents the robot’s world but is not a metric map. SemaFORR has rapidly learned
     spatial models that support efficient travel in a variety of simulated two-dimensional worlds.
     That approach was purely reactive, however, without recourse to a map or a planner.
         SemaFORR can learn a spatial model either from its percepts as it navigates or in
     simulation on a map of its environment. Current work includes the construction of ROS-
     based SemaFORR modules parameterized for a variety of real-world robot platforms. Work
     is also underway to adapt SemaFORR for movement through crowd models based on well-
     documented human behaviors. We will extend work on movement toward and through
     crowds to real-world environments, where we can test a variety of human-robot interactions.
         Thus we envision SemaFORR as a collaborator in navigation in two ways:
         As a companion to SLAM: Current development includes classical planning in a traditional
         metric map, novel planners in the spatial model, and techniques to integrate them. We
         expect that a plan derived in SemaFORR’s spatial model will prove more flexible than
         those of traditional map-based planners.
         As a companion to a human traveller: Recent work in cognitive neuroscience (including
         the 2014 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine) has detected place cells, grid cells, and
         direction mechanisms in mammalian brains that have strong analogies to our spatial
         affordances. Thus we believe that SemaFORR is a strong foundation for dialogue with
         a human traveling companion about decisions and the nature of the environment. The
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                   45


   user-friendly qualities of SemaFORR’s spatial model and the simplicity of its reasoning
   structure provide a natural common ground within which to discuss which way to travel
   and why.



3.9    Flexible Execution of Human-Robot Collaborative Plans: a
       cognitive control
Alberto Finzi (University of Naples, IT)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Alberto Finzi


In social and service robotics, complex collaborative plans should be executed while interacting
with humans in a natural and fluent manner. Indeed, a robotic system is often provided with
structured tasks to be accomplished; on the other hand, this execution should be continuously
adapted to the human activities, commands, and interventions. In these scenarios, the human
interaction is unpredictable and very complex (multimodal, verbal and non-verbal, either
explicit or implicit, etc.), therefore, several mechanisms should be supported, such as human
state/activity/intention recognition, joint attention, attention manipulation, referencing,
turn-taking, action coordination, dialogue management.
    Different frameworks have been proposed in the robotics literature to conciliate natural
human-robot interaction and the execution of complex cooperative plans. The dominant
approach relies on the planning and execution paradigm and deploys replanning to adapt
task execution to the behaviors of the agents involved in the interaction. This paradigm is
effective in mixed-initiative planning and execution, however, the associated continuous plan-
ning/replanning process usually impairs the naturalness and effectiveness of the interaction
with the humans and the environment.
    We propose to tackle these issues from a different perspective exploiting the concept
of cognitive control introduced in cognitive psychology and neuroscience to describe the
executive mechanisms/functions needed to support flexible, adaptive responses and complex
goal-directed cognitive processes and behaviors. Inspired by this literature, we propose to
deploy a supervisory attentional system paradigm [Norman Shallice 1986]. In this framework,
executive attention plays a crucial rule. Indeed, the supervisory attentional system coordinates
and monitors hierarchically organized behavioral schemata exploiting attentional regulations
to facilitate the execution of desired processes, while inhibiting the inappropriate ones.
This paradigm seems particularly relevant not only for flexible plan execution, but also for
human-robot interaction, because it directly provides attentional mechanisms (attention
manipulation, joint attention, action facilitation, habituation, etc.) considered as pivotal for
implicit, non-verbal human-human communication [Tomasello 2008].
    Following this approach, we propose and discuss an interactive framework that combines
human-aware planning, flexible and interactive plan execution, human monitoring, multimodal
interaction, and task teaching. In this setting, a cooperative plan is considered as an
attentional guidance for an attentional executive system influenced by the human actions
and the environmental changes. Finally, we discuss how the proposed framework can support
not only flexible and interactive execution of structured tasks, but also incremental task
adaptation through teaching by demonstration.




                                                                                                   17031
46   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     3.10      Combined Task and Motion Planning is Classical Planning
     Hector Geffner (UPF – Barcelona, ES)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Hector Geffner


     Robot planning is a broad area. I focus here on what’s called “combined task and motion
     planning”. Some approaches split the problem into two, task and motion planning, that are
     ad- dressed by two types of planning algorithms. Such a decomposition however tends to
     be ineffective as the two components are not independent. More recent approaches have
     aimed at exploiting the efficiency of modern classical planners, either by taking the spatial
     constraints into account as part of a symbolic, goal-directed replanning process [7], or by
     using geometrical information in the computation of the classical planner heuristic [3]. My
     position is that combined task and motion planning (CTMP) is classical planning, and that
     it may pay to address the problem in this way. What is classical planning? It’s planning
     from a known initial state using deterministic actions with known effects for achieving a goal
     state. It is assumed that the state space is discrete and finite, and given in compact form as
     the values of a set of variables whose values are changed by the actions. The first obstacle
     that needs to be overcome in order to formulate and solve CTMP as classical planning is
     that the space of robot and object configurations is not finite or discrete. Yet, it’s common
     for such configuration spaces to be discretized by means of probabilistic sampling schemes
     [5]. The second challenge is the limitation of existing classical planners for modeling CTMP
     problems even when discretized. It’s not clear indeed how to express for example that
     “spatial collisions” are to be avoided in STRIPS-like languages without ending up with huge
     encodings. The third challenge is that, even if one develops a suitable planning language
     for modeling discretized CTMP as a classical planning problem, there may be no effective
     planners for dealing with such a language, nor efficient ways for translating it into one that
     can be handled by modern planners like LAMA. Yet these are all limitations of current
     classical planners, not of classical planning that is supposed to deal with sequential decision
     problems involving deterministic actions and a fully known initial state. Moreover, these
     limitations have little to do with robotics. For example, the Atari video-games, and many of
     the games of the General-Video AI game competition are classical planning problems that
     cannot be addressed by the standard classical planners. Indeed there is no PDDL encodings
     for such problems but just a simulator. In the last few years, we have developed expressive
     planning languages [2] and classical algorithms that can effectively plan with such languages
     and with simulators [6, 4]. More recently, we have shown how these ideas can be applied to
     CMTP where problems involving tens of objects and a PR2 robot can be fully compiled and
     solved as classical planning problems [1].
     References
     1    J. Ferrer, G. Frances, and H. Geffner. Submitted. Videos at http://bit.ly/2fnXeAd, 2016.
     2    G. Frances and H. Geffner. Modeling and computation in planning. In Proc. ICAPS, 2015.
     3    C. Garrett, T. Lozano-Perez, and L. Kaelbling. FFRob: An efficient heuristic for task
          and motion planning. In Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics XI, pages 179–195. Springer,
          2015.
     4    T. Geffner and H. Geffner. Width-based planning for general video-game playing. In Proc.
          AIIDE-2015, 2015.
     5    S. M. LaValle. Planning algorithms. Cambridge, 2006.
     6    N. Lipovetzky, M. Ramirez, and H. Geffner. Classical planning with simulators: Results on
          atari. In Proc. IJCAI, 2015.
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                    47


7      S. Srivastava, E. Fang, L. Riano, R. Chitnis, S. Russell, and P. Abbeel. Combined task and
       motion planning through an extensible planner-independent interface layer. In Proc. ICRA,
       pages 639–646, 2014.



3.11      Planning for Long-Term Robot Autonomy
Nick Hawes (University of Birmingham, GB)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Nick Hawes


An open problem within the use of planning technologies on robots is the problem of planning
for long--term autonomy. There are at least two challenges within this problem. The first
is that within a long--term autonomous robot, planning may never formally start and end.
Instead the robot should maintain a plan which achieves goals for some future time horizon,
where that time horizon is only part of a longer--term schedule of goal--driven behaviour.
For example the robot may have a known list of goals which it should achieve that day, or
that week, and must also respond to goals provided to it in an on--demand fashion. It also
must manage it’s limited resources (notably battery and time) to ensure that it is able to
achieve all its goals in its future, not just the ones in the time horizon. Finally it must also
be able to deal with the inevitable failures and unexpected consequences of operating in the
real world. This challenge brings together planning and scheduling along with prior work
on oversubscription planning, continual planning and goal--driven autonomy. The second
challenge within planning for long--term autonomy is being able to automatically generate
planning domains, environment models etc. in such a way that they capture the experience
of the robot (in plan execution, and of the environment more broadly) over the long time
periods it operates for. This will allow for planning models which better match reality,
resulting in better performing robots and fewer failures at execution time.



3.12      Plan-based robot control
Joachim Hertzberg (Universität Osnabrück, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Joachim Hertzberg


Robotics and AI planning are both in a healthy state, as we all know. A deep integration
of the two is open in many respects. In my view, the depth of integration would increase
with the number and caliber of processes of robot control, on the one side, and planning,
on the other, that run in closed loop – and with closed loop, I mean that they both take
input from the respective other one and generate output for the respective other one (which
this one takes as input). To make such a closed-loop integration possible, requires a deep
understanding of what happens on both ends of the loop, and requires deep integration in
terms of representation formalisms, representation granularity, control granularity, and, of
course, interfaces. I will name three issues, which are intertwined, where I see room as well
as the need for improvement.




                                                                                                    17031
48   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     Execution monitoring
     The classic. As long as a course of action runs perfectly as planned and as envisaged by
     the planning domain model, all is good. As soon as it deviates from this nominal course,
     we have little to say about it. This starts with the problem of recognizing in the first place
     when deviation starts. We may represent time lines about state variables to include timing
     behavior of actions – this allows to detect delays, but not every delay is a fatal deviation.
     Even if we determine that something has gone wrong with executing some action or plan,
     then what was the cause of the fault? AI planning is strong in modeling abstractly nominal
     courses of action; plan-based robot control needs deep models of the environment and its
     dynamics that allow non-nominal developments to be understood, too. To make it efficient,
     both should probably work in the same representation framework.

     Semantic perception
     Interpretation of the data flow from a configuration of robot sensors is, in the utmost of
     cases and methods, understood as a process of bottom-up aggregation and abstraction from
     sensor data “upward” to symbols, and eventually into pieces or sentences in a representation
     language. That is good, but it is just one part of the story. To have its knowledge influence
     the action of the robot efficiently, the inverse process is needed: the priming by context,
     as determined by reasoning about the knowledge about the current situation, of the act of
     perceiving. This starts from directing the sensors and the sensor data processing resources
     to salient spots or events in the environment, continues over discarding much if not most of
     the raw sensor data deemed uninteresting, and goes into interpreting the salient data in the
     current context according to the current needs. Sensor data – be they single still images or
     full ROS bags – don’t hit us like rainfall. As part of robot control, they are, or should be,
     actively acquired, to a large extent.

     Dealing with huge, flawed, and deficient bodies of knowledge
     Knowledge in many robot domains is huge (think of all that needs to be known about an
     office building for a courier robot), facts are subject to change independent of robot actions
     (think of all that goes on in an office building outside of the robot’s control), and the robot
     can impossibly know all that is the case in its world, even though it may once become
     relevant for its action (again, think of all that is the case in an office building). Yet, it has
     to get along with what it knows, as good as it knows it. AI has it since a long time that
     reasoning is defeasible. Robotics tells you: this is the norm rather than an exotic exception
     in a robot’s knowledge base; whatever reasoning is used has to function with huge knowledge
     bases that contain large numbers of flaws and gaps. What is a formalism and a calculus to
     cope with that? What additional robot tasks are needed for making its precious knowledge
     base sustainable in spite of these flaws and gaps? As far as I know, no one knows.
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                        49


3.13      Flexible Planning for HRI
Laura M. Hiatt (Naval Research Lab – Washington, DC, US) and Mark Roberts (Naval
Research – Washington, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Laura M. Hiatt and Mark Roberts


As robots become more pervasive in our daily lives, it becomes more important to be able
to interact with them, and task them, naturally and spontaneously. One major hindrance
to achieving this goal is a lack of flexibility in how robots can execute tasks and interact
with the world. For example, if a robot that is carrying a tool to a teammate is asked by
another human to help them hold open a door, the robot should conceptually be able to help.
In most current robotic planning systems, however, unless such a scenario was specifically
foreseen and engineered, this level of flexibility is not possible: the robot would either have to
prematurely end the tool task, or deliver the tool and then return to help with the door. This
both hinders overall robot performance and, we argue, decreases the quality of interactions
between robots and human partners.
    We are addressing this problem by beginning to investigate how different robotic tasks
can be concurrently executed in an ad hoc fashion, even if they utilize overlapping resources
on the robot (such as the same arm). One of the key questions of this concurrency is how to
ensure the correctness of the combined execution of the tasks. In our approach, we address
correctness by enabling tasks to specify constraints that other executing tasks must observe
when executing concurrently. Returning to the earlier example, the robot carrying the tool
to the teammate may specify that its arm can move around or be used in another task as
long as the tool stays 3 inches away from any object. Both goal reasoning and planning
algorithms must then be extended to support these constraints, allowing reasoning about
domains not only where multiple tasks can execute at once, but also where the tasks can
physically affect one another.
    It is our belief that giving robots this additional level of flexibility will both increase their
overall functionality, as well as increase their ability to naturally team with human partners.



3.14      Safety Reconsidered – planning for safe human-robot
          collaboration
Michael W. Hofbaur (Joanneum Research – Klagenfurt/Wörthersee, AT)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Michael W. Hofbaur


Real world applications of human-robot collaboration require conformity to relevant standards.
For robotic manipulators, for example, it is obligatory to operate the machines according
to the guidelines defined in ISO 10218 “Robots and robotic devices – Safety requirements
for industrial robots” and ISO 15055 “Robots and robotic devices – Collaborative robots”.
These standards introduce a framework for safety that is conceptually different from the
safety concept that is typically used in computer science, AI and planning, in particular.
    For example, ISO 15066 defines specific operational modes that restrict the functionality
of a robot to physically safe manipulation operations. These limitations often lead to
impractical robot applications (e.g. too slow, inadequate force / torque capabilities for
real-world applications, etc.). Using environmental perception and task- / situation-aware




                                                                                                        17031
50   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     high level control using advanced planning and scheduling could significantly improve the
     robot’s capabilities and enable new applications of human-robot collaboration. However,
     this will also require the planning component to obey certain practical requirements, such as
     coding-standards and architectural-considerations and guaranteed dependability levels.
         Our impulse talk will therefore consider safety concepts from both perspectives and
     sketches possible future directions for planning and scheduling in high-level control systems
     of collaborative robots that enable safe autonomous behaviors of these machines.



     3.15      Conditional Planning for Human-Robot Interaction
     Luca Iocchi (Sapienza University of Rome, IT)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Luca Iocchi


     Service robots interacting with people in home or public environments are required to execute
     many different tasks, including various forms of interaction with the users. These actions
     typically depends on the needs or requests of the users and generating all the possible
     combinations in advance and manually is a too demanding task. Moreover, when interacting
     with naive users, the robot has to be robust to many unexpected situations. Finally, the
     assumption that a robot is always able to have perfect knowledge about the situation is too
     unrealistic and plans must be robust to imperfect and noisy perception.
         In this scenarios, automated planning procedures are very useful to generate many
     interactions with a compact representation of the domain, resulting in less effort for the
     designer of the system and better performance of the overall task.
         However, the most common standard planning techniques present the following issues:
     1. classical planning assumes perfect knowledge and perfect action execution;
     2. replanning after failures assumes perfect sensing (to detect failures and to determine the
         new initial state for replanning);
     3. Markov Decision Processes (MDP) require perfect observability of the state;
     4. Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDP) allow for modelling perception
         uncertainty, but efficiency of the algorithms does not scale with the complexity of the
         problem and determining correct probability values is a difficult task.

         Conditional planning instead has nice features in this scenario: (i) it is based on explicit
     sensing, thus perception is limited to the execution of such sensing actions (rather than
     passively used to determine any state); (ii) only partial knowledge about the initial state is
     required; (iii) conditional planners are efficient. In other words, conditional planning allows
     for execution of minimal sensing procedures that minimizes the risk of wrong execution of
     the plans due to wrong perceptions.
         However, conditional planning still suffers from the following problems: (i) actions are
     assumed to be deterministic (except for different sensing outcomes) and perfect; (ii) plans do
     not contain loops, so it is not possible to model repetitions of parts of the plan (which is
     useful in HRI applications). We propose to solve these problems by adding an additional
     layer in the plan generation procedure that aims at improving the robustness of a plan
     generated by a conditional planner through execution rules. This additional layer takes the
     conditional plan generated by a planner and a set of declarative rules and generates a more
     complex and robust plan.
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                    51


    The execution rules allow to: (1) define execution variables (different from planning
variables) associated to action executions; (2) check their values at run-time in order to
execute local recovery procedures when the values of such execution variables affect the
success of the execution of actions; (3) define conditions that allow repetitions of parts of the
plan.
    This idea has been implemented and experimented with different formalisms, including
the transformation of an MDP policy to a conditional plan [Iocchi et al. ICAPS 2016] and
the use of the conditional planner Contingent-FF integrated in ROSPlan (http://kclplanning.
github.io/ROSPlan).
    While the robust plan is represented using the Petri Net Plans (PNP) formalism (http:
//pnp.dis.uniroma1.it) and executed by the PNP engine.
    The method has been tested with a real robot interacting with many users in public
environments, within the COACHES project (https://coaches.greyc.fr/)
    Although, the system is still sensible to wrong perceptions (i.e., it is still possible that
wrong perceptions determine wrong executions of the plans), this risk is minimized, since
perceptions are performed a minimum number of times, that is only when it is strictly
required to proceed with the plan.
    Discussion will include how to further improve the system, by adding more principled
solutions of the above mentioned problems. Moreover, generation and execution of robust
plans is an orthogonal feature that is useful for every robot planning application domain.



3.16      Rethinking Computational Investments in Planning and Execution
Gal A. Kaminka (Bar-Ilan University – Ramat Gan, IL)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Gal A. Kaminka


Planning when to plan, and when not to. I work on multi-robot plan execution; in particular,
on executing plans for teams of robots. I have been working on plan execution systems
for teams of robots, for more than 15 years. A cornerstone of executing team plans is to
recognize the points in which robots will make a decision, e.g., by voting or other social-choice
mechanism. By recognizing these points, the systems I have designed are able to guarantee
good teamwork of the robot, in the sense of carrying out their tasks in an agreed-upon
manner.
    There is really no feasible way to plan the voting process in advance, in the sense of
planning out which robot will vote for what option. This is inherently an execution-time
process. However, planning to hold a vote should be possible, just as it should ideally
be possible to plan whether to hold a vote of a specific type (e.g., plurality vs. Borda vs.
dictatorial). The lesson is that some executions you cannot plan, but you can plan to execute.
    More generally . . . Back in 1997, I was taking a graduate course in artificial intelligence
planning, taught by Craig Knoblock and Yolanda Gil. As a final project, we were asked
to write a paper that would tackle an open question, provide the literature survey and
recommend directions for further research. My paper addressed the computational effort in
planning and execution. I contrasted the approaches of the planning community (graphplan
and satplan were the newest planners), and the robotics community (subsumption was being
pushed out in favor of behavior-based control). The two communities were seemingly at odds,
scientifically. The mainstream planning community focused, as it does today, on building




                                                                                                    17031
52   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     planners that extensively relied on simulating the effects of actions. To do this, they needed
     models of how the world behaves. The mainstream robotics community had just completed its
     embrace of reactivity, subsumption and behavior-based robotics, which emphasized throwing
     away models (and therefore planning), or at the very least limiting the role of planning
     significantly. Just a few years before, Matt Ginsburg wrote that “Universal Planning is an
     almost universally bad idea” in an issue of AI Magazine, and Agre and Chapman, having
     successfully built Pengo without a planner, were leaving both communities with the impression
     that there is a justified gap between robotic acting in dynamic environments, and planning
     for static environments. Sure, there were also researchers working on integrated planning and
     execution, but they were mostly working on softbots or learning policies via reinforcement
     learning.
         I took the position that the planning community and the robotics community were in
     fact in complete agreement: they were both advocating the use of incredibly dumb executors.
     The planning community were expecting an executor which will blindly execute a series
     of actions, given as grounded operators. The most that would be expected from such an
     executor would be to check whether preconditions and effects hold as predicted. The robotics
     community, having given up hope on planning, was instead building very dumb mechanisms
     as well. Execution of policies, from this respect, is not very different: follow the policy
     and myopically respond as dictated. The various behavior selection and fusion mechanisms
     which are often discussed in this community are as myopic as the sequential selection of
     grounded operators for execution. In short, both communities were assuming essentially
     all computation is carried out in planning time. By comparison, decision-making during
     execution is computationally trivial, because it is myopic.
         I would like to see us shifting the computational burden, to do more computation during
     execution (possibly, invested in projections of future state, but not only). Some HTN planners,
     and BDI agent architectures, come somewhat close to this, in the sense that they both allow
     on-line refinements for plan recipes. But their refinement is an all-or-nothing deal: recipes
     given in advance are either refined or are not; they are not usually modified during execution.
     The philosophical shift in focus of the autonomous agents community, from the agent as
     a planner, to the agent as a plan selector is not enough in this regard. It emphasizes the
     importance of integrating planning and execution, and it highlights the very real challenges
     involved in everything beyond generating plans. But plans are still thought of as rigid objects,
     generated by planners, to be handed off for execution after some filtering and selection.
         I would like to have a planner that knows when to plan, and when to leave off planning to
     a later point in time; a planner that plans for later planning. I believe the way to achieve this
     goes through rethinking of the planning process, as a process that spans execution. No more
     interleaving of calls to a planner with calls to step execution. Rather, a single computational
     process that plans when it can, and automatically stops filling in details when it cannot.



     3.17      Cognitive Robotics on the Factory Floor
     Erez Karpas (Technion – Haifa, IL)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Erez Karpas


     Industry 4.0 is one of the most common buzzwords heard today. The term is a reference to
     the industrial revolutions of the past: The (first) industrial revolution, in the 18th century,
     came about with the advent of the first steam- powered machines. The second industrial
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                     53


revolution, in the 19th and early 20th century, involved using electricity to power assembly
lines in performing mass production. The third industrial revolution, from the 1970s, involved
computer-integrated manufacturing (as well as computer-aided design), and is the origin
of industrial robotics. While the term industry 4.0 has many different interpretations, it
usually refers to integrating many sensors in the factory, and using analytics to derive some
actionable insight from the data (this is often called Internet-of-Things and Big Data). In
my talk, I will argue that cognitive robots could be of great benefit on the factory floor, and
should be counted as an integral part of the fourth industrial revolution.
    The first major benefit of cognitive robotics is in reducing the cost of setting up a factory.
Traditional industrial robots typically require extensive, low-level, programming by highly
specialized experts | a very expensive process in both cost and factory downtime. On the
other hand, cognitive robots could be programmed by giving them a goal, such as “assemble
1000 electric razors of type X”, and will plan all the low-level details by themselves. Second,
customized manufacturing is a very important trend now. For ex- ample, Motorola now
allows customers to customize the phones they order on the web, choosing between millions
of possible configurations. Cognitive robots could manufacture each device according to
order, further taking into account deadlines, shipping schedules, etc.
    Finally, although ideally robots will be able to do everything humans can, this will not
happen any time in the near future. Thus, human-robot teamwork is an important part of
any cognitive manufacturing robot. The ability to communicate with, and work alongside,
a human requires high-level reasoning, and is an interesting challenge to the planning and
robotics community. Although putting cognitive robots on the factory floow is a significant
challenge. However, I believe it is easier to succeed on the factory floor than, for example, in
a home environment for service robots, because the environment is much more structured and
controllable, and because there are far fewer ethical concerns. Furthermore, a manufacturing
setting provides clear and measurable economic benefit, which can allow us to claim that it
is worth investing in planning and robotics research.



3.18      Multi-Robot Planning with Spatial and Temporal Constraints
Sven Koenig (USC – Los Angeles, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Sven Koenig


There are several gaps between symbolic AI planning research (as typically presented at
ICAPS) and robotics that need to be addressed to make AI planning research more useful
for robotics:
    Robots operate in dynamic worlds, which makes on-line planning necessary. They also
    need to make many decisions quickly during execution, not only because stopping wastes
    time but also because the world continues to evolve. Thus, AI planning research needs to
    focus more on realtime planning.
    Robots operate in spatial environments. Thus, AI planning research needs to focus more
    on spatial planning and the integration of spatial and temporal planning.
    Robots operate around people. Thus, AI planning research needs to take into account
    that the behavior of robots needs to be predictable (for example, that similar tasks should
    result in similar behaviors). This criterion needs to be incorporated into the objective
    function of AI planners. (This issue is also important in the context of replanning for




                                                                                                     17031
54   17031 – Planning and Robotics


        teams of humans, such as for emergency teams, where it is often important to keep the
        modifications of the previous plan small in case of contingencies in order to avoid a large
        coordination overhead. Again, similar situations should result in similar behaviors.)
        Robots cannot execute plans perfectly since planning uses models of the world and models
        never represent reality perfectly. Thus, plan execution will frequently deviate from the
        plan, which makes plan-execution monitoring and replanning necessary. AI planning
        research often assumes that this issue can be handled well with online replanning, which
        always re-solves the planning problem from the current state in case plan execution
        deviates from the plan. However, planning is often too slow for online replanning to be
        a viable strategy for real-time planning. Thus, AI planning research needs to develop
        integrated planning and plan-execution architectures that use slow replanning only very
        selectively. They could, for example, use hierarchical replanning strategies that use fast
        plan-adaptation whenever possible and slow replanning only as a last resort.
        Finally, multi-robot systems are more fault-tolerant and allow for more parallelism than
        single-robot systems. Thus, AI planning research needs to focus more on cooperative
        multi-agent planning, both in centralized and – very importantly – decentralized settings.
        Some AI planning research studies multi-agent planning but focuses on privacy, which is
        less important for robotics than other applications.

         The research of my research group addresses these issues in the context of multi-robot
     path finding, where multi-robot teams have to assign target locations among themselves
     and then plan collision-free paths to them. Examples include automated warehouse systems,
     autonomous aircraft towing vehicles, office robots and game characters in video games. For
     example, hundreds of robots already navigate autonomously in Amazon fulfillment centers to
     move inventory pods all the way from their storage locations to the packing stations. Path
     planning for these robots is NP-hard, yet planning must find high-quality collision-free paths
     for them in real-time.
         There is a long way to go to bridge the gap between AI planning research and robotics.
     We advocate robotics-friendly planning domains for IPC competitions as one possible way to
     engage AI planning researchers. For example, one suggestion is to use a planning domain
     that models the Harvard TERMES robots as part of the multi-agent planning competition.
     The Harvard TERMES project investigated how multiple robots can cooperate to build
     userspecified three-dimensional structures much larger than themselves. Planning is required,
     even for single robots, to build structures effectively since they need to build ramps to reach
     high places but ramps consist of many blocks and are time-consuming to build. Thus, robots
     need to plan carefully when and where to build ramps and, once built, how to utilize them
     best. Planning for single robots is already difficult due to the large number of blocks and
     long plans. Planning for multiple robots is even more difficult since, as for multi-robot path
     finding, it needs to reason about how to achieve a high degree of parallelism without robots
     obstructing each other even though many robots operate together in tight spaces.
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                  55


3.19      Explainable Robotics
Lars Kunze (University of Birmingham, GB)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Lars Kunze


Planning and decision making in the real world requires autonomous robots to draw on
different sources of knowledge. This includes prior knowledge about the domain, knowledge
acquired through longterm experience, and knowledge derived from more recent observations
through robotic sensors. Hence, planning and decision making as well as the resulting
behavior of robot systems, can be quite complex. For end-users, and sometimes even for
robot developers, it might not be clear why a system behaves in a particular way. Therefore,
I argue that autonomous robots should be equipped with principled ways that allow them to
explain their own behavior and their own decisions. For example, to answer the question
“why did you stop in front of a green traffic light?” an autonomous car could generate an
explanation such as “I stopped because I saw a person approaching at very high speed”. By
providing explanations and/or justifications for decisions users can follow and comprehend
the internal processes of robot systems. Such transparency can lead to an increased user
acceptance and eventually to trust in autonomous robots in general. Moreover, while
analyzing the behavior of a robot system developers could benefit from mechanisms that can
explain ‘why’ an action was performed.
    Realizing systems that can provide explanations about themselves and their own behavior
poses several challenges. First of all, these systems require explicit (and interpretable)
representations about the world, about themselves, and their planning and decision making
processes. Secondly, robots need to be equipped with inference mechanisms to reason about
different possible explanations. Finally, to provide explanations to users and developers
novel interfaces for Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) are required. In previous work, we
have developed the Semantic Robot Description Language (SRDL). SRDL is based on the
Web Ontology Language (OWL) and provides a principled way to describe robots, their
components, and their capabilities semantically. It allows robots to explain what tasks (and
actions) they are able to perform and it allows them to infer why they are not able to perform
certain actions. Hence, I believe that SRDL is a good starting point for enabling robots to
reason about their own planning and decision making processes. For reasoning about different
possible explanations we are currently investigating Answer Set Programming (ASP). ASP
has been successfully integrated with ontologies and uses explicit representations to reason
about different possible worlds (or Answer Sets). Hence, I think that ASP is a reasonable
candidate for generating sets of different explanations for planning decisions.
    Finally, I believe that the design and the development of novel HRI interfaces that make
interpretable models accessible to users and developers is an open problem which should be
addressed by researchers from various disciplines including (Cognitive) Psychology, Computer
Science (HCI), and Robotics.
    To summarize, I believe that autonomous robots (and other AI systems) should be
equipped with the capability to ‘explain’ their own behavior and their own decisions. I
suspect that such explanations will lead to a better understanding of robot systems in general.
Thereby, user acceptance will be increased and trust in robot systems will be build up.
Additionally, developers will benefit from transparent planning and decision processes when
analyzing the behavior and the performance of complex robot systems.




                                                                                                  17031
56   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     3.20      Probabilistic Planning for Mobile Robots with Formal Guarantees
     Bruno Lacerda (University of Birmingham, GB)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Bruno Lacerda


     In recent years, the field of mobile service robots has witnessed important developments in
     terms of the ability for robust deployments in real life environments. Thus, we are quickly
     approaching an era where robot systems are regularly deployed among humans as an extra
     tool to improve productivity, for example, in office environments. Robots in such scenarios
     can perform a range of tasks such as fetch-and-carry, or security checks. In order to perform
     such deployments, one needs the ability to quickly generate robust and efficient plans for
     large scale systems. On top of that, another aspect I see as a crucial element in any safe,
     robust and efficient design/deployment loop is the ability to provide formal guarantees of
     performance for such plans. For example, guarantee that a robot will never navigate into
     dangerous regions of the environment; provide a value for the probability of a task being
     successfully completed; or give an expectation of the time that the execution of a task will
     take.
         I have been researching the use of probabilistic model checking techniques for the
     generation of high-level plans for mobile robots with probabilistic formal guarantees, and
     using such plans on real life mobile service robot deployments. In parallel with the research
     on probabilistic model checking, and using many similar techniques, there have been efforts
     from the artificial intelligence and planning community on sequential decision making under
     uncertainty. This research generally does not provide formal guarantees. On the other hand,
     it focuses on fast generation of plans for large problems, using approximation techniques,
     something which probabilistic model checking approaches struggle with. Broadly speaking,
     even though probabilistic model checking and sequential decision making use many of the
     same underlying models, historically, the point of view of each field has been slightly different.
     A key point of my research agenda is to bring ideas from these two fields together, applying
     them to the deployment of safe and robust robot deployments in the real world.
         Finally, I believe that extending probabilistic model checking techniques to multi-robot
     systems can yield very significant contributions to the field. In particular, there are many
     works applying sequential decision making techniques to multi-agent coordination. Building
     on those, ad also extending single-robot verification techniques in order to provide team level
     guarantees at different levels of abstraction is currently my main research goal. These tech-
     niques will combine approaches from sequential decision making and probabilistic verification
     in order to generate policies for task allocation and multi-robot coordination, with attached
     probabilistic guarantees, such as “regardless of the state of the team, there will always be
     one robot able to get to reception within 5 min, with probability 0.95”. The main challenges
     in order to achieve this goal are to correctly apply different techniques in a well founded
     way, such that the overall framework can scale while still being able to provide meaningful
     guarantees over both individual robots, and overall team performance.
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                  57


3.21      Planning for Persistent Autonomy: Where are we struggling?
Daniele Magazzeni (King’s College London, GB)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Daniele Magazzeni


AI Planning is about determining actions before doing them, anticipating the things that
will need to be done and preparing for them. Planners use domain-independent heuristics to
guide the search in huge state spaces.
    Recently, AI Planning has been successfully applied to handle complex systems. PDDL+
is the formalism used to describe hybrid systems, and allows the modelling of the differential
equations governing the continuous behaviour of the system. This talk provides an overview of
how PDDL+ can be used to model robotics and autonomous systems; presents a new PDDL+
planner based on SMT and the ROSPlan framework for planning with ROS; highlights some
open challenges on the integration between planning and robotics.



3.22      Temporal Planning for Execution
Lenka Mudrova (University of Birmingham, GB)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Lenka Mudrova


Many researchers dream about a mobile service autonomous robot who will roam our work
environments and homes and assist us with our every day tasks. If we pretend that robotics
has solved all “low-level” problems to make such a robot possible ( hence the robot has
certain capabilities, such as moving around, grasping objects, opening doors, observing and
recognising, understanding speech, etc.) then we face at least the following questions.
1. How the robot can plan its behaviour in order to be able to perform required tasks given
    by a human?
2. When the robot should act in order to satisfy human’s time constraints?
3. How to execute obtained plan in more robust sense, i.e., the robot is not stopping and
    re-thinking everything all the time...
4. How to react to situations that can go wrong in the execution? How to react when
    experiencing unknown unknowns?

    In my currect research, Ive focused on giving some answers to Questions 1 and 2,
developing an approach based on merging of partial order plans with durative actions, that
can quickly and effectively generate a plan for a set of independent tasks. This plan exploits
some of the synergies and demands of the plans for each single task, such as common locations
where certain actions should be executed. This approach also handles situations when a task
is required to be satisfied within a time window, and the partial order of the plan is a strong
benefit for execution, when the final plan can be joined online in reaction to the current
observations.
    In order to make a progress with Questions 3 and 4, I think the community needs to
move away from the current evaluation type “it runs” to benchmarking. As benchmarking in
the real world is hard due to influence of many uncontrollable events, I propose to focus on
developing benchmarking domains in simulations (using standard robot simulators) where
different aspect affecting execution can be plugged in and repeat it many times under same
conditions. Hence, more discusstion is needed about what are the aspects to be monitor
during execution and modelled in such a benchmark domain.


                                                                                                  17031
58   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     3.23      Symbiotic Human Robot Planning
     Daniele Nardi (Sapienza University of Rome, IT)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Daniele Nardi


     While operating in domestic environments, robots will necessarily face difficulties not envi-
     sioned by their developers. Moreover, the tasks to be performed by a robot will often have
     to be specialized and/or adapted to the needs of specific users and specific environments.
     Hence, the conventional approach to planning, based on a fixed action specification does not
     seem a suitable modeling tool.
         Learning how to operate by interacting with the user seems a key enabling feature
     to support the introduction of robots in everyday environments. Symbiotic autonomy
     is a recently introduced viewpoint where the user should help the robot to improve its
     performance and to perform tasks otherwise not achievable. This novel perspective to the
     design of intelligent robots leads to a number of interesting research questions that are
     related to planning. First, the robot should plan including speech acts and, more specifically,
     requests for help from the user. Second, the robot can learn from the user plans to accomplish
     complex task. Third, the robot can learn from action/plan failures by requesting explanations
     to the user.
         Our aim is to explore the above research question and illustrate some initial contributions
     following this approach. In particular, we present a novel approach for learning, through the
     interaction with the user, complex task descriptions that are defined as a combination of
     primitive actions. The proposed approach makes a significant step forward by allowing task
     descriptions parametric with respect to domain specific semantic categories. Moreover, by
     mapping the task representation into a task representation language, we are able to express
     complex execution paradigms and to revise the learned tasks in a high-level fashion. The
     approach is implemented in multiple practical test cases with a service robot.



     3.24      Towards an Integrated Approach to Planning and Execution
     Tim Niemüller (RWTH Aachen, DE) and Gerhard Lakemeyer (RWTH Aachen, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Tim Niemüller and Gerhard Lakemeyer


     Challenges
     Building a robotics system is inherently an integration challenge. A diverse set of software
     components must be combined and the interaction with the physical world places high
     demands on robustness and fault tolerance. Still, task-level planning and reasoning for
     autonomous mobile robots – that claims to help in solving in some of these challenges by
     automatic and flexible behavior design – is still the exception rather than the norm. A part
     of the problem is that the scope of the planning community often ends once the plan has been
     generated. In the robotics community, on the other hand, most researchers are concerned
     with other components such as perception, navigation, or manipulation. The modeling and
     integration overhead for planning systems often appears considerable even for small problems,
     and unable to scale to larger ones.
         Therefore, from our perspective one of the fundamental challenges for the closer coopera-
     tion and mutual benefit of both such communities is an integrated approach to planning and
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                      59


execution. That starts with good craftsmanship to design and implement the appropriate
software interfaces. But it also contains research questions, such as what would a unified
language for planning and execution look like, and what would be its model and semantics?
What would be an accurate and expressive representation of plans that allows to combine,
for example, classical and temporal plans for a common executive and to choose the appro-
priate planner depending on the sub-problem to solve? What does execution monitoring for
generated plans mean in the presence of uncertainty and contingencies?

Some Pieces of the Puzzle
To tackle these questions, efforts are required in both communities. While the planning
community’s first and foremost goal is to efficiently generate plans, for the robotics community
task-level behavior is often only means to test and demonstrate other components. Bringing
these worlds together requires dedicated work on the interface part, the integration of efficient
planning systems and execution and execution monitoring of generated plans.
    An observation is that execution of plans (handled by an executive of some sort) is often
only an afterthought, if at all. It often requires interfacing with planners that produce
output in a mostly non-unified format (contrary to the somewhat unified input language
based on PDDL), making it harder to replace a specific planning system and also leading to
many ad-hoc solutions if planning is used on a robot. We think that a unified language that
combines the definition of a planning domain and problem, and also of the execution and
monitoring of the resulting plans is desirable. We have made first steps with GologCP [5]
which builds on ideas for automatic Golog/PDDL translation [3] and continual planning [2]
to create an integrated framework to planning and execution. The results show a significant
performance improvement and sound modeling. However, a language more similar to PDDL
or other planning languages might be desirable, for example, building on PRS ops [1].
    A generalized representation of plans might be desirable. There have been systems already
using simple temporal networks (STN) on the planning [4] and the execution [6] side. It can
represent simple or more complex plans and thus scale with the capabilities of the planning
system. We are currently investigating the possibility to use a classical planner to solve
sub-problems in a multi-robot context, and then use additional information to transform the
resulting sequence into an STN to allow for parallel execution of parts of the plan.
    It seems useful if the execution of plans itself was more carefully modeled including the
interactions between planning and execution. This might also include extensions for plan
repair if re-planning is too costly, starting execution already once a (likely) prefix of the plan
has been determined, or to include assertions as in continual planning, which are conditionally
expanded sub-plans that allow to cope, for example, with incomplete knowledge (postponing
it to be a run-time decision, requiring a closer integration).
    While we do not suggest giving up the separation between planning and execution
generally, we think it is still worth investigating the possible interactions of the two processes,
and benefits or drawbacks on making these more explicit, fine-grained, and more expressive.

Evaluation Scenario
The integration of planning and execution demands different evaluation scenarios as are
used, for example, in the International Planning Competition. Autonomous mobile robotics
scenarios naturally require such a closer integration as the environments are typically dynamic,
short reaction times are necessary, and there are many uncertainties. In cooperation with
Karpas, Vaquero, and Timmons we therefore proposed a Planning Competition for Logistics




                                                                                                      17031
60   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     Robots In Simulation [7]. It provides a suitable scenario at a comprehensible size. It
     is to be understood as a first step and we explicitly deem other scenarios relevant and
     useful. The chose scenario is based on the RoboCup Logistics League [8], an established
     real-world robotics league that focuses on production in modern manufacturing environments
     downscaled and build with readily available hardware. It has a natural focus on planning and
     reasoning systems for multirobot coordination and cooperation. Performing the simulation
     in simulation (at least initially) allows to easily adjust complexity, size, and duration.
     References
     1    Alami, R.; Chatila, R.; Fleury, S.; Ghallab, M.; and Ingrand, F. 1998. An architecture for
          autonomy. The International Journal of Robotics Research 17(4).
     2    Brenner, M., and Nebel, B. 2009. Continual planning and acting in dynamic multiagent
          environments. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 19(3).
     3    Claßen, J.; Röger, G.; Lakemeyer, G.; and Nebel, B. 2012. PLATAS – integrating planning
          and the action language Golog. KI – Künstliche Intelligenz 26(1).
     4    Halsey, K.; Long, D.; and Fox, M. 2004. CRIKEY – A Temporal Planner Looking at the In-
          tegration of Scheduling and Planning. In Workshop on Integrating Planning into Scheduling
          at 13th International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS).
     5    Hofmann, T.; Niemueller, T.; Claßen, J.; and Lakemeyer, G. 2016. Continual Planning in
          Golog. In Proceedings of the 30th Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI).
     6    Levine, S. J., and Williams, B. C. 2014. Concurrent plan recognition and execution for
          human-robot teams. In Int. Conf. on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS).
     7    Niemueller, T.; Karpas, E.; Vaquero, T.; and Timmons, E. 2016. Planning Competition for
          Logistics Robots in Simulation. In WS on Planning and Robotics (PlanRob) at Int. Conf.
          on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS).
     8    Niemueller, T.; Lakemeyer, G.; and Ferrein, A. 2015. The RoboCup Logistics League as a
          Benchmark for Planning in Robotics. In WS on Planning and Robotics (PlanRob) at Int.
          Conf. on Aut. Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS).



     3.25      How much reliable are plan-based controllers for autonomous
               robots?
     Andrea Orlandini (CNR – Rome, IT)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Andrea Orlandini


     Decisional autonomy is considered among one of the key system abilities for robotics applica-
     tions. This entails robotics platforms to be endowed with a wide set of automated reasoning
     capabilities to be implemented by means of suitable technologies. Among these, automated
     planning and scheduling (P&S) technology plays a crucial role.
         In general, automated P&S systems are finding increased application in real-world mission
     critical systems that operate under high levels of unpredictability. Given a description of
     a desired goal, and a model of possible actions and their causal/temporal constraints, the
     planning problem consists of finding a plan, which is a sequence of actions, the execution of
     which is calculated to lead to the goal state under normal circumstances. Such technology
     can be used to generate plans to control a plant (for example a robot), driven by goals often
     issued by humans. Such technology is occasionally referred to as model--based autonomy.
     Then, a P&S system takes as input a domain model and a goal, and produces a plan of
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                    61


actions to be executed, which will achieve the goal. A P&S system typically also offers plan
execution and monitoring engines.
     To foster effective use of Automated P&S systems in (near future) robotics applications
such as, for instance, service robots, it is of great importance to significantly increase the
trust of end users in such technology.
     On one hand, automated P&S systems often bring solutions which are neither “obvious”
nor immediately acceptable for them. This is mainly because these tools directly reason
on causal, temporal and resource constraints; moreover, they employ resolution processes
designed to optimize the solution with respect to non trivial evaluation functions. On the
other hand, due to the non--deterministic nature of planning problems, it is a challenge
to construct correct and reliable P&S systems, including, for example, declarative domain
models. That is, it is not straightforward to guarantee the correctness/reliability of P&S
systems.
     In this regard, Verification and validation (V&V) techniques may represent a complement-
ary technology with respect to P&S, that contribute to develop richer software environments
to synthesize a new generation of robust problem--solving applications. The aim of this
talk is to discuss open issues related to V&V techniques in P&S considering multiple needs,
i.e., considering V&V of domain models, V&V of plans, V&V of plan executions, V&V of
planners, V&V of plan execution engines and V&V of plan execution monitors.
References
1    Bensalem S, Havelund K, Orlandini A (2014) Verification and validation meet planning and
     scheduling. International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer 16(1):1–12.
2    A. Cesta, A. Finzi, S. Fratini, A. Orlandini, and E. Tronci, (2010) Validation and Verifica-
     tion Issues in a Timeline-Based Planning System, Knowledge Engineering Review, vol. 25,
     no. 3, pp. 299–318.
3    Orlandini A, Finzi A, Cesta A, Fratini S (2011) TGA-based controllers for flexible plan
     execution. In: KI 2011: Advances in Artificial Intelligence, Proceedings of the 34th Annual
     German Conference on AI, Springer, LNCS, vol 7006, pp. 233–245.
4    Cesta A, Finzi A, Fratini S, Orlandini A, Tronci E (2010) Analyzing flexible timeline-based
     plans. In: Proceedings of the 19th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI
     2010), pp. 471–476.



3.26      Some practical issues for social consumer robots: an industrial
          perspective
Amit Kumar Pandey (Aldebaran Robotics – Paris, FR)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Amit Kumar Pandey


Personal social robot for everyone is the next big thing in the history of robotics. It is the
time when robots are entering into our day to day life. And we, the human, together with
such social robots, are converging towards creating an intelligent and embodied eco-system
of living, where robots will coexist with us in harmony, for a smarter, healthier, safer and
happier life. There are some key ingredients for such robots to be a successful personal and
social robots. Such robots are expected to behave in socially accepted and socially expected
manners. For this to achieve, Social Intelligence of robots will be the paramount.




                                                                                                    17031
62   17031 – Planning and Robotics


         For achieving Social Intelligence in robots, there is a great need towards developing
     coherent theoretical and functional framework, by identifying the basic ingredients of de-
     velopment of social skills. Some of those are social interaction, situation assessment, social
     learning, socially-aware manipulation & navigation. For each of these aspects, the robot has
     to plan and act accordingly to fulfil the needs, while taking into account that it is operating
     in a human-centered environment with potentially human around it. This creates a new
     era of planning problem, which goes beyond the mere safety aspect of planning towards
     socially-aware aspects. For example, the robot has to plan the interaction action, for it to
     appear social, the robot has to chose where to focus and what to “perceive” to be useful for
     the situation and interaction, the robot has to react to stimuli, the robot has to understand
     the meaning of the day to day tasks, so that it can plan to perform them differently in
     different situations, without the need of pre-programming for each and every situation it can
     encounter in daily life, the robot has to be able to incorporate high-level human-oriented and
     Social constraints in its manipulation and navigation plannings, and should be able to come
     up with shared plans if necessary, (and by involving human) to achieve a task in socially
     intelligent manner. Further, all these have to be achieved with the additional constraint of
     being realtime, intuitive and for real environment.
         The talk will illustrate such issues, through some of the use cases for social robot
     grounded with some European Projects. It will try to provide a generalized definition of
     action from Human-Robot Interaction and Socially Intelligent Robot perspectives. This will
     be followed by feedback from real users and discuss some of the immediate multi-disciplinary
     R&D challenges and needs from industrial perspective, and some initial results towards
     solving them, including planning for interaction, perception, manipulation & navigation,
     and highlighted human-in-the-loop based learning aspects of robots for understanding task
     semantics, complex affordances, and being proactive. The talk will conclude with some open
     and grand challenges ahead, for us, the interdisciplinary community, to brainstorm and solve.



     3.27       Multirobot coordination
     Simon Parsons (King’s College London, GB)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Simon Parsons


     This short paper describes progress on the challenging problem of planning and executing
     missions with teams of robots. The overall goal of this work is as follows:

          Given a mission specification and access to a group of robots with a range of abilities,
          first select a team of robots, some subset of the full group, which can achieve the
          mission. Then construct a plan for achieving the mission, distributing tasks to
          individual team members. Finally, execute the mission, monitoring the progress of
          the plan, and adjusting it if and when that is necessary1 .

     While we have made progress on several of the elements, we are still a considerable way from
     the goal.


     1
         I think of this as the Mission Impossible problem since it was a major feature of the plot of pretty much
         every episode of the early seasons of the 1960s TV show. Later series dropped the “Dossier Scene” in
         which the team leader picked the members of his team according to their skills.
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                      63


    The area on which we have made the most progress in recent years is that of task
allocation. Provided that the mission is specified as a set of sub-tasks, task allocation is
enough to generate a plan. (A necessary extension to this work is being able to handle
the decomposition of missions into tasks in the case in which a mission is not specified
so conveniently.) In [2, 4, 3], we have looked at task allocation mechanisms in a range of
scenarios. These range from the simple case in which all tasks are known at the start, all
tasks require one robot, and all tasks can be carried out by every robot [2], through the case
in which tasks are given to the team over time [4] to the case in which tasks can require
more than one robot, and there are constraints between tasks [3]. The approaches that we
used were all market-based, in which team members bid for tasks based on the cost to them
of executing the tasks (in the scenarios we have looked at, cost is related to the distance of
the robot from the task, fuel cost if you will). More work is necessary here, for example to
allow robots to switch tasks when that is appropriate, and to handle truely heterogeneous
capabilities.
    The other area in which we have made progress, overlaps somewhat with what was just
described. In this work, [6, 7] we looked at constructing a plan for a team in a distributed
fashion, here using standard planning representations. The advantage of constructing a plan
like this, is that team members can make use of local information (see [5] for an example of
how exploiting local information can be advantageous). Once a plan is constructed, team
members can then monitor their progress against it, and can decide whether it is necessary
to contact their teammates to ensure that joint activities are correctly coordinated2 .
    The major area in which there is still work to do (in addition to the areas already
mentioned) is the one that corresponds to the first element of the description above – from a
mission specification, and a set of potential members, identify the team members with the
necessary skills to complete the task. This could be viewed as a planning task: pick a subset
of the group, see if there is a feasible plan to complete the mission, if not then try another
subset. However, a more attractive approach is one which views this as both a knowledge
representation problem (how to represent a mission, and the capabilities of a team member)
and a problem of reasoning at different levels of granularity, since it should not be necessary
to fully plan out the completion of a mission to select a team that is capable of achieving it.
References
1    S. Parsons, S. Poltrock, H. Bowyer, and Y. Tang. Analysis of a recorded team coordination
     dialogue. In Proceedings of the Second Annual Conference of the International Technology
     Alliance, London, 2008.
2    Eric Schneider, Ofear Balas, A Tuna Özgelen, Elizabeth I Sklar, and Simon Parsons. Eval-
     uating auction-based task allocation in multi-robot teams. In Workshop on Autonomous
     Robots and Multirobot Systems (ARMS) at Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems
     (AAMAS), Paris, France, May 2014.
3    Eric Schneider, Elizabeth I. Sklar, and Simon Parsons. Evaluating multi-robot teamwork
     in parameterised environments. In Lyuba Alboul, Dana Damian, and Jonathan M. Aitken,
     editors, Towards Autonomous Robotic Systems: 17th Annual Conference, TAROS 2016,
     pages 301–313. Springer International Publishing, 2016.
4    Eric Schneider, Elizabeth I Sklar, Simon Parsons, and A Tuna Özgelen. Auction-based task
     allocation for multi-robot teams in dynamic environments. In Towards Autonomous Robotic


2
    In human teams, a large amount of the communication seems to be status updates [1]. By updating
    only when necessary, we can save communication bandwidth.




                                                                                                      17031
64   17031 – Planning and Robotics


          Systems: 16th Annual Conference, TAROS 2015, pages 246–257. Springer International
          Publishing, 2015.
     5    E. I. Sklar and M. Q. Azhar. Argumentation-based dialogue games for shared control in
          human-robot systems. Journal of Human-Robot Interaction, 4(3):120–148, 2015.
     6    Y. Tang.      A Symbolic Exploration of the Joint State Space and the Underlying
          Argumentation-based Reasoning Processes for Multiagent Planning. PhD thesis, Graduate
          Center, City University of New York, 2012.
     7    Y. Tang, T. Norman, and S. Parsons. A model for integrating dialogue and the execution
          of joint plans. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Autonomous Agents
          and Multi-Agent Systems, Budapest, Hungary, 2009.



     3.28      Knowledge-level planning for Human-Robot Interaction
     Ron Petrick (Heriot-Watt University – Edinburgh, GB)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Ron Petrick


     At a basic level, the automated planning problem is one of context-dependent action selection:
     given an initial state, a domain description, and a set of goals, generate a sequence of
     actions whose execution will bring about the goal conditions. However, the problem of action
     selection is not unique to automated planning. One important field where this issue is also
     of primary concern is that of spoken dialogue systems, whose tools play a central role in
     addressing the problem of human-robot interaction. At the heart of the dialogue system
     is the interaction manager whose primary task is to carry out a form of action selection:
     based on the current state of an interaction, the interaction manager makes a high-level
     decision as to which spoken, non-verbal, and task-based actions the system should apply. An
     important aspect of research in this area has been the development of toolkits to support the
     construction of end-toend systems. Given the parallels between the planning and dialogue
     tasks, our recent work has explored the application of automated planning techniques to
     human-robot interaction (HRI) as an alternative to standard dialogue system toolkits (such
     as Trindikit, COLLAGEN, IrisTK, OpenDial, among others).
         While the link between natural language processing and automated planning has a long
     tradition, going back to at least the 1980s, in recent years the two communities have focused
     on different problems and solutions, with planning for natural language problems largely
     overlooked in favour of more specialpurpose solutions. For instance, the interactive systems
     toolkits attempt to offer a one-stop solution for system building combining action selection,
     representation, and technical architectures. In contrast, the planning community has focused
     on defining domains in common representation languages like PDDL and comparing different
     domain-independent strategies within this context through events like the International
     Planning Competitions; the study of the representation languages themselves has also led to
     a better understanding of the trade-offs between different representations.
         Our own work in this area has focused on applying domain-independent knowledge-level
     planning techniques to the problem of action selection in human-robot interaction. In
     particular, the beliefs of the planning agent (robot) about the world and other agents are
     represented, and sensing actions are used to model certain types of information-gathering
     speech acts. Task-based actions are also planned using the same general-purpose planning
     mechanisms.
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                    65


    However, the problem of human-robot interaction also offers some wider opportunities
and lessons for the planning community. First, the presence of action selection at the core of
interaction management offers the obvious possibility of applying other types of planning
techniques. Second, the nature of the applications addressed by many HRI systems also
highlights the importance of building real-world systems – an area that has gained wider
traction in the planning community but one that is still somewhat outside the mainstream
of most planning research. Finally, the process for evaluating robot-based dialogue systems,
and in particular the role of human users, also presents new directions and challenges for
planning.



3.29      Goal Reasoning for Robotics
Mark Roberts (Naval Research – Washington, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Mark Roberts


Goals are the hinge-pins of deliberative behavior. Whether explicit (e.g., as a symbolic
structure), implicit (e.g., as a reward or error signal), provided by a designer, or learned over
time, goals unify motivations and action. They can be used to prune the search for solutions,
to label or query persistent storage, or to structure learning from experience. Researchers
have recently proposed a synthesis of the research disciplines that examine deliberation
about goals, calling it goal reasoning: the ability of an agent to determine, pursue, and
modify its own goals in response to notable events. In this talk, we identify three challenges
we have studied with respect to goal reasoning systems in robotics. We will present the
goal lifecycle, a formal model of goal reasoning built on goal-task networks, and showcase
its implementation in a system called ActorSim, which links several robotic and virtual
autonomous systems.
    To perform complex tasks, a team of robots requires both reactive and deliberative
planning. For reactive control, a restricted variant of Linear Temporal Logic called General
Reactivity(1) can be used to synthesize correct-by-construction controllers in polynomial
time, but they often ignore time and resource constraints to maintain tractable synthesis.
For deliberation, hierarchical goal reasoning can be used to reason about time and resources.
However, the coordination of reactive control and deliberation remains a challenge, which we
accomplish through a set of Coordination Variables. We integrate these two approaches in
the Situated Decision Process (SDP), a predecessor of part of ActorSim. The SDP will allow
an Operator to control a team of semi-autonomous vehicles performing information gathering
tasks for Foreign Disaster Relief operations. We demonstrate that the SDP responds to
a dynamic, open world while ensuring that vehicles eventually perform their commanded
actions.
    In complex and dynamic scenarios, autonomous vehicles often need to intelligently adapt
their behavior to unexpected events. We extend the ActorSim to include information measures
and expectations used by the vehicles to assess their performance. This system, called Goal
Reasoning with Information Measures, is demonstrated using a disaster relief scenario in
which a small team of vehicles is tasked with surveying a predefined set of geographical
regions. Additionally, a preliminary study shows that the inclusion of resolution strategies
increases the likelihood that it successfully finishes its goals.




                                                                                                    17031
66   17031 – Planning and Robotics


         Finally, robots are increasingly performing well on focused tasks in constrained worlds over
     increasing time horizons. We argue that goal reasoning is essential as autonomous systems,
     robotic or virtual, transition to operating in open worlds over time horizons of months
     or years while maintaining hundreds of goals that vary in duration and priority. But to
     achieve long-duration autonomy presents two new challenges. First, existing robots can have
     relatively short life spans, limiting progress. As a contingency, we plan to study long-duration
     autonomy in 3D game engines similar to the way in which the Robocup simulator served as
     an early testbed until robotics systems became more capable and reliable. Second, we must
     enable a robot to store, access, and learn over very long time horizons of weeks, months, or
     even years. This presents challenges not only in how to capture this information but also in
     how to maintain an ever growing knowledge base, retrieve relevant memories and experience,
     and update it with new knowledge. We argue that cognitive structures are needed to manage
     long-term memory structures, focus effort, and derive curricula. Further, we argue that
     hybrid model-based and reactive control architectures must be leveraged because each excels
     at complementary tasks in a robot.



     3.30      Effective Hybrid Planners for robotics
     Enrico Scala (Australian National University – Canberra, AU)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Enrico Scala


     A fundamental building block towards an effective integration and exploitation of AI planning
     in robotics systems requires reasoning mechanisms over mixed representations combining
     logical and numeric constraints. This becomes apparent even in very simple problems of
     integration between task and motion planning, where geometric and causal reasoning have
     to be considered in an intertwined way [15, 5]. Decoupling them may result in very poor
     performances.
         Planning for such hybrid systems is a very hard computational problem (even very
     restricted models are NP-hard to solve) since it requires an intertwined reasoning over
     discrete and continuous domain variables along with changes of the states that can also
     be both discrete and continuous. Work to better handle such problems has been done
     [4, 3, 14, 8, 7], but more work is still needed to scale up to realistic size problem.
         In my research I am investigating different methods to deal with a discretised version
     of this class of problems: forward state space planning via heuristic search, compilation
     to satisfiability modulo theory, robust plan execution and plan repair ([9, 10, 11, 13, 12]).
     These works adapt and extend well known classical planning techniques to the hybrid case in
     different ways, all of them starting from the key observation that a powerful computational
     representation of the hybrid case (including processes) is that of sequential numeric planning
     with global constraints. Improving on (and exploiting) the reasoning about the exposed
     numeric structures of the problem becomes of crucial importance. By adapting and extending
     previous work done in classical planning, these works do actually attempt to solve classical
     (task) and numeric (motion) planning in an integrated way.
         These approaches though suffer in some situations, and in particular when many and
     complex constraints need to be enforced. I see this seminar as a great opportunity to engage
     discussions with people working on constrained-based/timeline-based planning [1, 2] and/or
     motion planning, to study synergies and exchange of methods among these approaches.
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                   67


References
 1 Javier Barreiro, Matthew Boyce, Minh Do, Jeremy Frank, Michael Iatauro, Tatiana Kich-
     kaylo, Paul Morris, James Ong, Emilio Remolina, Tristan Smith, et al. Europa: a platform
     for ai planning, scheduling, constraint programming, and optimization. 4th International
     Competition on Knowledge Engineering for Planning and Scheduling (ICKEPS), 2012.
 2 John L. Bresina, Ari K. JÃ3nsson, Paul H. Morris, and Kanna Rajan. Mixed-initiative
     planning in mapgen: Capabilities and shortcomings. In In Proceedings of the ICAPS-05
    Workshop on Mixed-initiative Planning and Scheduling, 2005.
 3 Michael Cashmore, Maria Fox, Derek Long, and Daniele Magazzeni. A compilation of the
     full PDDL+ language into SMT. In Planning for Hybrid Systems, Papers from the 2016
     AAAI Workshop, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, February 13, 2016., 2016.
 4 Giuseppe Della Penna, Daniele Magazzeni, Fabio Mercorio, and Benedetto Intrigila. Up-
     murphi: A tool for universal planning on PDDL+ problems. In Proceedings of the 19th In-
     ternational Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, ICAPS 2009, Thessaloniki,
     Greece, September 19–23, 2009, 2009.
 5 Christian Dornhege, Patrick Eyerich, Thomas Keller, Sebastian Trúg, Michael Brenner, and
     Bernhard Nebel. Semantic attachments for domain-independent planning systems. In Proc.
     of International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS-09), 2009.
 6 Maria Fox and Derek Long. Modelling mixed discrete-continuous domains for planning. J.
     Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR), 27:235–297, 2006.
 7 Drew V. McDermott. Reasoning about autonomous processes in an estimated-regression
     planner. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Automated Planning
     and Scheduling (ICAPS 2003), June 9-13, 2003, Trento, Italy, pages 143–152, 2003.
 8 Wiktor Piotrowski, Maria Fox, Derek Long, Daniele Magazzeni, and Fabio Mercorio. Heur-
     istic planning for pddl+ domains. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), New York (NY), USA, 2016.
 9 Enrico Scala, Patrik Haslum, and Sylvie Thiébaux. Heuristics for numeric planning via
     subgoaling. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, IJCAI 2016, New York, NY, USA, 9-15 July 2016, pages 3228–3234, 2016.
10 Enrico Scala, Patrik Haslum, Sylvie Thiébaux, and Miquel Ramírez. Interval-based relaxa-
     tion for general numeric planning. In ECAI 2016 – 22nd European Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, 29 August-2 September 2016, The Hague, The Netherlands - Including Presti-
     gious Applications of Artificial Intelligence (PAIS 2016), pages 655–663, 2016.
11 Enrico Scala, Miquel Ramírez, Patrik Haslum, and Sylvie Thiébaux. Numeric planning with
     disjunctive global constraints via SMT. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International
     Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, ICAPS 2016, London, UK, June 12-17,
     2016., pages 276–284, 2016.
12 Enrico Scala and Pietro Torasso. Proactive and reactive reconfiguration for the robust
     execution of multi modality plans. In ECAI 2014 – 21st European Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, 18-22 August 2014, Prague, Czech Republic, pages 783–788, 2014.
13 Enrico Scala and Pietro Torasso. Deordering and numeric macro actions for plan repair. In
     Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
     IJCAI 2015, Buenos Aires, Argentina, July 25-31, 2015, pages 1673–1681, 2015.
14 Ji-Ae Shin and Ernest Davis. Processes and continuous change in a sat-based planner.
     Artificial Intelligence, 166(1-2):194–253, 2005.
15 Siddharth Srivastava, Eugene Fang, Lorenzo Riano, Rohan Chitnis, Stuart Russell, and
     Pieter Abbeel. Combined task and motion planning through an extensible planner-
     independent interface layer. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2014 IEEE International
     Conference on, pages 639–646. IEEE, 2014.




                                                                                                   17031
68   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     3.31      Planning for Open-ended Missions
     Matthias Scheutz (Tufts University – Medford, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Matthias Scheutz


     Many envisioned applications for future robots (e.g., robots for search and rescue domains,
     space environments, etc.) will take place in contexts that are “open”, i.e., where aspects of
     the task and the mission are not known ahead of time and where unforeseen events can alter
     mission planning and execution. Most current robotic architectures, however, are only able to
     deal in a very limited way with open-world aspects. In particular, most planning algorithms
     assume that the domain model for the planner is given in its entirety, so that planning really
     amounts to search over the states and actions defined by the model. We argue that such an
     assumption is not warranted in open worlds and that task and action planners integrated
     into robotic architectures need to be able to intrinsically cope with unknown aspects of the
     domain model (e.g., goals that involved entities where the planner does not know all relevant
     aspects of the entity).



     3.32      Planning with Incomplete models
     Reid Simmons (NSF – Arlington, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Reid Simmons


     Planners need models in order to predict the effects of actions. We all know, however, that
     any model of the real world is merely an incomplete representation. While some models may
     be higher fidelity than others, all are deficient in some respects, or another. Thus, planning
     can never accurately predict all the effects of actions in every context.
         In robotics, feedback controllers are often used to address this deficiency – plans provide
     higherlevel of abstractions and the low-level controller behaviors are designed to achieve the
     intended effects of the plan. Clearly, however, there are drawbacks with this approach; for
     instance, suboptimal plans may be produced that cause the controllers to expend much more
     time/energy than would otherwise be necessary, and, in the worst case, the plans may fail
     altogether because the controllers are not applicable for the contexts in which the plans have
     put them.
         The question, then, is how to deal with the inevitable fact of planning with incomplete
     models? I suggest three approaches that can help – planning with probabilistic models,
     learning to improve models, and planning with multiple models.
         Planning with probabilistic models, such as MDPs or POMDPs, is now considered fairly
     standard in robotics. The idea is to “mask” the incompleteness of the models using a
     distribution of possible effects of actions, and to plan to achieve a metric such as maximizing
     (or exceeding some threshold of) probability of plan achievement, maximizing expected
     reward, or maximizing expected utility, taking risk into account. Such approaches produce
     plans that work well, on average, provided that the reward function, and transition and
     observation probabilities, are close to their true values.
         This leads to learning to improve models. I start with the assumption that the models are
     reasonably accurate, but do not completely reflect reality. Here, experience-based learning
     can be used to improve transition and observation probabilities, and techniques such as
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                    69


learning from demonstration and inverse reinforcement learning can be used to improve
the reward function. In addition, by modeling the uncertainty in the model parameters,
active learning can be used to guide the agent to situations where it can efficiently learn the
parameters it is most uncertain about.
    Things get more complicated, though, in situations where models have hidden (latent)
state. Effective methods for learning such models exist, such as EM or spectral methods,
but they typically need large amounts of training data. We are exploring an alternate,
data-efficient, approach that uses statistical tests to identify regions of the state space that
appear to be drawn from different distributions than other parts of the state space. The
approach incrementally searches ellipsoidal regions of the state space to find the contexts in
which the observed distribution differs significantly from the model. For instance, it might
discover that the robot typically slips more than expected when turning left at a high velocity
in a given area of the building. While we, as people, may understand that is because the
area is tiled, to the robot it is sufficient to have improved its navigational model in the
given context, which enables it to create better plans (e.g., by slowing down in that area, or
avoiding it altogether).
    Finally, we acknowledge that different models often have different strengths and weaknesses.
By choosing the most appropriate model for a particular planning task, one may produce
better plans for that particular situation. To that end, we are exploring an approach that
uses of a hierarchy of models. The idea is to plan first in a lower fidelity model, then check
if the plan is valid in higher fidelity models. If not, it is assumed the higher fidelity model
contains information relevant to a potential plan failure, and so the plan is patched using
that model. In this way, the planner can use lower fidelity (and typically computationally
less expensive) models, when appropriate, but still make use of higher fidelity models, when
necessary.
    This approach differs from standard abstraction and HTN planning in two major ways.
First, unlike abstraction and HTN planning, any of the models in the hierarchy can produce
a directly executable plan, thus, it is not necessary to plan in multiple models if the situation
is “simple” enough. Second, rather than a linear, predefined ordering of models, as with
abstraction planning, our approach supports a complete lattice of models. Different models
in the lattice make different information explicit – for instance, one model may represent
vehicle dynamics while another model may represent shape and material properties of the
vehicle. Thus, choosing with which model to plan, in a given context, is a key issue with this
approach, and one that we are actively researching.
    While it is inevitable that all models of the real world are incomplete, to some extent, we
can use that knowledge to our advantage in designing planners that explicitly handle sources
of incompleteness, either probabilistically or through explicit model choice, and learners that
can efficiently improve models through experience. The ultimate goal is to develop robotic
systems that can reason about the incompleteness of their models and actively characterize
and improve them, through interactions with the environment.




                                                                                                    17031
70   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     3.33      On the Shoulders of Giants: The Case for Modular Integration of
               Discrete Planners and Continuous Planners for Robotics
     Siddharth Srivastava (UTRC – Berkeley, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Siddharth Srivastava


     The field of automated planning has its roots in planning for SHAKEY, a problem-solving
     robot created at SRI in the 70s. For the most part, the modern planning paradigm for
     autonomous robots assumes a similar architecture, making a clean separation between the
     abstract problem of task planning with discrete states and actions, and the problems of
     motion planning and control synthesis involving the computation of continuous trajectories
     in a high-dimensional configuration space. However, for the most part these fields have
     developed in mathematical isolation from each other. Naïve approaches for reconciling them
     (e.g., first computing a task plan and then “implementing” each action through a motion
     planner) result in solutions that are unexecutable because of the lossy abstractions required
     for constructing task-level models.
         The situation in planning for robotics is thus not very different from the state of model
     checking just before the advent of SAT-modulo-theories (SMT) techniques. Many of the
     motivators for SMT research hold in our setting: we have efficient solvers (planners) at each
     level of abstraction; modeling entire tasks at the finest level of granularity is cumbersome
     when it is not impossible and typically results in computationally intractable problems.
     Indeed, from the point of view of making collective progress, developing new “task and
     motion” planners from scratch for various formulations (deterministic, non-deterministic or
     stochastic models of actuators with deterministic, non-deterministic or stochastic models of
     sensors for single or multiple agents), most of which are addressed independently in these
     fields, would be inefficient at best and reinvention in the worst case.
         I believe that these observations provide evidence for new opportunities as well as
     challenges for innovative research in planning for robotics, geared towards the modular
     utilization of existing paradigms for discrete sequential decision making, motion planning,
     and control synthesis in a hierarchical planning paradigm. Opportunities stem from a
     perspective that allows us to learn from the development of SMT solvers. The challenges, and
     the corresponding domains of innovation, arise from the numerous aspects of planning for
     robotics that are not addressed in the existing theory for SMT solvers; a direct application
     of those techniques is unlikely to succeed. We need new research on rigorous methods for the
     synthesis and analysis of abstraction functions that translate planning problems between
     different levels of the hierarchy. Existing domain description languages require new constructs
     and semantics to succinctly and correctly express abstractions of sequences of low-level actions
     (existing representations lead to incorrect models and unexecutable solutions). Solutions to
     motion planning problems are continuous trajectories that need new symbolic representations
     suitable for high-level reasoning. Finally, uncertainty in sensing and actuation in each level
     of abstraction makes it harder to construct “lemmas” for use at the next higher level of
     abstraction.
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                      71


3.34      Persistent, Instructable, Interruptible, Transparent Autonomy
Manuela Veloso (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Manuela Veloso


Besides the Roomba robots, and instances of service mobile robots in some hospital, public
environments, there are not many autonomous robots that persist in real human environments.
We have experienced the CoBot mobile robots that have persisted at Carnegie Mellon capable
of autonomously performing navigation and service tasks for the last 5-6 years. (There are
the Google-Uber-Baidu-etc self-driving cars, which are becoming a reality.) We are interested
of further understanding how to better plan for such persistent “co-existing” robots.
    The real world offers challenges to robot autonomy, at all levels, namely perceptual,
cognitive, and actuation. Focusing on the real world where humans live, robots further
concretely face navigation, timing, quality, and interaction challenges. Planning involves
having models of the world, and models of actions. It is challenging, or most probably
impossible, to get appropriate and correct models up front: the real world is dynamic,
uncertain, personalized, and it includes other external, at best poorly modeled, actuators,
such as other robots and people.
    We are interested in the issues underlying robot autonomy, in particular planning, that
needs to persist, exist, improve in the real world. Along this goal, we pursue research on
instructing and correcting a robot, interrupting the execution of its plans, and making it be
transparent about its actions and plans.
    We have developed instruction graphs as a way for humans to provide verbal command-
based instructions to become procedural plans. The robot is equipped with action and
sensing primitives that the instruction graphs then organize in sequencing, conditionals,
and looping constructs. Upon execution of the instructed graphs, humans can check that
the plan is suitable or not, and correct it as needed. As the human knows the plan that
is being executed, we conjecture that it may be easier for the human to correct the robot
behavior than if the planning model were non-procedural actions. Such instruction graphs
are independent of the robot platform. We have used instruction graphs for our CoBot
and Baxter robots. We have also addressed the problem of acquiring a library of plans,
as instruction graphs, for different tasks. The challenge is to recall a similar past learned
plan and reuse it. We have also researched on generalizing different plans and proposing
autocompletions of possible plans when a human is instructing or correcting a robot. We
believe there is a lot left to do in terms of providing, generalizing, revising, and reusing plans.
    We also research on the challenge of enabling a robot with the ability to replan when
interrupted. When the robots generate plans to achieve their tasks, they then execute them
determined with the sole goal of executing their plans. If CoBot is executing its plan to deliver
a package to someone’s office, and Manuela finds CoBot in the middle of the corridor, and
she wants to tell “CoBot, thanks for the package, I got it!”, she can’t: CoBot will go all the
way to the destination office to finish its delivery task. Tasks can of course be managed and
interrupted remotely through an administrative interface, but not by naturally interrupting
the robot. We have created an approach to interrupt a robot, but there is a lot left to do in
terms of investigating the need to replan when and how, so that the robots can take input
from humans about their plans and new task requests. In the general scenario of our research,
in which robots encounter a wide variety of people, and not just the robot developers, such
interruptible autonomy is a challenging research question, as the robot needs to be able to
evaluate the requests and attend to them according to models of priorities, authority, level of




                                                                                                      17031
72   17031 – Planning and Robotics


     accomplishment and type of tasks under execution and scheduled. Replanning becomes a
     question, which is not just a function of the failure of preconditions, but includes dynamic
     task optimization and model learning.
         Autonomous robots that plan cannot be opaque to their human users. We research on
     methods to increase the transparency of the robot planners, such that the robot explains
     its choices, and reveals the actions selected, as well as possibly future actions. Interestingly,
     robot act according to plans that include future actions, so they can make their future
     actions known to humans, who could potentially better understand and possibly correct
     the intentions and plans of the robots. We have developed a verbalization algorithm which
     enables a robot to describe its experience in natural language. The robot can transform its
     planned and executed route into natural language. We also research on multiple techniques
     to enable a robot to be transparent to humans in their decisions, planning, and learning.
     We believe there is a lot left to do in terms of augmenting planning algorithms with the
     ability to increase their transparency towards humans. We research on expressive lights to
     improve the understanding of the robot’s actions, on verbalization in different dimensions
     to generate varied descriptions of experience in natural language, and on augmenting video
     capturing of robot’s plan execution with markings that aim at visually explaining the robot’s
     performance.
         In summary, we are interested in planning, as an integral part of a persistent autonomous
     mobile service robot, that needs to persistently interact with humans. We will discuss our
     research and open planning research directions in robot instructability, interruptibility, and
     transparency. Our underlying approach assumes that robots need to learn improved planning
     models over time with experience.
M. Ghallab, N. Hawes, D. Magazzeni, B. C. Williams, and A. Orlandini                                       73


       Participants
  Rachid Alami                      Laura M. Hiatt                   Andrea Orlandini
LAAS – Toulouse, FR               Naval Research Lab –              CNR – Rome, IT
  Iman Awaad                      Washington, DC, US
                                                                      Amit Kumar Pandey
Hochschule Bonn-Rhein-Sieg –        Michael W. Hofbaur              Aldebaran Robotics – Paris, FR
St. Augustin, DE                  Joanneum Research –
  Roman Bartak                    Klagenfurt/Wörthersee, AT           Simon Parsons
Charles University – Prague, CZ     Jörg Hoffmann                   King’s College London, GB
  Michael Beetz                   Universität des Saarlandes, DE
                                                                      Ron Petrick
Universität Bremen, DE              Felix Ingrand                   Heriot-Watt University –
  Ronen I. Brafman                LAAS – Toulouse, FR               Edinburgh, GB
Ben Gurion University –             Luca Iocchi
Beer Sheva, IL                    Sapienza University of Rome, IT     Mark Roberts
                                                                    Naval Research –
  Michael Cashmore                  Gal A. Kaminka                  Washington, US
King’s College London, GB         Bar-Ilan University –
  Martin Davies                   Ramat Gan, IL                       Enrico Scala
Guidance Automation Ltd –           Erez Karpas                     Australian National University –
Leicester, GB                     Technion – Haifa, IL              Canberra, AU
  Minh Do                           Oliver E. Kim                     Matthias Scheutz
NASA – Moffett Field, US          University of Birmingham, GB      Tufts University – Medford, US
  Susan L. Epstein                  Sven Koenig
                                                                     Reid Simmons
City University of New York, US   USC – Los Angeles, US
                                                                    NSF – Arlington, US
  Alberto Finzi                     Lars Kunze
University of Naples, IT          University of Birmingham, GB        Elizabeth Sklar
  Hector Geffner                    Bruno Lacerda                   King’s College London, GB
UPF – Barcelona, ES               University of Birmingham, GB        Stephen Smith
  Malik Ghallab                     Gerhard Lakemeyer               Carnegie Mellon University –
LAAS – Toulouse, FR               RWTH Aachen, DE                   Pittsburgh, US
  Nick Hawes                        Daniele Magazzeni
                                                                     Siddharth Srivastava
University of Birmingham, GB      King’s College London, GB
                                                                    UTRC – Berkeley, US
  Malte Helmert                     Lenka Mudrova
Universität Basel, CH             University of Birmingham, GB        Manuela Veloso
  Andreas Hertle                    Daniele Nardi                   Carnegie Mellon University –
Universität Freiburg, DE          Sapienza University of Rome, IT   Pittsburgh, US
  Joachim Hertzberg                 Tim Niemüller                    Brian C. Williams
Universität Osnabrück, DE         RWTH Aachen, DE                   MIT – Cambridge, US




                                                                                                       17031
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 17032

Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined
Infrastructures
Edited by
David Hausheer1 , Oliver Hohlfeld2 , Diego R. López3 ,
Bruce MacDowell Maggs4 , and Costin Raiciu5

1    TU Darmstadt, DE, hausheer@ps.tu-darmstadt.de
2    RWTH Aachen, DE, hohlfeld@comsys.rwth-aachen.de
3    Telefonica I+D – Seville, ES, diego.r.lopez@telefonica.com
4    Duke University – Durham, US, bmm@cs.cmu.edu
5    University Politehnica of Bucharest, RO, costin.raiciu@cs.pub.ro


      Abstract
The softwarization of networks by introducing concepts such as Software-Defined Networking
(SDN) or Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) currently massively changes network manage-
ment by enabling more flexible communication networks. The main goal of this seminar was to
gather researchers from academia, industry, and standardization bodies to discuss a joint per-
spective on research questions in the field of NFV. This report contains talk summaries, reports
on the discussion groups, as well as the personal statements and main challenges contributed by
the seminar participants.
Seminar January 15–18, 2017 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/17032
1998 ACM Subject Classification Network Architecture and Design, Network Operations
Keywords and phrases flexible network management, network function virtualization, software-
   defined networking
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.7.1.74
Edited in cooperation with Leonhard Nobach



 1      Executive Summary
David Hausheer
Oliver Hohlfeld
Diego R. López
Bruce MacDowell Maggs
Costin Raiciu
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © David Hausheer, Oliver Hohlfeld, Diego R. López, Bruce MacDowell Maggs, and Costin Raiciu


Network management currently undergoes massive changes towards realizing more flexible
management of complex networks. Recent efforts include slicing data plane resources by using
network (link) virtualization and applying operating system design principles in Software
Defined Networking (SDN). Driven by network operators, network management principles
are currently envisioned to be even further improved by virtualizing network functions which
are currently realized in dedicated hardware appliances. The resulting Network Function
Virtualization (NFV) paradigm abstracts network functions from dedicated hardware to


            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 7, Issue 1, pp.
74–102
Editors: David Hausheer, Oliver Hohlfeld, Diego R. López, Bruce MacDowell Maggs, and Costin Raiciu
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                               75


virtual machines running on commodity hardware and enables a Cloud-like network man-
agement. All of these efforts contribute to a softwarization of communication networks.
This softwarization represents a significant change to network design and management by
allowing the application of operating system design and software engineering principles to
make network management more efficient, e.g., by enabling flexible and dynamic service
provisioning.
    Since the NFV efforts are currently mainly driven by carriers and standardization bodies,
academic research is decoupled from the industry driven NFV attempts in redesigning network
management. Due to this missing link to academic research, opportunities for groundbreaking
research and broad impact in academia are currently missing out. This Dagstuhl Seminar
thus gathered researchers from academia, industry, and standardization bodies to establish
this missing link by fostering collaborations and joint research initiatives. Thus, a particular
focus of the seminar was on identifying the diverse connections between industry driven NFV
efforts and current academic networking research.
    The seminar brought together 24 participants in January 2017 to discuss a potential NFV
research agenda within 2.5 days. The program included different invited talks that provided
an overview on selected aspects of NFV and lightning talks by each participants to provide
first research questions and to sketch research directions. We summarize each talk in the
remainder of this report. The main focus of the seminar was then the in-depth discussion
the research areas identified in the lightning talks in several breakout sessions, which we
also summarize. We closed the seminar by collecting and discussing several opinions from
each participant: (i) lessons learned and surprises on NFV during the seminar and (ii) open
research questions. We further collected controversial statements on NFV research and asked
the seminar participants on whether they agree or disagree to each presented statement. We
summarize the outcomes at the end of the report.




                                                                                                   17032
76   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


      2      Table of Contents
     Executive Summary
       David Hausheer, Oliver Hohlfeld, Diego R. López, Bruce MacDowell Maggs, and
       Costin Raiciu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74

     Madness Talks
          Who Am I? What Am I doing here?
          Diego R. López . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
          Personal Introduction
          Bruce MacDowell Maggs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
          Personal Introduction
          Dirk Kutscher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
          Personal Introduction
          Felipe Huici . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
          Personal Introduction
          Gabriela Gheorghe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
          Performance Assessment of NFV
          Thomas Zinner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
          NFV: Where are we?
          James Kempf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
          Checking Policy Compliance
          Aaron Gember-Jacobson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
          Challenges in Network Functions Virtualization
          David Hausheer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
          Road towards lightweight virtual network functions
          Oliver Hohlfeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   81
          NFV for Industrial Control Networks
          Jan Rüth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
          Seamless Elasticity in NFV Infrastructures with Heterogeneous Hardware Require-
          ments
          Leonhard Nobach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
          NFV Performance Profiling and Optimization
          Andreas Kassler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
          Bring those network functions back to the plumbing!
          Fernando M. V. Ramos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      84
          Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures
          Michael Scharf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    84
          On Research Challenges of NFV
          Christian Esteve Rothenberg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     84
          NFV at the Edge
          Tim Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                                  77


   Utilizing Hardware Capabilities for Efficient NF Deployment
   Fabian Schneider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
   Dynamic Placement of Network Functions for Mitigating Internet-Scale Attacks
   Oliver Michel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
   User-Centric NFV
   Theophilus Benson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
   Flexibility as a Design Guideline for NFV and SDN
   Wolfgang Kellerer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86

Lightning Talks
   An overview of network verification
   Costin Raiciu and Aaron Gember-Jacobson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
   Network Programmability: A Primer of Routing Synthesis
   Laurent Vanbever . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87
   The NFV Standardization Concoction
   Diego R. López . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87
   The Functions Placement Problem
   Wolfgang Kellerer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
   Getting out of the NFV Deployment Quagmire
   Felipe Huici . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88

Working Groups
   NFV Security, Validation, and Verification
   Aaron Gember-Jacobson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
   Placement
   Wolfgang Kellerer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
   NFV Economics
   Leonhard Nobach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    91
   NFV Performance
   Theophilus Benson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
   NFV Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    94

Wrap-up
   Research Areas and Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     94
   Lessons Learned, Surprises      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
   Controversial statements about NFV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
   Wrap-up Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
   What comes after NFV? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102




                                                                                                      17032
78   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


      3      Madness Talks
     3.1     Who Am I? What Am I doing here?
     Diego R. López (Telefonica I+D – Seville, ES)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Diego R. López


     Challenges:
       Performance
       Security
       Design Patterns
       Deployment Patterns
       A software network discipline
       Evolve management
       Evolve architectures
       Evolve business models
       Evolve industry culture



     3.2     Personal Introduction
     Bruce MacDowell Maggs (Duke University – Durham, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Bruce MacDowell Maggs


          Largest DDOS Attacks by Year
          Leverage Compromised Home Cable Modems/Routers
          Account Takeover Campaign Attack Architecture
          Attacking IP Persistence: Finance Customer



     3.3     Personal Introduction
     Dirk Kutscher (Huawei Technologies – München, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Dirk Kutscher


          Performance in the presence of heterogeneity and dynamic network conditions
          Rethinking collaboration of apps, transport and forwarding
          New forwarding abstractions and SDN control for that
          Enabling dynamic computation in the network securely
          Use cases: IoT, blending VoD and live streaming
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                            79


3.4    Personal Introduction
Felipe Huici (NEC Laboratories Europe – Heidelberg, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Felipe Huici


Despite years of research and a whole lot of noise made about the great benefits of NFV,
especially in terms of lower OPEX/CAPEX, how to provide high utilization and performance
isolation on x86 servers for production-level deployments have proven so tricky that most
operators resort to throwing money at the problem: each NFV instance runs in its own core,
ensuring reliable performance but woeful utilization. In this brief talk I make the case for
applying machine learning techniques, and in particular reinforcement learning, to develop
novel, more efficient NFV resource allocators.



3.5    Personal Introduction
Gabriela Gheorghe (PwC – Luxembourg, LU)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Gabriela Gheorghe


   Cloud & secure storage
   SDN security & network troubleshooting
   Policy-based security monitoring at network level



3.6    Performance Assessment of NFV
Thomas Zinner (Universität Würzburg, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Thomas Zinner


The variety of different virtualized network functions as well as the availability of diverse
deployment options requires new means for their performance assessment. This includes
appropriate benchmarking methods and tools, but also well-suited performance models based
on methods like discrete-time analysis, queuing networks or the network calculus. The
resulting models and corresponding key performance indicators will then enable an optimized
placement of virtualized network functions.



3.7    NFV: Where are we?
James Kempf (Ericsson – Santa Clara, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © James Kempf


The Gartner hype curve is a well-known way of classifying where a technology is in terms of
deployment. Right now, NFV seems to be in the “Valley of Disillusionment”. This is a period
in which the initially promised benefits of the technology fail to pan out and early adopters




                                                                                                17032
80   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


     are left trying to figure out what benefit, if any, the technology has. With respect to NFV,
     it has promised that it would reduce operator costs and provide much faster development
     of new services. In 2016, the cost per bit for operators to deliver data increased above the
     revenue per bit (according to analyst Tom Nolan). Can NFV help solve this problem? NFV
     deployments have so far not shown promise in this regard. As for services, there have been a
     few (SD-WAN for example), and this area seems more promising. Over the next couple of
     years, we will see if NFV reaches the “Slope of Enlightenment” and the “Plateau of Everyday
     Use”, and becomes a widely deployed and useful technology for operators and enterprises.



     3.8     Checking Policy Compliance
     Aaron Gember-Jacobson (Colgate University – Hamilton, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Aaron Gember-Jacobson
      Joint work of Aaron Gember-Jacobson, Raajay Viswanathan, Aditya Akella, Ratul Mahajan, Chaithan Prakash,
                    Robert Grandl, Junaid Khalid, Sourav Das
     Main reference A. Gember-Jacobson, R. Viswanathan, A. Akella, R. Mahajan, “Fast Control Plane Analysis Using
                    an Abstract Representation”, in Proc. of the 2016 ACM SIGCOMM Conf., pp. 300–313, ACM,
                    2016.
               URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2934872.2934876


     This talk highlights two major pieces of work I have done to improve the correctness of
     networks: OpenNF and ARC. The former is a framework for quickly and safely transferring
     NF state amidst traffic redistribution. The latter is an efficient control plane verifier that
     uses graphs to model the network’s behavior and computes properties of these graphs to
     check that a policy is satisfied under arbitrary failures. An interesting area of future research
     is verifying that networks conform to more complex policies involving stateful NFs.



     3.9     Challenges in Network Functions Virtualization
     David Hausheer (TU Darmstadt, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © David Hausheer


     Our existing work on SDN/NFV covers Software-defined Multicast (SDM), NFVI bench-
     marking, and application scenarios of bare metal switches. Moreover, resource models for
     SDN/NFV data planes and seamless elasticity in hardware-accelerated NFV, as well as VNF
     state migration are of interest. SDN support of CDN networks and SDN/NFV machine
     learning have been partially tackled as well. Novel challenges include the discussion of
     relevant killer applications, functions, and use cases for NFV that show the greatest benefits.
     Also, what’s going to be the long-term impact on hardware vendors, network providers, and
     end-users? Moreover, what are the biggest barriers for research? Finally, is NFV just another
     hype? And whats going to be next after NFV/SDN?
     References
      1 Julius Rückert, Jeremias Blendin, Rhaban Hark, David Hausheer: Flexible, Efficient, and
          Scalable Software-Defined Over-the-Top Multicast for ISP Environments with DynSDM.
          TNSM, 2016
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                                        81


 2    Julius Rückert, Jeremias Blendin, David Hausheer: Software-Defined Multicast for Over-
      the-Top and Overlay-based Live Streaming in ISP Networks. JNSM Special Issue on Man-
      agement of Software Defined Networks, July 2014.
 3    Jeremias Blendin, Julius Rückert, Sascha Bleidner, David Hausheer: Taking the Sting out
      of Flow Update Peaks in Software-Defined Service Chaining. 2nd International Workshop
      on Management of SDN and NFV Systems (ManSDN/NFV 2015), November 2015.
 4    Julius Rückert, Jeremias Blendin, Rhaban Hark, David Hausheer: DYNSDM: Dynamic and
      Flexible Software-Defined Multicast for ISP Environments. 11th International Conference
      on Network and Service Management (CNSM 2015), November 2015.
 5    Jeremias Blendin, Julius Rückert, Tobias Volk, David Hausheer: Adaptive Software Defined
      Multicast. 1st IEEE Conference on Network Softwarization (NetSoft 2015), April 2015.
 6    Leonhard Nobach, David Hausheer: Open Elastic Provisioning of Hardware Acceleration
      in NFV Environments. Workshop on Software-Defined Networking and Network Function
      Virtualization for Flexible Network Management (SDNFlex 2015), March 2015.
 7    Jeremias Blendin, Julius Rückert, Nicolai Leymann, Georg Schyguda, David Hausheer:
      Position Paper: Software-Defined Network Service Chaining. EWSDN 2014, September
      2014.
 8    Julius Rückert, Roberto Bifulco, Muhammad Rizwan-Ul-Haq, Hans-Joerg Kolbe, David
      Hausheer: Flexible Traffic Management in Broadband Access Networks using Soft-
      ware Defined Networking. IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
      (NOMS 2014), May 2014.
 9    Leonhard Nobach, Oliver Hohlfeld, David Hausheer: New Kid on the Block: Network
      Functions Virtualization: From Big Boxes to Carrier Clouds. Computer Communication
      Review. July 2016.
10    Leonhard Nobach, Benedikt Rudolph, David Hausheer: Benefits of Conditional FPGA
      Provisioning for Virtualized Network Functions, SDNFlex Workshop, March 2017.
11    Jeremias Blendin, Yuriy Babenko, Dennis Kusidlo, Georg Schyguda, David Hausheer: Posi-
      tion Paper: Towards a Structured Approach to Developing Benchmarks for Virtual Network
      Functions. EWSDN, October 2016.
12    Leonhard Nobach, Ivica Rimac, Volker Hilt, David Hausheer: SliM: Enabling Efficient,
      Seamless NFV State Migration. IEEE ICNP, November 2016.



3.10      Road towards lightweight virtual network functions
Oliver Hohlfeld (RWTH Aachen, DE)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Oliver Hohlfeld
Main reference F. Schmidt, O. Hohlfeld, R. Glebke, K. Wehrle, “Santa: Faster Packet Delivery for Commonly
               Wished Replies”, Computer Communication Review – SIGCOMM’15, 45(5):597–598, ACM, 2015.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2785956.2790014


Current research efforts concern the creation, execution, or the placement of network function
– mainly encapsulated in VMs or containers. While these virtualization efforts enable elastic
scaling and cost efficient provisioning of virtual network functions, some functions require
smaller and more lightweight execution environments. In this talk, I argue that there exists
a case for realizing lightweight on-path network functions that do not need fully-fledged
VM-based execution environments but rather run on network elements (e.g., switches). We
have created a first prototype of an application agnostic execution environment to implement
intelligent on-path functions in the network. By using this prototype, we show that server




                                                                                                            17032
82   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


     application performance can be optimized by utilizing these accelerated functions executed
     in the network core.
     References
     1    Florian Schmidt, Oliver Hohlfeld, René Glebke, Klaus Wehrle: Santa: Faster Packet De-
          livery for Commonly Wished Replies. Computer Communication Review 45(5):597–598,
          2015.
     2    Amir Mehmood, Oliver Hohlfeld, Dan Levin, Andreas Wundsam, Florin Ciucu, Fabian
          Schneider, Anja Feldmann, Ralf-Peter Braun: The RouterLab – Emulating Internet Char-
          acteristics in a Room. 11th ITG Conference on Photonic Networks, 2010.
     3    Yvonne Coady, Oliver Hohlfeld, James Kempf, Rick McGeer, Stefan Schmid: Distributed
          cloud computing: Applications, status quo, and challenges. Computer Communication
          Review 45(2):38–43, 2015.
     4    Marc Werner, Johannes Schwandke, Matthias Hollick, Oliver Hohlfeld Torsten Zimmer-
          mann, Klaus Wehrle STEAN: A storage and transformation engine for advanced networking
          context. IFIP Networking Conference, 2016



     3.11      NFV for Industrial Control Networks
     Jan Rüth (RWTH Aachen, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Jan Rüth


     The rising demand for automation and flexible manufacturing challenges the way today’s
     Network Control Systems are structured. Current control architectures are composed of
     expensive and proprietary controllers that have been tailored for a specific use case. It
     is at the moment impossible to flexibly change the control algorithms and configurations.
     Therefore, the idea of a “controller in the cloud” is promising to give the flexibility and scaling
     properties that cloud computing has brought to networking. However, a controller in a cloud
     environment hosted over the Internet cannot meet the demands of current control algorithms,
     namely low latency and low jitter. We therefore propose to enable flexible lightweight-VNFs
     that can be computed on path within the switches of an industry control network that
     are under orchestration of the controller in a cloud environment. This idea challenges how
     packet processing within the switches can be flexibilized and how control algorithms may be
     expressed in this domain while maintaining high performance.



     3.12      Seamless Elasticity in NFV Infrastructures with Heterogeneous
               Hardware Requirements
     Leonhard Nobach (TU Darmstadt, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Leonhard Nobach


     Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) applies the principles known from cloud computing
     to network functions traditionally running on dedicated, inflexible and expensive hardware.
     In our work, we delve into two major topics:
         First, we argue that the increased elasticity and fast provisioning properties of NFV come
     to the cost of performance issues on a single VNF instance, as these commonly operate on
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                               83


sequentially-working processors, unlike ASIC-driven high-performance appliances. However,
the inclusion of hardware acceleration (HWA) into NFV infrastructures carries the danger
of bringing back rigidness and inflexibility. We therefore propose a framework for elastic
provisioning of reconfigurable hardware. VNF instances can dynamically claim and release
FPGA (or NPU) resources over the network from a pool in the datacenter, if their performance
requirements increase.
    Secondly, the arising advantages for elasticity and dynamicity require state transfer
mechanisms (for relocation or scale-in/out, x86 or HWA) that are seamless – the end user
does not perceive any service disruption. Existing work does not consider the high costs of
seamless state transfer traffic as a critical resource, however, links of network functions tend
to be higher utilized than traditional server-cloud traffic, and state transfer attempts from or
to edge or even fog instances aggravate this issue. We introduce the concept of statelets and
our SliM state transfer mechanism, which can increase the possible link utilization up to a
factor of three compared to previous approaches.
References
1    Leonhard Nobach, David Hausheer: Open Elastic Provisioning of Hardware Acceleration in
     NFV Environments. In: Workshop on Software-Defined Networking and Network Function
     Virtualization for Flexible Network Management (SDNFlex 2015), March 2015.
2    Leonhard Nobach, Ivica Rimac, Volker Hilt, David Hausheer: SliM: Enabling Efficient,
     Seamless NFV State Migration. In: IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols
     (ICNP), November 2016.



3.13      NFV Performance Profiling and Optimization
Andreas Kassler (Karlstad University, SE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Andreas Kassler


As network functions will be virtualized and may run on any given hardware the NFVI
operator owns, we need proper methods that allow us to predict the NFV performance
for a given infrastructure configuration. This requires a flexible profiling framework which
allows to benchmark a given virtualized NF and configure the infrastructure in a flexible
way. Having available KPIs from both inside virtual NF and the hypervisors, we would
be able to model and predict the VNF performance. For optimization of VNF placement,
we typically do not know precisely the input to the optimization problem. For example,
we cannot accurately predict the amount of resources a given VNF needs to perform its
functions. From optimization theory it is a well-known fact that once parameter are allowed
to deviate from the nominal values, the optimal solution may become highly infeasible one.
Consequently, we need to develop fast online solution algorithm that are able to cope with
the uncertainty of information in a robust way.




                                                                                                   17032
84   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


     3.14      Bring those network functions back to the plumbing!
     Fernando M. V. Ramos (University of Lisbon, PT)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Fernando M. V. Ramos


     With Network Function Virtualization (NFV) the network functionality of dedicated hardware
     middleboxes is replaced by software running in VMs in commodity servers. In this talk we
     propose to bring (part of) the network functions back to the network (i.e., run the functions in
     network switches). This is made possible today by the recent advances in network data plane
     programmability (enabled by switch chip architectures such as RMT-PISA, for instance).
     Recently, high-performance switches (e.g., Barefoot Tofino) that can be programmed using
     high-level languages (e.g., P4) have emerged. The strengths of the proposed solution is
     mainly a gain in performance, in both lower latency (the NFs can be exactly where they’re
     needed) and higher aggregate throughput (as NFs run in switches). The main challenges are
     the limited memory and computation resources of network switches. Interesting research
     questions in this space include how much of the network function can be offloaded to
     programmable hardware, the implications of the additional network programmability in
     terms of security, and how networks composed of stateful boxes that lead to “mutable data
     paths” (in which the handling of a packet depends not just on immutable forwarding state,
     but also on state that changes at packet time scales) can be verified, tested and debugged.



     3.15      Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined
               Infrastructures
     Michael Scharf (NOKIA – Stuttgart, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Michael Scharf


     Software Defined Networking (SDN) is an essential part of dynamic enterprise services,
     which include, amongst others, Network Functions Virtualization (NFV). Existing Carrier-
     SDN solutions provide network function management, analytics and assurance, as well as
     dynamic management and control. These Carrier-SDN solutions are already deployed in
     operational networks. Still, open research issues remain. Examples include the future design
     of data modeling languages (e.g., YANG, TOSCA) or verification of the interoperability in
     heterogeneous environments.



     3.16      On Research Challenges of NFV
     Christian Esteve Rothenberg (State University of Campinas, BR)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Christian Esteve Rothenberg


     Critical issues to realize NFV in practice include proper performance evaluation methodologies
     towards predictable behavior and in support of optimized VNF placement. An open-source,
     collaborative approach is desirable to provide rich, reproducible platforms for VNF testing
     and benchmarking. Those issues are on our road-map and I hope the community will be
     able to effectively solve them.
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                            85


3.17      NFV at the Edge
Tim Wood (George Washington University – Washington, DC, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Tim Wood


NFV offers the opportunity to run high-performance network services in a flexible way. Edge
clouds may become a new place to provide such services, potentially with very low latency
access for users. The types of “users” connecting to such services also may change over
time – not just users on phones or laptops, but autonomous vehicles, robots, smart city
infrastructure, etc. These new types of users may require new types of NFV services, and
may cause us to rethink the line between a network function and an application.


3.18      Utilizing Hardware Capabilities for Efficient NF Deployment
Fabian Schneider (NEC Laboratories Europe – Heidelberg, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Fabian Schneider


Current trends in SDN research, such as BFBA or P4, lead to extended possibilities to
program network elements and NICs. Furthermore, hardware components such as GPUs
or encryption cards allow for extended options to instantiate (virtual) network functions.
The challenges stemming from this include, but are not limited to, (a) decision algorithms
on how to split/delegate/offload sub-functions to hardware or in-network (b) programming
abstraction that allows for such a functional split and (c) dynamic and online re-composition
of NFs.


3.19      Dynamic Placement of Network Functions for Mitigating
          Internet-Scale Attacks
Oliver Michel (University of Colorado – Boulder, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Oliver Michel


Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks and other large-scale network attacks are
common in today’s Internet. They cost significant amounts of money each day by making
information and services unavailable or forcing businesses to scale up their resources in
the network or in the cloud while under attack. Over the past years however, mitigation
techniques also become more advanced. Advanced Intrusion Detection and Prevention
Systems (IDS/IPS) often are ASIC-based and can inspect large volumes of traffic at high
rates. They use advanced application-layer analysis techniques, and leverage learning-based
approaches to detect anomalies. We argue that wide-area SDN and NFV technologies
can complement such advanced detection and filtering techniques. In particular, network
functions can be placed on-demand during an attack to inspect and filter traffic at multiple
locations throughout the network. These locations can be dynamically chosen to be closer
to the attacker sources as opposed to placing all filtering at the victim’s network gateway
where the attack traffic volume can already be intractable to control. As we imagine such an
architecture also in an inter-domain (AS) setting, several questions regarding a centralized
trusted party and business models for cooperative, on-demand DDoS defense arise.




                                                                                                17032
86   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


     3.20      User-Centric NFV
     Theophilus Benson (Duke University – Durham, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Theophilus Benson


     NFV has emerged as a panacea for a multitude of problems. Surprisingly, many solutions aim
     to provide homogeneous substrates of infrastructures. In this talk, I will argue for specializing
     the configuration and infrastructure to optimize the performance delivered to an end user.
     Although this talk focuses on performance, the broad concept of specialization can be used
     to improve other properties: security and reliability.
         In this talk, I will present several configuration examples that impact the end user’s
     performance. Motivated by these benefits, I will present a framework for optimizing and
     specializing NFV infrastructures: I will discuss inputs and constraints to the optimization
     problem. I will conclude by asking others to think of the potential of heterogeneity on
     emerging use-cases.



     3.21      Flexibility as a Design Guideline for NFV and SDN
     Wolfgang Kellerer (TU München, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Wolfgang Kellerer


     The following questions are still challenging in NFV research: How to cope with the emerging
     network dynamics? How to design a network for flexibility? How to migrate (network)
     functions? What is the role of virtualization and SDN? How can we use “flexibility” as a
     measure to compare different system designs?



      4      Lightning Talks
     4.1     An overview of network verification
     Costin Raiciu (University Politehnica of Bucharest, RO) and Aaron Gember-Jacobson (Col-
     gate University)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Costin Raiciu and Aaron Gember-Jacobson


     Networks are a critical part of our society, but managing them is tedious and error-prone.
     Configuration errors are common and bring major disruptions. NFV and SDN will further
     amplify the difficulty of ensuring networks are functioning correctly, i.e. they obey their
     operator policy.
         The talk will cover efforts to verify formally that a network obeys the policy of its operator
     and has two parts focusing on the control plane verification and data plane verification.
     Data plane verification means taking a snapshot of the data plane state, converting it into a
     verifiable model; next the policy is checked against the model.
         The talk will briefly cover HSA and NOD the best-known data plane verification tools,
     and details the design and implementation of Synet, our symbolic execution tool optimized
     for networks, and the associated SEFL language.
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                               87


    Control plane verification models the control plane, rather than the data plane, allowing
policies to be verified across arbitrary failure scenarios. The talk will briefly cover Batfish,
a recent control plane verifier, as well as discuss ARC, a control plane verifier that speeds
up network verification by casting verification as a graph analysis problem. One limitation
of control plane verifiers is their inability to capture subtle ties in the implementation of
routing protocols on different vendors’ devices.



4.2    Network Programmability: A Primer of Routing Synthesis
Laurent Vanbever (ETH Zürich, CH)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Laurent Vanbever


Between 50% and 80% of the network downtime are due to human, not equipment failing.
Most of these are due to configuration mistakes, i.e. due to humans. In this talk, I present new
directions in network management, one area akin to declarative programming. Specifically, I
describe two complementary ways to declare and provision forwarding state, network-wide,
of legacy equipment. One of the body of work is fibbing, a way to generate inputs to a
distributed algorithm (Dijkstra) is that it computes what the operator wishes. In the second
body of work, Synet, I explain how one can actually generate the distributed algorithm itself.



4.3    The NFV Standardization Concoction
Diego R. López (Telefonica I+D – Seville, ES)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Diego R. López


The goal of the talk was to provide an introduction to the most relevant standardization
efforts in the NFV arena, and to explore how they were related to current research challenges,
and how the technology itself was shaping a new way to produce such standards.
    We started with a brief introduction to the research challenges in NFV, from the per-
spective of a network service provider that has participated in the development of the NFV
concepts since their inception. A list of technology and business challenges were introduced
and briefly discussed.
    The core of the talk was focused on the two main standards-focused groups currently
involved in NFV matters: the ETSI NFV ISG and IRTF’s NFVRG. The evolution, structure,
and current plans of ETSI NFV where introduced, discussing the three types of deliverables
the community aims at: normative and informative (as in many other standards bodies),
and demonstrative (in the form of PoCs and early interoperability assessments)
    The origin and goals of the NFVRG were introduced afterwards, detailing its research
agenda, as an initial input to the discussion planned for the seminar. Later, the activities
connected with NFV in other standards bodies were presented, and finally a discussion of
relevant open-source projects and their influence in the standardization process was presented.
    The talk concluded with a summary of how NFV is shaping standardization while it
is standardized itself, and a call to the participants to bring their results to these ongoing
efforts.




                                                                                                   17032
88   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


     4.4       The Functions Placement Problem
     Wolfgang Kellerer (TU München, DE)
              License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Wolfgang Kellerer
         Joint work of Wolfgang Kellerer, Arsany Basta, Andreas Blenk, Marco Hoffmann, Hajo Morper, Klaus Hoffmann


     Network Function Virtualization (NFV) together with Software Defined Networking (SDN)
     opens up new challenges for the composition, placement and migration of network function in
     an operator’s network. We refer to this class of problems as the Function Placement Problem
     (FPP) inspired from the Controller Placement Problem that has been introduced for SDN
     controllers by Heller in HOTSDN 2012. However, we see new types of challenges arising
     with the FPP. First, as part of an optimal placement an optimal function (de-)composition
     and chaining has to be considered. SDN and NFV offer complementing concepts here where
     network functions can be moved completely (based on NFV) or partially (based on the SDN
     control/data plane split) into a data center [1]. Second, we address dynamic placement and
     migration as a further important network design aspect [2]. Finally, we show how to analyze
     the flexibility a chosen network design to understand its overall benefits [3].
     References
     1    A. Basta, W. Kellerer, M. Hoffmann, H. Morper, K. Hoffmann. Applying NFV and SDN
          to LTE Mobile Core Gateways; The Functions Placement Problem. AllThingsCellular14,
          Workshop ACM SICGOMM, Chicago, IL, USA, August 2014.
     2    A. Basta, A. Blenk, M. Hoffmann, H. Morper, K. Hoffmann, W. Kellerer. SDN and NFV
          Dynamic Operation of LTE EPC Gateways for Time-varying Traffic Patterns. 6th Interna-
          tional Conference on Mobile Networks and Management (MONAMI), Würzburg, Germany,
          September 2014.
     3    W. Kellerer, A. Basta, A. Blenk. Using a Flexibility Measure for Network Design Space
          Analysis of SDN and NFV. Software-Driven Flexible and Agile Networking (SWFAN),
          IEEE INFOCOM Workshop, San Francisco, USA, April 2016.
     4    W. Kellerer, A. Basta, A. Blenk. Flexibility of Networks: a new measure for network design
          space analysis? arXiv report, December 20151 .



     4.5       Getting out of the NFV Deployment Quagmire
     Felipe Huici (NEC Laboratories Europe – Heidelberg, DE)
              License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                        © Felipe Huici


     Containers are in great demand because they are very lightweight when compared to virtual
     machines: both boot times and memory usage are significantly smaller than traditional VMs,
     and this allows massive consolidation of workloads on the same hardware. On the downside,
     containers have fundamentally weaker isolation properties than VMs.
        In this talk, we examine whether there is indeed a strict tradeoff between isolation
     (VMs) and efficiency (containers). By redesigning the control plane of Xen and using small,
     optimized unikernel based virtual machines we show that it is possible to achieve VM boot
     times on the order of milliseconds while packing thousands of VMs on modest hardware.


     1
         http://www.lkn.ei.tum.de/forschung/publikationen/dateien/Kellerer2015FlexibilityofNetworks:a.pdf
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                                   89


 5      Working Groups
5.1     NFV Security, Validation, and Verification
Aaron Gember-Jacobson (Colgate University – Hamilton, US)
       License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Aaron Gember-Jacobson
 Joint work of Aaron Gember-Jacobson, Gabriela Gheorghe, James Kempf, Diego R.López, Bruce MacDowell
               Maggs, Costin Raiciu


     Service level agreements drive operator’s efforts to verify/attest correctness, performance,
     etc.
     How does verification change as you go from hardware to software?
        NFV is less trustworthy:
         ∗ With hardware boxes, the development and deployment cycle is long: The vendor
            takes time to develop an NF and the operator takes time to certify the NF.
         ∗ NFV tends to follow a DevOps model: less testing → higher likelihood of bugs →
            verification becomes more important. To benefit from NFV, you need to change the
            corporate culture within the ISP regarding the need for extensive certification and
            having individual boxes fulfill 99,999% (5-nines) uptime.
        Verification of chaining:
         ∗ With hardware, you simply trace the cables.
         ∗ With software, it is much more difficult – you now have the chance to deploy very
            complex chains of small VNFs that were not deployable before, which makes the
            big picture more complex.
     How do we go about doing verification?
        Lots of languages/tools for expressing/checking policies – not clear these are used.
        P4 is valuable as a modeling language.
        Verification could be made simpler by leveraging flexibility offered by NFV, for ex-
        ample...
         ∗ . . . always put NFs in a particular order that is easier to verify
         ∗ . . . break NFs into micro-services – introduces interoperability challenges; could also
            make verification harder, as noted above.
        If you optimize for performance, then verification is hard, and vice versa.
     Operators want to be able to provide micro-containerized services that can be flexibly
     moved around.
        Infrastructure needs to know if one can trust the hardware and software needs to know
        if one can trust the infrastructure.
        Who vouches for the authenticity of an NF? How do you do this in real time? – we
        know how to do attestation, but doing it at scale is hard.
        How do we apply attestation mechanisms for hypervisors to SDN controllers and
        switches?
        How do you protect private keys stored on NFs that split TCP connections? – Can’t
        put keys on every edge NF.




                                                                                                       17032
90   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


     5.2    Placement
     Wolfgang Kellerer (TU München, DE)
           License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Wolfgang Kellerer
      Joint work of Andreas Kassler, Wolfgang Kellerer, Diego Lopez, Michael Scharf, Fabian Schneider, Andreas
                    Wundsam, Thomas Zinner


        Scope: Offline vs. online; the focus is online!
        1. Ways to decide to program and deploy depending on hardware capabilities, for example
           DPDK or P4. → Hardware offloading/transition? Heterogeneous hardware (adaptive
           hardware)?
             Decomposition of VNFs:
              ∗ Manual/Automatic,
              ∗ Optimization,
              ∗ Structural – designing the system,
              ∗ Dynamic – reacting to environment/traffic.
        2. Machine Learning (control loop)
             Actions:
              ∗ Resource allocation, e.g. VM migration,
              ∗ scheduling; single server (early papers exist).
             Metrics/objective functions (different ones).
              ∗ What metrics? – traditional (hardware), software, service level (KPI).
             Monitoring / telemetry
        3. Heuristics for VNF placements (e.g., co-location)
             Online and offline placement is mostly a planning process.
             There could be placement (optimization) or assignment problems, or also other
             interconnected problems (e.g. from switch to controller).
        4. Dynamics – Changing the system
             What is the cost of migration (resource, time)?
             Verification of continuity of operation
             Debugging / root cause analysis
             Robustness, e.g. during state migration, uncertainty of prediction, impact?
        Open Questions / Discussion
           Machine Learning – how good is it?
           ∗ Where does the data/training come from? The assumption is that data is available.
           ∗ Machine Learning <-> Heuristics / Optimizers
           ∗ Both may may be combined, e.g. machine for pre-filtering and then heuristics or
             optimization of a simpler problem.
           Reaction to unknown situations (e.g., attacks!)
           Models and abstractions for performance
           ∗ How realistic is a “world model”?
             · Where to place, when to place?
             · What are the parameters that we need to optimize for?
             · How is the real hardware working?
           ∗ SLA metrics for NFV (under standardization)? KPI? Abstractions?
             · Remark from Diego Lopez: There is some ongoing work in ETSI on performance
                characterization and maybe some early work on KPI. There is nothing on SLA
                so far.
           Conflicting goals → how to sort this out?
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                                     91


      ∗ User: Best performance (SLA-defined)
      ∗ Operator: “Run infrastructure hot”
   Discussion:
     James Kempf: What algorithms would you use? Traditional optimization algorithms
     are not designed for online use.
     Diego Lopez: Call to practitioners for data-driven management [seminar conclusion].
     Thomas Zinner: Machine learning is not good for systems under change since the
     algorithms are not trained for the new conditions.
     Andreas Kassler: How would one compare different heuristics? There is no standard
     set of agreed-upon topologies, workload, . . . for the evaluation. We need something
     like a standardized VNF evaluation database.
     Suggestion: This may be a topic for another Dagstuhl seminar or a project proposal.
     Diego Lopez: To have predictable performance, you need plenty of knowledge about
     the underlying hardware/platform (ongoing work with Intel). Open-source MANO:
     osm.etsi.org.
     Security properties of the network need to be reflected, not only topology.
     Tim Wood: What is different about NFV placement as compared to other placement
     problems?
     Network topology has more impact on how things are run.
     NFV, by definition, has high I/O.
     In the end it is an optimization problem, just more complex.



5.3    NFV Economics
Leonhard Nobach (TU Darmstadt, DE)
      License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Leonhard Nobach
 Joint work of Tim Wood, David Hausheer, Jan Rüth, Leonhard Nobach, Oliver Hohlfeld, Theophilus Benson


   ISPs provide services to over-the-top (OTT) providers to deploy services.
     Why would they do that? Money, Network offloading.
     Follow-me-Cloud: Which applications exist? High computing power required with low
     latency.
     However, much latency added at the edge (e.g. forward error correction).
     Privacy issues
      ∗ Locality → local laws
      ∗ Power over infrastructure
     Do we need more than sandboxing via SDN?
     Are there mechanisms to guarantee that the provider cannot e.g. snoop the memory
     of my VNF?
     Asymmetric bandwidth: The reason is DDoS. Edge clouds would make it worse.
     DDoS Detection would be a good use case: An NF may search for signs for DDoS.
     Suggestion: An NF which returns aggregates of customer data only (data protection).
     New economics:
      ∗ The ISP provides feature for OTTs to install VNFs, It then charges the customer.
      ∗ Customer requests OTT service, OTT installs VNF to deliver the better service to
        customer.
      ∗ Aggregation of multiple customers possible.




                                                                                                         17032
92   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


           ∗ Small and medium enterprises.
          What is the cost/revenue share between the ISP and OTT provider?
          Regulation: Is this net neutrality?
           ∗ If every OTT can deploy VNFs: No need for regulation.
          Use case for low latency: Tactile gaming.
        Discussion:
          Objections from Diego Lopez
          Idea: Tactile e-commerce (James)
           ∗ Bruce Maggs: E-Commerce is the one place today where people pay a lot of money
              for low latency. How can you use NFV to realize that?
          Dirk Kutscher: There are only two use cases for edge computing.
           ∗ Lots of data is generated locally.
           ∗ Interactive VR
           ∗ For all other use cases, one is much better off reducing the overall latency.
          Tim Wood: The pricing of these resources is going to be complicated
          Bruce Maggs: This sort of net neutrality doesn’t exist yet. Operators currently charge
          whatever they want
          Michael Scharf: For a VNF to be useful you need 1) a VNF and 2) connectivity.
          This can provide some interesting economics related to location: 1) infrastructure
          is idle (and thus cheap) but connectivity is overloaded. 2) infrastructure is hot, but
          connectivity has idle resources.
          Michael Scharf: The other interesting implication is the last-mile connectivity is
          typically the expensive part.



     5.4    NFV Performance
     Theophilus Benson (Duke University)
           License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Theophilus Benson
      Joint work of Theophilus Benson, Christian Esteve Rothenberg, David Hausheer, Oliver Hohlfeld, Leonhard
                    Nobach


        Fundamental questions:
          What is a VNF?
          How can we systematically model and measure the performance characteristics of a
          VNF?
          How can we make (or develop) techniques and frameworks that enable a software
          (VNF) to provide similar performance guarantees as hardware-based functions?
        Understanding and framing the performance problem:
          Types of metrics: App-specific (SIP rps, HTTP rps ), user-specific (page load time),
          or general VNF metrics.
          General VNF Metrics: first class (latency/throughput), second class (migration/boot-
          up time).
        Use cases for VNF:
          What is a VNF: a middlebox running in a VM or a middlebox rewritten for “the
          cloud”?
          Control functions – DNS, DHCP, BGP aggregation.
          Data functions – focus on network functions that cannot be supported in ASICs/P4.
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                             93


      ∗ A stateful load balancer which requires HTTP header information,
      ∗ A dynamic deep packet inspector (DPI): flexible regular expression or signature
         matching not supported,
      ∗ Software-defined WAN: WAN optimization not supported in ASIC,
      ∗ Billing/Accounting: cannot be scalable done in ASIC,
      ∗ Fine-grained and specialized code: ASIC doesn’t allow sufficient programmability
         for arbitrary code,
      ∗ Interface and API for deployment: Automated attestation and provisioning.
    Measure / Benchmark VNFs
      Dimensions to analyze and compare
      ∗ Describe and quantify input of: SFC, operating system and hardware stack, Ver-
         sioning, collateral workload, etc. etc.
      ∗ Versioning: code release, configuration change.
      ∗ Hardware specifications: x86 vs. FPGA vs GPU with performance guarantees
        (consistent / constant performance behavior).
      ∗ Guarantees under normal and adversarial workloads: e.g. physically co-located
        VNFs competing for I/O or trashing memory caches.
      ∗ Cost vs. performance trade-off: Cost performance characteristics or guarantees of a
        VNF.
      Who uses the benchmarks? How much control does the benchmark have?
      ∗ An entity using a third-party cloud/cloudlet?
      ∗ An entity that controls code and infrastructure?
      Open / General framework for testing (functional, regression, performance) during
      development. See Fd.io approach.
      Linked-in versus Telco data centers.
      Containers vs. VM: how do you reason about the guarantees.
      Existing infrastructure support will impact how we design and decompose functions.
      Definition of a VNF: Composed of several (one or more) virtualization units connected
      by an infrastructure network.
      ∗ Think more broadly about not just a unit but an orchestration of VNFs.
      ∗ SDN in the VNF and outside of the VNF.
      ∗ VM in the data path – there are complex (legacy) constraints between the VM.
      ∗ VM in the control space – multiple VMs for redundancy.
      ∗ ETSI has the notion of VNFC which are components of the VNF – the potential
         unit.
    Ongoing / Related Work:
      Gym [Christian Rothenberg & Ericsson Research]2
      vnfbench3
      VBaaS4
      Towards a Structured Approach to Developing Benchmarks for Virtual Network
      Functions.5
      Andreas Kassler’s recent project (see Lightning talks).


2
  http://materials.dagstuhl.de/files/17/17032/17032.ChristianEsteve%20Rothenberg1.Slides.pdf
3
  https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-rosa-bmwg-vnfbench-00
4
  https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-rorosz-nfvrg-vbaas/
5
  Jeremias Blendin, Yuriy Babenko, Dennis Kusidlo, Georg Schyguda and David Hausheer. In EWSDN
  2016.




                                                                                                 17032
94   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


          Discussion:
            Dirk Kutscher: The evolution of non-telco datacenters might be very relevant to the
            function placement / composition problem, e.g., the way that LinkedIn is running
            $change_me?
            Diego Lopez: The VNF does not necessarily equal to a virtualization unit, e.g. a VNF
            can be composed out of more than one VM.
          To do:
            Definition of a VNF highly unclear → a definition should be added to the report →
            discuss with Diego Lopez.
            The VNF can contain forwarding, as well.
            In ETSI, the term VNFC is used (c for component).
            Fabian Schneider: It would be good to outline deployment options for VNF.
            Container-based
            In switches



     5.5     NFV Use Cases
          Operator view
            NFs in operator networks
            Transparent middleboxes (e.g., proxy, application acceleration) are going to die –
            because all traffic is encrypted.
            At the wired edge as a DSLAM and CGNAT.
            In mobile networks there are eNodeBs, S-GWs (end of encrypted tunnels), and P-GWs.
            Control boxes: accounting, radio service, monitoring.
            We want to move all of these to software.
            Vision of moving virtualized functions to the eNodeB and moving them to another
            eNodeB when the user moves.
            NFV challenges: security, placement (includes hardware/software split), testing/visib-
            ility/verification, performance, economics?
            We want to combine wired and mobile networks into one network.
          End users (and apps?) view
            We want to insert VNF along the path.
            This is being done a little by allowing insertion of, for example, virtual firewalls in the
            mobile edge cloud – only tenants with a business relationship with the provider are
            allowed to put VMs in the mobile edge cloud; mobile edge computing is like a CDN
            edge.
            Not really cloud computing – call it “middleboxes-as-a-service”.
            Service providers have same perspective.



      6      Wrap-up
     6.1     Research Areas and Questions
     At the end of the seminar, we asked each seminar participant to identify research areas and
     open research questions on NFV and anonymously provide them on paper cards. We state
     the returned questions below.
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                             95


  Impact of a microservice architecture on NFV performance, flexibility, resilience, etc.
  Metrics-Analytics-Policing-Control Loops: How much of network management can be
  automated and how can possible fatal clashes between control loop actions (e.g. one loop
  changes routing in one direction of another in the opposite direction) be identified and
  mitigated?
  Distributed Cloud, Edge Cloud: Does this have any impact on NFV deployment?
  How can HW capabilities (e.g. programmable hardware) be exposed by the hypervisor
  and used for NFV (placement)?
  How can a provider run untrusted NFs safely? How can a customer run NFs on an
  untrusted provider safely?
  How can an NFV platform provide real-time performance guarantees?
  How do you estimate the performance of a VNF in an early stage of the development?
  How to characterize/predict the performance of complex/dynamic systems with many
  VNFs.
  Placement optimization that considers the peculiar properties (e.g. the number of lookups,
  cache behavior). Optimized schedulers for this environment.
  How to include FPGA resources into NFV infrastructures while keeping elasticity and
  flexibility properties known from COTS processors?
  Networking vs. Commodity: What area should we match to?
  What sorts of applications would external parties (e.g. CDNs) like to deploy as network
  functions in carrier networks? One example might be a distributed denial of service
  mitigation function.
  How could carriers safely allow the deployment of such functions?
  What functionality could NFV provide that can’t be easily provided any other way?
  Does it make sense to unify SDN with some sort of NFV control?
  Applicability of Microservice Architectures to Telco NFV.
  Better concepts for edge computing.
  Usable and Actionable SLAs for NFV.
  NFV introducing exponentially-growing heterogeneity may require to rethink current
  approaches to Data and Information Modelling.
  Methods to measure and guarantee consistent performance, including multi-dimensional
  KPIs.
  Computer-assisted de-composition & re-composition of network functions: Programming
  Language, Instantiation Optimization.
  How to decompose big, monolithic NFs into smaller microservices? Can we do this
  automatically? Creation of use cases beyond current ASIC/HW-centric NFs to drive
  NFV (open problem rather than specific question).
  How to enable inter-AS VNFs that span over administrative boundaries?
  Definition of metrics and performance evaluation principles for VNFs.
  How can you quantify the user-level impact of employing NFV? Performance impact?
  Privacy? Availability?
  How can you reason about the implication of configuration changes in a principled
  manner?
  How do we convert home network gateway devices, laptops, cell phones into infrastructures
  (Edge cloud) for supporting user / application-specific NFV?
  How do we perform proactive data plane verification in a network that uses traditional
  routing protocols?
  How do we build higher-fidelity – yet tractably analyzable – models of NFs for verification?




                                                                                                 17032
96   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


          How do we speed up the NF certification process performed by operators?
          How to unify a network containing thousands of stateful data plane nodes?
          Which new security threats arise with NFV?
          What can be offloaded to (programmable) hardware?
          Automatic leveraging of hardware and in-network capabilities for VNFs.
          YANG, TOSCA, ____ ? What comes next?6
          How to bring performance benchmarking results and placement/optimization together
          without getting killed by complexity; where is the right abstraction?
          How to design appropriate mechanisms to “check” decisions/output of machine learning
          models; how to do a quality assessment of the machine learning results on short time
          scales?
          What fundamental design differences in NFV architectures we would envisage if we
          assume the Datacenter network has 500 terabytes per second of bi-sectional bandwidth
          within a single datacenter (Google Prediction)?
          Making SDN and NFV convergence happen.
          A general theory (and practice!) of software-based networking.
          Data-driven network management.
          Security in all aspects.
          New business model
          Application of Machine Learning to function placement
          Techno-economic analysis
          Placement w.r.t. dynamics, functional decomposition
          Flexibility as a metric to analyze designs
          Verification



     6.2      Lessons Learned, Surprises
     We anonymously asked the seminar participants about their lessons learned during the
     seminar and state them below.

          The extent of the TUM work on EPC decomposition virtualization. They seem to have
          covered most of the important points.
          Significant disconnect between academia and industry.
          Control may or may not be different from management.
          How messy and complex the services are inside telco providers.
          There is no clear distinction in NFV: Middlebox vs. edge-cloud vs. 5G core virtualization.
          There is no clear consensus on the definition of a VNF.
          The distinction between conceptual and implementation aspects is fuzzy (e.g. VM/Con-
          tainer).
          That there is little excitement and novelty. Unfortunately.
          Pessimism about the impact that OpenFlow will have in the future (You can’t buy
          OpenFlow switches)
          NFV isn’t really about virtualization, it is about implementing network functionality in
          software – in a portable way.


     6
         https://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/teas/current/msg01900.html
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                                97


  SDN isn’t about software, it is about separating the control plane from the dataplane
  and perhaps centralizing the control plane.
  Lack of common views and amount of disagreement.
  The amount of faith in Machine Learning / Artificial Intelligence to solve “untrackable”
  challenges in NFV/SDN.
  The definition of a VNF and NFV use cases is still a highly controversial topic that has
  not settled yet.
  NFV still is telco-centric: needs of service providers other than telcos do not seem to play
  a major role currently.
  The role of NFV in 5G networks.
  The plethora of open questions in NFV placement.
  There are research questions in NFV.
  Most researchers do not read architectural documents developed by SDOs in their domain.
  This leads to unnecessary discussions on terminology and common understanding of
  principles and concepts. Point from the discussion: A literature research is not complete
  if you only consider academic papers.
  Recent progresses in (control plane) verification.
  Foglets maybe make it to real deployments (just making fun...).
  American people do not say “allow to”.
  Many people say there are no research challenges for NFV: No!!! When it comes to
  operational questions etc.
  “Intent” is not the powerful buzzword, I thought it was.
  Good old control plane protocols have still a lot to squeeze out when it comes to verification,
  control, management...
  People mistake OpenFlow to be equal to SDN!
  The control vs. management question is still not solved in industry.
  Confirmation of: SDN is not OpenFlow, which is dead.
  The NFV ecosystem (users, operators, vendors) needs further consideration.
  ETSI NFV standardization status (still fuzzy)




                                                                                                    17032
98   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


     6.3   Controversial statements about NFV
     In this session, we asked the 20 participants to write down controversial statements about
     NFV anonymously on blank cards. We collected them afterwards, read them aloud, and
     asked all participants to raise hands if they agree on the statement () or if they disagree
     on it ().

                  “NFV is an attempt to re-invent Intelligent Networks.”
                                       8  8

     “Will the network management overhead kill network virtualization and NFV?”
                                     0  21

            “SDN will never make it to the CORE of the Internet backbone”
                                      3  18

            “NFV will never make it to the CORE of the Internet backbone”
                                      13  8

     “There is no technology which is generic enough to solve different use-cases.
     We will end up in use-case specific solutions! Even P4 will (probably) be used
      to the interconnection DL/WAN. SDN is “only” used for TE in WAN (or
                         what might be something like SDN).”
                                       1  20

     “SDN and NFV is both all about network management and not about control!
               (And network management is not well researched)”
                                     3  12

                          “There is no research challenge in NFV”
                                          0  21

     “Data-driven (ML)-based network management will render networks infeasible
                                     to debug”
                                     7  10

     “Because SW is slower than optimized hardware, we need to throw much more
            hardware at the problem to meet current performance criteria.”
                                      11  6

       “Like SDN, in practice, NFV apps will run only on end hosts, and not on
                 network hardware/appliances deployed in networks”
                                     0  21

       “NFV will enable more smaller-size companies to enter NF markets (e.g.
                                providing CDNs)”
                                     15  5
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu              99


“We (terribly) lack good software engineering principles in the application of
                                 SDN/NFV”
                                  15  3

  “Regulation will anyway restrict SDN & NFV to the enterprise networks”
                                  0  21

    “There has been no fundamental and deployed innovation in network
                         management for the last”
                               0  0

          “SDN/NFV as a research area is slowly but surely dying”
                               5  13

      “NFV will increase costs due to Software maintenance and make
                 misconfiguration even easier than today”
                                 8  11

 “Heterogeneity of deployment options will result in unmanageable systems”
                                 5  15

                      “OpenFlow is no longer required!”
                                 13  7

    “NFV won’t significantly lower costs for operators – they will need to
                      structurally reform or will die”
                                 13  5

                       “NFV research is mostly dead”
                                0  0

           “NFV will never see widespread real-world deployment”
                                 0  21

“There will only be at most 5 different useful network functions (i.e. there is
                       no need for an NFV app store”
                                  13  6

 “Edge clouds will never provide a useful service normal people care about”
                                 1  20

 “Only NFs without cross-flow state can be dynamically scaled, because state
                    sharing is prohibitively expensive”
                                 5  12

        “SDN will make it, but not with OpenFlow (how we know it)”
                                 18  2




                                                                                  17032
100   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


                           “NFV is going to converge with SDN”
                                        9  7

      “High-throughput, ASIC-based network appliances are not going to be replaced
                                      by NFV.”
                                      17  2

       “NFV will have its first widespread deployment in the 5G RAN and mobile
                                          core”
                                        12  1

         “OpenFlow will remain a niche protocol and will never achieve its initial
         promise to replace existing protocols due to the lack of suitable hardware
                              available in a timely fashion.”
                                         21  0

         “Constructing real networks based on NFV will require a large amount of
       system integration (i.e. glue code), and until that is sorted through, networks
      based on NFV will be more expensive than traditional networks, but afterwards
                                   will be much cheaper.”
                                          14  1

      “The impact of open source on standardization will be disruptive and there will
                              be less SDOs in the future.”
                                       9  3

      “NFV will lower the innovation, because vendors cannot sell boxes anymore, so
                    there is no incentive to develop novel functions.”
                                         0  21

                        “NFV allows to speed up NF performance.”
                                        10  6

       “There is only one way to meet the required NF performance: Put the NF in
                                       the switch!”
                                        1  20




      6.4   Wrap-up Notes
      Author: Leonhard Nobach

         Orchestration has been identified as the current “hype buzzword”.
         When NFV is solved, what will be the next hype? For example how to automate network
         management? How to avoid feedback loops (critical)? How to maximize automation?
         How to bring data-driven network management to the masses? Still, no buzzword exists
         for these questions.
D. Hausheer, O. Hohlfeld, D. R. López, B. MacDowell Maggs, and C. Raiciu                             101


     Other problems to solve are intent management (on-going work in the ONF7 ), and
     occurring conflicts.
     There might be a lack of solving “new” problems with NFV, i.e. a lack of innovation.

    A very important outcome was that there is still no consensus on a very simple question:
the definition of a network function (NF). Existing definitions have been discussed in a recent
survey [1]: An NF can be considered as a logical network building block doing tasks which
go beyond (SDN) forwarding. Taking such a definition, Layer 3 forwarding (involving more
complex decisions, exchanging data link addresses and decrementing time-to-live counters)
can be considered as a grey area, while any stateful processing (stateful firewalls, dynamic
NAT) could be clearly considered as an NF. This does not exclude the possibility that parts
of these NFs are implemented on an SDN data plane (for example the NF implementation
dynamically adding or removing flows for established NAT or firewall sessions via OpenFlow).
    According to this definition, a (V)NF can be implemented in one or multiple VMs (VNF
instances), in the data plane itself, on reconfigurable, hardware–accelerated devices (e.g.
FPGAs), or in a distributed system comprising a combination of these components.
References
1    Leonhard Nobach, Oliver Hohlfeld, David Hausheer: New Kid on the Block: Network Func-
     tions Virtualization: From Big Boxes to Carrier Clouds (Editorial). In: ACM Computer
     Communications Review (CCR), July 2016.



6.5     What comes after NFV?
Author: Oliver Hohlfeld

     Lots of pessimism in the research questions.
     Currently listed topics are more on the management side.
     Promise of SDN/NFV was to enable in the network. Where is this happening? Comment
     James Kempf: SDWAN.
     Don’t apply verification to OpenFlow control plane aspects. Stop with OpenFlow. The
     important questions are in the management plane.
        Verification for intent: ONF TIPI
        Northbound interface of a controller.
        Published four months ago, not yet accessible to research.
     Remark Fabian Schneider: Move the abstractions up the stack. We need abstractions
     going above OpenFlow and come with verification properties.
     Comment Michael Scharf: Scripting etc. needed way up in the management plane.
     To-do point: A literature research is not complete if you only consider academic papers.
     Microservice ecosystem (a.k.a. Active Networks)
     HW/SW Codesign (for flexibility)




7
    https://www.opennetworking.org/?p=1633&option=com_wordpress&Itemid=155




                                                                                                  17032
102   17032 – Network Function Virtualization in Software Defined Infrastructures


             Participants
        Theo Benson                     Wolfgang Kellerer              Fernando M. V. Ramos
      Duke University – Durham, US    TU München, DE                 University of Lisbon, PT
        Christian Esteve Rothenberg     James Kempf                    Jan Rüth
      State University of             Ericsson – Santa Clara, US     RWTH Aachen, DE
      Campinas, BR                      Dirk Kutscher                  Michael Scharf
        Aaron Gember-Jacobson         Huawei Technologies –          NOKIA – Stuttgart, DE
      Colgate University –            München, DE                      Fabian Schneider
      Hamilton, US                      Diego R. Lopez               NEC Laboratories Europe –
        Gabriela Gheorghe             Telefonica I+D – Seville, ES   Heidelberg, DE
      PwC – Luxembourg, LU              Bruce MacDowell Maggs          Laurent Vanbever
        David Hausheer                Duke University – Durham, US   ETH Zürich, CH
      TU Darmstadt, DE                  Oliver Michel                  Timothy Wood
        Oliver Hohlfeld               University of Colorado –       George Washington University –
      RWTH Aachen, DE                 Boulder, US                    Washington, DC, US
        Felipe Huici                    Leonhard Nobach                Andreas Wundsam
      NEC Laboratories Europe –       TU Darmstadt, DE               Big Switch Networks –
      Heidelberg, DE                    Costin Raiciu                Santa Clara, US
        Andreas Kassler               University Politehnica of        Thomas Zinner
      Karlstad University, SE         Bucharest, RO                  Universität Würzburg, DE
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 17041

Randomization in Parameterized Complexity
Edited by
Marek Cygan1 , Fedor V. Fomin2 , Danny Hermelin3 , and
Magnus Wahlström4

1    University of Warsaw, PL, cygan@mimuw.edu.pl
2    University of Bergen, NO, fomin@ii.uib.no
3    Ben Gurion University – Beer Sheva, IL, hermelin@bgu.ac.il
4    Royal Holloway University of London, GB, magnus.wahlstrom@rhul.ac.uk


      Abstract
Dagstuhl Seminar 17041 “Randomization in Parameterized Complexity” took place from January
22nd to January 27th 2017 with the objective to bridge the gap between randomization and
parameterized complexity theory. This report documents the talks held during the seminar as
well as the open questions arised in the discussion sessions.
Seminar January 22–27, 2017 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/17041
1998 ACM Subject Classification F.2.2 Nonnumerical Algorithms and Problems, G.2.1 Com-
   binatorics, G.2.2 Graph Theory
Keywords and phrases fixed-parameter tractability, intractability, parameterized complexity,
   randomness
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.7.1.103
Edited in cooperation with Marc Roth



 1     Executive Summary
Marek Cygan
Fedor V. Fomin
Danny Hermelin
Magnus Wahlström
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström


Randomization plays a prominent role in many subfields of theoretical computer science.
Typically, this role is twofold: On the one hand, randomized methods can be used to solve
essentially classical problems easier or more efficiently. In many cases, this allows for simpler,
faster, and more appealing solutions for problems that have rather elaborate deterministic
algorithms; in other cases, randomization provides the only known way to cope with the
problem (e.g. polynomial identity testing, or deciding whether there exists a perfect matching
with exactly b red edges in an edge-colored bipartite graph). On the other hand, there are
also cases where randomness is intrinsic to the question being asked, such as the study of
properties of random objects, and the search for algorithms which are efficient on average for
various input distributions.
    Parameterized complexity is an approach of handling computational intractability, where
the main idea is to analyze the complexity of problems in finer detail by considering additional
problem parameters beyond the input size. This area has enjoyed much success in recent
years, and has yielded several new algorithmic approaches that help us tackle computationally
           Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
           under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Randomization in Parameterized Complexity, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 7, Issue 1, pp. 103–128
Editors: Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström
                  Dagstuhl Reports
                  Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
104   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


      challenging problems. While randomization already has an important role in parameterized
      complexity, for instance in techniques such as color-coding or randomized contractions, there
      is a common opinion within researchers of the field that the full potential of randomization
      has yet to be fully tapped.
          The goal of this seminar was to help bridge this gap, by bringing together experts in the
      areas of randomized algorithms and parameterized complexity. In doing so, we hope to:
          Establish domains for simpler and/or more efficient FPT algorithms via randomization.
          Identify problems which intrinsically need randomization.
          Study parameterized problems whose instances are generated by some underlying distri-
          bution.
          Stimulate the development of a broadened role of randomness within parameterized
          complexity.
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström                                          105


 2       Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström . . . . . 103

Overview of Talks
     Hardness in P
     Amir Abboud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
     Towards Hardness of Approximation for Polynomial Time Problems
     Arturs Backurs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
     Directed Hamiltonicity parameterized by the largest independent set
     Andreas Björklund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
     Fine-grained dichotomies for the Tutte plane and Boolean #CSP
     Cornelius Brand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
     A Near-Linear Pseudopolynomial Time Algorithm for Subset Sum
     Karl Bringmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
     Relatively recent insights into counting small patterns
     Radu Curticapean . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
     Finding Detours is Fixed-parameter Tractable
     Holger Dell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
     Average-Case Analysis of Parameterized Problems
     Tobias Friedrich . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
     Spanning Circuits in Regular Matroids
     Petr A. Golovach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
     Parameterized Traveling Salesman Problem: Beating the Average
     Gregory Z. Gutin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
     How proofs are prepared at Camelot
     Petteri Kaski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
     Improved algebraic algorithms for out-branchings problems
     Yiannis Koutis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
     Improving TSP tours using dynamic programming over tree decomposition
     Łukasz Kowalik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
     A Randomized Polynomial Kernelization for Vertex Cover with a Smaller Parameter
     Stefan Kratsch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
     Gap Amplification using Bipartite Random Graphs
     Bingkai Lin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
     Lossy Kernelization I
     M. S. Ramanujan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
     Lossy Kernelization II: Cycle Packing
     Fahad Panolan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
     Lossy Kernelization, III: Lower Bounds
     Daniel Lokshtanov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116




                                                                                                        17041
106   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


        Exponential Time Paradigms Through the Polynomial Time Lens
        Jesper Nederlof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
        Faster Space-Efficient Algorithms for Subset Sum, k-Sum and Related Problems
        Jesper Nederlof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
        Subexponential Parameterized Algorithms for Planar Graphs, Apex-Minor-Free
        Graphs and Graphs of Polynomial Growth via Low Treewidth Pattern Covering
        Marcin Pilipczuk and Dániel Marx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
        Exact Algorithms via Monotone Local Search
        Saket Saurabh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
        Backdoors for Constraint Satisfaction
        Stefan Szeider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
        Parameterized Algorithms for Matrix Factorization Problems
        David P. Woodruff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
        k-Path of Algorithms
        Meirav Zehavi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118

      Open problems
        FPT-approximation of bandwidth
        Daniel Lokshtanov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
        Time and space complexity of k-LCS
        Michał Pilipczuk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
        Fine-grained complexity of k-LCS
        Karl Bringmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
        Fine-grained complexity of Hitting Set w.r.t. VC dimension
        Karl Bringmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
        FPT-approximation of VC dimension
        Bingkai Lin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
        Better approximation of Dominating Set
        Bingkai Lin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
        Orthogonal Vectors for Subset Sum
        Jesper Nederlof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
        Fixed parameter tractability of Weighted Low Rank Approximation
        David P. Woodruff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
        Short resolution refutations for SAT when parameterized by treewidth
        Stefan Szeider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
        Small universal Steiner tree covers
        Marcin Pilipczuk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
        Even Set
        Dániel Marx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
        FPT-approximation of Maximum Clique and Minimum Dominating Set
        Dániel Marx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström                                       107


   Polynomial (Turing) Kernels
   Dániel Marx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
   Directed Odd Cycle Traversal
   Dániel Marx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
   Square root phenomenon
   Dániel Marx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
   Disjoint paths / minor testing
   Dániel Marx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128




                                                                                                     17041
108   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


       3     Overview of Talks
      3.1    Hardness in P
      Amir Abboud (Stanford University, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Amir Abboud


      The class P attempts to capture the efficiently solvable computational tasks. It is full of
      practically relevant problems, with varied and fascinating combinatorial structure.
         In this talk, I will give an overview of a rapidly growing body of work that seeks a better
      understanding of the structure within P. Inspired by NP-hardness, the main tool in this
      approach are combinatorial reductions. Combining these reductions with a small set of
      plausible conjectures, we obtain tight lower bounds on the time complexity of many of the
      most important problems in P.


      3.2    Towards Hardness of Approximation for Polynomial Time Problems
      Arturs Backurs (MIT – Cambridge, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Arturs Backurs


      Proving hardness of approximation is a major challenge in the field of fine-grained complexity
      and conditional lower bounds in P. How well can the Longest Common Subsequence (LCS)
      or the Edit Distance be approximated by an algorithm that runs in near-linear time? In
      this paper, we make progress towards answering these questions. We introduce a framework
      that exhibits barriers for truly subquadratic and deterministic algorithms with good approx-
      imation guarantees. Our framework highlights a novel connection between deterministic
      approximation algorithms for natural problems in P and circuit lower bounds.
          In particular, we discover a curious connection of the following form: if there exists a
      δ > 0 such that for all  > 0 there is a deterministic (1 + )-approximation algorithm for LCS
      on two sequences of length n over an alphabet of size no(1) that runs in O(n2−δ ) time, then
      a certain plausible hypothesis is refuted, and the class ENP does not have non-uniform linear
      size Valiant Series-Parallel circuits. Thus, designing a “truly subquadratic PTAS” for LCS is
      as hard as resolving an old open question in complexity theory.


      3.3    Directed Hamiltonicity parameterized by the largest independent
             set
      Andreas Björklund (Lund University, SE)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Andreas Björklund
       Joint work of Andreas Björklund, Petteri Kaski, Ioannis Koutis


      We present a Monte Carlo algorithm deciding Hamiltonicity in n-vertex directed graphs in
      O∗ (3n−mis(G) ) time and polynomial space, where mis(G) is the size of the largest independent
      set in the graph. In particular, in bipartite graphs we get a O∗ (1.733n ) time and polynomial
      space algorithm improving over the O∗ (1.888n ) time and exponential space algorithm by
      Cygan et al. from STOC 2013.
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström                                             109


3.4     Fine-grained dichotomies for the Tutte plane and Boolean #CSP
Cornelius Brand (Universität des Saarlandes, DE)
      License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Cornelius Brand
 Joint work of Cornelius Brand, Holger Dell, Marc Roth


Jaeger, Vertigan, and Welsh proved a dichotomy for the complexity of evaluating the Tutte
polynomial at fixed points: The evaluation is #P-hard almost everywhere, and the remaining
points admit polynomial-time algorithms. Dell, Husfeldt, and Wahlén and Husfeldt and
Taslaman, in combination with Curticapean, extended the #P-hardness results to tight lower
bounds under the counting exponential time hypothesis #ETH, with the exception of the line
y = 1, which was left open. We complete the dichotomy theorem for the Tutte polynomial
under #ETH by proving that the number of all acyclic subgraphs of a given n-vertex graph
cannot be determined in time exp(o(n)) unless #ETH fails. Another dichotomy theorem
we strengthen is the one of Creignou and Hermann for counting the number of satisfying
assignments to a constraint satisfaction problem instance over the Boolean domain. We prove
that all #P-hard cases are also hard under #ETH. The main ingredient is to prove that the
number of independent sets in bipartite graphs with n vertices cannot be computed in time
exp(o(n)) unless #ETH fails. In order to prove our results, we use the block interpolation
idea by Curticapean and transfer it to systems of linear equations that might not directly
correspond to interpolation.



3.5     A Near-Linear Pseudopolynomial Time Algorithm for Subset Sum
Karl Bringmann (MPI für Informatik – Saarbrücken, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Karl Bringmann
Main reference K. Bringmann, “A Near-Linear Pseudopolynomial Time Algorithm for Subset Sum”, in Proc. of
               the 28th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA 2017), pp. 1073–1084,
               SIAM, 2017.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611974782.69


Given a set Z of n positive integers and a target value t, the SubsetSum problem asks
whether any subset of Z sums to t. A textbook pseudopolynomial time algorithm by Bellman
from 1957 solves SubsetSum in time O(nt). Here we present a simple randomized algorithm
running in time Õ(n + t). This improves upon a classic result and is likely to be near-optimal,
since it matches conditional lower bounds from SetCover and k-Clique. One of our main
tools originated in the field of parameterized algorithms. We also present a new algorithm
with pseudopolynomial time and polynomial space.




                                                                                                           17041
110   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


      3.6    Relatively recent insights into counting small patterns
      Radu Curticapean (Hungarian Academy of Sciences – Budapest, HU)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Radu Curticapean
       Joint work of Radu Curticapean, Holger Dell, Dániel Marx


      We consider the problem of counting subgraphs. More specifically, we look at the following
      problems #Sub(C) for fixed graph classes C: Given as input a graph H from C (the pattern)
      and another graph G (the host), the task is to count the occurrences of H as a subgraph
      in G. Our goal is to understand which properties of the pattern class C make the problem
      #Sub(C) easy/hard. For instance, for the class of stars, we can solve this problem in linear
      time. For the class of paths however, it subsumes counting Hamiltonian paths and is hence
      #P-hard.
          As it turns out, the notion of #P-hardness fails to give a sweeping dichotomy for the
      problems #Sub(C), since there exist classes C of intermediate complexity. However, adopting
      the framework of fixed-parameter tractability, and parameterizing by the size of the pattern,
      it was shown in 2014 how to classify the problems #Sub(C) as either polynomial-time solvable
      or #W[1]-hard: A class C lies on the polynomial-time side of this dichotomy iff the graphs
      appearing in C have vertex-covers of constant size.
          In this talk, we introduce a new technique that allows us to view the subgraph counting
      problem from a new perspective. In particular, it allows for the following applications:
      1. A greatly simplified proof of the 2014 dichotomy result, together with almost-tight lower
          bounds under ETH, which were not achievable before.
      2. Faster algorithms for counting k-edge subgraphs, such as k-matchings, with running time
          nck for constants c < 1.



      3.7    Finding Detours is Fixed-parameter Tractable
      Holger Dell (Universität des Saarlandes, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Holger Dell
               URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.07737
       Joint work of Ivona Bezáková, Radu Curticapean, Holger Dell, Fedor V. Fomin


      We consider the following natural “above guarantee” parameterization of the classical Longest
      Path problem: For given vertices s and t of a graph G, and an integer k, the problem
      Longest Detour asks for an (s, t)-path in G that is at least k longer than a shortest (s, t)-path.
      Using insights into structural graph theory, we prove that Longest Detour is fixed-parameter
      tractable (FPT) on undirected graphs and actually even admits a single-exponential algorithm,
      that is, one of running time exp(O(k)) · poly(n). This matches (up to the base of the
      exponential) the best algorithms for finding a path of length at least k.
          Furthermore, we study the related problem Exact Detour that asks whether a graph G
      contains an (s, t)-path that is exactly k longer than a shortest (s, t)-path. For this problem,
      we obtain a randomized algorithm with running time about 2.746k , and a deterministic
      algorithm with running time about 6.745k , showing that this problem is FPT as well. Our
      algorithms for Exact Detour apply to both undirected and directed graphs.
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström                                              111


3.8    Average-Case Analysis of Parameterized Problems
Tobias Friedrich (Hasso-Plattner-Institut – Potsdam, DE)
      License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Tobias Friedrich
 Joint work of Karl Bringmann, Tobias Friedrich, Danny Hermelin, Christian Hercher, Nikolaos Fountoulakis


Many computational problems are NP-hard and are therefore generally believed not to be
solvable in polynomial time. Additional assumptions on the inputs are necessary to solve
such problems efficiently. Two typical approaches are (i) parameterized complexity where we
assume that a certain parameter of the instances is small, and (ii) average-case complexity
where we assume a certain probability distribution on the inputs. There is a vast literature on
both approaches, but very little about their intersection. Nevertheless, combining these two
approaches seems natural and potentially useful in practice. The talk presents the following
line of results:
    A hierarchy of parameterized average-case complexity classes [2].
    The W[1]-complete problem k-clique drops to an average-case analog of FPT for homo-
    geneous Erdős-Rényi random graphs of all densities [2] and for inhomogeneous Chung-Lu
    random graphs with power-law exponent γ > 2 [4, 5].
    The bounded search tree paradigm allows analyzing average-case run times for a very
    relaxed graph model that only assumes stochastic independence of the edges. This is
    demonstrated for the parameterized problems k-Clique, Vertex Cover, and Hitting Set
    [unpublished].
    The Edge Cover Problem has no kernel of subexponential size in the worst-case (unless
    P = NP). We study a well-known set of reduction rules and prove that random intersection
    graphs are reduced completely by these rules [3].
    The geometric problem of computing the hypervolume indicator is W[1]-hard in the
    worst-case, but can be solved in expected FPT-time if the input is distributed at random
    on a d-dimensional simplex [1].

References
1    Karl Bringmann and Tobias Friedrich. Parameterized average-case complexity of the hyper-
     volume indicator. In Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO), pages
     575–582. ACM, 2013.
2    Nikolaos Fountoulakis, Tobias Friedrich, and Danny Hermelin. On the average-case com-
     plexity of parameterized clique. Theoretical Computer Science, 576:18–29, 2015.
3    Tobias Friedrich and Christian Hercher. On the kernel size of clique cover reductions for
     random intersection graphs. Journal of Discrete Algorithms, 34:128–136, 2015.
4    Tobias Friedrich and Anton Krohmer. Parameterized clique on scale-free networks. In
     International Symposium on Algorithms and Computation (ISAAC), volume 7676 of Lecture
     Notes in Computer Science, pages 659–668. Springer, 2012.
5    Tobias Friedrich and Anton Krohmer. Parameterized clique on inhomogeneous random
     graphs. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 184:130–138, 2015.




                                                                                                            17041
112   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


      3.9     Spanning Circuits in Regular Matroids
      Petr A. Golovach (University of Bergen, NO)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Petr A. Golovach
       Joint work of Fedor V. Fomin, Petr A. Golovach, Daniel Lokshtanov, Saket Saurabh
      Main reference F. V. Fomin, P. A. Golovach, D. Lokshtanov, S. Saurabh, “Spanning Circuits in Regular Matroids”,
                     in Proc. of the 28th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA 2017),
                     pp. 1433–1441, SIAM, 2017.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611974782.93


      We consider the fundamental Matroid Theory problem of finding a circuit in a matroid
      spanning a set T of given terminal elements. For graphic matroids this corresponds to the
      problem of finding a simple cycle passing through a set of given terminal edges in a graph.
      The algorithmic study of the problem on regular matroids, a superclass of graphic matroids,
      was initiated by Gavenčiak, Král’, and Oum [ICALP’12], who proved that the case of the
      problem with |T | = 2 is fixed-parameter tractable (FPT) when parameterized by the length
      of the circuit. We extend the result of Gavenčiak, Král’, and Oum by showing that for
      regular matroids
          the Minimum Spanning Circuit problem, deciding whether there is a circuit with at
          most ` elements containing T , is FPT parameterized by k = ` − |T |;
          the Spanning Circuit problem, deciding whether there is a circuit containing T , is FPT
          parameterized by |T |.
      We note that extending our algorithmic findings to binary matroids, a superclass of regular
      matroids, is highly unlikely: Minimum Spanning Circuit parameterized by ` is W[1]-hard
      on binary matroids even when |T | = 1. We also show a limit to how far our results can be
      strengthened by considering a smaller parameter. More precisely, we prove that Minimum
      Spanning Circuit parameterized by |T | is W[1]-hard even on cographic matroids, a proper
      subclass of regular matroids.



      3.10      Parameterized Traveling Salesman Problem: Beating the Average
      Gregory Z. Gutin (Royal Holloway University of London, GB)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Gregory Z. Gutin
       Joint work of Gregory Z. Gutin, Viresh Patel
      Main reference G. Gutin, V. Patel, “Parameterized Traveling Salesman Problem: Beating the Average”, SIAM J.
                     Discrete Math., 30(1):220–238, SIAM, 2016.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/140980946


      In the traveling salesman problem (TSP), we are given a complete graph Kn together with
      an integer weighting w on the edges of Kn , and we are asked to find a Hamilton cycle of Kn
      of minimum weight. Let h(w) denote the average weight of a Hamilton cycle of Kn for the
      weighting w. Vizing in 1973 asked whether there is a polynomial-time algorithm which always
      finds a Hamilton cycle of weight at most h(w). He answered this question in the affirmative
      and subsequently Rublineckii, also in 1973, and others described several other TSP heuristics
      satisfying this property. We prove a considerable generalization of Vizing’s result: for each
      fixed k, we give an algorithm that decides whether, for any input edge weighting w of Kn ,
      there is a Hamilton cycle of Kn of weight at most h(w) − k (and constructs such a cycle if it
      exists). For k fixed, the running time of the algorithm is polynomial in n, where the degree of
      the polynomial does not depend on k (i.e., the generalized Vizing problem is fixed-parameter
      tractable with respect to the parameter k).
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström                                                113


3.11      How proofs are prepared at Camelot
Petteri Kaski (Aalto University, FI)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Petteri Kaski
 Joint work of Andreas Björklund, Petteri Kaski
Main reference A. Björklund, P. Kaski, “How Proofs are Prepared at Camelot: Extended Abstract”, in Proc. of
               the 2016 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC 2016), pp. 391–400,
               ACM, 2016.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2933057.2933101


We study a design framework for robust, independently verifiable, and workload-balanced
distributed algorithms working on a common input. The framework builds on recent
noninteractive Merlin–Arthur proofs of batch evaluation of Williams [31st IEEE Colloquium
on Computational Complexity (CCC’16, May 29-June 1, 2016, Tokyo), 2:117] with the basic
observation that Merlin’s magic is not needed for batch evaluation: mere Knights can prepare
the independently verifiable proof, in parallel, and with intrinsic error-correction.
    As our main technical result, we show that the k-cliques in an n-vertex graph can be
counted and verified in per-node O(n(ω + ) k6 ) time and space on O(n(ω + ) k6 ) compute
nodes, for any constant  > 0 and positive integer k divisible by 6, where 2 ≤ ω < 2.3728639
is the exponent of square matrix multiplication over the integers. This matches in total
running time the best known sequential algorithm, due to Nešetřil and Poljak [Comment.
Math. Univ. Carolin. 26 (1985) 415–419], and considerably improves its space usage and
parallelizability. Further results include novel algorithms for counting triangles in sparse
graphs, computing the chromatic polynomial of a graph, and computing the Tutte polynomial
of a graph.



3.12      Improved algebraic algorithms for out-branchings problems
Yiannis Koutis (University of Puerto Rico – Rio Piedras, PR)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Yiannis Koutis


We present an O∗ (2k ) algorithm for deciding if a directed graph contains an out-branching
with at least k internal nodes. We also present an algorithm for detecting out-branchings
with at least k leaves and at most s internal nodes with out-degree greater than 1. The
algorithm runs in time O∗ (2k+s ), and for certain values of s it improves upon the previous
upper bounds for the k-leaf problem. The algorithms are algebraic and work via reductions
to two non-standard problems concerning monomial detection in multivariate polynomials.




                                                                                                              17041
114   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


      3.13      Improving TSP tours using dynamic programming over tree
                decomposition
      Łukasz Kowalik (University of Warsaw, PL)
             License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Łukasz Kowalik
       Joint work of Marek Cygan, Łukasz Kowalik, Arkadiusz Socała


      Given a traveling salesman problem (TSP) tour H in graph G a k-move is an operation
      which removes k edges from H, and adds k edges of G so that a new tour H 0 is formed. The
      popular k-OPT heuristics for TSP finds a local optimum by starting from an arbitrary tour
      H and then improving it by a sequence of k-moves.
         Until 2016, the only known algorithm to find an improving k-move for a given tour was
      the naive solution in time O(nk ). At ICALP’16 de Berg, Buchin, Jansen and Woeginger
                       2
      showed an O(nb 3k c+1 )-time algorithm.
                                                    1
         We show an algorithm which runs in O(n( 4 +k )k ) time, where lim k = 0. We are able
      to show that it improves over the state of the art for every k = 5, . . . , 10. For the most
      practically relevant case k = 5 we provide a slightly refined algorithm running in O(n3.4 )
      time. We also show that for the k = 4 case, improving over the O(n3 )-time algorithm of
      de Berg et al. would be a major breakthrough: an O(n3− )-time algorithm for any  > 0
      would imply an O(n3−δ )-time algorithm for the APSP problem, for some δ > 0.



      3.14      A Randomized Polynomial Kernelization for Vertex Cover with a
                Smaller Parameter
      Stefan Kratsch (Universität Bonn, DE)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Stefan Kratsch
      Main reference S. Kratsch, “A Randomized Polynomial Kernelization for Vertex Cover with a Smaller Parameter”,
                     in Proc. of the 24th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA 2016), LIPIcs, Vol. 57,
                     pp. 59:1-59:17, Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2016.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2016.59


      In the Vertex Cover problem we are given a graph G = (V, E) and an integer k and have
      to determine whether there is a set X ⊆ V of size at most k such that each edge in E
      has at least one endpoint in X. The problem can be easily solved in time O∗ (2k ), making
      it fixed-parameter tractable (FPT) with respect to k. While the fastest known algorithm
      takes only time O∗ (1.2738k ), much stronger improvements have been obtained by studying
      parameters that are smaller than k. Apart from treewidth-related results, the arguably best
      algorithm for Vertex Cover runs in time O∗ (2.3146p ), where p = k − LP (G) is only the excess
      of the solution size k over the best fractional vertex cover (Lokshtanov et al. TALG 2014).
      Since p ≤ k but k cannot be bounded in terms of p alone, this strictly increases the range of
      tractable instances.
           Recently, Garg and Philip (SODA 2016) greatly contributed to understanding the para-
      meterized complexity of the Vertex Cover problem. They prove that 2LP (G) − M M (G) is a
      lower bound for the vertex cover size of G, where M M (G) is the size of a largest matching
      of G, and proceed to study parameter ` = k − (2LP (G) − M M (G)). They give an algorithm
      of running time O∗ (3` ), proving that Vertex Cover is FPT in `. It can be easily observed
      that ` ≤ p whereas p cannot be bounded in terms of ` alone. We complement the work of
      Garg and Philip by proving that Vertex Cover admits a randomized polynomial kernelization
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström                                  115


in terms of `, i.e., an efficient preprocessing to size polynomial in `. This improves over
parameter p = k − LP (G) for which this was previously known (Kratsch and Wahlström
FOCS 2012).



3.15      Gap Amplification using Bipartite Random Graphs
Bingkai Lin (National Institute of Informatics – Tokyo, JP)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Bingkai Lin


Gap amplification transformation plays an important role in proving hardness of approx-
imation results. This talk presents a new method to construct gap amplification reduction
for parameterized optimization problems. First, I will review the threshold phenomenon
of random graphs G(n, p) containing a bipartite complete subgraph . Then I will show its
application on ruling out super-polynomial time algorithms for approximating Maximum
k-Set Intersection and Minimum Set Cover to some ratios.



3.16      Lossy Kernelization I
M. S. Ramanujan (TU Wien, AT)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © M. S. Ramanujan
 Joint work of Daniel Lokshtanov, Fahad Panolan, M. S. Ramanujan, Saket Saurabh
Main reference D. Lokshtanov, F. Panolan, M. S. Ramanujan, S. Saurabh, “Lossy Kernelization”,
               arXiv:1604.04111v2 [cs.DS], 2016.
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.04111v2


Introductory talk on a new framework for analyzing the performance of preprocessing
algorithms. This framework builds on the notion of kernelization from parameterized
complexity. However, as opposed to the original notion of kernelization, this framework
combines very well with approximation algorithms and heuristics.



3.17      Lossy Kernelization II: Cycle Packing
Fahad Panolan (University of Bergen, NO)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Fahad Panolan
 Joint work of Daniel Lokshtanov, Fahad Panolan, M. S. Ramanujan, Saket Saurabh
Main reference D. Lokshtanov, F. Panolan, M. S. Ramanujan, S. Saurabh, “Lossy Kernelization”,
               arXiv:1604.04111v2 [cs.DS], 2016.
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.04111v2


In this talk we see an example of Lossy Kernelization – Disjoint Factors. Disjoint Factors
problem is closely related to Cycle Packing. We prove that Disjoint Factors admits a
Polynomial Sized Approximate Kernelization Scheme (PSAKS).




                                                                                                17041
116   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


      3.18      Lossy Kernelization, III: Lower Bounds
      Daniel Lokshtanov (University of Bergen, NO)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Daniel Lokshtanov
       Joint work of Daniel Lokshtanov, Fahad Panolan, M. S. Ramanujan, Saket Saurabh
      Main reference D. Lokshtanov, F. Panolan, M. S. Ramanujan, S. Saurabh, “Lossy Kernelization”,
                     arXiv:1604.04111v2 [cs.DS], 2016.
                URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.04111v2


      We show how to combine the tecniques for showing kernelization lower bounds with the
      methods for showing hardness of approximation to rule out approximate kernels of polynomial
      size for concrete problems. We outline proofs that the longest path problem parameterized
      by solution size, and the set cover problem parameterized by the size of the universe do not
      admit constant factor approximate kernels of polynomial size.



      3.19      Exponential Time Paradigms Through the Polynomial Time Lens
      Jesper Nederlof (TU Eindhoven, NL)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Jesper Nederlof
       Joint work of Andy Drucker, Jesper Nederlof, Rahul Santhanam
      Main reference A. Drucker, J. Nederlof, R. Santhanam, “Exponential Time Paradigms Through the Polynomial
                     Time Lens”, in Proc. of the 24th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA 2016), LIPIcs,
                     Vol. 57, pp. 36:1-36:14, Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2016.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2016.36


      We propose a general approach to modelling algorithmic paradigms for the exact solution of
      NP-hard problems. Our approach is based on polynomial time reductions to succinct versions
      of problems solvable in polynomial time. We use this viewpoint to explore and compare the
      power of paradigms such as branching and dynamic programming, and to shed light on the
      true complexity of various problems.
          In this talk I will mainly talk about lower bounds for OPP algorithms. For example, if there
      is a polynomial time algorithm that, given a planar graph, outputs a maximum independent
      set of n vertices with probability exp(−n1− ) for some  > 0, then NP ⊆ coNP/poly. I will
      also outline connections with “AND-compositions” from kernelization theory.



      3.20      Faster Space-Efficient Algorithms for Subset Sum, k-Sum and
                Related Problems
      Jesper Nederlof (TU Eindhoven, NL)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Jesper Nederlof
       Joint work of Nikhil Bansal, Shashwat Garg, Jesper Nederlof, Nikhil Vyas
      Main reference N. Bansal, S. Garg, J. Nederlof, N. Vyas, “Faster Space-Efficient Algorithms for Subset Sum,
                     k-Sum and Related Problems”, arXiv:1612.02788v1 [cs.DS], 2016.
                URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.02788v1


      We present a randomized Monte Carlo algorithm that solves a given instance of Subset
      Sum on n integers using O∗ (20.86n ) time and O∗ (1) space, where O∗ () suppresses factors
      polynomial in the input size. The algorithm assumes random access to the random bits used.
      The same result can be obtained for Knapsack on n items, and the same methods also have
      consequences for the k-Sum problem.
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström                                                  117


3.21      Subexponential Parameterized Algorithms for Planar Graphs,
          Apex-Minor-Free Graphs and Graphs of Polynomial Growth via
          Low Treewidth Pattern Covering
Marcin Pilipczuk (University of Warsaw, PL) and Dániel Marx (Hungarian Academy of
Sciences – Budapest, HU)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Marcin Pilipczuk and Dániel Marx
 Joint work of Fedor V. Fomin, Daniel Lokshtanov, Dániel Marx, Marcin Pilipczuk, Michal Pilipczuk,
               Saket Saurabh
Main reference F. V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, Ma. Pilipczuk, Mi. Pilipczuk, S. Saurabh, “Subexponential
               Parameterized Algorithms for Planar and Apex-Minor-Free Graphs via Low Treewidth Pattern
               Covering”, in Proc. of the 57th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS
               2016), pp. 515–524, IEEE, 2016.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2016.62


We prove the following theorem. Given a planar graph G and an integer k, it is possible in
polynomial time to randomly sample a subset A√of vertices of G with the following properties:
    A induces a subgraph of G of treewidth O( k log k), and
    for every connected subgraph H of G on at√most k vertices, the probability that A covers
                                                        2
    the whole vertex set of H is at least (2O( k log k) · nO(1) )−1 , where n is the number of
    vertices of G.
Together with standard dynamic programming techniques for graphs of bounded treewidth,
this result gives a versatile technique for obtaining (randomized) subexponential parameterized
                                                                                  √    2
algorithms for problems on planar graphs, usually with running time bound 2O( k log k) nO(1) .
The technique can be applied to problems expressible as searching for a small, connected
pattern with a prescribed property in a large host graph; examples of such problems include
Directed k-Path, Weighted k-Path, Vertex Cover Local Search, and Subgraph
Isomorphism, among others. Up to this point, it was open whether these problems can
be solved in subexponential parameterized time on planar graphs, because they are not
amenable to the classic technique of bidimensionality. Furthermore, all our results hold in
fact on any class of graphs that exclude a fixed apex graph as a minor, in particular on
graphs embeddable in any fixed surface. We also provide a similar statement for graph classes
of polynomial growth.



3.22      Exact Algorithms via Monotone Local Search
Saket Saurabh (The Institute of Mathematical Sciences, India, IN)
       License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Saket Saurabh
 Joint work of Daniel Lokshtanov, Serge Gaspers, Fedor Fomin, Saket Saurabh


In a vertex subset problem we are given as input a universe U of size n, and a family F of
subsets of the universe defined implicitly from the input. The task is to find a subset S in F
of smallest possible size. For an example the Vertex Cover problem is a subset problem where
input is a graph G, the universe is the vertex set of G, and the family F is the family of all
vertex covers of G. Here a vertex set S is a vertex cover of G if every edge of G has at least
one endpoint in S. Many problems, such as Vertex Cover, Feedback Vertex Set, Hitting Set
and Minimum Weight Satisfiability can be formalized as vertex subset problems. The trivial
algorithm for such problems runs in time 2n . We show that (essentially) any vertex subset
                                                               O(1)
problem that admits an FPT algorithm with running time ckn          , where c is a constant and




                                                                                                                17041
118   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


      k is the size of the optimal solution, also admits an algorithm with running time (2 − 1c )n .
      In one stroke this theorem improves the best known exact exponential time algorithms
      for a number of problems, and gives tighter combinatorial bounds for several well-studied
      objects. The most natural variant of our algorithm is randomized, we also show how to get a
      deterministic algorithm with the same running time bounds, up to a sub-exponential factor
      in the running time. Our de-randomization relies on a new pseudo-random construction that
      may be of independent interest.



      3.23      Backdoors for Constraint Satisfaction
      Stefan Szeider (TU Wien, AT)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Stefan Szeider
       Joint work of Robert Ganian, Serge Gaspers, Neeldhara Misra, Sebastian Ordyniak, M. S Ramanujan, Stefan
                     Szeider, Stanislav Živný
      Main reference S. Gaspers, S. Ordyniak, S. Szeider, “Backdoor Sets for CSP”, in The Constraint Satisfaction
                     Problem: Complexity and Approximability, Dagstuhl Follow-Ups, Vol. 7, pp. 137–157, Schloss
                     Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2017.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4230/DFU.Vol7.15301.137


      We will review some recent parameterised complexity results for the Constraint Satisfaction
      Problem (CSP), considering parameters that arise from strong backdoor sets into CSP classes
      defined by tractable constraint languages. The language restrictions have recently stepped
      into the spotlight because of the recently claimed solution of the long-standing Dichotmy
      Conjecture. One of the results we will present is based on a novel combination of backdoor
      sets and treewidth.



      3.24      Parameterized Algorithms for Matrix Factorization Problems
      David P. Woodruff (IBM Almaden Center – San Jose, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © David P. Woodruff


      I will give a survey on parameterized algorithms for matrix factorization problems, focusing
      on non-negative matrix factorization, `1 low rank factorization, tensor factorization, and
      weighted low rank approximation.



      3.25      k-Path of Algorithms
      Meirav Zehavi (University of Bergen, NO)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Meirav Zehavi


      An overview of several algorithms for the k-Path problem and the tools employed to de-
      randomize them, including a presentation of a simple algorithm for the Longest Cycle
      problem.
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström                                  119


 4     Open problems
4.1    FPT-approximation of bandwidth
Daniel Lokshtanov (University of Bergen, NO)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Daniel Lokshtanov


 Bandwidth
 Input: An undirected graph G = (V, E), integer k.
 Question: Is there an ordering (injective function) π : V → {1, . . . , |V |}, such that
 maxuv∈E |π(u) − π(v)| ≤ k.


I Open Problem 1. Is there an FPT-approximation on general graphs parameterized by k?
In particular none of the following is known:
    Is there (1 + )-approximation in FPT time?
    Is there constant approximation in FPT time?
    Is there f (k)-approximation in FPT time?

Relevant reference: In [11] a polynomial time k O(k) -approximation is shown for trees and
graphs of bounded treelength.



4.2    Time and space complexity of k-LCS
Michał Pilipczuk (University of Warsaw, PL)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Michał Pilipczuk



 k-Longest Common Subsequence (k-LCS)
 Input: alphabet Σ, strings s1 , . . . , sk ∈ Σ∗ .
 Question: what is the longest common subsequence of all the strings si .

   The standard dynamic programming has running time and space complexity O(nk ). By
Savitch’s theorem we can reduce the space complexity to poly(k, n) at the cost of increasing
the running time to nO(k log n) .

I Open Problem 2. Is k-LCS solvable in nf (k) time and FPT space?

Relevant reference: in [21] a connection is proved between this open problem and the question
of space efficient algorithms for bounded treewidth graphs. Other relevant reference: [12].




                                                                                                17041
120   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


      4.3    Fine-grained complexity of k-LCS
      Karl Bringmann (MPI für Informatik – Saarbrücken, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Karl Bringmann


      We can solve k-LCS (defined above) in time O(nk ), but under SETH there is no O(nk− )
      time algorithm |Σ| = Ω(k) [1]. On the other hand we know for |Σ| = O(1) the problem is
      W[1]-hard and there is no no(k) time algorithm [19].

      I Open Problem 3. Is there an O(n(1−Σ )k ) time algorithm?



      4.4    Fine-grained complexity of Hitting Set w.r.t. VC dimension
      Karl Bringmann (MPI für Informatik – Saarbrücken, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Karl Bringmann



       Hitting Set
       Input: a set family F ⊆ 2U , integer k.
       Question: Is there a set X ⊆ U of size at most k, such that X interesects each set in F.

      We know that Hitting Set can be solved in time nk+o(1) (for k ≥ 7), and under the Strong
      Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH) no O(nk− ) time algorithm exists [18].

      I Definition 1. We say that a set X ⊆ U is shattered by a set family F ⊆ 2U if the family
      {X ∩ S : S ∈ F} contains all the subsets of X. The VC dimension of F is the largest
      cardinality of a set X, such that X is shattered by F.

          It is known that for VC = 1 the Hitting Set problem is polynomial time solvable, while
                                                                         k
      for VC = 2 the problem becomes W[1]-hard and does not admit no( log k ) time algorithm [6].

      I Open Problem 4. Is there O(n(1−V C )k ) time algorithm for the Hitting Set problem?



      4.5    FPT-approximation of VC dimension
      Bingkai Lin (National Institute of Informatics – Tokyo, JP)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Bingkai Lin


      I Open Problem 5. Is there a constant-factor FPT-time approximation algorithm for VC
      dimension (defined above)?
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström                                        121


4.6    Better approximation of Dominating Set
Bingkai Lin (National Institute of Informatics – Tokyo, JP)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Bingkai Lin



 Dominating Set
 Input: an undirected graph G, an integer k.
 Question: is there a set X ⊆ V (G) of size at most k, such that each vertex of G is in X
 or has a neighbour in X?

It is well known that Dominating Set admits polynomial time ln(n)-approximation algorithm
as well as nO(k) time exact algorithm.

I Open Problem 6. Is there an o(ln n)-approximation algorithm for the Dominating Set
problem running in time nk− ?



4.7    Orthogonal Vectors for Subset Sum
Jesper Nederlof (TU Eindhoven, NL)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Jesper Nederlof



 Orthogonal Vectors for Subset Sum (OVSS)
                 [d]
 Input: A, B ⊆ d/4   .
 Question: is there A ∈ A, B ∈ B such that A ∩ B = ∅?

We are satisfied with any algorithm with constant error probability. For an integer d, denote
                         [d]
[d] = {1, . . . , d} and d/4 for the set of all subsets of [d] of size d/4. Let h(·) denote the
binary entropy function and Õ omit factors polynomial in d.
                                                                
                                                          (1−)d
I Open Problem 7. Solve OVSS in time Õ (|A| + B|) · 2 d           for  > 0.
                                                          (d/4)
                                                                     d
                                                                       
Observations: Let α = 1 − h(1/4) ≈ 0.1888. Note that 2αd = 2d / d/4      .
   There is an Õ((|A| + |B|)2αd ) time algorithm based on representative sets (see [16] for an
   extended version of this open problem statement outlining the algorithm).
               0               0
   If |A| ≤ 2α d or |B| ≤ 2α d for α0 < α, then trivial enumeration works. Moreover, by
   directly using the improvements over this trivial enumeration from [2, 7, 13], we may in
   fact assume |A|, |B| ≥ 2(α+δ)d for some δ > 0.
   If |A| > 2βd , where β > h(1/4) − (1 − h(1/4)) ≈ 0.6223, an algorithm of Björklund et
   al. [5] works: it runs in time Õ((| ↓ A| + | ↓ B|)) ≤ Õ(2h(1/4)d ), where for a set family F,
   ↓ F denotes the sets of subsets of elements of F.
   In fact, | ↓ A| can be upper bounded by Õ(maxλ min{|A| d/4
                                                                          d
                                                                      λd , λd }). After a small
   calculation, this gives that the algorithm from [5] is fast enough whenever β > 0.525.

I Open Problem 8. Does there exist for some constant c > 0 an algorithm that, given z = 2cd
instances (A1 , B1 ), . . . , (Az , Bz ) of OVSS, detects whether any instance is a YES-instance in
      Pz
time ( i=1 (|Ai | + |Bi |))2(α−)d , for  > 0?




                                                                                                      17041
122   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


          Note Open Problem 8 relaxes Open Problem 7 as it asks whether exponentially many
      instances of OVSS can be solved fast in an amortized sense.
      Motivation: Following the approach of [4], a positive answer would imply an Õ(2(.5−)n )
      time algorithm for n-integer subset sum for some  > 0.



      4.8     Fixed parameter tractability of Weighted Low Rank Approximation
      David P. Woodruff (IBM Almaden Center – San Jose, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © David P. Woodruff


       Weighted Low Rank Approximation
       Input: n × n matrix A over reals, rank bound r = O(1), weight matrix W ∈ Rn×n
       Goal: find a rank r matrix B such that the weighted Frobenius norm of the difference
       |W ◦ (A − B)|F = (Wi,j · (Ai,j − Bi,j )2 ) is small, i.e., at most 1.01 · OP T
                         P


      We assume the entries of A and W are integers in the range {−M, −M + 1, . . . , M } for an
      integer M ≤ 2poly(n) , i.e., that the entries of A and W can be specified using poly(n) bits.

      I Open Problem 9. Is there an FPT algorithm for this problem when parameterized by the
      rank of the weight matrix W ?

          It is known [22] that there is an nO(k) upper bound and conditional 2Ω(k) lower bound.



      4.9     Short resolution refutations for SAT when parameterized by
              treewidth
      Stefan Szeider (TU Wien, AT)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Stefan Szeider


      We consider propositional formulas in conjunctive normal form (CNF), given as a set of
      clauses, where each clause is a set of literals, e.g., F = {{x, y}, {x, ȳ, z}, {x̄, y}, {x̄, ȳ}, {z̄}}.

      I Definition 1. A clause C is the resolvent of clauses C1 and C2 if there is exactly one
      variable x such that x ∈ C1 , x̄ ∈ C2 , and C = (C1 \ {x}) ∪ (C2 \ {x̄}).
          A resolution refutation of a formula F is a vertex-labeled dag with exactly one sink where
      each vertex has in-degree 0 or 2. Each node is labeled with a clause as follows: (i) each
      source is labeled with a clause from F , (ii) each non-source is labeled with the resolvent of
      the clauses labeling its predecessors, and (iii) the clause which labels the sink is empty.
          The size of a resulution refutation is the number of its vertices.

          It is known that a formula is unsatisfiable if and only if it has a resolution refutation.

      I Definition 2. The primal graph P (F ) of a formula F is the graph whose vertices are the
      variables of F , where two vertices are connected by an edge iff the corresponding variables
      appear together (negated or unnegated) in some clause.
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström                                     123


   The incidence graph I(F ) is the bipartite graph between variables and clauses where
two vertices are connected by an edge iff the corresponding variable appears (negated or
unnegated) in the corresponding clause.
    It is known that for any formula F the treewidth of its incidence graph is at most the
treewidth of its primal graph plus one:

   tw(I(F )) ≤ tw(P (F )) + 1 .

Also, it is known that #SAT is FPT when parameterized by tw(I(F )) and tw(P (F )). Further,
it is known that every unsatisfiable formula F has a resolution refutation of FPT size when
parameterized by tw(P (F )).
I Open Problem 10. Is there always a resolution refutation of FPT size when parameterized
by tw(I(F ))?


4.10      Small universal Steiner tree covers
Marcin Pilipczuk (University of Warsaw, PL)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Marcin Pilipczuk


Let G be a graph embedded on the plane in such a manner that the outerface of G, denoted
henceforth ∂G, is a simple cycle of length k. For a set T ⊆ V (∂G) and A ⊆ V (G), we say
that A covers an optimal Steiner tree for T if there exists an optimum Steiner tree in G with
terminals T , such that every vertex of degree at least three in this tree lies in A. A set A is
a universal Steiner tree cover in G if A covers an optimal Steiner tree for every T ⊆ V (∂G).
   In [20] we have shown an existence of a universal Steiner tree cover of size bounded
polynomially in k, but the degree of the bound is above 100. On the other hand, we do not
know any example that is significantly worse than a grid of perimeter k.
I Open Problem 11. Prove or disprove the following statement: for every such G, there
                                              e 2 ).
exists a universal Steiner tree cover of size O(k


4.11      Even Set
Dániel Marx (Hungarian Academy of Sciences – Budapest, HU)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Dániel Marx


 Even Set
 Input: Set system S over a universe U , integer k.
 Find: A nonempty set X ⊆ U of size at most k such that |X ∩ S| is even for every S ∈ S.

Essentially equivalent formulations:
   With graphs and neighborhoods.
   Minimum circuit in a binary matroid.
   Minimum distance in a linear code over a binary alphabet.
I Open Problem 12. What is the parameterized complexity of Even Set? Is it fixed parameter
tractable?



                                                                                                   17041
124   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


      4.12      FPT-approximation of Maximum Clique and Minimum
                Dominating Set
      Dániel Marx (Hungarian Academy of Sciences – Budapest, HU)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Dániel Marx


      I Open Problem 13. Can Maximum Clique (Minimum Dominating Set) be approximated
      in FPT time? I.e., is there an algorithm running in time f (k) · nO(1) that, given a graph
      G and an integer k, finds a g(k)-clique (dominating set of size g(k)) for some unbounded
      nondecreasing function g or correctly states that there is no k-clique (dominating set of size
      k) in G?



      4.13      Polynomial (Turing) Kernels
      Dániel Marx (Hungarian Academy of Sciences – Budapest, HU)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Dániel Marx


      I Open Problem 14. Do the following problems have polynomial kernels?
         Directed Feedback Vertex Set
         Multiway Cut (with arbitrary number t of terminals)
         Planar Vertex Deletion
      Does k-Path have a polynomial Turing kernel?



      4.14      Directed Odd Cycle Traversal
      Dániel Marx (Hungarian Academy of Sciences – Budapest, HU)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Dániel Marx


       Directed Odd Cycle Traversal
       Input: Directed graph G, integer k.
       Find: A set X ⊆ U of at most k vertices such that G − X has no directed cycle of odd
       length.

      This problem generalizes
         Directed Feedback Vertex Set [9]
         Odd Cycle Transversal [23]
         Directed S-Cycle Transversal [10]

      I Open Problem 15. What is the parameterized complexity of Directed Odd Cycle Traversal?
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström                                   125


4.15      Square root phenomenon
Dániel Marx (Hungarian Academy of Sciences – Budapest, HU)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Dániel Marx
                                           √
I Open Problem 16. Are there 2O( k·polylog(k)) nO(1) time FPT algorithms for planar prob-
lems?

Natural targets are
   Steiner Tree
   Directed Steiner Tree
   Directed Subset TSP

What about counting problems?
  k-path
  k-mathching
  k disjoint triangles
  k independent set



4.16      Disjoint paths / minor testing
Dániel Marx (Hungarian Academy of Sciences – Budapest, HU)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Dániel Marx


The best known parameter dependence for the k-disjoint paths problem and H-minor testing
                                                                                poly(k)
seems to be triple exponential [15] using [8]. For planar graphs [3] gave an 22         nO(1)
algorithm.

I Open Problem 17. Are there 2poly(k) nO(1) time algorithms for planar or general graphs?


References
 1 Amir Abboud, Arturs Backurs, and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Tight hardness
     results for LCS and other sequence similarity measures. In Venkatesan Guruswami,
     editor, IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS
     2015, Berkeley, CA, USA, 17-20 October, 2015, pages 59–78. IEEE Computer Soci-
     ety, 2015. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/mostRecentIssue.jsp?punumber=7352273,
     doi:10.1109/FOCS.2015.14.
 2 Amir Abboud, Richard Ryan Williams, and Huacheng Yu. More applications of the
     polynomial method to algorithm design. In Indyk [14], pages 218–230. doi:10.1137/
     1.9781611973730.17.
 3 Isolde Adler, Stavros G Kolliopoulos, Philipp Klaus Krause, Daniel Lokshtanov, Saket Saur-
     abh, and Dimitrios Thilikos. Tight bounds for linkages in planar graphs. In International
     Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, pages 110–121. Springer, 2011.
 4 Per Austrin, Petteri Kaski, Mikko Koivisto, and Jesper Nederlof. Dense subset sum may be
     the hardest. In Ollinger and Vollmer [17], pages 13:1–13:14. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.
     2016.13.




                                                                                                 17041
126   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


       5   Andreas Björklund, Thore Husfeldt, Petteri Kaski, and Mikko Koivisto. Counting paths and
           packings in halves. In Amos Fiat and Peter Sanders, editors, Algorithms – ESA 2009, 17th
           Annual European Symposium, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7-9, 2009. Proceedings,
           volume 5757 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 578–586. Springer, 2009. doi:
           10.1007/978-3-642-04128-0_52.
       6   Karl Bringmann, László Kozma, Shay Moran, and N. S. Narayanaswamy. Hitting set for
           hypergraphs of low vc-dimension. In Piotr Sankowski and Christos D. Zaroliagis, editors,
           24th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms, ESA 2016, August 22-24, 2016, Aarhus,
           Denmark, volume 57 of LIPIcs, pages 23:1–23:18. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum
           fuer Informatik, 2016. URL: http://www.dagstuhl.de/dagpub/978-3-95977-015-6, doi:10.
           4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2016.23.
       7   Timothy M. Chan. Speeding up the four russians algorithm by about one more logarithmic
           factor. In Indyk [14], pages 212–217. doi:10.1137/1.9781611973730.16.
       8   Chandra Chekuri and Julia Chuzhoy. Degree-3 treewidth sparsifiers. In Proceedings of
           the Twenty-Sixth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 242–255.
           Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2015.
       9   Jianer Chen, Yang Liu, Songjian Lu, Barry O’sullivan, and Igor Razgon. A fixed-parameter
           algorithm for the directed feedback vertex set problem. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
           55(5):21, 2008.
      10   Rajesh Chitnis, Marek Cygan, Taghi Hajiaghayi, Mohammad, Marcin Pilipczuk, and
           Michal Pilipczuk. Designing fpt algorithms for cut problems using randomized contrac-
           tions. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2012 IEEE 53rd Annual Symposium
           on, pages 460–469. IEEE, 2012.
      11   Markus Sortland Dregi and Daniel Lokshtanov. Parameterized complexity of bandwidth on
           trees. In Javier Esparza, Pierre Fraigniaud, Thore Husfeldt, and Elias Koutsoupias, editors,
           Automata, Languages, and Programming – 41st International Colloquium, ICALP 2014,
           Copenhagen, Denmark, July 8-11, 2014, Proceedings, Part I, volume 8572 of Lecture Notes
           in Computer Science, pages 405–416. Springer, 2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-43948-7_
           34.
      12   Michael Elberfeld, Christoph Stockhusen, and Till Tantau. On the space and circuit com-
           plexity of parameterized problems: Classes and completeness. Algorithmica, 71(3):661–701,
           2015. doi:10.1007/s00453-014-9944-y.
      13   Russell Impagliazzo, Shachar Lovett, Ramamohan Paturi, and Stefan Schneider. 0-1 integer
           linear programming with a linear number of constraints. CoRR, abs/1401.5512, 2014. URL:
           http://arxiv.org/abs/1401.5512.
      14   Piotr Indyk, editor. Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
           Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, January 4-6, 2015. SIAM, 2015.
           doi:10.1137/1.9781611973730.
      15   Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi and Paul Wollan. A shorter proof of the graph minor algorithm:
           the unique linkage theorem. In Proceedings of the forty-second ACM symposium on Theory
           of computing, pages 687–694. ACM, 2010.
      16   Jesper Nederlof.           Faster subset sum via improved orthogonal vectors?
           http://www.win.tue.nl/ jnederlo/problem.pdf.
      17   Nicolas Ollinger and Heribert Vollmer, editors. 33rd Symposium on Theoretical Aspects
           of Computer Science, STACS 2016, February 17-20, 2016, Orléans, France, volume 47 of
           LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2016.
      18   Mihai Patrascu and Ryan Williams. On the possibility of faster SAT algorithms. In
           Moses Charikar, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
           on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2010, Austin, Texas, USA, January 17-19, 2010, pages
           1065–1075. SIAM, 2010. doi:10.1137/1.9781611973075.86.
Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Danny Hermelin, and Magnus Wahlström                                   127


19   Krzysztof Pietrzak. On the parameterized complexity of the fixed alphabet shortest com-
     mon supersequence and longest common subsequence problems. J. Comput. Syst. Sci.,
     67(4):757–771, 2003. doi:10.1016/S0022-0000(03)00078-3.
20   Marcin Pilipczuk, Michal Pilipczuk, Piotr Sankowski, and Erik Jan van Leeuwen. Network
     sparsification for steiner problems on planar and bounded-genus graphs. In 55th IEEE An-
     nual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2014, Philadelphia, PA, USA,
     October 18-21, 2014, pages 276–285. IEEE Computer Society, 2014. URL: http://ieeexplore.
     ieee.org/xpl/mostRecentIssue.jsp?punumber=6975722, doi:10.1109/FOCS.2014.37.
21   Michal Pilipczuk and Marcin Wrochna. On space efficiency of algorithms working on
     structural decompositions of graphs. In Ollinger and Vollmer [17], pages 57:1–57:15. doi:
     10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2016.57.
22   Ilya P. Razenshteyn, Zhao Song, and David P. Woodruff. Weighted low rank approximations
     with provable guarantees. In Daniel Wichs and Yishay Mansour, editors, Proceedings of the
     48th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2016, Cambridge,
     MA, USA, June 18-21, 2016, pages 250–263. ACM, 2016. URL: http://dl.acm.org/citation.
     cfm?id=2897518, doi:10.1145/2897518.2897639.
23   Bruce Reed, Kaleigh Smith, and Adrian Vetta. Finding odd cycle transversals. Operations
     Research Letters, 32(4):299–301, 2004.




                                                                                                 17041
128   17041 – Randomization in Parameterized Complexity


              Participants
        Amir Abboud                     Danny Hermelin                       Marcin Pilipczuk
      Stanford University, US         Ben Gurion University –               University of Warsaw, PL
        Arturs Backurs                Beer Sheva, IL
                                                                             Michal Pilipczuk
      MIT – Cambridge, US               Petr Hlineny                        University of Warsaw, PL
        Andreas Björklund             Masaryk University – Brno, CZ
                                                                             M. S. Ramanujan
      Lund University, SE               Petteri Kaski
                                                                            TU Wien, AT
        Édouard Bonnet                Aalto University, FI
      Middlesex University, GB          Eun Jung Kim                         Peter Rossmanith
        Cornelius Brand               University Paris-Dauphine, FR         RWTH Aachen, DE
      Universität des Saarlandes, DE    Yiannis Koutis                       Marc Roth
        Karl Bringmann                University of Puerto Rico –           Universität des Saarlandes, DE
      MPI für Informatik –            Rio Piedras, PR
                                                                              Saket Saurabh
      Saarbrücken, DE                   Łukasz Kowalik                      The Institute of Mathematical
        Yixin Cao                     University of Warsaw, PL              Sciences, India, IN
      Hong Kong Polytechnic             Stefan Kratsch
      University, CN                  Universität Bonn, DE                    Ildiko Schlotter
                                                                            Budapest University of
        Radu Curticapean                Bingkai Lin                         Technology & Economics, HU
      Hungarian Academy of Sciences – National Institute of Informatics –
      Budapest, HU                    Tokyo, JP                              Stefan Szeider
        Marek Cygan                     Daniel Lokshtanov                   TU Wien, AT
      University of Warsaw, PL        University of Bergen, NO               Dimitrios M. Thilikos
        Holger Dell                     Dániel Marx                         University of Athens, GR
      Universität des Saarlandes, DE  Hungarian Academy of Sciences –         Magnus Wahlström
        Fedor V. Fomin                Budapest, HU                          Royal Holloway University of
      University of Bergen, NO          Jesper Nederlof                     London, GB
        Tobias Friedrich              TU Eindhoven, NL
                                                                             Gerhard J. Woeginger
      Hasso-Plattner-Institut –         Fahad Panolan
                                                                            RWTH Aachen, DE
      Potsdam, DE                     University of Bergen, NO
        Petr A. Golovach                Christophe Paul                       David P. Woodruff
      University of Bergen, NO        CNRS – Montpellier, FR                IBM Almaden Center –
                                                                            San Jose, US
        Gregory Z. Gutin                Geevarghese Philip
      Royal Holloway University of    Chennai Mathematical                   Meirav Zehavi
      London, GB                      Institute, IN                         University of Bergen, NO
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 17042

From Characters to Understanding Natural Language
(C2NLU): Robust End-to-End Deep Learning for NLP
Organized by
Phil Blunsom1 , Kyunghyun Cho2 , Chris Dyer3 , and
Hinrich Schütze4

1    University of Oxford, GB, phil.blunsom@cs.ox.ac.uk
2    New York University, US, kyunghyun.cho@nyu.edu
3    Carnegie Mellon University - Pittsburgh, US, cdyer@cs.cmu.edu
4    LMU München, DE, hs2016@cislmu.org

Edited by
Heike Adel5 and Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh6

5      LMU München, DE, heike@cis.lmu.de
6      LMU München, DE, yadollah@cis.lmu.de

      Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 17042 “From Charac-
ters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU): Robust End-to-End Deep Learning for NLP”.
The seminar brought together researchers from different fields, including natural language pro-
cessing, computational linguistics, deep learning and general machine learning. 31 participants
from 22 academic and industrial institutions discussed advantages and challenges of using char-
acters, i.e., “raw text”, as input for deep learning models instead of language-specific tokens.
Eight talks provided overviews of different topics, approaches and challenges in current natural
language processing research. In five working groups, the participants discussed current natural
language processing/understanding topics in the context of character-based modeling, namely,
morphology, machine translation, representation learning, end-to-end systems and dialogue. In
most of the discussions, the need for a more detailed model analysis was pointed out. Especially
for character-based input, it is important to analyze what a deep learning model is able to learn
about language – about tokens, morphology or syntax in general. For an efficient and effective
understanding of language, it might furthermore be beneficial to share representations learned
from multiple objectives to enable the models to focus on their specific understanding task instead
of needing to learn syntactic regularities of language first. Therefore, benefits and challenges of
transfer learning were an important topic of the working groups as well as of the panel discussion
and the final plenary discussion.
Seminar January 22–27, 2017 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/17042
1998 ACM Subject Classification I.2 Artificial Intelligence, I.2.7 Natural Language Processing
Keywords and phrases Natural Language Understanding, Artificial Intelligence, Deep Learning,
   Natural Language Processing, Representation Learning
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.7.1.129




            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU): Robust End-to-End Deep Learning for NLP,
Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 7, Issue 1, pp. 129–157
Editors: Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
130   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)


       1      Executive Summary
      Phil Blunsom
      Kyunghyun Cho
      Chris Dyer
      Hinrich Schütze
      Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, Hinrich Schütze, and Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh


      Deep learning is currently one of most active areas of research in machine learning and its
      applications, including natural language processing (NLP). One hallmark of deep learning
      is end-to-end learning: all parameters of a deep learning model are optimized directly for
      the learning objective; e.g., for the objective of accuracy on the binary classification task:
      is the input image the image of a cat? Crucially, the set of parameters that are optimized
      includes “first-layer” parameters that connect the raw input representation (e.g., pixels) to
      the first layer of internal representations of the network (e.g., edge detectors). In contrast,
      many other machine learning models employ hand-engineered features to take the role of
      these first-layer parameters.
          Even though deep learning has had a number of successes in NLP, research on true
      end-to-end learning is just beginning to emerge. Most NLP deep learning models still start
      with a hand-engineered layer of representation, the level of tokens or words, i.e., the input is
      broken up into units by manually designed tokenization rules. Such rules often fail to capture
      structure both within tokens (e.g., morphology) and across multiple tokens (e.g., multi-word
      expressions). Given the success of end-to-end learning in other domains, it is likely that it
      will also be widely used in NLP to alleviate these issues and lead to great advances.
          The seminar brought together researchers from deep learning, general machine learning,
      natural language processing and computational linguistics to develop a research agenda for
      the coming years. The goal was to combine recent advances in deep learning architectures
      and algorithms with extensive domain knowledge about language to make true end-to-end
      learning for NLP possible.
           Our goals were to make progress on answering the following research questions.
           C2NLU approaches so far fall short of the state of the art in cases where token structures
           can easily be exploited (e.g., in well-edited newspaper text) compared to word-level
           approaches. What are promising avenues for developing C2NLU to match the state of
           the art even in these cases of text with well-defined token structures?
           Character-level models are computationally more expensive than word-level models
           because detecting syntactic and semantic relationships at the character-level is more
           expensive (even though it is potentially more robust) than at the word-level. How can we
           address the resulting challenges in scalability for character-level models?
           Part of the mantra of deep learning is that domain expertise is no longer necessary. Is
           this really true or is knowledge about the fundamental properties of language necessary
           for C2NLU? Even if that expertise is not needed for feature engineering, is it needed to
           design model architectures, tasks and training regimes?
           NLP tasks are diverse, ranging from part-of-speech tagging over sentiment analysis to
           question answering. For which of these problems is C2NLU a promising approach, for
           which not?
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                    131


  More generally, what characteristics make an NLP problem amenable to be addressed
  using tokenization-based approaches vs. C2NLU approaches?
  What specifically can each of the two communities involved – natural language processing
  and deep learning – contribute to C2NLU?
  Create an NLP/deep learning roadmap for research in C2NLU over the next 5–10 years.




                                                                                             17042
132   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)


       2       Table of Contents
      Executive Summary
        Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, Hinrich Schütze, and Yadollah Yaghoobz-
        adeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130

      Introduction: C2NLU
         Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze
           Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
           Goals of the Seminar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
           Detailed Description of the Topic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135

      Overview of Talks
           C2NLU: An Overview
           Heike Adel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
           Should Model Architecture Reflect Linguistic Structure?
           Chris Dyer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
           From Bayes Decision Rule to Neural Networks for Human Language Technology
           (HLT)
           Hermann Ney . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
           Cross-Token Character N-Gram Modeling: The Other Shoe To Drop?
           Hinrich Schütze and Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
           Modeling Multiple Sequences: Explorations, Consequences and Challenges
           Orhan Firat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
           Robsut Wrod Reocginiton via semi-Character Recurrent Neural Network
           Kevin Duh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
           Inducing Morpho-syntactic Lexicons and Morphological Inflections
           Manaal Faruqui . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
           (Neural) Graphical Models Over Strings
           Ryan Cotterell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141

      Working groups
           Morphology
           Kristina Toutanova . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
           Machine Translation
           Parnia Bahar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
           Representation Learning
           Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
           End-to-End
           Heike Adel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
           Dialogue
           Heike Adel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                             133


Panel discussions
   Panel discussion: Character-based models
   Heike Adel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
   Plenary discussion: Where do we go from here?
   Heike Adel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157




                                                                                                      17042
134   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)


       3      Introduction: C2NLU
      Phil Blunsom (University of Oxford, GB), Kyunghyun Cho (New York University, US), Chris
      Dyer (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US), and Hinrich Schütze (LMU München,
      DE)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze


      This section contains the motivation for the seminar given in the proposal submitted by the
      organizers in 2015 to the Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. It has been
      slightly edited.



      3.1     Introduction
      Deep learning is currently one of most active areas of research in machine learning and its
      applications, including natural language processing (NLP). One hallmark of deep learning
      is end-to-end learning: all parameters of a deep learning model are optimized directly for
      the learning objective; e.g., for the objective of accuracy on the binary classification task:
      is the input image the image of a cat? Crucially, the set of parameters that are optimized
      includes “first-layer” parameters that connect the raw input representation (e.g., pixels) to
      the first layer of internal representations of the network (e.g., edge detectors). In contrast,
      many other machine learning models employ hand-engineered features to take the role of
      these first-layer parameters.
          Even though deep learning has had a number of successes in NLP, research on true
      end-to-end learning is just beginning to emerge. Most NLP deep learning models still start
      with a hand-engineered layer of representation, the level of tokens or words, i.e., the input is
      broken up into units by manually designed tokenization rules. Such rules often fail to capture
      structure both within tokens (e.g., morphology) and across multiple tokens (e.g., multi-word
      expressions). Given the success of end-to-end learning in other domains, it is likely that it
      will also be widely used in NLP to alleviate these issues and lead to great advances.



      3.2     Goals of the Seminar
      The seminar brought together researchers from deep learning, general machine learning,
      natural language processing and computational linguistics to develop a research agenda for
      the coming years. The goal was to combine recent advances in deep learning architectures
      and algorithms with extensive domain knowledge about language to make true end-to-end
      learning for NLP possible.
           Our goals were to make progress on answering the following research questions.
           C2NLU approaches so far fall short of the state of the art in cases where token structures
           can easily be exploited (e.g., in well-edited newspaper text) compared to word-level
           approaches. What are promising avenues for developing C2NLU to match the state of
           the art even in these cases of text with well-defined token structures?
           Character-level models are computationally more expensive than word-level models
           because detecting syntactic and semantic relationships at the character-level is more
           expensive (even though it is potentially more robust) than at the word-level. How can we
           address the resulting challenges in scalability for character-level models?
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                       135


   Part of the mantra of deep learning is that domain expertise is no longer necessary. Is
   this really true or is knowledge about the fundamental properties of language necessary
   for C2NLU? Even if that expertise is not needed for feature engineering, is it needed to
   design model architectures, tasks and training regimes?
   NLP tasks are diverse, ranging from part-of-speech tagging over sentiment analysis to
   question answering. For which of these problems is C2NLU a promising approach, for
   which not?
   More generally, what characteristics make an NLP problem amenable to be addressed
   using tokenization-based approaches vs. C2NLU approaches?
   What specifically can each of the two communities involved – natural language processing
   and deep learning – contribute to C2NLU?
   Create an NLP/deep learning roadmap for research in C2NLU over the next 5–10 years



3.3     Detailed Description of the Topic
C2NLU, i.e., for approaches to end-to-end deep learning in which either the input or the
output or both are character streams.
    The arguments for C2NLU we present below are closely related and can be thought of as
different perspectives on the same underlying problems of token-based approaches.

3.3.1   Robustness against noise
Human natural language processing (NLP) is robust in the sense that small perturbations of
the input do not affect processing negatively. Such perturbations include letter insertions,
deletions, substitutions and transpositions and the insertion of spaces (“guacamole” → “gua
camole”) and the deletion of spaces (“ran fast” → “ranfast”). Such perturbations can cause
complete failure of token-based processing. C2NLU has the potential of being robust against
this type of noise.

3.3.2   Robust morphological processing
There currently does not exist an approach to morphological processing that handles both
inflectional and derivational morphology and works across languages with typologically
different systems of morphology. If we give up the notion that a token is an opaque symbol
and instead model the sequence of characters it is made up of, then we can in principle
learn all morphological regularities: inflectional and derivational regularities as well as a
wide typological range of morphological processes such as vowel harmony, agglutination,
reduplication and nonconcatenativity (as in Arabic and Hebrew). Further, this information
can be integrated at the sequence level to permit the learning of agreement and other
morpho-syntactic phenomena.
    Two caveats are in order. First, it is clear that C2NLU has the potential of successful
acquisition of morphology, but whether it can do so in practice is a big question. Second,
adopting C2NLU does not mean that linguistically informed models will be replaced with
“linguistically ignorant” models. Instead, C2NLU can be a complement to traditional
morphological processing in computational linguistics, for example, in a system combination
approach. C2NLU is also a promising framework for incorporating linguistic knowledge
about morphology as an inductive bias into statistical models. The latter has been done
with only limited success in standard statistical NLP models.




                                                                                                17042
136   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)


      3.3.3     Orthographic productivity
      It is clear that the truth is between two extreme positions: (i) the character sequence of a
      token is arbitrary and uninformative and (ii) the character sequence of a token perfectly
      and compositionally predicts its linguistic properties. Morphology is the most important
      phenomenon of limited predictability that lies between these two extremes. But there are
      many other less prominent phenomena that taken together have the potential of improving
      NLP models and performance of NLP systems considerably if they could be handled at the
      level of human competence.
          Properties of names predictable from character patterns, e.g., “Yaghoobazadeh” is identi-
          fiable as a Farsi surname, “Darnique” and “Delonda” are identifiable as names of girls (in
          a US context), “osinopril” is most likely a medication
          Orthographic blends and modifications of existing words, e.g., “staycation”, “Obamacare”,
          “mockumentary”, “dramedy”, “cremains”
          Non-morphological orthographic productivity in certain registers, domains and genres:
          character repetition in tweets (“coooooooooool”), shm-reduplication (“fancy-shmancy”),
          the pseudo-derivational suffix “-gate” signifying “scandal” (“Watergate”, “Irangate”,
          “Dieselgate”)
          Sound symbolism, phonesthemes, e.g., “gl-” (“glitter”, “gleam”, “glint”, “glisten”, “glow”)
          Onomatopoeia, e.g., “oink”, “sizzle”, “tick tock”

      3.3.4     OOV analysis
      One big advantage of character models is that the problem of out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
      words disappears.1 Of course, if the NLP system encounters a character string that was
      never observed before and that would be opaque even to a human reader, then the situation
      is not better than it would be for a token-based model encountering an OOV. However, as
      discussed above, in many cases a great deal can be predicted from the character string of an
      OOV.
          So this argument – character models are a promising approach to OOV analysis – is
      a summary of the last three arguments. Character models are more robust against noise
      (which may lead to OOVs), have the potential for more robust morphological processing
      (many OOVs are due to inflection and derivation) and can handle orthographic productivity
      better (“Yaghoobazadeh”, “osinopril” and “staycation” are relevant examples for words that
      a token-based system may not have observed in the training set).

      3.3.5     OOV generation
      There is currently no principled and general way for token-based end-to-end systems to
      generate tokens that are not part of the training vocabulary. Since a token is represented
      as a vocabulary index and parameters governing system behavior affecting this token are
      referring to this vocabulary index, a token that does not have a vocabulary index cannot
      easily be generated in end-to-end systems.
          One application in which this is a critical problem is the generation of names in end-to-end
      machine translation. In the simplest case, a name like “Obama” must be copied from source
      sentence to target sentence. More complicated cases involve transliteration (English “Putin”


      1
          However, there will occasionally be out-of-alphabet characters if special cases like emoji and rare
          diacritics occur in the input.
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                            137


becomes French “Poutine”) and number variation (“4.12 million” may become “4 million” in
a summary). In token-based systems, these cases are often handled separately with external
mechanisms, such as an external transliteration system coupled with named-entity detection.
However, this is inherently limited as it requires a separate system, which is not jointly tuned
together with the main system, for each and every special case.
    Character-based systems do not have a problem with OOV generation in principle.
However, as with other potential advantages, the problem of practical feasibility arises:
specific proposals as to how C2NLU systems can learn to accurately generate OOVs are
needed.

3.3.6   Tokenization-free models
One of the drawbacks of token-based models is that they usually tokenize text early on and
it is difficult to correct these early tokenization decisions later on. While it is theoretically
possible to generate all possible tokenizations and pass any tokenization ambiguity through
the entire NLP pipeline (e.g., by using lattices), this is inefficient and often incompatible with
the requirements of subsequent processing modules. For this reason, text-to-text machine
translation systems usually only consider a single tokenization of source and target.
     Tokenization causes limited damage in English although even in English there are difficult
cases like “Yahoo!”, “San Francisco-Los Angeles flights”, “The Iowa campaign manager
was selected ‘The Apprentice’-style.” and hashtags like “#starwars”. In other languages,
tokenization is even more problematic. In Chinese, tokens are not separated by spaces or
other typesetting conventions. For most NLP applications, German compounds should be
split. Tokens in agglutinative languages like Turkish are difficult to process as unanalyzed
symbols.

3.3.7   Direct models of the data
Traditional machine learning and especially statistical natural language processing rely
heavily on feature engineering. In contrast, the philosophy of deep learning is to use any
knowledge about the domain for careful design of the architecture of models and for task
definitions and training regimes that optimally exploit available data. This careful modeling
should then obviate the need for manual feature engineering.
    One motivation for this approach is the view that a good set of features can best be
found by training a well designed model in a well designed experimental setup. In contrast,
manual feature design is prone to errors and omissions.
    The success of deep learning in speech, vision and machine translation demonstrates the
potential of giving models direct access to the data as opposed to through the intermediary
of human-designed features.
    However, in natural language processing – and even in neural machine translation – there
is still one set of manually designed features that is almost universally used: tokens. Given
the success of the raw-data approach for other applications, an approach that takes it to
the extreme – character-based models – seems worth investigating for natural language
processing. Character-based models are the most faithful to deep learning philosophy: they
model the data as it comes in without any alteration through manually designed features. It
is an open question whether character-based models will ultimately turn out to be superior
to token-based models, but it is an important question that we want to investigate in this
workshop.




                                                                                                     17042
138   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)


       4     Overview of Talks
      4.1    C2NLU: An Overview
      Heike Adel (LMU München, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Heike Adel


      Natural language processing (NLP) and natural language understanding (NLU) often build
      on a pipeline of different preprocessing modules, such as tokenization, sentence segmentation
      as well as syntactic and semantic analysis. This pipeline is prone to subsequent errors.
      However, recovering from those errors is often impossible or not feasible. Alternatively, NLU
      models could directly model the raw input data, i.e., sequences of characters. Especially
      with deep learning models, it is possible that the models learn their own representation
      of the data without the need of tokenizing the character sequence into words. In fact,
      character-based features have a long history in NLP/NLU, especially in information retrieval,
      grapheme-to-phoneme conversion or language identification. Recently, more and more studies
      use characters as input to (hierarchical) neural networks.
          This talk provides an overview of character-based NLP/NLU systems. It motivates the
      usage of characters as features for machine learning systems and/or as input to deep learning
      models. Furthermore, it presents existing studies on character-based NLU, clustering them
      into three categories: tokenization-based models, bag-of-n-gram models and end-to-end
      models.



      4.2    Should Model Architecture Reflect Linguistic Structure?
      Chris Dyer (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Chris Dyer


      Sequential recurrent neural networks (RNNs) over finite alphabets are remarkably effective
      models of natural language. RNNs now obtain language modeling results that substantially
      improve over long-standing state-of-the-art baselines, as well as in various conditional
      language modeling tasks such as machine translation, image caption generation, and dialogue
      generation. Despite these impressive results, such models are a priori inappropriate models of
      language. One point of criticism is that language users create and understand new words all
      the time, challenging the finite vocabulary assumption. A second is that relationships among
      words are computed in terms of latent nested structures rather than sequential surface order
      (Chomsky, 1957; Everaert, Huybregts, Chomsky, Berwick, and Bolhuis, 2015).
          In this talk I discuss two models that explore the hypothesis that more (a priori)
      appropriate models of language will lead to better performance on real-world language
      processing tasks. The first composes sub word units (bytes, characters, or morphemes) into
      lexical representations, enabling more naturalistic interpretation and generation of novel
      word forms. The second, which we call recurrent neural network grammars (RNNGs), is a
      new generative model of sentences that explicitly models nested, hierarchical relationships
      among words and phrases. RNNGs operate via a recursive syntactic process reminiscent
      of probabilistic context-free grammar generation, but decisions are parameterized using
      RNNs that condition on the entire (top-down, left-to-right) syntactic derivation history,
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                        139


greatly relaxing context-free independence assumptions. Experimental results show that
RNNGs obtain better results in generating language than models that don’t exploit linguistic
structures.



4.3    From Bayes Decision Rule to Neural Networks for Human
       Language Technology (HLT)
Hermann Ney (RWTH Aachen, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Hermann Ney


The last 40 years have seen dramatic progress in machine learning and statistical methods
for speech and language processing like speech recognition, handwriting recognition and
machine translation. Most of the key statistical concepts were originally developed for speech
recognition. Examples of such key concepts are the Bayes decision rule for minimum error
rate and probabilistic approaches to acoustic modeling (e.g., hidden Markov models) and
language modeling. Recently, the performance of HLT systems for speech recognition were
improved significantly by the use of artificial neural networks, such as deep feedforward
multi-layer perceptrons and recurrent neural networks (including long short-term memory
extension). We will discuss these approaches in detail and how they fit into the probabilistic
approach to HLT.



4.4    Cross-Token Character N-Gram Modeling: The Other Shoe To
       Drop?
Hinrich Schütze (LMU München, DE) and Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh (LMU München, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Hinrich Schütze and Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh


Representation learning in NLP is usually performed on the level of tokens, which requires
segmentation or tokenization of input sentences. Here, we introduce an alternative that is
completely nonsymbolic: random segmentation of the input (within-token or cross-token)
into character n-grams. This applies to training the parameters of the model on a training
corpus as well as to applying it when computing the representation of a new text. We give
linguistic motivation as well as reporting experimental results, hypothesizing that this way
of representation learning could be effective and overcome shortcomings of other methods.



4.5    Modeling Multiple Sequences: Explorations, Consequences and
       Challenges
Orhan Firat (Middle East Technical University – Ankara, TR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Orhan Firat


Deep (recurrent) neural networks have been shown to successfully learn complex mappings
between arbitrary length input and output sequences in varying input granularity, such



                                                                                                 17042
140   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)


      as words, sub-words, characters or even unicode bytes. We investigate extensions of this
      effective framework, encoder-decoder networks, that handle multiple sequences at the same
      time. This reduces to the problem of multi-lingual machine translation (MLNMT), as we
      explore and discuss the applicability and benefits of using finer tokens. Further we discuss
      future directions that are enabled by using finer tokens, from multi-modal processing and
      multi-task learning perspectives. We finally discuss observed problems and future challenges
      for multi-sequence modeling with finer tokens.



      4.6    Robsut Wrod Reocginiton via semi-Character Recurrent Neural
             Network
      Kevin Duh (Johns Hopkins University – Baltimore, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Kevin Duh


      The Cmabrigde Uinervtisy (Cambridge University) effect from the psycholinguistics literature
      has demonstrated a robust word processing mechanism in humans, where jumbled words (e.g.,
      Cmabrigde / Cambridge) are recognized with little cost. Inspired by the findings from the
      Cmabrigde Uinervtisy effect, we propose a word recognition model based on a semi-character
      level recursive neural network (scRNN). In our experiments, we demonstrate that scRNN
      has significantly more robust performance in word spelling correction (i.e., word recognition)
      compared to existing spelling checkers. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the model is
      cognitively plausible by replicating a psycholinguistics experiment about human reading
      difficulty using our model. (This is joint work with Keisukue Sakaguchi, Matt Post, and Ben
      Van Durme)



      4.7    Inducing Morpho-syntactic Lexicons and Morphological Inflections
      Manaal Faruqui (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Manaal Faruqui


      Morphology of a word can help determine different aspects of its meaning such as tense,
      mood, voice, aspect, person, gender, number and case. Such morpho-syntactic information
      about word meaning provides crucial information while training models for downstream NLP
      tasks. In this talk we are going to discuss two different problems involving morphology. In
      the first part of the talk I will show how morphological information can be used to construct
      large-scale morpho-syntactic lexicons for a large number of languages. In the second part of
      the talk I will show how different possible inflected forms of a word can be generated using
      encoder-decoder neural network models in a language-independent manner.
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                                   141


4.8      (Neural) Graphical Models Over Strings
Ryan Cotterell (Johns Hopkins University – Baltimore, US)
        License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                  © Ryan Cotterell


Natural language processing must sometimes consider the internal structure of words, e.g.,
in order to understand or generate an unfamiliar word. Unfamiliar words are systematically
related to familiar ones due to linguistic processes such as morphology, phonology, abbre-
viation, copying error, and historical change. We will show how to build joint probability
models over many strings. These models are capable of predicting unobserved strings, or
predicting the relationships among observed strings. However, computing the predictions
of these models can be computationally hard. We outline approximate algorithms based
on Markov chain Monte Carlo, expectation propagation, and dual decomposition. We give
results on some NLP tasks.



 5       Working groups
5.1      Morphology
Kristina Toutanova (Google – Seattle, US)
        License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Kristina Toutanova
 Joint work of Fabienne Cap, Ryan Cotterell, Chris Dyer, Kevin Duh, Manaal Faruqui, Vladimir Golkov, Adam
               Lopez, Laura Rimmel, Kristina Toutanova, François Yvon


5.1.1      Introduction
This is a report that summarizes the discussions and project ideas that originated in the
morphology working group. Our group had productive discussions on several topics that
deal with character-level and subword-level modeling of natural language.
    The discussion started with “what is morphology?” or rather what is a universally
accepted theory of how words are formed. Most people agreed that probably at some level
there exists a morpheme and then inflection generation on the morpheme leads to the creation
of new words. However, we did not delve deep into whether this is correct theory or not, as
we wanted to discuss more practical problems.
    A common agreement in the team was that derivational morphology is often ignored in
modeling, even though around 50% of words in English are constructed through derivational
processes. An example of this phenomenon is: unquaffability, which is composed of un + quaff
+ able + ity. In derivational morphology since the semantic meaning of the word changes,
it is more important to have segmentation of the word that can reveal its composition.
Derivational morphology is also different from inflectional morphology in the sense that we
often need to extract knowledge from the sentence context to be able to analyze the word.
    An advantage of character-level models over word or morpheme-level models is that it
allows the generation and analysis of out-of-vocabulary words. Using character-level models
of course raises the question whether morphology is useful at all practically or it is something
that can be ignored. To people whose interest lies in understanding how language works, this
is an interesting question. But for those who only care about whether information within a
word can help NLP systems, just proceeding with a character-level model seems like the best
route.



                                                                                                            17042
142   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)


      5.1.2    Research Questions
      Now we provide a list of different topics that we came up with for future research. We will
      describe one particular model in detail in Section 5.1.4.
         RQ1: Is there a relation between traditional morphology and character-level representa-
         tions?
         RQ2: Does morphological modeling help downstream tasks?
         RQ3: How do we incorporate morphology in neural machine translation?
         RQ4: How do we know if the characters of segments in a word are compositional?
         RQ5: How do we analyze what segments/characters of the word is the model selecting?
         RQ6: How does character-level NLP handle compounding and multi-word expressions?
         RQ7: How does character-level NLP handle non-standard morphological processes (e.g.,
         word analogies, phonesthemes (glow-glitter-glide), apocope, portmanteau words (Oxbridge,
         Bennifer, Brexit), diminutives, etc.
         RQ8: Given a word form, can we predict its morpho-syntactic properties?
         RQ9: Can we use data with perturbed character sequences within a word to generate
         more training data and improve model performance?
         RQ10: Do character and segment-level models learn the exact same thing?

      5.1.3    Analyzing distributed representations
      Character-based models deliver distributed representations for words, which are varying
      dependent on the context of their occurrences. An interesting issue is to try and diagnose
      the kind of morphological knowledge that is (or not) encoded in these representations.
         Expectations regarding these representations are that they should for instance encode:
         Ambiguity (in inflection and derivation): This is important because ambiguity is pervasive
         in NLP, and can sometimes have some systematic (i.e., in conjugation) nature. Therefore,
         looking at how ambiguity is encoded in distributional representations has a bearing on
         what we can expect from continuous representations.
         Another issue is with exceptional patterns: if we look at string patterns, we see regular
         and exceptional / coincidental patterns, e.g., dearly is dear+ly but early is not ear+ly.
         Can we detect regularity vs. exceptions in distributed representations? In a similar
         fashion, can we detect transparent vs. opaque derivatives based on these representations?

         In order to evaluate these models and representations, a set of systematic tests, applicable
      to a wide variety of languages and morphological systems needs to be designed. Possible
      tasks, along the lines of the recent work by [1, 2] are the following:
         Predict the correct agreement / case markings, for increasing complex (remote) depend-
         encies. This could be implemented in a number of ways, such as compare the likelihood
         of correct vs. incorrect forms.
         Another interesting test would a be akin to the “wug” test. Given a prefix sentence and
         the prefix of a word, see whether the model can generate the right suffix. For instance:
              I think that writing this short example really wug?
         If the model can also generate POS tags, we can make the task more interesting by also
         providing POS information (in the former example how to generate given .... (past,wug)).
         This kind of exercise should be designed for more inflectionally interesting languages than
         English.
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                                  143




     Figure 1 A graphical represention of the joint model.


     Testing derivational knowledge is more challenging. A possible source of inspiration is the
     definition generation task, which provides a way to explicitly stimulate lexical creativity.
     Alternatively, one could also try sentence completion exercises with contexts that should
     both constrain a given POS and a given derivative (if it exists)
        This model is really [Markovian / *Markovable / Markovist / *?Markoving /
        *Markovability / Markovesque / *Markovism] etc.
     and test phenomena such as morphotactics, morpho-phonological processes (or rather
     their orthographical expression), such as e.g., vowel harmony, vowel reduction, consonant
     assimilation, etc).

     As regards the evaluation of these representations, various ideas have popped up, such as:
     Correlate the distribution of representation of a word with the number of morphological
     analyses;
     Evaluate the ability of the representations to identify derivational families;
     Contrast character-based vs. word-based embeddings and see whether they can be made
     to agree2

   The next step, if these properties are not satisfied and actually matter for downstream
applications, is to try to enforce these properties by jointly learning word sequences and
their morphology. Such ideas are developed in the following section.

5.1.4      Proposed Model
In this section, we sketch out a language model that jointly models words (w) ~ and morpho-
logical features (m).
                  ~    Intuitively, each token has a set of morphological features, and the
generative process first selects the morphological features at time t and then, conditional on
that and the history of words, selects a word. A graphical representation is in Figure 1.


2
    This might be useful in the following setting: (1) learn word based embeddings for frequent words;
    (2) train a character-based model to reproduced these; (3) use the resulting character embeddings to
    generate embeddings for unknown words. This could also be used as a way to speed up the training of
    character-level embeddings.




                                                                                                           17042
144   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)



                                   X
                          p(w)
                            ~ =          p(w, m)
                                   m
                                   N
                                   Y
                       p(w, m) =         p(wt , mt | w<t , m<t )
                                   t=1
                                    N
                                   XY
                          p(w)
                            ~ =              p(wt , mt | w<t , m<t )
                                   ~ i=1
                                   m

         p(wt , mt | w<t , m<t ) = p(mt | w<t , m<t ) × p(wt | w<t , mt )                        (1)
                                = p(mt | m<t ) × p(wt | w<t , mt )                               (2)
                                = p(mt | mt−1 ) × p(wt | w<t , mt )                              (3)
                                = p(mt | w<t , mt−1 ) × p(wt | w<t , mt )                        (4)

      In Equations (1) and (2), supervised training is tractable, but marginalizing m is intractable.
      However, the models given by Equations (3) and (4) are reasonable and the forward algorithm
      can be used to marginalize m which can be used for likelihood evaluation or unsupervised
      training.
                                                              w
                                                                
            p(wt = k | w<t , mt ) = softmaxk U tanh ϕmt ; ht−1
                                                      m      w
                                                                  
          p(mt = ` | w<t , m<t ) = softmax` V tanh ht−1    ; ht−1

         Possible extensions of the baselines:
      1. generate words with a character model (instead of the softmax layer). It would be
         especially interesting to see whether the additional morphological “tier” helps to improve
         the morphological tasks;
      2. add an attention model over past words / past morphs / both;
                                                                  t−1
                                                                            !!
                                                                  X
                                                                       m w
              p(wt = k | w<t , mt ) = softmaxk U tanh ϕmt +           βi hi
                                                                         i=1
                                                               t−1
                                                                                            !!
                                                               X
              p(mt = ` | w<t , m<t ) = softmax`      V tanh          (αim him + βim hiw )
                                                               i=1

      3. use this as an additional model on the target side for MT tasks.

      5.1.5    Comparing Characters and Words
      Character-level modeling allows sharing of statistical strength among words that have common
      character sequences. Word-level modeling integrates an inductive bias towards architectures
      that construct and reason with representations of words. Prior work has built architectures
      using these different units of modeling, but has not isolated their impact in controlled
      comparative studies.
          We propose several experiments to evaluate the capacity and practical performance of
      character and word-based architectures. A simple experiment is to start with two architectures
      for word representations used in a language modeling task for a simple n-gram feed-forward
      language model. Architecture W embeds all words using a one-hot representation of words
      and a second architecture C uses a bi-directional character-level RNN with one or more
      layers to derive a word embedding as the last layer.
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                                 145


    Given a model trained on a given dataset D using architecture W and word embedding
size d, theory suggests that an architecture of type C exists that can obtain the same optimal
value of the training loss function. Theory does not provide guidance on the dimensionality
or number of hidden layers in C and similarly, nothing is known about the training time and
difficulty of the two optimization problems.
    We suggest to experiment with architectures of growing size in C, to discover patterns in
the relationship between dimensionality d in W and dimensionality and architectures in C.
We will experiment with multiple layers and hidden unit size in C, a final layer mapping to
dimensionality d. CNN in addition to RNN architectures will be interesting to evaluate. For
every candidate architecture, we will measure the loss function value obtained, as well as
dimensionalities, time, and learning curve.
    An alternative to training character-level architectures from scratch is to first train a
word-level architecture and then train a character level sub-model which for each word
w aims to fit its word embedding v via the character-level sub-network. In theory, this
approach would result in a similar value of the loss function (if the word embeddings can be
approximated very well), but would be much faster to train since type-level as opposed to
token-level updates will be required in training. The authors of [3] have already shown that
character-level models are able to fit word vectors well, but have not studied the relative
dimensionality and efficiency of the two representations.
References
1    Tal Linzen, Emmanuel Dupoux, Yoav Goldberg: Assessing the Ability of LSTMs to Learn
     Syntax-Sensitive Dependencies. TACL 2016.
2    Rico Sennrich: How Grammatical is Character-level Neural Machine Translation? Assess-
     ing MT Quality with Contrastive Translation Pairs. EACL 2017.
3    Ryan Cotterell, Hinrich Schütze, Jason Eisner: Morphological Smoothing and Extrapola-
     tion of Word Embeddings. ACL 2016.



5.2      Machine Translation
Parnia Bahar (RWTH Aachen, DE)
        License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Parnia Bahar
 Joint work of Parnia Bahar, Ondrej Bojar, Desmond Elliot, Orhan Firat, Alex Fraser, Georg Heigold, Jan
               Niehues, Laura Rimell, Helmut Schmid


Machine translation (MT) is perhaps the biggest success of deep learning in NLP. This
working group was concerned with research questions and challenges for character-level MT.
In particular, the working group dealt with three issues in Neural Machine Translation
(NMT) [1, 2]: appropriate units for an NMT system; efficiency of NMT with different units;
and how to treat multilinguality and multiple modalities.

5.2.1      Appropriate Units for NMT
Since the vocabulary size needs to be shortened to the most frequent tokens in word-level
NMT, it suffers from out-of-vocabulary (OOV) problems. Possible solutions are subword
units or characters as the atomic units of translation.
   Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) [3] is a prominent approach which segments words into
sequences of subwords. The most frequent words are kept in their original forms while




                                                                                                          17042
146   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)


      the rare words are divided into pieces. This appproach is more effective than using words.
      However, it requires purely offline segmentation in advance and the number of merges needs to
      be predefined. An alternative idea would be to learn the merge operations inside the network
      for machine translation. Another solution which does not require explicit segmentation or
      word boundaries is character-level NMT.
          Although using character-level NMT reduces the computational complexity in the softmax
      operation and can handle the OOV problem, several requirements and challenges need to be
      considered. If the source and target sentences are encoded in characters, the sequence length
      is longer. Hence, for each target token, the decoder needs to attend to all characters in the
      source sequence. This can lead to an extreme computational time in the attention layer. One
      solution to overcome this problem is to have a shorter source representation. The authors
      of [4], for example, propose a convolutional neural network with different filter sizes and
      max-pooling to have a shorter representation in the encoder. In particular, a representation
      for every five character positions is created and then forwarded to a highway network and
      the encoder, which is a bidirectional gated recurrent neural network. Thus, the network
      calculates features on character n-grams including cross-token n-grams. The working group
      agreed that it should be possible to get slightly better results without max pooling if there is
      enough training data and time available.
          Character-based models provide advantages for multilingual models. However, they
      require a shared idea of characters. It is, for example, not clear if the model of [4] would work
      for both German and Chinese input. Coming up with a good BPE inventory for multilingual
      input/output is in general difficult.

      5.2.2   Efficiency of NMT with Different Units
      An advantage of character-based models is the possibility of attending to characters and,
      therefore, implicitly splitting compounds or words from agglutinative languages. However
      besides translation quality, efficiency of training and memory plays an important role. Based
      on experimental results reported in the literature, character-level NMT is three times slower
      than BPE-NMT. Therefore, utilizing larger strides in max pooling, reducing the number
      of computations of attention weights, faster convergence by means of momentum-based
      optimization algorithms and finally reducing the precision could speed up training and make
      memory usage more efficient. The decoder can be sped up by recomputing attention only
      after every three characters or by only computing attention for a few relevant positions. For
      this purpose, the working group proposed to run a recurrent neural network over the input
      embeddings to compute a relevance score (sigmoid output) for each position. Closely located
      high relevance scores are penalized (for example, by adding a sum of pairwise products of
      scores to the loss function). This additional constraint should force the model to identify a
      small set of highly relevant positional embeddings. The machine translation decoder can
      then only attend on the relevant positions. Having only a small number of relevant positions
      speeds up the decoder attention considerably.

      5.2.3   Multilinguality and Multi-Modality
      In the last session, the working group discussed how to use two input modalities, such
      as a character-level text and an image. An example for image-to-text decoding is the
      image captioning task. Because sharing information between character-level text, like the
      plural morpheme “+s” and a picture of two cats is difficult, the group first considered two-
      source character-level translation as in multilingual systems. The BLEU score of an NMT
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                          147


system which is trained on two sources (French and Spanish) for translating into English is
considerably higher than the BLEU scores of two single-source systems. The working group
assumed that this implies that the NMT systems learns a shared representation (something
like an interlingua). Alternatively, it might just be an ensembling effect of two co-existing
systems, leading to improvements because more target side data was seen effectively. To
test whether anything is shared or not, the working group created two setups. The first
one is to train two separate NMT systems: French→English and Spanish→English on the
same set of English sentences and apply multi-source translation at test time (by ensemble
decoding). In the second setup, there are two encoders (one for French and one for Spanish)
and one shared decoder for English, trained by alternating samples. If the second scenario
works better than the first one, there is some sharing in the joint decoder. This would be
beneficial, because it means that one can train two separate encoders (for different modalities,
such as character-level text and pictures) with a single shared output decoder. For such a
multi-modal system, the same test could be applied to figure out whether there is sharing
between the two modalities. An alternative approach for training shared representations is
an adversarial setup which includes a second objective in order to make it hard to tell from
which encoder the representation came.

5.2.4   Research Questions
The working group came up with the following research directions:
   RQ1: What is a proper translation unit in terms of performance, efficiency and availability
   of reasonable computational resources?
      Possible units: characters, BPE, subwords, words, phrases, ...
      Investigation of BPE (offline segmentation) vs. character-based (online segmentation)
      models.
      The space of possible offline segmentations is huge.
      Reduction of BPE size towards characters to get a better generalization.
      Sennrich, for example, showed that a 2-gram character consecutive segmentation plus
      a word short list work well. [3]
      For efficiency, it might be better to have a hybrid representation instead of a fully
      character-based one.
      An important question is what sort of hybrid representations are possible. A possible
      hybrid would be BPE + characters in an encoder-decoder network with two attention
      layers.
      Comparison of character-based word representations and extra-token character-n-gram
      representations
      Is it possible to predict bytes or even bits?
      Investigation of multiple encoders at different levels (on words, BPE, characters).
      A two-level attention mechanism might be used which first decides which encoder to
      use. Another possibility is the concatenation of the results of the different encoders.
      Techniques from multi-source translations might be employed as well.
   RQ2: How can we inspect models?
      An interesting analysis would be the comparison of attention at character level and
      attention at segment level.
      Is it possible to use attention on character-to-character models to get BPE-like units
      (for evaluating character-to-character models)?
   RQ3: Can we use large amounts of monolingual source data to improve the encoder?
   One idea is to have multiple decoders with a shared encoder in a multi-task setting.




                                                                                                   17042
148   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)


            RQ4: How to investigate whether there is sharing between a character-level text encoder
            and a picture encoder for image caption translation?
            Is there a good representation like the red box proposed by the representation-learning
            working group?

      References
      1    Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, Yoshua Bengio: Neural Machine Translation by
           Jointly Learning to Align and Translate. ICLR 2015.
      2    Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, Quoc V. Le: Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural
           Networks. NIPS 2014.
      3    Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, Alexandra Birch: Neural Machine Translation of Rare Words
           with Subword Units. ACL 2016.
      4    Jason Lee, Kyunghyun Cho, Thomas Hofmann: Fully Character-Level Neural Machine
           Translation without Explicit Segmentation. arXiv 2016.
      5    Junyoung Chung, Kyunghyun Cho, Yoshua Bengio: A character-level decoder without
           explicit segmentation for neural machine translation. ACL 2016.
      6    Nal Kalchbrenner, Lasse Espeholt, Karen Simonyan, Aaron van den Oord, Alex Graves,
           Koray Kavukcuoglu: Neural Machine Translation in Linear Time. arXiv 2017.
      7    Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Yann N. Dauphin: A Convolutional Encoder
           Model for Neural Machine Translation. ICLR 2017.



      5.3       Representation Learning
      Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh (LMU München, DE)
               License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                        © Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh
          Joint work of Heike Adel, Phil Blunsom, Fabienne Cap, Vera Demberg, Chris Dyer, Jan Hajicč, Karl-Moritz
                        Hermann, Adam Lopez, Sien Moens, Martin Schmitt, Hinrich Schütze, Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh


      5.3.1       Introduction
      Starting from scratch and doing end-to-end learning for each individual task is not effective.
      In end-to-end NLP, we need to start from characters/bytes and therefore lots of training data
      is required. However, sparsity is always a reality. Therefore, we need to somehow transfer
      our knowledge (specifically, the generic knowledge) from one task to others. Representation
      learning is one way to do so: we learn a generic representation of the input and use that in
      the end tasks. We argue that segmentation of inputs to the sequence of characters/bytes
      makes representation learning ineffective.
          A representation should contain all general linguistic knowledge, including morphological,
      syntactic, semantic, sound/phonetic, orthographic, distributional and discourse knowledge.3
      Then, for the specific NLP tasks, mappings are learned on top of these general representations.
      The advantage of representations is that less training data is necessary for a target task.
      However, there are also some caveats, e.g., how to fit coreference resolution and discourse
      dependencies, even though these require general linguistic knowledge.
          There are some important (unanswered) questions about representation learning in NLP:
      (i) What is the level of granularity? (From morphemes to idioms). (ii) Are overlapping units


      3
          The possibility of extraction of world knowledge from text is limited; e.g., “black sheep” is far more
          common than “white sheep” in text.
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                         149




               cat.png         'cat'                           'chat'        'cat'




                  Representation                                 Representation




                   picture / text                                french / english

   Figure 2 Multimodal representation.             Figure 3 Multilingual representation.




   Figure 4 Schematic diagram of The Red-Box.


fine? Example: “seven”, “heaven” and “seventh heaven”. (iii) What should be the content
of the representations? Example types of content: phonetic similarity, visual similarity
(radicals, strokes, pixels, bits), Affordances, physical properties, (iv) Are the contents of
representations based on the target use case? (v) Should we use better learning objectives
for representations? (vi) How can we learn disentangled representations? (vii) How to trade
off memorization against generalization? (Saussure vs. Frege).

5.3.2   The Red-Box
The motivation and schematic diagram of the model we proposed for representation learning
is shown in Figure 4.
    There are some key considerations in modeling the Red-Box: (i) Activated representations
(AR) = standard embeddings + some context + some syntax + some semantics. (ii) The aim
is to facilitate learning task-specific models. (iii) Is the representation activation function
(RAF) equivalent to the NLP pipeline? (iv) Training: multi-task setup with joint core up
to AR. (v) RAF evaluation objective: minimize sample complexity for downstream tasks.
(vi) Duplication / Parameter Sharing: “In seventh heaven” is a unit that we can have
an embedding for. But to understand “the highest of seven heavens according to Islam




                                                                                                  17042
150   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)




                                          Engl. Dep. Tree         Czech




                                                       Red Box




                                                        English

         Figure 5 Example tasks for the Red-Box: dependency parsing and machine translation.


      and Judaism” we need access to the notion of seventh heaven downstream. In traditional
      approaches, all relevant info is in one place (the lexicon). In contrast in the Red-Box model,
      knowledge is distributed over two places: embeddings & RAF. How is knowledge shared
      between embeddings and RAF?

      5.3.3   Research Questions
      Apart from theoretical considerations, there are also some practical challenges and research
      questions that need to be addressed:

         RQ1: How to train the Red-Box? (i) on which tasks? (ii) with which kind of weighting
         regime and (iii) how to avoid catastrophic forgetting?
         We need to choose the tasks that we want to train the Red-Box on. Should these tasks
         be multi-modal, or just text-based?
             Example tasks A (see Figure 5). Task 1: dependency parsing, an English sentence as
             input and the English dependency parse of the sentence as output. Task 2: machine
             translation, an English sentence as input and the Czech translation as output. The
             Red-Box possibly benefits in this scenario as follows: Task 1 helps identify “grandma”
             as object of “take care” in “he took care of grandma”. Task 2 (transfer task) can then
             learn more easily that “grandma” needs to be generated in the accusative case.
             Example tasks B: Task 1: machine translation, a Finnish sentence as input and the
             English translation as output. Task 2 (transfer task): coreference resolution, a Finnish
             sentence as input and the resolved coreference chains as output. The Red-Box possibly
             benefits in this scenario as follows: Task 1 should learn coreference resolution since it
             is required for correct Finnish-to-English translation. Task 2 just has to tap into what
             Task 1 has already learned.
         To avoid catastrophic forgetting, we might need to include some sort of memory in the
         Red-Box – Human memory prevents forgetting.
         RQ2: What information should be in the output of the Red-Box? How to draw the
         line between core linguistic competence and non-linguistic information? What about:
         common-sense knowledge, world knowledge, logical inference? And: are vectors going to
         be the representation of outputs? Vectors are the “universal language” of deep learning,
         so an easy combination of modules is possible with them. However, they are hard to
         interpret.
         RQ3: How can the Red-Box and its output be interpreted? There are two questions
         in this regard: (i) Which parts of the sentence are responsible for a particular output?
         (ii) What is the interpretation proper of the output? There are some possible ways:
         (i) Nearest neighbors; (ii) Attention; (iii) Train special “task” modules that produce an
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                         151


   interpretable output; (iv) If we train the Red-Box on machine translation, how do we
   find out what it has learned? Maybe it has not learned anything interesting?
   RQ4: For which tasks can the Red-Box be used? There are more open research
   questions that need to be discussed: (i) Which tasks can a Red-Box trained on ma-
   chine translation perform well for? Question answering, textual entailment, inference?
   (ii) Which combination of tasks should the Red-Box be trained on, so that it is usable
   across a broad range of applications? (similar to the classical NLP pipeline).



5.4      End-to-End
Heike Adel (LMU München, DE)
        License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Heike Adel
 Joint work of Heike Adel, Jan Hajič, Thomas Hofmann, Hang Li, Hermann Ney, Ngoc Thang Vu


5.4.1      Introduction
There are several interpretations of the term “end-to-end”, such as “trainability of the system
as a whole”, “joint training of all system components” or “training without explicit feature
design”. While the term “end-to-end” is probably young, the concept of end-to-end learning
is more than 20 years old although back then people refered to it rather as a joint learning
of modules. While the computational complexity of such a system was too high in the past,
current studies are getting closer to building “real” end-to-end systems.

5.4.2      What are the “Two Ends”?
One characteristic of end-to-end systems is that the whole system is trained as a whole –
from the processing of the input to the prediction of the output.
    The typical input to end-to-end systems is raw data. While in speech, this corresponds
to the acoustic signal or spectral features, and computer vision uses the pixels of an image,
the question in NLP is whether to use words, characters or bytes. Mixtures of those are also
possible. The working group agreed that using pre-trained embeddings to represent the input
does not contradict the notion of end-to-end. One particular possibility is the joint (hybrid)
training of embeddings and the final task. Especially due to continuous vector representations
in neural network and end-to-end training, it is also possible to create representations for
inputs of different modalities in the same continuous space. However, this increases the
complexity of the model. Slightly different to multi-modal is cross-modal training. In this
case, the modality of the input is different to the modality of the output. An example is the
generation of an output in a different modality (such as image captioning). One research
question in this area is how to integrate a prior of the target modality into the end-to-end
model (such as language model probabilities for image captioning).
    For training end-to-end models, the correct choice of the objective function is crucial.
The objective function should be related to the end performance / final application to be
able to train every system component jointly. However, the end performance might be
hard to express mathematically or might not be differentiable. An example is a machine
translation system that should be used by human beings. The reaction of humans to the
system and its output can differ a lot from typical machine translation metrics, such as
the BLEU score. In training end-to-end systems, there might also be multiple objectives.
For example, an intermediate layer could be trained to predict part-of-speech (POS) tags




                                                                                                  17042
152   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)


                Traditional        Pipeline of modules
                                                         Pipeline of modules      'real' end-to-end
                 pipeline         (modules propagate
                                                            (differentiable,     (no distinguishable
              (independent          their confidence
                                                            trained jointly)          modules)
                 modules)                 values)


         Figure 6 Evolution from pipeline systems to end-to-end systems.


      using a side-objective in order to bias the model to learn POS tag-like features. This allows
      integrating linguistic or domain knowledge in a differentiable way into an end-to-end system.
      It can improve the final performance and lead to a faster convergence of the system.

      5.4.3   End-to-End Systems
      End-to-end learning refers to the joint training of individual system components. There
      is an important tradeoff between end-to-end training and model interpretability. Between
      traditional pipeline systems and “real” end-to-end systems, there are other hybrid possibilities.
      Figure 6 shows the evolution from pipeline systems to end-to-end systems. In traditional
      pipeline systems, each system component (module) is independent from the other modules. In
      a first hybrid step, the pipeline modules are still independent but propagate their confidence
      values to the following modules. Between these types of systems and “real” end-to-end
      systems which might not have distinguishable modules any more, there are pipeline systems
      with different modules but all modules are differentiable and can be trained jointly.
          Due to the complexity of end-to-end systems, a good implementation is necessary. There is
      statistical efficiency (i.e., how many training examples a system needs until it gets reasonable
      results) and computational complexity (i.e., how and after which training time the optimal
      parameters are found). In contrast to the past, it is now possible to apply backpropagation
      training through the whole end-to-end system.
          The working group discussed specific deep learning models and their strengths and
      weaknesses in terms of learning long-distance dependencies (which is a crucial challenge in
      text processing, especially when the input is a character sequence). While recurrent neural
      networks (RNNs and especially LSTMs) are more powerful, also for modeling long-range
      dependencies, they are also harder to train and computationally more expensive. While
      LSTMs actively manage their memory (hidden layers), attention is a recently introduced
      mechanism that avoids the need of a memory. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs), on the
      other hand, are good at (low-level) feature extraction (they are usually applied in combination
      with fully connected layers afterwards) and computationally more efficient but they have
      limitations in capturing long range dependencies.
          Hierarchical models have both advantages and disadvantages: Since documents are
      also built hierarchically, hierarchical models might be appropriate for modeling documents.
      However, processing a document without a hierarchical structure could factor out syntax
      and help focus on the semantic meanings.

      5.4.4   Research Questions
      The working group proposed the following set of research questions:
         RQ1: Interpretation of results: When papers report improvements for a specific task,
         it is central to show whether those improvements are also reproducible on other tasks
         and/or domains. It is important to see whether the improvement comes from a superior
         model or rather from a different (and maybe larger) training data set. In fact, systematic
         errors in the model or architecture might only be recognizable if the amount of training
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                         153


                            Output: sentiment
                                                Side task: emoticons



                                 model




                              Input: tweets
  Figure 7 Example for data augmentation.


  data is very large (infinite). This means that a more careful design of experiments as
  well as a detailed error analysis is necessary. A possibility to judge end-to-end models
  might be shared tasks because in shared tasks the competing systems are trained and
  evaluated on exactly the same dataset. Thus, direct comparisons of models are possible.
  RQ2: Understanding the models: Deep learning models and especially end-to-end
  models are often hard to interpret. Understandable models might be structured in a way
  that intermediate representations have meanings. For example, a model could have an
  intermediate layer that is trained to learn POS tag-like features. Similar to analyzing
  the results and errors of a model (see RQ1), the model itself should be inspected, too.
  Attention provides a straightforward way of visualizing attention weights. The question
  is whether this is enough to understand the model. Would it be possible, e.g., to visualize
  connections between words that are far away from each other in the input? In LSTMs, it
  is possible to analyze how the gradients flow through the different intermediate layers. In
  CNNs, most analysis focuses on extracting the most important n-gram features. An open
  question is whether these n-gram features are generalizable to other tasks and domains.
  In general, visualizing models or model components always comes with the theoretical
  question of what we actually expect.
  RQ3: Integrating knowledge into end-to-end systems: When training end-to-end
  systems, the system should learn everything by itself, i.e., without explicit feature design.
  Nevertheless, by designing the model, we implicitly use (and should use) knowledge about
  the task: For designing the input, it is crucial to know which information is needed for
  the task. When creating the model structure, we use our knowledge by deciding how the
  different modules should interact. For coming up with an appropriate objective function,
  it is important to know which function is most closely related to the application. That
  means although there is no explicit feature design in end-to-end learning, the models still
  reflect domain knowledge. Especially end-to-end systems are hard to train with little
  data. On the other hand, getting/annotating data can be very expensive. A cheap way of
  obtaining additional data for end-to-end systems in order to train them more robustly, is
  data augmentation. The concept is similar to transfer learning of domain information or
  multitask learning. Figure 7 shows how a side task can be used to better train a model
  for an application. In this example, the input to the model is tweets and the task is the
  prediction of sentiment. Beside the labeled data for the task (which might be little), there
  is a huge amount of unlabeled tweets available. Therefore, the model is extended with an
  additional output layer which predicts the emoticons in the unlabeled tweets. This allows
  a more robust training of the model part that creates a representation of the input tweet.
  The data augmentation process is another way of integrating domain knowledge since the
  selection of the side task needs a good understanding of the main task and domain.
  RQ4: Adaptivity of end-to-end systems: The adaptivity of end-to-end systems, e.g., to
  new domains is a very important challenge. An example would be self-driving cars in a




                                                                                                  17042
154   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)


         new city. A particular problem of end-to-end models is that they are very specialized to a
         particular task and domain. Furthermore, it is arguable whether there are still individual
         modules inside an end-to-end system that can be re-trained or exchanged with modules
         for the new domain (similar to “plug-and-play”). Another question that arises is how
         efficient adaptation can be ensured. A possibility might be defining and measuring an
         “adaptation distance”. When re-training the whole end-to-end system for the new domain,
         it would be interesting to analyze which parts of the network have changed because of
         the adaptation (see RQ2).



      5.5      Dialogue
      Heike Adel (LMU München, DE)
              License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Heike Adel
       Joint work of Heike Adel, Karl Moritz Hermann, Hang Li, Hermann Ney, Kristina Toutanova


      5.5.1      Introduction
      There are different variants of dialogue systems. The most important categorizations differ
      between task-independent vs. task-dependent systems, between single-turn or multi-turn
      dialogues and between retrieval-based vs. generation-based systems. Examples for task-
      independent models are chat bots. Task-dependent dialogue systems are, for example,
      question answering systems. The answer can be either found in structured data, e.g.,
      templates, databases, knowledge graphs, or in unstructured data, e.g., a forum.
          Character-based models are a great opportunity to improve dialogue systems since they
      provide the possibility of generating unseen words.
          There are different data sets available in different languages [1]. STC [2], for example,
      consists of Chinese single-turn dialogue data from Weibo. Ubuntu [3] is an English multi-turn
      dialogue data set from a chat room. Reddit [4] contains English comment data from Reddit.
      Unfortunately, there is usually not enough data to train robust systems.

      5.5.2      Research Topics
      The working group formulated the following research topics:
         Sample Complexity
         Robust Question Answering
         Multi-source Question Answering
         Inference in Question Answering

      References
      1    Iulian Vlad Serban, Ryan Lowe, Peter Henderson, Laurent Charlin, Joelle Pineau: A sur-
           vey of available corpora for building data-driven dialogue systems. arXiv preprint (2017).
           arXiv:1512.05742
      2    http://61.93.89.94/Noah_NRM_Data
      3    https://github.com/rkadlec/ubuntu-ranking-dataset-creator
      4    https://www.reddit.com/r/datasets/comments/3bxlg7/i_have_every_publicy_
           available_reddit_comment
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                           155


 6     Panel discussions
6.1    Panel discussion: Character-based models
Heike Adel (LMU München, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Heike Adel


Moderator: Manaal Faruqui
Participants: Ryan Cotterell, Kristina Toutanova, Chris Dyer, Jan Hajič, Phil Blunsom
    The decision whether to model words, characters, bytes or even bits is often an engineering
question depending on the bias of the models and the amount of available data. While
characters are a part of our language, bytes have been defined by humans. Since there is
a deterministic mapping between bytes and characters, it is a purely engineering decision
whether to learn that mapping or not. While it might be possible to capture some additional
signals or regularities when modeling bytes (e.g., capital letters have a fixed distance to
their lowercase counterpart), going beyond that (and, e.g., modeling bits) might not be
advantageous in general but could help for special tasks like pronunciation modeling.
    Since we cannot give our models access to everything, it is useful to help them with
linguistic information. (There might be an analogy to the epicycle history: Before the
observation that the sun was in the center, it was very hard to predict the planet movements.)
Linguistic features could, for example, be learned with multitask learning (as a side-knowledge
for the main task) and they might also be useful to better interpret the model after training.
However, it is an important question which kind of linguistics the model should learn:
linguistic theories? Some notions of morphology? Or just something like tokenization? A
promising solution could be to focus on phenomena described in most linguistic theories, i.e.,
phenomena most linguists agree on.
    Modeling morphology is an important part of natural language processing/understanding.
Sequences of characters do not capture all information. So, external knowledge about
morphology can help the model to solve its task. While morphology can be useful from the
empirical and engineering point of view, it is also an important theoretical topic (for example,
to answer questions like how children learn morphemes).
    For short-term artificial intelligence, end-to-end models are the quickest solution. However,
for long-term solutions, multitask and transfer learning techniques will get more important
because there is not enough data for end-to-end learning in general. Transfer learning
is similar to how children learn: They learn something from task A and then leverage
it for task B. Therefore, it is essential to separate representation learning and language
understanding from specific applications. An example for successes of transfer learning are
zero-shot translations. While deep learning facilitates the transfer of representations (even
across modalities), getting it to work is not straightforward. For example, it is not clear
which tasks we should use to learn to understand language and to figure out whether the
models have learned anything about language or linguistics. For example, if the models just
follow the traditional NLP pipeline, they do not learn anything about language but just
about our own understanding of it. In fact, models should be able to induce such kind of
knowledge as in, e.g., alignment learning in neural machine translation.
    The prospects of sharing character-level encoders among tasks might be task dependent.
However, at the character or morpheme level it should be possible to learn something general
and task-independent. A character-based model that is trained across tasks can benefit from
a large amount of training data. Examples are the success of multilingual models.




                                                                                                    17042
156   17042 – From Characters to Understanding Natural Language (C2NLU)


      6.2    Plenary discussion: Where do we go from here?
      Heike Adel (LMU München, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Heike Adel


      Moderator: Adam Lopez
          So far, we only know empirically that transfer learning works (example: word embeddings)
      but we do not have a theoretical basis for this (yet). It is an open question whether it is
      provable at all. There are similarites to semi-supervised learning for which we know criteria
      when it works and when it does not work. Transfer learning could be analyzed in a similiar
      way. A reason why transfer or multitask learning works in machine translation is that it
      prevents the decoder from only doing language modeling: Instead, the focus shifts more
      towards considering the source language. As a result, the system learns when to consider the
      source and when to consider the target language.
          Transfer or multitask learning can cause “catastrophic forgetting”. To mitigate this
      problem, examples from every task should be put into each batch and the weights should be
      updated based on the gradients gathered from all of them. This heuristic is used in machine
      translation research.
          An open question is how to find out whether a model has gathered linguistic knowledge.
      In contrast to vision, analyzing the internal features of a neural network is hard for language.
      Possible ways to answer this question could be (i) to do intrinsic queries (e.g., the model
      should have learned that “glasses” refers to a single object although it is a plural word), (ii) to
      generate text based on the internal representations, (iii) to alter the input in a systematic
      way, (iv) to permute the predictions and differentiate them with the input (to see what is
      forcing the prediction and where the gradients come from), or (v) to break down a big task
      (such as neural machine translation) into smaller incremental tasks and analyze the neural
      network on those.
          In general, there is a lot of data available. Rather than needing more data, we need more
      tasks and automatic evaluation methods.
          Especially in the context of end-to-end learning, there are different objectives, such
      as language engineering vs. gaining linguistic insights, or building intelligent agents vs.
      understanding the human brain / language / behavior.
Phil Blunsom, Kyunghyun Cho, Chris Dyer, and Hinrich Schütze                                            157


       Participants
 Heike Adel                         Manaal Faruqui                     Marie-Francine Moens
LMU München, DE                   Carnegie Mellon University –       KU Leuven, BE
 Parnia Bahar                     Pittsburgh, US                       Hermann Ney
RWTH Aachen, DE                      Orhan Firat                     RWTH Aachen, DE
 Phil Blunsom                     Middle East Technical University     Jan Niehues
University of Oxford, GB          – Ankara, TR                       KIT – Karlsruher Institut für
  Ondřej Bojar                     Alexander M. Fraser               Technologie, DE
Charles University – Prague, CZ   LMU München, DE                      Laura Rimell
                                   Vladimir Golkov                   University of Cambridge, GB
 Fabienne Cap
Uppsala University, SE            TU München, DE                       Helmut Schmid
                                    Jan Hajič                        LMU München, DE
  Ryan Cotterell
Johns Hopkins University –        Charles University – Prague, CZ      Martin Schmitt
Baltimore, US                      Georg Heigold                     LMU München, DE
 Vera Demberg                     DFKI – Kaiserslautern, DE            Hinrich Schütze
Universität des Saarlandes, DE     Karl Moritz Hermann               LMU München, DE
  Kevin Duh                       Google DeepMind – London, GB         Kristina Toutanova
Johns Hopkins University –         Thomas Hofmann                    Google – Seattle, US
Baltimore, US                     ETH Zürich, CH                       Ngoc Thang Vu
  Chris Dyer                        Hang Li                          Universität Stuttgart, DE
Carnegie Mellon University –      Huawei Technologies – Hong           Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh
Pittsburgh, US                    Kong, HK                           LMU München, DE
 Desmond Elliott                   Adam Lopez                          François Yvon
University of Amsterdam, NL       University of Edinburgh, GB        LIMSI – Orsay, FR




                                                                                                     17042
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 17051

Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types
Edited by
Simon Gay1 , Vasco T. Vasconcelos2 , Philip Wadler3 , and
Nobuko Yoshida4

1    University of Glasgow, GB, simon.gay@glasgow.ac.uk
2    University of Lisbon, PT, vmvasconcelos@ciencias.ulisboa.pt
3    University of Edinburgh, GB, wadler@inf.ed.ac.uk
4    Imperial College London, GB, yoshida@doc.ic.ac.uk


      Abstract
This report documents the programme and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 17051 “Theory
and Applications of Behavioural Types”. Behavioural types describe the dynamic aspects of
programs, in contrast to data types, which describe the fixed structure of data. Perhaps the
most well-known form of behavioural types is session types, which are type-theoretic specifica-
tions of communication protocols. More generally, behavioural types include typestate systems,
which specify state-dependent availability of operations; choreographies, which specify collective
communication behaviour; and behavioural contracts.
    In recent years, research activity in behavioural types has increased dramatically, in both
theoretical and practical directions. Theoretical work has explored new relationships between
established behavioural type systems and areas such as linear logic, automata theory, process
calculus testing theory, dependent type theory, and model-checking. On the practical side, there
are several implementations of programming languages, programming language extensions, soft-
ware development tools, and runtime monitoring systems, which are becoming mature enough to
apply to real-world case studies.
    The seminar brought together researchers from the established, largely European, research
community in behavioural types, and other participants from outside Europe and from related
research topics such as effect systems and actor-based languages. The questions that we intended
to explore included:
    How can we understand the relationships between the foundations of session types in terms
    of linear logic, automata, denotational models, and other type theories?
    How can the scope and applicability of behavioural types be increased by incorporating ideas
    and approaches from gradual typing and dependent type theory?
    What is the relationship, in terms of expressivity and tractability, between behavioural types
    and other verification techniques such as model-checking?
    What are the theoretical and practical obstacles to delivering behavioural types to software
    developers in a range of mainstream programming languages?
    What are the advantages and disadvantages of incorporating behavioural types into standard
    programming languages or designing new languages directly based on the foundations of
    session types?
    How can we evaluate the effectiveness of behavioural types in programming languages and
    software development?

Seminar January 29–3, 2017 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/17051
1998 ACM Subject Classification D.1.1 Applicative (Functional) Programming, D.1.3 Concur-
   rent Programming, D.2.4 Software/Program Verification, D.3.1 Formal Definitions and The-
   ory, D.3.3 Language Constructs and Features, F.3.2 Semantics of Programming Languages


            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 7, Issue 1, pp. 158–189
Editors: Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                   159


Keywords and phrases Behavioural Types, Programming Languages, Runtime Verification, Type
   Systems
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.7.1.158
Edited in cooperation with Tzu-Chun Chen



 1     Executive Summary
Simon Gay
Vasco T. Vasconcelos
Philip Wadler
Nobuko Yoshida
     License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida


Behavioural types describe dynamic aspects of a program, in contrast to data types, which
describe the fixed structure of data. Behavioural types include session types, typestate,
choreographies, and behavioural contracts. Recent years have seen a substantial increase in re-
search activity, including theoretical foundations, design and implementation of programming
languages and tools, studies of the relationships between different forms of behavioural types,
and studies of the relationships between behavioural types and more general type-theoretic
ideas such as gradual typing and dependent typing. The aim of this seminar was to bring
together researchers on behavioural types and related topics, in order to understand and
advance the state of the art.
    Many of the participants have been active in COST Action IC1201: Behavioural Types
for Reliable Large-Scale Software Systems (BETTY), a European research network on
behavioural types. Other participants were invited from related research areas and from
outside Europe, in order to broaden the scope of the seminar and to make connections
between communities.
    The programme for the first half of the week was planned in advance, with priority given
to two kinds of presentation: (1) demonstrations of programming language implementations
and tools, and (2) presentations by participants from outside the BETTY community. The
programme for the second half of the week evolved during the seminar, with more emphasis
on group discussion sessions.
    The seminar was judged to be a success by all the participants. At least one conference
submission resulted from collaboration started during the week, other existing collaborations
made substantial progress, and several participants planned a submission to the EU RISE
funding scheme. We intend to propose a follow-on seminar on a similar topic in the future.
    This report contains the abstracts of the talks and software demonstrations, and summaries
of the group discussion sessions.




                                                                                                  17051
160   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


       2      Table of Contents
      Executive Summary
        Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida . . . . . . 159

      Overview of Talks
           Towards Inferring Session Types
           Gul Agha . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
           Effects as Capabilities
           Nada Amin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
           Observed Communication Semantics for Classical Processes
           Robert Atkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
           Stateful Programming in Idris
           Edwin Brady . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
           Behavioral Types, Type Theory, and Logic
           Luis Caires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
           Session Types for Fault-tolerant Distributed Systems
           Patrick Thomas Eugster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
           Statically Detecting (Dead)locks in the Linear Pi-calculus
           Adrian Francalanza . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
           Gradual Typing
           Ronald Garcia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
           Practical Affine Types and Typestate-Oriented Programming
           Philipp Haller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
           DCR Tools
           Thomas Hildebrandt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
           Using Session Types for Reasoning About Boundedness in the Pi-Calculus
           Hans Hüttel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
           Session-ocaml: A Session-based Library with Polarities and Lenses
           Keigo Imai, Nobuko Yoshida, and Shoji Yuen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
           Lightweight Functional Session Types
           J. Garrett Morris . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
           Composable Actor Behaviour
           Roland Kuhn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
           Adaptive Interaction-Oriented Choreographies in Jolie
           Ivan Lanese . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
           Failure-Aware Protocol Programming
           Hugo-Andrés López . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
           Chaperone Contracts for Higher-Order Sessions
           Hernán Melgratti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
           Static Deadlock Detection for Go
           Nicholas Ng and Nobuko Yoshida . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                      161


  Session Types with Linearity in Haskell
  Dominic Orchard and Nobuko Yoshida . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
  A Simple Library Implementation of Binary Sessions
  Luca Padovani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
  Concurrent TypeState-Oriented Programming
  Luca Padovani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
  Precise Subtyping
  Jovanka Pantovic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
  Concurrent C0
  Frank Pfenning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
  Manifest Sharing with Session Types
  Frank Pfenning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
  Detecting Concurrency Errors of Erlang Programs via Systematic Testing
  Konstantinos Sagonas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
  Lightweight Session Programming in Scala
  Alceste Scalas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
  Programming Protocols with Scribble and Java
  Alceste Scalas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
  Partial Type Equivalences for Verified Dependent Interoperability
  Nicolas Tabareau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
  Gradual Session Types
  Peter Thiemann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
  Choreographies, Modularly: Components for Communication Centred Programming
  Hugo Torres Vieira . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
  From Communicating Machines to Graphical Choreographies
  Emilio Tuosto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
  Fencing off Go
  Nobuko Yoshida . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
  Undecidability of Asynchronous Session Subtyping
  Nobuko Yoshida . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177

Working groups
  Group Discussion: Integrating Static and Dynamic Typing
  Laura Bocchi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
  Group Discussion: Behavioural Types in Non-Communication Domains
  Simon Gay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
  Group discussion: Dependent Session Types
  Simon Gay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
  Group Discussion: Future Activities and Funding Possibilities
  Simon Gay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182
  Group Discussion: Session Sharing and Races
  Simon Gay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183




                                                                                                     17051
162   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


         Group Discussion: Standardisation of a Programming Language with Session Types
         Simon Gay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 184
         Group Discussion: Behavioural Types for Mainstream Software Development
         Philipp Haller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 185
         Group Discussion: Educational Resources for Behavioural Types
         Hugo Torres Vieira . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186

      Open problems
         A Meta Theory for Testing Equivalences
         Giovanni Tito Bernardi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188

      Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                    163


 3     Overview of Talks
3.1    Towards Inferring Session Types
Gul Agha (University of Illinois – Urbana-Champaign, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Gul Agha


In sequential systems, programmers are responsible for specifying a total order of events in a
system. This results in overly constraining when events may occur. In contrast, concurrent
systems allow nondeterministic interleaving of actions at autonomous actors. Without
additional constraints on the order of events at participating actors, an interleaving may
lead to incorrect operations – for example, one that results in a deadlock. Moreover, the
correct order of events at an actor is dependent on what interaction it is participating in. For
example, an actor may be in the role of a client in one interaction protocol and the role of a
backup server in another. To facilitate such flexibility, synchronization should be specified
separately from the functional behavior of an actor – in terms of its interface rather than
its representation. I will argue for the use of synchronization constraints as a user friendly
language whose semantics is given by multiparty session types. Moreover, I propose that it
is possible to infer session types with a degree of confidence by analyzing ordering patterns
in traces of program execution: if an ordering pattern is repeatedly observed in such traces,
we can impose the ordering to avoid Heisenbugs that may occur from rarer schedules that
violate the observed order.



3.2    Effects as Capabilities
Nada Amin (EPFL – Lausanne, CH)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Nada Amin
 Joint work of Fengyun Liu, Nicolas Stucki, Sandro Stucki, Martin Odersky


It seems quite natural that one should track effects by means of a static typing discipline,
similarly to what is done for arguments and results of functions. After all, to understand a
function’s contract and how it can be composed, knowing its effects is just as important as
knowing the types of its arguments and result. Yet after decades of research [3, 4, 6, 5, 7, 8,
11, 13], why are effect systems not as mainstream as type systems?
    The static effect discipline with the most widespread use is no doubt Java’s system of
checked exceptions. Ominously, they are now widely regarded as a mistake [2]. One frequent
criticism is about the notational burden they impose. Throws clauses have to be laboriously
threaded through all call chains. All too often, programmers make the burden go away by
catching and ignoring all exceptions that they think cannot occur in practice. In effect, this
disables both static and dynamic checking, so the end result is less safe than if one started
with unchecked exceptions only. Another common problem of Java’s exceptions is lack of
polymorphism: Often we would like to express that a function throws the same exceptions as
the (statically unknown) functions it invokes. Effect polymorphism can be expressed in Java
only at the cost of very heavy notation, so it is usually avoided. Java’s system of checked
exceptions may be an extreme example, but it illustrates the general pitfalls of checking
effects by shifting the burden of tracking effects to the programmer.




                                                                                                   17051
164   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


          We are investigating a new approach to effect checking, that flips the requirements around.
      The central idea is that instead of talking about effects we talk about capabilities. For
      instance, instead of saying a function “throws an IOException” we say that the function
      “needs the capability to throw an IOException”. Capabilities are modeled as values of some
      capability type. For instance, the aforementioned capability could be modeled as a value of
      type CanThrow[IOException]. A function that might throw an IOException needs to have
      access to an instance of this type. Typically it takes an argument of the type as a parameter.
          It turns out that that the treatment of effects as capabilities gives a simple and natural
      way to express “effect polymorphism” – the ability to write a function once, and to have it
      interact with arguments that can have arbitrary effects. Since capabilities are just function
      parameters, existing language support for polymorphism, such as type abstraction and
      subtyping, is readily applicable to them. But there are two areas where work is needed to
      make capabilities as effects sound and practical.
          First, when implemented naively, capabilities as parameters are even more verbose than
      effect declarations such as throws clauses. Not only do they have to be declared, but they
      also have to be propagated as additional arguments at each call site. We propose to make
      use of the concept of implicit parameters [9, 10, 14] to cut down on the boilerplate. Implicit
      parameters make call-site annotations unnecessary, but they still have to be declared just
      like normal parameters. To avoid repetition, we propose to investigate a way of abstracting
      implicit parameters into implicit function types. With implicits, the approach provides the
      common case of propagation for free, and an easy migration path from impure to pure.
          Second, there is one fundamental difference between the usual notions of capabilities and
      effects: capabilities can be captured in closures. This means that a capability present at
      closure construction time can be preserved and accessed when the closure is applied. Effects
      on the other hand, are temporal: it generally does make a difference whether an effect occurs
      when a closure is constructed or when it is used. We propose to address this discrepancy by
      introducing a “pure function” type, instances of which are not allowed to close over effect
      capabilities.
          In this talk, we report on work in progress, exploring the idea of effects as capabilities in
      detail. We have worked on minimal formalizations for implicit parameters and pure functions
      and studied encodings of higher-level language constructs into these calculi. Based on the
      theoretical modelization we are developing a specification for adding effects to Scala.
      References
       1 Lewis, Jeffrey R and Launchbury, John and Meijer, Erik and Shields, Mark B. Implicit
           parameters: Dynamic scoping with static types. Proceedings of POPL, 2000.
       2 Thomas Whitmore. Checked exceptions, Java ’s biggest mistake. Literal Java Blog, 2015.
       3 Gifford, David K and Lucassen, John M. Integrating functional and imperative program-
           ming. Proceedings of POPL, 1986.
       4 Lucassen, John M and Gifford, David K. Polymorphic effect systems. Proceedings of POPL,
           1988.
       5 Talpin, Jean-Pierre and Jouvelot, Pierre. The type and effect discipline. Information and
           computation, 1994.
       6 Talpin, Jean-Pierre and Jouvelot, Pierre. Polymorphic type, region and effect inference.
           Journal of Functional Programming, 1992.
       7 Wadler, Philip and Thiemann, Peter. The marriage of effects and monads. ACM Transac-
           tions on Computational Logic, 2003.
       8 Filinski, Andrzej. Monads in Action. Proceedings of POPL, 2010.
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                   165


 9    Odersky, Martin. Poor Man’s Typeclasses. Presentation to IFIP WG 2.8, 2006. http://
      lampwww.epfl.ch/~odersky/talks/wg2.8-boston06.pdf
10    Oliveira, Bruno CdS and Moors, Adriaan and Odersky, Martin. Type classes as objects and
      implicits. Proceedings of OOPSLA, 2010.
11    Rytz, Lukas and Odersky, Martin and Haller, Philipp. Lightweight polymorphic effects.
      Proceedings of ECOOP, 2012.
12    Ben Lippmeier. Type Inference and Optimisation for an Impure World. PhD Thesis, Aus-
      tralian National University, 2010.
13    Andrej Bauer and Matija Pretnar. Programming with algebraic effects and handlers. J. Log.
      Algebr. Meth. Program. 2015.
14    Oliveira, Bruno C.d.S. and Schrijvers, Tom and Choi, Wontae and Lee, Wonchan and Yi,
      Kwangkeun. The Implicit Calculus: A New Foundation for Generic Programming. Proceed-
      ings of PLDI, 2012.



3.3    Observed Communication Semantics for Classical Processes
Robert Atkey (University of Strathclyde – Glasgow, GB)
      License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
            © Robert Atkey
        URL http://materials.dagstuhl.de/files/17/17051/17051.RobertAtkey.Slides.pdf


Classical Linear Logic (CLL) has long inspired readings of its proofs as communicating
processes. Wadler’s CP calculus is one of these readings. Wadler gave CP an operational
semantics by selecting a subset of the cut-elimination rules of CLL to use as reduction
rules. This semantics has an appealing close connection to the logic, but does not resolve
the status of the other cut-elimination rules, and does not admit an obvious notion of
observational equivalence. We propose a new operational semantics for CP based on the
idea of observing communication, and use this semantics to define an intuitively reasonable
notion of observational equivalence. To reason about observational equivalence, we use the
standard relational denotational semantics of CLL. We show that this denotational semantics
is adequate for our operational semantics. This allows us to deduce that, for instance, all the
cut-elimination rules of CLL are observational equivalences.



3.4    Stateful Programming in Idris
Edwin Brady (University of St. Andrews, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Edwin Brady


I present a library for giving precise types to interactive, stateful programs in Idris, a
dependently typed pure functional programming language. I show how to describe state
transition systems in types, capturing pre- and post-conditions of operations, and dealing
with errors and feedback from the environment. I demonstrate with socket programming,
and an asynchronous server for a simple network protocol.




                                                                                                  17051
166   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


      3.5    Behavioral Types, Type Theory, and Logic
      Luis Caires (New University of Lisbon, PT)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Luis Caires
       Joint work of Luis Caires, Frank Pfenning, Bernardo Toninho, Jorge Perez, Joao Seco


      We review a collection of recent work providing a logical Curry-Howard foundation to the
      notion of behavioural type, useful to describe intensional usage protocols for state-full objects
      such as e.g., sessions. In particular we show how the basic linear logic interpretation discovered
      by Caires and Pfenning can be naturally extended to incorporate dependent types, allowing us
      to express higher order processes, value dependent behaviour, assertions, and proof carrying
      code; polymorphic types, allowing us to express behavioural genericity, and sums, allowing
      us to express non-determinism, and other typing constructs, relevant for typing shared state
      concurrency. We conclude by arguing that such linear logic interpretations provide a way of
      rooting the notion of behavioural type, and the notion of session type in particular, in the
      common house of Type Theory, from which the most fundamental programming language
      typing concepts have also emerged.



      3.6    Session Types for Fault-tolerant Distributed Systems
      Patrick Thomas Eugster (TU Darmstadt, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Patrick Thomas Eugster


      Distributed systems are hard to get right, due to the possibility of partial failures where
      certain components or participants fail while others continue to operate. Session types are
      an appealing approach to aid programmers in reasoning about complex interaction in the
      presence of partial failures, yet have so far focused more on high-level programming models
      such as Web Services, where many failures are abstracted. Our contributions to address the
      problem in this talk are twofold. First we propose a set of abstractions allowing programmers
      to describe the handling of failures of different kinds. Together with information about the
      underlying system model we infer how and where to notify participants of failures in order
      to achieve a consistent failure handling as described by programmers. Second, we discuss the
      integration of failure handling mechanisms with failure masking approaches. In the latter
      context, we focus on supporting different broadcast models in order to support redundancy.



      3.7    Statically Detecting (Dead)locks in the Linear Pi-calculus
      Adrian Francalanza (University of Malta – Msida, MT)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Adrian Francalanza
       Joint work of Adrian Francalanza, Marco Giunti, Antonio Ravara


      We propose an alternative approach to the study of type-based (dead)lock analysis in the
      context of the linear pi-calculus. Instead of targeting the class of (dead)lock-free processes, we
      study type-based techniques for statically approximating the class of (dead)locked processes.
      We develop type-based analyses that return lists of problematic channels on which (dead)locks
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                       167


occur once the analysed program is executed. Such information is arguably more useful in
the case of erroneous programs, because it directs the programmer to the source of the error.
Another distinguishing aspect of our work is that the semantic guarantees of our type-based
analysis ensure verdict precision (i.e. the absence of false negatives), but allow for occasionally
classifying erroneous programs as bug-free. This differs from more mainstream static analysis
approaches that tend to favour soundness, but is more useful for automated error resolution
procedures where, ideally, the analysed programs are not be modified unnecessarily.



3.8    Gradual Typing
Ronald Garcia (University of British Columbia – Vancouver, CA)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Ronald Garcia


Programming language design has recently exhibited a recurring trend: languages perceived
as “statically typed” are beginning to exhibit “dynamic typing” features, while “dynamically
typed” languages are exhibiting the converse. The theory of Gradual Typing has been
developed to help provide a foundation for languages that wish to exhibit similar combinations
while ensuring sound reasoning principles. This talk gives a high-level introduction to the
concepts underlying gradual typing, with some historical context, some recent work on
developing a general framework for developing gradually typed languages, and a list of open
challenges that pertain to the behavioural types community.



3.9    Practical Affine Types and Typestate-Oriented Programming
Philipp Haller (KTH Royal Institute of Technology – Stockholm, SE)
      License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
            © Philipp Haller
        URL http://materials.dagstuhl.de/files/17/17051/17051.PhilippHaller.Slides1.pdf


Aliasing is a known source of challenges in the context of imperative object-oriented languages,
which have led to important advances in type systems for aliasing control. However, their
large-scale adoption has turned out to be a surprisingly difficult challenge. While new
language designs show promise, they do not address the need of aliasing control in existing
languages.
    This talk presents a new approach to isolation and uniqueness in an existing, widely-used
language, Scala. The approach is unique in the way it addresses some of the most important
obstacles to the adoption of type system extensions for aliasing control. First, adaptation of
existing code requires only a minimal set of annotations. Only a single bit of information
is required per class. Surprisingly, the talk shows that this information can be provided
by the object-capability discipline, widely-used in program security. The type system is
implemented for the full Scala language, providing, for the first time, a sound integration
with Scala’s local type inference. Finally, we present an ongoing effort to generalize the type
system to typestates.




                                                                                                      17051
168   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


      3.10      DCR Tools
      Thomas Hildebrandt (IT University of Copenhagen, DK)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Thomas Hildebrandt
       Joint work of Thomas Hildebrandt, Søren Debois, Tijs Slaats, Morten Marquard
      Main reference S. Debois, T. T. Hildebrandt, M. Marquard, T. Slaats, “The DCR Graphs Process Portal”, in Proc.
                     of the BPM Demo Track 2016, pp. 7–11, 2016.
                URL http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1789/bpm-demo-2016-paper2.pdf


      The presentation give a quick tour of the tools for modelling and simulating Dynamic
      Condition Response (DCR) graphs. DCR graphs is a declarative process notation for the
      modelling of flexible adaptable choreographies developed through a number of research
      projects jointly with industry with the aim to support the design, analysis and execution of
      flexible and adaptable workflow and business processes. Formally, DCR graphs generalise
      labelled event structures to allow (1) finite descriptions of infinite behaviour, (2) represent
      mandatory (pending) events that must eventually happen or become in conflict with events
      that happened, (3) allow dynamic, asymmetric conflict. Regarding expressiveness, the core
      model can express exactly the languages that are a union of regular and omega-regular
      languages (if one ignore true concurrency) – but the model maps to true concurrency models
      such as event structures. The presentation focus on the tools that have been developed at
      the IT University of Copenhagen (http://dcr.tools) and the industry partner Exformatics
      (http://dcrgraphs.net). The development of the two tools also demonstrate a model for
      transferring research to industry, where the academic tool serves as a means to demonstrate
      new developments that later are transferred to the industrial tool.



      3.11      Using Session Types for Reasoning About Boundedness in the
                Pi-Calculus
      Hans Hüttel (Aalborg University, DK)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Hans Hüttel


      Depth-bounded and name-bounded processes are pi-calculus processes for which some of
      the decision problems that are undecidable for the full calculus become decidable. P is
      depth-bounded at level k if every reduction sequence for P contains successor processes with
      at most k active nested restrictions. P is name-bounded at level k if every reduction sequence
      for P contains successor processes with at most k active bound names. We use binary session
      types to formulate two type systems that give sound characterizations of these properties: If
      a process is well-typed, it is depth-bounded, respectively name-bounded.
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                                     169


3.12      Session-ocaml: A Session-based Library with Polarities and Lenses
Keigo Imai (Gifu University, JP), Nobuko Yoshida (Imperial College London, GB), and
Shoji Yuen (Nagoya University, JP)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Keigo Imai, Nobuko Yoshida, and Shoji Yuen
Main reference K. Imai, N. Yoshida, S. Yuen, “Session-ocaml: a session-based library with polarities and lenses”,
               Manuscript, 2017.
          URL http://www.ct.info.gifu-u.ac.jp/~keigoi/session-ocaml/


We propose session-ocaml, a novel library for session-typed concurrent/distributed program-
ming in OCaml. Our technique is based only on the parametric polymorphism, hence
common to various statically-typed programming languages. The key ideas are follows:
(1) The polarised session types gives an alternative formulation of duality enabling OCaml
to infer the appropriate session type in a session with a reasonable notational overhead.
(2) A parameterized monad with lenses enables full session type implementation including
delegation. We show an application of session-ocaml including an SMTP client and a database
server.



3.13      Lightweight Functional Session Types
J. Garrett Morris (University of Edinburgh, GB)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © J. Garrett Morris
 Joint work of Sam Lindley, J. Garrett Morris
Main reference S. Lindley, J. G. Morris, “Lightweight Functional Session Types”, in “Behavioural Types: from
               Theory to Tools”, River Publishers, 2017; pre-print available from author’s webpage.
          URL http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/slindley/papers/fst.pdf


Row types provide an account of extensibility that combines well with parametric poly-
morphism and type inference. We discuss the integration of row types and session types in a
concurrent functional programming language, and how row types can be used to describe
extensibility in session-typed communication.



3.14      Composable Actor Behaviour
Roland Kuhn (Actyx AG – München, DE)
       License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
             © Roland Kuhn
         URL http://materials.dagstuhl.de/files/17/17051/17051.RolandKuhn.Slides.pdf


This presentation focuses on the composition of the behavior of distributed components–
modeled using Actors–from reusable pieces. Allowing abstraction and type-safety to be
applied within these components for operations that are fundamentally non-local is seen as a
prerequisite for offering safe construction of distributed systems in a widely and practically
applicable programming tool.
   Please see the linked article for an introduction to the tool (based on Scala and Akka);
pointers to the source code and how to try it out are given towards the end.




                                                                                                                    17051
170   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


      3.15      Adaptive Interaction-Oriented Choreographies in Jolie
      Ivan Lanese (University of Bologna, IT)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Ivan Lanese


      We will give a demo of AIOCJ, Adaptive Interaction-Oriented Choreographies in Jolie. The
      tool is composed by an Eclipse plugin and a running environment to program distributed
      applications, and to adapt them at runtime by replacing pre-selected pieces of code with
      new code coming from outside the application. Notably, a single program describes the
      whole distributed application, and a single adaptation may involve many components. The
      application is free from communication races and deadlocks by construction, both before and
      after the adaptation.



      3.16      Failure-Aware Protocol Programming
      Hugo-Andrés López (Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK)
             License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                   © Hugo-Andrés López
               URL http://materials.dagstuhl.de/files/17/17051/17051.Hugo-Andr%C3%A9sL%C3%B3pez.Slides.pdf


      Motivated by challenging scenarios in Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), we study how cho-
      reographic programming can cater for dynamic infrastructures where not all endpoints are
      always available. We introduce the Global Quality Calculus (GCq), a variant of choreographic
      programming for the description of communication systems where some of the components
      involved in a communication might fail. GCq features novel operators for multiparty, partial
      and collective communications. In this talk I will study the nature of failure-aware commu-
      nication: First, we introduce GCq syntax, semantics and examples of its use. The interplay
      between failures and collective communications in a choreography can lead to choreographies
      that cannot progress due to absence of resources. In our second contribution, we provide a
      type system that ensures that choreographies can be realized despite changing availability
      conditions. A specification in GCq guides the implementation of distributed endpoints when
      paired with global (session) types. Our third contribution provides an endpoint-projection
      based methodology for the generation of failure-aware distributed processes. We show the cor-
      rectness of the projection, and that well-typed choreographies with availability considerations
      enjoy progress.



      3.17      Chaperone Contracts for Higher-Order Sessions
      Hernán Melgratti (University of Buenos Aires, AR)
             License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                   © Hernán Melgratti
               URL http://materials.dagstuhl.de/files/17/17051/17051.Hern%C3%A1nMelgratti.Slides.pdf


      Sessions in concurrent programs play the same role of functions and objects in sequential ones.
      This calls for a way to describe properties and relationships of messages exchanged in sessions
      using behavioral contracts, in the spirit of the design-by-contract approach to software
      development. Unlike functions and objects, however, the kind, direction, and properties of
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                                  171


messages exchanged in a session may vary over time, as the session progresses. This feature
of sessions enriches the “behavioral” qualification of session contracts, which must evolve
along with the session they describe.
    In this work, we extend to sessions the notion of chaperone contract (roughly, a contract
that applies to a mutable object) and investigate the ramifications of contract monitoring
in a higher-order calculus equipped with a session type system. We give a characterization
of correct module, one that honors the contracts of the sessions it uses, and prove a blame
theorem. Guided by the calculus, we describe a lightweight and portable implementation of
monitored sessions as an OCaml module with which programmers can benefit from static
session type checking and dynamic contract monitoring using an off-the-shelf version of
OCaml.



3.18      Static Deadlock Detection for Go
Nicholas Ng (Imperial College London, GB) and Nobuko Yoshida (Imperial College London,
GB)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Nicholas Ng and Nobuko Yoshida
 Joint work of Julien Lange, Nicholas Ng, Bernardo Toninho, Nobuko Yoshida
Main reference J. Lange, N. Ng, B. Toninho, N. Yoshida, “Fencing off go: liveness and safety for channel-based
               programming”, in Proc. of the 44th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming
               Languages (POPL 2017), pp. 748–761, ACM, 2017.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3009837.3009847


Go is a production-level statically typed programming language whose design features explicit
message-passing primitives and lightweight threads, enabling (and encouraging) programmers
to develop concurrent systems where components interact through communication more so
than by lock-based shared memory concurrency. Go can only detect global deadlocks at
runtime, but provides no compile-time protection against all too common communication
mismatches or partial deadlocks.
    In this talk we present a static verification framework for liveness and safety in Go
programs, able to detect communication errors and partial deadlocks in a general class of
realistic concurrent programs, including those with dynamic channel creation, unbounded
thread creation and recursion. Our approach infers from a Go program a faithful repres-
entation of its communication patterns as a behavioural type. By checking a syntactic
restriction on channel usage, dubbed fencing, we ensure that programs are made up of finitely
many different communication patterns that may be repeated infinitely many times. This
restriction allows us to implement a decision procedure for liveness and safety in types which
in turn statically ensures liveness and safety in Go programs.
    Details of our verification tool-chain are available on http://mrg.doc.ic.ac.uk/tools/gong/.




                                                                                                                 17051
172   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


      3.19      Session Types with Linearity in Haskell
      Dominic Orchard (University of Kent – Canterbury, GB) and Nobuko Yoshida (Imperial
      College London, GB)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Dominic Orchard and Nobuko Yoshida
      Main reference D. Orchard, N, Yoshida, “Sessions types with linearity in Haskell”, in Behavioural Types: from
                     Theory to Tools, River Publishers, 2017.


      Type systems with parametric polymorphism can encode communication patterns over
      channels, providing part of the power of session types. However, statically enforcing linearity
      properties of session types is more challenging. Haskell provides various features that can
      overcome this challenge. However, current approaches lead to a programming style which is
      either non-idiomatic for Haskell, or types which are too hard to write and read. I’ll demo
      an early version of a Haskell library for session types that does it all: session-typed, linear,
      idiomatic Haskell with easy-to-read-and-write types.



      3.20      A Simple Library Implementation of Binary Sessions
      Luca Padovani (University of Turin, IT)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Luca Padovani
      Main reference L. Padovani, “A simple library implementation of binary sessions”, Journal of Functional
                     Programming, Vol. 27:e4, 2017.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0956796816000289


      This demo is about FuSe, a simple OCaml implementation of binary sessions that supports
      delegation, equi-recursive, polymorphic, context-free session types, session subtyping, and
      allows the OCaml compiler to perform session type checking and inference.



      3.21      Concurrent TypeState-Oriented Programming
      Luca Padovani (University of Turin, IT)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Luca Padovani
       Joint work of Silvia Crafa, Luca Padovani
      Main reference S. Crafa, L. Padovani, “The chemical approach to typestate-oriented programming”, in Proc. of
                     the 2015 ACM SIGPLAN Int’l Conf. on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and
                     Applications (OOPSLA 2015), pp. 917–934, ACM, 2015.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2814270.2814287


      This demo is about CobaltBlue, a tool for the static behavioural analysis of Objective Join
      Calculus scripts. The tool checks that concurrent objects and actors (modelled as terms in
      the Objective Join Calculus) are consistent with – and are used according to – their protocol.
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                                      173


3.22      Precise Subtyping
Jovanka Pantovic (University of Novi Sad, RS)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Jovanka Pantovic
 Joint work of Mariangiola Dezani-Ciancaglini, Silvia Ghilezan, Svetlana Jaksic, Jovanka Pantovic, Alceste Scalas,
               Nobuko Yoshida
Main reference M. Dezani-Ciancaglini, S. Ghilezan, S. Jaksic, J. Pantovic, N. Yoshida, “Precise subtyping for
               synchronous multiparty sessions”, in Proc. of PLACES 2015, pp. 29–43, 2015.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.203.3


A subtyping relation is operationally precise if both the soundness and the completeness
with respect to type safety are satisfied. Soundness provides safe replacement of a term of
a smaller type when a term of a bigger type is expected. Is such a relation is the greatest
one, we get the completeness. We discuss the notion of operational preciseness, methodology
for proving the completeness and show how it works on the example of multiparty session
subtyping.



3.23      Concurrent C0
Frank Pfenning (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US)
       License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Frank Pfenning
 Joint work of Max Willsey, Rokhini Prabhu, Frank Pfenning
Main reference M. Willsey, R. Prabhu, F. Pfenning, “Design and Implementation of Concurrent C0”, in Proc.
               LINEARITY 2016, EPTCS 238, pp. 73–82, 2017.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.238.8


We give a demo of Concurrent C0, an imperative language extended with session-typed
message-passing concurrency. C0 is a type-safe and memory-safe subset of C, extended with
a layer of contracts, and has been used in teaching introductory programming at Carnegie
Mellon University since 2010. The extension follows the Curry-Howard interpretation of
intuitionistic linear sequent calculus, adapted to the linear setting. Considerable attention
has been paid to programmer-friendly features such as good error messages from the lexer,
parser, and (linear) type-checker. Access to Concurrent C0 can be obtain from the author.
The live-coded of a concurrent append function is available in the additional materials.



3.24      Manifest Sharing with Session Types
Frank Pfenning (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Frank Pfenning
 Joint work of Stephanie Balzer, Frank Pfenning
Main reference S. Balzer, F. Pfenning, “Manifest Sharing with Session Types”, Technical Report CMU-CS-17-106,
               Carnegie Mellon University, 2017.
          URL http://materials.dagstuhl.de/files/17/17051/17051.FrankPfenning.Slides.pdf


We report on work in progress to reconcile sharing of resources in logically based session
typed languages. The key idea is to decompose the exponential modality of linear logic
into two adjoint modalities and then give a nonstandard operational interpretation of the
shared layer. As a side effect, it seems we can faithfully interpret the (untyped) asynchronous
pi-calculus, answering a question by Wadler.




                                                                                                                     17051
174   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


      3.25      Detecting Concurrency Errors of Erlang Programs via Systematic
                Testing
      Konstantinos Sagonas (Uppsala University, SE)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Konstantinos Sagonas
      Main reference P. Abdulla, S. Aronis, B. Jonsson, K. Sagonas, “Optimal Dynamic Partial Order Reduction”, in
                     Proc. of the 41st ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages,
                     pp. 373–384, ACM, 2014. Extended and significantly revised version to appear in the Journal of
                     the ACM.
                URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2535838.2535845


      Testing and verification of concurrent programs is an important but also challenging problem.
      Effective techniques need to faithfully model the semantics of the language primitives and
      have a way to combat the combinatorial explosion of the possible different ways that threads
      may interleave (scheduling non-determinism). In this talk we will focus on a particular
      verification technique known as stateless model checking (a.k.a. systematic concurrency
      testing) and we will present Concuerror, a state-of-the-art tool for finding and reproducing
      errors in concurrent Erlang programs. Time permitting, we will briefly review the algorithms
      that Concuerror employs in order to examine only an optimal (but sound) subset of all
      interleavings.
          More information about the tool can be found at http://www.concuerror.com.



      3.26      Lightweight Session Programming in Scala
      Alceste Scalas (Imperial College London, GB)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Alceste Scalas
       Joint work of Alceste Scalas, Nobuko Yoshida
      Main reference A. Scalas, N. Yoshida, “Lightweight Session Programming in Scala”, in Proc. of the 30th European
                     Conf. on Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP 2016), LIPIcs, Vol. 56, pp. 21:1–21:28, Schloss
                     Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2016.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ECOOP.2016.21


      Designing, developing and maintaining concurrent applications is an error-prone and time-
      consuming task; most difficulties arise because compilers are usually unable to check whether
      the inputs/outputs performed by a program at runtime will adhere to a given protocol
      specification. To address this problem, we propose lightweight session programming in Scala:
      we leverage the native features of the Scala type system and standard library, to introduce
      (1) a representation of session types as Scala types, and (2) a library, called lchannels,
      with a convenient API for session-based programming, supporting local and distributed
      communication. We generalise the idea of Continuation-Passing Style Protocols (CPSPs),
      studying their formal relationship with session types. We illustrate how session programming
      can be carried over in Scala: how to formalise a communication protocol, and represent it
      using Scala classes and lchannels, letting the compiler help spotting protocol violations. We
      attest the practicality of our approach with a complex use case, and evaluate the performance
      of lchannels with a series of benchmarks.
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                                175


3.27      Programming Protocols with Scribble and Java
Alceste Scalas (Imperial College London, GB)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Alceste Scalas
 Joint work of Raymond Hu, Alceste Scalas, Nobuko Yoshida
Main reference R. Hu, N. Yoshida, “Hybrid Session Verification Through Endpoint API Generation”, in Proc. of
               the Int’l Conf. on Fundamental Approaches to Software Engineering (FASE 2016), LNCS,
               Vol. 9633, pp. 401–418, Springer, 2016.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49665-7_24


I will provide a brief introduction to Scribble – http://www.scribble.org/.
   Scribble is both a language for defining global protocols involving multiple participants,
and a tool that can verify the properties of such protocols (in particular: absence of deadlocks
and orphan messages). Scribble can also automatically generate APIs that simplify the
implementation of protocol-abiding programs. Its approach is based on the Multiparty
Session Types framework.
   During the talk I will illustrate the Scribble description of the SMTP protocol, and an
SMTP client based on Scribble-generated APIs for Java.



3.28      Partial Type Equivalences for Verified Dependent Interoperability
Nicolas Tabareau (Ecole des Mines de Nantes, FR)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Nicolas Tabareau
 Joint work of Pierre-Évariste Dagand, Nicolas Tabareau, Éric Tanter
Main reference P.-E. Dagand, N. Tabareau, E. Tanter, “Partial type equivalences for verified dependent
               interoperability”, in Proc. of the 21st ACM SIGPLAN Int’l Conf. on Functional Programming
               (ICFP 2016), pp. 298–310, ACM, 2016.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2951913.2951933


Full-spectrum dependent types promise to enable the development of correct-by-construction
software. However, even certified software needs to interact with simply-typed or untyped
programs, be it to perform system calls, or to use legacy libraries. Trading static guarantees
for runtime checks, the dependent interoperability framework provides a mechanism by which
simply-typed values can safely be coerced to dependent types and, conversely, dependently-
typed programs can defensively be exported to a simply-typed application. In this paper,
we give a semantic account of dependent interoperability. Our presentation relies on and is
guided by a pervading notion of type equivalence, whose importance has been emphasized in
recent works on homotopy type theory. Specifically, we develop the notion of partial type
equivalences as a key foundation for dependent interoperability. Our framework is developed
in Coq; it is thus constructive and verified in the strictest sense of the terms. Using our
library, users can specify domain-specific partial equivalences between data structures. Our
library then takes care of the (sometimes, heavy) lifting that leads to interoperable programs.
It thus becomes possible, as we shall illustrate, to internalize and hand-tune the extraction
of dependently-typed programs to interoperable OCaml programs within Coq itself.




                                                                                                               17051
176   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


      3.29      Gradual Session Types
      Peter Thiemann (Universität Freiburg, DE)
             License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                   © Peter Thiemann
               URL http://materials.dagstuhl.de/files/17/17051/17051.PeterThiemann.Slides.pdf


      Session types describe structured communication on heterogeneously typed channels at a high
      level. They lift many of the safety claims that come with sound type systems to operations
      on communcation channels.
          The use of session types requires a fairly rich type discipline including linear types in
      the host language. However, web-based applications and micro services are often written on
      purpose in a mix of languages, with very different type disciplines in the spectrum between
      static and dynamic typing.
          Effective use of session typing in this setting requires a mix of static and dynamic type
      checking. Gradual session types address this mixed setting by providing a framework which
      grants seamless transition between statically typed handling of sessions and any required
      degree of dynamic typing.
          We propose GradualGV as an extension of the functional session type system GV with
      dynamic types and casts. We use AGT as a guideline to obtain a consistent static semantics
      which conservatively extends GV. We demonstrate type and communication safety as well
      as blame safety, thus extending previous results to functional languages with session-based
      communication. Our system differs from previous gradually typed systems in two respects:
      the interplay of linearity and dynamic types as well as the necessity to deal with changing
      type state requires a novel approach to specifying the dynamics of the language.



      3.30      Choreographies, Modularly: Components for Communication
                Centred Programming
      Hugo Torres Vieira (IMT – Lucca, IT)
             License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Hugo Torres Vieira
       Joint work of Marco Carbone, Fabrizio Montesi, Hugo Torres Vieira


      As communicating systems are becoming evermore complex it is crucial to conceive program-
      ming abstractions that support modularity in the development of communicating systems. In
      this talk we present a new model for the modular development of component-based software,
      following the reactive style, i.e., computations in a component are triggered by the availability
      of new data. The key novelty is the mechanism for composing components, which is based
      on multiparty protocols given as choreographies. We show how our model can be compiled
      to a fully-distributed implementation by translating our terms into a process calculus, and
      present a type system for ensuring communication safety, deadlock-freedom, and liveness.
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                   177


3.31      From Communicating Machines to Graphical Choreographies
Emilio Tuosto (University of Leicester, GB)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Emilio Tuosto


I will showcase ChorGram (https://bitbucket.org/emlio_tuosto/chorgram/wiki/Home), a
tool for the reconstruction of choreographies from systems consisting of a class of communic-
ating automata. After a very brief and lightweight introduction to the underlying theory, I
will demonstrate how ChorGram can help in designing and analyse communication-centric
applications.



3.32      Fencing off Go
Nobuko Yoshida (Imperial College London, GB)
       License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
             © Nobuko Yoshida
         URL http://materials.dagstuhl.de/files/17/17051/17051.NobukoYoshida.Preprint.pdf


Go is a production-level statically typed programming language whose design features explicit
message-passing primitives and lightweight threads, enabling (and encouraging) programmers
to develop concurrent systems where components interact through communication more so
than by lock-based shared memory concurrency. Go can only detect global deadlocks at
runtime, but provides no compile-time protection against all too common communication
mis-matches or partial deadlocks. This work develops a static verification framework for
liveness and safety in Go programs, able to detect communication errors and partial deadlocks
in a general class of realistic concurrent programs, including those with dynamic channel
creation, unbounded thread creation and recursion. Our approach infers from a Go program
a faithful representation of its communication patterns as a behavioural type. By checking a
syntactic restriction on channel usage, dubbed fencing, we ensure that programs are made up
of finitely many different communication patterns that may be repeated infinitely many times.
This restriction allows us to implement a decision procedure for liveness and safety in types
which in turn statically ensures liveness and safety in Go programs. We have implemented a
type inference and decision procedures in a tool-chain and tested it against publicly available
Go programs.



3.33      Undecidability of Asynchronous Session Subtyping
Nobuko Yoshida (Imperial College London, GB)
       License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
             © Nobuko Yoshida
         URL http://materials.dagstuhl.de/files/17/17051/17051.NobukoYoshida1.Preprint.pdf


Asynchronous session subtyping has been studied extensively and applied in the literature.
An open question was whether this subtyping relation is decidable. This paper settles the
question in the negative. To prove this result, we first introduce a new sub-class of two-party
communicating finite-state machines (CFSMs), called asynchronous duplex (ADs), which we
show to be Turing complete. Secondly, we give a compatibility relation over CFSMs, which




                                                                                                  17051
178   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


      is sound and complete wrt. safety for ADs, and is equivalent to the asynchronous subtyping.
      Then we show that checking whether two CFSMs are in the relation reduces to the halting
      problem for Turing machines. In addition, we show the compatibility relation to be decidable
      for three sub-classes of ADs.



       4     Working groups
      4.1    Group Discussion: Integrating Static and Dynamic Typing
      Laura Bocchi (University of Kent – Canterbury, GB)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Laura Bocchi
       Joint work of Approximately half of the seminar participants.


      The starting point for the discussion was that most of us have worked or are working on
      static typing, some of us on dynamic typing and monitoring, or even on the combination
      of static and dynamic verification in a network (but not in the same node), and only a few
      have direct experience of gradual and hybrid typing. Gradual/hybrid behavioural typing is
      quite a new thread.
          The motivation is that run-time monitoring is critical in several contexts (e.g. when
      addressing security issues, in untrusted networks, in real-time scenarios where it is harder to
      make precise predictions). Run-time mechanisms provide programmers with better access
      to the current state of objects, which is often unclear at compile-time. Usability is also a
      motivation.
          What does it mean to monitor? The notion of monitors is strictly related to the notion of
      contract. Monitors are contracts, which are used to check interactions. There are two main
      aspects of monitoring: verification (check behaviour and determine blame) and enforcement
      (e.g. suppress bad messages).
          What does it mean to “go right and wrong”? There is a need for systematic construction
      of, and reasoning about, monitors.
          Gradual/hybrid typing require a more complex notion of correctness than the usual type
      safety given by static typing. Critical to this aim is the role of blame. There are several
      views of blame, including at least the following, and any points in between. Blame the the
      less precisely-typed code (e.g., when hybrid typing) [1]. Blame anybody who has violated
      the contract [2] Blame who originated the first contract violation (implicitly assumed in [3]).
          Blame in the case of sharable resources is not obvious. Shared resources may be linked to
      “something” linear which makes it not obvious to assign blame. This is a problem that comes
      with linearity (affinity would be ok).
          There is a general interest in a mathematical model of blame.
          Blame is also useful as it introduces a “social process” in the sense that it makes
      programmers want to work hard to satisfy their contracts (assuming that contract violations
      throws blame on others). This may promote the use of contracts in practice.
          There are some limitations of dynamic types. One critical problem is to define the
      boundaries between static and dynamic typing. Both static and dynamic typing have
      advantages and disadvantages. We focused, in our discussion, on the limitations of dynamic
      typing: worse performance (due to overhead), no progress guarantees, in some cases more
      expressive but in some other cases less expressive (e.g, when using parametricity or talking
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                      179


about multiple runs, to check branching-time properties, limitations like monitorability [3]
when having assertions on message content, loss of transparency in timed scenarios)
References
1    Philip Wadler, Robby Findler. Well-typed programs can’t be blamed. Proceedings of ESOP,
     2009.
2    Massimo Bartoletti, Alceste Scalas, Emilio Tuosto, Roberto Zunino. Honesty by Typing.
     Logical Methods in Computer Science 12(4), 2016.
3    Laura Bocchi, Tzu-chun Chen, Romain Demangeon, Kohei Honda, Nobuko Yoshida. Mon-
     itoring Networks through Multiparty Session Types. Proceedings of FORTE, 2013.
4    Limin Jia, Hannah Gommerstadt, Frank Pfenning Monitors and Blame Assignment for
     Higher-Order Session Types. Proceedings of POPL, 2016.
5    Christos Dimoulas, Robert Bruce Findler, Cormac Flanagan, Matthias Felleisen. Correct
     blame for contracts: no more scapegoating Proceedings of POPL, 2011.
6    Cameron Swords, Amr Sabry, Sam Tobin-Hochstadt. Expressing Contract Monitors as
     Patterns of Communication. Proceedings of ICFP, 2015.
7    Tim Disney, Cormac Flanagan, Jay McCarthy. Temporal Higher-Order Contracts. Proceed-
     ings of ICFP, 2011.



4.2    Group Discussion: Behavioural Types in Non-Communication
       Domains
Simon Gay (University of Glasgow, GB)
      License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Simon Gay
 Joint work of Approximately half of the seminar participants


The discussion focused on three main topics.

What is a behavioural type?
Hans Hüttel quoted the definition “... notions of typing that are also able to describe properties
associated with the behaviour of programs and in this way also describe how a computation
proceeds. This often includes accounting for the notions of causality and choice.” [1]
Examples include session types, type state, effect types, coeffect types, information flow,
intersection types, differential types. In many systems, behavioural types evolve with the
reduction of terms, whereas standard types remain the same. However, consider the functional
programming style based on the GV calculus: the types don’t change with reduction, but
instead due to rebinding – use linearity to encode changing types. The simply-typed lambda
calculus is not an example of a behavioural type system. Whilst this can be translated into
communication [2, 3], simple-types within the lambda calculus are not themselves behavioural.
Computations in one language can be translated into communication in another language,
capturing intensional aspects of a program [2, 4, 5].
    Another view is that non-behavioural types characterise the final value of the computation,
whereas behavioural types describe how the computation proceeds. Simple types control
termination, but are not seen as inherently behavioural. We could say that behavioural types
include everything that’s not a simple type. Logical relations give meaning to types, and can
have computational content, e.g. due to effects (trace properties).




                                                                                                     17051
180   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


      In what areas, other than communication, do type-state like constraints occur?
      It is interesting to infer type-state specifications for a given API to avoid some undesired
      behaviour, e.g. to avoid dereferencing a null, or to infer sequencing constraints. Jonathan
      Aldrich’s group have done empirical work on the occurrence of type-state in the wild [6].
      It relates strongly to notions of identity and state but a linear discipline allows it to be
      decomposed in a copying semantics (e.g. in a pure functional setting). Another empirical
      study of programming protocols is in Joshua Sunshine’s thesis, Chapter 3: “Quantitative
      study of API protocol usability”.
           Several people gave examples.
           Hugo López: cyberphysical systems have control events where the connection between
      events are unknown (cf. shared memory concurrency) and timing plays a part. In message-
      passing concurrency the links between events are much more clear. This is related to
      [7].
           Keigo Imai: Type-state example: in a smartphone there is a lot of context switching,
      involving serialising state, on a low-memory device. Applications are in various active/inactive
      states, and this changes the user’s capabilities to interact with each.
           Francisco Martins: Related example: different hardware components get turned on and
      off or have different capabilities for the purposes of battery saving. Programmers could be
      forced to follow the protocols such that a resource’s handles are closed and battery is saved.
           Garrett Morris: L4 microkernel off-loads responsibility for memory to user programs.
      Programs have to ask kernel to subdivide their heap allocation for subthreads, which then they
      give up some capability. Can’t DDOS the kernel by asking for lots of thread control blocks,
      because now these are within the purview of the programs. Have to manage the capabilities
      yourself. The state of the capabilities is a key part of the kernel/program interaction; the
      server can refuse requests that violate previous capability assignments. Microkernel design
      could benefit from type state definition.
           Dimitrios Kouzapas: Data processing, and private data, e.g. camera photographs and
      recognises number plate, if car is speeding the data is kept, if not the data is dropped. This
      is a protocol on the data and relates to provenance.
           Thomas Hildebrandt: There are legal frameworks for the behaviour of how our data is
      processed. We want to mediate between the contracts.
           Giovanni Bernardi: The idea of effects generalises the idea of communication, and
      mathematically this works out as a model of some kind of modality.
          We considered why behavioural and linear types became linked in the first place. There
      are behavioural specifications which don’t need linearity. Linearity gives us a way to encode
      the state changes. But is this too much? Bhavioural types could help people who write
      concurrent data structures. Does this provide a way to explain where locking is and isn’t
      needed?

      Areas for future research
         Consider behavioural types for concurrent data structures and algorithms.
         Perhaps we could weaken certain assumptions about shared channels so that protocols of
         interaction are more easily distributed and non-binary interactions are expressible, on
         shared channels, which may or may not imply locking/mutual exclusion.
         Look at the work of Beckman et al. [6] to give us a source of case studies for type-state
         systems and see what features can be captured by our current tools.
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                     181


   Re-examine the assumption that linearity is necessary, or at least re-examine its realisation,
   in the light of work such as Frank Pfenning’s talk during the seminar.
   Review work on formal theories about the interaction of different behaviours, e.g.,
   communication and hardware schedules in FPGA systems [8], probabilities and exceptions
   [9], differential types and state.

References
1    Hans Hüttel, Ivan Lanese, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Luís Caires, Marco Carbone, Pierre-Malo
     Deniélou, Dimitris Mostrous, Luca Padovani, António Ravara, Emilio Tuosto, Hugo Torres
     Vieira and Gianluigi Zavattaro. Foundations of Session Types and Behavioural Contracts.
     ACM Computing Surveys 49(1) 3:1–3:36, 2016.
2    Robin Milner. Functions as processes. Proceedings of ICALP, 1990.
3    Bernardo Toninho, Luís Caires and Frank Pfenning. Functions as session-typed processes.
     Proceedings of FOSSACS, 2012.
4    Dominic Orchard and Nobuko Yoshida. Effects as sessions, sessions as effects. Proceedings
     of POPL, 2016.
5    Cameron Swords, Amr Sabry and Sam Tobin-Hochstadt. Expressing Contract Monitors as
     Patterns of Communication. Proceedings of ICFP, 2015.
6    Nels Beckman, Duri Kim and Jonathan Aldrich. An Empirical Study of Object Protocols
     in the Wild. Proceedings of ECOOP, 2011.
7    Tim Disney, Cormac Flanagan, Jay McCarthy. Temporal Higher-Order Contracts. Proceed-
     ings of ICFP, 2011.
8    Xinyu Niu, Nicholas Ng, Tomofumi Yuki, Shaojun Wang, Nobuko Yoshida and Wayne Luk.
     EURECA compilation: Automatic optimisation of cycle-reconfigurable circuits. Proceed-
     ings of FPL, 2016.
9    Marco Gaboardi, Shin-ya Katsumata, Dominic Orchard, Flavien Breuvart and Tarmo
     Uustalu. Combining effects and coeffects via grading. Proceedings of ICFP, 2016.



4.3    Group discussion: Dependent Session Types
Simon Gay (University of Glasgow, GB)
      License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Simon Gay
 Joint work of Approximately half of the seminar participants.


Several researchers have studied dependent session types, in which the types of messages
may depend on the values of previous messages. Three lines of work have been produced by
different participants in the seminar.
    Frank Pfenning, Luis Caires and Bernardo Toninho have included dependent types in the
linear logic / Curry-Howard approach to session types, and have shown how they can encode
features such as proof-irrelevance.
    Conor McBride has developed a general setting for combining dependent types and linear
types, by distinguishing between “consumption” and “contemplation”, that is, value-level
and type-level uses of data. He has used dependent session types as an example of a specific
type theory that can be developed in this setting.
    Edwin Brady has embedded session types and related concepts of typestate in his general-
purpose dependently-typed programming language, Idris.
    The early part of the discussion focused on understanding the relationships between these
three approaches. Conor McBride emphasised the need to be clear about what it is that a




                                                                                                    17051
182   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


      session type can depend on: in his view it is the traffic on a channel, and this is consistent
      with the other approaches; note that dependence on the identity of a channel would be a
      different concept.
          There was some discussion about the possibility of dependence on the behaviour of a
      process. Dependence on traffic is one aspect of this idea, but there could be others. It leads
      to the need to define equivalence between processes.
          Towards the end of the discussion, areas for further research were identified.
          More detailed comparisons between the different approaches to dependent session types.
          Further study of process equivalence.
          The relationship between intuitionistic and classical formulations of the logical foundation
          of session types.
          Understanding the possibility of dependence on channel identity.



      4.4    Group Discussion: Future Activities and Funding Possibilities
      Simon Gay (University of Glasgow, GB)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Simon Gay
       Joint work of Approximately half of the seminar participants.


      The background to this discussion is that most of the participants in the seminar were
      involved in COST Action IC1201 (BETTY: Behavioural Types for Reliable Large-Scale
      Software Systems), which ran for four years from October 2012 to October 2016. The seminar
      included participants from outside the BETTY group, in order to bring in relevant ideas
      from broader research topics. The end of the COST Action naturally prompted discussion
      about future activities for the community, and future funding for research on behavioural
      types. These two points are closely linked.
          First we discussed future activities, independently of funding. We agreed that another
      Dagstuhl seminar would be worthwhile, with an expanded or different combination of people
      from related topics. Concurrent Separation Logic was mentioned as a relevant topic. There
      were several suggestions for different ways of organising a Dagstuhl seminar, especially in
      relation to the choice of discussion topics and the possibility of specifying discussion topics
      before the beginning of the seminar. We also noted the possibility of a more focussed meeting
      on a topic such as programming language design. Dagstuhl is not the only possible location
      for a similar seminar: we could consider the Shonan centre in Japan, or the Banff centre
      in Canada. However, Dagstuhl is the most convenient and we agreed to propose another
      seminar. The organisers of the present seminar said that they would be willing to organise
      another one.
          Discussion moved on to the question of funding. Hans Huttel spoke about Horizon 2020
      calls, noting that our community had applied unsuccessfully in recent calls. This led to a
      discussion about whether we had chosen the right calls, and then the higher-level question of
      how the topics of the calls are defined. Antonio Ravara argued that we have been too passive,
      and that we should try to get leaders of our community onto the committees that define the
      funding calls. Failing that, we should try to influence people who are on the committees.
      This requires long-term strategy and it’s too late for Horizon 2020, but we need to start
      thinking about the next cycle of research funding. An immediate action, which we agreed
      on, is to redevelop the BETTY website in order to raise the profile of the research area and
      community.
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                  183


    There was some discussion about specific areas, which have the possibility of funding, in
which to try to apply behavioural types. Some members of our community had applied to
Internet of Things calls, without success. Ivan Lanese noted that if we want to introduce
behavioural types into IoT applications, then we need to work with people who have more
practical experience with IoT; one way to start would be to invite such people to the next
Dagstuhl seminar. Giovanni Bernardi mentioned a specific high-profile systems researcher at
his institution, who might be a useful contact.
    The final topic of discussion focussed on national funding schemes. We should all apply
for national projects, and perhaps it would be possible to submit coordinated applications
in more than one country to support a collaborative project. Connecting with the earlier
discussion about adding session types to mainstream languages, people could apply for
national projects to do that. We could also try to systematically take advantage of schemes
for visiting professors and researchers, in order to arrange visits within the community.
Another possibility is to explore industrial funding, such as Google’s faculty grants; it was
also mentioned that Mozilla are funding PhD students at Northeastern University in the
USA. Finally, we in the community could support each other by sharing successful funding
proposals and by providing support for individual fellowship applications from early-career
researchers.



4.5    Group Discussion: Session Sharing and Races
Simon Gay (University of Glasgow, GB)
      License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Simon Gay
 Joint work of Approximately half of the seminar participants.


There was a discussion about the problems posed by allowing sharing and races within session
type systems, and various approaches to controlling these generalisations of the classical
session type systems. The group produced a list of relevant references.
References
1    Damiano Mazza. The true concurrency of differential interaction nets. Mathematical Struc-
     tures in Computer Science, 2016.
2    Stephen Brookes, Peter O’Hearn. Concurrent Separation Logic. ACM SIGLOG News, 2016.
3    Ilya Sergey. Concurrent Separation Logic family tree. http://ilyasergey.net/other/
     CSL-Family-Tree.pdf
4    Ralf Jung et al. Iris: Monoids and Invariants as an Orthogonal Basis for Concurrent Reas-
     oning. Proceedings of POPL, 2015.
5    Tzu-chun Chen, Kohei Honda. Specifying stateful asynchronous properties for distributed
     programs. Proceedings of CONCUR, 2012.
6    Lindsey Kuper, Ryan Newton. LVars: lattice-based data structures for deterministic paral-
     lelism. Proceedings of FHPC, 2013.
7    Filipe Militão, Jonathan Aldrich, Luís Caires. Composing Interfering Abstract Protocols.
     Proceedings of ECOOP, 2016
8    Filipe Militão, Jonathan Aldrich, Luís Caires. Rely-Guarantee Protocols. Proceedings of
     ECOOP, 2014.
9    Luís Caires, João Costa Seco. The type discipline of behavioural separation. Proceedings
     of POPL, 2013.




                                                                                                 17051
184   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


      4.6    Group Discussion: Standardisation of a Programming Language
             with Session Types
      Simon Gay (University of Glasgow, GB)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Simon Gay
       Joint work of Most of the seminar participants.


      At dinner the previous evening, there was a discussion between the seminar organisers (Phil
      Wadler, Nobuko Yoshida, Simon Gay, Vasco Vasconcelos) together with Mariangiola Dezani
      and Frank Pfenning. We agreed to suggest a project to integrate session types into Haskell,
      OCaml, Rust and Scala. This would include working with the language developers to add
      support for linear types in order to avoid the need for all the coding tricks we have seen in
      Haskell, OCaml and Scala.
          The general discussion involved 30 people, who between them represented most of the
      topics and approaches that had been presented during the seminar. Phil Wadler opened the
      discussion by summarising the situation that led to the development of Haskell as a standard
      lazy functional language: several languages were being developed by different research groups,
      and the community decided that it would be productive to adopt a single common language
      as a platform for exploring and promoting lazy functional programming.
          The group agreed that there are two distinct possibilities for developing a standard
      language that includes session types: (1) we develop a new language, similarly to the
      development of Haskell; (2) we pick an existing language (or several languages) and work
      with its developers to put session types into it. There was also discussion about whether
      standardising a programming language is the right level to work at. An alternative would be
      to follow the Imperial College group in using Scribble as a standard language-independent
      formalism for describing protocols.
          Each approach has advantages and disadvantages, which were discussed thoroughly. The
      main advantage of working with an existing language (or languages) is that they already
      have programmers and communities who would be able to take advantage of session types in
      a familiar setting. The main disadvantage is that it might not be straightforward to combine
      session types, especially the necessary linear typing, with a full range of existing language
      features such as polymorphism. This problem could be reduced by working with Rust, which
      already has affine types. Frank Pfenning explained that he has already made contact with
      Mozilla about integrating session types into Rust, although he doesn’t yet have a concrete
      proposal for a language extension. It was also noted that extending an existing language and
      getting the extension into the main release would require deep involvement in that language’s
      community.
          The main advantage of developing a new language is that the design is not constrained
      by existing features. Frank Pfenning has developed two small languages based on session
      types: SILL, and Concurrent C0. The latter was demonstrated during the seminar. The
      main disadvantage of developing a new language is that a great deal of engineering work is
      required to produce a usable full-spectrum language. This can be reduced to some extent by
      building on the runtime system of an existing language, as Scala did with Java. Perhaps
      Erlang woudl be an interesting base. Conor McBride took the view, based on his experience
      with dependently-typed programming and the relationship between Haskell and languages
      such as Agda, that the aim should not be to achieve widespread adoption of a new language;
      instead, success consists of features being stolen by mainstream languages.
          There is a question of whether session types are a sufficiently foundational feature to
      justify a new language design. Concurrency is a cross-cutting concern, orthogonal to the
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                  185


main language paradigm, so it seems that a new language design would have to commit to
one of the existing main paradigms and this decision would provoke disagreement before
any work is done on session typing features. Countering this point could be the argument
that session-typed concurrent programming, based on pi calculus, could be a paradigm for
controlling massively parallel architectures.
    It was noted that a language design from our community should have a well-specified
formal semantics. Derek Dreyer (not present at the seminar) has an ERC grant to formally
study the semantics and type system of Rust; we agreed that it would be useful to involve
him in future meetings.
    There was some discussion about the advantages and disadvantages of full type inference,
with significant support for the idea that we should not aim for it. In relation to a session-
typed methodology for developing distributed systems, it makes more sense to start with
explicitly declared types as part of the system design. Interactive programming guided by
session types has some attractions.
    In the end, there was enthusiasm from around half of the people present, for the idea of
developing a new language based on session types. More detailed discussion will follow in
the future, and other interested people will be able to join in. It was noted that Dagstuhl
has the possibility of small focussed meetings, as well as full seminars, and this could be a
way of proceeding with a language design effort.



4.7    Group Discussion: Behavioural Types for Mainstream Software
       Development
Philipp Haller (KTH Royal Institute of Technology – Stockholm, SE)
      License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Philipp Haller
 Joint work of Approximately half of the seminar participants.


The starting point of the discussion was the question: how to support software development
using behavioral types? Practical software development requires the use of widely-used
programming languages, such as Scala, OCaml, or Haskell. Several approaches to encoding
session types in the type systems of these languages were presented during the seminar.
Thus, a natural question to ask was whether these existing implementations are “enough”, or
whether they have fundamental limitations that should be addressed in future work by the
community. It was noted that current implementations already improve upon programming
models used in industry; it would thus be worthwhile to create industrial-strength systems
building upon the approaches of existing session type implementations.
    Two principal approaches were identified to implementing session types for existing
languages: the first approach encodes session types in the type system of an existing
language; this approach requires the host language to have a sufficiently powerful type
system. The second approach directly extends an existing language. It was mentioned
that widely-used languages have developed to include features which support more direct
encodings than are possible today in Haskell, OCaml, or Scala. For example, Rust has
support for affine types, and there is at least one implementation of session types in Rust.
    An important limitation of existing implementations of session types was identified,
namely, useful and informative type error messages. Luca Padovani pointed out that in his
OCaml implementation, if a developer does not implement an end point correctly, error
messages are informative, and error locations are precise. However, when connecting two




                                                                                                 17051
186   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


      end points and a type error exists, the error may occur “far away” from where the actual
      problem is. It was also noted that type inference may be a source of difficulties. Making
      types explicit typically improves type error messages, for example, in the existing Scala
      library implementations. Finally, Gul Agha pointed out that most informative would be
      error traces corresponding to session types.
          A group of discussion participants identified development tools as important for the
      adoption of session types by practitioners. It was noted that session types appear related to
      UML sequence diagrams, widely used in practice. Simon Gay pointed out that the generation
      of code templates can guide developers during the implementation of communication protocols.
      Code generation could also be integrated with modern IDEs.
          On a less technical level, it was noted that establishing good feedback channels between
      software developers and designers of languages and libraries for programming with session
      types is a challenge. In this context, interaction with open-source maintainers may be
      an effective way to receive valuable feedback. In addition, integrating session types into
      open-source projects could demonstrate their value to software developers.
          Education and training were also identified as important for the adoption of session types
      by the broader software development community. It was suggested that curricula at colleges
      and universities helped adoption of functional programming languages like Haskell. As a
      possible route discussion participants suggested the collection of patterns, inspired by the
      Gang-of-Four book, showing how session types or linearity help address common issues in
      software development. These patterns could then be taught at universities.
          Modularity and reuse of session types was identified as a topic requiring further research.
      While FSMs are often natural for expressing the communication patterns of individual
      processes, their complexity can easily explode in the context of several participants. Gul
      Agha had explained this challenge in his presentation earlier during the seminar. Both Gul
      Agha and Luca Padovani pointed out that in different contexts, the same concurrent object
      might be used with different protocols/session types. Thus, modular specifications of session
      types are required which separate protocols from concurrent objects.
          The discussion participants identified the following future directions. First, the develop-
      ment of compelling use cases that mirror modern software development; these use cases must
      be “complex enough” to showcase the power of session types. Second, the development of
      design patterns in the style of the Gang-of-Four book. Third, work on suitable abstractions,
      beyond state machines, that are provided to developers. Fourth, the development of a system-
      atic approach to evaluate session types in the context of professional software development
      (taking open source software into account). Fifth, exchanges between industry and academia,
      and collaboration with industrial research labs. Finally, development of suitable concepts
      and curricula for teaching and education.



      4.8    Group Discussion: Educational Resources for Behavioural Types
      Hugo Torres Vieira (IMT – Lucca, IT)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Hugo Torres Vieira
       Joint work of Approximately half of the seminar participants.


      The discussion started with a short description of past experiences of teaching courses related
      to behavioural types.
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                  187


    At Imperial College London a course on concurrent programming uses LTSA (https:
//www.doc.ic.ac.uk/ltsa/) for the verification of systems modelled as a set of interacting
finite state machines, and Java for the actual implementation. A gap between the high-level
modelling and the Java implementations was identified as an issue for the students’ learning
experience, both conceptually and at the level of tool support.
    At the University of Leicester more than one course on concurrent programming was
mentioned, an optional module based on Java (offered to 3rd year BSc and MSc students)
and notably an MSc course (core to several MSc degrees) that uses choreographies for system
specification. CFSMs are used the model the global interaction scenario which are then
used in a top-down style to obtain the local implementations. Students reacted positively
to the inclusion of some encompassing theory in the latest edition, and tool support with
ChorGram is a goal for the next one.
    At CMU some courses related to behavioural types were mentioned, most of which
using C0 http://c0.typesafety.net. In particular, the introductory course on imperative
programming uses behavioural type like specifications to provide contracts written in the
language itself. Some other courses that address data structures in a concurrency setting
were also mentioned.
    At IMT Lucca a PhD level module on type-based verification was mentioned, where
behavioural types were the topic of the last few lectures.
    At the University of British Columbia, at the EPFL, and at the University of Strathclyde
the reported experiences with courses related to type-based verification mostly concerned
sequential languages, and the relationship with behavioural types is a topic of interest for
further developments.
    After the report on past and ongoing experiences, some desirable future goals for our
community were discussed.
    Obtaining language and tool support for reducing the gap between specifications and
implementations.
    Creating a repository for the exchange of existing solutions to example scenarios in the
existing approaches (the repository created by the ABCD project at Glasgow University,
Edinburgh University and Imperial College London was mentioned as an existing resource).
    Creating a repository with related documentation of courses taught at various places to
serve as a reference for complementary courses. For instance, courses on designing/model-
ling based on behavioural types may refer to courses/material on programming based on
behavioural types
    Establishing a common agreement on the principles to be taught in courses related to
behavioural types so that training can lead to the desired effect of creating a community
of programmers with the specialized know-how (a mention to Benjamin Pierce’s Software
Foundations course was made, as a reference for future courses).
    In the discussion it was noted that tool support in a module requires to spend time on the
usability of tools. However, this time can be compensated if some tools offer some automatic
marking features.




                                                                                                 17051
188   17051 – Theory and Applications of Behavioural Types


       5      Open problems
      5.1     A Meta Theory for Testing Equivalences
      Giovanni Tito Bernardi (University Paris-Diderot, FR)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Giovanni Tito Bernardi
      Main reference Giovanni Bernardi, Matthew Hennessy, “Mutually Testing Processes”, Logical Methods in
                     Computer Science, 11(2:1), 2015.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.2168/LMCS-11(2:1)2015


      Testing equivalences are an alternative to bisimulation equivalence that provide in a natural
      way semantic models for session types. In this talk we will recall the chief ideas behind
      testing equivalences, along with part of the state of the art. We will also present an open
      problem, hopefully spurring discussion.
Simon Gay, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Philip Wadler, and Nobuko Yoshida                                      189


       Participants
  Gul Agha                          Philipp Haller                   Dominic Orchard
University of Illinois –         KTH Royal Institute of            University of Kent –
Urbana-Champaign, US             Technology – Stockholm, SE        Canterbury, GB
  Nada Amin                         Thomas Hildebrandt              Luca Padovani
EPFL – Lausanne, CH              IT University of                  University of Turin, IT
  Robert Atkey                   Copenhagen, DK
                                                                    Jovanka Pantovic
University of Strathclyde –         Hans Hüttel                    University of Novi Sad, RS
Glasgow, GB                      Aalborg University, DK
  Giovanni Tito Bernardi                                             Frank Pfenning
                                    Keigo Imai                     Carnegie Mellon University –
University Paris-Diderot, FR
                                 Gifu University, JP               Pittsburgh, US
  Laura Bocchi
University of Kent –                Dimitrios Kouzapas               Antonio Ravara
Canterbury, GB                   University of Glasgow, GB         Universidade Nova de Lisboa, PT
  Edwin Brady                       Roland Kuhn                     Konstantinos Sagonas
University of St. Andrews, GB    Actyx AG – München, DE            Uppsala University, SE
  Luis Caires                       Ivan Lanese                      Alceste Scalas
New University of Lisbon, PT     University of Bologna, IT         Imperial College London, GB
  Marco Carbone                     Hugo-Andrés López                Nicolas Tabareau
IT University of                 Technical University of Denmark   Ecole des Mines de Nantes, FR
Copenhagen, DK                   – Lyngby, DK
  Ilaria Castellani                                                 Peter Thiemann
                                    Francisco Martins              Universität Freiburg, DE
INRIA Sophia Antipolis, FR       University of Lisbon, PT
  Tzu-chun Chen                                                      Hugo Torres Vieira
TU Darmstadt, DE                    Conor McBride                  IMT – Lucca, IT
                                 University of Strathclyde –
  Mariangiola Dezani             Glasgow, GB                        Emilio Tuosto
University of Turin, IT                                            University of Leicester, GB
                                    Hernán Melgratti
  Patrick Thomas Eugster                                            Vasco T. Vasconcelos
                                 University of Buenos Aires, AR
TU Darmstadt, DE                                                   University of Lisbon, PT
  Adrian Francalanza                Fabrizio Montesi
University of Malta – Msida, MT University of Southern Denmark –    Philip Wadler
                                 Odense, DK                        University of Edinburgh, GB
  Ronald Garcia
University of British Columbia –    J. Garrett Morris                Nobuko Yoshida
Vancouver, CA                    University of Edinburgh, GB       Imperial College London, GB
  Simon Gay                         Nicholas Ng                      Shoji Yuen
University of Glasgow, GB        Imperial College London, GB       Nagoya University, JP




                                                                                                     17051
