                                                               Incompleteness in the finite domain
                                                                                      Pavel Pudlák ∗
arXiv:1601.01487v2 [math.LO] 18 May 2017




                                                                                      May 22, 2017


                                                                                          Abstract
                                                       Motivated by the problem of finding finite versions of classical incompleteness the-
                                                   orems, we present some conjectures that go beyond NP 6= coNP. These conjectures
                                                   formally connect computational complexity with the difficulty of proving some sen-
                                                   tences, which means that high computational complexity of a problem associated with
                                                   a sentence implies that the sentence is not provable in a weak theory, or requires a
                                                   long proof. Another reason for putting forward these conjectures is that some results
                                                   in proof complexity seem to be special cases of such general statements and we want
                                                   to formalize and fully understand these statements. In this paper we review some
                                                   conjectures that we have presented earlier [26, 32, 33, 34], introduce new conjectures,
                                                   systematize them and prove new connections between them and some other statements
                                                   studied before.


                                           1       Introduction
                                           Gödel’s incompleteness theorem is undoubtedly one of the most important theorems in logic.
                                           It speaks about absolute provability, i.e., about proofs without any restriction on their length.
                                           The question whether there is a “ﬁnite” or “feasible” version of the incompleteness theorem,
                                           where the complexity of proofs is bounded, has certainly intrigued many people, but very
                                           little has been published about it. With the advent of computers and theories developed for
                                           them, in particular complexity theory, the question about a ﬁnite version of the incomplete-
                                           ness theorem became even more interesting. The concept of polynomial time computations
                                           turned out to be the most important concept in complexity theory. The distinction between
                                           functions decidable in polynomial time and those computable only in exponential time plays
                                           a similar role as the distinction between computable and non-computable in computability
                                           theory. The successful use of polynomial bounds suggested that one should also study which
                                           theorems have polynomial length proofs. A natural version of a ﬁnite incompleteness theo-
                                           rem was formulated by Harvey Friedman in 1979. Let ConT (n̄) be a natural formalization
                                               The author is supported by the ERC Advanced Grant 339691 (FEALORA) and the institute grant
                                               ∗

                                           RVO: 67985840. Part of this article was written while the author was visiting Simons Insitute in Berkeley,
                                           California.

                                                                                               1
of the statement “there is no derivation of contradiction of length n from the axioms of T ”.
Friedman proved a lower bound of the form nǫ for some ǫ > 0 and asked whether such
sentences have proofs in T of polynomial length [13].1 It turned out that the answer to his
question is yes [28], but it is still possible, and seems very plausible, that for natural vari-
ations of this question there are no polynomial length proofs. Namely, this should be true
if we ask about the lengths of proofs of ConT (n̄) in a theory S suﬃciently weaker than T .
However, proving such a claim must be extremely diﬃcult, because it implies P 6= NP (and
even more than that).
    Our motivation for studying such problems is the fundamental question: what is the con-
nection between logical strength of theories and computational complexity? which is basically
what the ﬁeld of proof complexity is about. Here we refer to proof complexity in a broader
sense that also includes the study of ﬁrst order theories called bounded arithmetic. Since
there is a close connection between propositional proof systems and ﬁrst order theories, we
view these two concepts as nonuniform and uniform versions of the same concept.
    To give an example of a connection between theories and computational complexity, let
us consider Buss’s Witnessing Theorem [6]. This theorem states that one can construct poly-
nomial time algorithms from proofs of certain sentences in the theory S21 (see Theorem 2.1
below). This is an instance of a general phenomenon: if a theory is weak, the provably
total functions have small computational complexity. Such theorems have been proven for a
number of other theories and complexity classes. Another connection is the Feasible Interpo-
lation Theorem of Krajı́ček [24]. According to this theorem, one can construct circuits from
proofs of certain tautologies in various proof systems, in particular, in resolution; the circuits
separate two sets of Boolean vectors deﬁned by the tautology. A high level form of these
results is that if something is provable in a weak formal system, i.e., the logical strength
of the system is bounded, we can give bounds on some computational problems associated
with the systems. If we state it contrapositively it suggests that increasing strength of logi-
cal formal systems is correlated with increasing complexity of the associated computational
tasks. Thus a more speciﬁc question is: find general principles of which these results are
special instances.
    Connection between proofs and computations have been extensively studied in construc-
tive mathematics in the context of intutionistic logic. There are also results that show
interesting connections of proofs in the intutionistic calculus with computational complex-
ity. For example, Buss and Mints [8] proved that given an intuitionistic proof of a disjunction
φ ∨ ψ in propositional logic (say, in the sequent calculus), one can ﬁnd in polynomial time
a proof of either φ or ψ. A more general theorem, a version of a realizability theorem for
intuitionistic propositional calculus, was proved in [9]. However, the problems we are going
to consider in this paper have not been studied in the context of intuitionistic logic and also
in this paper we will only use classical logic.
    The general principles that we study are connected with notoriously open and probably
very diﬃcult problems in computational complexity theory, so we cannot prove or disprove
them with the currently available means. They can only be stated as hypotheses or conjec-
  1
      Here n̄ denotes a binary numeral, a term of length O(log n) that represents n.


                                                      2
tures without any formal supporting evidence. There are, essentially, two reasons for stating
some sentences as conjectures. First, we believe that some basic theorems of proof theory
should also hold true with suitable bounds on the lengths of proofs. The prime example is the
Second Incompleteness Theorem discussed above. Second, some results in proof complexity
and bounded arithmetic seem to follow a general pattern. For example, as we noted above,
polynomial time computations are associated with the theory S21 by a witnessing theorem.
If we take S22 , which we believe is a stronger theory, then the corresponding function class
is PNP ,2 which we believe is a larger class than P.3 The form of this result suggests that S22
requires more complex functions.
    Alternatively, we can view the proposed conjectures as axioms. In fact, NP 6= P has been
treated as an axiom “to prove” hardness of various problems. In many cases NP 6= P does
not suﬃce and therefore a number of stronger hypotheses have been proposed. For example,
the Exponential Time Hypothesis of Impagliazzo and Paturi [18] and its variants are used
to determine the time complexity of concrete polynomial time computable problems. In the
theory of approximate algorithm several conjectures have been proposed in order to show
nonapproximability of certain problems.
    Although we have to treat the most interesting statements only as hypotheses, there are
some interesting problems that we can study and solve with the currently available means.
These are problems about relationships among various conjectures. In particular, we would
like to know whether there is one general principle that would cover all instances, or there is
an inﬁnite hierarchy. If there is a hierarchy, is it linear, or does it branch? If it branches, is
there a natural classiﬁcation of conjectures? We will address some questions of this kind in
this paper. Furthermore, one can study relativizations of these conjectures. Several results
about relativizations have been proven, but much more is needed. We will mention some
more concrete problems at the and of the paper.
    We are primarily interested in these questions, because we want to understand the essence
of fundamental problems. However, there is also a practical aspect of this research. The gen-
eral conjectures suggest what speciﬁc problems in proof complexity we should study. Then
we can “test” the conjectures on weak formal systems for which we do have means to prove
results connecting them with computational complexity. In fact the main Conjectures CON
and TFNP represent what researchers in proof complexity believe is likely to be true.
    All conjectures that we consider in this paper state something about unprovability, al-
though they often have a natural equivalent version stated in purely complexity-theoretical
terms. The “ﬁnite domain” in the title refers to the fact that the lengths of computations
and lengths of proofs of instances of the problems that we consider are at most exponential,
hence there is a finite bound on them. Perhaps, a more precise term would be “exponential
domain”. In previous presentations of this topic, in particular in [32, 33], we used the term
“feasible incompleteness”, which should be understood as “being incomplete with respect to
feasible proofs”. In [32, 33] we also stated the feasible incompleteness thesis, which is an
   2
    This was also proved by Buss in [6].
   3
    We are not able to prove it formally, because a formal proof would give us PNP 6= P, which is equivalent
to NP 6= P.



                                                     3
informal statement saying that unprovability of a sentence in a weak formal system may be
caused by high computational complexity of a computational problem naturally associated
with the sentence.
    This paper is partly a survey, but a large part consists of new results, or results that
have not been published with full proofs. Speciﬁcally, the main conjectures were already
presented in [33], but connections between them were only sketched there.
    Here is how the paper is organized. After two introductory sections, in Section 3, we recall
a conjecture about ﬁnite consistencies and introduce a new conjecture about ﬁnite reﬂection
principles. In Section 4 we present another important conjecture about total polynomial
search problems. We discuss equivalent and stronger statements based on propositional proof
systems and disjoint NP and coNP pairs of sets in Section 5. We introduce a classiﬁcation
of conjectures in Section 6 and show that uniform conjectures can be stated as statements
about unprovability, which suggests a way towards general conjectures. Section 7 is about
the role of reductions in the statements of conjectures. We conclude the paper with some
open problems.


2     Preliminaries
2.1    Theories
In this paper we will use the word “theory” for a set of axioms that is decidable in polynomial
time (i.e., for each formula we can decide in polynomial time in the length of the formula
whether or not it is an axiom). This implies that given a sentence φ and a string of symbols
d, it is possible also to decide in polynomial time if d is a proof of φ. Furthermore, we
will only consider consistent arithmetical theories that use a ﬁxed ﬁnite set of function
and relation symbols representing functions and relation on the natural numbers. We use
fragments of arithmetic (as those theories are called), because one can easily refer to standard
formalizations of basic syntactical concepts. Being able to formalize syntactical concepts,
such as ﬁrst order formulas and proofs, is the essential property of the theories that we need.
    Furthermore, we need that theories be sufficiently strong, because we need the formaliza-
tions of basic properties of syntactical concepts and computations to to be provable in the
theories we will use. As usual, we will ensure that a theory is suﬃciently strong by assuming
that it contains a particular ﬁxed basis theory. We will use Buss’s theory S21 for this purpose.
Theory S21 is one of the fragments of Bounded Arithmetic S2 deﬁned by Buss [6] (see also
[16, 23]). Formally, it is not a fragment of P A (Peano Arithmetic), because it is formalized
in a slightly richer language, but it is interpretable in it.

Definition 1 We denote by T the class of all consistent arithmetical theories that extend
Buss’s theory S21 by a set of axioms that is decidable in polynomial time.

    For lack of a good name, we will only use the symbol T to denote this class of theories.



                                               4
2.2     Bounded arithmetic
We will brieﬂy describe S21 . It is very convenient to use S21 , but it should be noted that
essentially all results and conjectures do not depend on the particular choice of the base
theory. (This also concerns the formalization of the class P; the particular formalization
that we use is also not essential.) So the reader can safely skip this subsection if they are
not interested in bounded arithmetic.
    S21 is a basic fragment of S2 and it has similar relation to S2 as IΣ1 (Peano Arithmetic
with induction restricted to Σ1 formulas) to Peano Arithmetic. In S2 (and so in S21 ) the
standard language of arithmetic is enriched by the symbols ⌊x/2⌋, |x|, x#y. The intended
interpretation of ⌊x/2⌋ is clear; this symbol is used in induction axioms. |x| is the length of
the binary representation of x if x > 0 and |0| = 0. The interpretation of x#y is 2|x|.|y|. Note
that we do not have exponentiation in S2 , so # has to be a primitive symbol. Also note that
the length of the binary representation of 2|m|.|n| is roughly the product of the lengths of m
and n. One can easily show that if t(x1 , . . . , xk ) is a term in the language of S2 , then the
length of t(n1 , . . . , nk ) is bounded by p(n1 , . . . , nk ) for some polynomial, and, vice versa, if
f (x1 , . . . , xk ) is a function that increases the lengths of input numbers at most polynomially,
then there exists a term t such that f (x1 , . . . , xk ) ≤ t(x1 , . . . , xk ).
    The theory S2 is axiomatized by a ﬁnite set of axioms BASIC that ﬁx the intended
interpretation of symbols and induction axioms

                            α(0̄) ∧ ∀x(α(⌊x/2⌋) → α(x)) → ∀x.α(x),                                  (1)

for all bounded formulas α. S2i is S2 with the axiom schema restricted to Σbi formulas; we
will deﬁne the classes Σbi below.

2.3     Formulas and complexity classes
By a bounded formula, we mean a formula in which quantiﬁed variables are bounded by
terms in the language of S2 . As we noted above, x ≤ t(y1 , . . . , yk ) implies that the length
of x is polynomially bounded by the lengths of y1 , . . . , yk . Sometimes we will also need
to bound the number itself by a polynomial in the lengths of some other numbers. For
example, we may need to bound the number of steps of an algorithm that has as an input
the binary representation of a number x. In such cases we use sharp bounds which are bounds
of the form x ≤ |s(y1 , . . . , yk )|. Since the outer function symbol in the term is | . . . |, x is
polynomially bounded by the lengths of y1 , . . . , yk . Sharply bounded quantifiers are bounded
quantiﬁers with sharp bounds.
    The hierarchy of bounded formulas Σbn , Πbn , n = 1, 2, . . . , is deﬁned by counting alterna-
tions of bounded quantiﬁers while ignoring sharply bounded quantifiers. In particular, prenex
formulas that use bounded existential quantiﬁers and arbitrary sharply bounded quantiﬁers
are Σb1 . So in Σb1 (and similarly in higher classes) bounded existential quantiﬁers may al-
ternate with sharply bounded universal quantiﬁers. This complication can be avoided by
slightly extending S21 with more function symbols and axioms. If we do this, then we can
move all sharply bounded universal quantiﬁers after the bounded existential ones. The Σbn

                                                   5
formulas where all sharply bounded quantiﬁers are after all bounded quantiﬁers are called
strict-Σbn , or Σ̂bn formulas. Π̂bn formulas are deﬁned similarly.
     In order to simplify formulas, we will sometimes use quantiﬁers with a superscript ∀p , ∃p
to indicate that the lengths of the quantiﬁed variables are polynomially bounded in the
formula that follows. For example, ∀x∃p y.φ(x, y) means that φ(x, y) is equivalent to the
formula |y| ≤ p(|x|) ∧ φ(x, y) for some polynomial p(x) (or, equivalently, to y ≤ t(x) ∧ φ(x, y)
for some S2 term t).
     The subsets of N that are in NP are precisely those that are deﬁnable by Σb1 formulas.
Similarly, other classes from the hierarchy of formulas Σbn , Πbn deﬁne corresponding complexity
classes Σpn , Πpn from the Polynomial Hierarchy.
     For P, there is no simple deﬁnition of a class of formulas. Formulas from the class
Σb0 (= Πb0 ) have only sharply bounded quantiﬁers. These bounds imply that they deﬁne sets
and relations computable in polynomial time, but we cannot deﬁne all sets in P by such
formulas. The standard approach is to extend the language by function symbols for every
polynomial time algorithm as it is in Cook’s theory P V [10].4 This requires also adding
inﬁnitely many axioms specifying the intended interpretation of each function symbol. In
this paper we will use a diﬀerent approach, one that does not need an inﬁnite number of
function symbols and axioms. To this end we will use Buss’s Witnessing Theorem.

Theorem 2.1 ([6]) Let φ(x, y) ∈ Σb1 and suppose that S21 ⊢ ∀x∃y.φ(x, y). Then there exists
a polynomial time computable function f such that N |= ∀x.φ(x, f (x)). Moreover, f is
definable by a Σb1 formula.

The deﬁnability of f means that there exists a Σb1 formula ψ(x, y) such that
                             S21 ⊢ ∀x∃!y.ψ(x, y) ∧ ∀x∀y(ψ(x, y) → φ(x, y)).
    A formula σ(x) is ∆b1 provably in a theory T if σ(x) ∈ Σb1 and, for some π(x) ∈ Πb1 ,
T proves the sentence ∀x.σ(x) ≡ π(x). By Buss’s Witnessing Theorem, the provability of
the equivalence in S21 ensures that σ(x) deﬁnes a set in P. We should stress that it is essential
that the proof is in S21 . The equivalence N |= ∀x.σ(x) ≡ π(x) in general only ensures that
σ(x) deﬁnes a set in NP ∩ coNP which is believed to be larger than P.
    Thus we will formalize polynomial decidable sets and relations by formulas that are
∆1 provably in S21 . In the rest of this paper ∆b1 will always mean: ∆b1 provably in S21 .
  b

Polynomial time computable functions will be formalized by Σb1 formulas ψ(x, y) such that
S21 ⊢ ∀x∃!y.ψ(x, y). One can show that polynomial time computable functions are provably in
S21 closed under composition and a form of recursion called limited recursion on notation [10,
6, 23]. Because of these properties, one can formalize syntax in a natural way in S21 .

2.4       Proofs
We will assume that proofs are formalized in a standard Hilbert-style proof system for ﬁrst
order logic. We will view the proofs as strings of formulas such that each formula is either an
  4
      The relation of P V to S21 is similar to the relation of Primitive Recursive Arithmetic to Peano Arithmetic.

                                                         6
axiom (logical or an axiom of the theory in question) or is derived from previous formulas by
an application of a deduction rule. The particular choice of the system makes little diﬀerence,
because various calculi for ﬁrst order logic polynomially simulate each other, which means
that there are polynomial time computable transformations of proofs from one calculus to
the other. However, it is important that the graph of the proof is a general directed acyclic
graph, not just a tree, because transforming a general proof into the tree form may increase
the length exponentially.
    We could also use sequent calculi, but only the calculi with the cut rule present. Cut-
elimination may increase the length more than any elementary function.
    We will assume that formulas and proofs are encoded by binary strings. The length of a
proof is the length of the string representing the proof. For the Gödel number of a formula,
or a proof, we add 1 at the beginning of the string and take the number that it represents
in binary notation.
    A proof in a theory T will simply be called a T -proof.

2.5    Notation
A binary numeral is a suitably chosen closed term n̄ whose value is n and whose length is
O(log n). For example, we can represent a number with binary representation a1 a2 . . . ak by
the term
                       (. . . ((a1 · 2̄) + a2 ) · 2̄ . . . . . . + ak−1 )2̄ + ak ,
where 2̄ is SS(0).
    Our computation model is the standard Turing machine, where the inputs are words in the
alphabet Σ := {0, 1}. When computing with numbers, we assume the binary representation.
We will use numbers instead of binary strings when we formalize computations. For n ∈ N,
we denote by |n| the length of the binary representation of n (the same symbol as is in S2 ).
    We will denote by P rT (x, y) a natural formalization of the relation “x is a T -proof of y”.
We will assume that basic properties of this relation are provable in S21 . Furthermore, we
will assume that the following fact is true.

Fact 1 If m is a Gödel number of a T -proof of a sentence with a Gödel number n, then there
exists an S21 -proof of P rT (m̄, n̄) whose length is bounded by a polynomial in |m| and |n|.

   The main numerical parameter will be denoted by n. When we say “polynomial length”
without mentioning the argument of the polynomial, we will always mean “length bounded
by p(n) for some polynomial p”.


3     The basic paradigm – finite consistency
3.1    Finite consistency
Let T ∈ T . We will denote by ConT (x) a formula expressing (in a natural way) the fact
that there is no T -proof of contradiction of length x. In particular, we will need ConT (n̄),

                                               7
for n ∈ N. The question mentioned in the introduction is:
Question 1 What is the length of the shortest T -proof of ConT (n̄)?
    Using the analogy with Gödel’s incompleteness theorem, it is natural to conjecture that
the proof must be long, speciﬁcally, not polynomial in n. Friedman also proved a lower
bound nǫ for some ǫ > 0.5 This lower bound was improved to Ω(n/ log2 n) for a proof system
with Rosser’s C-rule
                                           ∃x.φ(x)
                                              φ(c)
where c is a new constant [29]. This rule enables one to refer to an element satisfying φ
without having to mention φ. The same asymptotic bound is probably true for some other
systems where this rule can be simulated. In particular, in natural deduction systems, we can
start with an assumption φ(y) and argue about y without having to repeat the assumption
in each proof line.
    The idea of the proofs of these lower bounds is to adapt the original proof of Gödel to
the ﬁnite setting. Thus instead of the original diagonal formula, one uses a formula δ(n̄)
with intended meaning “I do not have a T -proof of length ≤ n”. One can easily prove that
δT (n̄) is true and any proof of it must be longer than n. Then one proves that δT (n̄) can
be derived from ConT (n̄) by a short proof. This is essentially the same as in the proof of
Gödel’s theorem, except that one has to prove good upper bounds on the lengths of proofs
of certain true sentences. The shorter proofs one is able to ﬁnd, the larger the lower bound
is.
    In [28] a polynomial upper bound was proved for ﬁnitely axiomatized sequential theories.
In [29] the bound was improved to a linear upper bound for ﬁnitely axiomatized sequential
theories and proofs using the C-rule. Sequential theories are, roughly speaking, theories in
which one can code any ﬁnite sequence of elements of the universe (see [16] for the deﬁnition).
Already very weak fragments of arithmetic and set theory are known to be sequential. This
bound is based on partial truth deﬁnitions. In the standard proofs of the consistency of
a theory T (without any bound on the lengths of proofs), one uses a truth deﬁnition for
all formulas. Since in proofs of bounded length only formulas of bounded complexity can
occur, it suﬃces to use a partial truth deﬁnition that deﬁnes truth only for sentences of
limited complexity. The fact that partial truth deﬁnitions exist is well-known. However,
to obtain such bounds one has to carefully estimate the length of the formulas and the
lengths of proofs of particular statements. A polynomial upper bound can also be proved
for theories axiomatized by a schema of a particular form, which includes Peano Arithmetic
and Zermelo-Fraenkel Set Theory [28].
    To sum up the discussion above we state the bounds explicitly, but for the sake of
simplicity we will only use theories from T .
Theorem 3.1 ([28, 29]) For every theory T ∈ T , there exist ǫ > 0 such that the length
of the shortest T -proof of ConT (n̄) is at least nǫ . Moreover, if T is sequential and finitely
axiomatized, then there are T -proofs of ConT (n̄) lengths of polynomial in n.
  5
      Note that the length of the sentence ConT (n̄) is O(log n).

                                                       8
    In spite of the polynomial upper bound, we still believe that the incompleteness phe-
nomenon of Gödel’s theorem should manifest itself also in the ﬁnite domain—manifest not
only by the nǫ lower bound. We conjecture that if T is suﬃciently stronger than a theory S,
then S-proofs of ConT (n̄) cannot be polynomially bounded. Concerning Gödel’s Theorem,
it should be noted at this point that the fact that T does not prove its own consistency is
not important—having a proof of consistency in a theory that we do not a priory believe
is consistent would be useless. What is important is the consequence of Gödel’s Theorem
that there is no theory that could prove the consistency of all other consistent theories. The
paradigm for our conjecture is this corollary, not the theorem itself.
    Since it is not clear how much stronger T must be, we proposed the following conjecture
in [28]:

Conjecture (CONN ) For every S ∈ T , there exists T ∈ T such that the lengths of S-proofs
of ConT (n̄) cannot be bounded by a polynomial in n.6

   Of course, we would also like to know how much stronger T must be than S so that there
are no polynomial length S-proofs of ConT (n). It has been conjectured that it suﬃces that
T proves the consistency of S, i.e., the following seems to be true:

Conjecture (CONN + ) for every S, T ∈ T , if T proves ConS , then S-proofs of ConT (n̄)
cannot be bounded by a polynomial in n.

   The following observation suggests that the assumption about provability of the consis-
tency may be the right choice.

Proposition 3.2 Let T0Con := T and Tk+1  Con
                                              := TkCon + ConTkCon for k ∈ N. Suppose that for
every T ∈ T , T proves ConT +ConT (n̄) by proofs of polynomial length. Then every T ∈ T
proves ConTkCon (n̄) by proofs of polynomial length for every k ∈ N.

In plain words, if there are polynomial length T -proofs of ConT +ConT (n̄) for every T ∈ T ,
then there are polynomial length T -proofs of bounded consistencies of theories essentially
stronger than T + ConT . The proposition is an immediate corollary of the following lemma.

Lemma 3.3 Suppose that R proves Cons (n̄) by proofs of polynomial length and S proves
ConT (n̄) by proofs of polynomial length. Then R proves ConT (n̄) by proofs of polynomial
length. (Polynomial bounds are in terms of n.)

Proof-sketch. Instead of polynomially bounded proofs of bounded consistency statements,
suppose that R ⊢ ConS and S ⊢ ConT . Arguing in R, suppose that ¬ConT . By the Σ-
completeness of S, we have S ⊢ ¬ConT , hence S is inconsistent, contrary to the assumption
R ⊢ ConS .7 To prove the lemma just restate the proof with bounded consistency statements
and polynomial bounds on the proofs.
  6
   The superscript N stands for “nonuniform”, whose meaning will be explained in Section 6.
  7
   A high-level proof is: ConS is the Π1 -reflection principle for S and ConT is a Π1 sentence. Hence
R ⊢ ConT .

                                                 9
    It is well-known [12] that if T is stronger (proves more sentences) than S, then some
sentences provable in both theories have much shorter proofs in T compared to the proofs
in S. This may suggest that it would suﬃce to make T just a little stronger than S in order
to ensure that S-proofs of ConT (n̄) do not have polynomial length proofs. However, recently
Pavel Hrubeš proved, using a Rosser-type selfreferential sentence, that in general this is not
the case [personal communication]. His result is even stronger than the mere refutation of
such a strengthening of Conjecture CONN + .

Theorem 3.4 (P. Hrubeš, unpublished) Let S ∈ T be a sequential finitely axiomatized
theory and let S ⊆ T ∈ T . Then there exists a true Π1 sentence φ such that φ is not provable
in T , yet the lengths of S-proofs of ConS+φ (n̄) can be bounded by a polynomial in n.

Proof. By the ﬁxpoint theorem, one can construct a sentence φ such that

                  S ⊢ φ ≡ ∀x(P rT (x, φ̄) → ∃y(|y| ≤ 2|x| ∧ P rS (y, ¬φ̄))),               (2)

where P rT (u, v) (and P rS (u, v)) are natural formalizations of the relation u is a T -proof
(respectively S-proof) of v. This is the well-known Rosser sentence, except that we use the
bound |y| ≤ 2|x| instead of the usual one y < x and two proof relations instead of one. One
can easily prove
                                  T 6⊢ φ, S 6⊢ ¬φ, and N |= φ,
in the same way as it is done for the standard Rosser sentence (cf. [16]). The idea of the
proof of the theorem is to adapt the proof of S 6⊢ ¬φ so that it gives a polynomial length
S-proof of ConS (p(n)) → ¬∃x(P rS (x, ¬φ̄) ∧ |x| ≤ n̄) for some polynomial p. Note that the
consequent of the implication is essentially ConS+φ (n̄). Hence we get the statement of the
theorem from the upper bound of Theorem 3.1.
    In the rest of this proof we will use the symbol ⊢∗ to denote provability by a proof of
length polynomial in n.

Lemma 3.5 S ⊢∗ ¬∃x(P rT (x, φ̄) ∧ 2|x| < n̄), or equivalently, S ⊢∗ ∀x(P rT (x, φ̄) → 2|x| ≥
n̄).

Proof-sketch. The number of numbers x such that 2|x| < n is at most n − 1. Thus S can
verify that each of them is not a T -proof of φ using a proof whose total length is polynomial
in n. We are using the fact (not provable in S) that T 6⊢ φ.
    Now we continue with the proof of the theorem. We will abbreviate the formula ∃y(P rS (y, x)∧
|y| ≤ z) by P rlS (z, x). We have

                      S ⊢∗ P rlS (n̄, ¬φ) → P rlS (m̄2 , ⌈(P rlS (n̄, ¬φ))⌉),              (3)

where m2 is polynomially bounded by n. This follows by the principle: given a proof of
length ≤ n, S can prove that such a proof exists by a proof of length polynomial in n (see
Fact 1). Observe that according to (2)

                    S ⊢∗ (∀x(P rT (x, φ̄) → 2|x| ≥ n̄) ∧ P rlS (n̄, ¬φ)) → φ.

                                                10
(This is in fact provable by a logarithmic length proof.) From Lemma 3.5, we get
                                    S ⊢∗ P rlS (n̄, ¬φ) → φ.
Again, by formalizing this proof,
                       S ⊢∗ P rlS (m̄2 , ⌈P rlS (n̄, ¬φ)⌉) → P rlS (m̄3 , φ),
for some m3 polynomially bounded by n. By (3), this reduces to
                              S ⊢∗ P rlS (n̄, ¬φ) → P rlS (m̄3 , φ).
Since the antecedent says that ¬φ is provable by a proof of length ≤ n, we get
                               S ⊢∗ P rlS (n̄, ¬φ) → ¬ConS (m̄),
for some m polynomially bounded by n. Since ConS (m̄) has an S-proof of length polynomial
in m, we get a polynomial length S-proof of the negation of the antecedent, hence also of
ConS+φ (n̄).

   Finally, we observe that if T is not ﬁnitely axiomatized, then it is possible that it does
not prove the sentences ConT (n̄) by proofs of polynomial (in n) lengths. I am indebted to
Fedor Pakhomov for suggesting this problem.
Proposition 3.6 Suppose CONN is true. Then for every S ∈ T , there exists S ′ , S ⊆ S ′ ∈ T
such that the lengths of S ′ -proofs of ConS ′ (n̄) cannot be bounded by a polynomial in n.
Proof. Let S ∈ T be given. Let T ∈ T be such that the lengths of S-proofs of ConT (n̄)
cannot be bounded by a polynomial in n. Such a T exists if we assume CONN . Deﬁne
                             S ′ := S ∪ {¬P rT (N̄ , ⊥) | N ∈ N}.
Suppose that S ′ proves ConS ′ (n̄) by a proof of length p(n) for some polynomial p. Such
a proof can only use a polynomial number of the axioms of the form ¬P rT (N̄ , ⊥) with
|N| ≤ p(n) (while there are exponentially many such axioms). But S can prove each of these
axioms by a proof of polynomial size. Hence
                                          S ⊢ ConS ′ (n̄)
by a polynomial size proof. Furthermore, for a suitable polynomial q,
                                 S ⊢ ConS ′ (q(n)) → ConT (n̄)
by a polynomial (in fact, even polylogarithmic) length proof. To prove this claim, one only
needs to formalize the following argument in S:
     “Suppose there exists a proof P of contradiction in T of length ≤ n. Then it is
     possible to prove in S that P rT (P̄ , ⊥) holds true by a proof of length polynomial
     in |P |, i.e., also polynomial in n. Hence we would get a proof of contradiction in
     S ′ of length q(n).”
Thus we would get polynomial length S-proofs of ConT (n̄) contrary to our assumption.

                                                11
3.2    A finite reflection principle
Recall that the sentences expressing consistency of a theory T are special cases of reflection
principles (see [39]). There are many versions of reﬂection principles. Here we will focus on
the uniform Σ1 -reﬂection principles.
   The uniform Σ1 -reflection principle for T , Σ1 RF NT , is the following schema for all Σ1
sentences σ(x) with one free variable x

                                   ∀x∀u(P rT (u, ⌈σ(x̄)⌉) → σ(x)),

where ⌈σ(x̄)⌉ denotes the function that assigns the Gödel number of the formula σ(x̄) to a
given x, and P rT (u, v) says that u is a proof of v in T . The principle is true if T is Σ1 -sound,
i.e., T does not prove a false Σ1 sentence. This schema can be axiomatized by a single
sentence using a partial truth deﬁnition for Σ1 formulas (a universal Σ1 formula). Therefore
the principle is called “uniform” and abbreviated with capital letters.
     In order to get a meaningful ﬁnite version of Σ1 RF NT we have to make a couple of
modiﬁcations. We start by deﬁning a ﬁnite Σb1 reﬂection principle for one formula.

Definition 2 Let T be a theory, let α(x) be a Σb1 formula and let n ∈ N. Then Σb1 Rf nαT (n̄)
will denote the sentence:

                         ∀u, x, |u| ≤ n̄, |x| ≤ n̄ (P rT (u, ⌈α(x̄)⌉) → α(x)) .

    Having deﬁned the reﬂection principle for one formula, we can study the schema, i.e., the
set of sentences Σb1 Rf nαT (n̄) for all Σb1 formulas, but it is more interesting to have a single
sentence for every n from which all instances are derivable by short proofs. To this end we
need a universal Σb1 formula. One can construct a Σb1 formula µ1 such that for every Σb1
formula α(x) there exist a natural number e and a polynomial p such that

                                |z| ≥ p(|x|) → (α(x) ≡ µ1 (ē, x, z))                              (4)

is provable in S21 (see [16], page 336). The sentences that we are going to deﬁne are essentially
Σb1 Rf nµT1 (n̄).

Definition 3 The ﬁnite uniform Σb1 principle is the sequence of sentences Σb1 RF NT (n̄),
n ∈ N, defined by

              ∀e, u, x, z(|e|, |u|, |x|, |z| ≤ n̄ ∧ P rT (u, ⌈µ1 (ē, x̄, z̄)⌉) → µ1 (e, x, z)).

Lemma 3.7 For every Σb1 formula α(x), there exist polynomials q and r such that S21 -proofs
of the sentences
                           Σb1 RF NT (q(n)) → Σb1 Rf nαT (n̄)
can be constructed in time r(|n|).

Proof. Let e ∈ N and p be such that (4) is provable in S21 . Let n ∈ N be such that n ≥ |e|
and let m = p(n). The following argument can be done in S21 .

                                                     12
      Suppose |u|, |x| ≤ n and P rT (u, ⌈α(x̄)⌉). Then we also have |u|, |x| ≤ m and,
      since (4) is provable in T , we have P rT (u′ , ⌈µ1 (ē, x̄, 2m )⌉) for some u′. The proof
      u′ is constructed from u using the proof of (4) in T , which adds only a constant to
      the length and a small part in which this sentence is instantiated for the numerals
      x̄ and 2m . This makes the proof u′ at most polynomially longer than m. Let m′
      be this polynomial bound. Applying Σb1 RF NT (m′ ), we get µ1 (ē, x̄, 2m ). Then
      using (4) in S21 , we ﬁnally get α(x̄).
Now we only need to observe that the above S21 proof was explicitly constructed and the
number of steps and the length of the formulas involved are of length polynomial in |n|.

Corollary 3.8 Let S, T ∈ T . Suppose that
  1. T ⊢ ∀x.φ(x), where φ ∈ Σb1 , and

  2. S-proofs of the sentences Σb1 RF NT (n̄) can be constructed in polynomial time in n.
Then S-proofs of the sentences φ(m̄) can be constructed in time r(|m|) for some polynomial r.

Proof. Since ∀x.φ(x) is provable in T , the sentences φ(m̄) have T -proofs of length bounded
by q(|m|) for some polynomial q. This is provable in S21 , so also in S. According to the
assumption about S and by Lemma 3.7, one can construct in polynomial time proofs of
Σb1 Rf nφT (q(|m|) in polynomial time in |m|. Thus we get S-proofs of φ(m̄) in polynomial
time.

   Using Σb1 RF NT (n̄), we can state a conjecture similar to our conjecture about ConT (n̄).

Conjecture (RFNN     1 ) For every S ∈ T , there exists T ∈ T such that the lengths of S-proofs
of Σb1 RF NT (n̄) cannot be bounded by p(n) for any polynomial p.

    When α is 0 = 1, then Σb1 Rf nαT (n̄) is equivalent to ConT (n̄) and this equivalence has an
  1
S2 -proof of length polynomial in |n|. Thus, by Lemma 3.7, there exists a polynomial q such
that Σb1 RF NT (q(n)) → ConT (n̄) has an S21 -proof of length polynomial in |n|. Consequently,
Conjecture CONN implies Conjecture RFNN       1 .
    We will prove that Conjecture RFNN    1  implies NP6=coNP.

Proposition 3.9 If NP=coNP, then there exists S ∈ T such that for all T ∈ T , the
lengths of S-proofs of Σb1 RF NT (n̄) can be bounded by p(n) for some polynomial p.

Proof. The basic idea is to take some base theory and add all sentences of the form Σb1 RF NT (n̄)
that are true as axioms, disregarding whether or not T is consistent. Assuming NP=coNP,
it is possible to test these sentences in nondeterministic polynomial time for each T . Since
the polynomial bound is diﬀerent for diﬀerent theories T we have to apply padding.
    Here is a sketch of a proof in more detail. Assume NP=coNP. Instead of just the
sentences expressing Σb1 RF NT (x), we will consider all formulas with one free variable x with

                                                 13
bounded quantiﬁers in which the bounds are either of the form |y| ≤ p(x), where y the
quantiﬁed variable and p is a term expressing a polynomial, or of the usual form y ≤ t(x),
where t is a term of S2 . Let Γ denote the class of such formulas. Our assumption implies
that every formula φ(x) ∈ Γ is equivalent to a formula from this class in which all quantiﬁers
are existential. Consequently, for every φ(x) ∈ Γ, there exists a nondeterministic Turing
machine M that accepts only true sentences of the form φ(n̄) and runs in time polynomial
in n. With some additional (and tedious) work, one can show:

Claim 1 There exists a nondeterministic Turing machine M that accepts true sentences
of the form φ(n̄), for φ(x) ∈ Γ and n ∈ N, such that for every φ(x) ∈ Γ, there exists a
polynomial pφ such that on sentences φ(n̄) the machine always stops after pφ (n) steps.

   For every φ(n̄) ∈ Γ and n, m ∈ N, let a padded version of φ(n̄) be

                             φ(n̄)m := φ(n̄) ∨ (0| = 1 ∧ .{z
                                                           . . ∧ 0 = 1}).
                                                           m

Clearly, φ(n̄) is derivable from φ(n̄)m in predicate calculus using a proof whose length is
polynomial (in fact, linear) in the length of the sentence φ(n̄)m . Using a simple modiﬁcation
of the machine M from the previous claim, one can prove:

Claim 2 There exists a nondeterministic polynomial time Turing machine M ′ that accepts
only some true sentences of the form φ(n̄)m , for φ(x) ∈ Γ, n, m ∈ N and such that for every
φ(x) ∈ Γ, there exists a polynomial pφ such that for all n ∈ N, M ′ accepts φ(n̄)m for some
m ≤ pφ (n).

    Let S ′ be the theory axiomatized by the sentences accepted by M ′ . By construction,
every true sentence of the form φ(n̄), φ(x) ∈ Γ has an S ′ -proof of length polynomial in n;
in particular, this holds true for true sentences of the form Σb1 RF NT (n̄). The only issue is
that the set of axioms is in NP and, maybe, not in P. This can also be ﬁxed by padding:
we can encode accepting computations into padding. E.g., by using 0 = 1 and 1 = 0, we can
encode an arbitrary bit string and let a padded formula be accepted iﬀ the padding encodes
an accepting computation of M ′ on input φ(n̄)m .

      The reason for introducing the conjecture about Σb1 RF N is that it enables us to connect
diverging branches of so far postulated conjectures, as we will see shortly. One can cer-
tainly study similar statements based on stronger reﬂection principles for classes of formulas
Σb2 , Σb3 , . . .. The strength of these principles decreases with increasing indexes, so they are not
interesting if we are looking for stronger conjectures. However, the study of these principles
may reveal further interesting connections.




                                                 14
3.3         What is the finite Gödel theorem?
We ﬁnish this section with a remark concerning the question what should be called the ﬁnite
Gödel theorem. If Conjecture CONN were proven true, we would certainly advocate calling
it the ﬁnite Gödel theorem. However, one can also argue that the connection is diﬀerent.
Note that if T proves ConS , then T -proofs of ConS (n̄) are very short; they are of logarithmic
length in n, because the length of ConS (n̄) is logarithmic (recall that we are using binary
numerals) and this sentence follows from ConS by substitution (if we formalize ConS as
∀x.ConS (x)). Using this fact, we can derive Gödel’s theorem from Friedman’s lower bound
nǫ on the lengths of T -proofs of ConT (n̄). So Friedman’s lower bound can also be viewed as
the ﬁnite Gödel theorem.
    Proving Gödel’s theorem in this roundabout way is certainly not natural, but in some
cases it may be useful. Using estimates on ﬁnite consistency statements, we proved [30] that
S2 does not prove bounded consistency of the apparently weaker theory S21 , which ruled out
an approach to the separation problem of these two theories. (Bounded consistency means
that we only consider proofs in which all formulas are bounded.)


4         Fast growing functions and hard search problems
An important property of ﬁrst-order theories studied in classical proof theory is their strength
measured by the set of arithmetical sentences provable in them. Among the arithmetical
sentences the most important role is played by Π1 and Π2 sentences. A proper Π2 sentence, a
sentence that is not equivalent to a Π1 sentence, expresses the fact that some function is total.
Speciﬁcally, ∀x∃y.φ(x, y), where φ is a bounded formula, can be interpreted as saying that
there exists a computable function such that ∀x.φ(x, f (x)). If we cannot write it equivalently
using a formula ∀x.ψ(x, y), where in ψ all quantiﬁers are bounded, then f has to grow faster
than all functions deﬁned by the terms of the theory. Moreover, for pairs of natural theories
S and T with T essentially stronger than S, there are provably total computable functions
in T that cannot be bounded by computable functions provably total in S. One can say that
“T proves the existence of larger numbers than S”. This intuition can be made more precise
using cuts of nonstandard models of arithmetic in which the arithmetical theories of S and
T are satisﬁed: in general, T requires longer cuts than S.8
        Remark. It is important to realize what “provably total” means. For a given theory and
a computable function f , we can always find a Σ1 definition for which the totality of f is not
provable (e.g., given a defining formula φ(x, y), we can extend it by adding the consistency of T ,
i.e., φ(x, y) ∧ ConT (x)). So when we say that f is provably total, we mean that f is provably total
for some Σ1 definition of f .
    8
        Consider cuts that contain a fixed nonstandard element.




                                                       15
4.1     Total polynomial search problems
We are interested in the exponential domain, which means that we only consider functions f
such that the length of f (x) is bounded by p(|x|) for some polynomial p, so it does not make
sense to compare the growth rate of the functions. Instead, we study the complexity of these
functions. The class of sentences corresponding to Π2 are ∀Σ̂b1 sentences—the sentences
starting with unbounded universal quantiﬁer followed by a Σ̂b1 sentence. Essentially, this
class consists of sentences of the form

                                     ∀x∃y(|y| ≤ p(|x|) ∧ φ(x, y)),                                     (5)

where φ is a formalization of a polynomial time relation (i.e., φ ∈ ∆b1 ) and p is some poly-
nomial. There is a computational task naturally associated with such sentences. Since this
is important, we deﬁne it formally.

Definition 4 A total polynomial search problem is given by a pair (p, R), where p is a
polynomial and R is a binary relation such that
   1. R is decidable in polynomial time,

   2. N |= ∀x∃y(|y| ≤ p(|x|) ∧ R(x, y)).
The computational task is, for a given x, find y such that |y| ≤ p(|x|) ∧ R(x, y).

The class of all total polynomial search problems will be denoted by TFNP.9 Here are two
examples of TFNP problems.
    Example 1. This example is based on the Pigeon-Hole Principle, which says that there
is no one-to-one mapping from an N +1-element set to an N-element set. The computational
task associated with this principle is: given a mapping from an N + 1-element set to an N-
element set, ﬁnd a “collision”, which is a pair x 6= x′ such that f (x) = f (x′ ). This problem
is algorithmically trivial if the mapping is given as a list of pairs (x, f (x)). In this case N
is less than the input length. However, if the problem is presented so that N is exponential
in the input length, no polynomial time algorithm is known. Such a representation can be
deﬁned using Boolean circuits, or polynomial time algorithms that compute the function f .
In fact, researchers in cryptography believe that the problem is hard even if the mapping
is from [N] to [M] for M much smaller than N. These hash functions are used in various
protocols.
    A TFNP problem based on the Pigeon-Hole Principle can formally be deﬁned as follows.
Take a polynomial time computable function f (r, x); think of f as a set of polynomial
time computable functions of one variable x parametrized by r. Deﬁne a binary relation
computable in polynomial time by

        R(r, u) :≡ (u ≤ r ∧ f (r, u) ≥ r) ∨ ∃x, x′ ≤ r(u = (x, x′ ) ∧ f (r, x) = f (r, x′ )).
   9
     The abbreviation TFNP is standard, but is rather misleading; the class is not a class of functions and
it is not defined using NP relations. Therefore we used TPS in [33].

                                                    16
In this formula, u is a witness of the fact that f does not map {0, . . . , r} into {0, . . . , r − 1}
or a witness of a collision. A polynomial bound on |u| is determined by a polynomial bound
on the lengths pairs of elements less than r.
    Example 2. Our second example is based on the problem of factoring integers. Again
the problem is nontrivial only if the number to be factored is presented in binary (decimal
etc.) notation, in which case it is exponential in the input length. Since the search problem
must have a solution for every number N, we have to distinguish the cases when N is
prime and when it is composite. It is well-known that this is decidable in polynomial time.
Formally, we deﬁne a binary relation computable in polynomial time by

                  Q(N, M) :≡ N is prime ∨ (1 < M < N ∧ M divides N).

The bound on M is simply |M| ≤ |N|. A solution is any number M, |M| ≤ |N|, if N is
prime, or a proper factor if N is composite.
    Having the concept of a total polynomial search problem, we can now replace the growth
rate of functions by the computational complexity of ﬁnding solutions. Not surprisingly, the
situation is much less clear than in the classical setting. Firstly, we can only hypothesize
about the computational complexity of speciﬁc search problems. But this is what we expected
and are ready to face. Secondly, we do not have a quantitative measure of complexity that
we could apply to this kind of computational problems. We can distinguish problems for
which the task is solvable in polynomial time from those for which it isn’t, but some evidence
suggests that there are also distinct classes of problems that are not solvable in polynomial
time and have diﬀerent complexity. To compare the complexity of diﬀerent problems, we use
reductions. Polynomial reductions are known for decision problems and used, in particular,
in the theory of NP completeness. For TFNP there is also a natural concept of polynomial
reduction. (Note that TFNP is not a class of decision problems, so we do need a diﬀerent
concept.)

Definition 5 ([19]) Let R and S be total polynomial search problems. We say that R is
polynomially reducible to S if R can be solved in polynomial time using an oracle that gives
solutions to S. We say that R and S are polynomially equivalent if there are polynomial
reductions in both directions. We say that R is many-one polynomially reducible to S, if it
is polynomially reducible using one query to the oracle for S.

Many-one polynomial reducibility can be equivalently deﬁned by the condition: there are
functions f and g computable in polynomial time such that for all x and z,

                                   S(f (x), z) ⇒ R(x, g(x, z)),

were we are assuming that polynomial bounds on the lengths of numbers involved are implicit
in the relations R and S.
    Reductions enable us to study the structure of TFNP and deﬁne subclasses. We are
interested in classes that are closed under polynomial reductions. One important class is

                                                 17
PHP, the class of all TFNP problems reducible to an instance of the Pigeon-Hole Problem
as described in Example 1 above. Several other classes were deﬁned already in the seminal
paper [19]. They enable one to show that a problem is probably not solvable in polynomial
time. Speciﬁcally, if one proves that a problem is complete in one of the well-known classes,
it implies that the problem is not solvable in polynomial time unless the class collapses to
the bottom class consisting of all problems solvable in polynomial time.
    From the point of view of computational complexity, it is natural to identify polynomially
equivalent problems. However, we should bear in mind that from the point of view of a
particular theory, two deﬁnition of the same problem may behave diﬀerently, as we noted
above. We will consider deﬁnitions of TFNP by ∆b1 formulas and for a given theory we will
take “the best possible deﬁnition”. Formally, this is deﬁned as follows.

Definition 6    1. A ∆b1 deﬁnition of a TFNP problem (p, R) is a pair (q, φ) where q is a
     polynomial and φ is a ∆b1 formula such that

                    N |= ∀x, y((|y| ≤ p(|x|) ∧ R(x, y)) ≡ (|y| ≤ q(|x|) ∧ φ(x, y))).

   2. We say that (p, P ) ∈ TFNP is provably total in a theory T , if for some ∆b1 definition
      (q, φ) of (p, P ), T proves that

                                      ∀x∃y(|y| ≤ q(|x|) ∧ φ(x, y)).

   3. The set of all (p, P ) ∈ TFNP provably total in T will be denoted by TFNP(T ). The
      set of all P ∈ TFNP polynomially reducible to some Q ∈TFNP(T ) will be denoted
      by TFNP∗ (T ).

Note that according to our deﬁnition of the class ∆b1 (in Subsection 2.3), the formula φ must
be a Σb1 formula equivalent to a Πb1 formula provably in S21 (to ensure that it deﬁnes a set
in P it does not suﬃce to have a proof in T ). On the other hand, we do not require that
a problem P in TFNP∗ (T ) is provably reducible to some Q ∈TFNP(T ). The diﬀerence
between TFNP(T ) and TFNP∗ (T ) is small; in fact, if we deﬁned TFNP using NP relations
(see TFNP below), these classes would be the same.
      To characterize low complexity theorems of fragments of arithmetic is an important
problem studied in proof complexity. In particular, we are interested in sentences that are
universal closures of Σb1 formulas. Naturally, we want to identify sentences that express
the same fact. The best way to do that is to focus on provably total polynomial search
problems. Provably total polynomial search problems of all fragments of bounded arithmetic
S2i , i = 1, 2, . . . , have been characterized using combinatorial principles [38, 1, 35]. (S2i is S2
with the induction schema (1) restricted to Σbi formulas.) For S21 they are all TFNP problems
that are solvable in polynomial time (the lowest class in TFNP). The class of provably total
problems of S22 turned out to be surprisingly the class Polynomial Local Search, a class that
had been introduced in [19].
      Here is another important conjecture.

                                                 18
Conjecture (TFNP) For every theory T ∈ T there exists a TFNP problem P that is
not polynomially reducible to any TFNP problem provably total in T . Stated in symbols
TFNP∗ (T ) 6= TFNP.10

    The weaker statement TFNP(T ) 6= TFNP, in plain words, says that, for every theory
T ∈ T , there exists a total polynomial search problem (p, R) such that T cannot prove that
the problem is total for any proper deﬁnition (deﬁnition by a ∆b1 formula) of (p, R). This
means that the unprovability in T is not caused by a particular way we deﬁne the problem,
but by a semantic property of it that we imagine as high computational complexity. We
state the conjecture in the stronger form, TFNP∗ (T ) 6= TFNP, because TFNP(T ) may
not be closed under polynomial time reductions.
    Let us compare this conjecture with the corresponding statement about fast growing
recursive functions. One can easily prove by diagonalization that for every T ∈ T , there
exists a computable function f which grows faster than any computable function provably
total in T . This means that for any computable function g provably total in T , there exists
an n0 such that f (n) > g(n) for all n ≥ n0 . Thus for any formalization of f by a Σ1 formula
T cannot prove that f is total. In the above conjecture, the condition that f cannot be
bounded by provably total functions is replaced by the condition that a TFNP problem is
not polynomially reducible to TFNP problems that are provably total in T .
    All conjectures in this area can be stated in purely complexity theoretical terms. The
above conjecture has an especially simple equivalent form, which we state now.

Conjecture (equivalent to TFNP) There is no complete problem in TFNP, i.e., there exist
no TFNP problem to which all TFNP problems can be reduced.

    The proof of the equivalence of the versions is easy. To prove that the ﬁrst version implies
the second, suppose the second is false. Let P be a complete problem in TFNP. Then take
a fragment of arithmetic and add the axiom that (a formalization of) P is total.
    The converse implication follows immediately from the following fact.

Lemma 4.1 For every T ∈ T , there exists a TFNP problem (p, P ) such that all TFNP
problems provably total in T are many-one polynomially reducible to (p, P ).

Proof. The proof is based on the fact that one can eﬀectively enumerate all problems in
TFNP∗ (T ). (Such proofs are routine and we include a proof here only because it demon-
strates a method that can be applied in other similar situations, in particular, we will use it
in Proposition 6.2). The basic idea is to connect all provably total problems into one. We
can recognize a deﬁnition of a provably total problem by ﬁnding a proof of the totality for
this deﬁnition. A minor complication is that diﬀerent provably total problems may require
diﬀerent polynomials as bounds on the witnesses and bounds in the ∆b1 formulas deﬁning
them. This can easily be solved by suitable padding.
 10
      We distinguish the complexity class TFNP and the conjecture about it TFNP by different fonts.



                                                    19
    Now we present the argument in more detail. Recall that from the point of view of
provability in a theory, it does not matter if we use ∆b1 formulas or, more generally, Σb1 in
the deﬁnition of the problems. So, for the sake of simplicity, we will enumerate Σb1 formulas.
    Given a Σb1 formula ψ(x), we say that r(n) is a syntactic nondeterministic time bound
for ψ if the bounds at quantiﬁers in the formula ensure that ψ(x) is decidable by a nonde-
terministic Turing machine in time r(n) where n is the length of x. Since ψ is a Σb1 formula,
there always exists a polynomial r that is such a bound for ψ.
    Let T ∈ T be given. We deﬁne a binary relation R(u, v) by the following condition:
   • if u = (x′ , φ, q, d, a) is a quintuple such that φ is a Σb1 formula, q is a polynomial, d
     is |T |-proof of ∀x∃y(|y| ≤ q(|x|) ∧ φ(x, y)) and |a| = r(|x′ |), where r is a syntactic
     nondeterministic time bound for ∃y(|y| ≤ q(|x|) ∧ φ(x, y)), then φ(x′ , v).
     Note that Φ := ∀x∃y(|y| ≤ q(|x|) ∧ φ(x, y)) is a Π1 sentence and T is consistent and
Σ1 -complete (since it contains S21 ). Hence if T proves Φ, then Φ is true in N.
     The relation R is computable in nondeterministic polynomial time, because the condition
on (x′ , φ, q, d, a) is a simple syntactical condition and if the condition is satisﬁed, φ(x′ , v) can
be computed in nondeterministic polynomial time bounded by |a|. Further, for every u
there exists some v, |v| ≤ |u|, such that R(u, v) holds true, because if the condition on
(x′ , φ, q, d, a) is satisﬁed, then for every x′ there exists v, |v| ≤ |a|, that satisﬁes φ(x′ , v), and
if the condition is not satisﬁed, then one can take v = 0.
     The fact that we only know that R is computable in nondeterministic polynomial time
is not a problem. Clearly, there exists a ternary relation P ′ computable in polynomial time
and a polynomial p′ such that

                           R(u, v) ≡ ∃w(|w| ≤ p(|u|, |v|) ∧ P ′(u, v, w)).

So we deﬁne

              P (u, y) :≡ ∃v, w(y = (v, w) ∧ P ′ (u, v, w))       and     p(n) = p′ (n, n).

   Let a TFNP problem (q, Q) be given and suppose that it is provably total in T . We
have a Σb1 formula φ and a polynomial q that deﬁnes the problem and a T -proof of totality
d for this representation. Also we have a nondeterministic polynomial time bound r for
∃y(|y| ≤ q(|x|) ∧ φ(x, y)). We deﬁne a reduction of (q, Q) to (p, P ) by

                                   x 7→ f (x) := (x, φ, q, d, 2r(|x|)).

Given a witness (v, w) for P (f (x), (v, w)) we get a witness for Q(x, v) simply by taking the
ﬁrst element from the pair (v, w).

   We are indebted to to Emil Jeřábek for the following proposition.

Proposition 4.2 (E. Jeřábek, unpublished) There exists a complete problem in TFNP
w.r.t. polynomial reductions if and only if there exists a complete problem in TFNP w.r.t.
many-one polynomial reductions.

                                                   20
      The proposition is an immediate corollary of the following lemma.

Lemma 4.3 For every TFNP problem P , there exists a TFNP problem P ′ such that for
every TFNP problem Q, if Q is polynomially reducible to P , then Q is many-one polyno-
mially reducible to P ′.

Proof. Let P be given by a polynomial p and a binary relation R. We deﬁne a binary relation
R′ (u, v) as follows. Interpret a string u as an encoding of a string x and an oracle Boolean
circuit C. We will only allow oracle circuits that have p(n) input bits for a possible oracle
answer for each query of length n. Then R′ ((x, C), v) will be deﬁned to be true if v encodes
a computation of C on input x with the oracle queries and answers to be pairs r, s such that
R(r, s) holds true; in other words, v encodes a computation of C that uses P as an oracle.
Furthermore, R′ (u, v) is deﬁned to be true, if u does not have the form described above.
Clearly, R′ deﬁnes a total problem: given (x, C), we can run C on input x using P as an
oracle.
    Suppose Q is reducible to P using a polynomial time query machine M. For each input
x for the problem Q, we can construct in polynomial time an oracle Boolean circuit C that
simulates computations of M on x. Given a string v such that R′ ((x, C), v), we get an output
string y of the computation of M that satisﬁes Q(x, y), because M is a polynomial reduction
of Q to R. So the reduction is given by the polynomial time functions x 7→ (x, C) and v 7→ y,
where y is the output of the computation encoded by v.

    Furthermore, Jeřábek noted that we also get an equivalent conjecture if we use the
following modiﬁcation. Let us denote by TFNP the class of search problems deﬁned in
the same way as TFNP except that the binary relations are only required to be in NP.11
Many-one polynomial reductions for TFNP are deﬁned exactly in the same way as for
TFNP.

Proposition 4.4 There exists a complete problem in TFNP if and only if there exists a
complete problem in TFNP.

Proof-hint. (1) Every problem P in TFNP is, by deﬁnition, also in TFNP. (2) Let Q ∈
TFNP. Let Q be given by a binary relation ∃p z.R(x, y, z). Then the binary relation R′
deﬁned by
                              R′ (x, (y1 , y2 )) := R(x, y1 , y2 )
deﬁnes a problem in TFNP.

 11
      It would be more logical to use TFP for what is called TFNP and reserve TFNP for TFNP.




                                                 21
4.2     Some arguments supporting the conjecture
It is always diﬃcult to justify a mathematical conjecture. Either the sentence is true, or it
is false, but unlike in physics, in mathematics there are no experiments that may support
one or the other. Thus the belief in a conjecture is based on subjective feelings. Here are
our reasons why we believe that the conjecture should be true.

   1. Every TFNP problem is based on some mathematical principle that ensures that for
      every input there exists a solution. Although these principles are simple for the basic
      classes of TFNP problems, it seems likely that there is no universal mathematical
      principle that would work for every TFNP problem.

   2. Combinatorial characterizations of provably total polynomial search problems have
      been obtained for some fragments of Bounded Arithmetic. The description of these
      combinatorial problems suggests that their strength increases with increasing strength
      of the theories.12

   3. An oracle has been constructed relative to which the conjecture holds true [34].

   4. The connection with search problems verifying the consistency of a theory that we
      describe below can also be viewed as a supporting argument.

4.3     Herbrand Consistency Search
Conjecture TFNP has another equivalent form in which the concept of consistency plays a key
role. The well-known Herbrand theorem provides a “combinatorial” characterization of prov-
ability in predicate calculus (see, e.g., [7]). In particular one can characterize the consistency
of theories. Let us consider logic without equality and the special case of universal sentences.
According to Herbrand’s theorem a universal sentence Φ := ∀x1 . . . ∀xk .φ(x1 , . . . , xk ), where
φ is quantiﬁer free, is consistent if and only if for every family of terms τij , i = 1, . . . , n,
j = 1, . . . , k,
                                          ^n
                                              φ(τi1 , . . . , τik )                             (6)
                                          i=1

is satisﬁable as a propositional formula. Sentences expressing consistency using standard
proofs (in Hilbert-style, or Gentzen calculi) and sentences expressing consistency using Her-
brand’s theorem are equivalent provably in every theory that proves Herbrand’s theorem.
However, the corresponding restricted ﬁnite versions of consistency statements are essen-
tially diﬀerent because the transformation of standard proofs into sets of terms that witness
provability in Herbrand’s theorem is nonelementary. But here we are interested in a diﬀer-
ent aspect of Herbrand’s theorem: the complexity of ﬁnding a satisfying assignment for (6).
  12
    We only hypothesize that the strength of fragments S2i of Bounded Arithmetic increases with increas-
ing i, but this hypothesis is supported by a connection with the Polynomial Hierarchy in computational
complexity [27].


                                                  22
Since the formula, as a proposition, is always satisﬁable when Φ is consistent, every consistent
universal sentence deﬁnes a natural TFNP problem.

Definition 7 Let Φ := ∀x1 , . . . , xk .φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) be a consistent universal sentence. Then
HCS(Φ), the Herbrand Consistency Search for Φ, is the following total polynomial search
problem. Given terms τij in the language of Φ, i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , k, find a truth
assignment
       Vn to the atomic subformulas occurring in φ(τi1 , . . . , τik ), for i = 1, . . . , n, that
makes i=1 φ(τi1 , . . . , τik ) true.

    For simplicity, we deﬁne Herbrand consistency search only for universal sentences in
this paper, but using Skolemization, one can easily extend this deﬁnition to conjunctions of
prenex formulas. In [34] we proved the following theorem.

Theorem 4.5 For every total polynomial search problem P , there exists a consistent uni-
versal sentence Φ such that the problem P is many-one polynomially reducible to HCS(Φ).

    Using this theorem we can state Conjecture TFNP in the following equivalent form.

Conjecture (equivalent to TFNP) For every theory T ∈ T there exists a consistent universal
sentence Φ such that HCS(Φ) is not polynomially reducible to any TFNP problem provably
total in T , i.e., HCS(Φ) 6∈ TFNP∗ (T ).

     This form of the TFNP conjecture suggests a natural question: what is a sentence Φ that
is likely not in TFNP∗ (T )? The following could be an answer to this question.

Conjecture (TFNP+ ) Suppose T ∈ T is axiomatized by a universal sentence. Then T does
not prove that HCS(T ) is total for any formalization of it by a ∆b1 formula.

    Note that if T is strong enough to prove Herbrand’s theorem, then it does not prove the
totality of HCS(T ) formalized in a natural way, because if it did, it would prove its own
consistency. However, this does not exclude the possibility that it proves the totality for
some contrived deﬁnition. Although we call it a conjecture, we are not very conﬁdent that
it is true. But suppose it were true and suppose that S ∈ T is axiomatized by a universal
formula and T is a theory that proves Herbrand’s Theorem and the consistency of S. Then
we would have HCS(S) ∈ TFNP∗ (T ) \ TFNP∗ (S). Thus according to this conjecture,
adding the consistency of a theory to itself produces more provably total polynomial search
problems (at least for theories axiomatized by a universal formula).


5     Propositional proof systems, disjoint NP-pairs and
      disjoint coNP-pairs
So far we were concerned with ﬁrst order theories. In this section we will show that one can
also use other formal systems, namely, propositional proof systems, in order to state and
study conjectures about incompleteness in the ﬁnite domain.

                                                23
    Let a language for classical propositional logic be ﬁxed; say, we take connectives ¬, ∧, ∨
and variables p1 , p2 , . . .. Let TAUT be the set of all tautologies and SAT be the set of all
satisﬁable propositions. Following [11], we say that a proof system is a polynomial time
computable function P from Σ∗ onto TAUT.13 If P (w) = φ, we say that w is a proof of φ in
the proof system P . This elegant deﬁnition captures three basic properties of proof systems:

   1. the relation “w is a proof of φ” is decidable in polynomial time;

   2. the system is sound;

   3. the system is complete.

In the rest of this section the term “proof system” will always refer to “propositional proof
system”.
    According to this deﬁnition, a proof can be any evidence that shows logical validity of
a proposition. The standard formalizations of propositional calculus based on axioms and
logical rules are systems from a special class of proof systems, called Frege systems.
    We say that a proof system P is polynomially bounded if there exists a polynomial p
such that every tautology φ has a P -proof of length at most p(|φ|). Since TAUT is coNP-
complete, the existence of a polynomially bounded proof system is equivalent to NP=coNP.
    A weaker concept is length optimality. We say that a proof system P is length-optimal if
for every proof system Q, there exists a polynomial p such that if φ has a proof of length n in
P , then it has a proof of length at most p(n) in Q. (Length-optimality is a nonuniform version
of p-optimality that will be deﬁned in Section 6.) In [26] we showed that Conjecture CONN
is equivalent to the following one.

Conjecture (equivalent to CONN ) There exists no length-optimal proof system.

    Why do we believe that this conjecture is true? An argument that we can give is based on
a construction of proof systems used to prove that the two statements of Conjecture CONN
are equivalent. Given an arithmetical theory T , we can formalize the concept of a proposi-
tional tautology by some formula τ (x). For a given tautology t, we take its Gödel number
n and treat any ﬁrst order T -proof of τ (n̄) as a proof in a propositional proof system. Then
it seem plausible that in stronger theories we can prove some tautologies by shorter proofs.
Moreover, one can show that these proof systems are in a sense universal. So the fact that
the logical strength of theories cannot be bounded is likely to be projected into these proof
systems.
    Another argument supporting the conjecture is from our experience with speciﬁc proof
systems studied in proof complexity. Most systems are based on some class of formulas
and deduction rules. If we enlarge the class of formulas then, usually, the system becomes
stronger. For example, if we use quantiﬁed Boolean formulas instead of ordinary Boolean
formulas, the system seems much stronger. For some weak systems, in particular, bounded
  13
     Recall that in this paper Σ denotes {0, 1}, but in this definition it could be any finite alphabet of size
at least 2.


                                                      24
depth Frege systems, this has actually been proven [20]. As, apparently, there is no limit
on how strong expressive power formulas can have, we also believe that there is no limit on
how eﬃcient a proof system can be.

5.1       Disjoint NP pairs
In [36] Razborov deﬁned the canonical pair of a proof system P to be the pair of sets
(P R(P ), NSAT ∗) where P R(P ) = {(φ, 2m); φ has a P -proof of length at most m}, and
NSAT ∗ = {(φ, 2m ); ¬φ is satisﬁable }. Note that it is a pair of two disjoint NP sets.
If a proof system P simulates a proof system Q, then (P R(Q), NSAT ∗ ) is polynomially
reducible to (P R(P ), NSAT ∗) in the following sense.
    We say that a disjoint NP pair (A, B) is polynomially reducible to a disjoint NP pair
(C, D) if there exists a polynomial time computable function f that maps A into C and
B into D. We say that pairs (A, B) and (C, D) are polynomially equivalent if there are
reductions between them in both directions.
    It is not diﬃcult to show that canonical pairs of proof systems are universal in the class
of all disjoint NP pairs, which means that every disjoint NP pair (A, B) is polynomially
reducible to the canonical pair of some proof system P . In fact, even more is true.

Proposition 5.1 ([14]) For every disjoint NP pair (A, B), there exists a proof system
whose canonical pair is polynomially equivalent to (A, B).

    Furthermore, if P and Q are proof systems and there exists a polynomial p such that
for every tautology φ, if φ has a P -proof of length n, then φ has a Q-proof of length at
most p(n), then the canonical pair of P is polynomially reducible to the canonical pair of Q.
Indeed, the mapping (φ, 2n ) 7→ (φ, 2p(n) ) is such a reduction. Thus we get:

Proposition 5.2 ([36, 21]) If P is a length-optimal proof system, then its canonical pair
is a complete disjoint NP pair with respect to polynomial reductions (i.e., every disjoint NP
pair is reducible to it).14

       Therefore the following conjecture is a strengthening of Conjecture CONN .

Conjecture (DisjNP) There exist no complete disjoint NP pair (with respect to polynomial
reductions).

    Glaßer et al. [15] constructed an oracle relative to which there is no complete disjoint NP-
pair. Other than that, we have little supporting evidence. A combinatorial characterization
of the canonical pair has only been found for the resolution proof system. In [15] they
also constructed an oracle relative to which there exists a complete disjoint NP-pair, but
no length-optimal proof system exists, i.e., Conjecture DisjNP fails, but Conjecture CONN
holds true.
  14
    Razborov proved this fact for p-optimal proof systems (see Definition 9 below); Köbler, Messner and
Torán improved it to length optimal proof systems.

                                                  25
5.2    Disjoint coNP pairs
We now turn to disjoint coNP pairs. When comparing diﬀerent disjoint coNP-pairs, one
can use the same polynomial reduction as used for disjoint NP-pairs; hence one can also ask
similar questions. In particular, are there disjoint coNP pairs inseparable by a set in P?
Are there complete disjoint coNP pairs? We believe that the answer to the ﬁrst question
is yes, because we accept NP ∩ coNP 6= P as a very likely fact. The answer to the second
question is less clear, but we still lean to the negative answer.
Conjecture (DisjCoNP) There exist no complete disjoint coNP pair (with respect to poly-
nomial reductions).
   The next proposition states that Conjecture TFNP is a consequence of the above conjec-
ture.
Proposition 5.3 If there exists a complete TFNP problem, then there exists a complete
disjoint coNP pair.
   The proposition follows from the two lemmas below. First we need a deﬁnition.
Definition 8 Let a TFNP problem (p, R) be given. Assume that R(x, y) ⇒ |y| = p(|x|).
The canonical disjoint coNP pair of (p, R) is the pair (A0 , A1 ) defined as follows. The
elements of A0 ∪ A1 are pairs (x, C) where x is an arbitrary binary string and C is a Boolean
circuit with p(|x|) bit-inputs and one bit-output. The sets A0 and A1 are defined by
                           (x, C) ∈ Ai ≡ ∀y(R(x, y) → C(y) = i).                              (7)
The condition that, for a given x, all elements y satisfying R(x, y) have the same length is,
clearly, not essential, because we can always pad the string y to the maximal length p(|x|).
Lemma 5.4 For every disjoint coNP pair (B0 , B1 ) there exists a TFNP problem (p, R)
such that (B0 , B1 ) is polynomially reducible to the canonical disjoint coNP pair of (p, R).
Proof. Let a disjoint coNP pair (B0 , B1 ) be given. Suppose that Bi s are deﬁned by
                            x ∈ Bi ≡ ∀y(|y| ≤ ri (|x|) → βi (x, y))
for i = 0, 1, where βi is computable in polynomial time and ri is a polynomial. Let the
binary relation R be deﬁned by
               R(x, z) ≡ ∃i ∈ {0, 1}∃y(z = (i, y) ∧ |y| ≤ ri (|x|) ∧ ¬βi (x, y)).
Since βi s are computable in polynomial time, so is also R and the length of every z satisfying
R(x, z) is polynomially bounded in the length of x. Furthermore, since B0 and B1 are disjoint,
R is total. Again, by suitably padding z we may ensure that R(x, z) ⇒ |z| = p(|x|) for some
polynomial p. Let (A0 , A1 ) be the canonical pair of (p, R). The pair (B0 , B1 ) is reducible to
(A0 , A1 ) by the mapping
                                        x 7→ (x, C),
where C is a circuit such that C(i, y) = 1 − i, because for this C, (x, C) ∈ Aj iﬀ x ∈ Bj .

                                               26
Lemma 5.5 Let (p, P ) and (q, Q) be two TFNP problems such that R(x, y) ⇒ |y| = p(|x|)
and Q(x, y) ⇒ |y| = q(|x|). Let (A0 , A1 ) respectively (B0 , B1 ) be their canonical coNP
pairs and suppose that (p, P ) is polynomially many-one reducible to (q, Q). Then (A0 , A1 ) is
reducible to (B0 , B1 ).

Proof. Let (p, P ), (q, Q) and a polynomial many-one reduction (f, g) of (p, P ) to (q, Q) be
given. Let (A0 , A1 ) and (B0 , B1 ) be the canonical coNP pairs of (p, P ) and (q, Q). We deﬁne
a polynomial reduction of (A0 , A1 ) to (B0 , B1 ) as follows. For an input of the form (x, C)
where C is a Boolean circuit, we put

                                     h(x, C) = (f (x), Dx ),

where Dx is a Boolean circuit with q(|f (x)|) bit inputs such that for all y of length q(|f (x)|),

                                      Dx (y) = C(g(x, y)).                                    (8)

If an input z does not have the required form, we put h(z) = 0. We will check that this
deﬁnes a polynomial reduction of (A0 , A1 ) to (B0 , B1 ). Let (x, C) ∈ Ai and let y be any
number such that |y| = q(|f (x)|) and Q(f (x), y). Since P (x, g(x, y)), we have C(g(x, y)) = i
by the deﬁnition of Ai . By (8), Dx (y) = i. This proves that f (x) ∈ Bi .


5.3    Multivalued functions
A class closely related to TFNP and the question whether there exists a complete problem
in this class were studied by Beyersdorﬀ, Köbler and Messner [4]. We need a couple of
preliminary deﬁnitions.
    A multivalued partial function f is called an NP multivalued function if it is computed
by a nondeterministic polynomial time Turing machine M in the following sense. M stops
in two possible states: ACCEPT and REJECT. For a given input value x, the values of f
are those words on the output tape which appear when the state ACCEPT is reached. For
a function f ∈ NPMV we denote by f {x} the set of all values for the input x. Thus f is
total iﬀ f {x} =
               6 ∅ for all x. The class of NP multivalued functions is denoted by NPMV.
The class of total NP multivalued functions is denoted by NPMVt .
    By their nature, NPMVt functions are TFNP problems, but there is an essential dif-
ference in how one deﬁnes reduction. For f, g ∈ NPMV, we say that f is polynomially
reducible to g if there exists a polynomial time computable function h such that for all x,

                                        f {x} = g{h(x)}.

   A relation to our Conjecture TFNP is given by the following proposition.

Proposition 5.6 The existence of a complete function in NPMVt implies the existence of
a complete TFNP problem.


                                               27
Proof. Let g be a complete function in NPMVt . We can represent g using a polynomial
time computable ternary relation as follows.

                                 g{x} = {y; ∃p z.R(x, y, z)}.

Recall that the superscript at the existential quantiﬁer means that we tacitly assume that
there exists a polynomial bound p such that R(x, y, z) is satisﬁed only if the lengths of y and
z are bounded by p(|x|). Deﬁne

                                 Q(x, u) := R(x, (u)1 , (u)2).

We claim that Q deﬁnes a complete TFNP problem. Let S(x, y) be a binary relation
computable in polynomial time viewed as a TFNP problem (again, we tacitly assume an
implicit polynomial bound on the length of y). Deﬁne a function f ∈ NPMVt by

                                    f {x} := {y; S(x, y)}.

Since f is reducible to the complete function g, there exists a polynomial time computable
function h such that f {x} = g{h(x)}, which is equivalent to

               {y; S(x, y)} = {y; ∃z.R(h(x), y, z)} = {y; ∃z.Q(h(x), (y, z))}.

Thus the pair of functions h, k, where k(u) := (u)1 , is a polynomial reduction of S to Q.

    We do not know if the opposite implication holds true. Beyersdorﬀ et al. [4] proved that
if there exists a complete function in NPMVt, then there exists a complete disjoint coNP
pair. This is now a consequence of Propositions 5.3 and 5.6.


6     Classification of conjectures
6.1    Uniform and nonuniform
A more natural way to compare proof systems than just comparing the lengths of proofs
is polynomial simulation. This is a concept, introduced in [10], is similar to polynomial
reductions used in the theory of NP-completeness and those we used to compare TFNP
problems.

Definition 9 We say that a proof P system polynomially simulates a proof system Q if
there exists a polynomial time computable function such that given a Q-proof d of φ, f (d)
is a P -proof of (the same) φ. We say that a proof system P is p-optimal if it polynomially
simulates every proof system.




                                              28
   Using this concept we can state a conjecture slightly weaker than Conjecture CONN .

Conjecture (CON) There exists no p-optimal proof system.

  In [26] we proved that this conjecture is equivalent to the following uniform version of
Conjecture CONN .

Conjecture (equivalent to CON) For every S ∈ T , there exists T ∈ T such that S-proofs of
ConT (n̄) cannot be constructed in polynomial time in n.

   A uniform version of Conjecture RFNN
                                      1 is obtained in the same way.

Conjecture (RFN1 ) For every S ∈ T , there exists T ∈ T such that S-proofs of Σb1 RF NT (n̄)
cannot be constructed in polynomial time in n.

    Except for modiﬁcations of these conjectures, such as Conjecture CONN + , we do not know
of any other pair of uniform and nonuniform conjectures. In particular, TFNP is apparently
uniform, but we do not know if it has a nonuniform companion.
    Note that NP 6= coNP is implied by the nonuniform conjectures CONN and RFNN      1 , while
the uniform versions CON and RFN1 are only known to imply P 6= NP. Thus we should also
classify NP 6= coNP as nonuniform and P 6= NP as uniform. Then it may seem strange
that according to this classiﬁcation NP 6= coNP should be a nonuniform conjecture, in
spite of the fact that both NP and coNP are uniform complexity classes. But if we look
at NP 6= coNP from the point of view of proof complexity, then it is clearly a nonuniform
version of P 6= NP. Just consider the following equivalent formulations of these conjectures:

   • P 6= NP ⇔ there exists a proof system P such that for every tautology τ a P -proof
     of τ can be constructed in polynomial time;

   • NP 6= coNP ⇔ there exists a proof system P such that every tautology τ has a
     P -proof of polynomial length.

However, although Conjecture DisjNP seems to be uniform, it does imply the nonuniform
Conjecture CONN (see Proposition 5.2). We do not have an explanation for this.

6.2    Logical complexity
We started with statements about ﬁnite consistency, statements that express facts about
logic, and eventually arrived at statements about disjoint sets of certain complexity, state-
ments from structural complexity theory that apparently have nothing to do with the main
theme of incompleteness. But one should realize that expressing these conjectures using
concepts from computational complexity theory is just a convenient way to state them. It
seems that it should be possible to present all uniform conjectures as statements about un-
provability of certain sentences in theories from the class T . The following proposition shows
how to state Conjecture CON in this way.

                                              29
Proposition 6.1 There exists a p-optimal proof system (for TAUT) if and only if there
exists a theory T ∈ T such that for every proof system P there exists a definition of P by a
∆b1 formula such that T proves the soundness of P represented by this formula.

For the proof, see [33], pages 578-9. Next proposition shows how to express Conjecture DisjNP
as a statement about unprovability of certain sentences.

Proposition 6.2 There exists a complete disjoint NP pair if and only if there exists a
theory T ∈ T such that for every disjoint NP pair (B0 , B1 ) there are Σb1 definitions of B0
and B1 for which T proves that they define disjoint sets.

Proof. Suppose that there exists a complete disjoint NP pair (A0 , A1 ). Let ∃p y.αi (x, y) be
Σb1 deﬁnitions of Ai , i = 0, 1. Deﬁne a theory T to be

                           S21 + ∀x(¬∃p y.α0 (x, y) ∨ ¬∃p y.α1 (x, y)).

Let (B0 , B1 ) be an arbitrary disjoint NP pair. Let ∃p y.βi (x, y) be some Σb1 deﬁnitions of Bi ,
i = 0, 1. Since (A0 , A1 ) is complete, there exists a polynomial time reduction f of (B0 , B1 )
to (A0 , A1 ). Consider the following deﬁnitions of Bi , i = 0, 1, by Σb1 formulas:

                                 ∃p y.βi (x, y) ∧ ∃p z.αi (f (x), z).

It is clear that they deﬁne the sets Bi correctly and that T proves that sets deﬁned by these
formulas are disjoint.
    The proof of the converse implication is a standard argument that we have already
presented in the proof of Lemma 4.1, so we will be very brief.
    Let T be a theory with the property stated in the proposition. For i = 0, 1, let Ai be the
set of tuples (x, β0 , β1 , d, a) such that
   • β0 and β1 are Σb1 formulas, d is a T -proof of the disjointness of the sets deﬁned by β0
     and β1 , a is a nondeterministic time bound for β0 and β1 , and ∃p y.βi (x, y) holds true.
We leave to the reader to verify that these conditions deﬁne a disjoint NP pair and that
every disjoint NP pair is polynomially reducible to it.

The non-existence of a complete disjoint coNP pair, Conjecture DisjCoNP, can be expressed
as a statement about provability in the same way. Conjecture TFNP was, in fact, introduced
as a sentence about unprovability in theories in T .
    Thus a natural way to classify such conjectures is according to the logical complexity
of sentences that are claimed to be unprovable. The two most important classes are ∀Πb1
and ∀Σb1 (i.e., the sentences of the form: universally quantiﬁed Πb1 and Σb1 formulas). Our
uniform conjectures are classiﬁed as follows:
   ∀Πb1 – CON, DisjNP;
   ∀Σb1 – RFN1 , TFNP, DisjCoNP.


                                                 30
6.3    Some related statements
Several concepts related to our conjectures have been studied. We will present some of these
sentences here. We will call them conjectures, since we believe that they are true, but we do
not have essentially any supporting argument for their truth.
    We have observed that Conjecture CONN can be strengthened to Conjecture DisjNP.
Its uniform version, Conjecture CON, can, furthermore, be strengthened in a diﬀerent way.
Recall that UP, unambiguous P, is the class of languages that are accepted by polynomial
time nondeterministic Turing machines that satisfy the property that for every accepted
input, there is a unique accepting computation. Köbler, Messner and Torán [21] proved
that if there exists a p-optimal proof system, then UP has a complete set with respect to
many-one reductions. Hence the following is a strengthening of Conjecture CON.

Conjecture (UP) There is no complete set, with respect to many-one reductions, in UP.

    So far we only talked about proof systems for TAUT. In the same way one can deﬁne
proof systems and polynomial simulations for any set. In particular, a proof system for
SAT is a polynomial time computable function from Σ∗ onto SAT. There is one essential
diﬀerence between proof systems for TAUT and SAT—the latter does have polynomially
bounded proof systems. In fact, the deﬁnition of SAT itself gives one such proof system; in
this system any pair (φ, a), where a is a satisfying assignment of a formula φ is a proof (of
the satisﬁability of) φ. This is called the standard proof system for SAT.
    Here is an example of a nonstandard proof system P for SAT. In P a proof of φ is either
a pair (φ, a), where a is a satisfying assignment of φ, or it is φ itself in the case when φ is
a proposition γn expressing, in a natural way, the fact that n is a composite number and
n is a composite number. Note that in the standard proof system the proof of γn encodes
a nontrivial factor of n. Hence, if the standard proof system p-simulated P , then factoring
would be in polynomial time.
    Beyersdorﬀ et al. [4] proved that the existence of a p-optimal proof system for SAT
implies the existence of a complete function in NPMVt . Hence, by our Proposition 5.6, it
also implies the existence of a complete problem in TFNP. To put the conjecture about
complete sets in SAT into context, we need the following proposition.
Proposition 6.3 Let S ∈ T be a theory such that for every theory T ∈ T , S-proofs of
Σb1 RF NT (n̄) can be constructed in polynomial time in n. Then there exists a p-optimal proof
system for SAT.
Proof. Let sat(x, y) be a ∆b1 formula expressing the fact that y is a satisfying assignment of
a propositional formula x. Suppose that S satisﬁes the assumption of the proposition. We
deﬁne a proof system P for SAT by:
                    y is a P -proof of x ⇔ y is an S-proof of ∃z.sat(x̄, z).
Given a proof system f for SAT, we take T ∈ T such that it proves the soundness of f , i.e.,
                                   T ⊢ ∀y∃z.sat(f (y), z).                                 (9)

                                              31
By Corollary 3.8, S-proofs of ∃z.sat(f (d), ¯ z) can be constructed in polynomial time for
every d. Thus, given an f -proof d of f (d), we can construct in polynomial time a proof in P .
Hence P is a p-optimal proof system for SAT.

  Conjectures DisjNP, DisjCoNP and UP are related to our main conjectures CON and
TFNP. Here is an example of a plausible conjecture that is apparently incomparable with
CON and TFNP.

Conjecture (NP∩coNP) There is no complete set in NP ∩ coNP.

   Beyersdorﬀ et al. [4] proved that if both TAUT and SAT have p-optimal proof systems,
then there exists a complete set in NP ∩ coNP. Hence Conjecture NP∩coNP is above
Conjecture RFN1 .
   The implications between the most important uniform conjectures considered in this
paper are depicted in the ﬁgure below. Recall that CON is equivalent to the nonexistence of
a p-optimal proof system for TAUT.

                                                                            DisjCoNP
                                                                            ✈✈✈
                                                                           ✈
                                                                        ✈✈✈
                                                                      {✈
                                                                      ✈
                  DisjNP
                       ❉❉       UP                                TFNP
                         ❉❉                                       ⑤⑤
                           ❉❉                                  ⑤⑤⑤
                             ❉❉                               ⑤
                               "                           }⑤
                                                            ⑤
                              CON❏      NP ∩ coNP        SAT
                                   ❏❏                   ✉
                                     ❏❏              ✉✉✉
                                       ❏❏           ✉
                                         ❏❏       ✉✉
                                           $  z✉✉
                                        CON ∨ SAT

                                           
                                         RFN1

                                            
                                        P 6= NP




6.4    Towards general conjectures
We will focus on uniform conjectures, because the situation there seems to be clearer. We
have seen that our uniform conjectures are statements about unprovability of particular
sentences. The structure of these sentences is determined by

  1. some class C of sentences

  2. associated with computational problems P, and

  3. some complexity hierarchy H of the associated problems.

                                                  32
The conjectures say that the more diﬃcult the associated computational problem is, the
more diﬃcult is to prove the sentence.
   Consider, for example, Conjecture DisjNP. In this conjecture we have sentences expressing
that two sets deﬁned by Σb1 sentences are disjoint. These sentences are of the form:

                                     ∀x(¬φ(x) ∨ ¬ψ(x)),                                   (10)

where φ and ψ are Σb1 sentences deﬁning the two sets. These sentences are equivalent to
universally quantiﬁed Πb1 sentence, but they are just some speciﬁc universally quantiﬁed Πb1
sentences. For such sentences, a natural task is, for a given x, to decide which of the two
¬φ(x) or ¬ψ(x) is true. The complexity hierarchy of the computational problems is deﬁned
using polynomial time reductions.
    Consider Conjecture CON. In the equivalent form of this conjecture given by Proposi-
tion 6.1, the sentences expressing that a propositional proof system P is sound are also
universally quantiﬁed Πb1 sentences. They have the form

                             ∀x, y, z(proof P (x, y) → sat(x, z)),                        (11)

where proofP (x, y) is a ∆b1 formula expressing that y is a P -proof of x. The structure of
sentences (10) and (11) is similar (essentially, they are universally quantiﬁed disjunctions),
but the length of y in the second formula is not polynomially bounded in the length of x.
Furthermore, we use a diﬀerent kind or reductions to deﬁne the hierarchy: in the ﬁrst case,
a reduction can map x to another element, but we do not care about the witnesses of the Σb1
formulas; in the second case, x does not change, but we map a witness y to another witness.
    Ideally, we would like to state a general conjecture from which our current conjectures
would follow as special cases. However, to be able to do that, we ﬁrst need to fully understand
what are the classes C whose sentences can be associated with computational tasks, what
are the computational problems P, and what are the complexity hierarchies H. So far we
only have examples.


7    The role of reductions
In Propositions 6.1 and 6.2 we saw that conjectures whose statements used reductions can be
equivalently stated without referring to any concept of polynomial reduction. In this section
we will explain how polynomial reductions naturally appear when we compare the logical
strength of sentences.
     When we are comparing sentences from some class C, we do it with respect to a speciﬁc
base theory T . Thus for some Φ, Ψ ∈ C, we are asking whether T ⊢ Φ → Ψ. One can
show that at least for some type of sentences and some theory T , the provability implies the
existence of a reduction.
     Let the base theory be S21 and the sentences have the form ∀x∃p y.φ(x, y), where φ is
Σb1 . We will show that provability of one sentence from the other implies the existence of a
polynomial reduction of one TFNP problem to the other. The following is a well-known fact

                                              33
(see [17]), but we will still give a proof, because we want to argue that it can be generalized
to stronger theories.

Proposition 7.1 Suppose that N |= ∀x∃p y.φ(x, y) ∧ ∀u∃p v.ψ(u, v) and

                            S21 ⊢ ∀x∃p y.φ(x, y) → ∀u∃p v.ψ(u, v),                         (12)

where φ and ψ define polynomial time computable relations. Then the TFNP problem defined
by ψ is polynomially reducible to the TFNP problem defined by ψ.

Proof. This proposition is an immediate consequence of the following result (see [31]).

Lemma 7.2 If S21 ⊢ ∀x∃p y∀p z.α(x, y, z), where α is Πb0 , then for a given x, one can compute
y such that ∀p z.α(x, y, z) using a polynomial time oracle Turing machine with any oracle that,
for a given x and y such that ∃p z.¬α(x, y, z) holds true, produces some z such that ¬α(x, y, z)
holds true.

Write the implication in (12) in the following prenex form

                                ∀u∃x∃v∀y(φ(x, y) → ψ(u, v)).

By the lemma, there is a polynomial time Turing machine M that computes x and v from a
given u using any oracle that whenever ∃y(φ(x, y) ∧ ¬ψ(u, v)) holds true produces a witness
for y. We want to use an oracle that only produces witnesses for ∃y.φ(x, y). Clearly, such an
oracle suﬃces. If M asks a query (x, v) such that ψ(u, v) is true, then we can stop, because
we already have a witness for ∃p v.ψ(u, v). If no such query occurs during the computation
of M, then the oracle must always produce a witness for ∃y.φ(x, y), hence we get x and v
such that ∀y(φ(x, y) → ψ(u, v)) is true, which is equivalent to ∃y.φ(x, y) → ψ(u, v). But the
antecedent is always true, so we have ψ(u, v).

   If the base theory T is stronger than S21 , we believe that we nevertheless get some class of
reductions that is probably stronger than polynomial time computable reductions, but still
somewhat restricted so that the classes of TFNP equivalent with respect to these reductions
do not completely collapse. These reductions should be deﬁned using the provably total
search problems of T . The idea is that the provably total polynomial search problems
of S21 are the problems solvable in polynomial time and this gives us reductions that are
polynomial time computations with oracle queries to which we substitute solutions of the
problem to which we are reducing the given problem. Similarly, if S is the class of provably
total polynomial search problems of T , then provability in T should give us reductions that
are problems from S with oracle queries. A special case of this appeared in [5] (not quite
explicitly) where the theory was T21 and the class of search problems was PLS. Although it
may be interesting to study such reductions in general, we believe that they would give the
same conjectures if used instead of polynomial reductions.


                                              34
8     Conclusions and open problems
In this paper we put forward the thesis that there exists a connection between the complexity
of problems associated with ﬁrst order sentences and their logical strength manifested as
impossibility of proving them in weak theories. If we interpret this thesis in a broad sense,
then the thesis is true; e.g., we cannot prove in a weak theory that some computation stops
if the problem requires extremely long time to be solved. However, our argument here is
that there may be such a connection already on the very low level, namely in the domain of
problems solvable in nondeterministic polynomial time. Since the current state of research
into such low complexity classes does not have the means to prove separations, we can only
state and compare hypotheses about such a connection.
    There are two basic conjectures which have equivalent formulations and come in some
ﬂavors. The ﬁrst one is about ﬁnite consistency statements and was proposed already a
long time ago [26]. The second one is more recent and concerns provably total polynomial
search problems. We showed how they are related to some weaker statements and some
stronger ones. Some of these statements had already been studied before. There are still
many problems that need to be solved if we want to fully understand this topic; some are of
a fundamental nature, some are more speciﬁc. Some problems have already been mentioned
in previous sections. Below we brieﬂy mention some more.

    1. The main problem, mentioned in Subsection 6.4, is to ﬁnd a general conjecture about
       incompleteness and computational complexity. The conjectures we studied in this
       paper should be special cases of it.

    2. More speciﬁcally, propose a natural and plausible conjecture that implies the two main
       Conjectures CON and TFNP, or prove that one of these conjectures implies the other,
       or show that their relativizations are independent.

    3. Construct an oracle with respect to which Conjecture DisjCoNP is true. Construct ora-
       cles that show that relativized conjectures are diﬀerent or show that they are equivalent
       for pairs of conjectures presented in this paper. Apparently the only separation that
       is known is a separation of Conjectures CON and DisjNP, see [15].

    4. In order to get more evidence for Conjecture TFNP, characterize provably total poly-
       nomial search problems in stronger systems of Bounded Arithmetic. The strongest
       theory for which a combinatorial characterization has been found is V21 , see [22, 2].

    5. Characterize more canonical pairs of propositional proof systems in order to get more
       evidence for Conjecture DisjNP. A combinatorial characterization of the canonical pair
       has only been found for Resolution, see [3]. Characterize canonical pairs of some total
       polynomial search problems (as deﬁned in this paper) in order to get some evidence
       for Conjecture DisjCoNP. Nothing is known in this direction.

    6. We would also be interested in seeing connections between the non-existence of com-
       plete problems in some probabilistic classes and our main conjectures. Köbler et al [21]

                                               35
     proved that if TAUT2 (or SAT2 ) have a p-optimal proof system, then BPP, RP and
     ZPP have many-one complete problems. (TAUT2 and SAT2 are the sets of Π2 and Σ2
     quantiﬁed Boolean tautologies.) But most researchers believe that these probabilistic
     classes do have complete problems, because they are in fact equal to P.

  7. Another important subject are proof-complexity generators of Krajı́ček and Razborov
     (see [25, 37] and the references therein). One conjecture about proof-complexity gen-
     erators states that they are hard for every proof system. It would be very interesting
     to ﬁnd connections to our conjectures.

Acknowledgment
I would like to thank Pavel Hrubeš, Emil Jeřábek, Jan Krajı́ček and Neil Thapen for their
useful comments on the draft of this paper. I am also indebted to an anonymous referee for
pointing out many small errors and suggesting improvements of presentation.


References
 [1] A. Beckmann and S.R. Buss: Characterizing Deﬁnable Search Problems in Bounded
     Arithmetic via Proof Notations. In: Ways of Proof Theory, Ontos Series in Mathematical
     Logic, 65–134 (2010)

 [2] A. Beckmann and S.R. Buss: Improved Witnessing and Local Improvement Principles
     for Second-Order Bounded Arithmetic. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic 15,
     1 Article 2 (2014)

 [3] A. Beckmann, P. Pudlák and N. Thapen: Parity games and propositional proofs. ACM
     Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 15:2, article 17 (2014)

 [4] O. Beyersdorﬀ, J. Köbler and J. Messner: Nondeterministic functions and the existence
     of optimal proof systems. Theoretical Computer Science 410, 3839–3855 (2009)

 [5] S.R. Buss, L. Kolodziejczyk and N. Thapen: Fragments of approximate counting. ACM
     Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 15:4, article 29 (2014)

 [6] S.R. Buss: Bounded Arithmetic. Bibliopolis, Naples (1986)

 [7] S.R. Buss: An Introduction to Proof Theory. In: S.R. Buss (ed.), Handbook of Proof
     Theory, Elsevier, 1-78, (1998).

 [8] S.R. Buss and G. Mints: The Complexity of the Disjunction and Existence Properties
     in Intuitionistic Logic. Pure and Applied Logic 99, 93–104 (1999).

 [9] S. Buss, P. Pudlák: On the computational content of intuitionistic propositional proofs.
     Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 109, 49–64 (2001).

                                             36
[10] S.A. Cook: Feasibly constructive proofs and the propositional calculus. In: Proc. seventh
     annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, ACM New York, 83–97 (1975)

[11] S.A. Cook and R.A. Reckhow: The relative eﬃciency of propositional proof systems. J.
     Symbolic Logic 44(1), 36–50, (1979)

[12] A. Ehrenfeucht and J. Mycielski: Abbreviating proofs by adding new axioms. Bulletin
     of the American Mathematical Society, 77, 366–367 (1971)

[13] Friedman, H.: On the consistency, completeness and correctness. Unpublished type-
     script, (1979)

[14] C. Glaßer, A. L. Selman, and L. Zhang. Canonical disjoint NP-pairs of propositional
     proof systems. Theor. Comput. Sci., 370(1-3):60–73 (2007)

[15] C. Glaßer, A. L. Selman, S. Sengupta and L. Zhang. Disjoint NP-pairs. SIAM J. Com-
     puting, 33(6), 1369–1416, (2004)

[16] P. Hájek and P. Pudlák: Metamathematics of ﬁrst order arithmetic, Springer-
     Verlag/ASL Perspectives in Logic (1993)

[17] J. Hanika: Herbrandizing Search Problems in Bounded Arithmetic. Mathematical Logic
     Quarterly 50 (6):577–586 (2004)

[18] R. Impagliazzo and R. Paturi: The Complexity of k-SAT. Proc. 14th IEEE Conf. on
     Computational Complexity, 237–240, (1999)

[19] Johnson, D., Papadimitriou, C., Yannakakis, M.: How easy is local search? J. Comput.
     System Sci. 37, 79–100, (1988)

[20] J. Krajı́ček and R. Impagliazzo: A note on conservativity relations among bounded
     arithmetic theories. Mathematical Logic Quarterly, 48(3), 375–377 (2002)

[21] J. Köbler, J. Messner and J. Torán: Optimal proof systems imply complete sets for
     promise classes. Information and Computation 184, 71–92 (2003)

[22] L. Kolodziejczyk, P. Nguyen and N. Thapen. The provably total NP search problems of
     weak second order bounded arithmetic. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, Vol 162:6,
     419–446 (2011)

[23] Krajı́ček, J.: Bounded arithmetic, propositional logic, and complexity theory. Encyclo-
     pedia of Mathematics and Its Applications, Vol.60, Cambridge University Press, (1995)

[24] J. Krajı́ček: Interpolation theorems, lower bounds for proof systems, and independence
     results for bounded arithmetic. J. Symbolic Logic 62(2), 457–486 (1997)

[25] J. Krajı́ček: On the proof complexity of the Nisan-Wigderson generator based on a hard
     NP∩coNP function. J. of Mathematical Logic, Vol.11 (1), 11–27 (2011)

                                             37
[26] J. Krajı́ček, P. Pudlák: Propositional proof systems, the consistency of ﬁrst order the-
     ories and the complexity of computations. J. Symbolic Logic 54(3), 1063–1079 (1989)

[27] J. Krajı́ček, P. Pudlák and G. Takeuti: Bounded arithmetic and polynomial hierarchy.
     Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 52, 143–154 (1991)

[28] P. Pudlák: On the length of proofs of ﬁnitistic consistency statements in ﬁrst order
     theories. In: Logic Colloquium 84. North Holland, 165–196 (1986)

[29] P. Pudlák: Improved bounds to the length of proofs of ﬁnitistic consistency statements.
     In: Contemporary mathematics Vol.65, American Math. Soc., 309-331 (1987)

[30] P. Pudlák: A note on bounded arithmetic, Fundamenta Mathematicae, Vol.136, No.2,
     86–89 (1990)

[31] P. Pudlák: Some relations between subsystems of arithmetic and the complexity theory,
     Proc. Conf. Logic from Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, 499–519 (1992)

[32] P. Pudlák: Gödel and computations. ACM SIGACT News Vol. 37/4, 13–21 (2006)

[33] P. Pudlák: Logical Foundations of Mathematics and Computational Complexity, a gen-
     tle introduction. Springer-Verlag, (2013)

[34] P. Pudlák: On the complexity of ﬁnding falsifying assignments for Herbrand disjunc-
     tions. Archive for Mathematical Logic 54(7), 769–783 (2015)

[35] P. Pudlák and N. Thapen: Alternating minima and maxima, Nash equilibria and
     Bounded Arithmetic. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, Vol 163(5), 604–614 (2012)

[36] A.A. Razborov: On provably disjoint NP-pairs. ECCC Technical Report TRR94-006
     (1994)

[37] A.A. Razborov: Pseudorandom Generators Hard for k-DNF Resolution and Polynomial
     Calculus Resolution, Annals of Mathematics, Vol. 181, No 2, 415–472 (2015)

[38] A. Skelley and N. Thapen: The provably total search problems of bounded arithmetic.
     Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, Vol 103(1), 106–138 (2011)

[39] C. Smoryński: The incompleteness theorems. In: Barwise, J. (ed.) Handbook of Math-
     ematical Logic. North-Holland, 821–865 (1977)

[40] A.J. Wilkie and J.B. Paris: On the schema of induction for bounded arithmetical for-
     mulas. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 35, 261–302 (1987)




                                              38
