                                        The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS

                                        JOHN FEARNLEY, University of Liverpool, UK
                                        PAUL W. GOLDBERG, University of Oxford, UK
                                        ALEXANDROS HOLLENDER, University of Oxford, UK
                                        RAHUL SAVANI, University of Liverpool, UK
                                        We study search problems that can be solved by performing Gradient Descent on a bounded convex polytopal domain and show
                                        that this class is equal to the intersection of two well-known classes: PPAD and PLS. As our main underlying technical contribution,
arXiv:2011.01929v4 [cs.CC] 3 Mar 2023




                                        we show that computing a Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) point of a continuously differentiable function over the domain [0, 1] 2 is
                                        PPAD ∩ PLS-complete. This is the first non-artificial problem to be shown complete for this class. Our results also imply that the class
                                        CLS (Continuous Local Search) – which was defined by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou as a more “natural” counterpart to PPAD ∩ PLS
                                        and contains many interesting problems – is itself equal to PPAD ∩ PLS.



                                        1    INTRODUCTION
                                        It is hard to overstate the importance of Gradient Descent. As noted by Jin et al. [39], “Machine learning algorithms
                                        generally arise via formulations as optimization problems, and, despite a massive classical toolbox of sophisticated
                                        optimization algorithms and a major modern effort to further develop that toolbox, the simplest algorithms—gradient
                                        descent, which dates to the 1840s [13] and stochastic gradient descent, which dates to the 1950s [51]—reign supreme in
                                        machine learning.” Jin et al. [39] continue by highlighting the simplicity of Gradient Descent as a key selling-point, and
                                        the importance of theoretical analysis in understanding its efficacy in non-convex optimization.
                                            In its simplest form, which we consider in this paper, Gradient Descent attempts to find a minimum of a continuously
                                        differentiable function 𝑓 over some domain 𝐷, by starting at some point 𝑥 0 and iterating according to the update rule

                                                                                               𝑥𝑘+1 ← 𝑥𝑘 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥𝑘 )

                                        where 𝜂 is some fixed step size. The algorithm is based on the fundamental fact that for any point 𝑥 the term −∇𝑓 (𝑥)
                                        points in the direction of steepest descent in some sufficiently small neighbourhood of 𝑥. However, in the unconstrained
                                        setting—where the domain is the whole space—it is easy to see that Gradient Descent can at best find a stationary
                                        point. Indeed, if the gradient is zero at some point, then there is no escape. Note that a stationary point might be a local
                                        minimum, but it could also be a saddle point or even a local maximum. Similarly, in the constrained setting—where the
                                        domain 𝐷 is no longer the whole space—Gradient Descent can at best find a point 𝑥 that satisfies the Karush-Kuhn-
                                        Tucker (KKT) optimality conditions. Roughly, the KKT conditions say that the gradient of 𝑓 is zero at 𝑥, or if not, 𝑥 is
                                        on the boundary of 𝐷 and any further local improvement would take us outside 𝐷.
                                            In this paper we investigate the complexity of finding a point where Gradient Descent terminates—or equivalently,
                                        as we will see, a KKT point—when the domain is bounded. It is known that a global or even a local minimum cannot be
                                        found in polynomial time unless P = NP [3, 48]. Indeed, even deciding whether a point is a local minimum is already
                                        co-NP-hard [48]. In contrast, it is easy to check whether a point satisfies the KKT conditions. In general, finding a KKT
                                        point is hard, since even deciding whether a KKT point exists is NP-hard in the unconstrained setting [2]. However,
                                        when the domain is bounded, a KKT point is guaranteed to exist! This means that in our case, we are looking for
                                        something that can be verified efficiently and that necessarily exists. Intuitively, it seems that this problem should
                                        be more tractable. This intuition can be made formal by noting that these two properties place the problem in the
                                                                                                                                                                              1
2                                                      John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


complexity class TFNP of total search problems in NP: any instance has at least one solution, and a solution can be
checked in polynomial time. A key feature of such problems is that they cannot be NP-hard unless NP = co-NP [44].
TFNP problems have been classified via certain “syntactic subclasses” of TFNP, of which PPAD and PLS are two of the
most important ones.

1.1    NP total search classes: PPAD, PLS, and CLS
As discussed by Papadimitriou [50], TFNP is unlikely to have complete problems, and various syntactic subclasses have
been used to classify the many diverse problems that belong to it. Among them, the classes PPAD and PLS (introduced
by Papadimitriou [50] and Johnson et al. [40] respectively) have been hugely successful in this regard. Each of these
classes has a corresponding computationally inefficient existence proof principle, one that when applied in a general
context, does not yield a polynomial-time algorithm.1 In the case of PPAD this is the parity argument on a directed graph,
equivalent to the existence guarantee of Brouwer fixpoints: a Brouwer function is a continuous function 𝑓 : 𝐷 → 𝐷
where 𝐷 is a convex compact domain, and Brouwer’s fixed point theorem guarantees a point 𝑥 for which 𝑓 (𝑥) = 𝑥.
PPAD has been widely used to classify problems of computing game-theoretic equilibria (a long line of work on Nash
equilibrium computation beginning with Chen et al. [17], Daskalakis et al. [20], and market equilibria, e.g., Chen et al.
[15]). PPAD also captures diverse problems in combinatorics and cooperative game theory [41].
    PLS, for “Polynomial Local Search”, captures problems of finding a local minimum of an objective function 𝑓 , in
contexts where any candidate solution 𝑥 has a local neighbourhood within which we can readily check for the existence
of some other point having a lower value of 𝑓 . Many diverse local optimization problems have been shown complete
for PLS, attesting to its importance. Examples include searching for a local optimum of the TSP according to the
Lin-Kernighan heuristic [49], and finding pure Nash equilibria in many-player congestion games [29].
    The complexity class CLS (“Continuous Local Search”) was introduced by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou [21] to classify
various important problems that lie in both PPAD and PLS. PPAD and PLS are believed to be strictly incomparable—one
is not a subset of the other—a belief supported by oracle separations [10, 11, 47]. It follows from this that problems
belonging to both classes cannot be complete for either one of them. CLS is seen as a strong candidate for capturing the
complexity of some of those important problems, but, prior to this work, only two problems related to general versions
of Banach’s fixed point theorem were known to be CLS-complete [23, 30]. An important result—supporting the claim
that CLS-complete problems are hard to solve—is that the hardness of CLS can be based on various cryptographic
assumptions such as indistinguishability obfuscation [36], the soundness of the Fiat-Shamir heuristic applied to the
sumcheck protocol [18], or the assumption that Learning With Errors (LWE) is sub-exponentially hard [38]. Prior to
the present paper, it was generally believed that CLS is a proper subset of PPAD ∩ PLS, as conjectured by Daskalakis
and Papadimitriou [21].

1.2    Our contribution and its significance
As our main result, we show that finding a point where Gradient Descent on a continuously differentiable function
terminates—or equivalently a KKT point—is PPAD ∩ PLS-complete, when the domain is a bounded convex polytope.
This continues to hold even when the domain is as simple as the unit square [0, 1] 2 . The PPAD ∩ PLS-completeness
result applies to the “white box” model, where functions are represented as arithmetic circuits.

1 The other well-known such classes, less relevant to the present paper, are PPA and PPP; it is known that PPAD is a subset of PPA and also of PPP. These
set-theoretic containments correspond directly to the strength, or generality, of the corresponding proof principles.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                    3


  Computational Hardness. As an immediate consequence, our result provides convincing evidence that the problem
is computationally hard. First of all, there are reasons to believe that PPAD ∩ PLS is hard simply because PPAD and
PLS are believed to be hard. Indeed, if PPAD ∩ PLS could be solved in polynomial time, then, given an instance of a
PPAD-complete problem and an instance of a PLS-complete problem, we would be able to solve at least one of the two
instances in polynomial time. Furthermore, since CLS ⊆ PPAD ∩ PLS, the above-mentioned cryptographic hardness of
CLS applies automatically to PPAD ∩ PLS, and thus to our problem of interest. Note that our result says that finding
a stationary point (or, to be more precise, a KKT point) is computationally hard, not only for the Gradient Descent
algorithm, but for any algorithm.

  Continuous Local Search. Since Gradient Descent is just a special case of continuous local search, our hardness
result implies that
                                                    CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS
which disproves the widely believed conjecture by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou [21] that the containment is strict.
Our result also allows us to resolve an ambiguity in the original definition of CLS by showing that the high-dimensional
version of the class reduces to the 2-dimensional version of the class (the 1-dimensional version is computationally
tractable, so no further progress is to be made). Equality to PPAD ∩ PLS also applies to a linear version of CLS analogous
to the class Linear-FIXP of Etessami et al. [27].

  PPAD ∩ PLS. Perhaps more importantly, our result establishes PPAD ∩ PLS as an important complexity class that
captures the complexity of interesting problems. It was previously known that one can construct a problem complete for
PPAD ∩ PLS by gluing together two problems, one for each class (see Section 2.2), but the resulting problem is highly
artificial. In contrast, the Gradient Descent problem we consider is clearly natural and of separate interest. Some TFNP
classes can be characterized as the set of all problems solved by some type of algorithm, where “solved” is interpreted
as “solved eventually, without any efficiency requirement”. For instance, PPAD is the class of all problems that can be
solved by “path-following” algorithms such as the Lemke-Howson algorithm. PLS is the class of all problems that can
be solved by general local search methods. Analogously, one can define the class GD containing all problems that can
be solved by the Gradient Descent algorithm on a bounded domain, i.e., that reduce to our Gradient Descent problem in
polynomial time. Our result shows that GD = PPAD ∩ PLS. In other words, the class PPAD ∩ PLS, which is obtained by
combining PPAD and PLS in a completely artificial way, turns out to have a very natural characterization:

                                PPAD ∩ PLS is the class of all problems that can be solved
                                 by performing Gradient Descent on a bounded domain.

Our new characterization has already been very useful in the context of Algorithmic Game Theory, where it was recently
used by Babichenko and Rubinstein [5], to show PPAD ∩ PLS-completeness of computing mixed Nash equilibria of
congestion games.


1.3   Further related work
Following the definition of CLS by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou [21], two CLS-complete problems were identified:
Banach [23] and MetametricContraction [30]. Banach is a computational presentation of Banach’s fixed point
theorem in which the metric is presented as part of the input (and could be complicated). Banach fixpoints are unique,
but CLS problems do not in general have unique solutions, and the problem Banach circumvents that obstacle by
4                                           John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


allowing certain “violation” solutions, such as a pair of points witnessing that 𝑓 is not a contraction map. Metamet-
ricContraction is a generalisation of Banach, where the metric is replaced by a slightly relaxed notion called a
meta-metric.
    Chatziafratis et al. [14] showed that online gradient descent can encode general PSPACE computations. In contrast,
our result provides evidence that the problem itself (which gradient descent attempts to solve) is hard. (Although, our
result does not automatically apply to the specific machine learning setting of [14].) The distinction between these two
types of statements is most clearly apparent in the case of linear programming, where the simplex method can encode
arbitrary PSPACE computations [1, 25, 33], while the problem itself can be solved in polynomial time.
    Daskalakis et al. [22] study nonlinear min-max optimization, namely the optimization problem: min𝑥 max𝑦 𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦)
where (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ R𝑑1 × R𝑑2 is constrained to lie in a polytope P and 𝑓 is a smooth function. They define an appropriate
notion of approximate local solution for this setting and prove that computing such a solution is PPAD-complete, for
a suitable regime of parameters. A contrasting aspect here is that our hardness result requires inverse-exponential
parameters, whereas Daskalakis et al. [22] achieve hardness with inverse-polynomial parameters—for us the inverse-
exponential parameters are a necessary evil, since the problem can otherwise be solved in polynomial time, even in high
dimension (by running Gradient Descent, see Lemma C.4). Furthermore, the PPAD-hardness of Daskalakis et al. [22]
requires P to be a carefully chosen subset of the unit hypercube, whereas for us, the feasible region is the unit square.
    Finally, note that in contrast to our hardness result, in the special case of convex optimization our problem can
be solved efficiently, even in high dimension and with inverse-exponential precision. Related work in nonlinear
optimization is covered in Section 3.2.1.

2     OVERVIEW
In this section we give a condensed and informal overview of the concepts, ideas, and techniques of this paper. We
begin by providing informal definitions of the problems of interest and the complexity classes. We then present an
overview of our results, along with the high-level ideas of our main reduction.

2.1    The problems of interest
The motivation for the problems we study stems from the ultimate goal of minimizing a continuously differentiable
function 𝑓 : R𝑛 → R over some domain 𝐷. As mentioned in the introduction, this problem is known to be intractable,
and so we instead consider relaxations where we are looking for a point where Gradient Descent terminates, or for
a KKT point. Our investigation is restricted to bounded domains, namely we consider the setting where the domain
𝐷 is a bounded convex polytope defined by a collection of linear inequalities. Furthermore, we also assume that the
function 𝑓 and its gradient ∇𝑓 are Lipschitz-continuous over 𝐷, for some Lipschitz constant 𝐿 provided in the input.
Let 𝐶𝐿1 (𝐷, R) denote the set of continuously differentiable functions 𝑓 from 𝐷 to R, such that 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 are 𝐿-Lipschitz.
    In order to define our Gradient Descent problem, we need to specify what we mean by “a point where Gradient
Descent terminates”. We consider the following two stopping criteria for Gradient Descent: (a) stop when we find a
point such that the next iterate does not improve the objective function value, or (b) stop when we find a point such
that the next iterate is the same point. In practice, of course, Gradient Descent is performed with some underlying
precision parameter 𝜀 > 0. Thus, the appropriate stopping criteria are: (a) stop when we find a point such that the next
iterate improves the objective function value by less than 𝜀, or (b) stop when we find a point such that the next iterate
is at most 𝜀 away. Importantly, note that, given a point, both criteria can be checked efficiently. This ensures that the
resulting computational problems lie in TFNP. The totality of the problems follows from the simple fact that a local
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                                          5


minimum must exist (since the domain is bounded) and any local minimum satisfies the stopping criteria. The first
stopping criterion has a local search flavour and so we call the corresponding problem GD-Local-Search. The second
stopping criterion is essentially asking for an approximate fixed point of the Gradient Descent dynamics, and yields the
GD-Fixpoint problem.
   Since we are performing Gradient Descent on a bounded domain, we have to ensure that the next iterate indeed lies
in the domain 𝐷. The standard way to achieve this is to use so-called Projected Gradient Descent, which computes the
next iterate as usual and then projects it onto the domain. Define Π𝐷 to be the projection operator, that maps any point
in 𝐷 to itself, and any point outside 𝐷 to its closest point in 𝐷 (under the Euclidean norm). The two Gradient Descent
problems are defined as follows.

                                               GD-Local-Search and GD-Fixpoint (informal)

     Input: 𝜀 > 0, step size 𝜂 > 0, domain 𝐷, 𝑓 ∈ 𝐶𝐿1 (𝐷, R) and its gradient ∇𝑓 .
     Goal: Compute any point where (projected) gradient descent for 𝑓 on 𝐷 terminates. Namely, find 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 such
     that 𝑥 and its next iterate 𝑥 ′ = Π𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥)) satisfy:
           • for GD-Local-Search:                 𝑓 (𝑥 ′ ) ≥ 𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝜀,                                                (𝑓 decreases by at most 𝜀)
           • for GD-Fixpoint:                          ∥𝑥 − 𝑥 ′ ∥ ≤ 𝜀.                                                            (𝑥 ′ is 𝜀-close to 𝑥)


   In a certain sense, GD-Local-Search is a PLS-style version of Gradient Descent, while GD-Fixpoint is a PPAD-style
version.2 We show that these two versions are computationally equivalent by a triangle of reductions (see Figure 3).
The other problem in that triangle of equivalent problems is the KKT problem, defined below.

                                                                     KKT (informal)

     Input: 𝜀 > 0, domain 𝐷, 𝑓 ∈ 𝐶𝐿1 (𝐷, R) and its gradient ∇𝑓 .
     Goal: Compute any 𝜀-KKT point of the minimization problem for 𝑓 on domain 𝐷.


   A point 𝑥 is a KKT point if 𝑥 is feasible (it belongs to the domain 𝐷), and 𝑥 is either a zero-gradient point of 𝑓 , or
alternatively 𝑥 is on the boundary of 𝐷 and the boundary constraints prevent local improvement of 𝑓 . “𝜀-KKT” relaxes
the KKT condition so as to allow inexact KKT solutions with limited numerical precision. For a formal definition of
these notions see Section 3.2.1.

   Representation of 𝒇 and ∇𝒇 . We consider these computational problems in the “white box” model, where some
computational device computing 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 is provided in the input. In our case, we assume that 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 are presented
as arithmetic circuits. In more detail, following Daskalakis and Papadimitriou [21], we consider arithmetic circuits
that use the operations {+, −, ×, max, min, <}, as well as rational constants.3 Another option would be to assume that
the functions are given as polynomial-time Turing machines, but this introduces some extra clutter in the formal
definitions of the problems. Overall, the definition with arithmetic circuits is cleaner, and, in any case, the complexity
of the problems is the same in both cases.

2 A very similar version of GD-Fixpoint was also defined by Daskalakis et al. [22] and shown to be equivalent to finding an approximate local minimum
(which is essentially the same as a KKT point).
3 A subtle issue is that it might not always be possible to evaluate such a circuit efficiently, because the ×-gates can be used to perform “repeated squaring”.
To avoid this issue, we restrict ourselves to what we call well-behaved arithmetic circuits. See Section 3.1.3 of the preliminaries for more details.
6                                                 John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani



                                                                                                      8
                                                                  6
                                             5                                      2



                                   1                4                     3
                                                                                            7



Fig. 1. Example of an End-of-Line instance for 𝑛 = 3. The 2𝑛 (= 8) vertices are represented by circular nodes and the directed edges
by arrows. Note that the graph is not provided explicitly in the input, but is only represented implicitly by a successor and predecessor
circuit. In this example, the End-of-Line solutions are the vertices 3, 7 and 8. In more detail, vertices 3 and 8 are sinks, while vertex 7
is a source. Note that the “trivial” source 1 is not a solution. Finally, the isolated vertex 5 is also not a solution.



    Promise-version and total-version. Given an arithmetic circuit for 𝑓 and one for ∇𝑓 , we know of no easy way of
checking that the circuit for ∇𝑓 indeed computes the gradient of 𝑓 , and that the two functions are indeed 𝐿-Lipschitz.
There are two ways to handle this issue: (a) consider the promise version of the problem, where we restrict our
attention to instances that satisfy these conditions, or (b) introduce “violation” solutions in the spirit of Daskalakis
and Papadimitriou [21], i.e. allow as a solution a witness of the fact that one of the conditions is not satisfied. The
first option is more natural, but the second option ensures that the problem is formally in TFNP. Thus, we use the
second option for the formal definitions of our problems in Section 3.2. However, we note that our “promise-preserving”
reductions ensure that our hardness results also hold for the promise versions of the problems.

2.2    Complexity classes
In this section we provide informal definitions of the relevant complexity classes, and discuss their key features. The
formal definitions can be found in Section 3.1, but the high-level descriptions presented here are intended to be sufficient
to follow the overview of our main proof in Section 2.4.

    PPAD. The complexity class PPAD is defined as the set of TFNP problems that reduce in polynomial time to the
problem End-of-Line.

                                                        End-of-Line (informal)

      Input: A directed graph on the vertex set [2𝑛 ], such that every vertex has in- and out-degree at most 1, and
      such that vertex 1 is a source.
      Goal: Find a sink of the graph, or any other source.


    Importantly, the graph is not provided explicitly in the input, but instead we are given Boolean circuits that efficiently
compute the successor and predecessor of each vertex. This means that the size of the graph can be exponential with
respect to its description length. A problem is complete for PPAD if it belongs to PPAD and if End-of-Line reduces in
polynomial time to that problem. Many variants of the search for a fixed point of a Brouwer function turn out to be
PPAD-complete. This is essentially the reason why GD-Fixpoint, and thus the other two equivalent problems, lie in
PPAD. See Figure 1 for an example of an instance of End-of-Line.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                 7




          1               2               3               4               5               6               7               8




Fig. 2. Example of an Iter instance 𝐶 for 𝑛 = 3. The 2𝑛 (= 8) nodes are represented by squares. The arrows indicate the mapping
given by the circuit 𝐶. In this example, nodes 2, 6 and 8 are the fixed points of 𝐶. Any node that is mapped by 𝐶 to a fixed point is a
solution to the Iter instance. Thus, in this example, the solutions are nodes 3 and 7.




   PLS. The complexity class PLS is defined as the set of TFNP problems that reduce in polynomial time to the problem
Localopt.


                                                       Localopt (informal)

    Input: Functions 𝑉 : [2𝑛 ] → R and 𝑆 : [2𝑛 ] → [2𝑛 ].
    Goal: Find 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] such that 𝑉 (𝑆 (𝑣)) ≥ 𝑉 (𝑣).


   The functions are given as Boolean circuits. A problem is complete for PLS if it belongs to PLS and if Localopt
reduces in polynomial time to that problem. PLS embodies general local search methods where one attempts to optimize
some objective function by considering local improving moves. Our problem GD-Local-Search is essentially a special
case of local search, and thus lies in PLS. In this paper we make use of the problem Iter, defined below, which is known
to be PLS-complete [47].


                                                          Iter (informal)

    Input: A function 𝐶 : [2𝑛 ] → [2𝑛 ] such that 𝐶 (𝑣) ≥ 𝑣 for all 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ], and 𝐶 (1) > 1.
    Goal: Find 𝑣 such that 𝐶 (𝑣) > 𝑣 and 𝐶 (𝐶 (𝑣)) = 𝐶 (𝑣).


   For this problem, it is convenient to think of the nodes in [2𝑛 ] as lying on a line, in increasing order. Then, any node
is either a fixed point of 𝐶, or it is mapped to some node further to the right. We are looking for any node that is not a
fixed point, but is mapped to a fixed point. It is easy to see that the condition 𝐶 (1) > 1 ensures that such a solution
must exist. See Figure 2 for an example of an instance of Iter.


   PPAD ∩ PLS. The class PPAD ∩ PLS contains, by definition, all TFNP problems that lie in both PPAD and in PLS.
Prior to our work, the only known way to obtain PPAD ∩ PLS-complete problems was to combine a PPAD-complete
problem 𝐴 and a PLS-complete problem 𝐵 as follows [21].
8                                               John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


                                                     Either-Solution(𝐴,𝐵)

      Input: An instance 𝐼𝐴 of 𝐴 and an instance 𝐼𝐵 of 𝐵.
      Goal: Find a solution of 𝐼𝐴 or a solution of 𝐼𝐵 .


    In particular, the problem Either-Solution(End-of-Line,Iter) is PPAD ∩ PLS-complete, and this is the problem we
reduce from to obtain our results.

    CLS. Noting that all known PPAD ∩ PLS-complete problems looked very artificial, Daskalakis and Papadimitriou
[21] defined the class CLS ⊆ PPAD ∩ PLS, which combines PPAD and PLS in a more natural way. The class CLS is
defined as the set of TFNP problems that reduce to the problem 3D-Continuous-Localopt.

                                            3D-Continuous-Localopt (informal)

      Input: 𝜀 > 0, 𝐿-Lipschitz functions 𝑝 : [0, 1] 3 → [0, 1] and 𝑔 : [0, 1] 3 → [0, 1] 3 .
      Goal: Compute any approximate local optimum of 𝑝 with respect to 𝑔. Namely, find 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1] 3 such that

                                                      𝑝 (𝑔(𝑥)) ≥ 𝑝 (𝑥) − 𝜀.


    This problem is essentially a special case of the Localopt problem, where we perform local search over a continuous
domain and where the functions are continuous. The formal definition of 3D-Continuous-Localopt includes violation
solutions for the Lipschitz-continuity of the functions. We also consider a more general version of this problem, which
we call General-Continuous-Localopt, where we allow any bounded convex polytope as the domain.

2.3    Results
The main technical contribution of this work is Theorem 4.1, which shows that the KKT problem is PPAD ∩ PLS-hard,
even when the domain is the unit square [0, 1] 2 . The hardness also holds for the promise version of the problem, because
the hard instances that we construct always satisfy the promises. We present the main ideas needed for this result in
the next section, but we first briefly present the consequences of this reduction here.
    A chain of reductions, presented in Section 5 and shown in Figure 3, which includes the “triangle” between the three
problems of interest, establishes the following theorem.

Theorem 5.1. The problems KKT, GD-Local-Search, GD-Fixpoint and General-Continuous-Localopt are PPAD ∩
PLS-complete, even when the domain is fixed to be the unit square [0, 1] 2 . This hardness result continues to hold even if one
considers the promise-versions of these problems, i.e., only instances without violations.

    These reductions are domain-preserving—which means that they leave the domain 𝐷 unchanged—and promise-
preserving—which means that they are also valid reductions between the promise versions of the problems. As a result,
the other problems “inherit” the hardness result for KKT, including the fact that it holds for 𝐷 = [0, 1] 2 and even for
the promise versions.

    Consequences for CLS. The PPAD ∩ PLS-hardness of General-Continuous-Localopt on domain [0, 1] 2 , and
thus also on domain [0, 1] 3 , immediately implies the following surprising collapse.

Theorem 6.1. CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                   9

                                                                 GD-Fixpoint

                                                Prop. 5.3


                                                                                       General-
      PPAD ∩ PLS                       KKT                     Prop. 5.2              Continuous-                      PPAD ∩ PLS
                       Theorem 4.1                                                     Localopt            Prop. 5.6


                                                Prop. 5.4
                                                                                Prop. 5.5
                                                              GD-Local-Search

Fig. 3. Our reductions. The main one (Theorem 4.1) is on the left; note that the other reductions are all domain- and promise-preserving.


As a result, it also immediately follows that the two known CLS-complete problems [23, 30] are in fact PPAD ∩ PLS-
complete.

Corollary 6.2. Banach and MetametricContraction are PPAD ∩ PLS-complete.

Our results also show that the definition of CLS is robust to various modifications. The fact that our hardness result
holds on domain [0, 1] 2 implies that the 𝑛-dimensional variant of CLS is equal to the two-dimensional version, a
fact that was not previously known. Furthermore, since our results hold even for the promise version of General-
Continuous-Localopt, this implies that the definition of CLS is robust with respect to the removal of violations
(promise-CLS = CLS). Finally, we also show that restricting the circuits to be linear arithmetic circuits (that compute
piecewise-linear functions) does not yield a weaker class, i.e., 2D-Linear-CLS = CLS. This result is obtained by showing
that linear circuits can be used to efficiently approximate any Lipschitz-continuous function with arbitrary precision
(Appendix E), which might be of independent interest. All the consequences for CLS are discussed in detail in Section 6.
In that section, we also define a Gradient Descent problem where we do not have access to the gradient of the function
(which might, in fact, not even be differentiable) and instead use “finite differences” to compute an approximate gradient.
We show that this problem remains PPAD ∩ PLS-complete.

2.4    Proof overview for Theorem 4.1
In this section we provide a brief overview of our reduction from the PPAD ∩ PLS-complete problem Either-Solution
(End-of-Line,Iter) to the KKT problem on domain [0, 1] 2 . We note that the proof can be simplified using subsequent
work by Göös et al. [35]. See Section 7 for more details on this.
   Given an instance 𝐼 EOL of End-of-Line and an instance 𝐼 ITER of Iter, we construct an instance 𝐼 KKT = (𝜀, 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 , 𝐿)
of the KKT problem on domain [0, 1] 2 such that from any 𝜀-KKT point of 𝑓 , we can efficiently obtain a solution to
either 𝐼 EOL or 𝐼 ITER . The function 𝑓 and its gradient ∇𝑓 are first defined on an exponentially small grid on [0, 1] 2 , and
then extended within every small square of the grid by using bicubic interpolation. This ensures that the function is
continuously differentiable on the whole domain. The most interesting part of the reduction is how the function is
defined on the grid points, by using information from 𝐼 EOL , and then, where necessary, also from 𝐼 ITER .

   Embedding 𝑰 EOL . The domain is first subdivided into 2𝑛 × 2𝑛 big squares, where [2𝑛 ] is the set of vertices in 𝐼 EOL .
The big squares on the diagonal (shaded in Figure 4) represent the vertices of 𝐼 EOL and the function 𝑓 is constructed
so as to embed the directed edges in the graph of 𝐼 EOL . If the edge (𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ) in 𝐼 EOL is a forward edge, i.e, 𝑣 1 < 𝑣 2 , then
there will be a “green path” going from the big square of 𝑣 1 to the big square of 𝑣 2 . On the other hand, if the edge
10                                                John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


                                                                                                              8

                                                                                                   7

                                                                                PLS     6

                                                                            5

                                                                 4

                                                      3

                                           2
                                         PLS

                               1

Fig. 4. A high-level illustration of our construction. The shaded squares on the diagonal correspond to vertices of the graph represented
by 𝐼 EOL , in this case corresponding to the graph in Figure 1. The green and orange arrows encode the directed edges of the graph. The
positions where 𝐼 ITER is encoded, i.e., the PLS-Labyrinths, are shown as boxes labelled “PLS”. They are located at points where the
embedding of 𝐼 EOL would introduce false solutions, and their purpose is to hide those false solutions by co-locating any such solution
with a solution to 𝐼 ITER .


(𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ) in 𝐼 EOL is a backward edge, i.e., 𝑣 1 > 𝑣 2 , then there will be an “orange path” going from the big square of 𝑣 1
to the big square of 𝑣 2 . These paths are shown in Figure 4 for the corresponding example instance of Figure 1. The
idea of embedding the vertices on the diagonal, in a “staircase embedding”, was introduced by Hubáček and Yogev
[36]. However, their work only required the embedding of forward edges, whereas we have to be able to implement
backward edges as well.
     The function 𝑓 is constructed such that when we move along a green path the value of 𝑓 decreases. Conversely,
when we move along an orange path the value of 𝑓 increases. Outside the paths, 𝑓 is defined so as to decrease towards
the origin (0, 0) ∈ [0, 1] 2 , where the green path corresponding to the source of 𝐼 EOL starts. As a result, we show that an
𝜀-KKT point can only occur in a big square corresponding to a vertex 𝑣 of 𝐼 EOL such that (a) 𝑣 is a solution of 𝐼 EOL , or
(b) 𝑣 is not a solution of 𝐼 EOL , but its two neighbours (in the 𝐼 EOL graph) are both greater than 𝑣, or alternatively both
less than 𝑣. Case (b) exactly corresponds to the case where a green path “meets” an orange path. In that case, it is easy
to see that an 𝜀-KKT point is unavoidable.

     The PLS-Labyrinth. In order to resolve the issue with case (b) above, we use the following idea: hide the (unavoid-
able) 𝜀-KKT point in such a way that locating it requires solving 𝐼 ITER ! This is implemented by introducing a gadget,
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                              11



                                    8

                                            7

                                                   6

                                                           5

                                                                   4

                                                                           3

                                                                                   2

                                                                                           1




Fig. 5. High-level illustration of the PLS-Labyrinth corresponding to the Iter example of Figure 2. Shaded squares on the diagonal
correspond to the nodes of Iter. Colours of lines determine how 𝑓 is constructed at these points. The horizontal blue lines (pointing
left) correspond to the 3 edges in Figure 2 that go out from non-solutions, and we do not use similar lines going out from solutions
(nodes 3 and 7).




that we call the PLS-Labyrinth, at the point where the green and orange paths meet (within some big square). An
important point is that the PLS-Labyrinth only works properly when it is positioned at such a meeting point. If it is
positioned elsewhere, then it will either just introduce additional unneeded 𝜀-KKT points, or even introduce 𝜀-KKT
points that are easy to locate. Indeed, if we were able to position the PLS-Labyrinth wherever we wanted, this would
presumably allow us to show PLS-hardness, which as we noted earlier we do not expect. In Figure 4, the positions
where a PLS-Labyrinth is introduced are shown as grey boxes labelled “PLS”.
   Every PLS-Labyrinth is subdivided into exponentially many medium squares such that the medium squares on the
diagonal (shaded in Figure 5) correspond to the nodes of 𝐼 ITER . The point where the green and orange paths meet,
which lies just outside the PLS-Labyrinth, creates an “orange-blue path” which then makes its way to the centre of the
medium square for node 1 of 𝐼 ITER . Similarly, for every node 𝑢 of 𝐼 ITER that is a candidate to be a solution (i.e., with
𝐶 (𝑢) > 𝑢), there is an orange-blue path starting from the orange path (which runs along the PLS-Labyrinth) and going
to the centre of the medium square corresponding to 𝑢. Sinks of orange-blue paths introduce 𝜀-KKT points, and so for
those 𝑢 that are not solutions of 𝐼 ITER , the orange-blue path of 𝑢 turns into a “blue path” that goes and merges into
the orange-blue path of 𝐶 (𝑢). This ensures that sinks of orange-blue paths (that do not turn into blue paths) exactly
correspond to the solutions of 𝐼 ITER . An interesting point to note is that sources of blue paths do not introduce 𝜀-KKT
points. This allows us to handle crossings between paths in a straightforward way. Figure 5 shows an overview of the
PLS-Labyrinth that encodes the Iter example of Figure 2.
12                                              John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


     Bicubic interpolation. In our construction, we specify how the objective function 𝑓 behaves within the “small
squares” of [0, 1] 2 . At this stage, we have values of 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 at the corners of the small squares, and we then need
to smoothly interpolate within the interior of each square. We use bicubic interpolation to do this. It constructs a
polynomial over every small square given values for 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 at the square’s corners, in such a way that putting all
these pieces together yields a continuously differentiable function over the whole domain [0, 1] 2 . We note that the
simpler bilinear interpolation, which was used by Hubáček and Yogev [36], yields a continuous function, but not a
continuously differentiable function over the whole domain. Since Hubáček and Yogev [36] reduce to continuous local
search, it is sufficient in their case to construct two continuous functions 𝑝 and 𝑔. However, in our case we reduce to a
gradient descent problem, so we have to construct a single continuously differentiable function 𝑓 .
     We must prove that using bicubic interpolation does not introduce any 𝜀-KKT points within any small square, unless
that small square corresponds to a solution of 𝐼 ITER or 𝐼 EOL . Each individual small square leads to a different class
of polynomials, based on the color-coding of the grid point, and the direction of the gradient at each grid point. Our
construction uses 101 distinct small squares, and we must prove that no unwanted solutions are introduced in any of
them. By making use of various symmetries we are able to group these 101 squares into just four different cases for
which we can directly verify that the desired statement holds: an 𝜀-KKT point can only appear in a small square that
yields a solution of 𝐼 ITER or 𝐼 EOL .

3     PRELIMINARIES
Let 𝑛 ∈ N be a positive integer. Throughout this paper we use ∥ · ∥ to denote the standard Euclidean norm in 𝑛-
dimensional space, i.e., the ℓ2 -norm in R𝑛 . The maximum-norm, or ℓ∞ -norm, is denoted by ∥ · ∥ ∞ . For 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ R𝑛 ,
⟨𝑥, 𝑦⟩ := 𝑛𝑖=1 𝑥𝑖 𝑦𝑖 denotes the inner product. For any non-empty closed convex set 𝐷 ⊆ R𝑛 , let Π𝐷 : R𝑛 → 𝐷 denote
         Í

the projection onto 𝐷 with respect to the Euclidean norm. Formally, for any 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 , Π𝐷 (𝑥) is the unique point 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷
that minimizes ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥. For 𝑘 ∈ N, let [𝑘] := {1, 2, . . . , 𝑛}.

3.1     Computational model, classes and arithmetic circuits
We work in the standard Turing machine model. Rational numbers are represented as irreducible fractions, with the
numerator and denominator of the irreducible fraction given in binary. Note that given any fraction, it can be made
irreducible in polynomial time using the Euclidean algorithm. For a rational number 𝑥, we let size(𝑥) denote the number
of bits needed to represent 𝑥, i.e., the number of bits needed to write down the numerator and denominator (in binary)
of the irreducible fraction for 𝑥.

3.1.1    NP total search problems and reductions.

     Search Problems. Let {0, 1}∗ denote the set of all finite length bit-strings and let |𝑥 | be the length of 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}∗ . A
computational search problem is given by a relation 𝑅 ⊆ {0, 1}∗ × {0, 1}∗ , interpreted as the following problem: given
an instance 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}∗ , find 𝑤 ∈ {0, 1}∗ such that (𝑥, 𝑤) ∈ 𝑅, or return that no such 𝑤 exists.
     The search problem 𝑅 is in FNP (search problems in NP), if 𝑅 is polynomial-time computable (i.e., (𝑥, 𝑤) ∈ 𝑅 can
be decided in polynomial time in |𝑥 | + |𝑤 |) and polynomially-balanced (i.e., there exists some polynomial 𝑝 such that
(𝑥, 𝑤) ∈ 𝑅 =⇒ |𝑤 | ≤ 𝑝 (|𝑥 |)). Intuitively, FNP contains all search problems where all solutions have size polynomial
in the size of the instance and any solution can be checked in polynomial time. (The solution 𝑤 is thought-of as a
witness.) The class of all search problems in FNP that can be solved by a polynomial-time algorithm is denoted by FP.
The question FP vs. FNP is equivalent to the P vs. NP question.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                                  13


   The class TFNP (total search problems in NP) is defined as the set of all FNP problems 𝑅 that are total, i.e., every
instance has at least one solution. Formally, 𝑅 is total, if for every 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}∗ there exists 𝑤 ∈ {0, 1}∗ such that (𝑥, 𝑤) ∈ 𝑅.
In a certain sense,4 TFNP lies between FP and FNP.
   Note that the totality of TFNP problems should not rely on any promise. Instead, there is a syntactic guarantee of
totality: for any instance, there is a solution. It is easy to see that a TFNP problem cannot be NP-hard, unless NP =
co-NP. Furthermore, it is also believed that no TFNP-complete problem exists. For more details on this, see [44].

   Reductions between TFNP problems. Let 𝑅 and 𝑆 be two TFNP problems. We say that 𝑅 reduces to 𝑆 if there
exist polynomial-time computable functions 𝑓 : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}∗ and 𝑔 : {0, 1}∗ × {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}∗ such that, for all
𝑥, 𝑤 ∈ {0, 1}∗ ,
                                                     (𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑤) ∈ 𝑆 =⇒ (𝑥, 𝑔(𝑥, 𝑤)) ∈ 𝑅
Intuitively, this says that for any instance 𝑥 of 𝑅, if we can find a solution 𝑤 to instance 𝑓 (𝑥) of 𝑆, then 𝑔(𝑥, 𝑤) gives us
a solution to instance 𝑥 of 𝑅. In particular, note that if 𝑆 is polynomial-time solvable, then so is 𝑅.

3.1.2 The classes PPAD, PLS and PPAD ∩ PLS. Since TFNP problems likely cannot be NP-hard, or TFNP-complete,
one instead attempts to classify the problems inside TFNP. Various subclasses of TFNP have been defined and natural
problems have been proved complete for these subclasses. In this section we formally define the subclasses PPAD and
PLS, which have both been very successful in capturing the complexity of interesting problems.
   The most convenient way to define these classes is using problems on Boolean circuits. A Boolean circuit 𝐶 :
{0, 1}𝑛 → {0, 1}𝑛 with 𝑛 inputs and 𝑛 outputs, is allowed to use the logic gates ∧ (AND), ∨ (OR) and ¬ (NOT), where
the ∧ and ∨ gates have fan-in 2, and the ¬ gate has fan-in 1. For ease of notation, we identify {0, 1}𝑛 with [2𝑛 ].

   PPAD. The class PPAD is defined as the set of all TFNP problems that reduce to the problem End-of-Line [20, 50].

     Definition 1. End-of-Line:
     Input: Boolean circuits 𝑆, 𝑃 : [2𝑛 ] → [2𝑛 ] with 𝑃 (1) = 1 ≠ 𝑆 (1).
     Goal: Find 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] such that 𝑃 (𝑆 (𝑣)) ≠ 𝑣 or 𝑆 (𝑃 (𝑣)) ≠ 𝑣 ≠ 1.


   The successor circuit 𝑆 and the predecessor circuit 𝑃 implicitly define a directed graph on the vertex set [2𝑛 ]. There
is an edge from 𝑣 1 to 𝑣 2 if 𝑆 (𝑣 1 ) = 𝑣 2 and 𝑃 (𝑣 2 ) = 𝑣 1 . Every vertex has at most one outgoing edge and at most one
incoming edge. Since the vertex 1 has one outgoing edge and no incoming edge, it is a source. The goal is to find another
end of line, i.e., another source, or a sink of the graph. Note that such a vertex is guaranteed to exist. The condition
𝑃 (1) = 1 ≠ 𝑆 (1) can be enforced syntactically, so this is indeed a TFNP problem and not a promise problem. See Figure 1
for an example of an End-of-Line instance.

   PLS. The class PLS is defined as the set of all TFNP problems that reduce to the problem Localopt [21, 40].

     Definition 2. Localopt:
     Input: Boolean circuits 𝑆, 𝑉 : [2𝑛 ] → [2𝑛 ].
     Goal: Find 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] such that 𝑉 (𝑆 (𝑣)) ≥ 𝑉 (𝑣).

4 Clearly, TFNP ⊆ FNP, but with a slight abuse of notation we can also say that FP ⊆ TFNP. Indeed, any problem 𝑅 in FP can be turned into a TFNP
problem by including a pair (𝑥, NO) in 𝑅 for each instance 𝑥 that does not have a solution, where NO is some dedicated bit-string. Note that despite this
minor modification, the search problem remains essentially the same.
14                                              John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


     This problem embodies local search over the node set [2𝑛 ]. The output of the circuit 𝑉 represents a value and ideally
we would like to find a node 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] that minimises 𝑉 (𝑣). The circuit 𝑆 helps us in this task by proposing a possibly
improving node 𝑆 (𝑣) for any 𝑣. We stop our search, when we find a 𝑣 such that 𝑉 (𝑆 (𝑣)) ≥ 𝑉 (𝑣), i.e., 𝑆 no longer helps
us decrease the value of 𝑉 . This is local search, because the circuit 𝑆 represents the search for an improving node in
some small (polynomial-size) neighbourhood.
     In this paper, we also make use of the following PLS-complete problem [47].

      Definition 3. Iter:
      Input: Boolean circuit 𝐶 : [2𝑛 ] → [2𝑛 ] with 𝐶 (1) > 1.
      Goal: Find 𝑣 such that either
           • 𝐶 (𝑣) < 𝑣, or
           • 𝐶 (𝑣) > 𝑣 and 𝐶 (𝐶 (𝑣)) = 𝐶 (𝑣).


     In this problem, it is convenient to think of the nodes in [2𝑛 ] as lying on a line from left to right. Then, we are
looking for any node 𝑣 that is mapped to the left by 𝐶, or any node 𝑣 that is mapped to the right and such that 𝐶 (𝑣) is
a fixed point of 𝐶. Since 𝐶 (1) > 1, i.e., node 1 is mapped to the right, it is easy to see that such a solution must exist
(apply 𝐶 repeatedly on node 1). Note that the condition 𝐶 (1) > 1 can be enforced syntactically, so this is indeed a TFNP
problem and not a promise problem. See Figure 2 for an example of an Iter instance.

     PPAD ∩ PLS. The class PPAD ∩ PLS is the set of all TFNP problems that lie in both PPAD and in PLS. A problem in
PPAD ∩ PLS cannot be PPAD- or PLS-complete, unless PPAD ⊆ PLS or PLS ⊆ PPAD. Neither of these two containments
is believed to hold, and this is supported by oracle separations between the classes [10, 11, 47]. It is easy to construct
“artificial” PPAD ∩ PLS-complete problems from PPAD- and PLS-complete problems.

Proposition 3.1 (Daskalakis and Papadimitriou [21]). For any TFNP problems 𝐴 and 𝐵, let Either-Solution(𝐴,𝐵)
denote the problem: given an instance 𝐼𝐴 of 𝐴 and an instance 𝐼𝐵 of 𝐵, find a solution of 𝐼𝐴 or a solution of 𝐼𝐵 . If 𝐴 is
PPAD-complete and 𝐵 is PLS-complete, then Either-Solution(𝐴,𝐵) is PPAD ∩ PLS-complete.

As a result, we obtain the following corollary, which we will use to show our main PPAD ∩ PLS-hardness result.

Corollary 3.2. Either-Solution(End-of-Line,Iter) is PPAD ∩ PLS-complete.

Prior to our work, the problems Either-Solution(𝐴,𝐵), where 𝐴 is PPAD-complete and 𝐵 is PLS-complete, were the
only known PPAD ∩ PLS-complete problems.

3.1.3 Arithmetic circuits and the class CLS. Noting that PPAD ∩ PLS only seemed to have artificial complete problems,
Daskalakis and Papadimitriou [21] defined a subclass of PPAD ∩ PLS with a more natural definition, that combines
PPAD and PLS nicely in a single problem. Unlike PPAD and PLS, CLS is defined using arithmetic circuits.

     Arithmetic circuits. An arithmetic circuit representing a function 𝑓 : R𝑛 → R𝑚 is a circuit with 𝑛 inputs and 𝑚
outputs, and every internal node is a gate with fan-in 2 performing an operation in {+, −, ×, max, min, >} or a rational
constant (modelled as a gate with fan-in 0). The comparison gate >, on input 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ R, outputs 1 if 𝑎 > 𝑏, and 0 otherwise.
For an arithmetic circuit 𝑓 , we let size(𝑓 ) denote the size of the circuit, i.e., the number of bits needed to describe the
circuit, including the rational constants used therein. Obviously, there are various different ways of defining arithmetic
circuits, depending on which gates we allow. The definition we use here is the same as the one used by Daskalakis and
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                     15


Papadimitriou [21] in their original definition of CLS. Many variants are equivalent to this definition, for example <, ≤,
and ≥ can be implemented using the given operations.
   These circuits are very natural, but they suffer from a subtle issue that seems to have been overlooked in some prior
works. Using the multiplication gate, such an arithmetic circuit can perform repeated squaring to construct numbers
that have exponential representation size with respect to the size of the circuit and the input to the circuit. In other
words, the circuit can construct numbers that are doubly exponential (or the inverse thereof). Thus, in some cases, it
might not be possible to evaluate the circuit on some input efficiently, i.e., in time polynomial in the size of the circuit
and the given input. Indeed, evaluating the circuit is at least as hard as solving the PosSLP problem (of checking whether
the output of a given straight-line program is positive) introduced by Allender et al. [4], which is not believed to be
polynomial-time solvable.
   This subtle issue was recently also noticed by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou, who proposed a way to fix it in a
corrigendum5 to the definition of CLS. Their modification consists in having an additional input 𝐾 (in unary) provided
as part of the input such that the evaluation of the arithmetic circuit—purportedly—only involves numbers of bit-size
at most 𝐾 · size(𝑥) on input 𝑥. Any point 𝑥 where the arithmetic circuit fails to satisfy this property is accepted as a
solution.
   In this paper, we use an alternative way to resolve the issue. We restrict our attention to what we call well-behaved
arithmetic circuits. An arithmetic circuit 𝑓 is well-behaved if, on any directed path that leads to an output, there are at
most log(size(𝑓 )) true multiplication gates. A true multiplication gate is one where both inputs are non-constant nodes
of the circuit. In particular, note that we allow our circuits to perform multiplication by a constant as often as needed
without any restriction. Indeed, these operations cannot be used to do repeated squaring.
   It is easy to see that given an arithmetic circuit 𝑓 , we can check in polynomial time whether 𝑓 is well-behaved.
Furthermore, these circuits can always be efficiently evaluated.

Lemma 3.3. Let 𝑓 be a well-behaved arithmetic circuit with 𝑛 inputs. Then, for any rational 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 , 𝑓 (𝑥) can be computed
in time poly(size(𝑓 ), size(𝑥)).

We provide a proof of this Lemma in Appendix A.
   Using well-behaved arithmetic circuits, instead of the solution proposed by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou, has the
advantage that we do not need to add any additional inputs, or any additional violation solutions to our problems. Indeed,
the restriction to well-behaved circuits can be enforced syntactically. Furthermore, we note that our problems defined
with well-behaved circuits easily reduce to the versions using the solution proposed by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou
(see Remark 1 below). Thus, this restriction only makes our hardness results stronger. In fact, for CLS we show
that restricting the circuits even further to only use gates {+, −, max, min, ×𝜁 } and rational constants (where ×𝜁 is
multiplication by a constant), so-called linear arithmetic circuits (representing piecewise linear functions), does not
make the class any weaker (see Section 6.2).
   For the problems we consider, it is quite convenient to use arithmetic circuits instead of, say, polynomial-time Turing
machines to represent the functions involved. Indeed, the problems could also be defined with polynomial-time Turing
machines, but that would introduce some technical subtleties in the definitions (the polynomial used as an upper bound
on the running time of the machines would have to be fixed). The important thing to note is that the Turing machine
variants of the problems would continue to lie in PPAD ∩ PLS. Thus, using arithmetic circuits just makes our hardness

5 http://people.csail.mit.edu/costis/CLS-corrigendum.pdf
16                                            John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


results stronger. Note also that in the hard instances we construct, the arithmetic circuits only perform a constant
number of true multiplications (see the proof of Lemma 4.2).

Remark 1. The proof of Lemma 3.3 (in Appendix A) shows that if we evaluate a well-behaved arithmetic circuit 𝑓
on some input 𝑥, then, the value 𝑣 (𝑔) at any gate 𝑔 of the circuit will satisfy size(𝑣 (𝑔)) ≤ 6 · size(𝑓 ) 3 · size(𝑥). As a
result, it immediately follows that problems with well-behaved arithmetic circuits can be reduced to the versions of the
problems with the modification proposed by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou in the corrigendum of the CLS paper. Indeed,
it suffices to let 𝐾 = 6 · size(𝑓 ) 3 , which can be written down in unary. In particular, this holds for the definition of CLS.

Remark 2. Our definition of well-behaved circuits is robust in the following sense. For any 𝑘 ∈ N, say that a circuit 𝑓
is 𝑘-well-behaved if, on any path that leads to an output, there are at most 𝑘 · log(size(𝑓 )) true multiplication gates. In
particular, a circuit is well-behaved if it is 1-well-behaved. It is easy to see that for any fixed 𝑘 ∈ N, if we are given a
circuit 𝑓 that is 𝑘-well-behaved, we can construct in time poly(size(𝑓 )) a circuit 𝑓 ′ that is well-behaved and computes
the same function as 𝑓 . This can be achieved by adding (size(𝑓 ))𝑘 dummy gates to the circuit 𝑓 , i.e., gates that do not
alter the output of the circuit. For example, we can add gates that repeatedly add 0 to the output of the circuit.

     Lipschitz-continuity. Note that even well-behaved arithmetic circuits might not yield continuous functions, be-
cause of the comparison gate. Some of our problems require continuity of the function, and the most convenient type
of continuity for computational purposes is Lipschitz-continuity. A function 𝑓 : R𝑛 → R𝑚 is Lipschitz-continuous on
the domain 𝐷 ⊆ R𝑛 with Lipschitz-constant 𝐿, if for all 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷

                                                ∥𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑓 (𝑦)∥ ≤ 𝐿 · ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥.

     Violations and promise-preserving reductions. There is no known way of syntactically enforcing that an
arithmetic circuit be Lipschitz-continuous. Thus, to ensure that our problems indeed lie in TFNP, we allow any well-
behaved circuit in the input, together with a purported Lipschitz-constant 𝐿, and also accept a pair (𝑥, 𝑦) witnessing a
violation of 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuity as a solution. This “trick” was also used by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou [21] for
the definition of CLS.
     One might wonder whether defining a problem in this way, with violations, makes it harder than the (more natural)
promise version, where we only consider inputs that satisfy the promise (namely, 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuity). We show
that for our problems, the promise versions are just as hard. Indeed, the hard instances we construct for the KKT
problem satisfy the promises and we then obtain this for the other problems “for free”, because all of our reductions are
promise-preserving, as defined in [31, Definition 7]. A reduction (𝑓 , 𝑔) from problem 𝑅 to problem 𝑆 is promise-preserving,
if for any instance 𝑥 of 𝑅, for any violation solution 𝑦 of instance 𝑓 (𝑥) of 𝑆, it holds that 𝑔(𝑥, 𝑦) is a violation solution
of instance 𝑥 of 𝑅. Informally: any violation solution of 𝑆 is mapped back to a violation solution of 𝑅.

     CLS. The class CLS is defined as the set of all TFNP problems that reduce to 3D-Continuous-Localopt.

      Definition 4. Continuous-Localopt:
      Input:
          • precision/stopping parameter 𝜀 > 0,
          • well-behaved arithmetic circuits 𝑝 : [0, 1]𝑛 → [0, 1] and 𝑔 : [0, 1]𝑛 → [0, 1]𝑛 ,
          • Lipschitz constant 𝐿 > 0.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                 17


    Goal: Compute an approximate local optimum of 𝑝 with respect to 𝑔. Formally, find 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 such that

                                                      𝑝 (𝑔(𝑥)) ≥ 𝑝 (𝑥) − 𝜀.

    Alternatively, we also accept one of the following violations as a solution:
           • (𝑝 is not 𝐿-Lipschitz) 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 such that |𝑝 (𝑥) − 𝑝 (𝑦)| > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥,
           • (𝑔 is not 𝐿-Lipschitz) 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 such that ∥𝑔(𝑥) − 𝑔(𝑦)∥ > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥.


  For 𝑘 ∈ N, we let 𝑘D-Continuous-Localopt denote the problem Continuous-Localopt where 𝑛 is fixed to be
equal to 𝑘.
  Continuous-Localopt is similar to Localopt, in the sense that we are looking for a minimum of 𝑝 over the domain
[0, 1]𝑛 using the help of a function 𝑔. The membership of the problem in PLS and in PPAD is easy to show [21]. The
membership in PPAD follows from the observation that 𝑔 is a Brouwer function and that every (approximate) fixed
point of 𝑔 also yields a solution to the Continuous-Localopt instance.
  Note that the original definition of Continuous-Localopt in [21] uses arithmetic circuits without the “well-behaved”
restriction. As argued above, these circuits cannot always be evaluated efficiently, and so we instead use well-behaved
arithmetic circuits, to ensure that the problem lies in TFNP. The interesting problems shown to lie in CLS by Daskalakis
and Papadimitriou [21] still reduce to Continuous-Localopt even with this restriction on the circuits. It also turns
out that this restriction does not make the class any weaker, since we show that 2D-Continuous-Localopt with
well-behaved arithmetic circuits is PPAD ∩ PLS-hard.
  For some applications it is convenient to allow more general domains than just [0, 1]𝑛 and so we also define a more
general version of Continuous-Localopt.

    Definition 5. General-Continuous-Localopt:
    Input:
           • precision/stopping parameter 𝜀 > 0,
           • (𝐴, 𝑏) ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 × R𝑚 defining a bounded non-empty domain 𝐷 = {𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 : 𝐴𝑥 ≤ 𝑏},
           • well-behaved arithmetic circuits 𝑝 : R𝑛 → R and 𝑔 : R𝑛 → R𝑛 ,
           • Lipschitz constant 𝐿 > 0.
    Goal: Compute an approximate local optimum of 𝑝 with respect to 𝑔 on domain 𝐷. Formally, find 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 such
    that
                                                   𝑝 Π𝐷 (𝑔(𝑥)) ≥ 𝑝 (𝑥) − 𝜀.
                                                              

    Alternatively, we also accept one of the following violations as a solution:
           • (𝑝 is not 𝐿-Lipschitz) 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 such that |𝑝 (𝑥) − 𝑝 (𝑦)| > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥,
           • (𝑔 is not 𝐿-Lipschitz) 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 such that ∥𝑔(𝑥) − 𝑔(𝑦)∥ > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥.


Note that given (𝐴, 𝑏) ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 × R𝑚 , it is easy to check whether the domain 𝐷 = {𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 : 𝐴𝑥 ≤ 𝑏} is bounded and
non-empty by using linear programming.
  We use the projection Π𝐷 in this definition, because it is not clear whether there is some syntactic way of ensuring
that 𝑔(𝑥) ∈ 𝐷. Namely, it is unclear whether Π𝐷 can be computed inside our arithmetic circuits. However, Π𝐷 can
be computed efficiently by a Turing machine, since it can be formulated as a convex quadratic program, known to
18                                           John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


be solvable in polynomial time [43]. To be more precise, given a rational vector 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 , Π𝐷 (𝑥) can be computed
exactly in time poly(size(𝑥), size(𝐴), size(𝑏)). Note that when 𝐷 = [0, 1]𝑛 , the projection Π𝐷 can easily be computed
by arithmetic circuits, so Π𝐷 is not needed in the definition of Continuous-Localopt. Indeed, when 𝐷 = [0, 1]𝑛 , we
have [Π𝐷 (𝑥)]𝑖 = min{1, max{0, 𝑥𝑖 }} for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] and 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 .
     The definition of CLS using 3D-Continuous-Localopt, instead of 2D-Continuous-Localopt, Continuous-
Localopt, or General-Continuous-Localopt, leaves open various questions about whether all these different ways
of defining it are equivalent. We prove that this is indeed the case. We discuss this, as well as the robustness of the
definition of CLS with respect to other modifications in Section 6.

3.2    Computational problems from nonlinear optimization
In this section we formally define our three problems of interest. We begin by a brief introduction to nonlinear
optimization.

3.2.1 Background on nonlinear optimization. The standard problem of nonlinear optimization (also called nonlinear
programming) can be formulated as follows:

                                                      min 𝑓 (𝑥)
                                                      𝑥 ∈R𝑛
                                                                                                                       (1)
                                               s.t.   𝑔𝑖 (𝑥) ≤ 0    ∀𝑖 ∈ [𝑚]
where 𝑓 : R𝑛 → R is the objective function to be minimised, and 𝑔1, . . . , 𝑔𝑚 : R𝑛 → R are the inequality constraint
functions. It is assumed that 𝑓 , 𝑔𝑖 are 𝐶 1 , i.e., continuously differentiable. Throughout this paper we consider the
minimisation problem, but our results also apply to the maximisation problem, since we consider function classes that
are closed under negation.

     Global minimum. Unfortunately, solving the optimization problem (1), namely computing a global minimum, is
intractable, even for relatively simple objective functions and constraints ([48] in the context of quadratic programming,
[8] in the context of neural networks).

     Local minima. The most natural way to relax the requirement of a global minimum, is to look for a local minimum
instead. A point 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 is a local minimum of (1), if it satisfies all the constraints, namely 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷, where 𝐷 = {𝑦 ∈
R𝑛 | 𝑔𝑖 (𝑥) ≤ 0 ∀𝑖 ∈ [𝑚]}, and if there exists 𝜀 > 0 such that

                                            𝑓 (𝑥) ≤ 𝑓 (𝑦)        ∀𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 ∩ 𝐵𝜀 (𝑥)                                       (2)

where 𝐵𝜀 (𝑥) = {𝑦 ∈ R𝑛 | ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ ≤ 𝜀}.
     However, while the notion of a local minimum is very natural, an important issue arises when the problem is
considered from the computational perspective. Looking at expression (2), it not clear how to efficiently check whether
a given point 𝑥 is a local minimum or not. Indeed, it turns out that deciding whether a given point is a local minimum is
co-NP-hard, even for simple objective and constraint functions [48]. Furthermore, it was recently shown that computing
a local minimum, even when it is guaranteed to exist, cannot be done in polynomial time unless P = NP [3], even for
quadratic functions where the domain is a polytope.

     Necessary optimality conditions. In order to avoid this issue, one can instead look for a point satisfying some
so-called necessary optimality conditions. As the name suggests, these are conditions that must be satisfied for any local
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                                19


minimum, but might also be satisfied for points that are not local minima. Importantly, these conditions can usually be
checked in polynomial time. For this reason, algorithms attempting to solve (1), usually try to find a point that satisfies
some necessary optimality conditions instead.

   KKT points. The most famous and simplest necessary optimality conditions are the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT)
conditions. The KKT conditions are first-order conditions in the sense that they only involve the first derivatives (i.e.,
the gradients) of the functions in the problem statement. Formally, a point 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 satisfies the KKT conditions if it is
feasible, i.e., 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 = {𝑦 ∈ R𝑛 | 𝑔𝑖 (𝑥) ≤ 0 ∀𝑖 ∈ [𝑚]}, and if there exist 𝜇1, . . . , 𝜇𝑚 ≥ 0 such that
                                                                      𝑚
                                                                      ∑︁
                                                           ∇𝑓 (𝑥) +         𝜇𝑖 ∇𝑔𝑖 (𝑥) = 0
                                                                      𝑖=1
and 𝜇𝑖 𝑔𝑖 (𝑥) = 0 for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑚]. This last condition ensures that 𝜇𝑖 > 0 can only occur if 𝑔𝑖 (𝑥) = 0, i.e., if the 𝑖th
constraint is tight. In particular, if no constraint is tight at 𝑥, then 𝑥 is a KKT point if ∇𝑓 (𝑥) = 0 (in other words, if it is
a stationary point). A point 𝑥 that satisfies the KKT conditions is also called a KKT point. Note that given access to
∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑔𝑖 (𝑥) and ∇𝑔𝑖 (𝑥), one can check in polynomial time whether 𝑥 is a KKT point, since this reduces to checking
the feasibility of a linear program.
   Every local minimum of (1) must satisfy the KKT conditions, as long as the problem satisfies some so-called
regularity conditions or constraint qualifications. In this paper, we restrict our attention to linear constraints (i.e.,
𝑔𝑖 (𝑥) = ⟨𝑎𝑖 , 𝑥⟩ − 𝑏𝑖 ). In this case, it is known that every local minimum is indeed a KKT point.

   𝜺-KKT points. In practice, but also when studying the computational complexity in the standard Turing model
(because of issues of representation), it is unreasonable to expect to find a point that exactly satisfies the KKT conditions.
Instead, one looks for an approximate KKT point. Given 𝜀 ≥ 0, we say that 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 is an 𝜀-KKT point if 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 and if
there exist 𝜇 1, . . . , 𝜇𝑚 ≥ 0 such that
                                                                      𝑚
                                                                      ∑︁
                                                           ∇𝑓 (𝑥) +         𝜇𝑖 ∇𝑔𝑖 (𝑥) ≤ 𝜀
                                                                      𝑖=1
and 𝜇𝑖 𝑔𝑖 (𝑥) = 0 for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑚].6 In particular, if no constraint is tight at 𝑥, then 𝑥 is an 𝜀-KKT point if ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥)∥ ≤ 𝜀
(i.e., if 𝑥 is an 𝜀-stationary point). Since ∥ · ∥ denotes the ℓ2 -norm, we can check whether a point is an 𝜀-KKT point
in polynomial time by using a convex quadratic program, which can be solved efficiently [43]. If we instead use the
ℓ∞ -norm or the ℓ1 -norm in the definition of 𝜀-KKT point, then we can check whether a point is an 𝜀-KKT point in
polynomial time by solving a linear program.
   Since we focus on the case where 𝐷 = {𝑦 ∈ R𝑛 | 𝐴𝑦 ≤ 𝑏}, (𝐴, 𝑏) ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 × R𝑚 , we can rewrite the KKT conditions
as follows. A point 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 is an 𝜀-KKT point if 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 and if there exist 𝜇 1, . . . , 𝜇𝑚 ≥ 0 such that

                                                                ∇𝑓 (𝑥) + 𝐴𝑇 𝜇 ≤ 𝜀

and ⟨𝜇, 𝐴𝑥 − 𝑏⟩ = 0. Note that this exactly corresponds to the earlier definition adapted to this case. In particular, the
condition “𝜇𝑖 [𝐴𝑥 − 𝑏]𝑖 = 0 for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑚]” is equivalent to ⟨𝜇, 𝐴𝑥 − 𝑏⟩ = 0, since 𝜇𝑖 ≥ 0 and [𝐴𝑥 − 𝑏]𝑖 ≤ 0 for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑚].
   It is known that if there are no constraints, then it is NP-hard to decide whether a KKT point exists [2]. This implies
that, in general, unless P = NP, there is no polynomial-time algorithm that computes a KKT point of (1). However,

6 This is the usual definition of an 𝜀 -KKT point [26, 53]. A weaker notion where the complementary slackness condition is relaxed to 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑥) ≥ −𝜀 can
                                                                                                                                       𝑖 𝑖
also be considered [26]. Our hardness result holds for this weaker notion as well. Indeed, it is easy to check that an 𝜀 -KKT point can be obtained by
first computing a “weak” 𝜀 ′ -KKT point 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1] 2 (for some 𝜀 ′ efficiently computable given 𝜀 and the other parameters of the problem), and by then
“rounding” 𝑥𝑖 to 0 or to 1 if it is sufficiently close to 0 or 1, respectively.
20                                             John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


this hardness result does not say anything about one very important special case, namely when the feasible region
𝐷 is a compact set (in particular, when it is a bounded polytope defined by linear constraints). Indeed, in that case, a
KKT point is guaranteed to exist—since a local minimum is guaranteed to exist—and easy to verify, and thus finding a
KKT point is a total search problem in the class TFNP. In particular, this means that, for compact 𝐷, the problem of
computing a KKT point cannot be NP-hard, unless NP = co-NP [44]. In this paper, we provide strong evidence that the
problem remains hard for such bounded domains, and, in fact, even when the feasible region is as simple as 𝐷 = [0, 1] 2 .
     The problem of finding an 𝜀-KKT point has primarily been studied in the “black box” model, where we only have
oracle access to the function and its gradient, and count the number of oracle calls needed to solve the problem. Vavasis
[53] proved that at least Ω( 𝐿/𝜀) calls are needed to find an 𝜀-KKT point of a continuously differentiable function
                              √︁

𝑓 : [0, 1] 2 → R with 𝐿-Lipschitz gradient. It was recently shown by Bubeck and Mikulincer [9] that this bound is tight
up to a logarithmic factor. For the high-dimensional case, Carmon et al. [12] showed a tight bound of Θ(1/𝜀 2 ), when
the Lipschitz constant is fixed.

3.2.2 The KKT problem. Given the definition of 𝜀-KKT points in the previous section, we can formally define a
computational problem where the goal is to compute such a point. Our formalisation of this problem assumes that 𝑓
and ∇𝑓 are provided in the input as arithmetic circuits. However, it is unclear if, given a circuit 𝑓 , we can efficiently
determine whether it corresponds to a continuously differentiable function, and whether the circuit for ∇𝑓 indeed
computes its gradient. Thus, one has to either consider the promise version of the problem (where this is guaranteed to
hold for the input), or add violation solutions like in the definition of Continuous-Localopt. In order to ensure that
our problem is in TFNP, we formally define it with violation solutions. However, we note that our hardness results also
hold for the promise versions.
     The type of violation solution that we introduce to ensure that ∇𝑓 is indeed the gradient of 𝑓 is based on the following
version of Taylor’s theorem, which is proved in Appendix B.2.

Lemma 3.4 (Taylor’s theorem). Let 𝑓 : R𝑛 → R be continuously differentiable and let 𝐷 ⊆ R𝑛 be convex. If ∇𝑓 is
𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous (w.r.t. the ℓ2 -norm) on 𝐷, then for all 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 we have
                                                                             𝐿
                                         𝑓 (𝑦) − 𝑓 (𝑥) − ⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑦 − 𝑥⟩ ≤     ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ 2 .
                                                                             2
We are now ready to formally define our KKT problem.

      Definition 6. KKT:
      Input:
           • precision parameter 𝜀 > 0,
           • (𝐴, 𝑏) ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 × R𝑚 defining a bounded non-empty domain 𝐷 = {𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 : 𝐴𝑥 ≤ 𝑏},
           • well-behaved arithmetic circuits 𝑓 : R𝑛 → R and ∇𝑓 : R𝑛 → R𝑛 ,
           • Lipschitz constant 𝐿 > 0.
      Goal: Compute an 𝜀-KKT point for the minimization problem of 𝑓 on domain 𝐷.
      Formally, find 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 such that there exist 𝜇 1, . . . , 𝜇𝑚 ≥ 0 such that

                                                       ∇𝑓 (𝑥) + 𝐴𝑇 𝜇 ≤ 𝜀

      and ⟨𝜇, 𝐴𝑥 − 𝑏⟩ = 0.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                   21


    Alternatively, we also accept one of the following violations as a solution:
        • (𝑓 or ∇𝑓 is not 𝐿-Lipschitz) 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 such that

                         |𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑓 (𝑦)| > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥     or     ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥) − ∇𝑓 (𝑦)∥ > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥,

        • (∇𝑓 is not the gradient of 𝑓 ) 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 that contradict Taylor’s theorem (Lemma 3.4), i.e.,
                                                                             𝐿
                                      𝑓 (𝑦) − 𝑓 (𝑥) − ⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑦 − 𝑥⟩ >        ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ 2 .
                                                                             2


  Note that all conditions on the input of the KKT problem can be checked in polynomial time. In particular, we can
use linear programming to check that the domain is bounded and non-empty. With regards to a solution 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷, there is
no need to include the values 𝜇 1, . . . , 𝜇𝑚 as part of a solution. Indeed, given 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷, we can check in polynomial time
whether there exist such 𝜇1, . . . , 𝜇𝑚 by solving the following convex quadratic program:
                                                                         2
                                               min      ∇𝑓 (𝑥) + 𝐴𝑇 𝜇
                                              𝜇 ∈R𝑚


                                              s.t.     ⟨𝜇, 𝐴𝑥 − 𝑏⟩ = 0
                                                       𝜇≥0

If the optimal value of this program is strictly larger than 𝜀 2 , then 𝑥 is not an 𝜀-KKT point. Otherwise, it is an 𝜀-KKT
point and the optimal 𝜇 1, . . . , 𝜇𝑚 certify this. If we use the ℓ∞ -norm or the ℓ1 -norm instead of the ℓ2 -norm for the
definition of 𝜀-KKT points, then we can check whether a point is an 𝜀-KKT point using the same approach (except
that we do not take the square of the norm, and we simply obtain a linear program). Whether we use the ℓ2 -norm, the
ℓ∞ -norm or the ℓ1 -norm for the definition of 𝜀-KKT points has no impact on the complexity of the KKT problem defined
above. Indeed, is is easy to reduce the various versions to each other.
  Note that 𝜀 and 𝐿 are provided in binary representation in the input. This is important, since our hardness result in
Theorem 4.1 relies on at least one of those two parameters being exponential in the size of the input. If both parameters
are provided in unary, then the problem can be solved in polynomial time on the domain [0, 1]𝑛 (see Lemma C.4).

3.2.3 Gradient Descent problems. In this section we formally define our two versions of the Gradient Descent problem.
Since we consider Gradient Descent on bounded domains 𝐷, we need to ensure that the next iterate indeed lies in 𝐷.
The standard way to handle this is by using so-called Projected Gradient Descent, where the next iterate is computed
using a standard Gradient Descent step and then projected onto 𝐷 using Π𝐷 . Formally,
                                                                      
                                        𝑥 (𝑘+1) ← Π𝐷 𝑥 (𝑘) − 𝜂∇𝑓 𝑥 (𝑘)

where 𝜂 > 0 is the step size. Throughout, we only consider the case where the step size is fixed, i.e., the same in
all iterations. Our first version of the problem considers the stopping criterion: stop if the next iterate improves the
objective function value by less than 𝜀.

    Definition 7. GD-Local-Search:
    Input:
        • precision/stopping parameter 𝜀 > 0,
22                                             John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


           • step size 𝜂 > 0,
           • (𝐴, 𝑏) ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 × R𝑚 defining a bounded non-empty domain 𝐷 = {𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 : 𝐴𝑥 ≤ 𝑏},
           • well-behaved arithmetic circuits 𝑓 : R𝑛 → R and ∇𝑓 : R𝑛 → R𝑛 ,
           • Lipschitz constant 𝐿 > 0.
      Goal: Compute any point where (projected) gradient descent for 𝑓 on domain 𝐷 with fixed step size 𝜂 terminates.
      Formally, find 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 such that                         
                                              𝑓 Π𝐷 𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥) ≥ 𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝜀.
      Alternatively, we also accept one of the following violations as a solution:
           • (𝑓 or ∇𝑓 is not 𝐿-Lipschitz) 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 such that

                           |𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑓 (𝑦)| > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥     or      ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥) − ∇𝑓 (𝑦)∥ > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥,

           • (∇𝑓 is not the gradient of 𝑓 ) 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 that contradict Taylor’s theorem (Lemma 3.4), i.e.,
                                                                             𝐿
                                         𝑓 (𝑦) − 𝑓 (𝑥) − ⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑦 − 𝑥⟩ >     ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ 2 .
                                                                             2


     Our second version of the problem considers the stopping criterion: stop if the next iterate is 𝜀-close to the current
iterate.

      Definition 8. GD-Fixpoint:
      Input:
           • precision/stopping parameter 𝜀 > 0,
           • step size 𝜂 > 0,
           • (𝐴, 𝑏) ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 × R𝑚 defining a bounded non-empty domain 𝐷 = {𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 : 𝐴𝑥 ≤ 𝑏},
           • well-behaved arithmetic circuits 𝑓 : R𝑛 → R and ∇𝑓 : R𝑛 → R𝑛 ,
           • Lipschitz constant 𝐿 > 0.
      Goal: Compute any point that is an 𝜀-approximate fixed point of (projected) gradient descent for 𝑓 on domain
      𝐷 with fixed step size 𝜂. Formally, find 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 such that

                                                  𝑥 − Π𝐷 𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥)
                                                                       
                                                                           ≤ 𝜀.

      Alternatively, we also accept one of the following violations as a solution:
           • (𝑓 or ∇𝑓 is not 𝐿-Lipschitz) 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 such that

                           |𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑓 (𝑦)| > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥     or      ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥) − ∇𝑓 (𝑦)∥ > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥,

           • (∇𝑓 is not the gradient of 𝑓 ) 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 that contradict Taylor’s theorem (Lemma 3.4), i.e.,
                                                                             𝐿
                                         𝑓 (𝑦) − 𝑓 (𝑥) − ⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑦 − 𝑥⟩ >     ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ 2 .
                                                                             2


     The comments made about the KKT problem in the previous section also apply to these two problems. In particular,
we show that even the promise versions of the two Gradient Descent problems remain PPAD ∩ PLS-hard. In other
words, the hard instances we construct have no violations.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                        23


Remark 3. An interesting question is: what happens if we omit the last violation (namely, the one about Taylor’s
theorem) from the definitions of these problems? For GD-Local-Search it turns out that this does not change the
complexity of the problem. Indeed, removing the last violation means that the functions 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 can now be completely
unrelated. However, for GD-Local-Search it is not hard to see that the problem remains in CLS (in fact, note that the
proof of Proposition 5.5 which reduces GD-Local-Search to General-Continuous-Localopt does not use violations
to Taylor’s theorem). Thus, the problem remains PPAD ∩ PLS-complete.
    On the other hand, for GD-Fixpoint and KKT it turns out that omitting the last violation does change the complexity
of the problem. Indeed, note that unlike GD-Local-Search, the property that some 𝑥 must satisfy in order to be a
(non-violation) solution only depends on ∇𝑓 , and not at all on 𝑓 . As a result, it is easy to reduce from the problem
of finding an approximate Brouwer fixed point of a function 𝑔 : [0, 1] 2 → [0, 1] 2 to either of these two problems, by
letting 𝑓 (𝑥) = 0, ∇𝑓 (𝑥) = 𝑥 − 𝑔(𝑥), and setting the remaining parameters appropriately. It follows that GD-Fixpoint
and KKT without the last violation are PPAD-hard, and in fact it can be shown that they are PPAD-complete. Finally,
note that it is easy to see that GD-Fixpoint and KKT remain equivalent if we remove the last violation: one direction is
given by the proof of Proposition 5.3 (which still works without violations to Taylor’s theorem), and the other direction
can be obtained by using the arguments in step 2 of the proof of Proposition 5.4.

4     KKT IS PPAD ∩ PLS-HARD
In this section, we prove our main technical result.

Theorem 4.1. KKT is PPAD ∩ PLS-hard, even when the domain is fixed to be the unit square [0, 1] 2 . The hardness
continues to hold even if one considers the promise-version of the problem, i.e., only instances without violations.

In order to show this we provide a polynomial-time many-one reduction from Either-Solution(End-of-Line,Iter) to
KKT on the unit square.

    Overview. Consider any instance of End-of-Line with 2𝑛 vertices and any instance of Iter with 2𝑚 nodes.
We construct a function 𝑓 for the KKT problem as follows. We first work on the domain [0, 𝑁 ] 2 with a grid 𝐺 =
{0, 1, 2, . . . , 𝑁 }2 , where 𝑁 = 2𝑛 · 2𝑚+4 . In the conceptually most interesting part of the reduction, we carefully specify
the value of the function 𝑓 and the direction of −∇𝑓 (the direction of steepest descent) at all the points of the grid 𝐺.
Then, in the second part of the reduction, we show how to extend 𝑓 within every square of the grid, so as to obtain a
continuously differentiable function on [0, 𝑁 ] 2 . Finally, we scale down the domain to [0, 1] 2 . We show that any 𝜀-KKT
point of 𝑓 (for some sufficiently small 𝜀) must yield a solution to the End-of-Line instance or a solution to the Iter
instance.

4.1    Defining the function on the grid
    Overview of the embedding. We divide the domain [0, 𝑁 ] 2 into 2𝑛 × 2𝑛 big squares. For any 𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ∈ [2𝑛 ], let
𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ) denote the big square                                          
                                               𝑁       𝑁             𝑁       𝑁
                                      (𝑣 1 − 1) 𝑛 , 𝑣 1 𝑛 × (𝑣 2 − 1) 𝑛 , 𝑣 2 𝑛 .
                                               2       2             2       2
We use the following interpretation: the vertex 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] of the End-of-Line instance is embedded at the centre of
the big square 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣). Thus, the vertices are arranged along the main diagonal of the domain. In particular, the trivial
source 1 ∈ [2𝑛 ] is located at the centre of the big square that lies in the bottom-left corner of the domain and contains
the origin.
24                                                John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


     We seek to embed the edges of the End-of-Line instance in our construction. For every directed edge (𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ) of the
End-of-Line instance, we are going to embed a directed path in the grid 𝐺 that goes from the centre of 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 1 ) to the
centre of 𝐵(𝑣 2, 𝑣 2 ). The type of path used and the route taken by the path will depend on whether the edge (𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ) is a
“forward” edge or a “backward” edge. In more detail:

      • if 𝑣 1 < 𝑣 2 (“forward” edge), then we will use a so-called green path that can only travel to the right and upwards.
         The path starts at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 1 ) and moves to the right until it reaches the centre of 𝐵(𝑣 2, 𝑣 1 ). Then, it
         moves upwards until it reaches its destination: the centre of 𝐵(𝑣 2, 𝑣 2 ).
      • if 𝑣 1 > 𝑣 2 (“backward” edge), then we will use a so-called orange path that can only travel to the left and
         downwards. The path starts at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 1 ) and moves to the left until it reaches the centre of 𝐵(𝑣 2, 𝑣 1 ).
         Then, it moves downwards until it reaches its destination: the centre of 𝐵(𝑣 2, 𝑣 2 ).

Figure 6 illustrates the high-level idea of the embedding with an example.
     For points of the grid 𝐺 that are part of the “environment”, namely that do not lie on a path, the function 𝑓 will
simply be defined by (𝑥, 𝑦) ↦→ 𝑥 + 𝑦. Thus, if there are no paths at all, the only local minimum of 𝑓 will be at the origin.
However, a green path starts at the origin and this will ensure that there is no minimum there. This green path will
correspond to the outgoing edge of the trivial source 1 ∈ [2𝑛 ] of the End-of-Line instance.
     The green paths will be constructed such that if one moves along a green path the value of 𝑓 decreases, which means
that we are improving the objective function value. Furthermore, the value of 𝑓 at any point on a green path will be
below the value of 𝑓 at any point in the environment. Conversely, the orange paths will be constructed such that if one
moves along an orange path the value of 𝑓 increases, so the objective function value becomes worse. Additionally, the
value of 𝑓 at any point on an orange path will be above the value of 𝑓 at any point in the environment.
     We say that a path starting at 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 1 ) “starts in the environment”, if there is no path ending at 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 1 ). Similarly, a
path ending at 𝐵(𝑣 2, 𝑣 2 ) “ends in the environment”, if there is no path starting at 𝐵(𝑣 2, 𝑣 2 ). If any path starts or ends
in the environment, the construction ensures that there is a stationary point (and thus a KKT point) there. The only
exception is the path corresponding to the outgoing edge of the trivial vertex 1 ∈ [2𝑛 ]. The start of that path will not
create a KKT point. Thus, in the example of Figure 6, there will certainly be KKT points in 𝐵(3, 3), 𝐵(7, 7) and 𝐵(8, 8),
but not in 𝐵(1, 1).
     Recall that every vertex 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] has at most one incoming edge and at most one outgoing edge. Thus, for any vertex
𝑣 ≠ 1, one of the following cases occurs:

      • 𝑣 is an isolated vertex. In this case, the big square 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) will not contain any path and will fully be in the
         environment, thus not containing any KKT point. Example: vertex 5 in Figure 6.
      • 𝑣 has one outgoing edge and no incoming edge. In this case, the big square 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) will contain the start of a
         green or orange path. There will be a KKT point at the start of the path, which is fine, since 𝑣 is a (non-trivial)
         source of the End-of-Line instance. Example: vertex 7 in Figure 6.
      • 𝑣 has one incoming edge and no outgoing edge. In this case, the big square 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) will contain the end of a green
         or orange path. There will be a KKT point at the end of the path, which is again fine, since 𝑣 is a sink of the
         End-of-Line instance. Example: vertices 3 and 8 in Figure 6.
      • 𝑣 has one outgoing and one incoming edge. In this case, there are two sub-cases:
         – If both edges yield paths of the same colour, then we will be able to “connect” the two paths at the centre of
            𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) and avoid introducing a KKT point there. Example: vertex 4 in Figure 6.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                  25


                                                                                                          8



                                             B(3, 7)                                            7



                                 B(2, 6)                                          6



                                                                        5



                                                          4

                                                                                      B(6, 4)

                                              3



                                  2

                                                                                                              B(8, 2)

                      1

                                                              B(4, 1)


Fig. 6. Example of the high-level idea for the embedding of an End-of-Line instance in the domain. In this example we are embedding
an End-of-Line instance with the set of vertices [8] (i.e., 𝑛 = 3) and the directed edges: (1, 4), (2, 8), (4, 6), (6, 2) and (7, 3) (see
Figure 1). The domain is divided into 8 × 8 big squares, and the big squares corresponding to the vertices of the End-of-Line graph
are coloured in grey. The solutions of this End-of-Line instance are the vertices 3, 7 and 8.




       – If one of the paths is green and the other one is orange, then there will be a local maximum or minimum in
          𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) (and thus a KKT point). It is not too hard to see that this is in fact unavoidable. Indeed, if the incoming
          path is green and the outgoing path is orange, then there will necessarily be a local minimum at the end of the
          green path (Example: vertex 6 in Figure 6). If the incoming path is orange and the outgoing path is green, then
          there will necessarily be a local maximum at the end of the orange path (Example: vertex 2 in Figure 6). This
          is where we use the main new “trick” of our reduction: we “hide” the exact location of the KKT point inside
          𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) in such a way, that finding it requires solving a PLS-complete problem, namely the Iter instance. This
          is achieved by introducing a new gadget at the point where the two paths meet. We call this the PLS-Labyrinth
          gadget.

The construction of the green and orange paths is described in detail in Section 4.1.3. The PLS-Labyrinth gadget is
described in detail in Section 4.1.4.
26                                                 John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


4.1.1 Pre-processing. Consider any instance ((𝑆, 𝑃), 𝐶) of Either-Solution(End-of-Line,Iter), i.e., 𝑆, 𝑃 : [2𝑛 ] → [2𝑛 ]
is an instance of End-of-Line and 𝐶 : [2𝑚 ] → [2𝑚 ] is an instance of Iter. Without loss of generality, we can assume
that these instances satisfy the following:

     (1) The successor and predecessor circuits 𝑆, 𝑃 agree on all edges. Formally, for all 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ], it holds that
         • if 𝑆 (𝑣) ≠ 𝑣, then 𝑃 (𝑆 (𝑣)) = 𝑣, and
         • if 𝑃 (𝑣) ≠ 𝑣, then 𝑆 (𝑃 (𝑣)) = 𝑣.
        This property can be ensured by a simple pre-processing step. We modify the circuit 𝑆, so that before outputting
        𝑆 (𝑣), it first checks whether (𝑆 (𝑣) ≠ 𝑣) ∧ (𝑃 (𝑆 (𝑣)) ≠ 𝑣), and, if this holds, outputs 𝑣 instead of 𝑆 (𝑣). It is easy to
         see that this new circuit for 𝑆 can be constructed in polynomial time in the size of 𝑆 and 𝑃. We also perform the
         analogous modification for 𝑃. It is easy to check that this does not introduce any new solutions.
     (2) For all 𝑢 ∈ [2𝑚 ] we have 𝐶 (𝑢) ≥ 𝑢. We can ensure that this holds by modifying the circuit 𝐶, so that before
         outputting 𝐶 (𝑢), it checks whether 𝐶 (𝑢) < 𝑢, and, if this is the case, outputs 𝑢 instead of 𝐶 (𝑢). Again, the
         modification can be done in polynomial time and does not introduce new solutions, nor does it stop the problem
         from being total.

4.1.2 The value regimes. Recall that we want to specify the value of 𝑓 and −∇𝑓 (the direction of steepest descent) at
all points on the grid 𝐺 = {0, 1, 2, . . . , 𝑁 }2 , where 𝑁 = 2𝑛 · 2𝑚+4 . In order to specify the value of 𝑓 , it is convenient to
define value regimes. Namely, if a point (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ 𝐺 is in:

      • the red value regime, then 𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦) := 𝑥 − 𝑦 + 4𝑁 + 20.
      • the orange value regime, then 𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦) := −𝑥 − 𝑦 + 4𝑁 + 10.
      • the black value regime, then 𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦) := 𝑥 + 𝑦.
      • the green value regime, then 𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦) := −𝑥 − 𝑦 − 10.
      • the blue value regime, then 𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦) := 𝑥 − 𝑦 − 2𝑁 − 20.

Note that at any point on the grid, the value regimes are ordered: red > orange > black > green > blue. Furthermore, it
is easy to check that the gap between any two regimes at any point is at least 10. Figure 7 illustrates the main properties
of the value regimes.

                                                                                                           y



                                                                                                                        x




Fig. 7. The value regimes. On the left, the colours are ordered according to increasing value, from left to right. On the right, we
indicate for each value regime, the direction in which it improves, i.e., decreases, in the 𝑥-𝑦-plane.



     The black value regime will be used for the environment. Thus, unless stated otherwise, every grid point is coloured
in black, i.e., belongs to the black value regime. Furthermore, in our construction, we will set the direction of steepest
descent, i.e., −∇𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦), at every grid point (𝑥, 𝑦) to be one of the four possible cardinal directions, i.e., left, right, up, or
down. Unless stated otherwise, at every black grid point (𝑥, 𝑦), the direction of steepest descent −∇𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦) will point to
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                               27


the left.7 The only exceptions to this (i.e., the only black grid points where the direction of steepest descent does not
point left) are black grid points that lie in paths, or black grid points that lie on the left boundary of the domain (i.e.,
points with 𝑥 = 0).

4.1.3 Embedding the End-of-Line instance: The green and orange paths. Our construction specifies for each grid point
a colour (which represents the value of 𝑓 at that point) and an arrow that represents the direction of −∇𝑓 at that point.
A general “rule” that we follow throughout our construction is that the function values should be consistent with the
arrows. For example, if some grid point has an arrow pointing to the right, then the adjacent grid point to the right
should have a lower function value, while the adjacent grid point to the left should have a higher function value. This
rule is not completely sufficient by itself to avoid KKT points, but it is already a very useful guide.
   Recall that the grid 𝐺 = {0, 1, 2, . . . , 𝑁 }2 subdivides every big square 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ) into 2𝑚+4 × 2𝑚+4 small squares. The
width of the paths we construct will be two small squares. This corresponds to a width of three grid points.

   Green paths. When a green path moves to the right, the two lower grid points will be coloured in green, and the
grid point at the top will be in black. Figure 8(a) shows a big square that is traversed by a green path from left to right.
Such a big square is said to be of type G1. The black arrows indicate the direction of −∇𝑓 at every grid point.
   When a green path moves upwards, the two right-most grid points will be coloured in green, and the grid point on
the left will be in black. Figure 8(b) shows a big square of type G2, namely one that is traversed by a green path from
the bottom to the top.
   Recall that a green path implementing an edge (𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ) (where 𝑣 1 < 𝑣 2 ) comes into the big square 𝐵(𝑣 2, 𝑣 1 ) from the
left and leaves at the top. Thus, the path has to “turn”. Figure 8(c) shows how this turn is implemented. The big square
𝐵(𝑣 2, 𝑣 1 ) is said to be of type G3.
   If a vertex 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] has one incoming edge (𝑣 1, 𝑣) and one outgoing edge (𝑣, 𝑣 2 ) such that 𝑣 1 < 𝑣 < 𝑣 2 , then both
edges will be implemented by green paths. The green path corresponding to (𝑣 1, 𝑣) will enter 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) from the bottom
and stop at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣). The green path corresponding to (𝑣, 𝑣 2 ) will start at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) and leave
the big square on the right. In order to avoid introducing any KKT points in 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) (since 𝑣 is not a solution of the
End-of-Line instance), we will connect the two paths at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣). This will be achieved by a simple turn, as
shown in Figure 8(d). The big square 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) is said to be of type G4.
   If a vertex 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] \ {1} has one outgoing edge (𝑣, 𝑣 2 ) such that 𝑣 < 𝑣 2 , and no incoming edge, then this will yield a
green path starting at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) and going to the right, as shown in Figure 8(e). The big square 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) is said
to be of type G5 in that case. It is not hard to see that there will be a KKT point at the source of that green path. On the
other hand, if a vertex 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] \ {1} has one incoming edge (𝑣 1, 𝑣) such that 𝑣 1 < 𝑣, and no outgoing edge, then this
will yield a green path coming from the bottom and ending at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣), as shown in Figure 8(f). The big
square 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) is said to be of type G6 in that case. Again, there will be a KKT point at the sink of that green path.

   Orange paths. The structure of orange paths is, in a certain sense, symmetric to the structure of green paths. When
an orange path moves to the left, the two upper grid points will be coloured in orange, and the grid point at the bottom
will be in black. Figure 9(a) shows a big square that is traversed by an orange path from right to left. Such a big square
is said to be of type O1.
7 Notice that this is not the same as the negative gradient of the “black regime function” (𝑥, 𝑦) ↦→ 𝑥 + 𝑦 , which would point south-west, as shown in
Figure 7. Nevertheless, as we show later, this is enough to ensure that the bicubic interpolation that we use does not introduce any points with zero
gradient in a region of the environment. Similarly, for grid points coloured with one of the other colours we will also not use the diagonal negative
gradient of the corresponding value regime function, but instead one of the four cardinal directions.
28                                               John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani




 (a) [G1] Green path traversing big square from left to right.         (b) [G2] Green path traversing big square from bottom to top.




(c) [G3] Green path entering big square from the left, turning,        (d) [G4] Green path entering big square from the bottom, turn-
and leaving at the top.                                                ing, and leaving on the right.




(e) [G5] Source: green path starting at the centre of big square       (f) [G6] Sink: green path entering big square from the bottom
and leaving on the right.                                              and ending at the centre.

Fig. 8. Construction of the green paths. The figures show various types of big squares containing different portions of green paths. In
these illustrations, the big squares are assumed to have size 8 × 8 instead of 2𝑚+4 × 2𝑚+4 .
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                       29


  When an orange path moves downwards, the two left-most grid points will be coloured in orange, and the grid point
on the right will be in black. Figure 9(b) shows a big square of type O2, namely one that is traversed by an orange path
from top to bottom. Note that the arrows on an orange path essentially point in the opposite direction compared to the
direction of the path. This is because we want the value to increase (i.e., worsen) when we follow an orange path.
  An orange path implementing an edge (𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ) (where 𝑣 1 > 𝑣 2 ) comes into the big square 𝐵(𝑣 2, 𝑣 1 ) from the right and
leaves at the bottom. This turn is implemented as shown in Figure 9(c). The big square 𝐵(𝑣 2, 𝑣 1 ) is said to be of type O3.
  If a vertex 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] has one incoming edge (𝑣 1, 𝑣) and one outgoing edge (𝑣, 𝑣 2 ) such that 𝑣 1 > 𝑣 > 𝑣 2 , then both
edges will be implemented by orange paths. The orange path corresponding to (𝑣 1, 𝑣) will enter 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) from the top
and stop at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣). The orange path corresponding to (𝑣, 𝑣 2 ) will start at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) and leave
the big square on the left. As above, we avoid introducing a KKT point by connecting the two paths at the centre of
𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣). This is achieved by the turn shown in Figure 9(d). The big square 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) is said to be of type O4.
  If a vertex 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] \ {1} has one outgoing edge (𝑣, 𝑣 2 ) such that 𝑣 > 𝑣 2 , and no incoming edge, then this will yield
an orange path starting at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) and going to the left, as shown in Figure 9(e). The big square 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) is
said to be of type O5 in that case. It is not hard to see that there will be a KKT point at the source of that orange path.
On the other hand, if a vertex 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] \ {1} has one incoming edge (𝑣 1, 𝑣) such that 𝑣 1 > 𝑣, and no outgoing edge, then
this will yield an orange path coming from the top and ending at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣), as shown in Figure 9(f). The big
square 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) is said to be of type O6 in that case. Again, there will be a KKT point at the sink of that orange path.

  Crossings. Note that, by construction, green paths only exist below the diagonal, and orange paths only exist above
the diagonal. Thus, there is no point where an orange path crosses a green path. However, there might exist points
where green paths cross, or orange paths cross. First of all, note that it is impossible to have more than two paths
traversing a big square, and thus any crossing involves exactly two paths. Furthermore, no crossing can occur in big
squares where a “turn” occurs, since, in that case, the turn connects the two paths.
  The only way for two green paths to cross is the case where a green path traverses a big square from left to right,
and a second green path traverses the same big square from bottom to top. In that case, we say that the big square is of
type G7. This problem always occurs when one tries to embed an End-of-Line instance in a two-dimensional domain.
Chen and Deng [16] proposed a simple, yet ingenious, trick to resolve this issue. The idea is to locally re-route the two
paths so that they no longer cross. This modification has the following two crucial properties: a) it is completely local,
and b) it does not introduce any new solution (in our case a KKT point). Figure 10(a) shows how this modification is
implemented for crossing green paths, i.e., what our construction does for big squares of type G7.
  The same issue might arise for orange paths. By the same arguments as above, this can only happen when an orange
path traverses a big square from right to left, and a second orange path traverses the same big square from top to
bottom. In that case, we say that the big square is of type O7. Figure 10(b) shows how the issue is locally resolved in
that case, i.e., what our construction does for big squares of type O7.

  Boundary and origin squares. Any big square that is not traversed by any path (including all big squares 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣)
where 𝑣 is an isolated vertex of the End-of-Line instance), will have all its grid points coloured in black, and −∇𝑓
pointing to the left. These big squares, which are said to be of type E1, are as represented in Figure 11(a). The only
exceptions to this rule are the big squares 𝐵(1, 𝑣) for all 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] \ {1}. In those big squares, which are said to be of
type E2, the grid points on the left boundary have −∇𝑓 pointing downwards, instead of to the left. The rest of the grid
points have −∇𝑓 pointing to the left as before. Note that none of these big squares is ever traversed by a path, so they
are always as shown in Figure 11(b).
30                                                John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani




(a) [O1] Orange path traversing big square from right to left.        (b) [O2] Orange path traversing big square from top to bottom.




(c) [O3] Orange path entering big square from the right, turning,     (d) [O4] Orange path entering big square from the top, turning,
and leaving at the bottom.                                            and leaving on the left.




(e) [O5] Source: orange path starting at the centre of big square     (f) [O6] Sink: orange path entering big square from the top and
and leaving on the left.                                              ending at the centre.

Fig. 9. Construction of the orange paths. The figures show various types of big squares containing different portions of orange paths.
In these illustrations, the big squares are assumed to have size 8 × 8 instead of 2𝑚+4 × 2𝑚+4 .
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                           31




                                                (a) [G7] Crossing of green paths.




                                               (b) [O7] Crossing of orange paths.

Fig. 10. Crossing gadgets for green and orange paths. In these two illustrations, the big squares are assumed to have size 16 × 16
instead of 2𝑚+4 × 2𝑚+4 .
32                                               John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani




         (a) [E1] Big square not traversed by any path.                         (b) [E2] Big square on left boundary of domain.

Fig. 11. Big squares not traversed by any path. In these two illustrations, the big squares are assumed to have size 8 × 8 instead of
2𝑚+4 × 2𝑚+4 .




                       Fig. 12. [S] Construction for big square 𝐵 (1, 1) (for size 8 × 8 instead of 2𝑚+4 × 2𝑚+4 ).


     The big square 𝐵(1, 1) is special and we say that it is of type S. Since it corresponds to the trivial source of the
End-of-Line instance, it has one outgoing edge (which necessarily corresponds to a green path) and no incoming edge.
Normally, this would induce a KKT point at the centre of 𝐵(1, 1) (as in Figure 8(e)). Furthermore, recall that, by the
definition of the black value regime, there must also be a KKT point at the origin, if it is coloured in black. By a careful
construction (which is very similar to the one used by Hubáček and Yogev [36] for Continuous-Localopt) we can
ensure that these two KKT points neutralise each other. In other words, instead of two KKT points, there is no KKT
point at all in 𝐵(1, 1). The construction for 𝐵(1, 1) is shown in Figure 12.
     Figure 13 shows the whole construction for a small example where 𝑛 = 1 and big squares have size 8 × 8 (instead of
2𝑚+4 × 2𝑚+4 ).

     Green and orange paths meeting. Our description of the construction is almost complete, but there is one crucial
piece missing. Indeed, consider any vertex 𝑣 that has one incoming edge (𝑣 1, 𝑣) and one outgoing edge (𝑣, 𝑣 2 ) such that:
A) 𝑣 1 < 𝑣 and 𝑣 2 < 𝑣, or B) 𝑣 1 > 𝑣 and 𝑣 2 > 𝑣. As it stands, a green path and an orange path meet at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣)
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                           33




Fig. 13. [X] Full construction for a small example, in particular showing the whole boundary. Here 𝑛 = 1 and big squares have size
8 × 8 (instead of 2𝑚+4 × 2𝑚+4 ).




which means that there is a local minimum or maximum at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣), and thus a KKT point. However, 𝑣 is
not a solution to the End-of-Line instance. Even though we cannot avoid having a KKT point in 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣), we can “hide”
it, so that finding it requires solving the Iter instance. This is implemented by constructing a PLS-Labyrinth gadget at
the point where the green and orange paths meet. Figures 14(a) and 14(b) show where this PLS-Labyrinth gadget is
positioned inside a big square of type LA (namely when case A above occurs) and a big square of type LB (namely
when case B above occurs) respectively. The PLS-Labyrinth gadget can only be positioned at a point where a green
path and an orange path meet. In particular, it cannot be used to “hide” a KKT point occurring at a source or sink of a
green or orange path, i.e., at a solution of the End-of-Line instance.

   In our construction, every big square is of type G1, G2, . . . , G7, O1, O2, . . . , O7, E1, E2, S, LA or LB. Note that we can
efficiently determine the type of a given big square, if we have access to the End-of-Line circuits 𝑆 and 𝑃.

4.1.4   Embedding the Iter instance: The PLS-Labyrinth.

   PLS-Labyrinth. We begin by describing the PLS-Labyrinth gadget for case A, i.e., 𝑣 has one incoming edge (𝑣 1, 𝑣)
and one outgoing edge (𝑣, 𝑣 2 ) such that 𝑣 1 < 𝑣 and 𝑣 2 < 𝑣. In particular, 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) is of type LA. The PLS-Labyrinth gadget
comprises 2𝑚+2 × 2𝑚+2 small squares and is positioned in the big square 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) as shown in Figure 14(a). Note, in
particular, that the bottom side of the gadget is adjacent to the orange path, and the bottom-right corner of the gadget
34                                               John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani




                   PLS
                 Labyrinth
                    A
                                                                                                      PLS
                                                                                                    Labyrinth
                                                                                                       B




(a) [LA] Position of PLS-Labyrinth gadget in big square of type      (b) [LB] Position of PLS-Labyrinth gadget in big square of type
LA.                                                                  LB.

                            Fig. 14. Position of PLS-Labyrinth gadget in big squares of type LA and LB.



lies just above the point where the green and orange paths intersect (which occurs at the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣)). Finally,
observe that since 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) has 2𝑚+4 × 2𝑚+4 small squares, there is enough space for the PLS-Labyrinth gadget.
     For convenience, we subdivide the PLS-Labyrinth gadget into 2𝑚 × 2𝑚 medium squares. Thus, every medium square
is made out of 4 × 4 small squares. We index the medium squares as follows: for 𝑢 1, 𝑢 2 ∈ [2𝑚 ], let 𝑀 (𝑢 1, 𝑢 2 ) denote the
medium square that is the 𝑢 2 th from the bottom and the 𝑢 1 th from the right. Thus, 𝑀 (1, 1) corresponds to the medium
square that lies at the bottom-right of the gadget (and is just above the intersection of the paths). Our construction will
create the following paths inside the PLS-Labyrinth gadget:
      • For every 𝑢 ∈ [2𝑚 ] such that 𝐶 (𝑢) > 𝑢, there is an orange-blue path (namely, a path formed by both orange and
        blue points) starting at 𝑀 (𝑢, 1) and moving upwards until it reaches 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢).
      • For every 𝑢 ∈ [2𝑚 ] such that 𝐶 (𝑢) > 𝑢 and 𝐶 (𝐶 (𝑢)) > 𝐶 (𝑢), there is a blue path starting at 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢) and moving
        to the left until it reaches 𝑀 (𝐶 (𝑢), 𝑢).
Figure 15 shows a high-level overview of how the Iter instance is embedded in the PLS-Labyrinth. Note that if 𝐶 (𝑢) > 𝑢
and 𝐶 (𝐶 (𝑢)) > 𝐶 (𝑢), then the blue path starting at 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢) will move to the left until 𝑀 (𝐶 (𝑢), 𝑢) where it will reach
the orange-blue path moving up from 𝑀 (𝐶 (𝑢), 1) to 𝑀 (𝐶 (𝑢), 𝐶 (𝑢)) (which exists since 𝐶 (𝐶 (𝑢)) > 𝐶 (𝑢)). Thus, every
blue path will always “merge” into some orange-blue path. On the other hand, some orange-blue paths will stop in
the environment without merging into any other path. Consider any 𝑢 ∈ [2𝑚 ] such that 𝐶 (𝑢) > 𝑢. The orange-blue
path for 𝑢 stops at 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢). If 𝐶 (𝐶 (𝑢)) > 𝐶 (𝑢), then there is a blue path starting there, so the orange-blue path “merges”
into the blue path. However, if 𝐶 (𝐶 (𝑢)) ≤ 𝐶 (𝑢), i.e., 𝐶 (𝐶 (𝑢)) = 𝐶 (𝑢), there is no blue path starting at 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢) and the
orange-blue path just stops in the environment. Thus, the only place in the PLS-Labyrinth where a path can stop in the
environment is in a medium square 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢) such that 𝐶 (𝑢) > 𝑢 and 𝐶 (𝐶 (𝑢)) = 𝐶 (𝑢). This corresponds exactly to the
solutions of the Iter instance 𝐶. In our construction, we will ensure that KKT points can indeed only occur at points
where a path stops without merging into any other path.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                             35




                                   LA2




                                                                                     LA7




                                                LA3         LA4




                                                LA6         LA5




                                   LA1




                                                                                     LA5




                            LAX1                                                                      LAX2



Fig. 15. Map of the PLS-Labyrinth for case A corresponding to the Iter example of Figure 2. Shaded squares are the medium squares
corresponding to the nodes of Iter. The horizontal blue lines (pointing left) correspond to the 3 edges in Figure 2 that go out from
non-solutions, and we do not use similar lines going out from solutions (nodes 3 and 7). We have also indicated the parts LA1-LA6,
and LAX1-LAX2, that are constructed in Figure 16.




   Orange-blue paths. An orange-blue path moves from 𝑀 (𝑢, 1) upwards to 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢) (for some 𝑢 ∈ [2𝑚 ] such that
𝐶 (𝑢) > 𝑢) and has a width of two small squares. The left-most point is coloured in orange and the two points on the
right are blue. Figure 16(a) shows a medium square that is being traversed by the orange-blue path, i.e., a medium
square 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑤) where 𝑤 < 𝑢. We say that such a medium square 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑤) is of type LA1. When the orange-blue path
reaches 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢), it either “turns” to the left and creates the beginning of a blue path (medium square of type LA4,
Figure 16(d)), or it just stops there (medium square of type LA2, Figure 16(b)). The case where the orange-blue path just
36                                            John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


stops, occurs when there is no blue path starting at 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢). Note that, in that case, 𝑢 is a solution of the Iter instance,
and so it is acceptable for a medium square of type LA2 to contain a KKT point.
     The orange-blue path begins in 𝑀 (𝑢, 1), which lies just above the orange path. In fact, the beginning of the orange-
blue path is adjacent to the orange path as shown in Figure 16(g). This is needed, since if the orange-blue path started
in the environment, the point coloured orange would yield a local maximum and thus a KKT point.
     The beginning of the orange-blue path for 𝑢 = 1 is special, since, in a certain sense, this path is created by the
intersection of the green and orange paths. Figure 16(h) shows how the intersection is implemented and how exactly it
is adjacent to 𝑀 (1, 1). Note that 𝑀 (1, 1) is just a standard “turn”, i.e., a medium square of type LA4.

     Blue paths. A blue path starts in 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢) for some 𝑢 ∈ [2𝑚 ] such that 𝐶 (𝑢) > 𝑢 and 𝐶 (𝐶 (𝑢)) > 𝐶 (𝑢). It moves
from right to left and has a width of two small squares. All three points on the path are coloured blue and the direction
of steepest descent points to the left. Figure 16(c) shows a medium square traversed by a blue path. Such a medium
square is said to be of type LA3. As mentioned above, the blue path starts at 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢) which is of type LA4 (a “turn”).
When the blue path reaches 𝑀 (𝐶 (𝑢), 𝑢), it merges into the orange-blue path going from 𝑀 (𝐶 (𝑢), 1) to 𝑀 (𝐶 (𝑢), 𝐶 (𝑢)).
This merging is straightforward and is implemented as shown in Figure 16(f). The medium square 𝑀 (𝐶 (𝑢), 𝑢) is then
said to be of type LA5.

     Crossings. Note that two orange-blue paths cannot cross, and similarly two blue paths can also not cross. However,
a blue path going from 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢) to 𝑀 (𝐶 (𝑢), 𝑢) can cross many other orange-blue paths, before it reaches and merges
into its intended orange-blue path. Fortunately, these crossings are much easier to resolve than earlier. Indeed, when
a blue path is supposed to cross an orange-blue path, it can simply merge into it and restart on the other side. The
important thing to note here is that, while a blue path cannot stop in the environment (without creating a KKT point),
it can start in the environment. Figure 16(e) shows how this is implemented. In particular, we use a medium square of
type LA5 for the merging, and a medium square of type LA6 for the re-start of the blue path.
     Note that if the blue path has to cross more than one orange-blue path in immediate succession, then it will simply
merge into the first one it meets, and restart after the last one (i.e., as soon as it reaches a medium square that is not
traversed by an orange-blue path).
     Finally, we say that a medium square is of type LA7, if it does not contain any path at all. Medium squares of type
LA7 are like the environment, i.e., all the grid points are coloured black and the arrows of steepest descent point to the
left. In our construction, every medium square in the PLS-Labyrinth gadget is of type LA1, LA2, . . . , LA6, or LA7. It is
easy to check that the type of a given medium square can be determined efficiently, given access to the Iter circuit 𝐶.
     The PLS-Labyrinth gadget for case B is, in a certain sense, symmetric to the one presented above. Indeed, it suffices
to perform a point reflection (in other words, a rotation by 180 degrees) with respect to the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣), and a
very simple transformation of the colours. With regards to the final interpolated function, this corresponds to rotating
𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) by 180 degrees around its centre and multiplying the output of the function by −1. Let 𝜙 : 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) → 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣)
denote rotation by 180 degrees around the centre of 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣). Then, the direction of steepest descent at some grid point
(𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣) in case B is simply the same as the direction of steepest descent at 𝜙 (𝑥, 𝑦) in case A. The colour of (𝑥, 𝑦)
in case B is obtained from the colour of 𝜙 (𝑥, 𝑦) in case A as follows:
      • black remains black,
      • green becomes orange, and vice-versa,
      • blue becomes red, and vice-versa.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                           37




(a) [LA1] Orange-blue path traversing       (b) [LA2] Orange-blue path ending in          (c) [LA3] Blue path traversing medium
medium square.                              medium square.                                square.




(d) [LA4] Orange-blue path turning in       (e) [LA6] Blue path crossing over orange-blue path. Medium square of type LA6 indi-
medium square and creating start of         cated in grey.
blue path.




(f) [LA5] Blue path merging into orange-blue path.       (g) [LAX1] Start of orange-blue      (h) [LAX2] Start of orange-blue path
Medium square of type LA5 indicated in grey.             path, adjacent to orange path.       for 𝑢 = 1, adjacent to the inter-
                                                                                              section of green and orange path.
                                                                                              𝑀 (1, 1) is indicated in grey.

         Fig. 16. Construction of blue and orange-blue paths in the PLS-Labyrinth gadget inside a big square of type LA.
38                                                      John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani



                          LBX2                                                                     LBX1




                                               LB5




                                                                                             LB1




                                                                       LB5        LB6




                                                                       LB4        LB3




                                               LB7




                                                                                             LB2




Fig. 17. Map of the PLS-Labyrinth for case B corresponding to the Iter example of Figure 2. Shaded squares are the medium squares
corresponding to the nodes of Iter. We have also indicated the parts LB1-LB6, and LBX1-LBX2, that are constructed in Figure 18.



Figure 17 shows a high-level overview of the PLS-Labyrinth gadget for case B. We obtain corresponding medium
squares of type LB1, LB2, . . . , LB7. The analogous illustrations for case B are shown in Figure 18.

4.2    Extending the function to the rest of the domain
Up to this point we have defined the function 𝑓 and the direction of its gradient at all grid points of 𝐺. In order to extend
𝑓 to the whole domain [0, 𝑁 ] 2 , we use bicubic interpolation (see e.g. [52] or the corresponding Wikipedia article8 ).
Note that the more standard and simpler bilinear interpolation (used in particular by Hubáček and Yogev [36]) yields a

8 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bicubic_interpolation
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                           39




(a) [LB1] Red-green path traversing          (b) [LB2] Red-green path ending in             (c) [LB3] Red path traversing medium
medium square.                               medium square.                                 square.




(d) [LB4] Red-green path turning in          (e) [LB6] Red path crossing over red-green path. Medium square of type LB6 indicated
medium square and creating start of red      in grey.
path.




(f) [LB5] Red path merging into red-green path. Medium    (g) [LBX1] Start of red-green path,   (h) [LBX2] Start of red-green path
square of type LB5 indicated in grey.                     adjacent to green path.               for 𝑢 = 1, adjacent to the inter-
                                                                                                section of orange and green path.
                                                                                                𝑀 (1, 1) is indicated in grey.

           Fig. 18. Construction of red and red-green paths in the PLS-Labyrinth gadget inside a big square of type LB.
40                                                  John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


continuous function, but not necessarily a continuously differentiable function. On the other hand, bicubic interpolation
ensures that the function will indeed be continuously differentiable over the whole domain [0, 𝑁 ] 2 .
     We use bicubic interpolation in every small square of the grid 𝐺. Consider any small square and let (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ [0, 1] 2
denote the local coordinates of a point inside the square. Then, the bicubic interpolation inside this square will be a
polynomial of the form:
                                                                      3 ∑︁
                                                                     ∑︁  3
                                                        𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦) =             𝑎𝑖 𝑗 𝑥 𝑖 𝑦 𝑗                                               (3)
                                                                     𝑖=0 𝑗=0
where the coefficients 𝑎𝑖 𝑗 are computed as follows
                   𝑎                   
                    00 𝑎 01 𝑎 02 𝑎 03 
                                       
                   𝑎 10 𝑎 11 𝑎 12 𝑎 13 
                   
                   𝑎
                                        
                                                                                                                                         (4)
                    20 𝑎 21 𝑎 22 𝑎 23 
                                       
                   𝑎 30 𝑎 31 𝑎 32 𝑎 33 
                                       
                      1
                            0   0    0   𝑓 (0, 0)         𝑓 (0, 1)    𝑓𝑦 (0, 0)           𝑓𝑦 (0, 1)  1    0   −3   2 
                                                                                                                          
                      0     0   1    0   𝑓 (1, 0)         𝑓 (1, 1)    𝑓𝑦 (1, 0)           𝑓𝑦 (1, 1)  0    0   3    −2
                   =                    ·                                                                ·
                      
                      −3 3 −2 −1  𝑓𝑥 (0, 0)                 𝑓𝑥 (0, 1)   𝑓𝑥 𝑦 (0, 0)        𝑓𝑥 𝑦 (0, 1)  0   1   −2   1 
                                                                                                                          
                       2 −2 1        1   𝑓𝑥 (1, 0)        𝑓𝑥 (1, 1)   𝑓𝑥 𝑦 (1, 0)        𝑓𝑥 𝑦 (1, 1)  0   0   −1   1 
                      
Here 𝑓𝑥 and 𝑓𝑦 denote the partial derivatives with respect to 𝑥 and 𝑦 respectively. Similarly, 𝑓𝑥 𝑦 denotes the second
order partial derivative with respect to 𝑥 and 𝑦. It remains to explain how we set the values of 𝑓 , 𝑓𝑥 , 𝑓𝑦 and 𝑓𝑥 𝑦 at the
four corners of the square:
      • The values 𝑓 (0, 0), 𝑓 (0, 1), 𝑓 (1, 0) and 𝑓 (1, 1) are set according to the value regimes in our construction.
      • The values of 𝑓𝑥 (0, 0), 𝑓𝑥 (0, 1), 𝑓𝑥 (1, 0), 𝑓𝑥 (1, 1), 𝑓𝑦 (0, 0), 𝑓𝑦 (0, 1), 𝑓𝑦 (1, 0) and 𝑓𝑦 (1, 1) are set based on the direction
         of steepest descent (−∇𝑓 ) in our construction, with a length multiplier of 𝛿 = 1/2. For example, if the arrow of
         steepest descent at (0, 1) is pointing to the left, then we set 𝑓𝑥 (0, 1) = 𝛿 and 𝑓𝑦 (0, 1) = 0. If it is pointing up, then
         we set 𝑓𝑥 (0, 1) = 0 and 𝑓𝑦 (0, 1) = −𝛿.
      • We always set 𝑓𝑥 𝑦 (0, 0) = 𝑓𝑥 𝑦 (0, 1) = 𝑓𝑥 𝑦 (1, 0) = 𝑓𝑥 𝑦 (1, 1) = 0.
By using this interpolation procedure in each small square, we obtain a function 𝑓 : [0, 𝑁 ] 2 → R. In fact, we can even
extend the function to points (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ R2 \ [0, 𝑁 ] 2 by simply using the interpolated polynomial obtained for the small
square that is closest to (𝑥, 𝑦). This will be done automatically by our construction of the arithmetic circuit computing
𝑓 and it will ensure that the gradient is well-defined even on the boundary of [0, 𝑁 ] 2 .

Lemma 4.2. The function 𝑓 : R2 → R we obtain by bicubic interpolation has the following properties:
      • It is continuously differentiable on R2 ;
      • 𝑓 and its gradient ∇𝑓 are Lipschitz-continuous on [0, 𝑁 ] 2 with Lipschitz-constant 𝐿 = 218 𝑁 ;
      • Well-behaved arithmetic circuits computing 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 can be constructed in polynomial time (in the size of the
         circuits 𝑆, 𝑃 and 𝐶).

     Proof. Regarding the first point, see, e.g., [52].

     Lipschitz-continuity. In order to prove the second point, we first show that 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 are 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous
in every small square of the grid. Consider any small square. In our construction, the values of 𝑓 , 𝑓𝑥 , 𝑓𝑦 , 𝑓𝑥 𝑦 used in the
computation of the coefficients 𝑎𝑖 𝑗 are clearly all upper bounded by 23 𝑁 in absolute value. Thus, using Equation (4), it
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                    41


is easy to check that |𝑎𝑖 𝑗 | ≤ 210 𝑁 for all 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}. Furthermore, note that the partial derivatives of 𝑓 inside the
small square can be expressed as:
                                           3 ∑︁3                                     3 ∑︁3
                              𝜕𝑓          ∑︁                            𝜕𝑓          ∑︁
                                 (𝑥, 𝑦) =         𝑖 · 𝑎𝑖 𝑗 𝑥 𝑖−1𝑦 𝑗        (𝑥, 𝑦) =         𝑗 · 𝑎𝑖 𝑗 𝑥 𝑖 𝑦 𝑗−1                         (5)
                              𝜕𝑥          𝑖=1 𝑗=0
                                                                        𝜕𝑦          𝑖=0 𝑗=1

using the local coordinates (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ [0, 1] 2 inside the small square. Finally, it is easy to check that the monomials 𝑥 𝑖 𝑦 𝑗 ,
𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}, are all 6-Lipschitz continuous over [0, 1] 2 . Putting everything together and using Equation (3) and
Equation (5), it follows that 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 are Lipschitz-continuous (w.r.t. the ℓ2 -norm) with Lipschitz constant 𝐿 = 218 𝑁
inside the small square. Note that the change from local coordinates to standard coordinates is just a very simple
translation that does not impact the Lipschitzness of the functions.
   Since 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 are 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous inside every small square and continuous over all of [0, 𝑁 ] 2 , it follows
that they are in fact 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous over the whole domain [0, 𝑁 ] 2 . Indeed, consider any points 𝑧 1, 𝑧 2 ∈ [0, 𝑁 ] 2 .
Then, there exists ℓ ∈ N such that the segment 𝑧 1𝑧 2 can be subdivided into 𝑧 1𝑤 1𝑤 2 . . . 𝑤 ℓ 𝑧 2 so that each of the segments
𝑧 1𝑤 1 , 𝑤 1𝑤 2, . . . , 𝑤 ℓ−1𝑤 ℓ , 𝑤 ℓ 𝑧 2 lies within a small square. For ease of notation, we let 𝑤 0 := 𝑧 1 and 𝑤 ℓ+1 := 𝑧 2 . Then, we
can write
                                                 ℓ
                                                ∑︁                                   ℓ
                                                                                    ∑︁
                    ∥∇𝑓 (𝑧 1 ) − ∇𝑓 (𝑧 2 )∥ ≤         ∥∇𝑓 (𝑤𝑖 ) − ∇𝑓 (𝑤𝑖+1 )∥ ≤ 𝐿         ∥𝑤𝑖 − 𝑤𝑖+1 ∥ = 𝐿∥𝑧 1 − 𝑧 2 ∥
                                                𝑖=0                                 𝑖=0
                                 Íℓ
where we used the fact that        𝑖=0 ∥𝑤𝑖 − 𝑤𝑖+1 ∥ = ∥𝑧 1 − 𝑧 2 ∥, since 𝑤 0𝑤 1𝑤 2 . . . 𝑤 ℓ 𝑤 ℓ+1 is just a partition of the segment
𝑧 1𝑧 2 . The exact same argument also works for 𝑓 .

   Arithmetic circuits. Before showing how to construct the arithmetic circuits for 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 , we first construct a
Boolean circuit 𝐵 that will be used as a sub-routine. The Boolean circuit 𝐵 receives as input a point (𝑥, 𝑦) on the grid
𝐺 = {0, 1, . . . , 𝑁 }2 and outputs the colour (i.e., value regime) and steepest descent arrow at that point. It is not too hard
to see that the circuit 𝐵 can be constructed in time that is polynomial in the sizes of the circuits 𝑆, 𝑃 and 𝐶. In more
detail, it performs the following operations:

   (1) Compute End-of-Line-vertices 𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ∈ [2𝑛 ] such that (𝑥, 𝑦) lies in the big square 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ).
   (2) Using the End-of-Line circuits 𝑆 and 𝑃 determine the exact type of 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ), namely one of the following:
        G1-G7, O1-O7, E1, E2, S, LA or LB.
   (3) If the type of 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ) is not LA or LB, then we know the exact structure of 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ) and can easily return the
        colour and arrow at (𝑥, 𝑦).
   (4) If the type of 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ) is LA or LB, then first determine whether (𝑥, 𝑦) lies in the PLS-Labyrinth inside 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 )
        or not.
   (5) If (𝑥, 𝑦) does not lie in the PLS-Labyrinth, then we can easily determine the colour and arrow at (𝑥, 𝑦), since we
        know the exact structure of 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ) except the inside of the PLS-Labyrinth.
   (6) If (𝑥, 𝑦) lies in the PLS-Labyrinth, then we can compute Iter-vertices 𝑢 1, 𝑢 2 ∈ [2𝑚 ] such that (𝑥, 𝑦) lies in the
        medium square 𝑀 (𝑢 1, 𝑢 2 ) of the PLS-Labyrinth inside 𝐵(𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 ).
   (7) Using the Iter circuit 𝐶 determine the type of 𝑀 (𝑢 1, 𝑢 2 ), namely one of the following: LA1-LA7, LB1-LB7. Given
        the type of 𝑀 (𝑢 1, 𝑢 2 ), we then know the exact structure of 𝑀 (𝑢 1, 𝑢 2 ) and can in particular determine the colour
        and arrow at (𝑥, 𝑦).

The arithmetic circuits for 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 are then constructed to perform the following operations on input (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ [0, 𝑁 ] 2 :
42                                                John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


                                                                                       𝑥 , 𝑦b) ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 𝑁 − 1}2 : a grid
     (1) Using the comparison gate < and binary search, compute the bits representing (b
         point such that (𝑥, 𝑦) lies in the small square that has (b
                                                                   𝑥 , 𝑦b) as its bottom left corner.
     (2) Simulate the Boolean circuit 𝐵 using arithmetic gates to compute (a bit representation) of the colour and arrow
         at the four corners of the small square, namely (b
                                                          𝑥 , 𝑦b), (b
                                                                    𝑥 + 1, 𝑦b),(b
                                                                                𝑥 , 𝑦b + 1) and (b
                                                                                                 𝑥 + 1, 𝑦b + 1).
     (3) Using this information and the formulas for the value regimes, compute the 16 terms for 𝑓 , 𝑓𝑥 , 𝑓𝑦 and 𝑓𝑥 𝑦 needed
         to determine the bicubic interpolation. Then, compute the coefficients 𝑎𝑖 𝑗 by performing the matrix multiplication
         in Equation (4).
     (4) In the arithmetic circuit for 𝑓 , apply Equation (3) to compute the value of 𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦). In the arithmetic circuit for
         ∇𝑓 , apply Equation (5) to compute the value of ∇𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦). Note that in the interpolation Equations (3) and (5), we
         have to use the local coordinates (𝑥 − 𝑥b, 𝑦 − 𝑦b) ∈ [0, 1] 2 instead of (𝑥, 𝑦).
The two arithmetic circuits can be computed in polynomial time in 𝑛, 𝑚 and in the sizes of 𝑆, 𝑃, 𝐶. Since 𝑛 and 𝑚 are
upper bounded by the sizes of 𝑆 and 𝐶 respectively, they can be constructed in polynomial time in the sizes of 𝑆, 𝑃, 𝐶.
Furthermore, note that the two circuits are well-behaved. In fact, they only use a constant number of true multiplication
gates. To see this, note that true multiplication gates are only used for the matrix multiplication in step 3 and for step 4.
In particular, steps 1 and 2 do not need to use any true multiplication gates at all (see, e.g., [17, 20]).                   □

4.3     Correctness
To show the correctness of the construction, we prove the following lemma, which states that 0.01-KKT points of 𝑓
only lie at solutions for the End-of-Line instance or the Iter instance.

Lemma 4.3. Let 𝜀 = 0.01. We have that (𝑥, 𝑦) is an 𝜀-KKT point of 𝑓 on the domain [0, 𝑁 ] 2 only if (𝑥, 𝑦) lies in a “solution
region”, namely:
      • (𝑥, 𝑦) lies in a big square 𝐵(𝑣, 𝑣), such that 𝑣 ∈ [2𝑛 ] \ {1} is a source or sink of the End-of-Line instance 𝑆, 𝑃, or
      • (𝑥, 𝑦) lies in a medium square 𝑀 (𝑢, 𝑢) of some PLS-Labyrinth gadget, such that 𝑢 ∈ [2𝑚 ] is a solution to the Iter
         instance 𝐶, i.e., 𝐶 (𝑢) > 𝑢 and 𝐶 (𝐶 (𝑢)) = 𝐶 (𝑢).

     Proof. Even though we have defined 𝜀-KKT points in Section 3.2.1 with respect to the ℓ2 -norm, here it is more
convenient to consider the ℓ∞ -norm instead. Note that any 𝜀-KKT point w.r.t. the ℓ2 -norm is also an 𝜀-KKT point w.r.t.
the ℓ∞ -norm. Thus, if Lemma 4.3 holds for 𝜀-KKT points w.r.t. the ℓ∞ -norm, then it automatically also holds for 𝜀-KKT
points w.r.t. the ℓ2 -norm.
     For the domain [0, 𝑁 ] 2 , it is easy to see that a point 𝑥 ∈ [0, 𝑁 ] 2 is an 𝜀-KKT point (with respect to the ℓ∞ -norm) if
and only if
      • for all 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2} with 𝑥𝑖 ≠ 0 : [∇𝑓 (𝑥)]𝑖 ≤ 𝜀
      • for all 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2} with 𝑥𝑖 ≠ 𝑁 : −[∇𝑓 (𝑥)]𝑖 ≤ 𝜀.
Intuitively, these conditions state that if 𝑥 is not on the boundary of [0, 𝑁 ] 2 , then it must hold that ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥)∥ ∞ ≤ 𝜀. If 𝑥
is on the boundary of [0, 1] 2 , then “−∇𝑓 (𝑥) must point straight outside the domain, up to an error of 𝜀”.
     In order to prove Lemma 4.3, we will show that any small square that does not lie in a solution region, does not
contain any 𝜀-KKT point. The behaviour of the function in a given small square depends on the information we have
about the four corners, namely the colours and arrows at the four corners, but also on the position of the square in
our instance, since the value defined by a colour depends on the position. For our proof, it is convenient to consider a
square with the (colour and arrow) information about its four corners, but without any information about its position.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                                    43


Indeed, if we can show that a square does not contain any 𝜀-KKT point using only this information, then this will
always hold, wherever the square is positioned. As a result, we obtain a finite number of squares (with colour and
arrow information) that we need to check. Conceptually, this is a straightforward task: for each small square we get a
set of cubic polynomials that could be generated by bicubic interpolation for that square, and we must prove that no
polynomial in that set has an 𝜀-KKT point within the square.
   However, this still leaves us with 101 distinct small squares to verify. In a earlier version of this paper, we presented
a computer-assisted proof that used an SMT solver for this task. For each square we wrote down an SMT formula that
encodes “there exists an 𝜀-KKT point within this square”. The SMT solver was then used to check this formula for
satisfiability over the real numbers.9 We applied the Z3 SMT solver [24] to all 101 squares in our construction and we
found that the formula is unsatisfiable for every square that does not lie directly at the end of a line of the End-of-Line
instance, or at a solution of the Iter instance, which proves Lemma 4.3. A detailed description of how the SMT formulas
were constructed, as well as the full output of the solver is available online.10
   Below, we present a direct non-computer-assisted proof of Lemma 4.3. This relatively concise proof makes extensive
use of symmetries to drastically reduce the number of cases that need to be verified. We view this proof not as a
replacement of the computer-assisted proof, but instead as additional evidence that Lemma 4.3 holds. Indeed, the two
proofs complement each other nicely, in the sense that they cover each other’s potential weaknesses. The new direct
proof eliminates any concerns one might have about the implementation of the SMT solver, or about possible hardware
failures. On the other hand, the original computer-assisted proof verified all 101 squares individually, thus avoiding
any errors in the use of symmetries and also performing the additional “sanity check” of showing that “bad” squares
(namely, squares that can only appear in a solution region) indeed introduce 𝜀-KKT points.
   We begin by describing the transformations that we use to group “symmetric” squares together. Throughout, we
consider a square where each of its four corners has an associated value in Z and an arrow pointing in a cardinal
direction. The first transformation is reflection with respect to the axis 𝑦 = 1/2. Applying this transformation to a
square has the following effect: the two corners at the top of the square now find themselves at the bottom of the
square (and vice-versa) and the sign of the 𝑦-coordinate of each arrow is flipped. Using Equations (3) and (4) one can
check that taking the bicubic interpolation of this reflected square yields the same result as taking the interpolation of
the original square and then applying the reflection to the interpolated function (which corresponds to considering
(𝑥, 𝑦) ↦→ 𝑓 (𝑥, 1 − 𝑦)). We can summarize this by saying that bicubic interpolation commutes with this transformation.
   The second transformation we use is reflection with respect to the axis 𝑦 = 𝑥, i.e., the diagonal through the square.
This corresponds to swapping the corners (0, 1) and (1, 0) of the square, and additionally also swapping the 𝑥- and
𝑦-coordinate of the arrows at all four corners. Again, using Equations (3) and (4) one can directly verify that this
transformation also commutes with bicubic interpolation (where applying the transformation to the interpolated
function 𝑓 corresponds to considering (𝑥, 𝑦) ↦→ 𝑓 (𝑦, 𝑥)). These two transformations are already enough to obtain any
rotation or reflection of the square. We will only need one more transformation: negation. This corresponds to negating
the values and arrows at the four corners, where “negating an arrow” just means replacing it by an arrow in the opposite
direction. Using Equations (3) and (4), it is immediately clear that negation commutes with bicubic interpolation.
   Since all three transformations commute with bicubic interpolation, this continues to hold for any more involved
transformation that is constructed from these basic three. Furthermore, it is easy to see that the basic transformations

9 SMT solvers are capable of deciding satisfiability for the existential theory of the reals. There are no rounding issues or floating point errors to worry
about.
10 https://github.com/jfearnley/PPADPLS/
44                                               John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


do not introduce 𝜀-KKT points. Indeed, if a function does not have any 𝜀-stationary points, then applying any reflection
or taking the negation cannot change that property. As a result, if two squares are “symmetric” (i.e., one can be obtained
from the other by applying a combination of the three basic transformations), then it is enough to verify that just one
of these two squares does not contain any 𝜀-KKT points when we take the bicubic interpolation.
     Using this notion of symmetry, the squares that need to be verified can be grouped into just four different groups,
namely Groups 1 to 4, as shown in Figure 19. The remaining squares lie in Group 0, which contains all squares that
always lie close to actual solutions and thus do not need to be verified. They are shown in Figure 20. We now prove that
the squares in Groups 1 to 4 do not contain 𝜀-KKT points.

     Group 1. This group contains the squares where all the arrows point in the same direction. These squares are all
symmetric to a square of the following form:

                                   𝑎             𝑏
                                                                                    Conditions:
                                                                                     𝑎 ≥𝑏+1
                                                                                     𝑐 ≥𝑑 +1
                                   𝑐             𝑑
where 𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐, 𝑑 are the values at the four corners of the square as shown. We now prove that bicubic interpolation does
not introduce any 𝜀-KKT point in such a square.
     Recall that 𝜀 = 0.01 and that we use 𝛿 = 1/2 as the length multiplier for the arrows. Also recall that the arrows point
in the opposite direction of the gradient. Thus, our goal here will be to prove that the bicubic interpolation 𝑓 satisfies
𝜕𝑓                                           2
𝜕𝑥 (𝑥, 𝑦) < −𝜀 for all points (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ [0, 1] in the square, which immediately implies that the square does not contain
any 𝜀-KKT point.
     We can compute the coefficients of the interpolation using Equation (4) by setting 𝑓 (0, 0) := 𝑐, 𝑓 (1, 0) := 𝑑, 𝑓 (0, 1) := 𝑎,
𝑓 (1, 1) := 𝑏, 𝑓𝑥 (0, 0) = 𝑓𝑥 (1, 0) = 𝑓𝑥 (0, 1) = 𝑓𝑥 (1, 1) := −𝛿 = −1/2, and the remaining terms to zero. Then, substituting
these coefficients into Equation (5) and simplifying, we obtain that for all 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1]:
                 𝜕𝑓           1                                                                          
                    (𝑥, 𝑦) = − − 3𝑥 (1 − 𝑥) 1 + 2(1 − 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦))(𝑐 − 𝑑 − 1) + 2𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦)(𝑎 − 𝑏 − 1)
                 𝜕𝑥           2
                              1
                           ≤ − < −𝜀
                              2
where we used the fact that 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ∈ [0, 1] for all 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1], as well as the conditions 𝑐 − 𝑑 − 1 ≥ 0 and 𝑎 − 𝑏 − 1 ≥ 0.

     Group 2. This group contains all the squares that are symmetric to a square of the following form:

                                                                                    Conditions:
                                   𝑎             𝑏
                                                                                     𝑎 ≥𝑏+1
                                                                                     𝑐 ≥𝑎+1
                                                                                     𝑑 ≥𝑏+1
                                   𝑐             𝑑                                   𝑐 ≥𝑑 −1

In order to prove that such squares do not contain any 𝜀-KKT points, we distinguish two cases depending on the value
                                                                            𝜕𝑓
of 𝑦: when 𝑦 ∈ [0, 2/3] (i.e., below the dotted line) we show that 𝜕𝑦 (𝑥, 𝑦) < −𝜀, and when 𝑦 ∈ [2/3, 1] (i.e., above
                              𝜕𝑓
the dotted line) we show that 𝜕𝑥 (𝑥, 𝑦) < −𝜀. Consider first the case where 𝑦 ≤ 2/3. Using Equations (4) and (5) and
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                             45

                                                          Group 1:




                                                          Group 2:




                                                          Group 3:




                                                          Group 4:




                 Fig. 19. Complete list of all squares that need to be verified, partitioned into four groups.
46                                              John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani

                                                             Group 0:




                   Fig. 20. List of squares that lie close to actual solutions, and thus do not need to be verified.




simplifying we obtain
                                                                       
                       𝜕𝑓           1                                  1                   
                          (𝑥, 𝑦) = − (1 − 𝑦) 1 + 3𝑦 1 + 2𝑥 + 4 𝑐 − 𝑎 −     1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥)
                       𝜕𝑦           2                                  2
                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                  2
                                                                             + 2(2𝑑 − 2𝑏 − 2)𝑥 (3 − 2𝑥)

                                     1           1
                                  ≤ − (1 − 𝑦) ≤ − < −𝜀
                                     2           6
where we used the fact that 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) ∈ [0, 1] for all 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1], as well as 𝑐 − 𝑎 − 1/2 ≥ 0 and 2𝑑 − 2𝑏 − 2 ≥ 0 to
obtain the first inequality, and then 𝑦 ≤ 2/3. Next, consider the case where 𝑦 ≥ 2/3. Using Equations (4) and (5) and
simplifying we obtain
                  𝜕𝑓           1                         
                     (𝑥, 𝑦) = − 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) − 3𝑥 (1 − 𝑥) (2𝑎 − 2𝑏 − 1)𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦)
                  𝜕𝑥           2
                                                                                                               
                                                                                    + 2(𝑐 − 𝑑) 1 − 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦)
                               1                                           
                            ≤ − 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) − 3𝑥 (1 − 𝑥) 3𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) − 2
                               2
                               1                 1
                            ≤ − 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ≤ − < −𝜀
                               2                 3
where we used 2𝑎 − 2𝑏 − 1 ≥ 1 and 𝑐 − 𝑑 ≥ −1 to obtain the first inequality (as well as the fact that 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ∈ [0, 1] for
all 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1] as before), and for the second and third inequality the fact that for 𝑦 ∈ [2/3, 1] we have 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ≥ 2/3.

     Group 3. This group contains all the squares that are symmetric to a square of the following form:

                                                                                      Conditions:
                                  𝑎              𝑏
                                                                                       𝑎 ≥𝑏+1
                                                                                       𝑐 ≥𝑎+1
                                                                                       𝑑 ≥𝑏+1
                                  𝑐              𝑑                                     𝑐 ≥𝑑 −1

Consider first the case where (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ [0, 1/2] × [2/3, 1], i.e., the point lies in the top-left corner region, as delimited by
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                        47


the dotted line. Using Equations (4) and (5) and simplifying we obtain
                                                       
                 𝜕𝑓           1
                    (𝑥, 𝑦) = − (1 − 𝑥) 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) + 3𝑥 𝑦 2 − 2𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) + 4(𝑎 − 𝑏)𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦)
                 𝜕𝑥           2
                                                                                                         
                                                                             + 4(𝑐 − 𝑑) 1 − 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦)

                              1                                                   
                           ≤ − (1 − 𝑥) 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) + 3𝑥 (𝑦 2 + 6𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) − 4)
                              2
                              1                        1
                           ≤ − (1 − 𝑥)𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ≤ − < −𝜀
                              2                        6
where we used 𝑎 −𝑏 ≥ 1, 𝑐 −𝑑 ≥ −1 and 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ∈ [0, 1] for the first inequality, and then the fact that 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ≥ 2/3
for 𝑦 ∈ [2/3, 1], as well as 𝑥 ≤ 1/2, for the second and third inequality.
   Next, consider the case where (𝑥, 𝑦) ∉ [0, 1/2] × [2/3, 1], i.e., 𝑥 > 1/2 or 𝑦 < 2/3. Using Equations (4) and (5) and
simplifying we obtain
                                                             
                 𝜕𝑓           1 𝑦                  
                    (𝑥, 𝑦) = − + 𝑦 1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) − (1 − 𝑦) − 4 + 3𝑥 (2 − 𝑥) − 5𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥)
                 𝜕𝑦           2 2
                                                                                                  
                                     + 12(𝑑 − 𝑏 − 1)𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) + 12(𝑐 − 𝑎 − 1) 1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥)

                              1 𝑦                                                         
                           ≤ − + 𝑦 1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) − (1 − 𝑦) 8 + 3𝑥 (2 − 𝑥) − 5𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥)
                              2 2
                              1 𝑦2                   
                           ≤− +      1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥)
                              2  2
                                           
                              1        2 3
                           ≤ − + max ,         < −𝜀
                              2        9 8
where we used 𝑑 − 𝑏 − 1 ≥ 0, 𝑐 − 𝑎 − 1 ≥ 0 and 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) ∈ [0, 1] for the first and second inequalities. For the third
inequality we used the fact that 𝑥 > 1/2 or 𝑦 < 2/3, where we note that 1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) ∈ [0, 1] when 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1], and
1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) ≤ 3/4 when 𝑥 ∈ [1/2, 1].

   Group 4. This group contains all the squares that are symmetric to a square of the following form:

                                                                                 Conditions:
                                 𝑎            𝑏
                                                                                 𝑐 ≥𝑎+1
                                                                                 𝑑 ≥𝑏+1
                                                                                 𝑐 ≥𝑑 +1
                                 𝑐            𝑑                                  𝑎 ≥𝑏−1

Consider first the case where (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ [0, 1/2] × [0, 1/3], i.e., the point lies in the bottom-left corner region, as delimited
by the dotted line. Using Equations (4) and (5) and simplifying we obtain
                                                            
                  𝜕𝑓           1
                     (𝑥, 𝑦) = − (1 − 𝑥) 1 − 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) + 3𝑥 − 1 + 𝑦 (2 − 𝑦) + 4(𝑎 − 𝑏)𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦)
                  𝜕𝑥           2
                                                                                                     
                                                                         + 4(𝑐 − 𝑑) 1 − 𝑦 2 (3 + 2𝑦)

                               1                                                           
                            ≤ − (1 − 𝑥) 1 − 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) + 3𝑥 3 + 𝑦 (2 − 𝑦) − 8𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦)
                               2
48                                               John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani

                                  1                          1
                               ≤ − (1 − 𝑥) 1 − 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ≤ − < −𝜀
                                  2                            6
where we used 𝑎 − 𝑏 ≥ −1, 𝑐 − 𝑑 ≥ 1 and 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ∈ [0, 1] for the first inequality, and 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ≤ 1/3 for 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1/3]
for the second inequality. For the third inequality, we used the fact that 𝑥 ≤ 1/2 and 1 −𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ≥ 2/3 for 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1/3].
     Next, consider the case where (𝑥, 𝑦) ∉ [0, 1/2] × [0, 1/3], i.e., 𝑥 > 1/2 or 𝑦 > 1/3. Using Equations (4) and (5) and
simplifying we obtain
                   𝜕𝑓           1 1                         3            
                      (𝑥, 𝑦) = − + (1 − 𝑦) 1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) − 𝑦 (1 − 𝑦) 3 − 𝑥 (2 − 𝑥)
                   𝜕𝑦           2 2                             2
                                                                                                        
                                              + 4(𝑑 − 𝑏 − 1)𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) + 4(𝑐 − 𝑎 − 1) 1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥)
                                1 1                         3                          
                             ≤ − + (1 − 𝑦) 1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) − 𝑦 (1 − 𝑦) 3 − 𝑥 (2 − 𝑥)
                                2 2                              2
                                1 1                        
                             ≤ − + (1 − 𝑦) 1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥)
                                2 2
                                            
                                1       3 1
                             ≤ − + max ,       < −𝜀
                                2       8 3
where we used 𝑑 −𝑏 − 1 ≥ 0, 𝑐 −𝑎 − 1 ≥ 0 and 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) ∈ [0, 1] for the first inequality, and the fact that 3 −𝑥 (2 −𝑥) ≥ 0
for the second inequality. For the third inequality we used the fact that 𝑥 > 1/2 or 𝑦 > 1/3, where we again note that
1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) ∈ [0, 1] when 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1], and 1 − 𝑥 2 (3 − 2𝑥) ≤ 3/4 when 𝑥 ∈ [1/2, 1].

     Boundary. Up to this point we have shown that there are no unintended 𝜀-KKT points in the interior of the domain
[0, 𝑁 ] 2 of our instance. It remains to show that no 𝜀-KKT points appear on the boundary of the domain. Intuitively, this
corresponds to showing that −∇𝑓 never points “straight outside the domain” when we are on the boundary.
     First of all, it is easy to see that there is no 𝜀-KKT point at any of the four corners of the domain [0, 𝑁 ] 2 . This follows
from the fact that at any such corner the arrow never points outside the domain (see Figure 13). Since these corners of
the domain are also corners of their respective squares, −∇𝑓 (where 𝑓 is obtained by bicubic interpolation in every
square) will automatically be equal to the arrow at that corner (scaled by 𝛿 = 1/2), which ensures that it is not an 𝜀-KKT
point.
     It remains to consider points that lie on the boundary of the domain, except at the corners. Using the first two
transformations introduced earlier it is easy to check that any square that lies on the boundary (see Figure 13) is
symmetric to one of the three following cases:

               𝑎                                           𝑎                                          𝑎



               𝑐                                           𝑐                                          𝑐

                    Case (i)                                   Case (ii)                                  Case (iii)
where for cases (ii) and (iii) we also have that 𝑐 ≥ 𝑎 + 1. In each of these three illustrations the square touches the
boundary of the domain with its left edge (which is not dashed). In order to show that there are no 𝜀-KKT points on
                                                                                                            𝜕𝑓
that left edge, it suffices to show that for any (𝑥, 𝑦) on that edge (i.e., 𝑥 = 0, 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1]) we have 𝜕𝑦 (𝑥, 𝑦) ∉ [−𝜀, 𝜀] or
𝜕𝑓
𝜕𝑥 (𝑥, 𝑦) < −𝜀.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                           49


      • For case (i), we have
                                 𝜕𝑓           1               1                    1
                                    (0, 𝑦) = − 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) −    1 − 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) = − < −𝜀.
                                 𝜕𝑥           2               2                      2
      • For case (ii), we have
                                    𝜕𝑓           1                            1
                                       (0, 𝑦) = − − 3(2𝑐 − 2𝑎 − 1)(1 − 𝑦)𝑦 ≤ − < −𝜀
                                    𝜕𝑦           2                            2
        where we used 2𝑐 − 2𝑎 − 1 ≥ 0.
      • For case (iii), if 𝑦 ≥ 1/2 then we have
                                            𝜕𝑓           1                1
                                               (0, 𝑦) = − 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ≤ − < −𝜀
                                            𝜕𝑥           2                4
        since 𝑦 2 (3 − 2𝑦) ≥ 1/2 when 𝑦 ∈ [1/2, 1]. On the other hand, if 𝑦 ≤ 1/2 then we have
                           𝜕𝑓           1                                 1           1
                              (0, 𝑦) = − (1 − 𝑦) (1 + 3(4𝑐 − 4𝑎 − 1)𝑦) ≤ − (1 − 𝑦) ≤ − < −𝜀
                           𝜕𝑦           2                                 2           4
        where we used 4𝑐 − 4𝑎 − 1 ≥ 0.
It follows that there are no 𝜀-KKT points on the boundary of the domain. This completes the proof of Lemma 4.3.                □

4.4    Re-scaling
The last step of the reduction is to re-scale the function 𝑓 so that it is defined on [0, 1] 2 instead of [0, 𝑁 ] 2 . Thus, the
final function, which we denote 𝑓b here, is defined by

                                              𝑓b(𝑥, 𝑦) = (1/𝑁 ) · 𝑓 (𝑁 · 𝑥, 𝑁 · 𝑦).

The properties of 𝑓 proved in Lemma 4.2 naturally also hold for 𝑓b, in the following sense. Clearly, 𝑓bis also continuously
differentiable. Furthermore, it holds that ∇ 𝑓b(𝑥, 𝑦) = ∇𝑓 (𝑁 · 𝑥, 𝑁 · 𝑦). Thus, we can easily construct well-behaved
arithmetic circuits for 𝑓b and ∇ 𝑓b in polynomial time given well-behaved circuits for 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 , which, in turn, can be
efficiently constructed according to Lemma 4.2. Furthermore, since ∇𝑓 is 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous, it is easy to see that
∇ 𝑓b is b
        𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous with b   𝐿 = 𝑁 · 𝐿 = 218 𝑁 2 = 22𝑛+2𝑚+26 . Finally, note that since 𝑓 is 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous,
𝑓b is too, and in particular it is also b
                                        𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous.
    All these properties imply that the instance of KKT we construct does not admit any violation solutions. In other
words, it satisfies all the expected promises. Finally, note that any 𝜀-KKT point of 𝑓b on [0, 1] 2 immediately yields an
𝜀-KKT point of 𝑓 on [0, 𝑁 ] 2 . Thus, the correctness of the reduction follows from Lemma 4.3.
    Note that we can re-scale the instance depending on the parameter regime we are interested in. The instance
(𝜀, 𝑓b, ∇ 𝑓b, b
              𝐿) we have constructed is clearly equivalent to the instance (𝛼𝜀, 𝛼 𝑓b, ∇(𝛼 𝑓b), 𝛼 b
                                                                                                 𝐿) for any 𝛼 > 0. For example, by
letting 𝛼 = 1/𝐿, we obtain hard instances with Lipschitz-constant 1, and with inversely exponential precision parameter.
                  b

5     GRADIENT DESCENT AND KKT ARE PPAD ∩ PLS-COMPLETE
In this section, we show how the PPAD ∩ PLS-hardness of KKT (Theorem 4.1) implies that our other problems of
interest, including our Gradient Descent problems, are PPAD ∩ PLS-complete. Namely, we prove:

Theorem 5.1. The problems KKT, GD-Local-Search, GD-Fixpoint and General-Continuous-Localopt are PPAD ∩
PLS-complete, even when the domain is fixed to be the unit square [0, 1] 2 . This hardness result continues to hold even if one
considers the promise-versions of these problems, i.e., only instances without violations.
50                                            John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


The hardness results in this theorem are the “best possible”, in the following sense:
      • Promise-problem: as mentioned in the theorem, the hardness holds even for the promise-versions of these
        problems. In other words, the hard instances that we construct are not pathological: they satisfy all the conditions
        that we would expect from the input, e.g., ∇𝑓 is indeed the gradient of 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 and 𝑓 are indeed 𝐿-Lipschitz-
        continuous, etc.
      • Domain: the problems remain hard even if we fix the domain to be the unit square [0, 1] 2 , which is arguably the
        simplest two-dimensional bounded domain. All the problems become polynomial-time solvable if the domain is
        one-dimensional (Lemma C.3).
      • Exponential parameters: in all of our problems, the parameters, such as 𝜀 and 𝐿, are provided in the input in
        binary representation. This means that the parameters are allowed to be exponentially small or large with respect
        to the length of the input. Our hardness results make use of this, since the proof of Theorem 4.1 constructs an
        instance of KKT where 𝜀 is some constant, but 𝐿 is exponential in the input length. By a simple transformation,
        this instance can be transformed into one where 𝜀 is exponentially small and 𝐿 is constant (see Section 4.4). It is
        easy to see that at least one of 𝜀 or 𝐿 must be exponentially large/small, for the problem to be hard on the domain
         [0, 1] 2 . However, this continues to hold even in high dimension, i.e., when the domain is [0, 1]𝑛 (Lemma C.4). In
        other words, if the parameters are given in unary, the problem is easy, even in high dimension. This is in contrast
        with the problem of finding a Brouwer fixed point, where moving to domain [0, 1]𝑛 makes it possible to prove
        PPAD-hardness even when the parameters are given in unary.
Theorem 5.1 follows from Theorem 4.1, proved in Section 4, and a set of domain- and promise-preserving reductions
as pictured in Figure 3, which are presented in the rest of this section as follows. In Section 5.1 we show that the
problems KKT, GD-Local-Search and GD-Fixpoint are equivalent. Then, in Section 5.2 we reduce GD-Local-Search
to General-Continuous-Localopt, and finally we show that General-Continuous-Localopt lies in PPAD ∩ PLS.

5.1    KKT and the Gradient Descent problems are equivalent
The equivalence between KKT, GD-Local-Search and GD-Fixpoint is proved by providing a “triangle” of reductions
as shown in Figure 3. Namely, we show that GD-Local-Search reduces to GD-Fixpoint (Proposition 5.2), GD-Fixpoint
reduces to KKT (Proposition 5.3), and KKT reduces to GD-Local-Search (Proposition 5.4). All the reductions are
domain- and promise-preserving.

Proposition 5.2. GD-Local-Search reduces to GD-Fixpoint using a domain- and promise-preserving reduction.

     Proof. Let (𝜀, 𝜂, 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 , 𝐿) be an instance of GD-Local-Search. The reduction simply constructs the instance
(𝜀 ′, 𝜂, 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 , 𝐿) of GD-Fixpoint, where 𝜀 ′ = 𝜀/𝐿. This reduction is trivially domain-preserving and it is also
promise-preserving, because any violation of the constructed instance is immediately also a violation of the original
instance. Clearly, the reduction can be computed in polynomial time, so it remains to show that any (non-violation)
solution of the constructed instance can be mapped back to a solution or violation of the original instance.
     Consider any solution 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 of the GD-Fixpoint instance, i.e.,

                                          ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ = ∥𝑥 − Π𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥))∥ ≤ 𝜀 ′ .

where 𝑦 = Π𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥)). If 𝑥, 𝑦 do not satisfy the 𝐿-Lipschitzness of 𝑓 , then we have obtained a violation. Otherwise,
it must be that
                                            |𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑓 (𝑦)| ≤ 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ≤ 𝐿𝜀 ′ = 𝜀.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                          51


In particular, it follows that
                                                         𝑓 (𝑦) ≥ 𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝜀
which means that 𝑥 is a solution of the original GD-Local-Search instance.                                                     □

Proposition 5.3. GD-Fixpoint reduces to KKT using a domain- and promise-preserving reduction.

  Proof. Let (𝜀, 𝜂, 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 , 𝐿) be an instance of GD-Fixpoint. The reduction simply constructs the instance (𝜀 ′ , 𝐴,
𝑏, 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 , 𝐿) of KKT, where 𝜀 ′ = 𝜀/𝜂. This reduction is trivially domain-preserving and it is also promise-preserving,
because any violation of the constructed instance is immediately also a violation of the original instance. Clearly,
the reduction can be computed in polynomial time, so it remains to show that any (non-violation) solution of the
constructed instance can be mapped back to a solution or violation of the original instance.
  In more detail, we will show that any 𝜀 ′ -KKT point must be an 𝜀-approximate fixed point of the gradient descent
dynamics. Consider any 𝜀 ′ -KKT point of the KKT instance, i.e., a point 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 such that there exists 𝜇 ≥ 0 with
⟨𝜇, 𝐴𝑥 − 𝑏⟩ = 0 and ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥) + 𝐴𝑇 𝜇 ∥ ≤ 𝜀 ′ .
  Let 𝑦 = Π𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥)). We want to show that ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ≤ 𝜀. Since 𝑦 is the projection of 𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥) onto 𝐷, by
Lemma B.1 it follows that for all 𝑧 ∈ 𝐷
                                                  ⟨𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑦, 𝑧 − 𝑦⟩ ≤ 0.
Letting 𝑧 := 𝑥, this implies that ⟨𝑥 − 𝑦, 𝑥 − 𝑦⟩ ≤ 𝜂⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑥 − 𝑦⟩ and thus

                 ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ 2 = ⟨𝑥 − 𝑦, 𝑥 − 𝑦⟩ ≤ 𝜂⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑥 − 𝑦⟩ = 𝜂⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥) + 𝐴𝑇 𝜇, 𝑥 − 𝑦⟩ − 𝜂⟨𝐴𝑇 𝜇, 𝑥 − 𝑦⟩
                                                                   ≤ 𝜂⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥) + 𝐴𝑇 𝜇, 𝑥 − 𝑦⟩
                                                                   ≤ 𝜂 ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥) + 𝐴𝑇 𝜇 ∥ · ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥

where we used the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and the fact that ⟨𝐴𝑇 𝜇, 𝑥 − 𝑦⟩ ≥ 0, which follows from

                                 ⟨𝐴𝑇 𝜇, 𝑥 − 𝑦⟩ = ⟨𝜇, 𝐴(𝑥 − 𝑦)⟩ = ⟨𝜇, 𝐴𝑥 − 𝑏⟩ − ⟨𝜇, 𝐴𝑦 − 𝑏⟩ ≥ 0

since ⟨𝜇, 𝐴𝑥 − 𝑏⟩ = 0, 𝜇 ≥ 0 and 𝐴𝑦 − 𝑏 ≤ 0 (because 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷).
  We can now show that ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ≤ 𝜀. If ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ = 0, this trivially holds. Otherwise, divide both sides of the inequality
obtained above by ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥, which yields

                                            ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ≤ 𝜂 ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥) + 𝐴𝑇 𝜇 ∥ ≤ 𝜂 · 𝜀 ′ = 𝜀.                                       □

Proposition 5.4. KKT reduces to GD-Local-Search using a domain- and promise-preserving reduction.

  Proof. Let (𝜀, 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 , 𝐿) be an instance of KKT. The reduction simply constructs the instance (𝜀 ′, 𝜂, 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 , 𝐿)
                                        2
of GD-Local-Search, where 𝜀 ′ = 8𝐿
                                𝜀 and 𝜂 = 1 . This reduction is trivially domain-preserving and it is also promise-
                                          𝐿
preserving, because any violation of the constructed instance is immediately also a violation of the original instance.
Clearly, the reduction can be computed in polynomial time, so it remains to show that any (non-violation) solution of
the constructed instance can be mapped back to a solution or violation of the original instance.
  Consider any 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 that is a solution of the GD-Local-Search instance and let 𝑦 = Π𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥)). Then, it must
be that 𝑓 (𝑦) ≥ 𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝜀 ′ . We begin by showing that this implies that ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ≤ 2𝐿
                                                                                     𝜀 , or we can find a violation of the

KKT instance.
52                                                       John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


     Step 1: Bounding ∥𝒙 − 𝒚∥. If 𝑥 and 𝑦 do not satisfy Taylor’s theorem (Lemma 3.4), then we immediately obtain a
violation. If they do satisfy Taylor’s theorem, it holds that
                                                                 𝐿
                                             ⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑥 − 𝑦⟩ −     ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑓 (𝑦) ≤ 𝜀 ′ .
                                                                 2
Now, since 𝑦 is the projection of 𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥) onto 𝐷, by Lemma B.1 it follows that ⟨𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑦, 𝑧 − 𝑦⟩ ≤ 0 for all
𝑧 ∈ 𝐷. In particular, by letting 𝑧 := 𝑥, we obtain that
                                                                   1
                                              ⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑥 − 𝑦⟩ ≥      ⟨𝑥 − 𝑦, 𝑥 − 𝑦⟩ = 𝐿∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ 2
                                                                   𝜂
where we used the fact that 𝜂 = 1/𝐿. Putting the two expressions together we obtain that
                                                 𝐿                           𝐿
                                                   ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ 2 = 𝐿∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ 2 − ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝜀 ′
                                                 2                           2
                                   √︁
which yields that ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ≤            2𝜀 ′ /𝐿 = 2𝐿
                                                   𝜀 .


     Step 2: Obtaining an 𝜺-KKT point. Next, we show how to obtain an 𝜀-KKT point or a violation of the KKT instance.
Note that if 𝑦 − 𝑥 = −𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥), then we immediately have that ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥)∥ = ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥/𝜂 ≤ 𝜀/2, i.e., 𝑥 is an 𝜀-KKT point.
However, because of the projection Π𝐷 used in the computation of 𝑦, in general we might not have that 𝑦 −𝑥 = −𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥)
and, most importantly, 𝑥 might not be an 𝜀-KKT point. Nevertheless, we show that 𝑦 will necessarily be an 𝜀-KKT point.
     Since 𝑦 is the projection of 𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥) onto 𝐷, by Lemma B.1 it follows that for all 𝑧 ∈ 𝐷

                                                          ⟨𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑦, 𝑧 − 𝑦⟩ ≤ 0.

From this it follows that for all 𝑧 ∈ 𝐷
                                                         1                 1                     𝜀
                                ⟨−∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑧 − 𝑦⟩ ≤         ⟨𝑦 − 𝑥, 𝑧 − 𝑦⟩ ≤ ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ · ∥𝑧 − 𝑦 ∥ ≤ ∥𝑧 − 𝑦 ∥
                                                         𝜂                 𝜂                     2
where we used the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, 𝜂 = 1/𝐿 and ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ≤ 𝜀/2𝐿. Next, unless 𝑥 and 𝑦 yield a violation to
the 𝐿-Lipschitzness of ∇𝑓 , it must hold that ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥) − ∇𝑓 (𝑦)∥ ≤ 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ≤ 𝜀/2. Thus, we obtain that for all 𝑧 ∈ 𝐷
                                   ⟨−∇𝑓 (𝑦), 𝑧 − 𝑦⟩ = ⟨−∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑧 − 𝑦⟩ + ⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥) − ∇𝑓 (𝑦), 𝑧 − 𝑦⟩
                                                       𝜀
                                                    ≤ ∥𝑧 − 𝑦 ∥ + ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥) − ∇𝑓 (𝑦)∥ · ∥𝑧 − 𝑦 ∥                                (6)
                                                       2
                                                    ≤ 𝜀 ∥𝑧 − 𝑦 ∥
where we used the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
     Let 𝐼 = {𝑖 ∈ [𝑚] : [𝐴𝑦 − 𝑏]𝑖 = 0}, i.e., the indices of the constraints that are tight at 𝑦. Denote by 𝐴𝐼 ∈ R (𝑚−|𝐼 |)×𝑛
the matrix obtained by only keeping the rows of 𝐴 that correspond to indices in 𝐼 . Assume for now that the statement

                                                  ∃𝑝 ∈ R𝑛 : 𝐴𝐼 𝑝 ≤ 0, ⟨−∇𝑓 (𝑦), 𝑝⟩ > 𝜀 ∥𝑝 ∥                                  (7)

does not hold. Then, by a stronger version of Farkas’ Lemma, which we prove in the appendix (Lemma B.3), it follows
                         |𝐼 |
that there exists 𝜈 ∈ R ≥0 such that ∥𝐴𝑇𝐼 𝜈 + ∇𝑓 (𝑦)∥ ≤ 𝜀. Let 𝜇 ∈ R𝑚
                                                                    ≥0 be such that 𝜇 agrees with 𝜈 on indices 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 , i.e.,
𝜇𝐼 = 𝜈, and 𝜇𝑖 = 0 for 𝑖 ∉ 𝐼 . Then we immediately obtain that 𝐴𝑇 𝜇 = 𝐴𝑇𝐼 𝜈 and thus ∥𝐴𝑇 𝜇 + ∇𝑓 (𝑦)∥ = ∥𝐴𝑇𝐼 𝜈 + ∇𝑓 (𝑦) ∥ ≤ 𝜀.
Since we also have that ⟨𝜇, 𝐴𝑦 − 𝑏⟩ = ⟨𝜇𝐼 , [𝐴𝑦 − 𝑏] 𝐼 ⟩ = 0 (because [𝐴𝑦 − 𝑏] 𝐼 = 0), it follows that 𝑦 indeed is an 𝜀-KKT
point of 𝑓 on domain 𝐷.
     It remains to show that the statement (7) indeed does not hold. Consider any 𝑝 ∈ R𝑛 such that 𝐴𝐼 𝑝 ≤ 0. Then, there
exists a sufficiently small 𝛼 > 0 such that 𝑧 = 𝑦 + 𝛼𝑝 ∈ 𝐷. Indeed, note that [𝐴𝑧 − 𝑏]𝑖 = [𝐴𝑦 − 𝑏]𝑖 + 𝛼 [𝐴𝑝]𝑖 and thus
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                   53


      • for 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 , we get that [𝐴𝑧 − 𝑏]𝑖 ≤ 0, since [𝐴𝑦 − 𝑏]𝑖 = 0 and [𝐴𝑝]𝑖 ≤ 0,
      • for 𝑖 ∉ 𝐼 , we have that [𝐴𝑦 − 𝑏]𝑖 < 0. If [𝐴𝑝]𝑖 ≤ 0, then we obtain [𝐴𝑧 − 𝑏]𝑖 ≤ 0 as above. If [𝐴𝑝]𝑖 > 0, then it
                                                         [𝐴𝑦−𝑏 ]
       also holds that [𝐴𝑧 − 𝑏]𝑖 ≤ 0, as long as 𝛼 ≤ − [𝐴𝑝 ] 𝑖 .
                                                             𝑖
                                 n                             o
                                    [𝐴𝑦−𝑏 ]
Thus, it suffices to pick 𝛼 = min − [𝐴𝑝 ] 𝑖 : 𝑖 ∉ 𝐼, [𝐴𝑝]𝑖 > 0 . Note that this indeed ensures that 𝛼 > 0.
                                           𝑖
  Since 𝑧 = 𝑦 + 𝛼𝑝 ∈ 𝐷, using (6) we get that
                                                   1                   𝜀
                                  ⟨−∇𝑓 (𝑦), 𝑝⟩ =     ⟨−∇𝑓 (𝑦), 𝑧 − 𝑦⟩ ≤ ∥𝑧 − 𝑦 ∥ = 𝜀 ∥𝑝 ∥.
                                                   𝛼                   𝛼
Thus, we have shown that the statement (7) indeed does not hold, and this finishes the proof.                           □

5.2    From GD-Local-Search to PPAD ∩ PLS
In this section we show that GD-Local-Search reduces to General-Continuous-Localopt (Proposition 5.5), and
then that General-Continuous-Localopt lies in PPAD ∩ PLS (Proposition 5.6).

Proposition 5.5. GD-Local-Search reduces to General-Continuous-Localopt using a domain- and promise-
preserving reduction.

  Proof. This essentially follows from the fact that the local search version of Gradient Descent is a special case of
continuous local search, which is captured by the General-Continuous-Localopt problem. Let (𝜀, 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜂, 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 , 𝐿)
be an instance of GD-Local-Search. The reduction simply constructs the instance (𝜀, 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝑝, 𝑔, 𝐿 ′ ) of General-
Continuous-Localopt, where 𝑝 (𝑥) = 𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑔(𝑥) = 𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥) and 𝐿 ′ = max{𝜂𝐿 + 1, 𝐿}. We can easily construct
an arithmetic circuit computing 𝑔, given the arithmetic circuit computing ∇𝑓 . It follows that the reduction can be
computed in polynomial time. In particular, since we extend ∇𝑓 by using only the gates − and ×𝜁 , the circuit for 𝑔 is
also well-behaved.
  Let us now show that any solution to the General-Continuous-Localopt instance yields a solution to the GD-
Local-Search instance. First of all, by construction of 𝑔, it immediately follows that any local optimum solution of the
General-Continuous-Localopt instance is also a non-violation solution to the GD-Local-Search instance.
  Next, we show that any pair of points 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 that violate the (𝜂𝐿 + 1)-Lipschitzness of 𝑔, also violate the 𝐿-
Lipschitzness of ∇𝑓 . Indeed, if 𝑥, 𝑦 do not violate the 𝐿-Lipschitzness of ∇𝑓 , then

                            ∥𝑔(𝑥) − 𝑔(𝑦)∥ ≤ ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ + 𝜂 ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥) − ∇𝑓 (𝑦)∥ ≤ (𝜂𝐿 + 1)∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥.

In particular, any violation to the 𝐿 ′ -Lipschitzness of 𝑔 yields a violation to the 𝐿-Lipschitzness of ∇𝑓 .
  Finally, any violation to the 𝐿 ′ -Lipschitzness of 𝑝 immediately yields a violation to the 𝐿-Lipschitzness of 𝑓 . Since
any violation to General-Continuous-Localopt yields a violation to GD-Local-Search, the reduction is also
promise-preserving.                                                                                                     □

Proposition 5.6. General-Continuous-Localopt lies in PPAD ∩ PLS.

  Proof. This essentially follows by the same arguments that were used by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou [21] to
show that CLS lies in PPAD ∩ PLS. The only difference is that here the domain is allowed to be more general. Consider
any instance (𝜀, 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝑝, 𝑔, 𝐿) of General-Continuous-Localopt.
  The containment of General-Continuous-Localopt in PPAD follows from a reduction to the problem of finding a
fixed point guaranteed by Brouwer’s fixed point theorem, which is notoriously PPAD-complete. Indeed, let 𝑥 ∗ ∈ 𝐷
be any 𝜀/𝐿-approximate fixed point of the function 𝑥 ↦→ Π𝐷 (𝑔(𝑥)), i.e., such that ∥Π𝐷 (𝑔(𝑥 ∗ )) − 𝑥 ∗ ∥ ≤ 𝜀/𝐿. Then,
54                                              John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


unless 𝑥 ∗ and Π𝐷 (𝑔(𝑥 ∗ )) yield a violation of 𝐿-Lipschitzness of 𝑝, it follows that 𝑝 (Π𝐷 (𝑔(𝑥 ∗ ))) ≥ 𝑝 (𝑥 ∗ ) − 𝜀, i.e., 𝑥 ∗ is a
solution of the General-Continuous-Localopt instance. Formally, the reduction works by constructing the instance
(𝜀 ′, 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝑔, 𝐿) of General-Brouwer, where 𝜀 ′ = 𝜀/𝐿. The formal definition of General-Brouwer can be found in
Appendix D, where it is also proved that the problem lies in PPAD.
     The containment of CLS in PLS was proved by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou [21] by reducing Continuous-
Localopt to a problem called Real-Localopt, which they show to lie in PLS. Real-Localopt is defined exactly as
Continuous-Localopt, except that the function 𝑔 is not required to be continuous. In order to show the containment
of General-Continuous-Localopt in PLS, we reduce to the appropriate generalisation of Real-Localopt, which we
simply call General-Real-Localopt. Formally, the reduction is completely trivial, since any instance of General-
Continuous-Localopt is also an instance of General-Real-Localopt, and solutions can be mapped back as is. The
formal definition of General-Real-Localopt can be found in Appendix D, where it is also proved that the problem
lies in PLS.                                                                                                                        □

6     CONSEQUENCES FOR CONTINUOUS LOCAL SEARCH
In this section, we explore the consequences of Theorem 4.1 (and Theorem 5.1) for the class CLS, defined by Daskalakis
and Papadimitriou [21] to capture problems that can be solved by “continuous local search” methods. In Section 6.2 we
also consider a seemingly weaker version of CLS, which we call Linear-CLS, and show that it is in fact the same as CLS.
Finally, we define a Gradient Descent problem where we do not have access to the gradient of the function (which
might, in fact, not even be differentiable) and instead use “finite differences” to compute an approximate gradient. We
show that this problem remains PPAD ∩ PLS-complete.

6.1    Consequences for CLS
The class CLS was defined by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou [21] as a more natural counterpart to PPAD ∩ PLS. Indeed,
Daskalakis and Papadimitriou noted that all the known PPAD ∩ PLS-complete problems were unnatural, namely
uninteresting combinations of a PPAD-complete and a PLS-complete problem. As a result, they defined CLS, a subclass
of PPAD ∩ PLS, which is a more natural combination of PPAD and PLS, and conjectured that CLS is a strict subclass
of PPAD ∩ PLS. They were able to prove that various interesting problems lie in CLS, thus further strengthening the
conjecture that CLS is a more natural subclass of PPAD ∩ PLS, and more likely to capture the complexity of interesting
problems.
     It follows from our results that, surprisingly, CLS is actually equal to PPAD ∩ PLS.

Theorem 6.1. CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS.

Recall that in Theorem 5.1, we have shown that General-Continuous-Localopt with domain [0, 1] 2 is PPAD ∩ PLS-
complete. Theorem 6.1 follows from the fact that this problem lies in CLS, almost by definition. Before proving this in
Proposition 6.3 below, we explore some further consequences of our results for CLS. An immediate consequence is that
the two previously known CLS-complete problems are in fact PPAD ∩ PLS-complete.

Corollary 6.2. Banach and MetametricContraction are PPAD ∩ PLS-complete.

For the definitions of these problems, which are computational versions of Banach’s fixed point theorem, see [23] and
[30], respectively.
Furthermore, our results imply that the definition of CLS is “robust” in the following sense:
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                     55


     • Dimension: the class CLS was defined by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou [21] as the set of all TFNP problems that
        reduce to 3D-Continuous-Localopt, i.e., Continuous-Localopt with 𝑛 = 3. Even though it is easy to see
        that 𝑘D-Continuous-Localopt reduces to (𝑘 + 1)D-Continuous-Localopt (Lemma C.1), it is unclear how to
        construct a reduction in the other direction. Indeed, similar reductions exist for the Brouwer problem, but they
        require using a discrete equivalent of Brouwer, namely End-of-Line, as an intermediate step. Since no such
        discrete problem was known for CLS, this left open the possibility of a hierarchy of versions of CLS, depending
        on the dimension, i.e., 2D-CLS ⊂ 3D-CLS ⊂ 4D-CLS . . . . We show that even the two-dimensional version is
        PPAD ∩ PLS-hard, and thus the definition of CLS is indeed independent of the dimension used. In other words,

                                                            2D-CLS = CLS = 𝑛D-CLS.

        Note that this is tight, since 1D-Continuous-Localopt can be solved in polynomial time (Lemma C.3), i.e.,
        1D-CLS = FP.11
     • Domain: some interesting problems can be shown to lie in CLS, but the reduction produces a polytopal domain,
        instead of the standard hypercube [0, 1]𝑛 . In other words, they reduce to General-Continuous-Localopt,
        which we have defined as a generalization of Continuous-Localopt. Since General-Continuous-Localopt
        is PPAD ∩ PLS-complete (Theorem 5.1), it follows that CLS can equivalently be defined as the set of all TFNP
        problems that reduce to General-Continuous-Localopt.
     • Promise: the problem Continuous-Localopt, which defines CLS, is a problem with violation solutions. One
        can instead consider promise-CLS, which is defined as the set of all TFNP problems that reduce to a promise
        version of Continuous-Localopt. In the promise version of Continuous-Localopt, we restrict our attention
        to instances that satisfy the promise, i.e., where the functions 𝑝 and 𝑔 are indeed 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous. The
        class promise-CLS could possibly be weaker than CLS, since the reduction is required to always map to instances
        of Continuous-Localopt without violations. However, it follows from our results that promise-CLS = CLS,
        since the promise version of Continuous-Localopt is shown to be PPAD ∩ PLS-hard, even on domain [0, 1] 2
        (Theorem 5.1).
     • Turing reductions: since PPAD and PLS are closed under Turing reductions [11], it is easy to see that this also
        holds for PPAD ∩ PLS, and thus by our result also for CLS.
     • Circuits: CLS is defined using the problem Continuous-Localopt where the functions are represented by
        general arithmetic circuits. If one restricts the type of arithmetic circuit that is used, this might yield a weaker
        version of CLS. Linear arithmetic circuits are a natural class of circuits that arise when reducing from various
        natural problems. We define Linear-CLS as the set of problems that reduce to Continuous-Localopt with linear
        arithmetic circuits. In Section 6.2 we show that Linear-CLS = CLS.
Before moving on to Section 6.2 and Linear-CLS, we provide the last reduction in the chain of reductions proving
Theorem 6.1.

Proposition 6.3. General-Continuous-Localopt with fixed domain [0, 1] 2 reduces to 2D-Continuous-Localopt
using a promise-preserving reduction. In particular, the problem lies in CLS.

   Proof. Given an instance (𝜀, 𝑝, 𝑔, 𝐿) of General-Continuous-Localopt with fixed domain [0, 1] 2 , we construct the
instance (𝜀, 𝑝, 𝑔 ′, 𝐿) of 2D-Continuous-Localopt, where 𝑔 ′ (𝑥) = Π𝐷 (𝑔(𝑥)). Note that since 𝐷 = [0, 1] 2 , the projection

11 With the slight abuse of notation that FP ⊆ TFNP, as explained in Section 3.1.1.
56                                                      John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


Π𝐷 can easily be computed as [Π𝐷 (𝑥)]𝑖 = min{1, max{0, 𝑥𝑖 }} for all 𝑥 ∈ R2 and 𝑖 ∈ [2]. In particular, since we extend
𝑔 by using only the gates −, ×𝜁 , min, max and rational constants, the circuit for 𝑔 ′ is also well-behaved.
     Any non-violation solution of the constructed instance is also a solution of the original instance. Any violation
of the constructed instance is immediately mapped back to a violation of the original instance. In particular, it holds
that ∥𝑔 ′ (𝑥) − 𝑔 ′ (𝑦)∥ ≤ ∥𝑔(𝑥) − 𝑔(𝑦)∥ for all 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1] 2 , since projecting two points cannot increase the distance
between them. This implies that any violation of the 𝐿-Lipschitzness of 𝑔 ′ is also a violation of the 𝐿-Lipschitzness of
𝑔. Note that by Lemma C.2 we do not need to ensure that the codomain of 𝑝 is in [0, 1]. Finally, it is easy to see that
2D-Continuous-Localopt lies in CLS, since it immediately reduces to 3D-Continuous-Localopt (Lemma C.1).                      □

6.2    Linear-CLS and Gradient Descent with finite differences
The class CLS was defined by Daskalakis and Papadimitriou [21] using the Continuous-Localopt problem which
uses arithmetic circuits with gates in {+, −, min, max, ×, <} and rational constants. In this section we show that even if
we restrict ourselves to linear arithmetic circuits (i.e., only the gates in {+, −, min, max, ×𝜁 } and rational constants are
allowed), the Continuous-Localopt problem and CLS remain just as hard as the original versions. Note that even
though these circuits are called linear, they in fact correspond to piecewise linear functions.

      Definition 9. Linear-Continuous-Localopt:
      Input:
           • precision/stopping parameter 𝜀 > 0,
           • linear arithmetic circuits 𝑝 : [0, 1]𝑛 → [0, 1] and 𝑔 : [0, 1]𝑛 → [0, 1]𝑛 .
      Goal: Compute an approximate local optimum of 𝑝 with respect to 𝑔. Formally, find 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 such that

                                                               𝑝 (𝑔(𝑥)) ≥ 𝑝 (𝑥) − 𝜀.


For 𝑘 ∈ N, we let 𝑘D-Linear-Continuous-Localopt denote the problem Linear-Continuous-Localopt where
𝑛 is fixed to be equal to 𝑘. Note that the definition of Linear-Continuous-Localopt does not require violation
solutions, since every linear arithmetic circuit is automatically Lipschitz-continuous with a Lipschitz-constant that can
be represented with a polynomial number of bits (Lemma A.1). In particular, Linear-Continuous-Localopt reduces
to Continuous-Localopt and thus to General-Continuous-Localopt.
     We define the class 2D-Linear-CLS as the set of all TFNP problems that reduce to 2D-Linear-Continuous-Localopt.
We show that:

Theorem 6.4. 2D-Linear-CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS.

Note that, just as for CLS, the one-dimensional version can be solved in polynomial time, i.e., 1D-Linear-CLS = FP.12 The
containment 2D-Linear-CLS ⊆ PPAD ∩ PLS immediately follows from the fact that 2D-Linear-CLS ⊆ CLS ⊆ PPAD ∩ PLS.
The other, more interesting, containment in Theorem 6.4 can be proved by directly reducing 2D-Continuous-Localopt
to 2D-Linear-Continuous-Localopt. This reduction mainly relies on a more general result which says that any
arithmetic circuit can be arbitrarily well approximated by a linear arithmetic circuit on a bounded domain. This
approximation theorem (Theorem E.1) is stated and proved in Appendix E. The proof uses known techniques developed

12 With the slight abuse of notation that FP ⊆ TFNP, as explained in Section 3.1.1.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                  57


in the study of the complexity of Nash equilibria [17, 20], but replaces the usual averaging step by a median step, which
ensures that we obtain the desired accuracy of approximation.
  Instead of reducing 2D-Continuous-Localopt to 2D-Linear-Continuous-Localopt, we prove Theorem 6.4 by a
different route that also allows us to introduce a problem which might be of independent interest. To capture the cases
where the gradient is not available or perhaps too expensive to compute, we consider a version of Gradient Descent
where the finite differences approach is used to compute an approximate gradient, which is then used as usual to obtain
                                                                                                        ∇ℎ 𝑓 (𝑥) at some
the next iterate. Formally, given a finite difference spacing parameter ℎ > 0, the approximate gradient e
point 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 is computed as
                                        h           𝑓 (𝑥 + ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 ) − 𝑓 (𝑥 − ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 )
                                                       i
                                            ∇ℎ 𝑓 (𝑥)
                                            e                  =
                                                           𝑖        2ℎ
for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]. The computational problem is defined as follows. Note that even though we define the problem on the
domain [0, 1]𝑛 , it can be defined on more general domains as in our other problems.


    Definition 10. GD-Finite-Diff:
    Input:
        • precision/stopping parameter 𝜀 > 0,
        • step size 𝜂 > 0,
        • finite difference spacing parameter ℎ > 0,
        • linear arithmetic circuit 𝑓 : R𝑛 → R.
    Goal: Compute any point where (projected) gradient descent for 𝑓 on domain 𝐷 = [0, 1]𝑛 using finite differences
    to approximate the gradient and fixed step size 𝜂 terminates. Formally, find 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 such that

                                               𝑓 (Π𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝜂 e
                                                            ∇ℎ 𝑓 (𝑥))) ≥ 𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝜀

    where for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]
                                        h              i           𝑓 (𝑥 + ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 ) − 𝑓 (𝑥 − ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 )
                                            ∇ℎ 𝑓 (𝑥)
                                            e                  =                                     .
                                                           𝑖                       2ℎ


GD-Finite-Diff immediately reduces to Linear-Continuous-Localopt by setting 𝑝 := 𝑓 and 𝑔 := Π𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝜂 e
                                                                                                      ∇ℎ 𝑓 (𝑥)).
It is easy to construct a linear arithmetic circuit computing 𝑔, given a linear arithmetic circuit computing 𝑓 . Note,
in particular, that the projection Π𝐷 can be computed by a linear circuit since 𝐷 = [0, 1]𝑛 . Indeed, [Π𝐷 (𝑥)]𝑖 =
min{1, max{0, 𝑥𝑖 }} for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] and 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 . Finally, the restriction of the codomain of 𝑝 to [0, 1] can be handled
exactly as in the proof of Lemma C.2.
  In particular, the reduction from GD-Finite-Diff to Linear-Continuous-Localopt is domain-preserving and thus
Theorem 6.4 immediately follows from the following theorem.


Theorem 6.5. GD-Finite-Diff is PPAD ∩ PLS-complete, even with fixed domain [0, 1] 2 .


This result is interesting by itself, because the problem GD-Finite-Diff is arguably quite natural, but also because it
is the first problem that is complete for PPAD ∩ PLS (and CLS) that has a single arithmetic circuit in the input. Note
that our other problems which we prove to be PPAD ∩ PLS-complete, as well as the previously known CLS-complete
problems, all have two arithmetic circuits in the input.
58                                               John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


     Proof. As explained above, GD-Finite-Diff immediately reduces to Linear-Continuous-Localopt and thus to
General-Continuous-Localopt, which lies in PPAD ∩ PLS by Proposition 5.6. Thus, it remains to show that GD-
Finite-Diff is PPAD ∩ PLS-hard when we fix 𝑛 = 2. This is achieved by reducing from GD-Local-Search on domain
[0, 1] 2 , which is PPAD ∩ PLS-hard by Theorem 5.1. In fact, we can even simplify the reduction by only considering
GD-Local-Search instances that have some additional structure, but remain PPAD ∩ PLS-hard. Namely, consider an
instance (𝜀, 𝜂, 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 , 𝐿) of GD-Local-Search on domain 𝐷 = [0, 1] 2 such that:
      • ∇𝑓 is the gradient of 𝑓 ,
      • 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 are 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous on [−1, 2] 2 .
To see that the problem remains PPAD ∩ PLS-hard even with these restrictions, note that the restrictions are satisfied
by the hard instances constructed for the KKT problem in the proof of Theorem 4.1, and that the reduction from
KKT to GD-Local-Search in Proposition 5.4 also trivially preserves them. In particular, even though the proof of
Theorem 4.1 only mentions that 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 are 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous on [0, 1] 2 , the same arguments also show that
they are 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous on [−1, 2] 2 (where 𝐿 has been scaled by some fixed constant).
     Let us now reduce from the instance (𝜀, 𝜂, 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 , 𝐿) of GD-Local-Search to GD-Finite-Diff. We construct the
instance (𝜀 ′, 𝜂, ℎ, 𝐹 ) of GD-Finite-Diff where 𝜀 ′ = 𝜀/4, ℎ = min{1, 8𝜂𝐿
                                                                         𝜀 } and 𝐹 is a linear arithmetic circuit that is
                                                                           2

obtained as follows. Let 𝛿 = min{𝜀/4, 𝐿ℎ 2 /2}. By Theorem E.1 and Remark 4, we can construct a linear arithmetic circuit
𝐹 : R2 → R in polynomial time in size(𝑓 ), log 𝐿 and log(1/𝛿) such that |𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝐹 (𝑥)| ≤ 𝛿 for all 𝑥 ∈ [−1, 2] 2 . Note that
the second possibility in Theorem E.1 cannot occur, since 𝑓 is guaranteed to be 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous on [−1, 2] 2 .
   Consider any solution of that instance of GD-Finite-Diff, i.e., a point 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1] 2 such that 𝐹 (Π𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝜂 e
                                                                                                               ∇ℎ 𝐹 (𝑥))) ≥
𝐹 (𝑥) − 𝜀/4. Let us show that 𝑥 is a solution to the original GD-Local-Search instance, i.e., that 𝑓 (Π𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥))) ≥
𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝜀.
     We have that for 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2}
                                              
                              ∇ℎ 𝑓 (𝑥) 𝑖 − ∇𝑓 (𝑥) 𝑖
                              e

                         𝑓 (𝑥 + ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 ) − 𝑓 (𝑥 − ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 )        
                      =                                   − ∇𝑓 (𝑥) 𝑖
                                         2ℎ
                                                                                                          
                         1                                                                           
                      ≤       𝑓 (𝑥 + ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 ) − 𝑓 (𝑥) − ℎ ∇𝑓 (𝑥) 𝑖 + −𝑓 (𝑥 − ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 ) + 𝑓 (𝑥) − ℎ ∇𝑓 (𝑥) 𝑖
                        2ℎ
                            
                         1
                      =       𝑓 (𝑥 + ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 ) − 𝑓 (𝑥) − ∇𝑓 (𝑥), (𝑥 + ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 ) − 𝑥
                        2ℎ
                                                                                  
                        + −𝑓 (𝑥 − ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 ) + 𝑓 (𝑥) + ∇𝑓 (𝑥), (𝑥 − ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 ) − 𝑥
                                                 
                           1 𝐿       2 𝐿        2     𝐿ℎ
                      ≤        ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 + −ℎ · 𝑒𝑖     =
                          2ℎ 2         2               2
where we used Taylor’s theorem (Lemma 3.4). Note that 𝑥 ± ℎ · 𝑒𝑖 ∈ [−1, 2] 2 , since ℎ ≤ 1. Furthermore, it is easy
to see that [ e              ∇ℎ 𝑓 (𝑥)]𝑖 ≤ 𝛿/ℎ, since 𝐹 approximates 𝑓 up to error 𝛿 on all of [−1, 2] 2 . It follows that
              ∇ℎ 𝐹 (𝑥)]𝑖 − [ e
                       √
 ∇ℎ 𝐹 (𝑥) − ∇𝑓 (𝑥) ≤ 2(𝛿/ℎ + 𝐿ℎ/2) ≤ 2𝐿ℎ. From this it follows that
 e
                                                                             
                                        𝑓 Π𝐷 𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑓 Π𝐷 𝑥 − 𝜂 e ∇ℎ 𝐹 (𝑥)

                                          ≤ 𝐿 · Π𝐷 𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥) − Π𝐷 𝑥 − 𝜂 e
                                                                                  
                                                                          ∇ℎ 𝐹 (𝑥)
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                   59

                                                                        
                                     ≤𝐿·    𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑥 − 𝜂 e
                                                                ∇ℎ 𝐹 (𝑥)

                                     ≤ 𝜂𝐿 · e
                                            ∇ℎ 𝐹 (𝑥) − ∇𝑓 (𝑥)
                                     ≤ 2𝜂𝐿 2ℎ ≤ 𝜀/4.

Finally, note that |𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝐹 (𝑥)| ≤ 𝛿 ≤ 𝜀/4 and
                                                                       
                                 𝑓 Π𝐷 𝑥 − 𝜂 e∇ℎ 𝐹 (𝑥) − 𝐹 Π𝐷 𝑥 − 𝜂 e
                                                                   ∇ℎ 𝐹 (𝑥) ≤ 𝛿 ≤ 𝜀/4.
                              
Thus, since 𝐹 Π𝐷 𝑥 − 𝜂 e
                       ∇ℎ 𝐹 (𝑥) ≥ 𝐹 (𝑥) − 𝜀/4, it follows that
                                                          
                                       𝑓 Π𝐷 𝑥 − 𝜂∇𝑓 (𝑥) ≥ 𝑓 (𝑥) − 4𝜀/4

i.e., 𝑥 is a solution to the original GD-Local-Search instance.                                                         □


7    FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Our results may help to identify the complexity of the following problems that are known to lie in PPAD ∩ PLS:

     • Mixed-Congestion: The problem of finding a mixed Nash equilibrium of a congestion game. It is known that
        finding a pure Nash equilibrium is PLS-complete [29]. As mentioned in Section 1.2, Babichenko and Rubinstein
        [5] have recently applied our main result to obtain PPAD ∩ PLS-completeness for Mixed-Congestion. It would
        be interesting to extend this to network congestion games, where the strategies are represented implicitly.
     • polynomial-KKT: The special case of the KKT problem where the function is a polynomial, provided explicitly
        in the input (exponents in unary). In particular, note that this version of the problem does not require the
        introduction of violation-solutions for Lipschitzness and smoothness. A consequence of the above-mentioned
        reduction by Babichenko and Rubinstein [5] is that the problem is PPAD ∩ PLS-complete for polynomials of
        degree 5. It is an interesting open problem to extend this hardness result to lower degree polynomials.
     • Contraction: Find a fixed point of a function that is contracting with respect to some ℓ𝑝 -norm.
     • Tarski: Find a fixed point of an order-preserving function, as guaranteed by Tarski’s theorem [19, 27, 32].
     • ColorfulCarathéodory: A problem based on a theorem in convex geometry [46].

The first three problems on this list were known to lie in CLS [21], while the other two were only known to lie in
PPAD ∩ PLS.
    The collapse between CLS and PPAD ∩ PLS raises the question of whether the class EOPL (for End of Potential
Line), a subclass of CLS, is also equal to PPAD ∩ PLS. The class EOPL, or more precisely its subclass UEOPL (with U for
unique), is known to contain various problems of interest that have unique solutions such as Unique Sink Orientation
(USO), the P-matrix Linear Complementarity Problem (P-LCP), Simple Stochastic Games (SSG) and Parity Games [31].
    In an earlier version of this paper, we conjectured that EOPL ≠ PPAD ∩ PLS, but, in another surprising turn of events,
subsequent work by Göös et al. [35] has shown that in fact EOPL = PPAD ∩ PLS. This collapse provides further evidence
that PPAD ∩ PLS is a natural and robust class. Furthermore, together with the work of Hubáček and Yogev [36], who
prove that EOPL ⊆ CLS, it also yields an alternative proof of CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS. Finally, regarding our results about
the gradient descent problem, the proof of PPAD ∩ PLS-hardness can now be significantly simplified by reducing from
End-of-Potential-Line, the standard EOPL-complete problem, instead of Either-Solution(End-of-Line,Iter). In
60                                             John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


particular, “green paths” are enough to embed an End-of-Potential-Line instance, and the “orange paths” and the
PLS-Labyrinth are no longer needed.
     The collapse EOPL = PPAD ∩ PLS leaves open the question of whether UEOPL is also equal to PPAD ∩ PLS. We
conjecture that UEOPL ≠ PPAD ∩ PLS. The canonical complete problem for UEOPL, Uniqe-End-of-Potential-Line,
is the same as End-of-Potential-Line, except that it also allows an additional kind of violation solution. We currently
see no way of reducing End-of-Potential-Line to Uniqe-End-of-Potential-Line, because this would require a
way to extract a standard solution from one of those new violation solutions. In order to provide evidence that the
classes are not equal, one could try to obtain an oracle separation between UEOPL and PPAD ∩ PLS, in the sense of
Beame et al. [6].
     Ishizuka [37] has recently shown that the definition of EOPL is robust with respect to some modifications (similarly
to PPAD [34]), and has provided a somewhat artificial problem that is complete for PPA ∩ PLS. This raises the interesting
question of whether PPA ∩ PLS, and other intersections of well-studied classes, also admit natural complete problems,
or if PPAD ∩ PLS is in fact an isolated case.


A     MORE ON ARITHMETIC CIRCUITS
A.1     Evaluation of well-behaved arithmetic circuits (Proof of Lemma 3.3)
We restate the Lemma here for convenience.


Lemma 3.3. Let 𝑓 be a well-behaved arithmetic circuit with 𝑛 inputs. Then, for any rational 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 , 𝑓 (𝑥) can be computed
in time poly(size(𝑓 ), size(𝑥)).


     Proof. Recall that an arithmetic circuit 𝑓 is well-behaved if, on any directed path that leads to an output, there
are at most log(size(𝑓 )) true multiplication gates. Without loss of generality, we can assume that the circuit 𝑓 only
contains gates that are used to compute at least one of the outputs.
     Let 𝑥 denote the input to circuit 𝑓 and for any gate 𝑔 of 𝑓 let 𝑣 (𝑔) denote the value computed by gate 𝑔 when 𝑥 is
provided as input to the circuit. For any gate 𝑔 that is not an input gate or a constant gate, let 𝑔1 and 𝑔2 denote the
two gates it uses as inputs. Clearly, if 𝑔 is one of {+, −, ×, max, min, >}, 𝑣 (𝑔) can be computed in polynomial time in
size(𝑣 (𝑔1 )) +size(𝑣 (𝑔2 )), including transforming it into an irreducible fraction. Thus, in order to show that the circuit can
be evaluated in polynomial time, it suffices to show that for all gates 𝑔 of 𝑓 , it holds that size(𝑣 (𝑔)) ≤ 𝑝 (size(𝑓 ) +size(𝑥)),
where 𝑝 is some fixed polynomial (independent of 𝑓 and 𝑥). In the rest of this proof, we show that

                                              size(𝑣 (𝑔)) ≤ 6 · size(𝑓 ) 3 · size(𝑥).

     It is convenient to partition the gates of the circuit depending on their depth. For any gate 𝑔 in 𝑓 , we let 𝑑 (𝑔) denote
the depth of the gate in 𝑓 . The input gates and the constant gates are at depth 1. For any other gate 𝑔, we define its depth
inductively as 𝑑 (𝑔) = 1 + max{𝑑 (𝑔1 ), 𝑑 (𝑔2 )}, where 𝑔1 and 𝑔2 are the two input gates of 𝑔. Note that 𝑑 (𝑔) ≤ size(𝑓 ) for
all gates 𝑔 in the circuit.
     We also define a notion of “multiplication-depth” 𝑚𝑑 (𝑔). The gates 𝑔 at depth 1 all have 𝑚𝑑 (𝑔) = 0. For the
rest of the gates, the multiplication-depth is defined inductively. For a gate 𝑔 whose inputs are 𝑔1 and 𝑔2 , we let
𝑚𝑑 (𝑔) = 1 + max{𝑚𝑑 (𝑔1 ), 𝑚𝑑 (𝑔2 )} if 𝑔 is a true multiplication gate, and 𝑚𝑑 (𝑔) = max{𝑚𝑑 (𝑔1 ), 𝑚𝑑 (𝑔2 )} otherwise.
Since 𝑓 is well-behaved, it immediately follows that 𝑚𝑑 (𝑔) ≤ log(size(𝑓 )) for all gates 𝑔 of the circuit.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                      61


   We begin by showing that for any gate 𝑔 of 𝑓 , it holds that |𝑣 (𝑔)| ≤ 2size(𝑓 ) (size(𝑥)+size(𝑓 )) . This follows from the
                                                                                                            2


stronger statement that
                                                                       𝑚𝑑 (𝑔) ·(size(𝑥)+size(𝑓 ))
                                                  |𝑣 (𝑔)| ≤ 2𝑑 (𝑔) ·2                               ,
which we prove by induction as follows. First of all, note that any gate at depth 1 satisfies the statement, since any
input or constant of the circuit is bounded by 2size(𝑥) or 2size(𝑓 ) respectively. Next, assume that the statement holds
for all gates with depth ≤ 𝑘 − 1 and consider some gate 𝑔 at depth 𝑘. Let 𝑔1 and 𝑔2 denote its two inputs, which must
satisfy that 𝑑 (𝑔1 ) ≤ 𝑘 − 1 and 𝑑 (𝑔2 ) ≤ 𝑘 − 1. If 𝑔 is one of {min, max, <}, then the statement immediately also holds
for 𝑔. If 𝑔 is an addition or subtraction gate, then |𝑣 (𝑔)| ≤ |𝑣 (𝑔1 )| + |𝑣 (𝑔2 )| ≤ 2 max{|𝑣 (𝑔1 )|, |𝑣 (𝑔2 )|}, which implies
that the statement also hold for 𝑔, since 𝑑 (𝑔1 ), 𝑑 (𝑔2 ) ≤ 𝑘 − 1 and 𝑑 (𝑔) = 𝑘. If 𝑔 is a multiplication by a constant, then
|𝑣 (𝑔)| ≤ 2size(𝑓 ) |𝑣 (𝑔1 )| (wlog 𝑔2 is the constant), and the statement holds for 𝑔 too. Finally, if 𝑔 is a true multiplication
gate, then |𝑣 (𝑔)| = |𝑣 (𝑔1 )||𝑣 (𝑔2 )| ≤ (max{|𝑣 (𝑔1 )|, |𝑣 (𝑔2 )|}) 2 . Since 𝑚𝑑 (𝑔) = 1 + max{𝑚𝑑 (𝑔1 ), 𝑚𝑑 (𝑔2 )}, it follows that
the statement also holds for 𝑔.
   Let 𝑑𝑒𝑛(𝑔) denote the absolute value of the denominator of 𝑣 (𝑔) (written as an irreducible fraction). We show that
for all gates 𝑔, it holds that 𝑑𝑒𝑛(𝑔) ≤ 2size(𝑓 ) (size(𝑥)+size( 𝑓 )) . This is enough to conclude our proof. Indeed, since we
                                                         2


also have that |𝑣 (𝑔)| ≤ 2 size(𝑓 ) 2 (size(𝑥)+size(𝑓 ))     , it follows that the absolute value of the numerator of 𝑣 (𝑔) is

                                            |𝑣 (𝑔)| · 𝑑𝑒𝑛(𝑔) ≤ 22·size(𝑓 ) (size(𝑥)+size(𝑓 )) .
                                                                                  2



As a result, it follows that

            size(𝑣 (𝑔)) ≤ 2 · size(𝑓 ) 2 (size(𝑥) + size(𝑓 )) + size(𝑓 ) 2 (size(𝑥) + size(𝑓 )) ≤ 6 · size(𝑓 ) 3 · size(𝑥).

It remains to show that 𝑑𝑒𝑛(𝑔) ≤ 2size(𝑓 ) (size(𝑥)+size(𝑓 )) , which we prove by showing that
                                                  2


                                                                        𝑚𝑑 (𝑔) ·(size(𝑥)+size(𝑓 ))
                                               𝑑𝑒𝑛(𝑔) ≤ 2𝑑 (𝑔) ·2                                       .

Let 𝑀 denote (the absolute value of) the product of all denominators appearing in the input 𝑥 and the description of 𝑓 ,
i.e., the denominators of the coordinates of the input 𝑥, and the denominators of the constants used by 𝑓 . Note that
𝑀 ≤ 2size(𝑥)+size(𝑓 ) . We prove by induction that for all gates 𝑔,
                                                                                           𝑚𝑑 (𝑔)
                                                      𝑑𝑒𝑛(𝑔) is a factor of 𝑀 𝑑 (𝑔) ·2

which in particular implies the bound on 𝑑𝑒𝑛(𝑔) above. First of all, note that any gate at depth 1 is an input or a constant,
and thus satisfies the statement. Next, assume that the statement holds for all gates with depth ≤ 𝑘 − 1 and consider
some gate 𝑔 at depth 𝑘. Let 𝑔1 and 𝑔2 denote its two inputs, which must satisfy that 𝑑 (𝑔1 ) ≤ 𝑘 − 1 and 𝑑 (𝑔2 ) ≤ 𝑘 − 1. If
𝑔 is one of {min, max, <}, then it is easy to see that the statement immediately also holds for 𝑔. If 𝑔 is an addition or
                                                                                                                           𝑚𝑑 (𝑔)
subtraction gate, then, since 𝑣 (𝑔1 ) and 𝑣 (𝑔2 ) can both be expressed as fractions with denominator 𝑀 𝑑 (𝑔) ·2                    , so can
                                                                                                                        𝑚𝑑 (𝑔)
𝑣 (𝑔), and the statement also holds for 𝑔. If 𝑔 is a multiplication by a constant, then 𝑑𝑒𝑛(𝑔) is a factor of 𝑀 𝑑 (𝑔) ·2       ,
                                             𝑚𝑑 (𝑔)
since 𝑑𝑒𝑛(𝑔1 ) is a factor of 𝑀 (𝑑 (𝑔)−1) ·2            and the denominator of the constant is a factor of 𝑀 (wlog assume that 𝑔2
                                                                                                                            𝑚𝑑 (𝑔) −1
is the constant). Finally, if 𝑔 is a true multiplication gate, then 𝑑𝑒𝑛(𝑔1 ) and 𝑑𝑒𝑛(𝑔2 ) are factors of 𝑀 𝑑 (𝑔) ·2                     , and
                                       𝑚𝑑 (𝑔)−1                     𝑚𝑑 (𝑔)
thus 𝑑𝑒𝑛(𝑔) is a factor of (𝑀 𝑑 (𝑔) ·2            ) 2 = 𝑀 𝑑 (𝑔) ·2           as desired.                                                   □

A.2   Linear arithmetic circuits are Lipschitz-continuous
Linear arithmetic circuits are only allowed to use the operations {+, −, max, min, ×𝜁 } and rational constants. The
operation ×𝜁 denotes multiplication by a constant (which is part of the description of the circuit). Every linear arithmetic
62                                                John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


circuit is in particular a well-behaved arithmetic circuit, and so, by Lemma 3.3, can be evaluated in polynomial time.
Furthermore, every linear arithmetic circuit represents a Lipschitz-continuous function such that the Lipschitz constant
has polynomial bit-size with respect to the size of the circuit.

Lemma A.1. Any linear arithmetic circuit 𝑓 : R𝑛 → R𝑚 is 2size(𝑓 ) -Lipschitz-continuous (w.r.t. the ℓ∞ -norm) over R𝑛 .
                                                                              2




     Proof. For any gate 𝑔 of the circuit 𝑓 , let 𝐿(𝑔) denote the Lipschitz-constant of the function which outputs the
value of 𝑔, given the input 𝑥 to the circuit. As in the proof of Lemma 3.3, it is convenient to partition the gates of 𝑓
according to their depth. Note that for all the gates 𝑔 at depth 1, i.e., the input gates and the constant gates, it holds
that 𝐿(𝑔) ≤ 1. We show that any gate 𝑔 at depth 𝑘 satisfies 𝐿(𝑔) ≤ 2𝑘 ·size(𝑓 ) . It immediately follows from this that 𝑓 is
2size(𝑓 ) -Lipschitz-continuous (w.r.t. the ℓ∞ -norm) over R𝑛 .
         2


     Consider a gate 𝑔 at depth 𝑘 with inputs 𝑔1 and 𝑔2 (which lie at a lower depth). If 𝑔 is + or −, then 𝐿(𝑔) ≤
𝐿(𝑔1 ) + 𝐿(𝑔2 ) ≤ 2 max{𝐿(𝑔1 ), 𝐿(𝑔2 )} ≤ 2 · 2 (𝑘−1) ·size(𝑓 ) ≤ 2𝑘 ·size(𝑓 ) . If 𝑔 is max or min, then it is easy to see that
𝐿(𝑔) ≤ max{𝐿(𝑔1 ), 𝐿(𝑔2 )} ≤ 2𝑘 ·size(𝑓 ) . Finally, if 𝑔 is ×𝜁 , then 𝐿(𝑔) ≤ |𝜁 | · 𝐿(𝑔1 ) ≤ 2size(𝑓 ) 2 (𝑘−1) ·size(𝑓 ) = 2𝑘 ·size( 𝑓 ) ,
where we used the fact that |𝜁 | ≤ 2size(𝑓 ) .                                                                                          □

B     MATHEMATICAL TOOLS
B.1     Tools from convex analysis and a generalization of Farkas’ Lemma
Let 𝐷 ⊆ R𝑛 be a non-empty closed convex set. Recall that the projection Π𝐷 : R𝑛 → 𝐷 is defined by Π𝐷 (𝑥) =
argmin𝑦 ∈𝐷 ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥, where ∥ · ∥ denotes the Euclidean norm. It is known that Π𝐷 (𝑥) always exists and is unique. The
following two results are standard tools in convex analysis, see, e.g., [7].

Lemma B.1. Let 𝐷 be a non-empty closed convex set in R𝑛 and let 𝑦 ∈ R𝑛 . Then for all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 it holds that

                                                    ⟨𝑦 − Π𝐷 (𝑦), 𝑥 − Π𝐷 (𝑦)⟩ ≤ 0.

Proposition B.2. Let 𝐷 1 and 𝐷 2 be two disjoint non-empty closed convex sets in R𝑛 and such that 𝐷 2 is bounded. Then,
there exist 𝑐 ∈ R𝑛 \ {0} and 𝑑 ∈ R such that ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ < 𝑑 for all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 1 , and ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ > 𝑑 for all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 2 .

We will need the following generalization of Farkas’ Lemma, which we prove below. For 𝜀 = 0, we recover the usual
statement of Farkas’ Lemma.

Lemma B.3. Let 𝐴 ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 , 𝑏 ∈ R𝑛 and 𝜀 ≥ 0. Then exactly one of the following two statements holds:
     (1) ∃𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 : 𝐴𝑥 ≤ 0, ⟨𝑏, 𝑥⟩ > 𝜀 ∥𝑥 ∥,
     (2) ∃𝑦 ∈ R𝑚 : ∥𝐴𝑇 𝑦 − 𝑏 ∥ ≤ 𝜀, 𝑦 ≥ 0.

     Proof. Let us first check that both statements cannot hold at the same time. Indeed, if this were the case, then we
would obtain the following contradiction

                         𝜀 ∥𝑥 ∥ < ⟨𝑏, 𝑥⟩ = ⟨𝐴𝑇 𝑦, 𝑥⟩ + ⟨𝑏 − 𝐴𝑇 𝑦, 𝑥⟩ ≤ ⟨𝑦, 𝐴𝑥⟩ + ∥𝑏 − 𝐴𝑇 𝑦 ∥∥𝑥 ∥ ≤ 𝜀 ∥𝑥 ∥

where we used the fact that ⟨𝑦, 𝐴𝑥⟩ ≤ 0 and the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
     Now, let us show that if statement 2 does not hold, then statement 1 must necessarily hold. Let 𝐷 1 = {𝐴𝑇 𝑦 : 𝑦 ≥ 0}
and 𝐷 2 = {𝑥 : ∥𝑥 −𝑏 ∥ ≤ 𝜀}. Note that since statement 2 does not hold, it follows that 𝐷 1 and 𝐷 2 are disjoint. Furthermore,
it is easy to check that 𝐷 1 and 𝐷 2 satisfy the conditions of Proposition B.2. Thus, there exist 𝑐 ∈ R𝑛 \ {0} and 𝑑 ∈ R such
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                         63


that ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ < 𝑑 for all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 1 , and ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ > 𝑑 for all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 2 . In particular, we have that for all 𝑦 ≥ 0, ⟨𝐴𝑐, 𝑦⟩ = ⟨𝑐, 𝐴𝑇 𝑦⟩ < 𝑑.
                                                                                                                 |𝑑 |
From this it follows that 𝐴𝑐 ≤ 0, since if [𝐴𝑐]𝑖 > 0 for some 𝑖, then ⟨𝐴𝑐, 𝑦⟩ ≥ 𝑑 for 𝑦 = [𝐴𝑐 ] 𝑒𝑖 .
                                                                                                                        𝑖
    In order to show that 𝑥 := 𝑐 satisfies the first statement, it remains to prove that ⟨𝑏, 𝑐⟩ > 𝜀 ∥𝑐 ∥. Note that by
setting 𝑦 = 0, we get that 0 = ⟨𝑐, 𝐴𝑇 0⟩ < 𝑑. Let 𝑧 = 𝑏 − 𝜀 ∥𝑐𝑐 ∥ . Since 𝑧 ∈ 𝐷 2 , it follows that ⟨𝑐, 𝑧⟩ > 𝑑 > 0. Since
⟨𝑐, 𝑧⟩ = ⟨𝑐, 𝑏⟩ − 𝜀 ∥𝑥 ∥, statement 1 indeed holds.                                                                                          □


B.2    Proof of Lemma 3.4 (Taylor’s Theorem)
We restate the Lemma here for convenience.

Lemma 3.4 (Taylor’s theorem). Let 𝑓 : R𝑛 → R be continuously differentiable and let 𝐷 ⊆ R𝑛 be convex. If ∇𝑓 is
𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous (w.r.t. the ℓ2 -norm) on 𝐷, then for all 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 we have
                                                                                        𝐿
                                            𝑓 (𝑦) − 𝑓 (𝑥) − ⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑦 − 𝑥⟩ ≤             ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ 2 .
                                                                                        2

    Proof. Let 𝑔 : [0, 1] → R be defined by 𝑔(𝑡) = 𝑓 (𝑥 + 𝑡 (𝑦 − 𝑥)). Then, 𝑔 is continuously differentiable on [0, 1] and
𝑔 ′ (𝑡) = ⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥 + 𝑡 (𝑦 − 𝑥)), 𝑦 − 𝑥⟩. Furthermore, 𝑔 ′ is (𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ 2 )-Lipschitz-continuous on [0, 1], since
                           |𝑔 ′ (𝑡 1 ) − 𝑔 ′ (𝑡 2 )| = |⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥 + 𝑡 1 (𝑦 − 𝑥)) − ∇𝑓 (𝑥 + 𝑡 2 (𝑦 − 𝑥)), 𝑦 − 𝑥⟩|
                                                 ≤ ∥∇𝑓 (𝑥 + 𝑡 1 (𝑦 − 𝑥)) − ∇𝑓 (𝑥 + 𝑡 2 (𝑦 − 𝑥))∥ · ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥
                                                 ≤ 𝐿 · ∥𝑡 1 (𝑦 − 𝑥) − 𝑡 2 (𝑦 − 𝑥)∥ · ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥
                                                 ≤ 𝐿 · |𝑡 1 − 𝑡 2 | · ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ 2

where we used the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. We also used the fact that ∇𝑓 is 𝐿-Lipschitz on 𝐷, and 𝑥 + 𝑡 (𝑦 − 𝑥) ∈ 𝐷
for all 𝑡 ∈ [0, 1]. Now, we can write
                                                                                                ∫ 1
                        𝑓 (𝑦) − 𝑓 (𝑥) − ⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑦 − 𝑥⟩ = 𝑔(1) − 𝑔(0) − 𝑔 ′ (0) =                     (𝑔 ′ (𝑡) − 𝑔 ′ (0)) d𝑡
                                                                                                 0
and thus
                                                       ∫ 1                              ∫ 1
                                                                                                                            𝐿
             |𝑓 (𝑦) − 𝑓 (𝑥) − ⟨∇𝑓 (𝑥), 𝑦 − 𝑥⟩| ≤             |𝑔 ′ (𝑡) − 𝑔 ′ (0)| d𝑡 ≤         𝐿 · ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ 2 · |𝑡 | d𝑡 =      ∥𝑦 − 𝑥 ∥ 2 .   □
                                                         0                               0                                  2

C     MINOR OBSERVATIONS ON CONTINUOUS-LOCALOPT AND KKT
Lemma C.1. For all integers 𝑘 2 > 𝑘 1 > 0, 𝑘 1 D-Continuous-Localopt reduces to 𝑘 2 D-Continuous-Localopt using a
promise-preserving reduction.

    Proof. For 𝑥 ∈ R𝑘2 , we write 𝑥 = (𝑥 1, 𝑥 2 ), where 𝑥 1 ∈ R𝑘1 and 𝑥 2 ∈ R𝑘2 −𝑘1 . Let (𝜀, 𝑝, 𝑔, 𝐿) be an instance of
𝑘 1 D-Continuous-Localopt. The reduction constructs the instance (𝜀, 𝑝 ′, 𝑔 ′, 𝐿) of 𝑘 2 D-Continuous-Localopt, where

                          𝑝 ′ (𝑥) = 𝑝 ′ (𝑥 1, 𝑥 2 ) = 𝑝 (𝑥 1 )     and         𝑔 ′ (𝑥) = 𝑔 ′ (𝑥 1, 𝑥 2 ) = (𝑔(𝑥 1 ), 0).

Clearly, the arithmetic circuits for 𝑝 ′ and 𝑔 ′ can be constructed in polynomial time and are well-behaved.
    Since |𝑝 ′ (𝑥) − 𝑝 ′ (𝑦)| = |𝑝 (𝑥 1 ) − 𝑝 (𝑦1 )| ≤ 𝐿∥𝑥 1 − 𝑦1 ∥ ≤ 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥, it is clear that any violation 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1]𝑘2 of
𝐿-Lipschitzness for 𝑝 ′ also yields a violation 𝑥 1, 𝑦1 ∈ [0, 1]𝑘1 for 𝑝. Similarly, since

                 ∥𝑔 ′ (𝑥) − 𝑔 ′ (𝑦)∥ = ∥(𝑔(𝑥 1 ), 0) − (𝑔(𝑦1 ), 0)∥ = ∥𝑔(𝑥 1 ) − 𝑔(𝑦1 )∥ ≤ 𝐿∥𝑥 1 − 𝑦1 ∥ ≤ 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥,
64                                               John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


any violation 𝑥, 𝑦 of 𝐿-Lipschitzness for 𝑔 ′ also yields a violation 𝑥 1, 𝑦1 for 𝑔. Thus, any violation of the constructed
instance is always mapped back to a violation of the original instance, and the reduction is indeed promise-preserving.
     Finally, note that any proper solution 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑘2 of the constructed instance, i.e., such that 𝑝 ′ (𝑔 ′ (𝑥)) ≥ 𝑝 ′ (𝑥) − 𝜀,
immediately yields a solution 𝑥 1 ∈ [0, 1]𝑘1 of the original instance.                                                             □

Lemma C.2. Continuous-Localopt with codomain [0, 1] for function 𝑝 is equivalent to Continuous-Localopt
without this restriction.

     Proof. It is clear that the version with the restriction trivially reduces to the version without the restriction. Thus, it
remains to show the other direction, namely that Continuous-Localopt without the codomain restriction reduces to
the restricted version.
     Let (𝜀, 𝑝, 𝑔, 𝐿) be an instance of Continuous-Localopt with domain [0, 1]𝑛 and without a codomain restriction for
𝑝. The reduction constructs the instance (𝜀 ′, 𝑝 ′, 𝑔, 𝐿 ′ ) of Continuous-Localopt with domain [0, 1]𝑛 , where 𝜀 ′ = 2𝑛𝐿
                                                                                                                       𝜀 ,

𝐿 ′ = max{𝐿, 2𝑛
              1 } and
                                                                                     
                                           ′                         1 𝑝 (𝑥) − 𝑝 (𝑧𝑐 )
                                          𝑝 (𝑥) = min 1, max 0, +
                                                                     2        2𝑛𝐿
where 𝑧𝑐 = (1/2, 1/2, . . . , 1/2) is the centre of [0, 1]𝑛 . Note that the arithmetic circuit computing 𝑝 ′ can be computed
in polynomial time given the circuit for 𝑝, and that the modification of 𝑝 will require using gates ×𝜁 , but no general
multiplication gates. Thus, the circuit for 𝑝 ′ is also well-behaved. Note, in particular, that the value 𝑝 (𝑧𝑐 ) can be
computed in polynomial time in the size of the circuit for 𝑝. It follows that the reduction can be computed in polynomial
time.
                                                                                     𝑝 (𝑥)−𝑝 (𝑧𝑐 )
     First of all, let us show that any point 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 such that 𝑝 ′ (𝑥) ≠ 12 +       2𝑛𝐿       will immediately yield a violation
of the 𝐿-Lipschitzness of 𝑝. Indeed, if 𝑥 and 𝑧𝑐 satisfy the 𝐿-Lipschitzness of 𝑝, then this means that

                                                |𝑝 (𝑥) − 𝑝 (𝑧𝑐 )| ≤ 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑧𝑐 ∥ ≤ 𝑛𝐿
                                                      𝑝 (𝑥)−𝑝 (𝑧𝑐 )                                     𝑝 (𝑥)−𝑝 (𝑧𝑐 )
since 𝑥, 𝑧𝑐 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 . As a result, it follows that 21 + 2𝑛𝐿       ∈ [0, 1] and thus 𝑝 ′ (𝑥) = 21 +        2𝑛𝐿       .
                                                                                (𝑥)−𝑝 (𝑧   )
     In the rest of this proof we assume that we always have 𝑝 ′ (𝑥) = 2 +
                                                                         1    𝑝          𝑐
                                                                                  2𝑛𝐿        , since we can  immediately extract a
violation if we ever come across a point 𝑥 where this does not hold. Let us now show that any solution of the constructed
instance immediately yields a solution of the original instance. Clearly, any violation of the 𝐿 ′ -Lipschitzness of 𝑔 is
trivially also a violation of 𝐿-Lipschitzness.
     Next assume that 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 are a violation of 𝐿 ′ -Lipschitzness of 𝑝 ′ . Let us show by contradiction that 𝑥, 𝑦 must
be a violation of 𝐿-Lipschitzness for 𝑝. Indeed, assume that 𝑥, 𝑦 satisfy the 𝐿-Lipschitzness for 𝑝, then
                                                                 𝑝 (𝑥) − 𝑝 (𝑦)    1
                                         |𝑝 ′ (𝑥) − 𝑝 ′ (𝑦)| =                 ≤    ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥
                                                                     2𝑛𝐿         2𝑛
which is a contradiction to 𝑥, 𝑦 being a violation of 𝐿 ′ -Lipschitzness of 𝑝 ′ .
     Finally, consider any proper solution of the constructed instance, i.e., 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 such that 𝑝 ′ (𝑔(𝑥)) ≥ 𝑝 ′ (𝑥) − 𝜀 ′ .
Then it follows straightforwardly that 𝑝 (𝑔(𝑥)) ≥ 𝑝 (𝑥) − 2𝑛𝐿𝜀 ′ , which implies that 𝑥 is a solution to the original instance,
since 2𝑛𝐿𝜀 ′ = 𝜀. Note that the reduction is also promise-preserving, since we always map violations of the constructed
instance back to violations of the original instance.                                                                              □

Lemma C.3. General-Continuous-Localopt with fixed dimension 𝑛 = 1 can be solved in polynomial time. As a result,
this also holds for KKT, GD-Local-Search and GD-Fixpoint.
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                         65


  Proof. This is a straightforward consequence of the fact that finding Brouwer fixed points in one dimension is
easy. Consider any instance (𝜀, 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝑝, 𝑔, 𝐿) of General-Continuous-Localopt with 𝑛 = 1. It is easy to see that any
𝜀/𝐿-approximate fixed point of 𝑥 ↦→ Π𝐷 (𝑔(𝑥)) immediately yields a solution to the General-Continuous-Localopt
instance.
  Thus, we proceed as follows. First of all, from 𝐴 and 𝑏 we can directly determine 𝑡 1, 𝑡 2 ∈ R such that 𝐷 = [𝑡 1, 𝑡 2 ].
Note that the bit-size of 𝑡 1 and 𝑡 2 is polynomial in the input size. Then define a grid of points on the interval [𝑡 1, 𝑡 2 ]
such that the distance between consecutive points is 𝜀/𝐿 2 . Finally, using binary search, find two consecutive points
𝑥 1 and 𝑥 2 such that 𝑔(𝑥 1 ) ≥ 𝑥 1 and 𝑔(𝑥 2 ) ≤ 𝑥 2 . One of these two points has to be an 𝜀/𝐿-approximate fixed point of
𝑥 ↦→ Π𝐷 (𝑔(𝑥)) (or we obtain a violation of Lipschitz-continuity). Binary search takes polynomial time, because the
number of points is at most exponential in the input size.
  Since the other three problems reduce to General-Continuous-Localopt using domain-preserving reductions (see
Section 5), it follows that they can also be solved in polynomial time when 𝑛 = 1.                                           □

Lemma C.4. KKT on domain [0, 1]𝑛 can be solved in polynomial time in 1/𝜀, 𝐿 and the sizes of the circuits for 𝑓 and ∇𝑓 .

  Proof. This follows from the fact that the problem can be solved by Gradient Descent in polynomial time in those
parameters. Let (𝜀, 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 , 𝐿) be an instance of KKT with domain [0, 1]𝑛 . First, compute 𝑓 (0) in polynomial time in
                                                                                          √           √
size(𝑓 ). If 𝑓 is indeed 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous, then it follows that 𝑓 (𝑥) ∈ 𝐼 = [𝑓 (0) − 𝑛𝐿, 𝑓 (0) + 𝑛𝐿] for all 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 .
If we ever come across a point where this does not hold, we immediately obtain a violation of 𝐿-Lipschitz-continuity of
𝑓 . So, for the rest of this proof we simply assume that 𝑓 (𝑥) ∈ 𝐼 for all 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 .
                                           √
    Note that the length of interval 𝐼 is 2 𝑛𝐿, which is polynomial in 𝐿 and 𝑛. By using the reduction in the proof of
                                                                                                                              2
Proposition 5.4, we can solve our instance by solving the instance (𝜀 ′, 𝜂, 𝑓 , ∇𝑓 , 𝐿) of GD-Local-Search, where 𝜀 ′ = 8𝐿
                                                                                                                        𝜀

and 𝜂 = 𝐿1 . The important observation here is that this instance of GD-Local-Search can be solved by applying
                                                                                         √
                                                                                |𝐼 |   16 𝑛𝐿 2
Gradient Descent with step size 𝜂 and with any starting point, in at most 𝜀 ′ =          𝜀2
                                                                                               steps. Indeed, every step must
improve the value of 𝑓 by 𝜀 ′ , otherwise we have found a solution. It is easy to see that each step of Gradient Descent
can be done in polynomial time in size(∇𝑓 ), 𝑛 and log 𝐿. Since the number of steps is polynomial in 1/𝜀, 𝐿 and 𝑛, the
problem can be solved in polynomial time in 1/𝜀, 𝐿, 𝑛, size(𝑓 ) and size(∇𝑓 ). Finally note that 𝑛 ≤ size(𝑓 ) (because 𝑓
has 𝑛 input gates).                                                                                                          □

D GENERAL-BROUWER AND GENERAL-REAL-LOCALOPT
In this section we define the computational problems General-Brouwer and General-Real-Localopt and prove that
they are PPAD- and PLS-complete respectively. These two completeness results follow straightforwardly from prior
work. The membership of General-Brouwer in PPAD and of General-Real-Localopt in PLS are used in this paper
to show that our problems of interest lie in PPAD ∩ PLS.

    Definition 11. General-Brouwer:
    Input:
         • precision parameter 𝜀 > 0,
         • (𝐴, 𝑏) ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 × R𝑚 defining a bounded non-empty domain 𝐷 = {𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 : 𝐴𝑥 ≤ 𝑏},
         • well-behaved arithmetic circuit 𝑔 : R𝑛 → R𝑛 ,
         • Lipschitz constant 𝐿 > 0.
66                                            John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


      Goal: Compute an approximate fixed point of 𝑔 on domain 𝐷. Formally, find 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 such that

                                                     ∥Π𝐷 (𝑔(𝑥)) − 𝑥 ∥ ≤ 𝜀.

      Alternatively, we also accept a violation of 𝐿-Lipschitzness of 𝑔 as a solution. Namely, 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 such that
      ∥𝑔(𝑥) − 𝑔(𝑦)∥ > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥.


Proposition D.1. General-Brouwer is PPAD-complete.

     Proof. Various formulations and special cases of the problem of finding a Brouwer fixed point are known to be
PPAD-complete [16, 28, 50]. The PPAD-hardness of our General-Brouwer problem immediately follows from the
PPAD-hardness of the problem on the domain [0, 1] 2 and when 𝑔 is a linear arithmetic circuit, which is known from
[45].
     The containment in PPAD essentially follows from Proposition 2 in [28], where it is shown that finding an approximate
fixed point of a Brouwer function that is efficiently computable and continuous, when the domain is a bounded polytope,
is in PPAD. In General-Brouwer, the function is not guaranteed to be continuous, but instead we allow violations
of Lipschitz-continuity as solutions. However, it can easily be seen that the proof in [28] also applies to this case.
Alternatively, we can also use our Theorem E.1 to approximate the circuit 𝑔 by a linear arithmetic circuit (which is
necessarily Lipschitz-continuous with a polynomially representable Lipschitz-constant, see Lemma 3.3) and then use
[28, Proposition 2] directly. Note that since 𝐷 is bounded, we can easily compute 𝑀 > 0 such that 𝐷 ⊆ [−𝑀, 𝑀]𝑛 (using
linear programming). Then, using Theorem E.1 and Remark 4, we can approximate 𝑔 by a linear arithmetic circuit on
the domain 𝐷.                                                                                                           □

      Definition 12. General-Real-Localopt:
      Input:
             • precision/stopping parameter 𝜀 > 0,
             • (𝐴, 𝑏) ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 × R𝑚 defining a bounded non-empty domain 𝐷 = {𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 : 𝐴𝑥 ≤ 𝑏},
             • well-behaved arithmetic circuits 𝑝 : R𝑛 → R and 𝑔 : R𝑛 → R𝑛 ,
             • Lipschitz constant 𝐿 > 0.
      Goal: Compute an approximate local optimum of 𝑝 with respect to 𝑔 on domain 𝐷. Formally, find 𝑥 ∈ 𝐷 such
      that
                                                 𝑝 (Π𝐷 (𝑔(𝑥))) ≥ 𝑝 (𝑥) − 𝜀.
      Alternatively, we also accept a violation of 𝐿-Lipschitzness of 𝑝 as a solution. Namely, 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝐷 such that
      |𝑝 (𝑥) − 𝑝 (𝑦)| > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥.


Proposition D.2. General-Real-Localopt is PLS-complete.

     Proof. The PLS-hardness of General-Real-Localopt immediately follows from Theorem 2.1 in [21], where it is
shown that the problem is PLS-complete in the special case where the domain is [0, 1] 3 . The proof of membership in
PLS for the domain [0, 1] 3 immediately generalizes to [0, 1]𝑛 , even for non-fixed 𝑛. Thus, it remains to show that we
can reduce General-Real-Localopt to the special case where the domain is [0, 1]𝑛 .
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                    67


  Note that since 𝐷 is bounded, we can easily compute 𝑀 > 0 such that 𝐷 ⊆ [−𝑀, 𝑀]𝑛 (using linear programming).
We extend 𝑝 and 𝑔 to the whole hypercube [−𝑀, 𝑀]𝑛 by using the projection onto 𝐷, namely 𝑝b(𝑥) = 𝑝 (Π𝐷 (𝑥)) and
𝑔b(𝑥) = 𝑔(Π𝐷 (𝑥)). Since ∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ≥ ∥Π𝐷 (𝑥) − Π𝐷 (𝑦)∥ for all 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ R𝑛 , it follows that any violation of 𝐿-Lipschitzness
 for 𝑝b immediately yields a violation for 𝑝. If 𝑥 ∈ [−𝑀, 𝑀]𝑛 is an 𝜀-approximate local optimum of 𝑝b with respect to 𝑔b,
             𝑔 (𝑥))) ≥ 𝑝b(𝑥) − 𝜀, then it immediately follows that Π𝐷 (𝑥) ∈ 𝐷 is an 𝜀-approximate local optimum of 𝑝 with
i.e., 𝑝b(Π𝐷 (b
respect to 𝑔. Thus, we have reduced the problem to the case where the domain is a hypercube [−𝑀, 𝑀]𝑛 .
    The final step is to change the domain from [−𝑀, 𝑀]𝑛 to [0, 1]𝑛 , which can easily be achieved by letting 𝑝˜ (𝑥) =
𝑝b(2𝑀 · 𝑥 − 𝑀 · e) and 𝑔(𝑥)
                       ˜        𝑔 (2𝑀 · 𝑥 − 𝑀 · e) + 𝑀 · e)/2𝑀. Here e ∈ R𝑛 denotes the all-ones vector. A violation
                             = (b
 of 2𝑀𝐿-Lipschitzness for 𝑝˜ immediately yields a violation of 𝐿-Lipschitzness for 𝑝b. Furthermore, if 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 is an
𝜀-approximate local optimum of 𝑝˜ with respect to 𝑔,   ˜ then it is easy to see that (2𝑀 · 𝑥 − 𝑀 · e) ∈ [−𝑀, 𝑀]𝑛 is an
𝜀-approximate local optimum of 𝑝b with respect to 𝑔b. We thus obtain an instance on the domain [0, 1]𝑛 with the functions
𝑝˜ and 𝑔˜ and 𝐿 ′ = 2𝑀𝐿 instead of 𝐿. By using the same arguments as in [21, Theorem 2.1], it follows that the problem
lies in PLS. Note that we do not actually need to construct arithmetic circuits that compute 𝑝˜ and 𝑔˜ (from the given
circuits for 𝑝 and 𝑔), because it suffices to be able to compute the functions in polynomial time for the arguments in
[21] to go through.                                                                                                      □

E    APPROXIMATION BY LINEAR CIRCUITS
In this section, we show that functions computed by arithmetic circuits can be approximated by linear arithmetic
circuits with a very small error. In linear arithmetic circuits we are only allowed to use the gates +, −, max, min, ×𝜁 and
rational constants. In particular, we cannot use general multiplication gates or comparison gates.

Theorem E.1. Given a well-behaved arithmetic circuit 𝑓 : [0, 1]𝑛 → R𝑑 , a purported Lipschitz constant 𝐿 > 0, and a
precision parameter 𝜀 > 0, in polynomial time in size(𝑓 ), log 𝐿 and log(1/𝜀), we can construct a linear arithmetic circuit
𝐹 : [0, 1]𝑛 → R𝑑 such that for any 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 it holds that:
     • ∥ 𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝐹 (𝑥)∥ ∞ ≤ 𝜀, or
     • given 𝑥, we can efficiently compute 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 such that

                                             ∥𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑓 (𝑦)∥ ∞ > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ∞ .

Here “efficiently” means in polynomial time in size(𝑥), size(𝑓 ), log 𝐿 and log(1/𝜀).

Our proof of this result relies on existing techniques introduced by Daskalakis et al. [20] and Chen et al. [17], but with
a modification that ensures that we only get a very small error. Indeed, using the usual so-called sampling trick with
averaging does not work here. We modify the sampling trick to output the median instead of the average.
    Since we believe that this tool will be useful in future work, we prove a more general version of Theorem E.1. This
more general version is Theorem E.2 and it is presented and proved in the next subsection, where we also explain how
Theorem E.1 is easily obtained from Theorem E.2.

Remark 4. Note that in Theorem E.1 the domain [0, 1]𝑛 can be replaced by [−𝑀, 𝑀]𝑛 for any 𝑀 > 0 (in which case
the running time is polynomial in the same quantities and in log 𝑀). This is easy to show by using a simple bijection
between [0, 1]𝑛 and [−𝑀, 𝑀]𝑛 . This also holds for the more general statement in Theorem E.2. In fact, the result
holds for any convex set 𝑆 ⊆ [−𝑀, 𝑀]𝑛 , as long as we can efficiently compute the projection onto 𝑆. Furthermore,
the choice of the ℓ∞ -norm in the statement is not important, and it can be replaced by any other ℓ𝑝 -norm, if 𝑓 is
𝐿-Lipschitz-continuous with respect to that norm.
68                                              John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


E.1     General statement and proof
In order to make the statement of the result as general as possible, we consider a class of functions F . Every function
𝑓 ∈ F has an associated representation, and we let size(𝑓 ) denote the length of the representation of 𝑓 . For example, if
F is the class of functions represented using a certain type of circuit, then size(𝑓 ) is the size of the circuit corresponding
to 𝑓 . The following definition is inspired by a similar notion in [28].

Definition 13. A class F of functions is said to be polynomially-approximately-computable if there exists a polynomial
𝑞 such that for any function 𝑓 ∈ F where 𝑓 : [0, 1]𝑛 → R𝑑 , any point 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 , and any precision parameter 𝛿 > 0, a
value 𝑣 ∈ R𝑑 such that ∥𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑣 ∥ ∞ ≤ 𝛿 can be computed in time 𝑞(size(𝑓 ) + size(𝑥) + log(1/𝛿)).

The next theorem basically says that any polynomially-approximately-computable class can be approximated by linear
arithmetic circuits, as long as the functions are Lipschitz-continuous.

Theorem E.2. Let F be a polynomially-approximately-computable class of functions. Given 𝑓 ∈ F where 𝑓 : [0, 1]𝑛 →
R𝑑 , 𝐿 > 0 and 𝜀 > 0, in polynomial time in size(𝑓 ), log 𝐿 and log(1/𝜀), we can construct a linear arithmetic circuit
𝐹 : [0, 1]𝑛 → R𝑑 such that for any 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 it holds that:

      • ∥ 𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝐹 (𝑥)∥ ∞ ≤ 𝜀, or
      • given 𝑥, we can efficiently compute 𝑦 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 such that

                                              ∥𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑓 (𝑦)∥ ∞ > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ∞ + 𝜀/2.

Here “efficiently” means in polynomial time in size(𝑥), size(𝑓 ), log 𝐿 and log(1/𝜀).

Note that Theorem E.2 immediately implies Theorem E.1, since the class of all well-behaved arithmetic circuits mapping
[0, 1]𝑛 to R𝑑 is polynomially-approximately-computable. (In fact, it is even exactly computable.) Note that since
𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ∞ + 𝜀/2 ≥ 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ∞ for any 𝜀 > 0, we indeed immediately obtain Theorem E.1.


     Proof of Theorem E.2. First of all, note that we can assume that 𝑑 = 1. Indeed, if 𝑓 : [0, 1]𝑛 → R𝑑 , then we can
consider 𝑓1, . . . , 𝑓𝑑 : [0, 1]𝑛 → R where 𝑓𝑖 (𝑥) = [𝑓 (𝑥)]𝑖 , and construct linear arithmetic circuits 𝐹 1, . . . , 𝐹𝑑 approximating
𝑓1, . . . , 𝑓𝑑 (as in the statement of the theorem). By constructing 𝐹 (𝑥) = (𝐹 1 (𝑥), . . . , 𝐹𝑑 (𝑥)), we have then obtained a
linear arithmetic that satisfies the statement of the theorem. Indeed, if for some 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 we have ∥𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝐹 (𝑥) ∥ ∞ > 𝜀,
then it follows that there exists 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] such that |𝑓𝑖 (𝑥) − 𝐹𝑖 (𝑥)| > 𝜀. From this it follows that we can efficiently compute
𝑦 with |𝑓𝑖 (𝑥) − 𝑓𝑖 (𝑦)| > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ∞ + 𝜀/2, which implies that ∥𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑓 (𝑦)∥ ∞ > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ∞ + 𝜀/2. Note that 𝑑 ≤ size(𝑓 ),
so this construction remains polynomial-time with respect to size(𝑓 ), log 𝐿 and log(1/𝜀).
     Consider any 𝐿 > 0, 𝜀 > 0 and 𝑓 ∈ F where 𝑓 : [0, 1]𝑛 → R. Pick 𝑘 ∈ N such that 𝑁 := 2𝑘 ≥ 4𝐿/𝜀. We consider the
partition of [0, 1]𝑛 into 𝑁 𝑛 subcubes of side-length 1/𝑁 . Every 𝑝 ∈ [𝑁 ]𝑛 then represents one subcube of the partition,
and we let 𝑝b ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 denote the centre of that subcube. Formally, for all 𝑝 ∈ [𝑁 ]𝑛 , 𝑝b ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 is given by
                                                     2𝑝𝑖 − 1
                                                𝑝b 𝑖 =                for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛].
                                                         2𝑁
For any 𝑝 ∈ [𝑁 ]𝑛 , let 𝑓˜(b                                  𝑝 ) with error at most 𝜀/16. Note that 𝑓˜(b
                           𝑝 ) denote the approximation of 𝑓 (b                                         𝑝 ) can be computed
in time 𝑞(size(𝑓 ) + size(b
                          𝑝 ) + log(16/𝜀)) (where 𝑞 is the polynomial associated to F ). Since size(b
                                                                                                    𝑝 ) is polynomial in
log 𝐿 and log(1/𝜀), we can compute a rational number 𝑀 > 0 such that size(𝑀) is polynomial in size(𝑓 ), log 𝐿 and
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                      69


log(1/𝜀), and it holds that | 𝑓˜(b
                                 𝑝 )| ≤ 𝑀 for all 𝑝 ∈ [𝑁 ]𝑛 . We then define
                                                                     16 
                                                𝐶 (𝑝) := 𝑓˜(b  𝑝) + 𝑀        +1
                                                                         𝜀
for all 𝑝 ∈ [𝑁 ]𝑛 . Note that 𝐶 (𝑝) ∈ [1, 32𝑀/𝜀 + 1] ∩ N. Pick 𝑚 ∈ N such that 2𝑚 ≥ 32𝑀/𝜀 + 1. Then, 𝐶 : [𝑁 ]𝑛 → [2𝑚 ]
and we construct a Boolean circuit {0, 1}𝑘𝑛 → {0, 1}𝑚 that computes 𝐶. Importantly, the Boolean circuit can be
constructed in polynomial time in size(𝑓 ), log 𝐿 and log(1/𝜀). Before we move on, note that for all 𝑝 ∈ [𝑁 ]𝑛 , letting
                     𝜀 − 𝑀, it holds that
𝑉 (𝑝) := (𝐶 (𝑝) − 1) 16
                                                                                                   𝜀
                                         𝑓 (b                𝑝 ) − 𝑓˜(b
                                            𝑝 ) − 𝑉 (𝑝) ≤ 𝑓 (b        𝑝 ) + 𝑓˜(b
                                                                               𝑝 ) − 𝑉 (𝑝) ≤                                              (8)
                                                                                                   8
          𝑝 ) − 𝑓˜(b
since |𝑓 (b        𝑝 )| ≤ 𝜀/16 and

                           𝑓˜(b
                              𝑝 ) − 𝑉 (𝑝)
                                                   16  𝜀
                         = 𝑓˜(b
                              𝑝 ) + 𝑀 − 𝑓˜(b 𝑝) + 𝑀
                                                       𝜀 16
                                                   16 𝜀               16            16  𝜀
                         ≤ 𝑓˜(b
                              𝑝 ) + 𝑀 − 𝑓˜(b𝑝) + 𝑀          + 𝑓˜(b
                                                                 𝑝) + 𝑀      − 𝑓˜(b
                                                                                  𝑝) + 𝑀
                                                      𝜀 16                 𝜀                𝜀 16
                            𝜀
                         ≤    .
                           16
   Using Lemma E.3, which is our key lemma here and is stated and proved in the next subsection, we can construct a
linear arithmetic circuit 𝐹 : [0, 1]𝑛 → R in polynomial time in size(𝐶) (and thus in size(𝑓 ), log 𝐿 and log(1/𝜀)), such
that for all 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛                                                                 
                                                  𝐹 (𝑥) ∈         min 𝐶 (𝑝), max 𝐶 (𝑝)
                                                                𝑝 ∈𝑆 (𝑥)   𝑝 ∈𝑆 (𝑥)
where 𝑆 (𝑥) ⊆ [𝑁 ]𝑛 is such that

   (1) |𝑆 (𝑥)| ≤ 𝑛 + 1,
   (2) ∥𝑥 − 𝑝b∥ ∞ ≤ 1/𝑁 for all 𝑝 ∈ 𝑆 (𝑥), and
   (3) 𝑆 (𝑥) can be computed in polynomial time in size(𝑥) and log 𝑁 .

                                                                                         𝜀 − 𝑀. Note that this is straight-
We modify the linear circuit so that instead of outputting 𝐹 (𝑥), it outputs (𝐹 (𝑥) − 1) 16
                                                                                    𝜀 − 𝑀, we obtain that for all
forward to do using the arithmetic gates at our disposal. Since 𝑉 (𝑝) = (𝐶 (𝑝) − 1) 16
𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛                                                                         
                                                 𝐹 (𝑥) ∈         min 𝑉 (𝑝), max 𝑉 (𝑝) .
                                                                𝑝 ∈𝑆 (𝑥)   𝑝 ∈𝑆 (𝑥)
   We are now ready to complete the proof. For this it suffices to show that if |𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝐹 (𝑥)| > 𝜀, then the second point in
the statement of the theorem must hold. Assume that 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 is such that |𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝐹 (𝑥)| > 𝜀. It immediately follows
that there exists 𝑝 ∗ ∈ 𝑆 (𝑥) such that |𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑉 (𝑝 ∗ )| > 𝜀. By Equation (8), it follows that |𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑓 (𝑝b∗ )| > 𝜀 − 𝜀/8 = 7𝜀/8.
Note that we might not be able to identify 𝑝 ∗ , since we can only approximately compute 𝑓 . Thus, we instead proceed
as follows. We compute 𝑝 ′ = argmax𝑝 ∈𝑆 (𝑥) |𝑓 ′ (𝑥) − 𝑓 ′ (b
                                                            𝑝 )|, where 𝑓 ′ denotes computation of 𝑓 with error at most
𝜀/32. Note that 𝑝 ′ can be computed in polynomial time in size(𝑥), size(𝑓 ), log 𝐿 and log(1/𝜀), since 𝑓 ′ and 𝑆 (𝑥) can be
computed efficiently.
   We now show that 𝑦 = 𝑝b′ ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 satisfies the second point in the statement of the theorem. First of all, note that
|𝑓 ′ (𝑥) − 𝑓 ′ (𝑝b∗ )| > 7𝜀/8−2𝜀/32 = 13𝜀/16. By the choice of 𝑝 ′ , it must be that |𝑓 ′ (𝑥) − 𝑓 ′ (𝑝b′ )| ≥ |𝑓 ′ (𝑥) − 𝑓 ′ (𝑝b∗ )| > 13𝜀/16,
70                                             John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


which implies that |𝑓 (𝑥)−𝑓 (𝑝b′ )| > 13𝜀/16−2𝜀/32 > 3𝜀/4. On the other hand, since we have that ∥𝑥−𝑝b′ ∥ ∞ ≤ 1/𝑁 ≤ 𝜀/4𝐿
(because 𝑝 ′ ∈ 𝑆 (𝑥)), it follows that 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑝b′ ∥ ∞ ≤ 𝜀/4. Thus, we indeed have that |𝑓 (𝑥) − 𝑓 (𝑦)| > 𝐿∥𝑥 − 𝑦 ∥ ∞ + 𝜀/2, as
desired. Since 𝑝 ′ can be computed efficiently, so can 𝑦 = 𝑝b′ .                                                              □

E.2     Key Lemma
Let us recall some notation introduced in the proof of Theorem E.2. For 𝑁 ∈ N, consider the partition of [0, 1]𝑛 into
𝑁 𝑛 subcubes of side-length 1/𝑁 . Every 𝑝 ∈ [𝑁 ]𝑛 then represents one subcube of the partition, and we let 𝑝b ∈ [0, 1]𝑛
denote the centre of that subcube. Formally, for all 𝑝 ∈ [𝑁 ]𝑛 , 𝑝b ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 is given by
                                                                   2𝑝𝑖 − 1
                                                              𝑝b 𝑖 =
                                                                       2𝑁
for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛].

Lemma E.3. Assume that we are given a Boolean circuit 𝐶 : {0, 1}𝑘𝑛 → {0, 1}𝑚 , interpreted as a function 𝐶 : [𝑁 ]𝑛 →
[2𝑚 ], where 𝑁 = 2𝑘 . Then, in polynomial time in size(𝐶), we can construct a linear arithmetic circuit 𝐹 : [0, 1]𝑛 → R
such that for all 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛                                                      
                                              𝐹 (𝑥) ∈        min 𝐶 (𝑝), max 𝐶 (𝑝)
                                                            𝑝 ∈𝑆 (𝑥)    𝑝 ∈𝑆 (𝑥)
where 𝑆 (𝑥) ⊆ [𝑁 ]𝑛 is such that
     (1) |𝑆 (𝑥)| ≤ 𝑛 + 1,
     (2) ∥𝑥 − 𝑝b∥ ∞ ≤ 1/𝑁 for all 𝑝 ∈ 𝑆 (𝑥), and
     (3) 𝑆 (𝑥) can be computed in polynomial time in size(𝑥) and log 𝑁 .

     Proof. We begin by a formal definition of 𝑆 (𝑥) and prove that it has the three properties mentioned in the statement
of the Lemma. We then proceed with the construction of the linear arithmetic circuit.
     For 𝑁 ∈ N, consider the partition of [0, 1] into 𝑁 subintervals of length 1/𝑁 . Let 𝐼 𝑁 : [0, 1] → [𝑁 ] denote the
function that maps any point in [0, 1] to the index of the subinterval that contains it. In the case where a point lies
on the boundary between two subintervals, i.e., 𝑥 ∈ 𝐵 = {1/𝑁 , 2/𝑁 , . . . , (𝑁 − 1)/𝑁 }, the tie is broken in favour of the
smaller index. Formally,                                                    
                                                                      ℓ −1 ℓ
                                        𝐼 𝑁 (𝑥) = min ℓ ∈ [𝑁 ] 𝑥 ∈        ,       .
                                                                        𝑁 𝑁
We abuse notation and let 𝐼 𝑁 : [0, 1]𝑛 → [𝑁 ]𝑛 denote the natural extension of the function to [0, 1]𝑛 , where it is simply
applied on each coordinate separately. Thus, if we consider the partition of [0, 1]𝑛 into 𝑁 𝑛 subcubes of side-length 1/𝑁 ,
then, for any point 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 , 𝑝 = 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑥) ∈ [𝑁 ]𝑛 is the index of the subcube containing 𝑥. For 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 \ [0, 1]𝑛 , we let
𝐼 𝑁 (𝑥) := 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦) where 𝑦 is obtained by projecting every coordinate of 𝑥 onto [0, 1].
     Letting e ∈ R𝑛 denote the all-ones vector, we define
                                                                          
                                                                          1
                                          𝑆 (𝑥) = 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑥 + 𝛼 · e) 𝛼 ∈ 0,       .
                                                                         2𝑁
In other words, we consider a small segment starting at 𝑥 and moving up simultaneously in all dimensions, and we let
𝑆 (𝑥) be the set of subcubes-indices of all the points on the segment. We can now prove the three properties of 𝑆 (𝑥):
     (1) Note that for any 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛], there exists at most one value 𝛼 ∈ [0, 1/2𝑁 ] such that [𝑥 + 𝛼 · e]𝑖 ∈ 𝐵 =
         {1/𝑁 , 2/𝑁 , . . . , (𝑁 − 1)/𝑁 }. We let 𝛼𝑖 denote that value of 𝛼 if it exists, and otherwise we let 𝛼𝑖 = 1/2𝑁 . Thus,
        we obtain 𝛼 1, 𝛼 2, . . . , 𝛼𝑛 ∈ [0, 1/2𝑁 ] and we rename them 𝛽𝑖 so that they are ordered, i.e., 𝛽 1 ≤ 𝛽 2 ≤ · · · ≤ 𝛽𝑛
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                     71


       and {𝛽𝑖 | 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]} = {𝛼𝑖 | 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]}. By the definition of 𝐼 𝑁 , it is then easy to see that 𝛼 ↦→ 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑥 + 𝛼 · e) is constant
       on each of the intervals [0, 𝛽 1 ], (𝛽 1, 𝛽 2 ], (𝛽 2, 𝛽 3 ], . . . , (𝛽𝑛−1, 𝛽𝑛 ] and (𝛽𝑛 , 1/2𝑁 ]. Since these 𝑛 + 1 intervals (some
       of which are possibly empty) cover the entirety of [0, 1/2𝑁 ], it follows that |𝑆 (𝑥)| ≤ 𝑛 + 1.
   (2) Consider any 𝑝 ∈ 𝑆 (𝑥). Let 𝛼 ∈ [0, 1/2𝑁 ] be such that 𝑝 = 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦) where 𝑦 = 𝑥 + 𝛼 · e. For any 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛], it
       holds that 𝑥𝑖 ≤ 𝑦𝑖 ≤ 𝑥𝑖 + 1/2𝑁 . There are two cases to consider. If 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦𝑖 ) = 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑥𝑖 ), then this means that 𝑥𝑖
       lies in the subinterval of length 1/𝑁 centred at [b
                                                         𝑝 ]𝑖 , and thus, in particular, |𝑥𝑖 − [b
                                                                                                𝑝 ]𝑖 | ≤ 1/2𝑁 ≤ 1/𝑁 . The
       only other possibility is that 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦𝑖 ) = 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑥𝑖 ) + 1, since 𝛼 ∈ [0, 1/2𝑁 ]. But for this to happen, it must be that
       (2𝐼 𝑁 (𝑥𝑖 )−1)/2𝑁 ≤ 𝑥𝑖 ≤ 2𝐼 𝑁 (𝑥𝑖 )/2𝑁 , since 𝛼 ≤ 1/2𝑁 . By definition, [b
                                                                                 𝑝 ]𝑖 = (2𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦𝑖 )−1)/2𝑁 = (2𝐼 𝑁 (𝑥𝑖 )+1)/2𝑁 ,
       and so we again obtain that |𝑥𝑖 − [b
                                          𝑝 ]𝑖 | ≤ 1/𝑁 . Since this holds for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛], it follows that ∥𝑥 − 𝑝b∥ ∞ ≤ 1/𝑁 .
   (3) Given 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 , the values 𝛼 1, . . . , 𝛼𝑛 ∈ [0, 1/2𝑁 ], defined in the first point above, can be computed in
       polynomial time in size(𝑥), 𝑛 and log 𝑁 . Then, 𝑆 (𝑥) can be computed by simply evaluating 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑥 + 𝛼 · e) for
       all 𝛼 ∈ {𝛼 1, . . . , 𝛼𝑛 , 1/2𝑁 }, which can also be done in polynomial time in size(𝑥), 𝑛 and log 𝑁 . Note that since
       𝑛 ≤ size(𝑥), the computation of 𝑆 (𝑥) runs in polynomial time in size(𝑥) and log 𝑁 .

We can now describe how the linear arithmetic circuit 𝐹 : [0, 1]𝑛 → R is constructed. Let 𝐶 : {0, 1}𝑘𝑛 → {0, 1}𝑚 be the
Boolean circuit that is provided. It is interpreted as a function 𝐶 : [𝑁 ]𝑛 → [2𝑚 ], where 𝑁 = 2𝑘 . Let 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]𝑛 be the
input to the linear arithmetic circuit. 𝐹 is constructed to perform the following steps.

  Step 1: Sampling trick. In the first step, we create a sample 𝑇 of points close to 𝑥. This is a standard trick that was
introduced in the study of the complexity of computing Nash equilibria [17, 20]. Here we use the so-called equi-angle
sampling trick introduced by Chen et al. [17]. The sample 𝑇 consists of 2𝑛 + 1 points:
                                                                                  
                                                  ℓ
                                     𝑇 = 𝑥+           · e ℓ ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , 2𝑛} .
                                                 4𝑛𝑁
Note that these 2𝑛 + 1 points can easily be computed by 𝐹 given the input 𝑥. The following two observations are
important:

   (1) for all 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 , 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦) ∈ 𝑆 (𝑥) (by definition of 𝑆 (𝑥)),
                                                    1 }, where 𝐵 = {1/𝑁 , 2/𝑁 , . . . , (𝑁 − 1)/𝑁 } and dist(𝑦 , 𝐵) =
   (2) Let 𝑇𝑏 = {𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 | ∃𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] : dist(𝑦𝑖 , 𝐵) < 8𝑛𝑁                                                        𝑖
       min𝑡 ∈𝐵 |𝑦𝑖 − 𝑡 |. We call these the bad samples, because they are too close to a boundary between two subcubes.
       The points in 𝑇𝑔 = 𝑇 \𝑇𝑏 are the good samples. It holds that |𝑇𝑏 | ≤ 𝑛. This is easy to see by fixing some coordinate
                                                                                               1 . Indeed, since the
       𝑖 ∈ [𝑛], and noting that there exists at most one point 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 such that dist(𝑦𝑖 , 𝐵) < 8𝑛𝑁
       samples are successively 1/4𝑛𝑁 apart, at most one can be sufficiently close to any given boundary. Furthermore,
       since the samples are all 1/2𝑁 close, at most one boundary can be sufficiently close to any of them (for every
       coordinate). Thus, since there is at most one bad sample for each coordinate, there are at most 𝑛 bad samples
       overall.

  Step 2: Bit extraction. In the second step, we want to compute 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦) for all 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 . This corresponds to extracting
the first 𝑘 bits of each coordinate of each point 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 , because 𝑁 = 2𝑘 . Unfortunately, bit extraction is not a continuous
function and thus it is impossible to always perform it correctly with a linear arithmetic circuit. Fortunately, we will
show that we can perform it correctly for most points in 𝑇 , namely all the good points in 𝑇𝑔 .
  Consider any 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 and any coordinate 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]. In order to extract the first bit of 𝑦𝑖 , the arithmetic circuit computes

                                      𝑏 1 = min{1, max{0, 8𝑛𝑁 (𝑦𝑖 − 1/2)} =: 𝜙 (𝑦𝑖 − 1/2).
72                                               John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


Note that if 𝑦𝑖 ≥ 1/2 + 1/8𝑛𝑁 , then 8𝑛𝑁 (𝑦𝑖 − 1/2) ≥ 1 and thus 𝑏 1 = 1. On the other hand, if 𝑦𝑖 ≤ 1/2 − 1/8𝑛𝑁 , then
8𝑛𝑁 (𝑦𝑖 − 1/2) ≤ −1 and thus 𝑏 1 = 0. This means that if dist(𝑦𝑖 , 𝐵) ≥ 1/8𝑛𝑁 , the first bit of 𝑦𝑖 is extracted correctly.
Note that 𝐵 = {1/𝑁 , 2/𝑁 , . . . , (𝑁 − 1)/𝑁 } = {1/2𝑘 , 2/2𝑘 , . . . , (2𝑘 − 1)/2𝑘 }.
     To extract the second bit, the arithmetic circuit computes 𝑡 := 𝑦𝑖 − 𝑏 1 /2 and

                                                          𝑏 2 = 𝜙 (𝑡 − 1/4).

By the same argument as above, 𝑏 2 is the correct second bit of 𝑦𝑖 , if |𝑡 − 1/4| ≥ 1/8𝑛𝑁 , i.e., if |𝑦𝑖 − 1/4| ≥ 8𝑛𝑁 and
|𝑦𝑖 − 3/4| ≥ 8𝑛𝑁 . Thus, if dist(𝑦𝑖 , 𝐵) ≥ 1/8𝑛𝑁 , the second bit is also computed correctly, since 1/4, 3/4 ∈ 𝐵.
     To extract the third bit, the arithmetic circuit updates 𝑡 := 𝑡 − 𝑏 2 /4 and computes 𝑏 3 = 𝜙 (𝑡 − 1/8). We proceed
analogously up to the 𝑘th bit 𝑏𝑘 . By induction and the same arguments as above, it follows that the first 𝑘 bits of 𝑦𝑖 are
computed correctly by the arithmetic circuit as long as dist(𝑦𝑖 , 𝐵) ≥ 1/8𝑛𝑁 . In particular, this condition always holds
for 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇𝑔 .
     By performing this bit extraction for each coordinate of each 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 , we obtain the purported bit representation of
𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦) for each 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 . The argumentation in the previous paragraphs shows that for all 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇𝑔 , we indeed obtain the
correct bit representation of 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦). For 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇𝑏 , we have no control over what happens, and it is entirely possible that
the procedure outputs numbers that are not valid bits, i.e., not in {0, 1}.

     Step 3: Simulation of the Boolean circuit. In the next step, for each 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 , we evaluate the circuit 𝐶 on the bits
purportedly representing 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦). The Boolean gates of 𝐶 are simulated by the arithmetic circuit as follows:

      • ¬𝑏 := 1 − 𝑏,
      • 𝑏 ∨ 𝑏 ′ := min{1, 𝑏 + 𝑏 ′ },
      • 𝑏 ∧ 𝑏 ′ := max{0, 𝑏 + 𝑏 ′ − 1}.

Note that if the input bits 𝑏, 𝑏 ′ are valid bits, i.e., in {0, 1}, then the Boolean gates are simulated correctly, and the output
is also a valid bit.
     For 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇𝑔 , since the input bits indeed represent 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦), the simulation of 𝐶 will thus output the correct bit repre-
sentation of 𝐶 (𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦)) ∈ [2𝑚 ]. We can obtain the value 𝐶 (𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦)) ∈ [2𝑚 ] itself by decoding the bit representation, i.e.,
multiplying every bit by the corresponding power of 2 and adding all the terms together.
     Let 𝑉 (𝑦) ∈ R denote the value that this step outputs for each 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 . For 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇𝑔 , we have that 𝑉 (𝑦) = 𝐶 (𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦)). For
𝑦 ∈ 𝑇𝑏 , there is no guarantee other than 𝑉 (𝑦) ∈ R.

     Step 4: Median using a sorting network. In the last step, we want to use the |𝑇 | = 2𝑛 + 1 values that we have
computed (namely {𝑉 (𝑦) | 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 }) to compute the final output of our arithmetic circuit. In previous constructions of
this type, in particular [17, 20], the circuit would simply output the average of the 𝑉 (𝑦). However, this is not good
enough to prove our statement, because even a single bad point 𝑦 can introduce an inversely polynomial error in the
average.
     In order to obtain a stronger guarantee, the arithmetic circuit instead outputs the median of the multiset {𝑉 (𝑦) | 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 }.
The median of the given 2𝑛 + 1 values can be computed by constructing a so-called sorting network (see, e.g., [42]).
The basic operation of a sorting network can easily be simulated by the max and min gates. It is easy to construct a
sorting network for 2𝑛 + 1 values that has size polynomial in 𝑛. The output of the sorting network will be the same
values that it had as input, but sorted. In other words, the sorting network outputs 𝑉1 ≤ 𝑉2 ≤ · · · ≤ 𝑉2𝑛+1 such that
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                               73


{𝑉 𝑗 | 𝑗 ∈ [2𝑛 + 1]} = {𝑉 (𝑦) | 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 } as multisets. The final output of our arithmetic circuit is 𝑉𝑛+1 , which is exactly the
median of the 2𝑛 + 1 values.
   Recall from step 1 that |𝑇𝑏 | ≤ 𝑛 and thus |𝑇𝑔 | ≥ 𝑛 + 1. It immediately follows that either 𝑉𝑛+1 corresponds to 𝑉 (𝑦) of a
good sample 𝑦, or there exist 𝑖 < 𝑛 + 1 and 𝑗 > 𝑛 + 1 such that both 𝑉𝑖 and 𝑉 𝑗 correspond to good samples. In other words,
the output of the circuit satisfies 𝐹 (𝑥) ∈ [min𝑦 ∈𝑇𝑔 𝐶 (𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦)), max𝑦 ∈𝑇𝑔 𝐶 (𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦))]. As noted in step 1, 𝐼 𝑁 (𝑦) ∈ 𝑆 (𝑥) for
all 𝑦 ∈ 𝑇 . Thus, we obtain that 𝐹 (𝑥) ∈ [min𝑝 ∈𝑆 (𝑥) 𝐶 (𝑝), max𝑝 ∈𝑆 (𝑥) 𝐶 (𝑝)].
   It follows that the linear arithmetic circuit 𝐹 that we have constructed indeed satisfies the statement of the Lemma.
Furthermore, the construction we have described can be performed in polynomial time in size(𝐶), 𝑛, 𝑚 and 𝑘. Since
size(𝐶) ≥ max{𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑚}, it is simply polynomial time in size(𝐶).                                                                                    □

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers for comments and suggestions that helped improve the presentation of the paper.
Alexandros Hollender was supported by an EPSRC doctoral studentship (Reference 1892947).

REFERENCES
 [1] Ilan Adler, Christos Papadimitriou, and Aviad Rubinstein. 2014. On Simplex Pivoting Rules and Complexity Theory. In Proceedings of the 17th
     Conference on Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization (IPCO). 13–24. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-07557-0_2
 [2] Amir Ali Ahmadi and Jeffrey Zhang. 2022. Complexity aspects of local minima and related notions. Advances in Mathematics 397, Article 108119
     (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aim.2021.108119
 [3] Amir Ali Ahmadi and Jeffrey Zhang. 2022. On the complexity of finding a local minimizer of a quadratic function over a polytope. Mathematical
     Programming 195 (2022), 783–792. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10107-021-01714-2
 [4] Eric Allender, Peter Bürgisser, Johan Kjeldgaard-Pedersen, and Peter Bro Miltersen. 2009. On the Complexity of Numerical Analysis. SIAM J.
     Comput. 38, 5 (2009), 1987–2006. https://doi.org/10.1137/070697926
 [5] Yakov Babichenko and Aviad Rubinstein. 2021. Settling the complexity of Nash equilibrium in congestion games. In Proceedings of the 53rd ACM
     Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 1426–1437. https://doi.org/10.1145/3406325.3451039
 [6] Paul Beame, Stephen Cook, Jeff Edmonds, Russell Impagliazzo, and Toniann Pitassi. 1998. The Relative Complexity of NP Search Problems. J.
     Comput. System Sci. 57, 1 (1998), 3–19. https://doi.org/10.1145/225058.225147
 [7] Dimitri P. Bertsekas. 1999. Nonlinear Programming. Athena Scientific.
 [8] Avrim Blum and Ronald L. Rivest. 1992. Training a 3-node neural network is NP-complete. Neural Networks 5, 1 (1992), 117–127. https:
     //doi.org/10.1016/S0893-6080(05)80010-3
 [9] Sébastien Bubeck and Dan Mikulincer. 2020. How to Trap a Gradient Flow. In Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on Learning Theory (COLT). 940–960.
     http://proceedings.mlr.press/v125/bubeck20b.html
[10] Joshua Buresh-Oppenheim and Tsuyoshi Morioka. 2004. Relativized NP search problems and propositional proof systems. In Proceedings of the 19th
     IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC). 54–67. https://doi.org/10.1109/CCC.2004.1313795
[11] Samuel R. Buss and Alan S. Johnson. 2012. Propositional proofs and reductions between NP search problems. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 163,
     9 (2012), 1163–1182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apal.2012.01.015
[12] Yair Carmon, John C. Duchi, Oliver Hinder, and Aaron Sidford. 2020. Lower bounds for finding stationary points I. Mathematical Programming 184
     (2020), 71–120. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10107-019-01406-y
[13] Augustin-Louis Cauchy. 1847. Méthode générale pour la résolution des systèmes d’équations simultanées. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 25 (1847), 536–538.
[14] Vaggos Chatziafratis, Tim Roughgarden, and Joshua R. Wang. 2019. On the Computational Power of Online Gradient Descent. In Proceedings of the
     32nd Conference on Learning Theory (COLT). 624–662. http://proceedings.mlr.press/v99/chatziafratis19a.html
[15] Xi Chen, Decheng Dai, Ye Du, and Shang-Hua Teng. 2009. Settling the Complexity of Arrow-Debreu Equilibria in Markets with Additively Separable
     Utilities. In Proceedings of the 50th IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). 273–282. https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2009.29
[16] Xi Chen and Xiaotie Deng. 2009. On the complexity of 2D discrete fixed point problem. Theoretical Computer Science 410, 44 (2009), 4448 – 4456.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2009.07.052
[17] Xi Chen, Xiaotie Deng, and Shang-Hua Teng. 2009. Settling the complexity of computing two-player Nash equilibria. J. ACM 56, 3 (2009), 14:1–14:57.
     https://doi.org/10.1145/1516512.1516516
[18] Arka Rai Choudhuri, Pavel Hubáček, Chethan Kamath, Krzysztof Pietrzak, Alon Rosen, and Guy N. Rothblum. 2019. Finding a Nash equilibrium is
     no easier than breaking Fiat-Shamir. In Proceedings of the 51st ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 1103–1114. https://doi.org/10.1145/
     3313276.3316400
74                                                     John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani


[19] Chuangyin Dang, Qi Qi, and Yinyu Ye. 2020. Computations and Complexities of Tarski’s Fixed Points and Supermodular Games. (2020).
     arXiv:2005.09836
[20] Constantinos Daskalakis, Paul W. Goldberg, and Christos H. Papadimitriou. 2009. The complexity of computing a Nash equilibrium. SIAM J. Comput.
     39, 1 (2009), 195–259. https://doi.org/10.1137/070699652
[21] Constantinos Daskalakis and Christos Papadimitriou. 2011. Continuous local search. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
     Algorithms (SODA). 790–804. https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611973082.62
[22] Constantinos Daskalakis, Stratis Skoulakis, and Manolis Zampetakis. 2021. The complexity of constrained min-max optimization. In Proceedings of
     the 53rd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 1466–1478. https://doi.org/10.1145/3406325.3451125
[23] Constantinos Daskalakis, Christos Tzamos, and Manolis Zampetakis. 2018. A converse to Banach’s fixed point theorem and its CLS-completeness.
     In Proceedings of the 50th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 44–50. https://doi.org/10.1145/3188745.3188968
[24] Leonardo Mendonça de Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. 2008. Z3: An Efficient SMT Solver. In Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of
     Systems, 14th International Conference, TACAS. Springer, 337–340. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78800-3_24
[25] Yann Disser and Martin Skutella. 2019. The Simplex Algorithm Is NP-Mighty. ACM Transactions on Algorithms 15, 1 (2019), 5:1–5:19. https:
     //doi.org/10.1145/3280847
[26] Joydeep Dutta, Kalyanmoy Deb, Rupesh Tulshyan, and Ramnik Arora. 2013. Approximate KKT points and a proximity measure for termination.
     Journal of Global Optimization 56, 4 (2013), 1463–1499. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10898-012-9920-5
[27] Kousha Etessami, Christos Papadimitriou, Aviad Rubinstein, and Mihalis Yannakakis. 2020. Tarski’s Theorem, Supermodular Games, and the
     Complexity of Equilibria. In Proceedings of the 11th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS). 18:1–18:19. https://doi.org/10.
     4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2020.18
[28] Kousha Etessami and Mihalis Yannakakis. 2010. On the complexity of Nash equilibria and other fixed points. SIAM J. Comput. 39, 6 (2010), 2531–2597.
     https://doi.org/10.1137/080720826
[29] Alex Fabrikant, Christos Papadimitriou, and Kunal Talwar. 2004. The complexity of pure Nash equilibria. In Proceedings of the 36th ACM Symposium
     on Theory of Computing (STOC). 604–612. https://doi.org/10.1145/1007352.1007445
[30] John Fearnley, Spencer Gordon, Ruta Mehta, and Rahul Savani. 2017. CLS: New Problems and Completeness. (2017). arXiv:1702.06017
[31] John Fearnley, Spencer Gordon, Ruta Mehta, and Rahul Savani. 2020. Unique End of Potential Line. J. Comput. System Sci. 114 (2020), 1–35.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcss.2020.05.007
[32] John Fearnley, Dömötör Pálvölgyi, and Rahul Savani. 2022. A Faster Algorithm for Finding Tarski Fixed Points. ACM Transactions on Algorithms 18,
     3, Article 23 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3524044
[33] John Fearnley and Rahul Savani. 2015. The Complexity of the Simplex Method. In Proceedings of the 47th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
     (STOC). 201–208. https://doi.org/10.1145/2746539.2746558
[34] Paul W. Goldberg and Alexandros Hollender. 2021. The Hairy Ball problem is PPAD-complete. J. Comput. System Sci. 122 (2021), 34–62. https:
     //doi.org/10.1016/j.jcss.2021.05.004
[35] Mika Göös, Alexandros Hollender, Siddhartha Jain, Gilbert Maystre, William Pires, Robert Robere, and Ran Tao. 2022. Further Collapses in TFNP. In
     Proceedings of the 37th Computational Complexity Conference (CCC). 33:1–33:15. https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPICS.CCC.2022.33
[36] Pavel Hubáček and Eylon Yogev. 2020. Hardness of continuous local search: Query complexity and cryptographic lower bounds. SIAM J. Comput.
     49, 6 (2020), 1128–1172. https://doi.org/10.1137/17M1118014
[37] Takashi Ishizuka. 2021. The complexity of the parity argument with potential. J. Comput. System Sci. 120 (2021), 14–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
     jcss.2021.03.004
[38] Ruta Jawale, Yael Tauman Kalai, Dakshita Khurana, and Rachel Zhang. 2021. SNARGs for Bounded Depth Computations and PPAD Hardness from
     Sub-Exponential LWE. In Proceedings of the 53rd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 708–721. https://doi.org/10.1145/3406325.3451055
[39] Chi Jin, Praneeth Netrapalli, Rong Ge, Sham M. Kakade, and Michael I. Jordan. 2021. On Nonconvex Optimization for Machine Learning: Gradients,
     Stochasticity, and Saddle Points. J. ACM 68, 2 (2021), 11:1–11:29. https://doi.org/10.1145/3418526
[40] David S. Johnson, Christos H. Papadimitriou, and Mihalis Yannakakis. 1988. How easy is local search? J. Comput. System Sci. 37, 1 (1988), 79–100.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0000(88)90046-3
[41] Shiva Kintali, Laura J. Poplawski, Rajmohan Rajaraman, Ravi Sundaram, and Shang-Hua Teng. 2013. Reducibility among Fractional Stability
     Problems. SIAM J. Comput. 42, 6 (2013), 2063–2113. https://doi.org/10.1137/120874655
[42] Donald E. Knuth. 1998. The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 3: Sorting and Searching. Addison-Wesley Professional.
[43] M. K. Kozlov, S. P. Tarasov, and L. G. Khachiyan. 1980. The polynomial solvability of convex quadratic programming. U. S. S. R. Comput. Math. and
     Math. Phys. 20, 5 (1980), 223–228. https://doi.org/10.1016/0041-5553(80)90098-1
[44] Nimrod Megiddo and Christos H. Papadimitriou. 1991. On total functions, existence theorems and computational complexity. Theoretical Computer
     Science 81, 2 (1991), 317–324. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3975(91)90200-L
[45] Ruta Mehta. 2018. Constant Rank Two-Player Games are PPAD-hard. SIAM J. Comput. 47, 5 (2018), 1858–1887. https://doi.org/10.1137/15m1032338
[46] Frédéric Meunier, Wolfgang Mulzer, Pauline Sarrabezolles, and Yannik Stein. 2017. The rainbow at the end of the line—a PPAD formulation of
     the colorful Carathéodory theorem with applications. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA). 1342–1351.
     https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611974782.87
The Complexity of Gradient Descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS                                                                                                   75


[47] Tsuyoshi Morioka. 2001. Classification of search problems and their definability in bounded arithmetic. Master’s thesis. University of Toronto.
     https://www.collectionscanada.ca/obj/s4/f2/dsk3/ftp04/MQ58775.pdf
[48] Katta G. Murty and Santosh N. Kabadi. 1987. Some NP-complete problems in quadratic and nonlinear programming. Mathematical Programming 39,
     2 (1987), 117–129. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02592948
[49] Christos H. Papadimitriou. 1992. The complexity of the Lin-Kernighan heuristic for the traveling salesman problem. SIAM J. Comput. 21, 3 (1992),
     450–465. https://doi.org/10.1137/0221030
[50] Christos H. Papadimitriou. 1994. On the complexity of the parity argument and other inefficient proofs of existence. J. Comput. System Sci. 48, 3
     (1994), 498–532. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-0000(05)80063-7
[51] Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. 1951. A stochastic approximation method. Annals of Mathematical Statistics 22, 3 (1951), 400–407. https:
     //doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177729586
[52] William S. Russell. 1995. Polynomial interpolation schemes for internal derivative distributions on structured grids. Applied Numerical Mathematics
     17, 2 (1995), 129 – 171. https://doi.org/10.1016/0168-9274(95)00014-L
[53] Stephen A. Vavasis. 1993. Black-box complexity of local minimization. SIAM Journal on Optimization 3, 1 (1993), 60–80. https://doi.org/10.1137/0803004
