                                                                                                                                         SIAM J. DISCRETE MATH.                              
                                                                                                                                                                                             c 2005 Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
                                                                                                                                         Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 608–625




                                                                                                                                                      A LINEAR PROGRAMMING FORMULATION AND
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                             APPROXIMATION ALGORITHMS
                                                                                                                                                          FOR THE METRIC LABELING PROBLEM∗
                                                                                                                                                             C. CHEKURI† , S. KHANNA‡ , J. NAOR§ , AND L. ZOSIN¶

                                                                                                                                             Abstract. We consider approximation algorithms for the metric labeling problem. This prob-
                                                                                                                                         lem was introduced in a paper by Kleinberg and Tardos [J. ACM, 49 (2002), pp. 616–630] and
                                                                                                                                         captures many classiﬁcation problems that arise in computer vision and related ﬁelds. They gave
                                                                                                                                         an O(log k log log k) approximation for the general case, where k is the number of labels, and a 2-
                                                                                                                                         approximation for the uniform metric case. (In fact, the bound for general metrics can be improved
                                                                                                                                         to O(log k) by the work of Fakcheroenphol, Rao, and Talwar [Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM
                                                                                                                                         Symposium on Theory of Computing, 2003, pp. 448–455].) Subsequently, Gupta and Tardos [Pro-
                                                                                                                                         ceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, 2000, pp. 652–658] gave
                                                                                                                                         a 4-approximation for the truncated linear metric, a metric motivated by practical applications to
                                                                                                                                         image restoration and visual correspondence. In this paper we introduce an integer programming
                                                                                                                                         formulation and show that the integrality gap of its linear relaxation either matches or improves the
                                                                                                                                         ratios known for several cases of the metric labeling problem studied until now, providing a uniﬁed
                                                                                                                                         approach to solving them. In particular, we show that the integrality gap of our linear programming
                                                                                                                                         (LP) formulation is bounded by O(log k) for a general k-point metric and 2 for the uniform metric,
                                                                                                                                         thus matching the known √ ratios. We also develop an algorithm based on our LP formulation that
                                                                                                                                         achieves a ratio of 2 + 2 ≃ 3.414 for the truncated linear metric improving the earlier known ratio
                                                                                                                                         of 4. Our algorithm uses the fact that the integrality gap of the LP formulation is 1 on a linear
                                                                                                                                         metric.

                                                                                                                                             Key words. metric labeling, linear program, approximation algorithm, truncated linear metric

                                                                                                                                             AMS subject classiﬁcations. 68Q25, 68W25, 90C59

                                                                                                                                             DOI. 10.1137/S0895480101396937


                                                                                                                                              1. Introduction. Motivated by certain classiﬁcation problems that arise in com-
                                                                                                                                         puter vision and related ﬁelds, Kleinberg and Tardos introduced the metric labeling
                                                                                                                                         problem [26]. In a typical classiﬁcation problem, one wishes to assign labels to a set
                                                                                                                                         of objects so as to optimize some measure of the quality of the labeling. The metric
                                                                                                                                         labeling problem captures a broad range of classiﬁcation problems where the quality
                                                                                                                                         of a labeling depends on the pairwise relations between the underlying set of objects.
                                                                                                                                         More precisely, the task is to classify a set V of n objects by assigning to each object
                                                                                                                                         a label from a set L of labels. The pairwise relationships between the objects are
                                                                                                                                         represented by a weighted graph G = (V, E), where w(u, v) represents the strength
                                                                                                                                            ∗ Received by the editors October 23, 2001; accepted for publication (in revised form) July 12, 2004;

                                                                                                                                         published electronically April 8, 2005. A preliminary version of this paper appeared in Proceedings
                                                                                                                                         of the Twelfth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, Washington, DC, 2001,
                                                                                                                                         pp. 109–118.
                                                                                                                                              http://www.siam.org/journals/sidma/18-3/39693.html
                                                                                                                                            † Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, 600 Mountain Ave., Murray Hill, NJ 07974 (chekuri@

                                                                                                                                         research.bell-labs.com).
                                                                                                                                            ‡ Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA

                                                                                                                                         19104 (sanjeev@cis.upenn.edu). The research of this author was supported in part by an Alfred P.
                                                                                                                                         Sloan Research Fellowship.
                                                                                                                                            § Computer Science Department, Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel (naor@cs.technion.ac.il). Most of

                                                                                                                                         this work was done while the author was at Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, 600 Mountain Ave.,
                                                                                                                                         Murray Hill, NJ 07974. The research of this author was supported in part by US-Israel BSF grant
                                                                                                                                         2002276 and by EU contract IST-1999-14084 (APPOL II).
                                                                                                                                            ¶ Bear Stearns & Company, One Federal St., 29th Floor, Boston, MA 02110 (LZosin@Bear.com).

                                                                                                                                         This work was done while the author was at NEC Research Institute, Princeton, NJ 08540.
                                                                                                                                                                                           608
                                                                                                                                                      LP FORMULATION AND ALGORITHMS FOR METRIC LABELING                                  609

                                                                                                                                         of the relationship between u and v. The objective is to ﬁnd a labeling, a function
                                                                                                                                         f : V → L, that maps objects to labels, where the cost of f , denoted by Q(f ), has
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         two components.
                                                                                                                                                • For each u ∈ V , there is a nonnegative assignment cost c(u, i) to label u with
                                                                                                                                         i. This cost reﬂects the relative likelihood of assigning labels to u.
                                                                                                                                                • For each pair of objects u and v, the edge weight w(u, v) measures the
                                                                                                                                         strength of their relationship. This models the assumption that strongly related
                                                                                                                                         objects should be assigned labels that are close. This is modeled in the objective
                                                                                                                                         function by the term w(u, v) · d(f (u), f (v)), where d(·, ·) is a distance function on the
                                                                                                                                         labels L.
                                                                                                                                         Thus
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                         Q(f ) =      c(u, f (u)) +        w(u, v) · d(f (u), f (v)),
                                                                                                                                                                     u∈V                (u,v)∈E

                                                                                                                                         and the goal is to ﬁnd a labeling of minimum cost. In the metric labeling problem,
                                                                                                                                         the distance function d is assumed to be a metric. We remark that if the distance
                                                                                                                                         function d is allowed to be arbitrary, the graph coloring problem can be reduced to
                                                                                                                                         the labeling problem.
                                                                                                                                              A prototypical application of the metric labeling problem is the image restoration
                                                                                                                                         problem in computer vision [4, 5, 6]. In the image restoration problem, the goal is
                                                                                                                                         to take an image corrupted by noise and restore it to its “true” version. The image
                                                                                                                                         consists of pixels and these are the objects in the classiﬁcation problem. Each pixel has
                                                                                                                                         an integer intensity value associated with it that is possibly corrupted and we would
                                                                                                                                         like to restore it to its true value. Thus the labels correspond to intensity values,
                                                                                                                                         and the goal is to assign a new intensity to each pixel. Further, neighboring pixels
                                                                                                                                         are assumed to be close to each other, since intensities typically change smoothly.
                                                                                                                                         Thus, neighboring pixels have an edge between them with a positive weight (assume
                                                                                                                                         a uniform value for concreteness). The original or observed intensities are assumed
                                                                                                                                         to be close to true values.1 The assignment cost is some positive cost associated with
                                                                                                                                         changing the intensity from its original value to a new value; the larger the change,
                                                                                                                                         the larger the cost. To see how the cost function models the restoration, consider a
                                                                                                                                         pixel corrupted by noise as a result of which its observed intensity is very diﬀerent
                                                                                                                                         from its neighboring pixels. By changing the corrupted pixel’s intensity we incur a
                                                                                                                                         cost of relabeling, but that can be oﬀset by the edge cost saved by being closer to
                                                                                                                                         its neighbors. The assignment costs weigh the labeling in favor of the original values
                                                                                                                                         since most of the intensities are likely to be correct (see also the footnote).
                                                                                                                                              The metric labeling problem naturally arises in other applications in image pro-
                                                                                                                                         cessing and computer vision. Researchers in these ﬁelds have developed a variety
                                                                                                                                         of good heuristics that use classical combinatorial optimization techniques, such as
                                                                                                                                         network ﬂow and local search [4, 21, 32, 17, 14, 12].
                                                                                                                                              Kleinberg and Tardos [26] formalized the metric labeling problem and its con-
                                                                                                                                         nections to Markov random ﬁelds and other classiﬁcation problems. (See [26] for a
                                                                                                                                            1 This assumption is based on the connection of the labeling problem to the theory of Markov

                                                                                                                                         random ﬁelds (MRFs) [27]. In this theory, the observed data or labeling of the objects is assumed
                                                                                                                                         to be obtained from a true labeling by adding independent random noise. The idea is to decide the
                                                                                                                                         most probable labeling given the observed data. An MRF can be deﬁned by a graph on the objects
                                                                                                                                         with edges indicating dependencies between objects. Under the assumption that the probability
                                                                                                                                         distribution of an object’s label depends only on its neighbors’ labels, and if the MRF satisﬁes two
                                                                                                                                         standard assumptions of homogeneity and pairwise interactions, the labeling problem can be restated
                                                                                                                                         as the problem of ﬁnding a labeling f that maximizes the a posteriori probability Pr [f |f  ], where
                                                                                                                                         f  is the observed labeling. See [26] for more details on the connection of metric labeling to MRFs.
                                                                                                                                         610                 C. CHEKURI, S. KHANNA, J. NAOR, AND L. ZOSIN


                                                                                                                                         thorough description of the various connections.) Metric labeling also has rich con-
                                                                                                                                         nections to some well-known problems in combinatorial optimization. It is related
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         to the quadratic assignment problem, an extensively studied problem in operations
                                                                                                                                         research. A special case of metric labeling is the 0-extension problem, studied by
                                                                                                                                         Karzanov [24, 25]. There are no assignment costs in this problem; however, the graph
                                                                                                                                         contains a set of terminals, t1 , . . . , tk , where the label of terminal ti is ﬁxed in advance
                                                                                                                                         to i and the nonterminals are free to be assigned to any of the labels. The 0-extension
                                                                                                                                         problem generalizes the well-studied multiway cut problem [13, 7, 23]. Karzanov
                                                                                                                                         [24, 25] showed that certain special cases (special metrics) of the 0-extension problem
                                                                                                                                         can be solved optimally in polynomial time. Another special case of the metric label-
                                                                                                                                         ing problem is the task assignment problem in distributed computing [28]. Here, tasks
                                                                                                                                         of a modular program need to be assigned to the processors of a distributed system,
                                                                                                                                         while balancing between task execution cost and intertask communication cost.
                                                                                                                                              Kleinberg and Tardos [26] obtained an O(log k log log k) approximation for the
                                                                                                                                         general metric labeling problem, where k denotes the number of labels in L, and
                                                                                                                                         a 2-approximation for the uniform metric. The approximation for general metrics
                                                                                                                                         improves to O(log k) by a recent result of Fakcheroenphol, Rao, and Talwar [16].
                                                                                                                                         Metric labeling is Max-SNP hard; this follows from the Max-SNP hardness of the
                                                                                                                                         multiway cut problem which is a special case. Given the rich connections of this
                                                                                                                                         problem to other well-studied optimization problems and a variety of applications, a
                                                                                                                                         natural interesting question is to determine the approximability of the general problem
                                                                                                                                         as well as of the important special cases that arise in practice.
                                                                                                                                              The truncated linear metric. Gupta and Tardos [18] considered the metric label-
                                                                                                                                         ing problem for the truncated linear metric, a special case motivated by its direct
                                                                                                                                         applications to two problems in computer vision, namely, image restoration and vi-
                                                                                                                                         sual correspondence. We brieﬂy describe the application of this metric to the image
                                                                                                                                         restoration problem discussed earlier; see [18] for more details. Consider the case
                                                                                                                                         of gray scale images where the intensities are integer values. Our earlier description
                                                                                                                                         assumed that intensities of neighboring pixels should be similar since the image is
                                                                                                                                         typically smooth. This motivates a linear-like metric on the labels where the distance
                                                                                                                                         between two intensities i and j is |i − j|. However, at object boundaries (here we are
                                                                                                                                         referring to objects in the image) sharp changes in intensities happen. Thus, for the
                                                                                                                                         metric to be robust, neighboring pixels that are actually at object boundaries (and
                                                                                                                                         hence naturally diﬀer in their intensities by large amounts) should not be penalized
                                                                                                                                         by arbitrarily large quantities. This motivated Gupta and Tardos to consider a trun-
                                                                                                                                         cated linear metric, where the distance between two intensities i and j is given by
                                                                                                                                         d(i, j) = min(M, |i − j|). Thus, the penalty is truncated at M ; this is a natural (and
                                                                                                                                         nonuniform) metric for the problem at hand. A very similar reasoning applies to the
                                                                                                                                         visual correspondence problem, where the objective is to compare two images of the
                                                                                                                                         same scene for disparity. The labels here correspond to depth of the point in the
                                                                                                                                         image from the camera. For the truncated linear metric a 4-approximation algorithm
                                                                                                                                         was given in [18] using local search. The local moves in the algorithm make use of
                                                                                                                                         the ﬂow network used in [4, 21], which gives an optimal solution to the linear metric
                                                                                                                                         case in polynomial time.
                                                                                                                                             For the image restoration application, other distance functions have also been
                                                                                                                                         studied. In particular, the quadratic distance function d(i, j) = |i − j|2 and its trun-
                                                                                                                                         cated version d(i, j) = min{M, |i − j|2 } have been considered (see [27] and [22]).
                                                                                                                                         Unfortunately, neither of these distance functions is a metric, and hence the algo-
                                                                                                                                         rithms for metric labeling problem cannot be used. However, as we discuss shortly,
                                                                                                                                                     LP FORMULATION AND ALGORITHMS FOR METRIC LABELING                         611

                                                                                                                                         we are able to provide nontrivial approximation ratios for them.
                                                                                                                                              Results. In this paper we address the problem of obtaining improved approxima-
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         tion guarantees for the metric labeling problem. Kleinberg and Tardos [26] pointed
                                                                                                                                         out the diﬃculty of the general case as having to do with the absence of a “natural”
                                                                                                                                         integer programming (IP) formulation for the problem. They give an IP formulation
                                                                                                                                         for tree metrics and use Bartal’s probabilistic tree approximations [2, 3] to reduce the
                                                                                                                                         problem with an arbitrary metric to that with a tree metric. In this work we give a
                                                                                                                                         natural IP formulation for the general problem. An advantage of our formulation is
                                                                                                                                         that it is applicable even to distance functions that are not metrics, for example, the
                                                                                                                                         quadratic distance function mentioned above. We substantiate the strength of this
                                                                                                                                         formulation by deriving both known results and new results using its linear relaxation.
                                                                                                                                         In particular, we show the following results on the integrality gap of our formulation:
                                                                                                                                                 • O(log k) for general metrics and a factor 2 for the uniform metric,
                                                                                                                                                 • 1 for the linear metric and distances on the line deﬁned by convex functions
                                                                                                                                         (not necessarily
                                                                                                                                                       √ metrics),
                                                                                                                                                 • 2 +√ 2 ≃ 3.414 for the truncated linear metric, and
                                                                                                                                                 • O( M ) for the truncated quadratic distance function.
                                                                                                                                         The integrality gaps we show for our formulation either match or improve on the best
                                                                                                                                         previous approximation ratios for most of the cases known to us. (In addition to the
                                                                                                                                         above, we can also show that if G is a tree the integrality gap is 1.) Our formulation
                                                                                                                                         allows us to present these results in a uniﬁed fashion. In the process we improve the
                                                                                                                                         4 approximation of Gupta and Tardos [18] for the important case of the truncated
                                                                                                                                         linear metric. We also show a reduction from the case with arbitrary assignment costs
                                                                                                                                         c(u, i) to the case where c(u, i) ∈ {0, ∞} for all u and i. The reduction preserves the
                                                                                                                                         graph G and the optimal solution but increases the size of the label space from k
                                                                                                                                         labels to nk labels. We also describe an alternative reduction of Chuzhoy [10] that
                                                                                                                                         preserves the label space but alters the graph to one with n + nk vertices. We believe
                                                                                                                                         that our results and techniques are a positive step toward obtaining improved bounds
                                                                                                                                         for both the general metric labeling problem and interesting special cases.
                                                                                                                                              Calinescu, Karloﬀ, and Rabani [8] considered approximation algorithms for the
                                                                                                                                         0-extension problem. They considered a linear programming (LP) formulation (which
                                                                                                                                         they called the metric relaxation) originally studied by Karzanov [24], where they as-
                                                                                                                                         sociated a length function with every edge of the graph and required that (i) the
                                                                                                                                         distance between terminals ti and tj , for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ k, is at least d(i, j), and (ii) the
                                                                                                                                         length function is a semimetric. We note that their formulation does not apply to
                                                                                                                                         the general metric labeling problem. They obtained an O(log k)-approximation algo-
                                                                                                                                         rithm for the 0-extension problem using this formulation and an O(1)-approximation
                                                                                                                                         for planar graphs. Our LP formulation, when specialized to the 0-extension problem,
                                                                                                                                         induces a feasible solution for the metric relaxation formulation, by deﬁning the length
                                                                                                                                         of an edge to be its transshipment cost (see section 2). It is not hard to verify that
                                                                                                                                         this length function
                                                                                                                                                      √         is a semimetric. Calinescu, Karloﬀ, and Rabani [8] also showed
                                                                                                                                         a gap of Ω( log k) on the integrality ratio of their formulation. Their lower bound
                                                                                                                                         proof does not seem to carry over in any straightforward way to our formulation. We
                                                                                                                                         note that the metric relaxation formulation optimizes over the set of all semimet-
                                                                                                                                         rics, while our formulation optimizes only over a subset of the semimetrics. Whether
                                                                                                                                         our formulation is strictly stronger than the metric relaxation of [8] is an interesting
                                                                                                                                         open problem.
                                                                                                                                              Outline. Section 2 describes our LP formulation for the general metric labeling
                                                                                                                                         problem. In section 3, we analyze our formulation for uniform and linear metrics.
                                                                                                                                         612                      C. CHEKURI, S. KHANNA, J. NAOR, AND L. ZOSIN


                                                                                                                                         Building on our rounding scheme for the linear metric, we design and analyze a
                                                                                                                                         rounding procedure for the truncated linear metric in section 4. In section 5, we
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         study the general metric labeling problem and show that the integrality gap of our
                                                                                                                                         formulation is bounded by O(log k). We also describe here a transformation that
                                                                                                                                         essentially eliminates the role of the label cost assignment function.
                                                                                                                                              2. The LP formulation. We present a new linear integer programming for-
                                                                                                                                         mulation of the metric labeling problem. Let x(u, i) be a {0, 1}-variable indicating
                                                                                                                                         that vertex u is labeled i. Let x(u, i, v, j) be a {0, 1}-variable indicating that for edge
                                                                                                                                         (u, v) ∈ E, vertex u is labeled i and vertex v is labeled j. See Figure 2.1 for the
                                                                                                                                         formulation.
                                                                                                                                              Constraints (2.1) simply express that each vertex must receive some label. Con-
                                                                                                                                         straints (2.2) force consistency in the edge variables: if x(u, i) = 1 and x(v, j) = 1,
                                                                                                                                         they force x(u, i, v, j) to be 1. Constraints (2.3) express the fact that (u, i, v, j) and
                                                                                                                                         (v, j, u, i) refer to the same edge; the redundancy helps in notation. We obtain a linear
                                                                                                                                         relaxation of the above program by allowing the variables x(u, i) and x(u, i, v, j) to
                                                                                                                                         take any nonnegative value. We note that equality in (2.2) is important for the linear
                                                                                                                                         relaxation.
                                                                                                                                              With each edge (u, v) ∈ E we associate a complete bipartite graph H(u, v). The
                                                                                                                                         vertices of H(u, v) are {u1 , . . . , uk } and {v1 , . . . , vk }, i.e., they represent all possible
                                                                                                                                         labelings of u and v. There is an edge (ui , vj ) connecting the pair of vertices ui
                                                                                                                                         and vj , 1 ≤ i, j ≤ k. In what follows, we refer to the edges of H(u, v) as links to
                                                                                                                                         distinguish them from the edges of G. Suppose that the value of the variables x(u, i)
                                                                                                                                         for all u and i has been determined. For an edge (u, v) ∈ E, we can interpret the
                                                                                                                                         variables x(u, i, v, j) from a ﬂow perspective. The contribution of edge (u, v) ∈ E to
                                                                                                                                         the objective function of the linear program is the cost of the optimal transshipment
                                                                                                                                         of ﬂow between {u1 , . . . , uk } and {v1 , . . . , vk }, where (i) the supply of ui is x(u, i) and
                                                                                                                                         the demand of vj is x(v, j) for 0 ≤ i, j ≤ k; (ii) the cost of shipping a unit ﬂow from
                                                                                                                                         ui to vj is d(i, j). (The choice of the supply side and the demand side is arbitrary.)
                                                                                                                                              For the rest of the paper, the quantity dLP (u, v) refers    to the LP distance between
                                                                                                                                         u and v and is deﬁned to be the transshipment cost i,j d(i, j) · x(u, i, v, j). The LP


                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                k                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                                 (I)   min              c(u, i) · x(u, i) +             w(u, v)             d(i, j) · x(u, i, v, j)
                                                                                                                                                              u∈V i=1                         (u,v)∈E             i=1 j=1


                                                                                                                                                         subject to

                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                        k
                                                                                                                                         (2.1)                                x(u, i) = 1                                         ∀v∈V
                                                                                                                                                                        i=1
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                         (2.2)               x(u, i, v, j) − x(u, i) = 0        ∀ u ∈ V , (u, v) ∈ E, i ∈ 1, . . . , k,
                                                                                                                                                       j=1

                                                                                                                                         (2.3)         x(u, i, v, j) − x(v, j, u, i) = 0                 ∀ u, v ∈ V , i, j ∈ 1, . . . , k,
                                                                                                                                         (2.4)                             x(u, i) ∈ {0, 1}                   ∀ u ∈ V , i ∈ 1, . . . , k,
                                                                                                                                         (2.5)                         x(u, i, v, j) ∈ {0, 1}           ∀ (u, v) ∈ E, i, j ∈ 1, . . . , k.

                                                                                                                                                                                  Fig. 2.1. IP formulation.
                                                                                                                                                     LP FORMULATION AND ALGORITHMS FOR METRIC LABELING                                         613

                                                                                                                                         distance derived from an optimal (fractional) solution to (I) induces a metric on the
                                                                                                                                         graph, since for any v1 , v2 , v3 ∈ V , the transshipment cost from v1 to v2 cannot be
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         more than the sum of the transshipment costs from v2 to v3 and from v3 to v1 . The
                                                                                                                                         transshipment problem between two distributions was introduced by Monge [29] and is
                                                                                                                                         also referred to as the Monge–Kantorovich mass transference problem and has several
                                                                                                                                         applications [31]. In the image processing literature [33, 30] this metric has also been
                                                                                                                                         referred to as the earth mover’s metric.
                                                                                                                                              A solution to the formulation has an interesting geometric interpretation. It
                                                                                                                                         deﬁnes an embedding of the graph into a k-dimensional simplex, where the distance
                                                                                                                                         between points in the simplex is deﬁned by the earth mover’s metric on the labels. Our
                                                                                                                                         formulation specializes to that of Kleinberg and Tardos [26] for the uniform metric
                                                                                                                                         case which in turn specializes to that of Călinescu, Karloﬀ, and Rabani [7] for the
                                                                                                                                         multiway cut problem where the distance between points in the embedding is simply
                                                                                                                                         their 1 distance.
                                                                                                                                             3. Uniform metrics and linear metrics. We now analyze the performance
                                                                                                                                         of our linear programming formulation on two natural special cases, namely, uniform
                                                                                                                                         metrics and linear metrics. Kleinberg and Tardos [26] showed a 2-approximation for
                                                                                                                                         the uniform metric case. Their approach is based on rounding the solution of a linear
                                                                                                                                         program formulated speciﬁcally for uniform metrics. We will show that our linear
                                                                                                                                         programming formulation dominates the one in [26] and thus also has an integrality
                                                                                                                                         gap of at most 2. For the case of linear metrics, Boykov, Veksler, and Zabih [4]
                                                                                                                                         and Ishikawa and Geiger [21] obtained exact algorithms by reducing the problem to
                                                                                                                                         a minimum {s, t}-cut computation. We show here that on linear metrics, our linear
                                                                                                                                         programming formulation gives an exact algorithm as well. Our analysis for the linear
                                                                                                                                         metric case plays an important role in the algorithm for the truncated linear metric
                                                                                                                                         case.
                                                                                                                                              3.1. The uniform metric case. Kleinberg and Tardos [26] formulated a lin-
                                                                                                                                         ear program, denoted (KT), for the uniform metric and gave the following iterative
                                                                                                                                         algorithm for rounding a solution to it. Initially, no vertex is labeled. Each iteration
                                                                                                                                         consists of the following steps: (i) choose a label uniformly at random from 1, . . . , k
                                                                                                                                         (say, a label i); (ii) choose a real threshold θ uniformly at random from [0, 1]; (iii) for
                                                                                                                                         all unlabeled vertices u ∈ V , u is labeled i if θ ≤ x(u, i). The algorithm terminates
                                                                                                                                         when all vertices are labeled. Kleinberg and Tardos [26] showed that the expected cost
                                                                                                                                         of a labeling obtained by this algorithm is at most twice the cost of the LP solution.

                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                              k                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                              (KT)     min             c(u, i) · x(u, i) +             w(u, v) ·         |x(u, i) − x(v, i)|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2 i=1
                                                                                                                                                             v∈V i=1                         (u,v)∈E

                                                                                                                                                subject to

                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                       x(u, i) = 1 ∀ u ∈ V,
                                                                                                                                                                 i=1
                                                                                                                                                                       x(u, i) ≥ 0    ∀ u ∈ V and i ∈ 1, . . . , k.

                                                                                                                                              We show that applying the rounding algorithm to an optimal solution obtained
                                                                                                                                         from linear program (I) yields the same approximation factor. Let x̄ be a solution to
                                                                                                                                         (I). Note that for both (I) and (KT) the variables x(u, i) completely determine the
                                                                                                                                         cost. We will show that cost of (KT) on x̄ is smaller than that of (I). Both linear
                                                                                                                                         614                  C. CHEKURI, S. KHANNA, J. NAOR, AND L. ZOSIN


                                                                                                                                         programs (I) and (KT) coincide regarding the labeling cost. Consider edge (u, v) ∈ E.
                                                                                                                                         We show that the contribution of (u, v) to the objective function of (I) is at least as
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         large as the contribution to the objective function of (KT).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                k  k                                           
                                                                                                                                               1                            1                                             
                                                                                                                                                    k                                                          k
                                                                                                                                                 ·    |x̄(u, i) − x̄(v, i)| = ·           x̄(u, i, v, j) −       x̄(v, i, u, j)
                                                                                                                                               2 i=1                         2 i=1  j=1                    j=1                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                k                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                             1                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                         k                           k
                                                                                                                                                                            ≤ ·                 x̄(u, i, v, j) +           x̄(v, i, u, j)
                                                                                                                                                                             2 i=1                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                      j=1, j=i                  j=1, j=i

                                                                                                                                                                               1          
                                                                                                                                                                                  k        k
                                                                                                                                                                           =    ·                    2 · x̄(u, i, v, j)
                                                                                                                                                                               2 i=1
                                                                                                                                                                                         j=1, j=i

                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                               k 
                                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                           =             d(i, j) · x̄(u, i, v, j).
                                                                                                                                                                               i=1 j=1

                                                                                                                                              The penultimate equality in the above set of equations is true since x̄(u, i, v, j) =
                                                                                                                                         x̄(v, j, u, i). The ﬁnal equality follows from the fact that d(i, i) = 0 and d(i, j) =
                                                                                                                                         1, i = j. The last term is the contribution of (u, v) to the objective function of (I).
                                                                                                                                         We note that the example used in [26] to show that the integrality gap of (KT) is at
                                                                                                                                         least 2 − 1/k can be used to show the same gap for (I) as well.
                                                                                                                                             3.2. The line metric case. We now turn to the case of a linear metric and
                                                                                                                                         show that the value of an integral optimal solution is equal to the value of a fractional
                                                                                                                                         optimal solution of the LP (I). Without loss of generality, we can assume that the
                                                                                                                                         labels of the metric are integers 1, 2, . . . , k. If the label set contains nonconsecutive
                                                                                                                                         integers, we can add all the “missing” intermediate integers to the label set and set
                                                                                                                                         the cost of assigning them to every vertex to be inﬁnite. In fact, the rounding can be
                                                                                                                                         generalized to the case where the labels are arbitrary points on the real line without
                                                                                                                                         any diﬃculty.
                                                                                                                                             Rounding procedure. Let x̄ be an optimal fractional solution to the linear program.
                                                                                                                                         We round the fractional solution as follows. Let θ be a real threshold chosen uniformly
                                                                                                                                         at random from [0, 1]. For all i, 1 ≤ i ≤ k, let
                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                                                               α(u, i) =           x̄(u, j).
                                                                                                                                                                                            j=1

                                                                                                                                         Each vertex u ∈ V is labeled by the unique label i that satisﬁes α(u, i − 1) < θ ≤
                                                                                                                                         α(u, i). Clearly all vertices are labeled since α(u, k) = 1.
                                                                                                                                             Analysis. We analyze the expected cost of the assignment produced by the round-
                                                                                                                                         ing procedure. For each vertex u ∈ V , let L(u) be a random variable whose value is
                                                                                                                                         the label assigned to u by the rounding procedure. It can be readily veriﬁed that the
                                                                                                                                         probability that L(u) = i is equal to x̄(u, i). This means that the expected labeling
                                                                                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                         cost of vertex v is equal to i=1 x̄(u, i) · c(u, i), which is precisely the assignment cost
                                                                                                                                         of u in the linear program (with respect to solution x̄). We now ﬁx our attention on
                                                                                                                                         the expected cost of the edges.
                                                                                                                                             Lemma 3.1. Consider edge (u, v) ∈ E. Then,
                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                                                                                  E [d((L(u), L(v))] =             |α(u, i) − α(v, i)|.
                                                                                                                                                                                             i=1
                                                                                                                                                     LP FORMULATION AND ALGORITHMS FOR METRIC LABELING                              615

                                                                                                                                             Proof. For the sake of the analysis we deﬁne auxiliary binary random vari-
                                                                                                                                         able Z1 , . . . , Zk−1 as follows. The variable Zi is 1 if min{L(u), L(v)} ≤ i and
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         max{L(u), L(v)} > i, and is 0 otherwise. In other words Zi is 1 if i is in the in-
                                                                                                                                         terval deﬁned by L(u) and L(v). It is easy to see that

                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                k−1
                                                                                                                                                                           d(L(u), L(v)) =            Zi .
                                                                                                                                                                                                i=1
                                                                                                                                                                          k−1
                                                                                                                                         Therefore E [d(L(u), L(v))] =       i=1 E [Zi ]. We claim that

                                                                                                                                                                 E [Zi ] = Pr [Zi = 1] = |α(u, i) − α(v, i)|.

                                                                                                                                         The lemma easily follows from this claim. To prove the claim, assume without loss of
                                                                                                                                         generality (w.l.o.g.) that α(u, i) ≥ α(v, i). If θ < α(v, i), it is clear that L(u), L(v) ≤ i,
                                                                                                                                         and if θ > α(u, i), then L(u), L(v) > i: in both cases Zi = 0. If θ ∈ (α(v, i), α(u, i)],
                                                                                                                                         then L(u) ≤ i and L(v) > i, which implies that Zi = 1. Thus Pr [Zi = 1] is exactly
                                                                                                                                         |α(u, i) − α(v, i)|.
                                                                                                                                              We now estimate the contribution of an edge (u, v) ∈ E to the objective function
                                                                                                                                         of the linear program. As indicated in section 2, the contribution is equal to the cost
                                                                                                                                         of the optimal transshipment cost of the ﬂow in the complete bipartite graph H(u, v)
                                                                                                                                         between {u1 , . . . , uk } and {v1 , . . . , vk }, where the supply ofui is x̄(u, i) and the
                                                                                                                                         demand of vj is x̄(v, j) for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ k. Recall that dLP (u, v) = i,j d(i, j)·x̄(u, i, v, j).
                                                                                                                                              Lemma 3.2. For the line metric
                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                                                     dLP (u, v) ≥         |α(u, i) − α(v, i)|.
                                                                                                                                                                                    i=1


                                                                                                                                              Proof. The crucial observation in the case of a linear metric is that ﬂow can be
                                                                                                                                         uncrossed. Let i ≤ i and j ≤ j  . Suppose that ε amount of ﬂow is sent from ui to vj 
                                                                                                                                         and from ui to vj . Then, uncrossing the ﬂow, i.e., sending ε amount of ﬂow from ui
                                                                                                                                         to vj and from ui to vj  will not increase the cost of the transshipment. This means
                                                                                                                                         that the amount of ﬂow sent from {u1 , . . . , ui } to {v1 , . . . , vi } for all i, 1 ≤ i ≤ k,
                                                                                                                                         is precisely min{α(u, i), α(v, i)}. Therefore, |α(v, i) − α(u, i)| amount of ﬂow is sent
                                                                                                                                         “outside” the label set 1, 2, . . . , i and can be charged one unit of cost (with respect
                                                                                                                                         to i). Applying this argument to all values of i, 1 ≤ i ≤ k, we get that the cost
                                                                                                                                                                                               k
                                                                                                                                         of the optimal transshipment of ﬂow is precisely i=1 |α(u, i) − α(v, i)|. The lemma
                                                                                                                                         follows.
                                                                                                                                              Hence, together with Lemma 3.1, we get that the expected cost of edge (u, v) ∈ E
                                                                                                                                         after the rounding is no more than its contribution to the objective function of the
                                                                                                                                         linear program.
                                                                                                                                              The uncrossing of ﬂow in the proof of Lemma 3.2 relies on the Monge property
                                                                                                                                         of the distances induced by points on a line. Hoﬀman [20], in his classical paper,
                                                                                                                                         pointed out that the Monge property can be exploited for transportation and related
                                                                                                                                         problems.
                                                                                                                                              Theorem 3.3. The integrality gap of LP (I) for the line metric is 1.
                                                                                                                                             3.3. Distance functions on the line deﬁned by convex functions. We now
                                                                                                                                         consider distance functions on the labels 1, . . . , k on the integer line deﬁned by strictly
                                                                                                                                         convex functions, that is, d(i, j) = f (|i − j|), where f is convex and nondecreasing.
                                                                                                                                         Notice that such distance functions do not satisfy the metric property, since d is a
                                                                                                                                         616                 C. CHEKURI, S. KHANNA, J. NAOR, AND L. ZOSIN


                                                                                                                                         metric if and only if f is concave and increasing. Our motivation for studying these
                                                                                                                                         metrics comes from the quadratic function d(i, j) = |i − j|2 , which is of particular
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         interest in the image restoration application [22, 27] described earlier. We note that
                                                                                                                                         for the special case where the assignment cost is also a convex function (of the label),
                                                                                                                                         eﬃcient algorithms are given by [19]. We can show the following.
                                                                                                                                              Theorem 3.4. For any distance function on the line deﬁned by a convex function,
                                                                                                                                         the integrality gap of LP (I) is 1.
                                                                                                                                              We sketch the proof, since it is similar to the linear case. Consider a feasible
                                                                                                                                         solution x̄ to the LP. For any edge (u, v), if f is convex, the optimal cost transshipment
                                                                                                                                         ﬂow in H(u, v) is noncrossing. Further, for the rounding that we described for the
                                                                                                                                         linear case, if the ﬂow is noncrossing, Pr [L(u) = i ∧ L(v) = j] = x̄(u, i, v, j). The
                                                                                                                                         theorem follows from this last fact trivially. Ishikawa and Geiger [22] showed that
                                                                                                                                         the ﬂow graph construction for the line metric can be extended for convex functions
                                                                                                                                         to obtain an optimal solution. The advantage of our approach is that the solution is
                                                                                                                                         obtained from a general formulation. This allows us to extend the ideas to obtain the
                                                                                                                                         ﬁrst nontrivial approximation for the truncated quadratic distance function.
                                                                                                                                               4. Improved approximation
                                                                                                                                                                      √        for the truncated line metric. In this section
                                                                                                                                         we use LP (I) to give a (2+ 2)-approximation algorithm for the truncated line metric
                                                                                                                                         case. This improves the 4-approximation provided in [18]. We prefer to view the
                                                                                                                                         metric graph as a line with the truncation to M being implicit. This allows us to
                                                                                                                                         use, with appropriate modiﬁcations, ideas from section 3.2. We round the fractional
                                                                                                                                         solution x̄ once again using only the values x̄(u, i). Let M  ≥ M be an integer
                                                                                                                                         parameter that we will ﬁx later. We repeat the following iteration until all vertices
                                                                                                                                         are assigned a label:
                                                                                                                                                 • Pick an integer  uniformly at random in [−M  + 2, k]. Let I be the interval
                                                                                                                                         [,  + M  − 1].
                                                                                                                                                 • Pick a real threshold θ uniformly at random from [0, 1].
                                                                                                                                                 • Let u be an unassigned vertex. If there is a label i ∈ I such that

                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                        i−1                    
                                                                                                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                                                                              x̄(u, j) < θ ≤         x̄(u, j),
                                                                                                                                                                        j=                    j=

                                                                                                                                         we assign i to u. Otherwise u is unassigned in this iteration.
                                                                                                                                         The above algorithm generalizes the rounding algorithms for the uniform and line
                                                                                                                                         metrics in a natural way. Once the index  is picked, the rounding is similar to that
                                                                                                                                         of the line metric in the interval I . The diﬀerence is that a vertex might not get a
                                                                                                                                         label in an iteration. If two vertices u and v get separated in an iteration, that is,
                                                                                                                                         only one of them gets assigned, our analysis will assume that their distance is M .
                                                                                                                                         This is similar to the analysis in [26] for the uniform metric case. Our improvement
                                                                                                                                         comes from a careful analysis of the algorithm that treats links diﬀerently, based on
                                                                                                                                         whether their distance is linear or truncated. The analysis guides the choice of M  to
                                                                                                                                         obtain the best guarantee.
                                                                                                                                              Let L(u) and L(v) be random variables that indicate the labels that get assigned
                                                                                                                                         to u and v by the algorithm.
                                                                                                                                              Lemma 4.1. In any given iteration, the probability of an unassigned vertex u
                                                                                                                                         getting a label i in that iteration is exactly x̄(u, i)·M  /(k+M  −1). The probability of u
                                                                                                                                         getting assigned in the iteration is M  /(k+M  −1). Therefore Pr [L(u) = i] = x̄(u, i).
                                                                                                                                              Proof. If  is picked in the ﬁrst step of an iteration, the probability of assigning
                                                                                                                                         i to u is exactly x̄(u, i), if i ∈ I , and zero otherwise. The number of intervals that
                                                                                                                                                     LP FORMULATION AND ALGORITHMS FOR METRIC LABELING                            617

                                                                                                                                         contain i is M  , and hence the probability of u getting i in an iteration is simply
                                                                                                                                         x̄(u, i) · M  /(k + M  − 1).
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                              It also follows from Lemma 4.1 that with high probability all vertices are assigned
                                                                                                                                         in O(k log n) iterations. The following lemma bounds the expected distance between
                                                                                                                                         L(u) and L(v) as a function of M  . Recall dLP (u, v) = i,j d(i, j) · x̄(u, i, v, j).
                                                                                                                                              Lemma 4.2. The expected distance between L(u) and L(v) satisﬁes the following
                                                                                                                                         inequality:
                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                          2M M 
                                                                                                                                                            E [d(L(u), L(v))] ≤ 2 + max       ,       dLP (u, v).
                                                                                                                                                                                          M M
                                                                                                                                                                                              √
                                                                                                                                              Theorem 4.3. There is a randomized (2 + 2)-approximation algorithm for the
                                                                                                                                         metric labeling problem when the metric is truncated linear.
                                                                                                                                              Proof. We note that the algorithm and the analysis
                                                                                                                                                                                              √       easily generalizes to the case
                                                                                                                                         when M  is a real number. We choose M  = 2M and the theorem follows from
                                                                                                                                         Lemmas 4.1 and 4.2.
                                                                                                                                              The algorithm that we described can be derandomized using the method of con-
                                                                                                                                         ditional probabilities. The proof uses standard ideas, and hence we omit it.
                                                                                                                                              For the rest of the section, we restrict our attention to one particular edge (u, v) ∈
                                                                                                                                         E(G). We analyze the eﬀect of the rounding on the expected distance with the goal
                                                                                                                                         of proving Lemma 4.2. To analyze the process, we consider an iteration before which
                                                                                                                                         neither u or v is assigned. If, in the current iteration, only one of u or v is assigned
                                                                                                                                         a label, that is, they are separated, we will pay a distance of M . If both of them
                                                                                                                                         are assigned, then we pay a certain distance based on their labels in the interval.
                                                                                                                                         The main quantity of interest is the expected distance between the labels of u and v
                                                                                                                                         in a single iteration conditioned under the event that both of them are assigned in
                                                                                                                                         this iteration. Recall that a link refers to the edges in the complete bipartite graph
                                                                                                                                         H(u, v).
                                                                                                                                              Given an interval I = [,  + M  − 1], we partition the interesting links for I
                                                                                                                                         into three categories, internal, left crossing, and right crossing. The internal links
                                                                                                                                         denoted by int(I ) are all the links (u, i, v, j) with i, j ∈ I ; the left crossing links
                                                                                                                                         denoted by lcross(I ) are those with min{i, j} <  and max{i, j} ∈ I ; and the right
                                                                                                                                         crossing links denoted by rcross(I ) are those with min{i, j} ∈ I and max{i, j} >
                                                                                                                                          + M  − 1. It is clear that no link is both left and right crossing. Let cross(I )
                                                                                                                                         denote lcross(I ) ∪ rcross(I ). See Figure 4.1 for an example. It is easy to see that
                                                                                                                                         e is not relevant to I if i, j ∈/ I .
                                                                                                                                              We set up some notation that we use for the rest of this section. For a link
                                                                                                                                         e = (u, i, v, j) let dlin (e) = |i − j| and d(e) = d(i, j) = min(M, dlin (e)) be the linear
                                                                                                                                         distance and truncated linear distance, respectively, between i and j. The quantity
                                                                                                                                         x̄e is compact notation for x̄(u, i, v, j). Consider a link e that crosses the interval I
                                                                                                                                         and let i be the label of e that is internal to I . We denote by d (e) the quantity
                                                                                                                                         ( + M  − 1 − i), the linear   distance from i to the right end of the interval. The
                                                                                                                                         quantity x̄(u, I ) refers to i∈I x̄(u, i), the ﬂow of u assigned by the LP to labels
                                                                                                                                         in I .
                                                                                                                                              Lemma 4.4. The probability of u and       v being separated given that  was chosen
                                                                                                                                         in the ﬁrst step of the iteration is at most e∈cross(I ) x̄e .
                                                                                                                                              Proof. The probability of separation    is exactly |x̄(u, I ) − x̄(v, I )|, which can
                                                                                                                                         easily be seen to be upper bounded by e∈cross(I ) x̄e .
                                                                                                                                              Lemma 4.5. For two vertices u and v, unlabeled before an iteration, let p be
                                                                                                                                         the expected distance between them, conditioned on the event that  was chosen in the
                                                                                                                                         618                   C. CHEKURI, S. KHANNA, J. NAOR, AND L. ZOSIN

                                                                                                                                                                                        Il
                                                                                                                                                       u
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                       v



                                                                                                                                                                                          internal links
                                                                                                                                                                  left crossing link                                right crossing links


                                                                                                                                                                    Fig. 4.1. Illustration of interesting links for I .


                                                                                                                                         ﬁrst step of the iteration and both were assigned a label in I . Then
                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                p ≤          d (e)x̄e +        dlin (e)x̄e .
                                                                                                                                                                         e∈cross(I )                  e∈int(I )

                                                                                                                                               We provide some intuition before giving the formal proof. Once  is ﬁxed, the
                                                                                                                                         rounding is exactly the same as that for the line metric when restricted to the interval
                                                                                                                                         I . From Lemma 3.1 we know the exact expected cost of the rounding. However, we
                                                                                                                                         do not have an equivalent of Lemma 3.2 to bound the LP cost, because I is only a
                                                                                                                                         subinterval of the full line and also because of the truncation. The main diﬃculty
                                                                                                                                         is with links that belong to cross(I ). By charging each of the crossing links e, an
                                                                                                                                         amount equal to d (e) (instead of d(e) that LP paid), we are able to pay for the
                                                                                                                                         expected cost of rounding. In other words, we charge the interesting links of I to
                                                                                                                                         pay for the optimal linear metric transshipment ﬂow induced by the fractional values
                                                                                                                                         x̄(u, i) and x̄(v, i), i ∈ I , when restricted to I .
                                                                                                                                               Proof. Fix an  and w.l.o.g. assume that x̄(u, I ) ≥ x̄(v, I ). With probability
                                                                                                                                         q = x̄(v, I ), both u and v get labels from I . We analyze the expected distance
                                                                                                                                         conditioned on this event. Once the interval I is ﬁxed, the rounding  j+iis very similar
                                                                                                                                         to that of the linear metric case. For 0 ≤ i < M  let α(u, i) = j= x̄(u, j). The
                                                                                                                                         quantity α(u, i) sums the amount of ﬂow of u in the ﬁrst i + 1 labels of the interval
                                                                                                                                         I . In the following analysis we assume that distances within I are linear and ignore
                                                                                                                                         truncation. This can only hurt us. Following the reasoning in Lemma 3.1, the expected
                                                                                                                                                                                  M  −1
                                                                                                                                         distance between u and v is equal to i=0 | min{q, α(u, i)}−α(v, i)|, which we upper
                                                                                                                                                     M  −1
                                                                                                                                         bound by i=0 |α(u, i) − α(v, i)|. We claim that
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                     M   −1                                                             
                                                                                                                                                              |α(u, i) − α(v, i)| ≤                    d (e)x̄e +                 dlin (e)x̄e .
                                                                                                                                                      i=0                               e∈cross(I )                  e∈int(I )

                                                                                                                                         To prove this claim, we consider each link e ∈ cross(I ) ∪ int(I ) and sum its contri-
                                                                                                                                         bution to the terms qi = |α(u, i) − α(v, i)|, 0 ≤ i < M  . Let e = (u, a, v, b) ∈ int(I ).
                                                                                                                                         It is clear that e contributes exactly x̄e to qi if a ≤ i and b > i or if a > i andb ≤ i.
                                                                                                                                         Otherwise its contribution is 0. Therefore, the overall contribution of e to          qi is
                                                                                                                                         x̄e |a − b| = x̄e dlin (e).
                                                                                                                                                      LP FORMULATION AND ALGORITHMS FOR METRIC LABELING                               619

                                                                                                                                              Now suppose e = (u, a, v, b) ∈ lcross(I ). Assume w.l.o.g. that a ≥  and b < ;
                                                                                                                                         the other case is similar. Link e will contribute x̄e to α(u, i) for a −  ≤ i < M  and
                                                                                                                                         contributes 0 to α(v, i) for 0 ≤ i < M  since b is outside the interval I . Therefore,
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         the contribution of eto qi is x̄e for a −  ≤ i < M  and 0 otherwise. The overall
                                                                                                                                         contribution of e to     qi is x̄e | + M  − 1 − a| = d (e)x̄e . A similar argument holds
                                                                                                                                         for the case when e ∈ rcross(I ).
                                                                                                                                              Proof of Lemma 4.2. For a given iteration before which neither u nor v has a
                                                                                                                                         label, let Pr [u ∧ v], Pr [u ⊕ v], and Pr [u ∨ v] denote the probabilities that u and v
                                                                                                                                         are both assigned, exactly one of them is assigned, and at least one of them is assigned,
                                                                                                                                         respectively. We upper bound the quantity E [d(L(u), L(v))] as follows. If u and v
                                                                                                                                         are separated in some iteration, we upper bound their resulting distance by M . Using
                                                                                                                                         this simpliﬁcation, E [d(L(u), L(v))] is bounded by the quantity below:
                                                                                                                                                            Pr [u ⊕ v] · M + Pr [u ∧ v] · E [d(L(u), L(v))|u ∧ v]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                Pr [u ∨ v]
                                                                                                                                         We upper bound the above expression as follows:
                                                                                                                                              • We lower bound Pr [u ∨ v] by Pr [u], which by Lemma 4.1 is equal to M  /(k+
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                         M − 1).                                         
                                                                                                                                              • We upper bound Pr [u ⊕ v] by k+M1  −1  e∈cross(I ) x̄e using Lemma 4.4.
                                                                                                                                              • By the deﬁnition of p in Lemma 4.5 we get the following:
                                                                                                                                                                                               1     
                                                                                                                                                      Pr [u ∧ v] E [d(L(u), L(v))|u ∧ v] =       
                                                                                                                                                                                                         p .
                                                                                                                                                                                           k+M −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                         Putting all these together and using Lemma 4.5 to bound p ,
                                                                                                                                                                         ⎛                                                        ⎞
                                                                                                                                                                   1 ⎝                                     
                                                                                                                                              E [d(L(u), L(v))] ≤                       (M + d (e))x̄e +            dlin (e)x̄e ⎠
                                                                                                                                                                  M
                                                                                                                                                                           e∈cross(I )                   e∈int(I )
                                                                                                                                                                             ⎛                                                 ⎞
                                                                                                                                                                   1  ⎝                                     
                                                                                                                                                                ≤       x̄e               (M + d (e)) +             dlin (e)⎠ .
                                                                                                                                                                  M e
                                                                                                                                                                                      cross(I )e            int(I )e

                                                                                                                                         Lemma 4.6 shows that
                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                     (M + d (e)) +                   dlin (e) ≤ 2M  + max{2M, (M  )2 /M } d(e).
                                                                                                                                             cross(I )e                int(I )e

                                                                                                                                         It follows that
                                                                                                                                                                           1                               
                                                                                                                                                     E [d(L(u), L(v))] ≤     
                                                                                                                                                                               2M  + max{2M, (M  )2 /M }   x̄e d(e)
                                                                                                                                                                           M                               e
                                                                                                                                                                        ≤ (2 + max{2M/M  , M  /M }) · dLP (u, v).
                                                                                                                                         This ﬁnishes the proof.
                                                                                                                                             Lemma 4.6. Let e = (u, i, v, j) be a link. Then
                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                      (M + d (e)) +         dlin (e) ≤ 2M  + max 2M, (M  )2 /M d(e).
                                                                                                                                             cross(I )e               int(I )e

                                                                                                                                                            ¯ =                                                                ¯
                                                                                                                                               Proof. Let d(e)     cross(I )e (M + d (e)) +  int(I )e dlin (e). We evaluate d(e)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                         separately for three diﬀerent types of links based on their lengths. Recall that M ≥ M
                                                                                                                                         and hence d(e) ≤ M ≤ M  for all links e. Let e correspond to the link (u, i, v, j) in
                                                                                                                                         H(u, v) and w.l.o.g. assume that i ≤ j; the other case is similar. Also recall that
                                                                                                                                         dlin (e) = |i − j|.
                                                                                                                                         620                     C. CHEKURI, S. KHANNA, J. NAOR, AND L. ZOSIN


                                                                                                                                              • dlin (e) ≥ M  . In this case it is clear that e is not an internal edge for any I ;
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                         hence int(I )e dlin (e) = 0. Also d(e) = M . Therefore
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                ¯ =
                                                                                                                                                d(e)                    (M + d (e))
                                                                                                                                                         cross(I )e
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                     =                    (M + d (e)) +                          (M + d (e))
                                                                                                                                                         lcross(I )e                            rcross(I )e

                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                              j                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                                                                     =                  (M + M  +  − 1 − i) +                              (M + M  +  − 1 − i)
                                                                                                                                                         =j−M  +1                                         =i−M  +1
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                     ≤ M (2M + M )
                                                                                                                                                     = M  (2 + M  /M )M = M  (2 + M  /M )d(e).

                                                                                                                                               • dlin (e) < M . In this case d(e) = dlin (e).
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                  ¯ =
                                                                                                                                                  d(e)                     (M + d (e)) +                       dlin (e)
                                                                                                                                                             cross(I )e                          int(I )e
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                         =                  (M + d (e)) +                          (M + d (e))
                                                                                                                                                             lcross(I )e                          rcross(I )e
                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                 +                   dlin (e)
                                                                                                                                                                     int(I )e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                              j                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                            j−M
                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                         =           (M + M +  − 1 − i) +                                 (M + M  +  − 1 − i)
                                                                                                                                                             =i+1                                        =i−M  +1

                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                                                 +                     dlin (e)
                                                                                                                                                                     =j−M  +1
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                         ≤ (2M + 2M − dlin (e))dlin (e)
                                                                                                                                                         ≤ (2M  + 2M )dlin (e)
                                                                                                                                                         = M  (2 + 2M/M  )d(e).

                                                                                                                                               • M ≤ dlin (e) < M  . In this case d(e) = M .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                ¯ =
                                                                                                                                                d(e)                     (M + d (e)) +                          (M + d (e)) +                  dlin (e)
                                                                                                                                                         lcross(I )e                            rcross(I )e                     int(I )e
                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                          j                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                          j−M
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                     =           (M + M +  − 1 − i) +                               (M + M  +  − 1 − i)
                                                                                                                                                         =i+1                                         =i−M  +1

                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                                                                             +                   dlin (e)
                                                                                                                                                                 =j−M  +1
                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                     = (2M + 2M − dlin (e))dlin (e)
                                                                                                                                                     ≤ M  (2M + M  )
                                                                                                                                                     = M  (2 + M  /M )d(e).
                                                                                                                                                     LP FORMULATION AND ALGORITHMS FOR METRIC LABELING                          621

                                                                                                                                             4.1. The truncated quadratic distance on the line. Consider the label
                                                                                                                                         space 1, 2, . . . , k on the line where the distance function d(i, j) = min{M, |i − j|2 }.
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         This is the truncated version of the quadratic distance. We note that the quadratic
                                                                                                                                         distance is not a metric. However, as mentioned earlier, this distance function arises in
                                                                                                                                         image processing applications. In subsection 3.3 we showed that our LP formulation
                                                                                                                                         gives an optimal solution for the quadratic distance on the line. For the truncated
                                                                                                                                         version
                                                                                                                                         √       of this distance we can use the algorithm from section 4. By choosing M  =
                                                                                                                                           M we can show the following theorem.
                                                                                                                                              √
                                                                                                                                             Theorem         4.7. The integrality gap of LP (I) for the truncated quadratic distance
                                                                                                                                         is O( M ).

                                                                                                                                             5. General metrics.

                                                                                                                                              5.1. Integrality gap on general metrics. We now show that the integrality
                                                                                                                                         gap of the LP formulation is O(log k) on general metrics. This gives an alternative
                                                                                                                                         way to obtain the result of Kleinberg and Tardos [26]. The latter algorithm uses the
                                                                                                                                         approach of ﬁrst approximating the given metric probabilistically by a hierarchically
                                                                                                                                         well-separated tree (HST) metric [2] and then using an LP formulation to solve the
                                                                                                                                         problem on tree metrics. The Kleinberg–Tardos LP formulation has only an O(1)
                                                                                                                                         integrality gap on HST metrics. Since any arbitrary k-point metric can be probabilis-
                                                                                                                                         tically approximated by an HST metric with an O(log k) distortion [16], their result
                                                                                                                                         follows. In contrast, our approach is based on directly using our LP formulation on
                                                                                                                                         the given general metric. As a ﬁrst step, we use the LP solution to identify a de-
                                                                                                                                         terministic HST metric approximation of the given metric such that the cost of our
                                                                                                                                         fractional solution on this HST metric is at most O(log k) times the LP cost on the
                                                                                                                                         original metric. This ﬁrst step is done by using the following proposition from [16].
                                                                                                                                         A weaker version was shown earlier in [9, 3] with a bound of O(log k log log k).
                                                                                                                                              Proposition 5.1. Let d be an arbitrary k-point metric and let α be a nonnegative
                                                                                                                                         function deﬁned over all pairs of points in the metric. Then d can be deterministically
                                                                                                                                         approximated by an HST metric dT such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   α(i, j) · dT (i, j) ≤ O(log k)         α(i, j) · d(i, j).
                                                                                                                                                             i,j                                    i,j


                                                                                                                                              Given an optimal solution x̄ to our LP formulation, we apply Proposition 5.1
                                                                                                                                         with the weight function α(i, j) =      (u,v)∈E w(u, v) · x̄(u, i, v, j) for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ k.
                                                                                                                                         Thus, α(i, j) is the fractional weight of edges between i and j. Let dT denote the
                                                                                                                                         resulting HST metric. Since we are changing only the metric on the labels and not
                                                                                                                                         the assignments provided by the LP, the fractional solution is a feasible solution for
                                                                                                                                         this new metric and has cost at most O(log k) · C ∗ , where C ∗ is the optimal LP cost
                                                                                                                                         for the original metric. Thus, if we can now round our fractional solution on dT by
                                                                                                                                         introducing only a constant factor increase in the solution cost, we will obtain an
                                                                                                                                         O(log k)-approximation algorithm. We prove this by showing that on any tree metric,
                                                                                                                                         our LP formulation is at least as strong as the Kleinberg–Tardos LP formulation (for
                                                                                                                                         tree metrics).
                                                                                                                                              Given an edge weighted tree that deﬁnes the metric on the labels, we root the
                                                                                                                                         tree at some arbitrary vertex. Let Ta denote the subtree hanging oﬀ a vertex a in
                                                                                                                                         the rooted tree and let T denote the set of all such trees. For any tree T ∈ T we
                                                                                                                                         denote by (T ) the lengthof the edge leaving the root of T to its parent. Let xT (u)
                                                                                                                                         be compact notation for i∈T x(u, i), the fractional assignment of the LP to labels
                                                                                                                                         622                   C. CHEKURI, S. KHANNA, J. NAOR, AND L. ZOSIN


                                                                                                                                         in the subtree T . With this notation the LP formulation in [26] is as follows:

                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                                               (KT)   min              c(u, i) · x(u, i) +             w(u, v)          (T ) · |xT (u) − xT (v)|
                                                                                                                                                             v∈V i=1                         (u,v)∈E             T ∈T


                                                                                                                                                subject to
                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                                                          x(u, i) = 1 ∀ u ∈ V,
                                                                                                                                                                    i=1
                                                                                                                                                                          x(u, i) ≥ 0   ∀ u ∈ V and i ∈ 1, . . . , k.

                                                                                                                                              Let x̄ be a solution to our formulation (I). As we remarked in section 3.1, for both
                                                                                                                                         (I) and (KT) above, the values x̄(u, i) completely determine the cost. We will show
                                                                                                                                         that cost of (KT) on x̄ is smaller than that of (I). Both linear programs (I) and (KT)
                                                                                                                                         coincide regarding the labeling cost. For each edge (u, v) ∈ E we will show that LP
                                                                                                                                         distance for (u, v) is smaller in (I) than (KT). This is based on the following claim.
                                                                                                                                              Claim 5.2. For any feasible solution x̄ of (I),
                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                 (T ) · |x̄T (u) − x̄T (v)| ≤   d(i, j) · x̄(u, i, v, j).
                                                                                                                                                             T ∈T                                   i,j


                                                                                                                                             The proof of the above claim is straightforward and simply relies on the fact
                                                                                                                                         that the distance between two vertices in a tree metric is deﬁned by the unique path
                                                                                                                                         between them. We omit the details. We obtain the following theorem from the above
                                                                                                                                         discussion.
                                                                                                                                             Theorem 5.3. The integrality gap of LP (I) on a k-point metric is O(log k).
                                                                                                                                              5.2. Reduction to zero-inﬁnity assignment costs. We now describe a trans-
                                                                                                                                         formation for the general problem that essentially allows us to eliminate the label
                                                                                                                                         assignment cost function. This transformation reduces an instance with arbitrary
                                                                                                                                         label assignment cost function c to one where each label assignment cost is either 0
                                                                                                                                         or ∞. We refer to an instance of this latter type as a zero-inﬁnity instance. Our
                                                                                                                                         transformation exactly preserves the cost of any feasible solution but in the process
                                                                                                                                         increases the number of labels by a factor of n. This provides some evidence that
                                                                                                                                         the label cost assignment function does not play a strong role in determining the
                                                                                                                                         approximability threshold of the metric labeling problem. In particular, existence of
                                                                                                                                         a constant factor approximation algorithm for zero-inﬁnity instances would imply a
                                                                                                                                         constant factor approximation algorithm for general instances as well.
                                                                                                                                              From an instance I = c, d, w, L, G(V, E) of the general problem, we create an
                                                                                                                                         instance of the zero-inﬁnity variant I  = c , d , w, L , G(V, E) as follows. We deﬁne
                                                                                                                                         a new label set L = {iu | i ∈ L and u ∈ V }, i.e., we make a copy of L for each vertex
                                                                                                                                         in G. The new label cost assignment function is given by c (u, iv ) = 0 if v = u and ∞
                                                                                                                                         otherwise. Thus, each vertex has its own copy of the original label set, and any ﬁnite
                                                                                                                                                         I  would assign each vertex a label from its own private copy.
                                                                                                                                         cost solution to
                                                                                                                                              Let Wu = (u,v)∈E w(u, v) for any vertex u ∈ V . The new distance metric on
                                                                                                                                         L is deﬁned in terms of the original distance metric as well as the original label cost
                                                                                                                                         assignment function. For i = j or u = v,

                                                                                                                                                                                                   c(u, i) c(v, j)
                                                                                                                                                                       d (iu , jv ) = d(i, j) +          +        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Wu      Wv
                                                                                                                                                     LP FORMULATION AND ALGORITHMS FOR METRIC LABELING                           623

                                                                                                                                         and d (iu , iu ) = 0. It can be veriﬁed that d is indeed a metric and that any solution
                                                                                                                                         to instance I can be mapped to a solution to instance I  , and vice versa, in a cost-
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         preserving manner. The proof of the following theorem follows in a straightforward
                                                                                                                                         manner from the above construction.
                                                                                                                                             Theorem 5.4. If there exists a f (n, k)-approximation algorithm for zero-inﬁnity
                                                                                                                                         instances of the metric labeling problem, then there exists a f (n, nk)-approximation
                                                                                                                                         algorithm for general instances.
                                                                                                                                             In fact, there is an even simpler reduction to zero-inﬁnity instances, conveyed to
                                                                                                                                         us by Chuzhoy [10], which does not change the input metric but changes the graph
                                                                                                                                         in a very simple way. For each vertex v and label j such that c(v, j) > 0, add a new
                                                                                                                                         vertex zvj to the graph for which
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                         ∞ if  = j,
                                                                                                                                                                          c(zvj , ) =
                                                                                                                                                                                         0 if  = j.
                                                                                                                                         A new edge (v, zvj ) is added to the graph. Let  = j be the label that minimizes
                                                                                                                                         d(j, ) such that d(j, ) > 0. The weight of the edge (v, zvj ) is set to
                                                                                                                                                                                           c(v, j)
                                                                                                                                                                            w(v, zvj ) =           .
                                                                                                                                                                                           d(j, )
                                                                                                                                         Set c(v, j) = 0 for 1 ≤ j ≤ k. We now obtain a new instance of the metric labeling
                                                                                                                                         problem by the above transformation. Note that the metric has not been altered. It
                                                                                                                                         is not hard to verify that this reduction preserves the value of an optimal solution
                                                                                                                                         and that an r-approximation to the new instance also yields an r-approximation to
                                                                                                                                         the original instance. Hence the following theorem is obtained.
                                                                                                                                              Theorem 5.5 (see Chuzhoy [10]). If there is a f (n, k)-approximation algorithm
                                                                                                                                         for zero-inﬁnity instances of metric labeling, then there is a f (n+nk, k)-approximation
                                                                                                                                         algorithm for general instances.
                                                                                                                                              6. Conclusions. As mentioned in section 1, our LP formulation has integrality
                                                                                                                                         gap 1 when G is a tree. We give a brief sketch of the idea. Consider an edge (u, v)
                                                                                                                                         in G where u is a leaf connected to v. If v is assigned a label i in some solution,
                                                                                                                                         then it is easy to see that an optimal assignment to u is to assign it a label j, where
                                                                                                                                         c(u, j) + w(u, v)d(i, j) = mink (c(u, k) + w(u, v)d(i, k)). Hence the assignment to u is
                                                                                                                                         completely ﬁxed by the assignment to v. We can eliminate u from G and incorporate
                                                                                                                                         the cost of u in the assignment cost of v as follows: set c (v, i) = c(v, i)+mink (c(u, k)+
                                                                                                                                         w(u, v)d(i, k)). This transformation can be repeated until there is only one node left
                                                                                                                                         and the optimal solution then is trivial. The same argument above can be used to
                                                                                                                                         show optimality of our LP formulation for trees. We leave  √ the details to the reader.
                                                                                                                                              Chuzhoy and Naor [11] recently obtained an Ω( log k)-factor hardness of ap-
                                                                                                                                         proximation for the metric labeling problem. The 0-extension problem generalizes
                                                                                                                                         the multiway cut problem and is a special case of the metric labeling √        problem. As
                                                                                                                                         mentioned earlier, Calinescu, Karloﬀ, and Rabani [8] established an Ω( log k) lower
                                                                                                                                         bound on the integrality gap of the metric relaxation for the 0-extension problem.
                                                                                                                                         Fakcheroenphol et al. [15] improved the upper bound on the integrality gap of the
                                                                                                                                         metric relaxation to O(log k/ log log k). It is worthwhile to study the integrality gap
                                                                                                                                         of our formulation for this restricted problem. See [1] for results in this direction.
                                                                                                                                              The truncated quadratic distance function is of particular interest to applications
                                                                                                                                         in computer vision. Although this distance function does not form a metric, it is
                                                                                                                                         quite possible that a constant factor approximation is achievable. Here, too, our
                                                                                                                                         formulation might be of use in developing improved algorithms.
                                                                                                                                         624                 C. CHEKURI, S. KHANNA, J. NAOR, AND L. ZOSIN


                                                                                                                                             Acknowledgments. We thank Olga Veksler and Mihalis Yannakakis for useful
                                                                                                                                         discussions. We thank Julia Chuzhoy for allowing us to include her reduction in
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         section 5.2.

                                                                                                                                                                                 REFERENCES

                                                                                                                                          [1] A. Archer, J. Fakcharoenphol, C. Harrelson, R. Krauthgamer, K. Talwar, and E.              ´
                                                                                                                                                  Tardos, Approximate classiﬁcation via earthmover metrics, in Proceedings of the Fifteenth
                                                                                                                                                  Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, New Orleans, LA, 2004, pp. 1072–
                                                                                                                                                  1080.
                                                                                                                                          [2] Y. Bartal, Probabilistic approximation of metric spaces and its algorithmic applications, in
                                                                                                                                                  Proceedings of the 37th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
                                                                                                                                                  1996, pp. 184–193.
                                                                                                                                          [3] Y. Bartal, On approximating arbitrary metrics by tree metrics, in Proceedings of the 30th
                                                                                                                                                  Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 1998, pp. 161–168.
                                                                                                                                          [4] Y. Boykov, O. Veksler, and R. Zabih, Markov random ﬁelds with eﬃcient approximations,
                                                                                                                                                  in Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1998,
                                                                                                                                                  pp. 648–655.
                                                                                                                                          [5] Y. Boykov, O. Veksler, and R. Zabih, Fast approximate energy minimization via graph
                                                                                                                                                  cuts, in Proceedings of the 7th IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 1999,
                                                                                                                                                  pp. 377–384.
                                                                                                                                          [6] Y. Boykov, O. Veksler, and R. Zabih, A new algorithm for energy minimization with discon-
                                                                                                                                                  tinuities, in Proceedings of the International Workshop on Energy Minimization Methods
                                                                                                                                                  in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1999.
                                                                                                                                          [7] G. Călinescu, H. Karloff, and Y. Rabani, An improved approximation algorithm for mul-
                                                                                                                                                  tiway cut, J. Comput. System Sci., 60 (2000), pp. 564–574.
                                                                                                                                          [8] G. Calinescu, H. Karloff, and Y. Rabani, Approximation algorithms for the 0-extension
                                                                                                                                                  problem, SIAM J. Comput., 34 (2004), pp. 358–372.
                                                                                                                                          [9] M. Charikar, C. Chekuri, A. Goel, and S. Guha, Rounding via trees: Deterministic ap-
                                                                                                                                                  proximation algorithms for group steiner trees and k-median, in Proceedings of the 30th
                                                                                                                                                  ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 1998, pp. 114–123.
                                                                                                                                         [10] J. Chuzhoy, private communication, 2001.
                                                                                                                                         [11] J. Chuzhoy and J. Naor, The hardness of metric labeling, in Proceedings of the 45th Annual
                                                                                                                                                  IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 2004, pp. 108–114.
                                                                                                                                         [12] F. S. Cohen, Modeling and applications of stochastic processes, in The Markov Random Fields
                                                                                                                                                  for Image Modeling and Analysis, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Nether-
                                                                                                                                                  lands, 1986, pp. 243–272.
                                                                                                                                         [13] E. Dalhaus, D. S. Johnson, C. H. Papadimitriou, P. D. Seymour, and M. Yannakakis,
                                                                                                                                                  The complexity of multiterminal cuts, SIAM J. Comput., 23 (1994), pp. 864–894.
                                                                                                                                         [14] R. Dubes and A. Jain, Random ﬁeld models in image analysis, J. Appl. Stat., 16 (1989),
                                                                                                                                                  pp. 131–164.
                                                                                                                                         [15] J. Fakcharoenphol, C. Harrelson, S. Rao, and K. Talwar, An improved approximation
                                                                                                                                                  algorithm for the 0-extension problem, in Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual ACM-
                                                                                                                                                  SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, Baltimore, MD, 2003, pp. 257–265.
                                                                                                                                         [16] J. Fakcharoenphol, S. Rao, and K. Talwar, A tight bound on approximating arbitrary
                                                                                                                                                  metrics by tree metrics, in Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory
                                                                                                                                                  of Computing, 2003, pp. 448–455.
                                                                                                                                         [17] D. Greig, B. Porteous, and A. Seheult, Exact maximum a posteriori estimation for binary
                                                                                                                                                  images, J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B, 51 (1989), pp. 271–279.
                                                                                                                                         [18] A. Gupta and E. Tardos, Constant factor approximation algorithms for a class of classiﬁ-
                                                                                                                                                  cation problems, in Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of
                                                                                                                                                  Computing, 2000, pp. 652–658.
                                                                                                                                         [19] D. Hochbaum, An eﬃcient algorithm for image segmentation, markov random ﬁelds and
                                                                                                                                                  related problems, J. ACM, 48 (2001), pp. 686–701.
                                                                                                                                         [20] A. J. Hoffman, On simple linear programming problems, in Proceedings of the 7th Symposium
                                                                                                                                                  in Pure Mathematics, Vol. 7, V. Klee, ed., AMS, Providence, RI, 1963, pp. 317–327.
                                                                                                                                         [21] H. Ishikawa and D. Geiger, Segmentation by grouping junctions, in Proceedings of IEEE
                                                                                                                                                  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1998, pp. 125–131.
                                                                                                                                         [22] H. Ishikawa and D. Geiger, Mapping image restoration to a graph problem, in Proceedings
                                                                                                                                                  of the 1999 IEEE-EURASIP Workshop on Nonlinear Signal and Image Processing, 1999.
                                                                                                                                         [23] D. Karger, P. Klein, C. Stein, M. Thorup, and N. Young, Rounding algorithms for a
                                                                                                                                                     LP FORMULATION AND ALGORITHMS FOR METRIC LABELING                                 625

                                                                                                                                                  geometric embedding of multiway cut, in Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM Sym-
                                                                                                                                                  posium on Theory of Computing, 1999, pp. 668–678.
                                                                                                                                         [24] A. Karzanov, Minimum 0-extension of graph metrics, European J. Combin., 19 (1998), pp. 71–
Downloaded 09/20/24 to 140.177.159.179 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                  101.
                                                                                                                                         [25] A. Karzanov, A combinatorial algorithm for the minimum (2, r)-metric problem and some
                                                                                                                                                  generalizations, Combinatorica, 18 (1999), pp. 549–569.
                                                                                                                                         [26] J. Kleinberg and E. Tardos, Approximation algorithms for classiﬁcation problems with pair-
                                                                                                                                                  wise relationships: Metric labeling and markov random ﬁelds, J. ACM, 49 (2002), pp. 616–
                                                                                                                                                  630.
                                                                                                                                         [27] S. Z. Li, Markov Random Field Modeling in Computer Vision, 2nd ed., Springer-Verlag, New
                                                                                                                                                  York, 2001.
                                                                                                                                         [28] I. Milis, Task assignment in distributed systems using network ﬂow methods, in Proceedings
                                                                                                                                                  of the Conference on Combinatorics and Computer Science, Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci.
                                                                                                                                                  1120, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1996, pp. 396–405.
                                                                                                                                         [29] G. Monge, Déblai et Ramblai, Mem. de l’Academie des Sciences, 1781.
                                                                                                                                         [30] S. Peleg, M. Werman, and H. Rom, A uniﬁed approach to the change of resolution: Space
                                                                                                                                                  and gray-level, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intel., 11 (1989), pp. 739–742.
                                                                                                                                         [31] S. Rachev, The Monge-Kantorovich mass transference problem and its stochastic applications,
                                                                                                                                                  Theory Probab. Appl., 29 (1984), pp. 647–676.
                                                                                                                                         [32] S. Roy and I. Cox., A maximum-ﬂow formulation of the N-camera stereo correspondence prob-
                                                                                                                                                  lem, in Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision, 1998, pp. 492–499.
                                                                                                                                         [33] Y. Rubner, C. Tomasi, and L. Guibas, The earth mover’s distance as a metric for image
                                                                                                                                                  retrieval, Int. J. Comput. Vis., 40 (2000), pp. 99–121.
