                                                               Parallel Repetition of Entangled Games

                                                                            Julia Kempe∗               Thomas Vidick†

                                                                                         October 26, 2018
arXiv:1012.4728v2 [quant-ph] 11 May 2011




                                                                                               Abstract
                                                    We consider one-round games between a classical referee and two players. One of the main
                                                 questions in this area is the parallel repetition question: Is there a way to decrease the maximum
                                                 winning probability of a game without increasing the number of rounds or the number of
                                                 players? Classically, efforts to resolve this question, open for many years, have culminated in
                                                 Raz’s celebrated parallel repetition theorem on one hand, and in efficient product testers for
                                                 PCPs on the other.
                                                    In the case where players share entanglement, the only previously known results are for
                                                 special cases of games, and are based on techniques that seem inherently limited. Here we
                                                 show for the first time that the maximum success probability of entangled games can be re-
                                                 duced through parallel repetition, provided it was not initially 1. Our proof is inspired by a
                                                 seminal result of Feige and Kilian in the context of classical two-prover one-round interactive
                                                 proofs. One of the main components in our proof is an orthogonalization lemma for operators,
                                                 which might be of independent interest.


                                           1 Introduction
                                           Two-player games play a major role both in theoretical computer science, where they have led to
                                           many breakthroughs such as the discovery of tight inapproximability results for some constraint
                                           satisfaction problems, and in quantum physics, where they first arose in the context of Bell in-
                                           equalities. In such games, a referee (or verifier) chooses a pair of questions from some distribution
                                           and sends one question to each of two non-communicating players (or provers), who then respond
                                           with answers taken from some finite set. The referee, based on the questions and answers, decides
                                           whether to accept (i.e., whether the players win). The main question of interest is the following:
                                           given the referee’s behavior as specified by the game, what is the maximum winning probability
                                           achievable by the players? Somewhat surprisingly, the answer to this question turns out to depend
                                           on whether we force the players to behave classically, or allow them to use quantum mechanics.
                                           In the former case, the players’ answers are simply deterministic functions of their inputs1 , and
                                           the maximum probability of winning is known as the (classical) value of the game. In the latter case
                                             ∗ Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel and CNRS & LRI, University of
                                           Paris-Sud, Orsay, France. Supported by an Individual Research Grant of the Israeli Science Foundation, by European
                                           Research Council (ERC) Starting Grant QUCO and by the Wolfson Family Charitable Trust.
                                              † Computer Science division, UC Berkeley, USA. Supported by ARO Grant W911NF-09-1-0440 and NSF Grant CCF-

                                           0905626. Part of this work while done while visiting LRI, University of Paris-Sud, Orsay, France.
                                              1 One can allow the players to use randomness, but this does not change their maximum winning probability.



                                                                                                   1
the players, though still not allowed to communicate, may share an arbitrary entangled state and
each perform arbitrary measurements on their share of the state. The maximum winning prob-
ability in this case is known as the entangled value of the game. This model of entangled players
(also known as that of non-local games) dates back at least to the work of Tsirelson, and it has been
intensely studied in recent years; yet many questions about it are still wide open.
    One of the most important and interesting questions in this context is the parallel repetition
question. It is well known that one can reduce both the value and the entangled value of a game
by repeating it sequentially, or alternatively, by repeating it in parallel with several independent
pairs of players. However, for many applications (like hardness of approximation results or ampli-
fications preserving zero-knowledge) we need a way to decrease the winning probability without
increasing the number of rounds or the number of players, i.e., while staying in the model of two-
player one-round games. Parallel repetition is designed to do just that: in its most basic form, in
the ℓ-parallel repeated game, the referee simply chooses ℓ pairs of questions independently and
sends to each player his corresponding ℓ-tuple of questions. Each player then replies with an ℓ-
tuple of answers, which are accepted if and only if each of the ℓ answer pairs would have been
accepted in the original game.
    Clearly the value of an ℓ-parallel repeated game is at least the ℓ-th power of the value of the
original game, since the players can just answer each of the ℓ questions independently as in the
original protocol. However, contrary to what intuition might suggest and to the case of sequential
repetition, parallel repetition does not necessarily decrease the value of a game in a straightfor-
ward exponential manner2 . The parallel repetition question is that of finding upper bounds on the
value of a repeated game, and for a long time no such upper bound, even very weak, could be
proved. First results date to Verbitsky [Ver94] who showed that indeed the value goes to zero with
the number of repetitions. Following this, Feige and Kilian [FK00] showed that the value decreases
polynomially with the number of repetitions for the special case of so-called projection games (in
which the second player’s answer is uniquely determined by the first player’s). They used a mod-
ified parallel repetition procedure in which a large fraction of the repetitions are made of dummy
rounds, that is, rounds in which the questions are chosen independently at random for both play-
ers, and in which any answer is accepted. In this paper we deviate somewhat from the common
terminology, and use the term “parallel repetition” even when referring to such more general pro-
cedures. Finally, in a breakthrough result, Raz [Raz98] showed that the value of a game repeated
in parallel indeed decreases exponentially with the number of repetitions (albeit not exactly at
the same rate as sequential repetition). There is still very active research in this area, mostly on
simplifying the analysis, which, over a decade later, remains quite involved, and improving it for
certain special cases of games [Hol07, Rao08, FKO07, Raz08, BHH+ 08, BRR+ 09, AKK+ 08, RR10].


1.1 Previous work
In this paper we focus on parallel repetition of games with entangled players. The only two previous
results in this area are for two special classes of games. First, Cleve et al. showed that for the
class of XOR games (i.e., games with binary answers in which the referee’s decision is based solely
on the XOR of the two answers), perfect parallel repetition holds [CSUU08]. This means that the
   2 See [Fei91] for a classical example, and [CSUU08] for an example using entangled players due to Watrous. See

also [KR10] for another example where parallel repetition does not reduce the value of a game at the exact rate one
would expect if the players were playing independently.


                                                        2
entangled value of an ℓ-parallel repeated game is exactly the ℓ-th power of the entangled value
of the original game. Parallel repetition has also been shown to hold for the more general (but
still quite restricted) class of unique games [KRT08] (i.e., games where the referee applies some
permutation to the answers of the second player and accepts if and only they match those from
the first player). One might also add a third result by Holenstein [Hol07], who proved a parallel
repetition theorem for the so-called no-signaling value; since the no-signaling value is an upper
bound on the entangled value, this can sometimes be used to upper bound the entangled value
of repeated games. However, there is in general no guarantee regarding the quality of this upper
bound, and in many cases (e.g., all unique games) the no-signaling value is always 1, making it
useless as an upper bound on the entangled value.
     It is important to note that in these results the entangled value of the parallel repeated game
is never analyzed directly; instead, one uses a “proxy” such as a semidefinite program [CSUU08,
KRT08] or the no-signaling value [Hol07], whose behavior under parallel repetition is well un-
derstood. Moreover, in all these cases, the proxy’s value is efficiently computable. This unfortu-
nately gives a very strong indication that such techniques cannot be extended to deal with general
games. Indeed, it is known that it is NP-hard to tell if the entangled value of a given game is 1
or not [KKM+ 08, IKM09]; hence, unless P=NP, for any efficiently computable upper bound on the
entangled value, there are necessarily games whose entangled value is strictly less than 1 yet for
which that upper bound is 1 (and such games can often be exhibited explicitly without relying on
P6=NP). We note that some of the early parallel repetition results for the classical value [FL92] fol-
lowed the same route (of upper bounding the value by a semidefinite program) and were limited
to special classes of games for the exact same reason.
    To summarize, no parallel repetition result (not even one with very slow decay) is known for
the entangled value of general games, and, moreover, the known techniques are unlikely to extend
to this case. Hence the natural question:
     Can parallel repetition decrease the entangled value of games? If so, can we bound the rate of
     decrease?
    In parallel to work on the parallel repetition problem, the related question of product testing
arose in the context of error amplification for PCPs [DR06, DG08, Imp08, IKW09]. Roughly speak-
ing, the question here is to design tests by which a referee can check that the players play according
to a product strategy, i.e., answer each question independently of the other questions (as one would
expect from an honest behavior). Note that if the players are constrained to follow a product strat-
egy, then their maximum winning probability must necessarily go down exponentially, hence the
connection to the parallel repetition question. The result of Feige and Kilian [FK00] mentioned
above in fact also shows that the strategy of the players must have some product structure, and
recently there has been lots of renewed interest in this question leading to much stronger product
testers [DM10]. In the case of entangled players, however, absolutely nothing was known:
     Is there a way to test if the strategy of entangled players is in some sense close to a product
     strategy?

1.2 Our results
In this work we answer both questions in the affirmative, and our main result can be informally
stated as follows.

                                                   3
Theorem 1 (informal). For any s < 1, δ > 0, and entangled game G, there is a corresponding ℓ-parallel
repeated game G ′ , where ℓ = poly((1 − s)−1 , δ−1 ), such that if the value of G is less than s then the value
of G ′ is at most δ, whereas if the value of G is 1 then this also holds3 for the repeated game.

     The dependency of ℓ on δ in our theorem is polynomial, whereas as we already mentioned it
is known that in some cases this dependence can be made poly-logarithmic (and this is certainly
the case if the players are assumed to play independently). While a poly-logarithmic dependence
is important in some applications for which one would like to perform amplification up to an
exponentially small value, in many cases the main use of parallel repetition is to amplify a small
“gap” between value 1 and value 1 − 1/poly(| G |) to a constant gap, say between 1 and 1/2. In
this case the polynomial dependence of ℓ on (1 − s)−1 that we obtain is optimal (up to the exact
value of the exponent).
     In the course of the proof of this theorem we also establish that the player’s strategies have
a certain “serial” or “product” structure (more on this in the proof ideas and techniques section
below). The informal statement above hides some details, which we now discuss. The kind of par-
allel repetition we perform depends on the structure of the game G, and we distinguish whether
it is a projection game or not.

Repetition for projection games. If G is a projection game, then the repeated game is obtained
by independently playing the original G on a subset of the repetitions, and playing dummy rounds
in the other repetitions. We note that projection games form a wide class of games that captures
most of the games one typically encounters in the classical literature (see [Rao08]).
    If, in addition, the game happens to be a free game (i.e., a game in which the referee’s distribu-
tion on question pairs is a product distribution), then the dummy questions are no longer needed
and hence our analysis applies to the standard ℓ-fold repetition.

Repetition for general games. If the game G does not have the projection property, then it is
necessary to add a number of consistency rounds to the repetition. In those rounds the referee sends
identical questions to the players, and expects identical answers. As before, the other rounds of
the repetition are either the game G or dummy rounds. The consistency questions are added to
play the role of the projection constraints.
    This kind of repetition raises the following issue4 : namely, it is not obvious that honest entan-
gled players can answer the consistency questions correctly. This implies that, even if the original
game had value 1, players might not be able to succeed in the consistency questions and hence the
value of the repeated game might not equal 1 anymore. This may or may not be an issue depend-
ing on where the original game comes from. In many cases it is known that, if there is a perfect
strategy, it does not require any entanglement at all, or it can be achieved using the maximally
entangled state. In both cases it is not hard to see that players will be able to answer consistency
questions perfectly, and hence our result holds. Because of this we regard this issue as a minor
one; however it might be important in some contexts.
  3 See the discussion following the theorem for some caveats.
  4 This is why we treat the projection case separately, despite it leading to similar decay.




                                                            4
1.3 Proof idea and techniques
We focus on the case of projection games, as the proof of the other cases does not present additional
challenges. The starting point of our proof is the work of Feige and Kilian [FK00], for which the
following intuition can be given5 . Our goal as the referee is to force the players to use a product
strategy, preventing any elaborate cheating strategies. In other words, we want to make sure that
the player chooses his answer to the ith question based only on that question and not on any of
the other ℓ − 1 questions. Towards this end, the referee chooses a certain (typically large) fraction
of the ℓ question pairs to be independently distributed dummy questions, the answers to which are
ignored. These dummy questions are meant to confuse the players: if they were indeed trying
to carefully choose their answer to a certain question by looking at many other questions, now
most of these other questions will be completely random and uncorrelated with the other player’s
questions, so that such a strategy cannot possibly be helpful.
    In more detail, Feige and Kilian prove the following dichotomy theorem on the structure of
single-player repeated strategies (that is, maps from ℓ-tuples of questions to ℓ-tuples of answers):
either the strategy looks rather random (in which case the players cannot win the game with good
probability — this is where the projection property is used) or it is almost a serial or product strat-
egy, i.e., the answer to each question is chosen based on that question only (in which case the
player is playing the rounds independently, and his success probability will suffer accordingly).
    Our proof follows a similar structure. However, an important challenge immediately surfaces:
the proof in [FK00], and indeed all proofs of parallel repetition theorems or direct product tests,
make the important initial step of assuming that the player’s strategies are deterministic (which
is easily seen to hold without loss of generality). And indeed, it is not at all trivial to extend those
proofs to even the randomized setting without making this initial simplifying assumption. To
give a simple example, an important notion in Feige and Kilian’s proof is that of a dead question —
simply put, a question to which the player does not give any majority answer, when one goes over
all possible ways of completing that specific question into a tuple of questions for the repeated
game. It is easily seen that, in the case of a deterministic strategy, dead questions are harmful, as
the players are unlikely to satisfy the projection property on them. However, it is just as easily
seen that for most randomized strategies, good or bad, all questions are dead.
    This illustrates the kinds of difficulties that one encounters while trying to show parallel rep-
etition in the case of entangled players, when one cannot simply “fix the randomness”. The issue
we just raised is not too hard to solve, and others are more challenging. Indeed the main difficulty
is to define a proper notion of almost serial for operators, which would in particular incorporate
the inherent randomness of quantum strategies. It turns our that the right notion is the notion
of consecutive measurements (rather than tensor products of measurements for each question, a
tempting but excessively strong possibility). Based on a quantum analogue of Feige and Kilian’s
dichotomy theorem, we are able to show that the almost serial condition induces a condition of
almost orthogonality on the player’s operators. At this point we need to prove a genuinely quan-
tum lemma, which lets us extract a product strategy from the almost-orthogonal condition. This
novel orthogonalization lemma is at the heart of our proof. We obtain that the players approximately
perform a series of consecutive measurements, each depending only on the current question. An
upper bound on the value of the repeated game then follows.
   5 We refer to Ryan O’Donnell’s excellent lecture notes [O’D05b, O’D05a] for a helpful exposition of Feige and Kilian’s

proof.



                                                           5
Organization of the paper. We start with a few definitions, including a description of the form
of the repeated games that we consider, in Section 2. We then give a high-level overview of the
structure of the proof, and the main ideas governing it, in Section 3. Section 4 contains the proof
of our main theorem. Finally, Section 5 contains the proof of an important technical component
of our proof: an approximate joint block-diagonalization of positive matrices which are close to
being orthogonal. Appendix A contains a few additional useful technical facts.


2 Preliminaries
2.1 Games
In this paper we study two-player one-round games. Let Q and A be finite sets. An entangled
game (or simply game) can be defined as follows.

Definition 2. An entangled game G = (V, π ) is given by a function V : A2 × Q2 → {0, 1} and a
distribution π : Q2 → [0, 1]. The referee samples questions (q′ , q) according to π, and sends q′ to the first
player and q to the second player. He receives back answers a′ , a respectively. He accepts those answers if
and only if V ( a′ , a | q′ , q) = 1. The value of the game is
                                                                                                        ′
                 ω ∗ (G) =     sup           ∑             ∑          π (q′ , q)V ( a′ , a|q′ , q) hΨ| Aqa′ ⊗ Bqa |Ψi
                             |Ψi,Aq ,Bq ( q ′ ,q )∈ Q2 ( a′ ,a)∈ A2


where the supremum is taken over all finite-dimensional Hilbert spaces H, all a priori shared states |Ψi ∈ H
                                                                          ′
and all Projective Operator-Valued Measurements (POVMs)6 Aq′ = { Aqa′ }a′ ∈ A and Bq = { Bqa }a∈ A on H.

   We note that by standard purification techniques (see [CHTW04]) one can assume that for each
question q each player performs a projective measurement with outcomes in A (i.e., ∑ a∈ A Aqa = Id
and ( Aqa )† = Aqa = ( Aqa )2 ).
   We will be interested in some special classes of games.

Definition 3. A game = (V, π ) is called a

   • Projection game if for every q′ , q ∈ Q and a′ ∈ A, there is a unique a ∈ A such that V ( a′ , a|q′ , q) =
     1.

   • Free game if π = π A × π B is a product distribution.

   • Symmetric game if π is symmetric, and for any q′ , q, a′ , a we have V ( a′ , a|q′ , q) = V ( a, a′ |q, q′ ).

2.2 Repeated games
We consider two different types of repeated games. The first one, originally used by Feige and
Kilian, applies to projection games, and we describe it in Definition 4. The second type of repeti-
tion applies to consistency games, and is closer to the direct product testing technique originally
introduced by Dinur and Reingold [DR06]; we explain it in Definition 5.
  6 The POVM condition states that each A a ′ ≥ 0, and         ′
                                          q′           ∑ a′ Aqa′ = Id.




                                                                      6
Definition 4 (Feige-Kilian repetition). Let ℓ be any integer, and define C1 := ℓ1/2 and C2 := ℓ − C1 .
Given a two-player projection game G = (π, V, Q, A), its ℓ-th Feige-Kilian repetition is the following game
GFK(ℓ) :
    • The referee picks a random partition [ℓ] = M ∪ F, where | M | = C1 and | F | = C2 = ℓ − C1 . Indices
      in M will be called “game” indices, while indices in F will be called “confuse” indices.

    • The referee picks (q′M , q M ) ∼π C1 ( Q × Q)C1 .

    • He picks (q′F , q F ) ∼(π A ×π B )C2 ( Q × Q)C2 , where π A is the marginal of π on the first player, and π B
      the marginal on the second player.

    • The referee sends the questions to the players (without specifying which questions are of which type).
      On game questions he verifies that the original game constraint is satisfied. He accepts any answers
      to confuse questions.
Definition 5 (Dinur-Reingold repetition). Let ℓ be any integer, and define C1′ := ℓ1/2 , C1 = 2C1′ and
C2 := ℓ − C1 . Given a two-player symmetric game G = (π, V, Q, A), its ℓ-th Dinur-Reingold repetition
is the following game GDR(ℓ) :
    • The referee picks a random partition [ℓ] = R ∪ G ∪ F, where | R| = C1′ , | G | = C1′ , and | F | = C2 .
      Indices in R will be called “consistency” indices, those in G will be called “game” indices, and those
      in F “confuse” indices.
                                                          ′
    • The referee picks C1′ questions q R ∼ C1′ QC1 and sets q′R = q R , where π A is the marginal of π on the
                                               πA
      first player (since we assumed G was symmetric, this is the same as π B , the marginal on the second
      player).
                                                                            ′
    • The referee picks C1′ pairs of questions (q′G , q G ) ∼ C1′ ( Q × Q)C1 .
                                                                  π

    • He picks (q′F , q F ) ∼(π A ×π B )C2 ( Q × Q)C2 .

    • The referee sends the questions to the players (without specifying which questions are of which type).
      On consistency questions he verifies that both answers, from Alice and from Bob, are identical. On
      game questions he verifies that the original game constraint is satisfied. He accepts any answers to
      confuse questions.
    Note that, if a game G has value 1, then its Dinur-Reingold repetition does not necessarily also
have value 1, as the player’s optimal strategy in G might not be consistent. A consistent strategy
is one in which whenever the players are asked the same question they provide the same answer
with certainty. This may not always hold of an optimal strategy; nevertheless the following lemma
shows that we can assume it holds in some natural settings.
Lemma 6 (Lemmas 3 and 4 in [KKM+ 08]). Let G = (V, π ) be an arbitrary 2-player entangled game.
Then there exists a game G ′ = (V ′ , π ′ ) of the same classical and quantum values with twice as many
questions, and such that π ′ and V ′ are symmetric under permutation of the variables. Moreover, given
any strategy P1 , . . . , PN with entangled state |Ψi that wins G with probability p, there exists a strategy
P1′ , . . . , PN′ with entangled state |Ψ′ i that wins G ′ with probability p and is such that P1′ = · · · = Pk′ and
|Ψ′ i is symmetric with respect to the provers 1, . . . , k. In addition, if |Ψi was a maximally entangled state
then |Ψ′ i is also.

                                                              7
    This lemma shows that, if G is any game, then we may symmetrize it and assume that the
provers are also playing according to a symmetric strategy. In particular, if G had value 1, and the
optimal strategy used either no entanglement or a maximally entangled state, then this also holds
of the optimal strategy in the symmetrized game. Such a strategy is automatically consistent.


3 Proof overview
We first give a formal account of our results in the next section, before proceeding to give an
overview of their proof in Section 3.2.

3.1 Results
We first state our main theorems. They refer to the two types of repetition of an entangled game
G defined in the previous section, its ℓ-th Feige-Kilian repetition GFK(ℓ) , and its ℓ-th Dinur-Reingold
repetition GDR(ℓ). Both types of repeated games are made of ℓ independent rounds, played in
parallel. Some of these rounds consist of independent repetitions of G, while others are either
confuse or consistency rounds, containing simple tests independent of the original game (except
for the distribution with which questions are chosen in those rounds). Our first result pertains to
projection games.

Theorem 7. There exists a constant c ≥ 1 such that, for all s < 1 and δ > 0 there is a ℓ = O((δ−1 (1 −
s)−1 )c ) such that, if G is a projection game with value ω ∗ ( G ) ≤ s, then the entangled value of the game
GFK(ℓ) is at most δ. Moreover, if the value of G is 1 then the value of GFK(ℓ) is also 1.

    In the case of free projection games, questions to the players are chosen independently, so that
the distribution on questions in the confuse rounds of the game GFK(ℓ) is exactly the same as that
in the original game. The only difference is that in such a round, all answers are accepted, which
can only help the players. Hence the direct parallel repetition of G has a smaller value than its
Feige-Kilian repetition, which implies the following.

Corollary 8. Let s < 1 and δ > 0. Then there is a ℓ = O((δ−1 (1 − s)−1 )c ) such that, if G is a free
projection game such that ω ∗ ( G ) ≤ s, then the (direct) ℓ-fold parallel repetition of G has value at most δ.

   Our second result is more general, as it applies to arbitrary games. It only comes with the mild
caveat that, in order to preserve the fact that the original game had value 1 (whenever this indeed
holds), it is required that in that case there also exists a perfect strategy which is consistent.

Theorem 9. There exists a constant c ≥ 1 such that, for all s < 1 and δ > 0 there is a ℓ = O((δ−1 (1 −
s)−1 )c ) such that, if G is an arbitrary game with value ω ∗ ( G ) ≤ s , then the entangled value of the game
GDR(ℓ) is at most δ. Moreover, if G has a perfect consistent strategy then the value of GDR(ℓ) is also 1.

    Lemma 6 shows that the requirement that G has a perfect consistent strategy (which is only
a requirement in cases where we are interested in preserving the fact that G might have value 1)
is satisfied for many examples of games, including those for which we know a priori that, if the
value of G is 1, then there is an optimal strategy that either does not use any entanglement at all,
or uses the maximally entangled state.



                                                      8
3.2 Proof overview
In the remainder of this section we describe the main ideas behind the proof of Theorem 7 and
Theorem 9; full details can be found in Sections 4 and 5. Our goal is to understand repeated quan-
tum strategies, that is, maps q ∈ Qℓ 7→ { Xqa }a∈ Aℓ which map tuples of questions q = (q1 , . . . , qℓ )
to projective measurements { Xqa }a∈ Aℓ in dimension d. The semantics are that, on receiving ques-
tions q, a player measures his share of the entangled state |Ψi according to { Xqa }a∈ Aℓ , resulting in
him sending back answer a with probability hΨ| Id ⊗ Xqa |Ψi. Interestingly, most of the proof will be
directly concerned with the measurements { Xqa }a∈ Aℓ themselves (together with the reduced den-
sity ρ = Tr A |ΨihΨ|), without reference to the other player’s measurements or even the underlying
game.
    We will be interested in a strategy’s marginals: given a fixed subset of indices S ⊆ [ℓ] and a set
of questions qS on the indices in S, one can define the marginalized measurement
                       n                        h     q         q         io
                           aS
                         XqS : ρ 7→ E q∼π [ℓ]\S   ∑      XqS q ρ XqaSS qa
                                                          aS a
                                                                                       aS ∈ A S
                                                       a∈ A [ℓ]\ S

which corresponds to choosing a tuple q ∈ Q[ℓ]\S by picking the question in each coordinate
independently according to some fixed distribution π,7 making the measurement corresponding
to the POVM described by { XqaSS qa }( aS ,a)∈ Aℓ , and marginalizing over those answers a corresponding
to indices not in S.
     Given that X was a projective measurement, the marginalized strategy is a POVM — it is not
necessarily projective any more. Our main results will pertain to the structure of such marginal-
ized strategies. We will show that they are either very random (this is formally called dead later
on, and morally means that the marginalized strategy is very far from a projective measurement;
rather its singular values tend to be small and spread out), or highly structured (this is called se-
rial later on, and after some work we will show that it implies that the marginalized strategy has
somewhat of a product form, i.e. it can be decomposed as a product Πqa11 · · · Πqass on a subset of the
coordinates). The attentive reader might already see that once this is proven it will be possible
to bound the success probability of both types of strategies in the repeated game; however we
should warn that the exact statements, and their proofs, are quite technical and carry only a fair
share of the intuition we have just given.
   We proceed to give a few more details on the structure of the proof of our results. It can be
divided into three main steps. The first two steps establish facts about the structure of repeated
single-player strategies, and are independent of the game being played, as well as of the other
player’s strategy.

Step 1: A quantum dichotomy theorem. In the first step we prove an analogue of Feige and
Kilian’s dichotomy theorem [FK00]. The precise statement is given in Lemma 12, and its simple
proof very closely follows that of Feige and Kilian’s theorem. Informally, it states that there exists
an integer 1 ≤ r∗ ≪ ℓ, such that a tuple of questions ( R, q R ), where R ⊆ [ℓ] denotes a subset of r∗
indices, and q R fixed questions in those positions, can be of two types only. Either it is dead (case 1
in the lemma), or it is (1 − η )-serial, where η > 0 is a small parameter (case 2 in the lemma). Both
   7 We will often drop the reference to π and simply write E
                                                             q [·]. π will be fixed throughout, and later instantiated to
the (marginal) distribution on questions from the original game G that is being repeated.


                                                             9
types of strategies are precisely defined in Definition 11, and the meaning of dead is the easiest to
grasp. The technical definition is simply that the (marginalized) measurement {XqaRR }aR ∈ A R , when
performed twice (sequentially) on the same half8 of the state |Ψi, is unlikely to produce the same
result. This kind of strategy is easily seen to be bad for the players, as is shown in step 3. of the
proof.
    Serial strategies are more subtle. In the case of a classical deterministic player, a serial strategy
is such that, when one conditions on the player giving answers aR to the questions q R in R, the
answers to most other questions (not in R) are for the most part determined by the player as a
direct function of the corresponding question, i.e. he is playing an honest product strategy on
those coordinates. In the quantum case, we will adopt a seemingly weaker definition, which is
that a strategy is serial on (q R , aR ) if, in expectation over the choice of an additional question qi
in position i, when the marginalized measurement {XqaRR qaii }( aR ,ai )∈ A R∪{i} is performed twice on the
same half of |Ψi, the probability that the same answer ( aR , ai ) is obtained twice is almost as large
as the probability that just aR is obtained twice: conditioned on being consistent on the answers to
the questions in R, the strategy is also consistent in its answer on a random additional question qi
in position i.
    Fleshing out the consequences of this definition to eventually show that it implies something
close to the classical definition requires some work, and is the object of the second step of the
proof.

Step 2: A product theorem for serial strategies. While for a classical deterministic player a
serial strategy, as defined in the previous section, is one which decides on the answer ai to most
questions qi not in R as a function of that question alone, in the quantum setting this is much less
clear. The first task is to decide on what one expects from a serial strategy. For instance, one might
ask for the measurements to take some “approximately-tensor” form; however we find that this is
too strong a requirement. Instead, we first show that the serial property implies that the player’s
measurement operator {XqaRR qaii }( aR ,ai )∈ A R∪{i} has a certain block-diagonal form, in the sense that9

                                              XqaRR qaii ≈ Πqaii XqaRR qaii Πqaii

where {Πqaii }ai ∈ A are orthogonal projectors; the precise statement is given in Claim 16. Its proof goes
through a technical statement about sets of operators which are close to being pairwise orthogonal.
That statement, proven in Lemma 23, shows the natural fact that such operators are close to having
a common block-diagonalization basis.
    Once this is shown it is not hard to extend the approximation to a small number of additional
questions q1 , . . . , q g , showing that the corresponding measurement also has a block-diagonal form,
                                                                                   a
this time described by the product of the corresponding projectors Πqa11 · · · Πqgg ; a precise statement
is given in Lemma 17. It is in the precise sense described in that lemma that we can say that a serial
strategy has a product form, based on which we can think of the player as playing sequentially on
a subset of the coordinates.
   8 In fact we will also need to consider the outcome of performing the same measurement simultaneously on the two

halves of | Ψi.
   9 Note that this “approximation” should be taken with a grain of salt; in particular one cannot expect to extract any

information about the measurement operators themselves simply by observing statistics of measurement outcomes.
Rather, all our estimates will bear on the post-measurement state, resulting from applying the measurement corre-
sponding to XqaRR qaii to one half of | Ψi.


                                                             10
Step 3: Both dead and serial strategies fail the repeated game. In the last step of the proof
we show that both types of strategies, dead or serial, must fail in the repeated game with high
probability (provided the value of the original game was bounded away from 1). For the case of
dead strategies this is fairly intuitive: since a dead strategy does not assign consistent answers
to a certain subset of the questions q R , this implies that the player’s answers in positions R will
very much depend on the questions present in those indices not in R; not only that but it will
be virtually impossible for the other player to correlate well with this player’s answers on those
indices. Here we crucially use the “projection”, or “consistency” rounds of the repeated game in
order to show that such strategies will fail in those rounds with high probability. This is proven in
Claim 18.
     The case of serial strategies is slightly harder to analyze, but it boils down to showing that
the block-diagonal form we described earlier roughly implies that we can in fact see one of the
players as making a sequential measurement governed by the Πqaii . Since in this case the player’s
answer to question qi is decided by applying a projective measurement depending on qi alone,
in case the original game had a value s < 1 such a strategy will fail in at least a fraction s/2 of
the “game” rounds with high probability, and be caught by the referee provided there are enough
such rounds. This is shown in Claim 19.
     Finally note that the “confuse” rounds of the repeated game are not used in this stage (and in-
deed the referee accepts any answers in those rounds), but they are crucial to show the dichotomy
lemma and the following claims, which only hold for strategies which have been marginalized
over a sufficiently large number of questions; in order to be able to perform this marginalization
it is important that questions to the players in the confuse rounds are picked independently.


4 Proof of the main theorem
In this section we give the proof our main results, Theorems 7 and 9. It is divided in three parts.
The first, in Section 4.2, establishes our “quantum dichotomy theorem”. The second, in Section 4.3,
investigates the structure of serial strategies, and shows that they admit a certain block structure.
The results in this section are based on our “orthogonalization lemma”, which is proved separately
in Section 5. Finally, in the third part, Section 4.4, we use the results from the first two parts to
bound the success probability of the players in the repeated game.
    Because of the nature of repeated strategies, which are indexed by large tuples of questions and
answers, we are constrained to use rather heavy notation. We explain it in detail in the following
section, which can also serve as a reading guide for the statements that are to follow.

4.1 Notation
Recall that for every q ∈ Qℓ , {Xqa }a∈ Aℓ is an arbitrary projective measurement in d dimensions, that
is, the Xqa are projector matrices, and for any fixed q they sum to the identity over a. The position
of the questions (or answers) in a tuple will always be fixed and usually clear from the context;
for example when we write q = (q G , q F ), where G, F ⊆ [ℓ] are sets of indices, it is not necessary
that the questions q G are placed before the questions q F in the tuple q; rather their position is
determined by the indices in G, F. When precision is needed we shall write (i, qi ) to express the
fact that question qi is destined to appear in the i-th position of some tuple q. We also write q¬i to
denote q1 , . . . , qi−1 , qi+1 , . . . , qℓ .


                                                  11
   We will often consider marginalized POVMs over a certain set S ⊆ [ℓ]. Given questions qS
indexed by S, the marginalized POVM is the POVM indexed by answers aS , which results from
applying {XqaSS qa }aS a for a random q ∈ Q[ℓ]\S , and ignoring the answers a not in S. More precisely,
given (S, qS , aS ) it will be convenient to work with the Stinespring representation
                                                  q      q
                                    X̂qS := ∑ ∑ π (q) XqaSS qa ⊗ hq, a| E
                                      aS
                                                   q       a

where E is an extra register of the appropriate dimension, and π denotes an arbitrary distribution,
fixed throughout (it will later be instantiated to the marginal distribution that arises from the
original game G that is being repeated). This definition satisfies, for any ρ ≥ 0,
                             h    q       q        i
                          E q ∑ XqaSS qa ρ XqaSS qa = X̂qaSS (ρ ⊗ IdE ) ( X̂qaSS )†
                                     a

where the identity IdE was created on the additional register E introduced in the definition of
X̂qaSS , and the expectation is with respect to the distribution π. In order to make measurements
corresponding to marginalization over different sets S, we will assume that the register E is always
of large enough dimension, and if necessary X̂qaSS is tensored with √ |1S| |S| ∑q,a hq, a| on the extra
                                                                                                       | Q| | A|
2|S| registers. Note that there is nothing in the definitions above that require the questions and
answers in X̂qaSS to be indexed to the same set, hence we extend them to define X̂qaST , for T ⊆ S ⊆ [ℓ],
in the obvious way.
    For any ρ ≥ 0, we write Trρ ( A) for Tr( A(ρ ⊗ IdE )), so that in particular
                                                       h           q                q             i
                   Trρ ( X̂qaST )† X̂qaST                  ∑ Tr         XqaSTqa ρ       XqaSTqa        = Tr XqaST ρ
                                                                                                                     
                                                = Eq
                                                               a

where we define                                                                 h                            i
                               XqaST := X̂qaST ( X̂qaST )† = E q∈ Q[ℓ]\S                 ∑         XqaSTqa
                                                                                    a∈ A [ℓ]\ T

Terms such as Tr XqaST ρ will frequently appear on the right-hand side of our inequalities, and they
                        

should simply be considered as normalization factors, accounting for the (possibly unnormalized)
underlying state ρ, and the conditioning on a fixed aT . Finally, given ρ ≥ 0 and a matrix A of
appropriate dimension, we introduce the semi-norm

                                    k Ak2ρ := Tr Aρ1/2 A† ρ1/2
                                                               
                                                                                                  (1)

Note that k · kρ is definite only if ρ has full rank. We will mostly use this norm for notational
convenience. At this point it suffices to observe that it derives from a semi inner-product, so that
it satisfies the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
     At a first reading it may be helpful for the reader to consider the special case of the totally
mixed state ρ = d−1 Id; putting the notation in context this corresponds to the players sharing the
maximally entangled     state. In this case very little of
                                                         the−above is really needed, and in particular
         aT † aT                                             1     a T a 
Trρ ( XqS ) XqS is simply the normalized trace Eq ∑ a d Tr XqS q . Many of our statements are
easier to prove, and to understand, in this setting (the main cause of simplification being the
commutation between ρ and the X operators), so that the reader may wish to consider it first.


                                                                   12
4.2 A quantum dichotomy theorem
In this section we prove two important lemmas on the structure of any quantum strategy in a
repeated game. The main lemma, Lemma 12, is the analogue of Lemma 11 in [FK00]. It establishes
a dichotomy between two different types of strategies that a player can use, showing that either
the strategy is very random, or it must have a relatively strong sequential structure. Its proof
follows that of the classical setting without too much added difficulty, provided the definitions
are made correctly — which we now proceed to do.
    A crucial difficulty in adapting Feige and Kilian’s argument is to define an appropriate mea-
sure of a strategy’s unpredictability. In the classical case of a deterministic strategy, this can be
measured through the entropy of the marginalized distribution on answers; however in the quan-
tum or even the randomized setting such a measure is no longer helpful, as even honest product
strategies can be very random, just by being convex combinations of distinct deterministic strate-
gies. Instead, we measure unpredictability as follows.

Definition 10. Given a strategy Xqa , a state ρ, and a fixed set of questions q R in positions R ⊆ [ℓ], define
the collision probability of X on q R as

                                           Pcol (q R | X, ρ) := ∑ Pcol (q R , aR | X, ρ)                                  (2)
                                                                   aR

where                                                                                                               
                                                Trρ ( X̂qaRR )† X̂qaRR ( X̂qaRR )† X̂qaRR + Tr XqaRR ρ1/2 XqaRR ρ1/2
                                                                                         
               Pcol (q R , aR | X, ρ) :=                                                                                  (3)

    To understand this definition, first consider the case when ρ is the totally mixed state d−1 Id. In
this case both terms inside the summation are equal to the normalized squared Frobenius norm
d−1 kXqaRR k2F . Expression (2) can be interpreted in two different ways. From an operational point
of view, it corresponds to the probability that one obtains twice the same answers when one se-
quentially performs a measurement using the POVM with elements {XqaRR }aR . In this sense, Pcol is a
measure of the predictability of the strategy Xqa : pick two completions q, q′ at random and measure
                                                           ′
using first {XqaRR qa }aR a and then using {XqaRR qa′ }aR a′ ; Pcol (q R | X, ρ) is the probability of getting twice the
same result aR (and ignoring the other answers a, a′ ). The analytic interpretation is that this is a
measure of the entropy of the spectrum of XqaRR , which is maximized when XqaRR is a projector (for a
fixed value of the trace).
    In case ρ is not the identity, and hence does not commute with the Xqa , we need to adopt
the more cumbersome definition (2) for technical reasons. However, note that the operational
interpretation remains — the first term on the right-hand side of (3) is the probability of obtaining
the same answer when performing the measurement twice on the same half of |Ψi, while the
second term is the same, when the measurement                     is performed on the two different halves of |Ψi:
                              a R 1/2 a R 1/2 
indeed, note that Tr Xq R ρ Xq R ρ              = hΨ|Xq R ⊗ ( XqaRR ) T |Ψi.10
                                                            aR


    The following lets us make the distinction between the two different types of strategies alluded
to above.

Definition 11. We will say that:
  10 Note the transpose sign, which indicates that our interpretation is only rigorously correct for the case of real sym-

metric X.


                                                                   13
   • A block ( R, q R ) is ε-dead if Pcol (q R | X, ρ) ≤ ε. If a block is not ε-dead it is ε-alive. Moreover, we say
     that the answer aR is ε-alive if it satisfies

                                            Pcol (q R , aR | X, ρ) ≥ ε Tr XqaRR ρ
                                                                                  


      Note that any ε-alive block has at least one ε-alive answer. Sometimes we will simply say that a block
      or an answer are alive or dead, leaving the parameter ε implicit.

   • A block ( R, q R , aR ) is (1 − η )-serial if aR is alive and the following holds:

                                    E(i,qi ) [ Pcol (q R , qi | X, ρ) ] ≥ (1 − η ) Pcol (q R | X, ρ)              (4)

Lemma 12. Assume that ε, η > 0 are chosen such that η ε3 > 16 C1−1/2 .11 Then one of the following holds

   1. At least a (1 − ε) fraction of blocks ( R, q R ) are ε-dead.

   2. At least an ε fraction of blocks ( R, q R ) are ε-alive, and moreover if ( R, q R ) is an ε-alive block then

                                                   ∑           Tr XqaRR ρ ≤ ε/2
                                                                         
                                                                                                                   (5)
                                                       a R : a R alive but
                                              ( q R ,a R ) is not (1 − η )-serial


      i.e. alive answers which are not (1 − η )-serial have a small probability of occurring.

Proof. We extend the definition of the collision probability to measuring collisions over answers
which are not necessarily on the same indices as the questions:
                                                                                                
           Pcol (q| R, X, ρ) := ∑ Trρ ( X̂qaR )† X̂qaR ( X̂qaR )† X̂qaR + Tr XqaR ρ1/2 XqaR ρ1/2
                                                                       
                                      aR

where now q can be any subset of fixed questions, and R denotes the subset of answers on which
we are measuring the collision probability.
Claim 13. There exists an integer 1 ≤ r∗ ≤ C1 such that

                 ER,q R [ Pcol (q R | R, X, ρ) ] − ER,q R ,i,qi [ Pcol (q R , qi | R ∪ {i }, X, ρ) ] ≤ 8 C1−1/2

where the expectation is taken over all subsets R of size | R| = r∗ .

Proof. There is a similar statement in [FK00]. Here we closely follow the proof of Corollary 3.2 in
the lecture notes [O’D05b]; since the argument is very similar (mostly replacing the use of Fact 1.3
in those notes by our Claims 26 and 29) we only outline it here, leaving the details to the reader.
The proof goes by considering what happens to the collision probability when one conditions on
an additional question, resp. one considers collisions over an additional answer. First, note that if
one extends R by an index i, then Pcol (q| R ∪ {i }, X, ρ) ≤ Pcol (q| R, X, ρ), since obtaining identical
answers on R is a necessary condition to obtain identical answers on R ∪ {i }. The following
equation is the analogue of Fact 1.4 in [O’D05b]:

                             E(i,qi ) [ Pcol (q, qi | R, X, ρ)] − Pcol (q| R, X, ρ) ≤ 4 C1−1/2                    (6)
  11 Recall that C , C are chosen so that C + C = ℓ: see Definitions 4 and 5 for more details.
                  1 2                      1   2



                                                                         14
The proof of (6) follows directly from Claims 26 and 29, and we omit it. It shows that the colli-
sion probability cannot increase by too much when one conditions on an additional question, in
expectation. The proof of the claim is then concluded exactly as in the classical case: consider a
sequence of steps in which one successively looks for collisions on an additional coordinate i, and
conditions on an additional question qi . In expectation over the choice of (i, qi ), Pcol will never go
up by more than 4C1−1/2 when one performs this operation. Since Pcol is always between 0 and 1,
the fact that it never goes up by much implies that there must be a step in which it doesn’t decrease
by more than 8C1−1/2 : the total decrease cannot be larger than the total increase plus 1. r∗ is chosen
so that this step occurs when r∗ indices (and questions) have already been fixed.

    Towards a contradiction, assume the negation of both 1. and 2. With probability at least ε
a random block ( R, q R ) is alive, and moreover if ( R, q R ) is alive then alive answers which are
not (1 − η )-serial have a significant contribution. Fix such an answer aR . Since (4) is not satisfied,
summing over all aR which are alive but not (1 − η )-serial one can see that the collision probability,
for this ( R, q R ), must decrease by at least

                                     η·                 ∑                       Pcol (q R , aR | X, ρ)
                                                   a R : a R alive but
                                          ( q R ,a R ) is not (1 − η )-serial


By the negation of (5) and the fact that the answers are alive, this quantity is at least ηε2 /2. Finally,
taking the expectation over the choice of ( R, q R ) gives a total decrease in Pcol of at least ηε3 /2,
contradicting Claim 13 if ηε3 /2 > 8 C1−1/2 .

4.3 Serial strategies
The main result of this section is Lemma 17, which shows that serial strategies have a product
structure. Given that most of the strategies that we consider in this section will have a fixed q R
and aR , we introduce the useful notation YqaSS := XqaRR qaSS (resp. ŶqaSS := X̂qaRR qaSS ) for any S ⊆ [ℓ]\ R; the
value of q R and aR should always be clear from the context. We will also simply write Y for XqaRR
(resp. Ŷ for X̂qaRR ). For the totality of this section η > 0 is a fixed parameter, which one can think of
as polynomial in the soundness δ that we are aiming for in the repeated game.
     We start with a simple fact which expands on the defining property of (1 − η )-serial strategies.

Fact 14. Let q R ∈ Q R . For every aR ∈ A R there exists α aR ≥ Tr XqaRR ρ such that ∑ aR α aR ≤ 3 and the
                                                                                                

following holds. Suppose ( R, q R , aR ) is (1 − η )-serial, and assume that η ≥ C2−1/2 . Then for a fraction at
least (1 − η 1/4 ) of all (i, qi ) for i ∈
                                         / R we have that

                       0 ≤ Trρ Ŷq†i Ŷqi Ŷq†i Ŷqi − ∑ Trρ (Ŷqaii )† Ŷqaii (Ŷqaii )† Ŷqaii ≤ 4 η 3/4 α aR
                                                                                               
                                                                                                                  (7)
                                                           ai
                                       1/2           1/2
                                                                − ∑ Tr Yqaii ρ1/2 Yqaii ρ1/2 ≤ 4 η 3/4 α aR
                                                                                           
                       0 ≤ Tr Yqi ρ          Yqi ρ                                                               (8)
                                                                      ai




                                                                       15
Proof. By condition (4) in the definition of (1 − η )-serial, the Yqaii satisfy
                              h                                                               i
                      E(i,qi ) Trρ Ŷ † ŶŶ † Ŷ − ∑ Trρ (Ŷqaii )† Ŷqaii (Ŷqaii )† Ŷqaii
                                                 
                                                            ai
                                                        h                                               i
                                               + E(i,qi ) Tr Y ρ1/2 Y ρ1/2 − ∑ Tr Yqaii ρ1/2 Yqaii ρ1/2
                                                                          
                                                                                       ai
                                                                               
                       ≤ η Trρ Ŷ † ŶŶ † Ŷ + Tr Y ρ1/2 Y ρ               1/2
                                                        
                                                                                                                         (9)

For any a′R ∈ A R , let

                        a′                            a′       a′     a′            a′          a′        a′ 
                                            h                                                                     i
     α a′R := max Tr( Xq RR ρ), η −1 E(i,qi ) Trρ ( X̂q RR )† Xq RR X̂q RR − Trρ ( X̂q RR qi )† Xq RR qi X̂q RR qi      (10)

                                                 a′
By applying Claim 29 to the X̂q RR q we obtain

                                       a′       a′     a′            a′          a′        a′ 
                           h                                                                        i
               ∑ E(i,qi)       Trρ ( X̂q RR )† Xq RR X̂q RR − Trρ ( X̂q RR qi )† Xq RR qi X̂q RR qi   ≤ 2C2−1/2 Tr(ρ)
                a′R

                                                                                            a′
which, by using our assumption that C2−1/2 ≤ η and ∑ a′R Tr( Xq RR ρ) ≤ Tr(ρ), implies ∑ a′R α a′R ≤
3Tr(ρ) ≤ 3. Applying Claim 26 to the Yqa we also obtain
                                       h                                            i
                                            Tr Y ρ1/2 Y ρ1/2 − Tr Yqi ρ1/2 Yqi ρ1/2
                                                            
                            E(i,qi )                                                   ≤ η αaR

Hence (9), together with an application of Markov’s inequality, implies that, for a fraction at least
(1 − η 1/4 ) of all (i, qi ),
                                                                                                                        
  Trρ Ŷq†i Ŷqi Ŷq†i Ŷqi − ∑ Trρ (Ŷqaii )† Ŷqaii (Ŷqaii )† Ŷqaii + Tr Yqi ρ1/2 Yqi ρ1/2 − ∑ Tr Yqaii ρ1/2 Yqaii ρ1/2
                                                                                             
                               ai                                                                      ai
                                                                                  
        ≤ η 3/4 Trρ Ŷ † ŶŶ † Ŷ + Tr Y ρ1/2 Y ρ               1/2
                                                                    
                                                                         + 2 αaR

By expanding out the Yqi terms, one can verify that both terms on the left-hand-side of this equa-
tion are positive, hence each of them must be smaller than the right-hand-side, itself smaller than
4 η 3/4 α aR . This proves both (7) and (8).

     We now prove a simple claim which shows that (1 − η )-serial strategies are close to being
orthogonal; this is how we will subsequently exploit that property.

Claim 15. Let q R ∈ Q R . For every aR ∈ A R there exists α aR ≥ Tr XqaRR ρ such that ∑ aR α aR ≤ 3 and
                                                                                    

the following holds. Suppose that ( R, q R , aR ) is (1 − η )-serial. Then for a fraction at least (1 − η 1/4 ) of all
(i, qi ) for i ∈
               / R,
                                                      a′   a′
                               ∑ Trρai (Ŷqaii )†Ŷqii (Ŷqii )† Ŷqaii ≤ 8η3/4 αaR
                                                                       
                                                                                                                 (11)
                                           ai 6 = a′i

where ρai = ρ1/2 Yqaii ρ1/2 .



                                                                     16
Proof. Define α aR as in (10). Letting Zi = Ŷq†i (Ŷqi Ŷq†i )Ŷqi − ∑ ai (Ŷqaii )† Ŷqaii (Ŷqaii )† Ŷqaii , Eq. (7) from Fact 14
can be re-written (for the (i, qi ) for which it holds) as

                                                                      Trρ ( Zi ) ≤ 4η 3/4 α aR

Let ρi := ∑ ai ρai , where ρai = ρ1/2 Yqaii ρ1/2 . Since ρi ≤ ρ and Zi ≥ 0, we get

                                                           Trρi ( Zi ) ≤ Trρ ( Zi ) ≤ 4η 3/4 α aR

and hence, expanding out Zi ,
                                                                                  a′i          a′i
                                                ∑ ′ Trρ (Ŷqa )†Ŷq (Ŷq )† Ŷqa                                     ≤ 4η 3/4 α aR
                                                                                                                
                                                              i         i
                                                                         i
                                                                                   i            i          i
                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                         (12)
                                              ai 6 = ai

Finally, we can use (8) to upper-bound
                                                                                        a′i          a′i
                                              ∑′′ ′ Trρ ′′ (Ŷqa )†Ŷq (Ŷq )† Ŷqa                                      ≤ 4η 3/4 α aR
                                                                                                                     
                                                                              i                                  i
                                                              a              i           i            i         i
                                                                  i
                                         ai 6 = ai ,ai

                               a′   a′
where we used ∑ a′i Ŷqii (Ŷqii )† ≤ Id. Together with (12), this proves the claim.

Claim 16. Let q R ∈ Q R . For every aR ∈ A R there exists α aR ≥ Tr XqaRR ρ such that ∑ aR α aR ≤ 3 and
                                                                                   

the following holds. Suppose that ( R, q R , aR ) is (1 − η )-serial, let 1 ≤ g ≤ C1 /2 be a fixed parameter, and
( G, q G ) chosen at random under the constraint that G ∩ R = ∅ and |G | = g. Then with probability at
least (1 − η 1/4 − e−2g ) over the choice of ( G, q G ), there is a partition G = G ′ ∪ G ′′ , where g′′ = | G ′′ | ≥
(1 − 4η c/4 ) g, such that for every i ∈ G ′′

                               ∑ TrρG (ŶqaGi )† ( Id − Πqaii )ŶqaGi ≤ O g η1/c2 αaR
                                                                                
                                                                                                                (13)
                                         ai

where for i ∈ G ′′ , {Πqaii }ai is an orthogonal measurement depending only on q R , aR and qi (it is independent
of the particular choice of ( G, q G )), ρG = ρ1/2 YqG ρ1/2 , and c > 0, c2 ≥ 1 are universal constants.

Proof. Since (q R , aR ) is (1 − η )-serial, we can apply Claim 15 to obtain that a fraction (1 − η 1/4 ) of
(i, qi ) satisfy
                                                      a′     a′
                                  ∑ Trρai (Ŷqaii )†Ŷqii (Ŷqii )† Ŷqaii ≤ 8η3/4 αaR
                                                                          
                                                                                                       (14)
                                              ai 6 = a′i

where as before ρai = ρ1/2 Yqaii ρ1/2 . We can now apply Lemma 23 to the Yqaii (with the states ρai ) to
obtain, for the fraction (1 − η 1/4 ) of (i, qi ) considered above, orthogonal projectors {Πqaii }ai satisfy-
ing
                                                                                                  1− c
                         ∑ Trρ            (Ŷqaii )† ( Id − Πqaii )Ŷqaii ≤ O η 3c/4 αcaR ∑ Tr ρai
                                                                         
                                    ai                                                                                                   (15)
                          ai                                                                                                   ai

Moreover, the Πqaii can easily be made into a projective measurement by enlarging one of them,
so that they sum to identity; this will not harm the above bound. By Markov’s          inequality, with
probability at least (1 − η c/4 ) over the choice of (i, qi ) it holds that Tr Yqi ρ ≤ η −c/4 Tr Yρ ≤
                                                                                                  


                                                                                              17
η −c/4 α aR . For any given ( G, q G ), let G ′′ ⊆ G denote those indices i in G for which this property
holds for (i, qi ), and moreover (i, qi ) falls in the set of indices for which (15) holds. By the union
bound and a Chernoff bound, the probability that | G ′′ | ≤ (1 − 4η c/4 ) g is less than e−2g , and for
ever i ∈ G ′′ we have

                              ∑ Trρai (Ŷqaii )† ( Id − Πqaii )Ŷqaii ≤ O η1/c2 αaR
                                                                              
                                                                                                     (16)
                                              ai

for some constant c2 > 0. Applying Claim 26 to the Ŷqaii , and summing over ai , we find that in
expectation
                  h                                                       i
         E( G,qG ) ∑ Trρ ai (Ŷqaii )† Ŷqaii − TrρG,ai (ŶqaGi )† ŶqaGi    ≤ g C2−1 Tr Yqi ρ ≤ gη 3/4 α aR
                                                                                             
                            ai

where we used C2−1 ≤ η, ρG,ai := ρ1/2 YqaGi ρ1/2 , and we think of the choice of ( G, q G ) as first picking
(i, qi ) and then the remaining positions and questions. Another application of Claim 26 combined
with (8) shows that for every i ∈ G ′′ ,
                                     h                           i
                            E( G,qG ) ∑ TrρG,a′ (Ŷqaii )† Ŷqaii ≤ O( g η 3/4 ) α aR
                                                                   i
                                                      ai 6 = a′i


Hence, letting ρG := ρ1/2 YqG ρ1/2 = ∑ ai ρG,ai , combining the two previous equations we get
                          h                                                    i
                 E( G,qG ) ∑ Trρ ai (Ŷqaii )† Ŷqaii − TrρG (ŶqaGi )† ŶqaGi    ≤ O( g η 3/4 ) α aR
                                                     
                                         ai

Using Markov’s inequality, his lets us replace Ŷqaii by ŶqaGi in (15) for a fraction (1 − η 1/4 ) of ( G, q G ),
losing an additional factor O( gη 1/2 )α aR . Hence

                          ∑ TrρG (ŶqaGi )† ( Id − Πqaii )ŶqaGi ≤ O g η1/c2 αaR
                                                                            
                                                                                                            (17)
                                           ai

where we safely assumed that c2 ≥ 2.

Lemma 17. Let q R ∈ Q R . For every aR ∈ A R there exists α aR ≥ Tr XqaRR ρ such that ∑ aR α aR ≤ 3 and the
                                                                                        

following holds. Under the same conditions as in Claim 16, except for a lower fraction (1 − 2η 1/4c2 − e−2g )
of ( G, q G ), it holds that
                             a ′′         a g ′′                  a g ′′  a ′′
                 ∑ TrρG (ŶqGG − ŶqG )† Πqg′′ · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqg′′ (ŶqGG − ŶqG ) ≤ O g2 η1/(4c2 ) αaR
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                            (18)
             aG ′′
                                    a           a           a          a ′′                     a ′′ a 
             ∑ Trρ               (ŶqGG ′′ )† ŶqGG ′′ − (ŶqGG ′′ )† Πqgg′′ · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqgg′′ ŶqGG ′′ ≤ O gη 1/(8c2 ) α aR
                                                                                                                              
                            G
                                                                                                                                      (19)
             aG ′′

Proof. Let {Πqaii } be the orthogonal projectors promised by Claim 16. Let g′′ = | G ′′ |, and assume
for simplicity that the first g′′ questions in G are those in G ′′ . To prove the first inequality, we
show the following by induction on i = 1, . . . , g′′ : there exists a constant C > 0 such that, if we let
Fi = {1, . . . , i }, then
                              aF                                             aF
                    ∑ TrρG (ŶqGi − ŶqG )† Πqaii · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqaii (ŶqGi − ŶqG ) ≤ C i g η1/(3c2 ) αaR
                                                                                         
                                                                                                                (20)
                     a Fi


                                                                          18
The statement for i = g′′ will imply (18). Let C0 be the constant implicit in (13) from Claim 16.
For i = 1, (20) is simply a re-statement of (13), provided C is chosen larger than C0 . Assume the
inequality verified for i − 1, and prove it for i. Write
                                                                             aF                                            aF
                                                                ŶqG − ŶqGi = (ŶqG − ŶqaGi ) + (ŶqaGi − ŶqGi )
The first term on the right-hand side (when plugged back into (20)) can be bounded directly us-
                                                          a
ing (13) (and the fact that the projectors Πq jj sum to identity over a j , for j ∈ {1, . . . , i − 1}). Regard-
ing the second, we can use the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality together with (13) to bound
                                   a                                  aF                p √                           1/2
  ∑ TrρG (ŶqaGi )† ( Id − Πqaii )Πqii−−11 · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqaii (ŶqGi − ŶqaGi ) ≤ 2 C0 gη1/(2c2 ) α1/2
                                                                                    
                                                                                                        a R Tr Yq G ρ
  a Fi

By Markov’s inequality, Tr YqG ρ ≤ η −1/4c2 Tr Yρ for a fraction at least (1 − η 1/4c2 ) of ( G, q G ), so
                                                                 
                                                                                √ √
that for those indices the bound above can be replaced by 2 C0 gη 1/(4c2 ) α aR . For the rest of this
proof we only consider questions ( G, q G ) for which the bound Tr YqG ρ ≤ η −1/4c2 Tr Yρ applies.
                                                                                                            

We can similarly obtain
                    aF                  a                                  aF                p √
        ∑ TrρG (ŶqGi )† ( Id − Πqaii )Πqii−−11 · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqaii (ŶqGi − ŶqaGi ) ≤ 2 C0 gη1/(4c2 ) αaR
                                                                                         
                a Fi

so that
                                  aF                                                       aF
         ∑Trρ                 (ŶqGi − ŶqaGi )† Πqaii · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqaii (ŶqGi − ŶqaGi )
                                                                                                         
                       G
         a Fi
                              aF               a                          a          aF                 p √
                  ≤ ∑ TrρG (ŶqGi − ŶqaGi )† Πqii−−11 · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqii−−11 (ŶqGi − ŶqaGi ) + 16 C0 gη 1/(4c2 ) α aR
                                                                                                   
                       a Fi
                              aF               a                          a          aF        ) 
                                                                                                      p √
                  = ∑ TrρG (ŶqGi−1 − ŶqG )† Πqii−−11 · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqii−−11 (ŶqGi−1 − ŶqG + 16 C0 gη 1/(4c2 ) α aR
                       a Fi

which can then be bounded
                    √        using the induction hypothesis. This concludes the induction step,
provided C ≥ C0 + 16 C0 , and proves (18).
   We now prove (19). Use the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality to bound
                        a ′′           a g ′′                  a g ′′ a ′′ 
              ∑ TrρG (ŶqGG − ŶqG )† Πqg′′ · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqg′′ ŶqGG
                                aG ′′
                                            
                                                                       a                   a ′′                     a ′′        a            1/2
                                        ≤       ∑ Trρ           G
                                                                    (ŶqGG ′′ − ŶqG )† Πqgg′′ · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqgg′′ (ŶqGG ′′ − ŶqG )
                                                aG ′′
                                                                                    a ′′                     a ′′   a ′′  1/2
                                                                                                                         
                                                                           a ′′
                                                    ∑ TrρG (ŶqGG )† Πqg′′ · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqg′′ ŶqGG
                                                                       g                       g
                                            ·
                                                    aG ′′

                                        ≤ O gη 1/(8c2 ) α aR
                                                       

by (18). We obtain (19) by noting that
                                                                   a           a               a ′′                     a ′′
                                            ∑ Trρ               (ŶqGG ′′ )† ŶqGG ′′ − Ŷq†G Πqgg′′ · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqgg′′ ŶqG = 0
                                                                                                                                  
                                                            G
                                            aG ′′

since the Πqaii sum to identity over ai .


                                                                                             19
4.4 Bounding the success of players in a repeated game
We proceed to show how the results from the two previous sections can be combined in order to
prove Theorems 7 and 9. For the remainder of this section we fix a game G with question set Q
and answer set A, and consider the ℓ-repeated games GFK(ℓ) and GDR(ℓ) for some fixed integer ℓ.
                                                                  ′
Let s be the entangled value of the original game G, and { Aqa′ }a′ (resp. {( Bqa ) T }a ) be an arbitrary
fixed projective strategy for Alice (resp. Bob), using entangled state |Ψi, in the ℓ-repeated game.12
Let ρ = Tr A |ΨihΨ| be the reduced density of |Ψi on Bob’s subsystem.
    We note here that both types of ℓ-repeated games have the same overall structure, in that they
consist of a set of C1 “correlated” rounds, in which the referee sends either “game” or “consis-
tency” questions, and C2 “independent” rounds, in which he asks questions chosen independently
from a product distribution (we refer to Definitions 4 and 5 for more details, including the defini-
tion of C1 and C2 ). In both cases, we can think of the referee as choosing the ℓ pairs of questions in
the following order.
   1. First, a subset R ⊆ [ℓ] of size r∗ ≤ C1 /2 is chosen, and designated as indices for either
      game rounds (in the case of a projection game), or otherwise consistency rounds. Pairs of
      questions (q′R , q R ) are then picked according to the appropriate distribution.
   2. A subset G ⊆ [ℓ]\ R of size C1 − r∗ is chosen. In the case of a projection game, all the
      indices in G are designated as game rounds. In the other cases, C1 /2 of the indices in G
      are designated (at random) as game rounds, and the remaining indices are designated as
      consistency rounds. Pairs of questions (q′G , q G ) are chosen accordingly. Note that the referee
      doesn’t know the value of r∗ , but he doesn’t need to explicitly distinguish between the game
      and consistency rounds, since they use the same distribution on pairs of questions. The
      distinction is made only as a convenience for the analysis.
   3. Finally, we let F = [ℓ]\( R ∪ G ). F has size C2 , and the indices it contains are designated as
      confuse rounds, with corresponding pairs of questions (q′F , q F ).
We will denote by (q′ , q) := (q′R q′G q′F , q R q G q F ) the ℓ-tuple of pairs of questions chosen by the
referee. Since questions on the indices in R always correspond to cases where for every answer of
Alice there is a unique possible valid answer for Bob, and since we will only perform consistency
(as opposed to game) checks on questions in those indices, we may regroup Alice’s tuples of
                                                                                                              a′ a
answers a′R when they induce the same aR for Bob. Hence we re-define AqaRR qa := ∑ a′R AqRR q , where
the summation runs over all a′R such that ( a′R , aR ) are valid answers to the questions (q′R , q R ).
    Our first claim shows that the players have a low success probability on blocks ( R, q R ) which
are dead.
Claim 18. Let ε > 0 be such that ε ≥ C1 C2−1 , and suppose that ( R, q R ) is an ε-dead block. Then the success
                            conditioned on the referee picking questions (q′ , q) such that q includes q R in the
probability of the players, √
positions in R, is at most 2 ε.
Proof. The definition of ( R, q R ) being ε-dead implies that

                                       ∑ Tr BqaRR ρ1/2 BqaRR ρ1/2 ≤ ε
                                                                 
                                            aR

  12 The transpose sign on Bob’s operators is there for consistency of notation. For simplicity we will omit this transpose

in the future whenever we consider expressions of the form hΨ| A ⊗ B | Ψi, which should be read as hΨ| A ⊗ B T | Ψi.


                                                           20
By applying Claim 26 to the BqaRR q together with Markov’s inequality, we obtain that in expectation
                                       h                                            i
                               EG,qG       ∑ Tr BqaRRqG ρ1/2 BqaRRqG ρ1/2                ≤ ε + C1 C2−1 ≤ 2ε             (21)
                                           aR

where we used | G | ≤ C1 and our assumption on ε. Condition on (q′R , q R ) being chosen as part of
the referee’s questions in the game, and assume that the referee only checks consistency of Alice
and Bob’s answers to the questions in R. This can only increase their success probability, which
can then be bounded as
                           h              ′
                                                                  i               h                1/2              1/2 i
 E( G,F),(q′G q′F ,qG q F ) ∑ hΨ| AqaR′ qa′ q′ ⊗ BqaRR qaG q F |Ψi ≤ EG,(q′G ,qG ) ∑ k AqaR′ q′ k2ρ             aR
                                                                                                           ∑ q R qG ρ
                                                                                                            k B    k 2
                                           R G F                                                             R G
                      a R ,a′ ,a                                                                aR                 aR
                                                                               √
                                                                         ≤         2ε

where we used that (q′F , q F ) are chosen according to a product distribution, the first inequality
follows from Cauchy-Schwarz (recall the definition of k · kρ given in (1)), and for the second we
upper-bounded ∑ aR k AqaR′ q′ k2ρ by 1 and used Jensen’s inequality together with (21) to bound the
                         R G
other term.

     We note informally that one can combine this claim with Lemma 17 to obtain a form of “direct
product test” for entangled strategies. Indeed, if two entangled players Alice and Bob win the
game with probability s ≫ ε, then by the previous claim a fraction at least s2 /2 of blocks ( R, q R )
should be alive; moreover a non-negligible fraction13 of answers aR to those blocks must be (1 −
η )-serial. Hence one can apply Lemma 17 to those blocks ( R, q R , aR ) and obtain a product form
for the corresponding marginalized strategy.
     The next claim shows that strategies which are product, even on a subset of the coordinates,
also have a low success probability.

Claim 19. Fix ( R, q R , aR ), and for every (i, qi ), where i ∈ [ℓ]\ R and qi ∈ Q, let {Πqai }a∈ A be a fixed
projective measurement. Suppose that Bob’s strategy is such that, with probability at least 1 − δ over the
choice of ( G, q G ) and G1 ⊆ G of size | G1 | = g, there is a partition G1 = G ′ ∪ G ′′ such that g′′ = | G ′′ | ≥
(1 − δ′ ) g and Bob’s POVM satisfies that for every aG′′
                                                a a ′′                  a ′′                    a ′′
                                            Bq RR qGG = ( B̂qaRR )† Πqgg′′ · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqgg′′ B̂qaRR

where for simplicity we wrote G ′′ = {1, . . . , g′′ }.
    Then the success probability of the players, conditioned on the referee asking questions (q′ , q) such that
q includes q R in the positions in R, and summed over all valid answers which include aR for Bob, is at most
                                                                     ′ 2 
                                                         δ + e−(1−s−δ ) g Tr BqaRR ρ
                                                                                     

   13 Note that one cannot hope to obtain any structural result on the strategies which would hold for more than a frac-

tion s of questions or answers, as the player’s strategy could be a mixture of a perfect winning strategy with probability
s, and a random strategy with probability (1 − s).




                                                                         21
Proof. Fixing the questions in R and G, and conditioning on the players consistently answering aR
to (q′R , q R ), their probability of being accepted is at most
               a R a′G ′′   a R aG ′′                                     a R a′G ′′            a g ′′               a g ′′

 ′
   ∑ hΨ| Aq′ q′ ⊗ Bq q |Ψi = ′ ∑ hΨ| Aq′ q′ ⊗ ( B̂qa )† Πq ′′ · · · Πqa · · · Πq ′′ B̂qa |Ψi
                R G
                             R G
                                                                           R G
                                                                                            R
                                                                                            R     g
                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                1      g
                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                  R
aG ′′ ,aG ′′                                          aG ′′ ,aG ′′
                                                                                             a R a′       a ′′                     a ′′
                                                         ∑           hΨ| Id ⊗ ( B̂qaRR )† · Aq′ qG′ ′′ ⊗ Πqgg′′ · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqgg′′ · Id ⊗ B̂qaRR |Ψi
                                                                                                                                                          
                                                 =
                                                       ′                                         R G
                                                      aG ′′ ,aG ′′
                                                                                                                                                 (22)

The fact that sequential strategies cannot succeed in many rounds of the repeated game implies
that
                               a R a′ ′′ a ′′                    a ′′
                          h                                            i
            E( G,q′G ,qG ) ∑ Aq′ qG′ ⊗ Πqgg′′ · · · Πqa11 · · · Πqgg′′   ≤ exp(−(1 − s − δ′ )2 g)
                                                      R G                                             ∞
                                a′G ′′ ,aG ′′

Indeed, the expression on the left-hand side can be upper-bounded by the maximum success prob-
ability of an Alice playing an arbitrary strategy and Bob a sequential strategy described by the
measurements Πqaii , provided the referee only checks the answers to those questions in G ′′ ⊆ G1 ,
where G1 is a random subset of G of size g chosen by the referee. But this success probability is
even lower than the success probability that Alice and Bob would have if Bob played his sequen-
tial strategy on all questions in G1 , but the referee was to accept as long as at least g′′ out of Alice
and Bob’s g answers were correct. Since the probability of such a serial strategy succeeding in
any round is at most the value s of the original game, and g′′ ≥ (1 − δ′ ) g, by a Chernoff bound
the probability that the players succeed in g′′ out of the g rounds is at most exp(−(1 − s − δ′ )2 g).
Hence the expression in (22) can be upper-bounded, in expectation, by
                                                ′ 2                                                       ′ 2
                            e−(1−s−δ ) g hΨ| Id ⊗ ( B̂qaRR )† B̂qaRR |Ψi = e−(1−s−δ ) g Tr BqaRR ρ
                                                                                                                              


      Finally, we must account for the small probability δ that the serial property does not hold; for
those sets G we     can trivially bound the success probability, conditioned on Bob answering aR to
q R , by Tr BqaRR ρ .

       We finally turn to the proof of our main theorem.

Proof of Theorem 7. We first set parameters: let C0 be a large enough constant, ε = C0−1 δ2 (recall that
δ is the target value for the repeated game GFK (ℓ)), η = C0−1 δ24c2 (1 − s) (where c2 is the constant
which appears in Claim 16),√g = C0 log(1/δ)(1 − s)−1 , and ℓ ≥ C015 δ−125c2 (1 − s)−4 . Recall also
that C1 was defined as C1 = ℓ, and C2 = ℓ − C1 . This choice of parameters satisfies the following
constraints:

       • η ε3 > 16 C1−1/2 , which is used in Lemma 12.

       • η ≥ C2−1/2 , which is used in Fact 14 and subsequent claims.

       • ε ≥ C1 C2−1 , which is used in Claim 18.

    As before, in game GFK(ℓ) , we can think of the referee as first picking r∗ ≤ C1 /2 pairs of
questions ( R, (q′R , q R )) for the players, then picking g pairs ( G1 , (q′G1 , q G1 )), then C1 − r∗ − g pairs
( G2 , (q′G2 , q G2 )) and finally C2 independent pairs of confuse questions ( F, (q′F , q F )). Let G = G1 ∪ G2

                                                                                       22
                                                                                            ′
and (q′ , q) = (q′R q′G q′F , q R q G q F ). Let { Aqa′ }a′ be Alice’s POVM on questions q′ , and { Bqa }a Bob’s
POVM on questions q.
    By Lemma 12, one of two cases hold. Either a (1 − ε) fraction of √              blocks ( R, q R ) are ε-dead, in
which case the player’s success probability is readily bounded by ε + 2ε by Claim 18. Otherwise,
it must be that we are in case 2 of the lemma,              √ so that ε-alive blocks are for the most part serial.
Note that any dead blocks contribute at most 2ε to the success probability, by Claim 18. A similar
argument √ to that in Claim 18 shows that alive blocks which are not (1 − η )-serial also contribute
at most 2ε, given the fact that we are in the case 2. of Lemma 12, and there can only be few such
blocks by (5).
    Suppose ( R, q R , aR ) is (1 − η )-serial. By Lemma 17, for every (i, qi ) there exists a projec-
tive measurement {Πqaii }ai , depending only on q R , aR , qi , ai , such that with probability at least
(1 − 2η 1/4c2 − e−2g ) over the choice of ( G, q G ) such that |G | = g there is a partition G1 = G ′ ∪ G ′′
such that g′′ = | G ′′ | ≥ (1 − 4η c/4 ) g such that Eqs. (18) and (19) from Lemma 17 are satisfied,
                                                                                    a ′′
where ρG = ρ1/2 BqaRR qG ρ1/2 . To alleviate notation we let Π = Πqa11 · · · Πqgg′′ , and we first use Cauchy-
Schwarz to bound
                                                                 a R a′G ′′          a R aG ′′                            a R aG ′′
                                         ∑ hΨ| Aq′ q′ ⊗ ( B̂q q )† ( Id − Π† Π) B̂q q |Ψi
                                                                                       R G                                  R G
                                       ′                             R G
                                      aG ′′ ,aG ′′
                                                                                                 a R aG ′′                            a R aG ′′
                                                     ≤ k AqaR′ qG kρ                ∑ ( B̂q q )† ( Id − Π† Π) B̂q q
                                                                                                  R G                                  R G
                                                                      R
                                                                                    aG ′′                                                         ρ
                                                                                
                                                                                                                 a a                              a a   1/2
                                                     ≤ k AqaR′ qG kρ                ∑ Trρ          G
                                                                                                       ( B̂q RRqGG ′′ )† ( Id − Π† Π) B̂q RRqGG ′′
                                                                      R
                                                                                    aG ′′
                                                                     √
                                                                          gη 1/(16c2 ) k AqaR′ q kρ α1/2
                                                                                      
                                                     ≤O                                              aR                                                             (23)
                                                                                                       R G


where ρG = ρ1/2 BqaRR qG ρ1/2 , the first inequality is by Cauchy-Schwarz, the second uses ( Id −
Π† Π) ≤ Id, the last is by Eq. (19) from Lemma 17, and α aR was defined in Eq. (10) (where here we
substitute B̂qaRR for X̂qaRR ). A similar argument, using this time Eq. (18), lets us bound

                         a R a′G ′′              a R aG ′′             †      a a
     ∑ hΨ| Aq′ q′ ⊗ B̂q q                                    − B̂qaRRqG Π† Π B̂q RRqGG ′′ − B̂qaRR qG |Ψi ≤ O gη 1/(8c2 ) k AqaR′ qG kρ α1/2
                                                                                                                        
                                                     R G                                                                                 aR  (24)
   ′                      R G                                                                                                                                   R
  aG ′′ ,aG ′′


and hence combining (23) and (24) we get
                              a R a′       a a                                               √
              ∑          hΨ| Aq′ qG′ ′′ ⊗ Bq RRqGG ′′ − ( B̂qaRR qG )† Π† Π B̂qaRR qG |Ψi ≤ O gη 1/(16c2 ) k AqaR′ qG kρ α1/2
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                          aR
            ′                           R G                                                                                                                     R
          aG ′′ ,aG ′′


Finally, by Claim 26 we have
                                                                  a R a′
                                         h                                                                                              i
                                                ∑            hΨ| Aq′ qG′ ′′ ⊗ ( B̂qaRR )† Π† Π B̂qaRR − ( B̂qaRRqG )† Π† Π B̂qaRRqG |Ψi
                                                                                                                                   
                         E ( G,qG )
                                                                              R G
                                             a′G ′′ ,aG ′′

                                                                                                                           2 1/2
                                                                                       h                                    i
                                                                                                             2
                                          ≤ 4k AqaR′ qG kρ E( G,qG )                             BqaRR ρ − BqaRR qG ρ
                                                             R

                                          ≤ 4η k AqaR′ qG kρ α1/2
                                                              aR
                                                                 R




                                                                                                         23
where for the first inequality we used ∑ a′′G Π† Π = Id, and for the second that η ≥ C2−1 . Hence
the statistical distribution of outcomes produced by Alice and Bob (conditioned on answering aR
to q R ) is close to that which would be obtained if Bob was to use the operators ( BqaRR )† Π† ΠBqaRR as
his POVM on questions q G . But the success probability of the latter, when summed over all valid
answers to the pair of questions (q′G′′ , q G′′ ), can be bounded by Claim 19. Hence summing over
all aR (and using ∑ aR k AqaR′ q kρ α1/2
                                     a R ≤ 3) and taking the expectation over q R , the average winning
                            R G
probability of the players for all (1 − η )-serial blocks ( R, q R , aR ) is at most
                                √                                               1/4c2 2
                                    g η 1/(16c2 ) + 2η c/4 + e−2g + e−(1−s−4η        ) g
                                                                                           
                            O

where we also accounted for those (rare) choices of ( G, q′G , q G ) for which the previous bounds do
not hold. Given our choice of parameters ε, η, g and ℓ, it can be checked that this expression is ≪ δ.
Combining this bound with the one resulting from dead blocks shows that the winning probability
of the players is at most δ, which proves the theorem as long as ℓ = poly(δ−1 , (1 − s)−1 ) is large
enough.

    We conclude this section by briefly explaining how the proof of Theorem 7 can be adapted to
prove Theorem 9. The main reason the proof carries over is that, in the proof of Theorem 7, we
only used the projection property for a subset of the game questions (to bound the success over
dead blocks), while for (1 − η )-serial blocks the game questions were only used in conjunction
with the fact that the value of the game was at most s. Here, consistency rounds will play the role
of the game questions previously in R, and game rounds will play the role of those game questions
previously in G (or rather its small subset G1 ).

Proof of Theorem 9. In game GDR(ℓ), we think of the referee as first picking r∗ ≤ C1 /2 pairs of
consistency questions ( R, (q′R , q R )) for the players, then picking C1 /2 − r∗ additional consistency
pairs ( R′ , (q′R′ , q R′ )), C1 /2 pairs of game questions ( G, (q′G , q G )) and finally C2 independent pairs
of confuse questions ( F, (q′F , q F )). Let (q′ , q) = (q′R q′R′ q′G q′F , q R q R′ q G q F ).
    Assume a choice of parameters made that is similar to the one in the proof of Theorem 7. As
before, we can apply Lemma 12 to Bob’s strategy Bqa , distinguishing between two cases.
    In the first case, a fraction (1 − ε) of blocks ( R, q R ) are dead, for | R| = r∗ . Then Claim 18 again
applies, as the only property we used in its proof was that any answer of Alice induced a fixed
answer for Bob, which is the case for consistency questions.
    In the second case, a fraction ε of blocks ( R, q R ) are alive. Those blocks which are dead can be
dealt with as in the previous case, and we can focus on blocks ( R, q R , aR ) which are (1 − η )-serial.
Here we can reason exactly as in Theorem 7, using Claim 19 with G1 chosen as a subset of the
questions in G, and the remaining consistency questions playing the role of the remaining game
questions before.


5 Approximate block-diagonalization of almost-orthogonal operators
In this section we prove our orthogonalization lemma, Lemma 23 below, which shows that pair-
wise almost-orthogonal operators are close to having a joint block-diagonal decomposition. The
main ingredient in its proof is a robust orthogonalization lemma for families of pairwise almost-
orthogonal projectors, Lemma 21.


                                                        24
   The proof of Lemma 21 is based on a variant of Schöneman’s solution to the “orthogonal Pro-
crustes14 problem”. Given any square matrices A and B, this is the problem of finding the orthog-
onal matrix Ω which minimizes

                                            Ω := argmin k A − BΩk2F

where kX k2F = d−1 Tr( X † X ) is the normalized Frobenius norm. Schöneman [Sch66] showed that
the optimal Ω is Ω = UV † , where UΣV † is the singular value decomposition of B T A.15 Indeed,
given unit vectors |u1 i, . . . , |vk i, one can let A be the matrix with columns the |ui i, and B the
identity. In this case, the orthogonal Procruste’s problem consists in finding the best rigid rotation
which maps the canonical basis of space to the vectors |vi i, where the error is measured in the
least squares sense — the columns of the corresponding orthogonal matrix will then form an
orthonormal family close to the |ui i.
    We carry out this solution precisely in Claim 20 below, which, even though we will not use
it directly, contains all the intuition necessary to solve our original problem on positive matrices.
Unfortunately, the solution to the latter is made more involved technically by the the matrices not
being of rank 1, and the slightly unorthodox (and, in particular, not rotationally invariant) way in
which we measure the error.

Claim 20. Let |u1 i, . . . , |uk i ∈ C k be unit vectors such that 1k ∑i6= j hui , u j i2 ≤ ε. Then there exist orthog-
                                                                             2
onal unit vectors |v1 i, . . . , |vk i ∈ C k such that 1k ∑i |ui i − |vi i       ≤ ε.
Proof. Let X be the k × k matrix whose columns are made of the vectors |ui i, expressed in the
canonical basis. The SVD of X is X = UΣV † , where U, V are unitary and Σ is diagonal with the
singular values si of M on the the diagonal. Then

                 1 k                                                 1             2
                       (1 − s2i )2 = kΣ† Σ − Idk2F = kX † X − Idk2F = ∑ hui , u j i ≤ ε
                 k i∑
                                                                                                                  (25)
                    =1
                                                                     k i6 = j

where for the first equality we used the unitary invariance of the Frobenius norm, and the second
is by definition of X and uses the fact that the |ui i have unit norm. Let Y = UV † . Y is a unitary
matrix so its column vectors |vi i form an orthonormal family. We have

                     1 k                    2                                           1 k
                                              = kX − Y k2F      = k Id − Σk2F =               (1 − s i )2
                     k i∑                                                               k i∑
                           |u i i − |vi i   2
                        =1                                                                 =1

which can be bounded by (25) since (1 − si )2 ≤ (1 − si )2 (1 + si )2 = (1 − s2i )2 .

    We now extend this claim to the case of almost-orthogonal projections, which need not have
rank 1, and to a slightly different way of measuring the error (most of the difficulty in proving the
lemma comes from the different norm rather than from the higher rank). In order to understand
the following, it may be helpful to first consider the case where ρi = (dk)−1 Id for every i.
  14 According to Wikipedia, Procrustes, or “the stretcher”, a figure from Greek mythology, was a rogue smith and

bandit from Attica who physically attacked people, stretching them, or cutting off their legs so as to make them fit an
iron bed’s size.
   15 We are grateful to the user “ohai” of MathOverflow.net for pointing out the connection between this problem and

that of the robust orthonormalization of almost-orthogonal vectors.


                                                           25
Lemma 21. Let ρi , i = 1, . . . , k be positive matrices, and ρ := ∑i ρi . Let P1 , . . . , Pk be d-dimensional
projectors such that
                        ∑ Tr( Pi Pj Pi ρi ) ≤ ε and            ∑ Tr( Pi ρj ) ≤ ε
                                      i6 = j                                                                 i6 = j

for some 0 < ε ≤ Tr(ρ). Then there exists orthogonal projectors Q1 , . . . , Qk such that
                                                 k
                                                ∑ Tr ( Pi − Qi )2 ρi = O ε1/2 Tr(ρ)1/2
                                                                                                               
                                                i=1
Proof. For every i write Pi = ∑l | xi,l ih xi,l |, where the {| xi,l i}l are orthonormal, and let Xi :=
∑l | xi,l ihei,l |, X := ∑i Xi , where |ei,l i is the canonical basis: X has the | xi,l i as its columns. In
order for X to be a square matrix, if necessary we extend the space in which the | xi,l i vectors live,
so as to make it the same dimension as Span{|ei,l i}. The inner-product condition on the Pi implies
that
                        ∑ Tr Pi Pj Pi ρi = ∑ ∑ h xi,l |xj,l′ ih xj,l′ |xi,l′′ ih xi,l′′ |ρi |xi,l i ≤ ε
                                        
                                                                                                         (26)
                            i6 = j                       i6 = j l,l ′ ,l ′′

Write X † X = ∑i,j,l,l ′ h xi,l | x j,l ′ i |ei,l ihe j,l ′ |, so that

        ∑ Tr X † X − Id)2 Xi† ρi Xi = ∑                                             ∑
                                                    
                                                                                                         h xi,l | x j,l ′ ih x j,l ′ | xi,l ′′ ih xi,l ′′ |ρi | xi,l i ≤ ε   (27)
              i                                                i,l,l ′′ ( j,l ′ )6 = ( i,l ),( i,l ′′)

where we used (26) to upper-bound the expression in the middle by ε. Indeed, in the second
summation, if i = j then either l ′ 6= l or l ′ 6= l ′′ , so that one of the inner products h xi,l | xi,l ′ i or
h xi,l ′ | xi,l ′′ i is 0, since the {| xi,l i}l are orthogonal.
      Let X = UΣV † , where Σ is diagonal positive and U, V unitary, be the polar decomposition
of X. By an appropriate choice of the basis |ei,l i we can assume that V = Id (if not, re-define
Xi := Xi V; this corresponds to changing |ei,l i → V † |ei,l i). Let Π be the projector on the span of
the eigenvectors of Σ with corresponding eigenvalue at least 1/2 and at most 2. Π is needed to
control eigenvalues of Σ which may be too small or too large.
      Let Ũ = UΠ and X̃ = XΠ. Let |ũi,l i (resp. | x̃i,l i) be the column vectors of Ũ (resp. X̃), so that
Ũ = ∑i,l |ũi,l ihei,l |. We will show that the projectors Qi := ∑l |ũi,l ihũi,l | are close to the projectors
Pi , in the sense claimed in the lemma (note that since U is unitary and Π a diagonal projector
the Qi are orthogonal projectors, which do not necessarily sum to identity). We first state some
consequences of (27).
Fact 22. The following inequalities holds
                                      ∑ hũi,l − x̃i,l |ũi,l′ − x̃i,l′ ih x̃i,l′ |ρi |x̃i,l i ≤ ε                                                                           (28)
                                      i,l,l ′
                                                                                                              √
                                      ∑ |hũi,l |ρ|ũi,l i − h x̃i,l |ρ|x̃i,l i| ≤ 2 2 ε1/2 Tr(ρ)1/2                                                                         (29)
                                       i,l

Proof. We start with proving (28). Since Σ is diagonal, one can immediately check that X † X − Id =
( X − U )† ( X + U ). Note also that ( X + U )( X + U )† = U ( Id + Σ)2 U † ≥ Id. Hence
             ∑ Tr (Σ − Id)2 Xi† ρi Xi = ∑ Tr (X − U )† (X − U )Xi† ρi Xi
                                                                          
                  i                                        i
                                                      ≤ ∑ Tr ( X − U )† ( X + U )( X + U )† ( X − U ) Xi† ρi Xi
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                           i
                                                      ≤ε                                                                                                                     (30)


                                                                                    26
where the last inequality is by (27). This implies that ∑i Tr((Σ − Id)2 ( Xi Π)† ρi ( Xi Π) ≤ ε (note that
Π commutes with Σ by definition), which is just (28).
   Before turning to the proof of (29), first observe that

                        Tr((Σ − Id)2 ΠX † ρX ) = ∑ Tr((Σ − Id)2 ΠXi† ρ j Xi
                                                                              
                                                                                    i,j

                                                                              ≤ 2ε                                                                         (31)

where the equality uses that (Σ − Id)2 Π) is diagonal, and the inequality is by (28) for the terms
i = j and uses (Σ − Id)2 Π ≤ Id and the second condition in the lemma for the terms i 6= j.
From (31) we get

                             ∑hũi,l − x̃i,l |ρ|ũi,l − x̃i,l i = Tr(Π(X − U )† ρ(X − U ))
                              i,l

                                                                             ≤ 4 Tr ΣΠΣ( X − U )† ρ( X − U )
                                                                                                                               

                                                                             = 4 Tr ( Id − Σ)Π( Id − Σ) X † ρX
                                                                                                                                

                                                                             ≤ 8ε                                                                          (32)

where the first inequality uses ΠΣ ≥ 1/2Π, by definition of Π, and the last is by (31).
  We now prove (29). By Cauchy-Schwarz, for every (i, l )

                              hũi,l − x̃i,l |ρ|ũi,l i ≤ hũi,l − x̃i,l |ρ|ũi,l − x̃i,l i1/2 hũi,l |ρ|ũi,l i1/2

hence by (32) we see that
                                                                                               √
                                           ∑ |hũi,l − x̃i,l |ρ|ũi,l i| ≤ 2 2 ε1/2 Tr(ρ)1/2
                                            i,l

A symmetric inequality can be obtained, and (29) follows by the triangle inequality.

    As a consequence of Fact 22, note that
                                                                                                       1/2                                            1/2
    ∑ hũi,l |x̃i,l′ i h x̃i,l′ |ρi |ũi,l − x̃i,l i ≤       ∑ h x̃i,l |x̃i,l′ ih x̃i,l′ |ρi |x̃i,l i             ∑hũi,l − x̃i,l |ρi |ũi,l − x̃i,l i
   i,l,l ′                                                   i,l,l ′                                              i,l
                                                                       1/2               1/2           1/2
                                                      ≤ Tr(ρ)                · (8ε)            = O(ε         ) Tr(ρ)1/2                                    (33)

where the first inequality is by Cauchy-Schwarz (and the |ũi,l i being orthonormal) and the second
uses X̃i X̃i† ≤ Id, and (32) (with ρi ≤ ρ).
   In order to bound the distance between Qi = ∑l |ũi,l ihũi,l | and Pi , we first bound the distance
between Qi and P̃i := X̃i X̃i† :

     ∑ Tr ( P̃i − Qi )2 ρi = ∑ h x̃i,l |ρi |x̃i,l i + hũi,l |ρi |ũi,l i − 2 ∑ ℜ hũi,l |x̃i,l′ i h x̃i,l′ |ρi |ũi,l i
                                                                                                                       
             i                            i,l                                                           i,l,l ′

                                     ≤ 2 ∑h x̃i,l |ρi | x̃i,l i − 2 ∑ ℜ hũi,l | x̃i,l ′ i h x̃i,l ′ |ρi | x̃i,l i + O(ε1/2 Tr(ρ)1/2 )
                                                                                                                  
                                                i,l                            i,l,l ′

                                     ≤ O(ε1/2 Tr(ρ)1/2 )                                                                                                   (34)


                                                                                 27
where the first inequality is by (29) and (33) and the second by (28). It remains to bound the
distance between the P̃i and the Pi :

            ∑ Tr ( P̃i − Pi )2 ρi = ∑ Tr ( Id − Π)Xi† ρi Xi
                                                           
               i                            i
                                       ≤ 2 ∑ Tr | Id − Σ|Xi† ρi Xi
                                                                                
                                                 i
                                                                                   1/2                     1/2
                                       ≤2         ∑ Tr ( Id − Σ)2 Xi† ρi Xi                   ∑ Tr Xi† ρi Xi
                                                   i                                           i
                                                 1/2           1/2
                                       ≤ 2ε            Tr(ρ)                                                               (35)

where the first inequality uses ( Id − Π) ≤ 2|Σ − Id| by definition of Π, the second is Cauchy-
Schwarz and the last is by (30). Combining (34) and (35) finishes the proof of the lemma.

     Lemma 21 lets us prove the orthogonalization lemma below. In that lemma one can think of the
Ŷi as operators in the Stinespring representation of a measurement Mi : ρ 7→ Ŷi (ρ ⊗ Id)Ŷi† , where
i refers to the i-th outcome of the measurement. In that setting the hypothesis of the lemma is that,
when M is performed twice sequentially on a specific state ρ, it is likely that identical answers
will be obtained. The conclusion is that the operators Ŷi have an approximate joint block-diagonal
form, as described by the orthogonal projectors Πi .
Lemma 23. [Orthogonalization Lemma] There is a c > 0 such that the following holds. Let ρi , i = 1, . . . , k
be positive, ρ such that ∑i ρi ≤ ρ and Ŷi , i = 1, . . . , k (possibly rectangular) matrices, be such that

                                     ∑ Trρi Ŷi† (Ŷj Ŷj† ) Ŷi ≤ α Tr(ρ)
                                                                  
                                                                                                            (36)
                                        i6 = j

and ∑i Ŷi Ŷi† ≤ Id. Then there exists orthogonal projectors {Πi } such that

                                   ∑ Trρi Ŷi† ( Id − Πi )Ŷi ≤ O αc Tr(ρ)
                                                                     
                                   i

Proof. The idea of the proof is simple. Let β1 , β 2 > 0 be parameters to be chosen later. For every
i, let Pi be the projector on the eigenvectors of Ŷi Ŷi† with corresponding eigenvalue at least β 1 .
Since Pi contains all the large eigenvalues, Pi Ŷi ≈ Ŷi . Moreover, by definition Pi ≤ β− 1      †
                                                                                          1 Ŷi Ŷi . These
                                                                     †               − 1
                                                                                
two properties together with (36) almost imply that ∑i6= j Trρi Ŷi Pi Pj Pi Ŷi . β αTr(ρ). Choosing
        √
β1 ≈ α, we could then apply Lemma 21 to the Pi and states σi := Ŷi ρi Ŷi† , recovering close
orthogonal projectors Πi which would satisfy the required condition. Carrying out this intuition
precisely is a bit tedious, and we now proceed to the details. We will use the following simple fact.
Fact 24. Let A ≥ 0, ρ ≥ 0, and Π a projection. Let
                                                                                                                       
         a = Trρ ( A),      b = | Trρ (( Id − Π) AΠ)|                     and       c = Trρ ( Id − Π) A( Id − Π)

Then both the following hold
                                        √      √ 2
                               Trρ ΠAΠ ≤   a + c ≤ 2( a + c )
                                         √ a + √ a + 4b 2
                               Trρ ΠAΠ ≤                     ≤ a + 2b
                                                 2

                                                                     28
Proof. Write Π = (Π − Id) + Id, so Trρ (ΠAΠ) ≤ | Trρ ((Π − Id) AΠ)| + | Trρ ( AΠ)|. The second
term can be bounded by a1/2 Trρ (ΠAΠ)1/2 by Cauchy-Schwarz. Similarly bounding the first term
by c1/2 Trρ (ΠAΠ)1/2 yields the first equation. To get the second, let X = Trρ (ΠAΠ)1/2 to obtain
the equation
                                        X 2 − a1/2 X − b ≤ 0
                                                                    √    √
Solving and using X ≥ 0, one finds that this is equivalent to X ≤ ( a + a + 4b )/2.

    Let Y−i := ∑ j6=i Ŷj Ŷj† ≤ Id, and Qi be the projector on the eigenvectors of Pi Y−i Pi with eigen-
value at most β 2 . Note that, by definition, Qi ≤ Pi ≤ β−            1      †
                                                                    1 Ŷi Ŷi (and in particular Q i commutes
with Pi ). We first bound the distance between Ŷi and Ŷi Qi : since Ŷi† ( Id − Qi ) = Ŷi† ( Id − Pi ) +
                                                          †        †

Ŷi† Pi ( Id − Qi ) Pi ,
                                                                                                          
               ∑ Trρi Ŷi† ( Id − Qi )Ŷi = ∑ Trρi Ŷi† ( Id − Pi )Ŷi + Trρi (Ŷi† Pi ( Id − Qi ) PiŶi )
                                                                     
                                                                                                             (37)
             i                                         i

The first term is easily bounded by β 1 Tr(ρ). For the second, note that Pi ( Id − Qi ) Pi ≤ β−  1
                                                                                                2 Pi Y− i Pi .
Using Fact 24 with Ai = Y−i , Πi = Pi , and ρi = Ŷi ρi (Ŷi )† we get ∑i ai ≤ αTr(ρ) and ∑i ci ≤ β1 Tr(ρ),
so that

                              ∑ Trρi Ŷi† PiY−i PiŶi ≤ 2(α + β1 )Tr(ρ)
                                                     
                                         i

Assuming α ≤ β1 (which will hold for our choice of parameters), from (37) we get

                         ∑ Trρi Ŷi† ( Id − Qi )Ŷi ≤ O( β−2 1 β1 )Tr(ρ)
                                                   
                                                                                                                                           (38)
                                     i

   Next observe that, by definition of Qi , followed by an application of the Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality,

    ∑ Trρi Ŷi† QiY−i ( Id − Qi )Ŷi = ∑ Trρi Ŷi† Qi Y−i ( Id − Pi )Ŷi
                                                                        
      i                                                    i
                                                                                           1/2                                 1/2
                                                  ≤            ∑ Trρi Ŷi† ( Id − Pi )Ŷi             ∑ Trρi (Ŷi† QiY−2 i QiŶi
                                                       i                                               i
                                                     1/2
                                                  ≤ β1 β2 Tr(ρ)                                                                            (39)

where we used Qi Y−2 i Qi ≤ β22 Id, which holds by definition of Qi , to bound the second term in the
last inequality. Using the second bound in Fact 24 with Ai = Y−i , Πi = Qi , ρi = Ŷi ρi (Ŷi )† , we get
                             1/2
∑i ai ≤ αTr(ρ) and ∑i bi ≤ β1 β 2 Tr(ρ) by (39), so that

                         ∑ Trρi Ŷi† Qi Q j QiŶi ≤ β−1 1 ∑ Trρi Ŷi† QiY−i QiŶi
                                                                                 
                            i6 = j                                             i

                                                                      ≤ β− 1
                                                                             α + 2β1/2
                                                                                        
                                                                         1         1 β 2 Tr ( ρ)

Set β 2 = β3/4
           1   and β 1 = α4/5 to obtain

                                         ∑ Trρ Ŷi† Qi Q j QiŶi ≤ O(α1/5 ) Tr(ρ)
                                                                           
                                                   i
                                                                                                                                           (40)
                                         i6 = j


                                                                         29
Let σi := Ŷi ρi Ŷi† . We are now ready to apply Lemma 21 to the Qi and σi : the first condition holds
by (40), and the second is a direct consequence of (36) and Q j ≤ β−        1      †
                                                                           1 Ŷj Ŷj for every j. The lemma
then gives us pairwise orthogonal Πi such that

                                  ∑ Trρi Ŷi† (Qi − Πi )2Ŷi ≤ O(α1/10 )Tr(ρ)
                                                            
                                 i

Combined with (38) and the triangle inequality, this leads to

                           ∑ Trρi Ŷi† ( Id − Πi )Ŷi ≤ O(α1/10 ) Tr(ρ)
                                                     
                                 i




6 Discussion and open questions
Our work shows for the first time that the entangled value of games can be decreased through
parallel repetition. Even though we framed and proved our results in the context of 2-player
games, it should not be hard to extend them in some cases to multiple players, depending on
the kind of projection or consistency constraints that one can assume on the game. On the other
hand, extending the result to either many-round games, or games with quantum messages, is an
interesting open question.
     One implication of our result is the following. The celebrated PCP theorem says that given a
game, it is NP-hard to tell if its value is 1 or less than, say, 0.99. Combined with Raz’s parallel rep-
etition result, one obtains that it is also hard to tell if the value is 1 or less than, say, 0.01. The latter
statement led to an enormous body of work on strong hardness of approximation results [Hås01].
It is currently a major open question whether an analogue of the PCP theorem holds for the en-
tangled value. If such a result was proved, our results would allow to amplify the hardness to 1
vs. 0.01, as in the classical case, possibly leading to further surprising implications.
     The main open question left by our work is whether it is possible to show a better rate of decay,
in particular an exponential rate as Raz obtained from direct parallel repetition, or [IKW09] first
obtained in the setting of direct product testers. Another open question is whether our statement
can be extended to hold for simple parallel repetition for arbitrary entangled games (i.e. without
adding dummy or consistency questions).
     We believe that our main conceptual contributions are the extension of the notion of “approx-
imately serial” to the setting of measurements, and our subsequent orthogonalization lemma. We
hope that these techniques might prove useful elsewhere, perhaps in establishing hardness of
entangled games. Lastly, product testers are very useful in the area of property testing, and it
remains to be seen if our result can be applied similarly.

Acknowledgments. We are indebted to Ryan O’Donnell for making publicly available his ex-
tremely clear and helpful lecture notes [O’D05b, O’D05a] on Feige and Kilian’s parallel repetition
result, and to user “ohai” of MathOverflow.net for pointing out the connection between the classi-
cal Procrustes problem and that of the robust orthonormalization of almost-orthogonal families of
vectors. We especially thank Oded Regev for useful discussions and helpful comments, Tsuyoshi
Ito and Ben Reichardt for comments, and Ben Reichard for pointing out an error in the proof of
Claim 29 in a previous version of this manuscript.

                                                     30
References
[AKK+ 08] S. Arora, S. A. Khot, A. Kolla, D. Steurer, M. Tulsiani, and N. K. Vishnoi. Unique
          games on expanding constraint graphs are easy. In Proc. 40th ACM Symp. on Theory of
          computing (STOC), pages 21–28. New York, NY, USA, 2008.

[BHH+ 08] B. Barak, M. Hardt, I. Haviv, A. Rao, O. Regev, and D. Steurer. Rounding Parallel
          Repetitions of Unique Games. In Proc. 49th IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer
          Science (FOCS), pages 374–383. 2008.

[BRR+ 09] B. Barak, A. Rao, R. Raz, R. Rosen, and R. Shaltiel. Strong Parallel Repetition Theorem
          for Free Projection Games. In Proc. 13th RANDOM, pages 352–365. 2009.

[CHTW04] R. Cleve, P. Høyer, B. Toner, and J. Watrous. Consequences and limits of nonlocal
         strategies. In Proc. 19th IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), pages 236–
         249. 2004.

[CSUU08] R. Cleve, W. Slofstra, F. Unger, and S. Upadhyay. Perfect parallel repetition theorem
         for quantum XOR proof systems. Computational Complexity, 17:282–299, 2008.

[DG08]     I. Dinur and E. Goldenberg. Locally Testing Direct Product in the Low Error Range. In
           Proc. 49th IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 613–622. 2008.

[DM10]     I. Dinur and O. Meir. Derandomized Parallel Repetition of Structured PCPs. In Proc.
           25th IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), pages 16–27. 2010.

[DR06]     I. Dinur and O. Reingold. Assignment Testers: Towards a Combinatorial Proof of the
           PCP Theorem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 36(4):975–1024, 2006.

[Fei91]    U. Feige. On the success probability of two provers in one-round proof systems. In
           Proc. 6th IEEE Structure in Complexity Theory, pages 116–123. 1991.

[FK00]     U. Feige and J. Kilian. Two-Prover Protocols—Low Error at Affordable Rates. SIAM
           Journal on Computing, 30(1):324, 2000.

[FKO07]    U. Feige, G. Kindler, and R. O’Donnell. Understanding Parallel Repetition Requires
           Understanding Foams. In Proc. 22nd IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity
           (CCC), pages 179–192. 2007.

[FL92]     U. Feige and L. Lovász. Two-Prover One-Round Proof Systems: Their Power and
           Their Problems. In Proc. 22nd ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 733–
           744. 1992.

[Hås01]   J. Håstad. Some optimal inapproximability results. J. ACM, 48:798–859, 2001.

[Hol07]    T. Holenstein. Parallel repetition: simplifications and no-signaling case. In Proc. 39th
           ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing (STOC). ACM, 2007.

[IKM09]    T. Ito, H. Kobayashi, and K. Matsumoto. Oracularization and Two-Prover One-Round
           Interactive Proofs against Nonlocal Strategies. In Proc. 24th IEEE Conference on Compu-
           tational Complexity, pages 217–228. 2009.

                                               31
[IKW09]     R. Impagliazzo, V. Kabanets, and A. Wigderson. New direct-product testers and 2-
            query PCPs. pages 131–140. 2009.

[Imp08]     R. Impagliazzo. Uniform direct product theorems:simplified, optimized, and deran-
            domized. In Proc. 40th ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 579–588.
            2008.

[KKM+ 08] J. Kempe, H. Kobayashi, K. Matsumoto, B. Toner, and T. Vidick. Entangled Games
          are Hard to Approximate. In Proc. 49th IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science
          (FOCS), pages 447–456. 2008.
[KR10]      J. Kempe and O. Regev. No Strong Parallel Repetition with Entangled and Non-
            signaling Provers. In Proc. 25th IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC),
            pages 7–15. 2010.

[KRT08]     J. Kempe, O. Regev, and B. Toner. Unique Games with Entangled Provers are Easy. In
            Proc. 49th IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 457–466. 2008.

[O’D05a]    R. O’Donnell. Lecture 12 : ”Confuse / Match” Games ( I ), 2005. Available at
            http://www.cs.washington.edu/education/courses/cse533/05au/.
[O’D05b]    R. O’Donnell. Lecture 13: ”Confuse / Match” Games ( II ), 2005. Available at
            http://www.cs.washington.edu/education/courses/cse533/05au/.

[Rao08]     A. Rao. Parallel Repetition in Projection Games and a Concentration Bound. In Proc.
            40th ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 1–10. 2008.

[Raz98]     R. Raz. A parallel repetition theorem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 27:763–803, 1998.

[Raz08]     R. Raz. A Counterexample to Strong Parallel Repetition. In Proc. 49th IEEE Symp. on
            Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 369–373. 2008.
[RR10]      R. Raz and R. Rosen. A Strong Parallel Repetition Theorem for Projection Games on
            Expanders. Technical report ECCC TR10-142, 2010.

[Sch66]     P. H. Schönemann. A generalized solution of the orthogonal Procrustes problem. Psy-
            chometrika, 31(1):1–10, 1966.

[Ver94]     O. Verbitsky. Towards the parallel repetition conjecture. In Proc. 9th IEEE Conference
            on Structure in Complexity Theory, pages 304–307. 1994.


A    Some useful technical facts
In this section we prove a series of useful claims showing that, in a strategy which has been
marginalized over a large number of indices, fixing a particular coordinate (i, qi ) does not have
much influence on average. Throughout this question we fix a question set Q and a distribution
µ on Q. Whenever an expectation over tuples of questions q ∈ QC is taken, it will be over the
product distribution µC .
    Our claims will rely essentially on the following, which applies to any matrix semi-norm k · k,
provided it is derived from a semi-inner product h·, ·i.

                                                32
Claim 25. Let C be an integer, and f : QC →       { X ∈ C d×d }. Let M = Eq [ f (q)] and for any (i, qi ),
Mi,qi = Eq¬i [ f (q)] . Suppose that Eq k f (q)k2 ≤ 1. Then
                                                 

                                   Eq [ k f ( q )k2]
   1. 0 ≤ Ei,qi k M − Mi,qi k2 ≤                      ≤ C1 .
                             
                                           C

   2. Ei,qi k M − Mi,qi k2 = Ei,qi k Mi,qi k2 − k M k2 .
                                                 

   3. Pri,qi (| Tr( M ) − Tr( Mi,qi )| ≥ C −1/3 ) ≤ C −1/3 .

Proof. The proof of all three parts is in close analogy to that of Lemma 2.1 in [O’D05a], which
shows similar statements for a Boolean function f . For part 1 note that Ei,qi k M − Mi,qi k2 =
                                                                                                  
1   C                       2 and hence it suffices to show that C E
                                                                ∑i=1 qi k M − Mi,qi k2 ≤ Tr( M ). Ob-
                                                                                   
C ∑ i=1 Eq i k M − Mi,q i k
serve that
        "                           #
0 ≤ Eq k f (q) − ∑( Mi,qi − M )k2
                         i
                                                                                          h                            i
                 2
                         − ∑ Eqi h Mi,qi − M, Mi,qi i + h Mi,qi , Mi,qi − M i + ∑ Eqi ,q j h M − Mi,qi , M − M j,q j i
                                                                          
 = Eq k f (q)k
                             i                                                     i,j
                 2                               2
                         − ∑ Eqi k M − Mi,qi k ,
                                                  
 = Eq k f (q)k
                             i
                                                                                              
where                        have used that Eqi Mi,qi − M = 0 and hence Eqi h Mi,qi − M, Mi,qi i =
    for the last equality we
Eqi h Mi,qi − M, Mi,qi − M i and, for i 6= j,
                       h                           i                      h           i
               Eqi ,q j h M − Mi,qi , M − M j,q j i = h Eqi M − Mi,qi , Eq j M − M j,q j i = 0

Part 1. now follows, and the second inequality is simply the assumption that Eq k f (q)k2 ≤ 1.
                                                                                                  

   Part 2 is trivial from the expansion of k M − Mi,qi k2 . Part 3 follows from part 1 using Markov’s
inequality, which gives Pri,qi (( Tr( M − Mi,qi ))2 ≥ C −2/3 ) ≤ C2/3 Ei,qi ( Tr( M − Mi,qi ))2 . Observing
                                                                                              

that for A := M − Mi,qi we have ( Tr( A))2 = h A, Idi2 ≤ k Ak2 · k Idk2 = k Ak2 gives the desired
bound.

     The following is a direct corollary of Claim 25, obtained for a specific instantiation of the norm
k · k.
Claim 26. Let Yqa , for q ∈ QC and a ∈ AC , be positive matrices such that Yq := ∑ a Yqa ≤ Id, and ρ ≥ 0.
              
Let Y = Eq Yq . Then
             h                                        i            h                  i
     E(i,qi ) Tr Y ρ1/2 Y ρ1/2 − Tr Yqi ρ1/2 Yqi ρ1/2    ≤ C −1 Eq Tr Yq ρ1/2 Yq ρ1/2 ≤ Trρ (Y )
                              


Proof. The statement follows from Claim 25, applied to f (q) = Yq and the (semi)-norm k Ak2 =
Tr Aρ1/2 A† ρ1/2 , which is derived from the inner-product ( A, B) 7→ Tr Aρ1/2 B† ρ1/2 . The second
                                                                                     

inequality holds since 0 ≤ Yq ≤ Id for every q.

   We now give two simple calculations which will be useful. The first is a well-known operator
version of the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.


                                                           33
Claim 27. Let A, B be (possibly rectangular) matrices such that A† B exists, and B† B is invertible. Then

                                                  ( A† B)( B† B)−1 ( B† A) ≤ A† A

Proof. Let ∆ = ( B† B)−1 ( B† A). Then the matrix ( A − B∆)† ( A − B∆) is positive, which gives the
result.

Claim 28. Let Yq ∈ C d×d , 0 ≤ Yq ≤ Id, for q ∈ QC , and let Y = Eq Yq , Yi,qi = Eq¬i Yq for i ∈ [C ].
                                                                                    

Then                                                              h i
                                  E(i,qi ) (Y − Yi,qi )2 ≤ C −1 Eq Yq2
                                                       


Proof. Write
                                                           
                    0 ≤ Yq − ∑(Yi,qi − Y ) Yq − ∑(Yi,qi − Y )
                                         i                         i
                       = Yq2 −      ∑ Yq (Yi,q − Y ) + Yi,q − Y )Yq + ∑ Yi,q − Y
                                                                                                                    
                                                  i                    i                       i
                                                                                                         Yj,q j − Y
                                     i                                                 i,j

Taking the expectation over q, we obtain

                                  ∑ Eqi (Yi,qi − Y )2 ≤ Eq Yq2
                                                         
                                                  i

Dividing by C on both sides proves the claim.
                                                                                q
Claim 29. For every q ∈ QC let {Xqa }a∈ AC ′ be a POVM, and X̂qa := π (q) Xqa ⊗ hq, a| (as described in
                                                                        p
                                                     h              i
Section 4.1), and ρ ≥ 0. Assume that X̂ X̂ † = ∑ a Eq X̂qa ( X̂qa )† ≤ Id. Then
                           h                                                                             i
              ∑ E(i,q )        Trρ ( X̂ a )† X̂ a ( X̂ a )† X̂ a − Trρ ( X̂qai )† X̂qai ( X̂qai )† X̂qai    ≤ 2 C −1/2 Tr(ρ)
                                                                
                       i
               a

Proof. Let X̃ia = X̂ a ( X̂ a )† − X̂qai ( X̂qai )† , and ρ̃ia = X̂ a ρ( X̂ a )† − X̂qai ρ( X̂qai )† , where the notation
keeps the dependence on qi implicit. Use the triangle inequality to write

   Tr X̂ a ( X̂ a )† X̂ a ρ( X̂ a )† − Tr X̂qai ( X̂qai )† X̂qai ρ( X̂qai )† ≤ Tr X̃ia X̂ a ρ( X̂ a )† + Tr X̂qai ( X̂qai )† ρ̃ia
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                    (41)

The expectation of the first term on the right-hand side of (41) can be bounded by Cauchy-Schwarz
as
                   h                       i         h                                                      1/2 i
           E(i,qi ) Tr X̃ia X̂ a ρ( X̂ a )† ≤ E(i,qi ) Trρ (( X̂ a )† X̂ a )1/2 Tr ( X̃ia )2 X̂ a ρ( X̂ a )†
                                                      ≤ C −1/2 Trρ (( X̂ a )† X̂ a )

by Claim 25, applied to the (semi)-norm k Ak2 := Tr ( A† A) ( X̂ a ρ( X̂ a )† ) and the mapping f : q 7→
                                                                               

X̂qa ( X̂qa )† .
      Regarding  pthe second term on the right-hand side of (41), let p A be the block-column matrix
with blocks π (qi )ρ̃i for every (i, qi ) and a, and B with blocks π (qi ) X̂ia ( X̂ia )† . Then B† B =
                         a




                                                                       34
            h               2 i
∑ a E(i,qi ) X̂ia ( X̂ia )†      ≤ Id. Let D = A† B = ∑ a E(i,qi ) ρ̃ia X̂ia ( X̂ia )† ; the operator Cauchy-Schwarz
                                                                                     

inequality from Claim 27 gives

                                  DD † ≤ D ( B† B)−1 D † ≤ A† A = ∑ E(i,qi ) (ρ̃ia )2
                                                                                             
                                                                              a

Applying Claim 28 to X̂qa ρ( X̂qa )† (for every a), we can then bound
                                                  h                i                   h                i
                                  †       −1                                 −1
                             DD ≤ C            Eq ( X̂q ρX̂q† )2       ≤ C        Eq       X̂q ρ X̂q†
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                               (42)
                                                                                   √
where for the second inequality we used X̂q† X̂q ≤ Id. Since Tr( D ) ≤ Tr DD † = k D k1 , taking
                                                                                         

the square root on both sides of (42) (the square root being operator monotone) and then the trace,
we obtain                                                  r h
                       h                    i                               i
                               a a      a †        −1/2                2 X̂ † = C −1/2 X̂ρ
              ∑ (i,qi)
                  E      Tr ρ̃  X̂
                               i i ( X̂ i )    ≤ C      Tr  E q X̂ q ρ     q               1
                  a

where X̂ is the rectangular matrix with square blocks π (q)−1/2 X̂qa arranged in a column. By
                                                                            h       i
Holder’s inequality X̂ρ 1 ≤ Tr(ρ)kX̂ k∞ , and kX̂ k∞ ≤ 1 since X̂ † X̂ = Eq X̂q† X̂q ≤ Id. This
finishes the proof of the claim.




                                                           35
