                    Choiceless Polynomial Time
            Andreas Blass, Yuri Gurevich and Saharon Shelah

                                      Abstract
         Turing machines de ne polynomial time (PTime) on strings but cannot deal
     with structures like graphs directly, and there is no known, easily computable
     string encoding of isomorphism classes of structures. Is there a computation
     model whose machines do not distinguish between isomorphic structures and
     compute exactly PTime properties? This question can be recast as follows:
     Does there exists a logic that captures polynomial time (without presuming
     the presence of a linear order)? Earlier, one of us conjectured the negative
     answer; see [74]. The problem motivated a quest for stronger and stronger
     PTime logics. All these logics avoid arbitrary choice. Here we attempt to
     capture the choiceless fragment of PTime. Our computation model is a version
     of abstract state machines (formerly called evolving algebras). The idea is to
     replace arbitrary choice with parallel execution. The resulting logic is more
     expressive than other PTime logics in the literature. A more dicult theorem
     shows that the logic does not capture all PTime.


1 Introduction
The standard computation model is Turing machines, whose inputs are strings. How-
ever, in combinatorics, database theory, etc., inputs are naturally structures (graphs,
databases, etc.) indistinguishable up to isomorphism. In such cases, there is a prob-
lem with string presentation of input objects: there is no known, easily computable
string encoding of isomorphism classes of structures. This calls for a computation
model that deals with structures directly rather than via string encoding. There is a
several such computation models in the literature, in particular relational machines
[Abiteboul and Vianu 1991] and abstract state machines (formerly called evolving
algebras) [Gurevich 1995].
    The natural question is whether there is a computation model that captures PTime
over structures (rather than strings). In di erent terms, essentially the same question
has been raised in [Chandra and Harel 1982]. Gurevich translated Chandra{Harel's
question as a question of existence of a logic that captures PTime and conjectured
that no such logic exists [Gurevich 1988]. We address this issue in Section 3; here it

                                           1
suces to say that the notion of logic is a very broad one and includes computation
models.
     If one seriously entertains the possibility that there is no logic that captures
PTime, the question arises how much of PTime can be captured by a logic. Here
we de ne a natural fragment of PTime and capture it by means of a version of ab-
stract state machines (ASMs). We call the fragment Choiceless Polynomial Time
(C~ PTime). The idea is to eliminate arbitrary choice by means of parallel execution.
Consider for example the Graph Reachability problem:
Instance: A graph G = (V; E ) with distinguished nodes s and t (an allusion to
    Source and Target respectively).
Question: Does there exists a path from s to t in G?
A common reachability algorithm constructs the set X of all vertices reachable from
s and then checks if X contains t. To construct X , an auxiliary \border-set" Y  X
is used.
if Mode = Initial then
   X; Y := fsg
             , Mode := Construct
endif



if Mode = Construct then
   if  Y 6= ;then
      choose     y2Y
         let     Z = fz 2 V   X : yEzg
            do in parallel
                   X := X [ Z
                   Y := (Y fyg) [ Z
            enddo
         endlet
      endchoose
   else Mode := Examine
   endif
endif



if Mode = Examine then
   If  t2X  then Output := Yes else Output := No endif
   Mode := Final
endif



                                         2
   If a given graph G comes with an order on vertices, the order can be used to elim-
inate choice, but we are interested in structures which are not necessarily ordered. In
the case of the reachability problem, choice can be eliminated by means of parallelism.
Here is a revised version of the second transition rule.
if Mode = Construct then
   if Y  6= ;
            then
      let   Z = fz 2 V     X : (9y 2 Y ) yEzg
           X := X [ Z
           Y := Z
   else Mode := Examine
   endif
endif


    Of course, one is not always so lucky. In Section 10, we describe a well-known
PTime algorithm for the Perfect Matching problem. The algorithm uses choice and,
as far as we know, there is no choiceless PTime algorithm for Perfect Matching.
    Our computation model is explained in Section 4 and our formalization L of
Choiceless PTime is given in Section 5. L is a computation model, but it can be
viewed as a (very generalized) logic. In Section 7, we show that this logic is more
expressive than Abiteboul{Vianu's logic (whose \formulas" are relational machines).
In Section 10, we show that L does not express the parity of a naked set or the perfect
matchability of a bipartite graph.
    One shortcoming of L is that it is naturally three-valued: some input structures
are accepted, some are rejected, and some may be neither accepted nor rejected by
a given machine. In Section 11, we augment our computation model with explicit
knowledge of the cardinality of (the base set of) the input structure. The augmented
logic L0 is two-valued. Parity is easily expressible in L0 but perfect matchability is
not expressible.
    The logic L can be easily extended with a counting function (see Section 4) and
maybe it should. This would be a natural way to continue this investigation. Let
us notice though that, unless there is a logic that captures PTime, there is no end
to possible extensions of L. Any PTime decidable problem can be converted to a
quanti er and added to L.
    Finally, there are some open problems that we leave. We conjecture that C~ PTime
enjoys some sort of zero-one or convergence law. We conjecture that the extension
C~ PTime + Count of C~ PTime with the counting function is a proper fragment of
PTime. Further, it is not dicult to concoct an arti cial complete problem for
C~ PTime, but it would be interesting to see a natural one.



                                          3
2 Preliminaries
We recall various de nitions and establish some terminology and notation. In this
paper, vocabularies are nite.

2.1 Global Relations
We start with a convenient notion of global relation [Gurevich 1988].
  A k-ary global relation of vocabulary  is a function  such that
    the domain Dom() consists of -structures and is closed under isomorphism,
     associates a k-ary relation A with every structure A 2 Dom(), and
     is abstract in the following sense: every isomorphism from a structure A 2
     Dom() onto a structure B is also an isomorphism from the structure (A; A)
     onto the structure (B; B).
    Typically the domain of a global relation of vocabulary  is the class of all -
structures or the class of all nite -structures. For example, every rst-order formula
'(v1; : : : ; vk) of vocabulary  with free variables as shown, denotes a k-ary global
relation (v1; : : : ; vk) on all -structures.

2.2 The Least Fixed Point Logic FO+LFP
The least xed point logic has been around for a long time [Moschovakis 1974]. It
is especially popular in nite model theory [Ebbinghaus and Flum 1995]. The latter
book contains all the facts that we need. For the reader's convenience (and to establish
notation), we recall a few things.

Syntax FO+LFP is obtained from rst-order logic by means of the following addi-
tional formula-formation rule:
    Suppose that '(P; v) is a formula with a k-ary predicate variable P and a k-tuple
     v of free individual variables. Further suppose that P occurs only positively in
     '. If t be a k-tuple of terms, then
                                    h                     i
                                        LFPP;v('(P; v)) (t)
     is a formula.

                                              4
The vocabulary and the free variables of the new formula are de ned in the obvious
way. In particular, P is not in the vocabulary of . Suppose that a predicate Q
belongs to the vocabulary of ; then Q occurs only positively in if and only if it
occurs only positively in '.

Semantics The formula '(P; v), may have free individual variables u in addition
to v. Let w be a k-tuple of fresh individual variables, and let  be the vocabulary of
the formula
                                      h                        i
                            (u; w) = LFPP;v('(P; u; v)) (w)
The meaning of is a global relation (u; w) whose domain consists of all -structures
(unless we restrict the domain explicitly, for example to nite -structures).
   Given an -structure A with xed values a of parameters u, consider the following
operator on k-ary relations over BaseSet(A):

                                (P ) = fv : '(P; a; v)g:
Since ' is positive in P ,  is monotone in P . The k-ary relation A(a; w) is the least
 xed point of . To obtain the least xed point, generate the sequence

                                 ;  (;)  2(;)  : : :
of k-ary relations over A. For a nite structure A, there exists a natural number l
such that l(;) = l+1 (;); in this case the least xed point is i(;). The case of in nite
A is similar except that l may be an in nite ordinal.

Simultaneous Induction Let  be a vocabulary and consider FO+LFP formulas
'(P; Q; u) and (P; Q; v) of vocabulary  [ fP; Qg which are positive in P and Q.
Here Arity(P ) = Length(u) and Arity(Q) = Length(v). There may be additional free
individual variables which we consider as paramenters.
   Given an -structure A with xed parameters, consider the monotone operator
                                                                       
                (P; Q) = P [ fu : '(P; Q; u)g; Q [ fv : (P; Q; v)g
and let (P ; Q) be the least xed point of .
Proposition 1 The global relations P  and Q are expressible by FO+LFP formulas.
Moreover, the result generalizes to simultaneous induction over any nite number of
predicate variables.

                                             5
2.3 The Finite Variable In nitary Logic
Again, the book [Ebbinghaus and Flum 1995] contains all the information that we
need, but we recall a few things for the reader's convenience.

Syntax As in a popular version of rst-order logic, L!1;! formulas are built from
atomic formulas by means of negations, conjunctions, disjunctions, the existential
quanti er and the universal quanti er. The only di erence is that L!1;! allows one
to form the conjunction and the disjunction of an arbitrary set S of formulas pro-
vided that the total number of variables in all S -formulas is nite. Here we have an
additional constraint: the vocabulary of every formula is nite. For every natural
number m, Lm1;! is the fragment of L!1;! where formulas use at most m individual
variables.

Semantics Every k-ary L!1;! formula of vocabulary  denotes a k-ary global rela-
tion of vocabulary  in the obvious way.
    An important fact is that every global relation expressible in FO+LFP is express-
ible in L!1;! [Ebbinghaus and Flum 1995, Theorem 7.4.2].

Pebble Games There is a pebble game Gm (A; B ) appropriate to Lm1;! . Here A and
B are structures of the same purely relational vocabulary. For explanatory purposes,
we pretend that that A is located on the left and B is located on the right, but in
fact A and B may be the same structure.
    The game is played by Spoiler and Duplicator. For each i = 1; : : :; k, there are two
pebbles marked by i: the left i-pebble and the right i-pebble. Initially all the pebbles
are o the board. After any number of rounds, for every i, either both i-pebbles are
o the board or else the left i-pebble covers an element of A and the right i-pebble
covers an element of B . In the obvious way, the pebbles on the board de ne a relation
R between A to B . A round of Gk (A; B ) is played as follows.
    If R is not a partial isomorphism, then the game is over; Spoiler has won and
Duplicator has lost. Otherwise Spoiler chooses a number i; if the i-pebbles are on
the board, they are taken o the board. Then Spoiler chooses left or right and puts
that i-pebble on an element of the corresponding structure. Duplicator puts the other
i-pebble on an element of the other structure.
Duplicator wins a play of the game if the number of rounds in the play is in nite.

Proposition 2 If Duplicator has a winning strategy in Gm (A; B ), then no Lm1;! sen-
tence distinguishes between A and B . Therefore, for every FO+LFP sentence ',
there exists m such that, for any A and B , if Duplicator has a winning strategy in
Gm (A; B ) then ' does not distinguish A from B .
                                           6
2.4 Set Theory
Let A be a structure. In the literature, notation jAj is used in two ways: to denote
the base set of A and to denote the cardinality of BaseSet(A). We will employ notation
jAj only in the sense of cardinality; we will also use an alternative notation Card(A)
for the cardinality of A.
    As usual in set theory, we identify a natural number (that is a non-negative integer)
i with the set of smaller natural numbers fj : j < ig; this set is called the von
Neumann ordinal for i. The rst in nite ordinal is denoted !.
    We consider sets built from atoms (or urelements). The term object will mean an
atom or a set. A set X is transitive if y 2 x 2 X implies y 2 X . If X is an object,
then TC(X ) is the least transitive set Y with X 2 Y . An object X is hereditarily
  nite if TC(X ) is nite.
    P is the powerset operation; if X is set then P(X ) is the collection of all subsets
of X . If X is a nite set of atoms, then
                        [
             HF(X ) := fPi(X ) : i < !g = X [ P(X ) [ P(P(X )) [ : : :
Alternatively, HF(X ) can be de ned as the smallest set Y such that X  Y and
every nite subset of Y is a member of Y .
    Every set has an ordinal rank. If x is an atom or the empty set, then the rank of
x equals 0; and if x is a nonempty set, then the rank of x equals 1 plus the maximum
of the ranks of the elements of x.

3 PTime and PTime Logics
In this section, structures are nite and global relations are restricted to nite struc-
tures.
    By de nition, the PTime complexity class consists of languages, that is sets of
(without loss of generality, binary) strings. A language X is PTime if there exists
a PTime Turing machine (that is polynomial time bounded Turing machine) that
accepts exactly the strings in X . This de nition is easily generalized to ordered
structures by means of a standard encoding; see for example [Ebbinghaus and Flum
1995] or [Gurevich 1988]. We will say that a Turing machine accepts an ordered
structure A if it accepts the standard encoding of A.
    The generalization to arbitrary (that is not necessarily ordered) structures is less
obvious. One does not want to distinguish between isomorphic structures and there
is no obvious, easily computable string encoding of isomorphism classes of structures.
    The problem was rst addressed by Chandra and Harel in the context of database
                                           7
theory [Chandra and Harel 1982]. We describe their approach. A database is de ned
as a purely relational structure whose elements come from some xed countable set,
without loss of generality the set of natural numbers. A query is a global relation over
databases; recall that global relations respect isomorphisms. A query Q is PTime if
the set

                                    f(B; x) : x 2 Q(B )g
is PTime. Thus each PTime query Q is given by a PTime Turing machine M that
accepts a string s if and only if s is the standard encoding of some (B; x) with
x 2 Q(B ); call M a PTime witness for Q. Let W be the collection of all PTime
witnesses for all queries. It is easy to check that W is not recursive. Chandra and
Harel posed the following question. Does there exists a recursive set S  W such
that every PTime query has a PTime witness in S ?
    Gurevich translated their question as a question of the existence of a logic that
captures PTime [Gurevich 1988]. He conjectured that the answer is negative; in this
connection his de nition of a logic is very broad. If desired, some obvious requirements
can be imposed; see [Ebbinghaus 1985] in this connection. Here we recall Gurevich's
de nitions and slightly generalize them in order to de ne three-valued logics.

PTime Global Relations What does it mean that a global relation is PTime?
The question easily reduces to the case of nullary global relations. Indeed, let 
be a k-ary global relation of some vocabulary  and let c1; : : : ; ck be the rst k
individual constants outside of . De ne the nullary relation  of vocabulary + =
 [ fc1; : : : ; ck g as follows. If A is an -structure, and a1; : : : ; ak are elements of A,
and B is the +-expansion of A where a1; : : : ; ak interpret c1; : : :; ck , then B ()
A (a1; : : :; ak ). Declare  PTime if  is so.
    A nullary global relation  of vocabulary  can be identi ed with the class of
-structures A such that A is true. It remains to de ne what does it mean that a
class K of structures of some vocabulary  is PTime. Let < be a binary predicate
not in . An ordered version of an -structure A is a structure B of vocabulary
 [ f<g such that the -reduct of B is isomorphic to A and the interpretation of <
is a linear order.
    De ne a class of K of -structures to be PTime if it is closed under isomorphisms
and there exists a PTime Turing machine M (a PTime witness for K ) which accepts
a binary string s if and only if s is the standard encoding of an ordered version of
some structure in K .

Logics For simplicity, we de ne logics whose formulas denote nullary global rela-
tions. The trick above allows one to extend such a logic so that its formulas denote
arbitrary global relations.

                                              8
    A logic L is given by a pair of functions (Sen,Sat) satisfying the following condi-
tions. Sen associates with every vocabulary  a recursive set Sen() whose elements
are called L-sentences of vocabulary . Sat associates with every vocabulary  a
recursive relation Sat(A; ') where A is an -structure and ' an L-sentence of vo-
cabulary . We say that A satis es ' (symbolically A j= ') if Sat (A; ') holds. It
is assumed that Sat(A; ') () Sat(B; ') if A and B are isomorphic.
    If ' is a sentence of vocabulary , let Mod(') be the collection of -structures A
satisfying '.

PTime Logics Let L be a logic. For each  and each ' 2 Sen(), let K (; ') be
the class of -structures A such that A j= '. Call L PTime, if every class K (; ') is
PTime.

Logic that Capture Ptime A logic L captures PTime if it is PTime and, for every
vocabulary , every PTime class of -structures coincides with some K (; ').
Remark It may seem odd that the de nition of logic does not require any uniformity
in , but uniformity is not necessary. It is not hard to show that, if there is a logic
of graphs (rather than arbitrary structures) that captures PTime on graphs, then
there is a logic that captures PTime on arbitrary structures and that possesses some
uniformity with respect to . [Gurevich 1988]. 2

Three-Valued Logics In the cases when a logic is really a computation model and
sentences are computing machines, A satis es ' means that ' accepts A. That calls
for the following natural generalization. Call logics de ned above two-valued.
    A three-valued logic L is like a two-valued logic except that Sat (A; ') has three
possible values telling us whether ' accepts A, or ' rejects A, or neither. It is assumed
that Sat (A; ') = Sat (B; ') if A and B are isomorphic.
    Each L-sentence ' of vocabulary  gives rise to two disjoint classes of -structures.
The class Mod+(') of -structures accepted by ' and the class Mod (') of classes
rejected by '. Call L PTime if, for every ', the classes Mod+(') and Mod (') are
PTime.
    Two disjoint classes K1; K2 of structures of some vocabulary  are L-separable if
there exists an L-sentence ' such that K1  Mod+(') and K2  Mod ('). We will
see that this is a more robust notion than the similar notion where  is replaced with
equality.

Abiteboul-Vianu Relational Machines Finally, for future reference, we recall
(a version of) Abiteboul-Vianu's Relational machines [Abiteboul and Vianu 1991;
Abiteboul-Vardi-Vianu 1997].
                                           9
    A relational machine is a Turing machine augmented with a relational store which
is a structure of a xed purely relational vocabulary . A part 0 of the vocabulary
is devoted to input relations. The Turing tape is initially empty. As usual, the
program consists of \if condition then action" instructions. Here is an example of an
instruction.

      If the control state is s3, and the head reads symbol 1, and the relation
      R1 is empty, then change the state to s4, replace 1 by 0, move the head
      to the right and replace R2 with R2 \ R3.

    In general, instructions are Turing instructions except that (1) the condition may
be augmented with the emptyness test of one of the relations, and (2) the action may
be augmented with an algebraic operation on the relations. The algebraic operations
are of the following four types. It is assumed that the arities of the operations involved
are appropriate; in the example above, the relations R2 and R3 are all of the same
arity.
    Boolean operations.
    Projections i1:::im Rk . Project Rk on the coordinates i1; : : :; im in the speci ed
     order.
    Cartesian product of two relations.
    Selections i=j Rk . Select the tuples in Rk whose i-th component coincides with
     the j -th component.
    A PTime relational machine M can be de ned as a relational machine together
with a polynomial p(n) bounding the number of computation steps on input structure
of size n. The notion of PTime relational machine gives rise to a PTime logic (whcih
may be called AV Logic) where the sentences of vocabulary 0 are PTime relational
machines with input vocabulary 0.
    In our view, AV Logic is naturally three-valued. Given an input structure I of
size n, a PTime relational machine (M; p(n)) may accept I within time p(n), may
reject I within time p(n), or do neither. One cannot modify M so that it computes
p(n) because n is unknown to the machine. Of course one can clump together all
non-accepted structures but this de nition is too sensitive to the choice of p(n).

4 Computation Model
Our computing devices are abstract state machines (ASMs, formerly called evolving
algebras) [Gurevich 1995, Gurevich 1997] adapted for our purposes here.
                                           10
4.1 Vocabularies
An ASM vocabulary is a nite collection of function names, each of a xed arity. Some
function names may be marked as relational or static, or both. Relational names are
also called predicates. A function name is dynamic if it is not marked static. The
Greek letter  is reserved to denote vocabularies.
    In our case, every vocabulary consists of the following four parts:
Logic names The equality sign, nullary function names true ; false and the names of
     the usual Boolean operations. All logic names are relational and static. (The
     standard ASM de nition [Gurevich 1995] requires another logic name, undef ,
     but we will not employ undef here, using ; instead as a default value.)
Set-theoretic names The static binary predicate 2 and the following static non-
     predicate function names.
        Nullary names ; and Atoms.
        Unary names S and TheUnique.
        A binary name Pair.
Input names A nite collection of static names. For simplicity of exposition, we
    assume that all input names are relational.
Dynamic names A nite collection of dynamic function names including nullary
    predicates Halt and Output.

4.2 States
A state A of vocabulary  is a structure A of vocabulary  satisfying a number of
conditions described in this subsection.

Base Set The base set of A consists of two disjoint parts:
  1. A nite set X of atoms, that is elements that are not sets.
  2. The collection of all hereditarily nite sets built from the atoms.
The atoms and the sets are objects of A. The objects form a transitive set HF(X )
which can be de ned as the closure of X under the following operation: If n is a
natural number and x1; : : : ; xn are in, then throw fx1; : : :; xng in. We have also:
                                       [
                            HF(X ) =         PowerSetn (X ):
                                       n<!

                                           11
Set-Theoretic Functions The interpretations of 2 Sand ; are obvious. Atoms is the
set of atoms. If a is an atomSor a logic element, then a = ;. If a1; : : : ; aj are atoms
and b1; : : :; bk are sets then fa1; : : :; aj ; b1; : : : ; bkg = b1 [    [ bk . If a is a singleton
set, then TheUnique(a) is the unique element       S
                                                              of a; otherwise TheUnique(a) = ;.
(If x is a set then x = TheUniquefxg = fxg, so TheUnique is redundant in this
situation, but it is needed if x is an atom.) Pair(a; b) = fa; bg.

Logic Names false and true are interpreted as 0 and 1 respectively. Recall that 0
is ; and that 1 is Pair(0; 0) = f;g. The Boolean connectives are interpreted in the
obvious way over the Boolean values 0; 1 and take the value 0 if at least one of the
arguments is not Boolean.

Predicates Predicates are interpreted as functions whose only possible values are
the Boolean values 0; 1. If P (a) evaluates to 1 (respectively 0), we say that P (a) holds
or is true (respectively, fails or is false). The input predicates \live" over the atoms:
if P is an input predicate and P (a1; : : :; aj ) holds, then every ai is an atom.

Dynamic Functions De ne the extent of a dynamic function f of arity j to be the
set

                           f(x0; : : : ; xj ) : f (x0; : : :; xj 1) = xj 6= 0g:
The only restriction on the interpretation of a dynamic function f is that its extent
is nite.

4.3 Input Structures
Consider an ASM vocabulary . An input structure appropriate for -programs is
any nite structure I of the input vocabulary. A little problem arises in the case
when some elements of I are sets. The actual input corresponding to I is a structure
isomorphic to I whose base set (the universe) consists of atoms. An -state is initial if
the extent of every dynamic function is empty. For any input structure I appropriate
for , there is a unique, up to isomorphism, initial -state A where the atoms together
with input relations form a structure isomorphic to I .
    Remark. We will be not very careful in distinguishing between an input structure
I and its atomic version. Without loss of generality, one may assume that the input
structure itself consists of atoms.



                                                   12
4.4 Terms
By induction, we de ne a syntactic category of terms and a subcategory of Boolean
terms.
      A variable is a term.
      If f is a function name of arity j and t1; : : : ; tj are terms, then f (t1; : : :; tj ) is a
       term. If f is a predicate then f (t1; : : :; tj ) is Boolean.
      Suppose that v is a variable, t(v) is a term, r is a term without free occurrences
       of v, and g(v) is a Boolean term. Then
                                          ft(v) : v 2 r : g(v)g
        is a term.
    In the usual way, the same induction is used to de ned free variables of a given
term. In particular, the free variables of ft(v) : v 2 r : g(v)g are those of t(v); r and
g(v) except for v.
    Semantics is obvious. In particular, the value of ft(v) : v 2 r : g(v)g at a given
state A is the set of values ValA(t(v)) such that, in A, v 2 r and g(v) holds.

4.5 Syntax of Rules
Transition rules are de ned inductively.

Skip Skip is a rule.
Update Rules Suppose that f is a dynamic function name of some arity r and
t0; : : : ; tr are terms. If f is relational, we require that t0 is Boolean. Then
f (t1; : : :; tr ) := t0
is a rule.

Conditional Rules If g is a Boolean term and R1; R2 are rules, then
if   g then R1 else R2 endif
is a rule.
                                                 13
Do-forall Rules If v is a variable, r is a term without v free, and R0(v) is a rule,
then
do forall      v2r
    R0 ( v )
enddo


is a rule with head variable v, guard r and body R0. The de nition of free and bound
variables is obvious.
    Abbreviate rule
do forall   v 2 f0 ; 1 g                                                   do-in-parallel
   if    v=0
          then 0     R                            to                           R0 ; R 1
          R
   else 1 endif
                                                                           enddo
enddo




Here and in the following, we use standard notation as a more readable substitute
for the ocial syntax. In particular, 0 means ;, fx; yg means Pair(x; y), fxg means
Pair(x; x), and 1 means f0g.

4.6 Semantics of Rules
If  is a variable assignment over a state A, assigning values to nitely many variables,
then the pair B = (A;  ) is an expanded state, A = State(B ),  = Assign(B ), and
Dom( ) = Var(B ). Further, let v be a variable and a an element of A. Then B (v 7! a)
is the expanded state obtained from B by assigning or reassigning a to v. In other
words, B (v 7! a) = (A;  0) where Dom( 0) = Dom( )[fvg,  0(v) = a and  0(u) =  (u)
for the remaining variables.
    A location of an expanded state A is a pair ` = (f; a) where f is a dynamic function
and a is a tuple of elements of A such that the length of a equals the arity of f . If b
is also an element of A, then the pair = (`; b) is an update of A. ((f; (a1; : : : ; aj )); b)
is abbreviated to (f; a1; : : :; aj ; b). To re at A, put b into the location f , that is,
rede ne A so that f (a) = b. The other locations remain intact. The resulting state is
the sequel of A with respect to . Two updates clash if they have the same locations
but di erent new contents.
    An action over a state A is a set of updates of A. An action is consistent if
it contains no clashing updates. To perform an action , do the following. If is
consistent, then re all updates 2 simultaneously; otherwise do nothing. The
result is the sequel of A with respect to . If is inconsistent then the sequel of A is
A itself.
                                             14
    A rule R and the expanded state A are appropriate for each other if Voc(A)
contains all function symbols in R and Var(A) contains all free variables in R.
    Now we are ready to explain the semantics of rules. The denotation Den(R) of a
rule R is a function on expanded states A appropriate for R. Each Den(R)(A) (or
Den(R; A) for brevity) is an action. To re R at A, perform the action Den(R; A)
at State(A). The sequel of A with respect to R is the sequel of A with respect to
Den(R; A). Den(R; A) is de ned by induction on R.

Skip Den(Skip; A) = ;.
Update Rules If R is an update rule f (s) := t and ` is location (f; ValA (s)), then
Den(R; A) = f(`; ValA (t))g.

Conditional Rules If R is the rule if g then R1 else R2 endif, then
                                   
                                   Den(R1; A) if g holds at A;
                       Den(R; A) = Den( R2; A) otherwise.

Do-forall Rules If R is
do forall     v 2 r,
   R0 ( v )
enddo


then
                               [
                 Den(R; A) = fDen(R0(v); A(v 7! a)) : a 2 ValA (r)g

4.7 Programs
A program is a rule without free variables. The vocabulary Voc() of a program
 is the collection of function names that occur in . States of  are states of the
vocabulary Voc().

Runs A run of  is a ( nite or in nite) sequence hAi : i < i of states of  such
that
    A0 is an initial state,

                                         15
    every Ai+1 is a sequel of Ai with respect to , and
    Halt fails at every Ai with i + 1 < .
Here  is a positive integer or the rst in nite ordinal !. The length of a nite run
hAi : i  li is l. The length of an in nite run is !.
   Let I be an input structure for . The run of  on I is the run hAi : i < i such
that
    A0 is the initial state generated by I , and
    either  is in nite, or else  is nite and Halt holds at the nal state A 1.
   The base set and objects of a run hAi : i < i are those of A0.

4.8 The Counting Function
There are many ways to extend the computation model described above without
introducing explicit choice in its full generality. One gentle extension of the compu-
tation model described above is considered in Section 11. A more powerful extension
is achieved by introducing the counting function which, given a set x of cardinality
k, produces the von Neumann ordinal for k.
    Remark. Since the computation model is expandable by adding static functions for
counting or perfect matching, etc., one gets in fact a notion of relative computability.

5 Choiceless PTime
It is easy to check that every computable global relation on nite structures is com-
putable by an appropriate ASM program. But we are interested in polynomial time
computations.

5.1 The De nition of Choiceless PTime
Critical, Active and Relevant Objects Let A be a state and x 2 BaseSet(A).
    Object x is critical at A if x is an atom, or x 2 f0; 1g, or x is a value of a dynamic
     function, or x is a component of a location where some dynamic function takes
     a value di erent from ;.
    Object x is active at A if x 2 TC(y) for some critical y.
                                           16
Further, let  be a run of a program . An object x of  is active in  if it is so at
some state of .

PTime Programs One may de ne a notion of honest computation time. Don't just
count computation steps; charge for example a unit of time for every function applica-
tion, every update, etc. In other words, instead of macrosteps, count the microsteps
of the computation [BG]. Here we use a simpler way to bound the computation time.
    A PTime (bounded) program  is a triple  = (; p(n); q(n)) where  is a program
and p(n); q(n) are integer polynomials. The run of  on an input structure I of size
n is the longest initial segment  of the run of  on I such that the length of  is
 p(n) and the number of active objects in  is  q(n). A PTime program  accepts
(respectively rejects) an input structure I if the run of  on I halts and Output equals
true (respectively false ) in the nal state.

Choiceless Polynomial Time Notice the classes of accepted and rejected input
structures are disjoint but not necessarily complementary and that increasing the
polynomial bound may increase these classes. If the size of the input structure is
known and if one uses a version of honest computation time, a program may keep
track of the honest computation time and in this way insure that every computation
is halting. We will consider this scenario in Section 11.
    Here, we de ne Choiceless Polynomial Time (in brief C~ PTime) as a collection
of pairs (K1 ; K2) where K1; K2 are disjoint classes of nite structures of the same
vocabulary. A pair (K1; K2) is in C~ PTime (or C~ PTime separable) if there exists a
PTime program that accepts all structures in K1 and rejects all structures in K2. The
program may accept some structures not in K1 or reject some structures not in K2.
Obviously, there is a three-valued logic that expresses exactly C~ PTime properties;
use PTime programs as sentences.
    A class K of nite structures of the same vocabulary  is in C~ PTime, if the pair
(K; K 0) is in C~ PTime where K 0 is the complement of K in the class of nite structures
of vocabulary .
    Call two programs  and  PTime equivalent if
    for every PTime version  of , there exists a PTime version  of  which ac-
     cepts all input structures accepted by  and rejects all input structures rejected
     by  , and
    for every PTime version  of , there exists a PTime version  of  which ac-
     cepts all input structures accepted by  and rejects all input structures rejected
     by  .


                                           17
5.2 Upper Bounds for C~ PTime
In our de nition of a PTime program, the given polynomials bound not only time
but also space. We show that C~ PTime is not too broad.

Theorem 1 Consider a PTime program  = (; p(n); q(n)).
  1. There is a PTime-bounded Turing machine that accepts exactly those strings
     that encode ordered versions of input structures accepted by  and rejects exactly
     those strings that encode ordered versions of input structures rejected by  .
  2. There exists a polynomial r(n) such that the number of microsteps in every run
     of  on an input structure of size n is bounded by r(n).

Proof 1. The desired Turing machine simulates the given PTime program. The
bound r in a term fs(v) : v 2 r : g(v)g and in a do-forall rule ensures that the
number of immediate subcomputations is bounded by the number of active elements
and thus by q(n). This yields a polynomial bound on the work needed to simulate
one transition in the run. since the number of transitions is bounded by p(n), the
whole simulation takes only polynomial time.
2. Since the number of macrosteps is bounded by a polynomial, it suces to check
that the number of microsteps needed to re an arbitrary rule R is bounded by a
polynomial. This is done by an obvious induction on R. 2

   The part 1 of the theorem gives the following corollary.
                  ~
Corollary 1 Every CPTime pair of structure classes (K1 ; K2 ) is separated by a
PTime class.

5.3 A Lower Bound for CP
In the previous subsection, we have shown that our de nition of CP is not too broad.
One may also worry that it is too narrow, that | because of the use of transitive
closure in the de nition of active objects | it is possible to create a large number
of active objects in short time. Some active objects, namely atoms and 0; 1, exist
already in the initial state. The problem is to show that only polynomially many
active nonempty sets can be created within polynomial honest computation time.
We show that, under the de nition of honest computation time hinted at above, the
number of objects activated (that is the number of active objects which are inactive in
the initial state) in any run of a PTime program is bounded by the honest computation
time. The details of the de nition of honest computation time are not important.

                                          18
    Consider a PTime program . Without loss of generality, we may assume that 
does not reuse variables, that is no variable is bound more than once. It follows that,
in every subrule of , no variable is bound more than once and no variable occurs
both free and bound. De ne a grounded term to be a pair (t; A) where t is a term
and A is an expanded state appropriate for t. Similarly, de ne a grounded rule to
be a pair consisting of a rule and expanded state appropriate for it. Notice that a
grounded term (t; A) has a value, namely ValA(t).
    The following de nitions are intended to describe, for each grounded term or rule,
say (X; A), a partially ordered set (poset) Pre(X; A) whose nodes are labeled with
grounded terms that one would naturally evaluate in the course of evaluating X at A;
the order of Pre(X; A) re ects the order in which one would evaluate the grounded
terms. Pre(X; A) is similar to the parse tree of X , but there are some distinctions. To
prevent the de nitions from getting even longer that they are, we omit the grounded
terms involved in evaluating guards; one could include them without any damage to
our argument. Also, we omit subrules that end up not being used because of clashes.
    In fact, Pre(X; A) is not necessarily a tree. It will be convenient for our purposes
that, for each free variable of X , there is at most one node with a label of the form
(x; A) or (x; A(v 7! a)); this gives rise to the following auxiliary de nition. Let P
be a poset whose nodes are labeled with ground terms, and let F be a collection of
variables such that no label in P has the form (x; A(x 7! a)) and each node with a
label of the form (x; A) or (x; A(v 7! a)) is minimal in P . Then adjusting P with
respect to F means merging, for each x 2 F , all nodes of P with labels of the form
(x; A) or (x; A(v 7! a)) into one node labeled with (x; A).
    De ne a disjoint union of labeled posets in the obvious way: order and the labels
within each piece are preserved and elements of distinct pieces are incomparable. Now
we are ready de ne posets Pre(X; A) by induction on X .

De nition 1 Pre(t; A) is de ned by recursion on t.
     If t is a variable x, then Pre(t; A) is a singleton poset whose only node is labeled
      with (x; A).
     If t is f (t1; : : : ; tj ), then Pre(t; A) is obtained from the disjoint union of
      Pre(t1; A); : : :; Pre(tj ; A) by adding a (t; A)-labeled node at the top and ad-
      justing the result with respect to the free variables of t.
     If t is fs(v) : v 2 r : g(v)g, then Pre(t; A) is obtained from the disjoint union of
      labeled posets Pre(s(v); A(v 7! a)), for all a 2 ValA (r) such that ValA(g(a)) =
      true , by doing the following. (1) Adjoin a (t; A)-labeled node at the top. (2)
      Adjoin a copy of Pre(r; A) below all (v; A(v 7! a))-labeled nodes. (3) Adjust
      the result with respect to the free variables of t.
2
                                           19
    Note that Pre(t; A) always has the top node labeled with (t; A). Further, for each
free variable x of t, there is at most one node labeled with (x; A) and this node (if
present at all) is minimal in Pre(t; A).
De nition 2 Pre(R; A) is de ned by recursion on R.
     If R is Skip, then Pre(R; A) = ;.
     If R is f (t1; : : :; tj ) := t0, then construct Pre(R; A) as follows. Form the disjoint
      union of Pre(t0; A); : : :; Pre(tj ; A) and adjust the result with respect to the free
      variables of R.
     If R is \if g then R1 else R2 endif" then Pre(R; A) is Pre(R1; A) or Pre(R2; A)
      according to whether ValA (g) is true or false.
     If R is \do forall v 2 r, R0(v) enddo", then construct Pre(R; A) as follows.
      Form the disjoint union of Pre(R0(v); A(v 7! a)) for all a 2 ValA (r). Add a
      copy of Pre(r; A) below each (v; A(v 7! a)) if there any; otherwise add a copy
      of Pre(r; A) to the disjoint union. Adjust the result with respect to the set of
      free variables of R.
2
   If (X; A) is a grounded term or rule, let Val[Pre(X; A)] be the collection of objects
ValB (s) such that (s; B ) is a label in Pre(X ).
Lemma 1 1. If Den(R; A) contains an update (f; (a0; : : :; aj 1); aj ), then every
   ai 2 Val[Pre(R; A)].
    2. Suppose that (X; A) is a grounded term or rule with bound variable v. If (v; B )
       is a label in Pre(X; A), then B has the form C (v 7! a) where C = A(u 7! b)
       and the variables u (if present at all) are all di erent from v.

Proof
1. Induction on R.
2. Induction on X . 2

   The labels of Pre(X; A) are (some of the) grounded terms that would be evaluated
when one evaluates X in A. At least one unit of honest computation time should be
spent to evaluate each of the labels. So if a run hA0; : : :; Ali of the program  takes
honest computation time T , then
                                     [
                              Card( Val[Pre(; Ai)])  T:
                                      i

                                             20
Theorem 2[Consider a run  = hA0; : : :; Ali of . Every object x activated in 
belongs to       Val[Pre(; Ai)].
             i
Proof Call sets 0; 1 binary and let x be an active nonbinary set in . In view of
the convention about dynamic functions in initial states, A0 has no critical nonbinary
sets and thus no active nonbinary sets. Let i be the rst index such that x is active
in Ai+1. So there is a nonbinary set y, critical for Ai+1, with x 2 TC(y). Since y is
not critical for Ai, there must be an update, executed in the step from Ai to Ai+1,
involving y as either the new value or a component of the location. By Lemma 1, y 2
Val[Pre(; Ai)]. Among all nodes n in Pre(; Ai) such that x 2 TC(Val(Label(n))),
choose a minimal one. Call this node n0 and let (t; B ) = Label(n0). Our goal is to
show that ValB (t) = x. So suppose this fails. Then there exists w 2 ValB (t) such
that x 2 TC(w). (This includes the possibility that x = w.) As x is a nonbinary
set, w is a nonbinary set. We consider the various possibilities for t and deduce a
contradiction in every case. Note that B is an expansion of Ai.
     Suppose that t has the form f (s) for a dynamic f . Then ValB (t) is critical already
in Ai and therefore x is active in Ai, contrary to our choice of i.
     Suppose that t is ; or Atoms. This is absurd, as ValB (t) contains a nonbinary set
w.
     Suppose that t is S s. Since w 2 ValB (t) = S ValB (s), we have w 2 u 2 ValB (s)
for some u. Since x 2 TC(w), we have x 2 TC(ValB (s)). But Pre(t; B ) has a node
labeled (s; B ) and thus there is a node labeled (s; B ) below n0 in Pre(; A). This
contradicts the choice of n0.
     Suppose t is fs1; s2g. Then x 2 TC(w) = TC(ValB (s)) for some s 2 fs1; s2g. The
rest is as in the S case.
     Suppose that t is TheUnique(s). Since ValB (t) is a set (not an atom),
TheUnique(s) = S(s) here, and we get a contradiction as in the S case.
     Suppose that t is P (s) where P is a predicate name. According to our presentation
of truth values, ValB (t) is either ; or f;g. In the rst case, we get a contradiction
as in the ; case. In the second case, w = ; which is impossible as TC(w) contains a
nonbinary set x.
     Suppose that t is fs(v) : v 2 r : g(v)g. Since w 2 ValB (t), there is some a 2
ValB (r) such that ValB(v7!a)(g(v)) = true and ValB(v7!a)(s(v)) = w. Recall that
x 2 TCB (w). But Pre(t; B ) has a node labeled (s(v); B (v 7! a)) and thus there is a
node labeled (s(v); B (v 7! a)) below n0 in Pre(; A). This contradicts the choice of
n0 .
     Finally, suppose that t is a variable v. As  is a program and thus has no free
variables, v is bound in . Since  does not reuse variables, v is bound exactly once,
either by a fs(v) : v 2 r : g(v)g construction or by a do-forall. Let r be the range of
v. By Lemma 1, B must be C (v 7! a), where C is an expansion of Ai that involves
                                            21
only variables di erent from v and where a 2 ValC (r). So ValB (t) = ValC(v7!a)(v) =
a 2 ValC (r). Thus, x 2 TC(ValC (r)). But Pre(; A) includes a copy of Pre(r; C ),
whose top node is labeled with (r; C ), below node n0. This contradicts the minimality
of n0.
    2
Corollary 2 Let  be a PTime program (; p(n); q(n)), and let  be the run of  on
some input structure I . The number of objects active in  is bounded by the number
of microsteps plus the number of atoms plus two.
Proof Except for 0; 1, and atoms, everything active in  is activated in . The
theorem and the observation preceding it immediately give the desired bound. 2

5.4 The Robustness of C~ PTime
We have considered two de nitions of PTime programs: the ocial de nition by
means of active elements, and the counting-microsteps de nition. Even though de-
tails of the second de nition have been skipped, we have shown in the previous two
subsections that the two de nitions are equivalent in the sense that they give rise to
the same notion of C~ PTime.
    There is another natural de nition of PTime programs. Fix a program , and
call an object x relevant to a state A of  if it is active at A or there exists a dynamic
function f such that x 2 TC(Extent(f )). Call1 x is relevant to a run  of  if it is
relevant to some state of .
    A PTime program can be de ned as a pair (; r(n)) where  is a program and
r(n) is a polynomial that bounds the number of relevant objects in 's runs. If  is
the run of  on an initial structure I , then the run of (; r(n)) on I is the maximal
initial segment 0 of  such (1) that the number of objects relevant to 0 is bounded
by r(n), and (2) all states of 0 are distinct. The second clause is needed to ensure
that 0 is nite in the case when  loops on I .
Theorem 3 The active-object and relevant-object de nitions give the same notion of
~
CPTime
Proof First, let (; r(n)) be a PTime program with respect to the relevant-object
de nition, and let  be the run of (; r(n)) on an input structure I of size n. Clearly,
r(n) bounds the number of active objects in 's runs. It suces to show that the
length of  is bounded by a polynomial of n that is independent of I .
   Let m be the number of dynamic names in Voc(), and let f range over dynamic
functions of . A state in  is uniquely determined by the relevant sets Extent(f ).
Hence the number of di erent states in  is at most r(n)m.
                                           22
    Second let (; q(n); r(n)) be a PTime program with respect to the active-object
de nition, and let  be the run of (; p(n); q(n)) on an input structure I of size n. It
suces to show that the number of objects relevant to  is bounded by a polynomial
of n that is independent of I .
    Let m be the number of dynamic functions in  and let j be the maximum of
their arities. A relevant object x has one of the following two forms. First, x may be
Extent(f ) for some dynamic function f . There at most m  p(n) relevant objects of
that sort. Second, x may be a k-tuple of active objects, k  j + 1, or a member of
the transitive closure of such a tuple. Obviously, there is a polynomial bound on the
number of such relevant objects. 2

6 Two Fixed-Point Theorems
6.1 De nable Set-Theoretic Functions
The ASM programming language allows one to use much of the usual set-theoretic
notation. Here are some examples.

Lemma 2 Over ASM states, every rst-order formula with bounded quanti ers is
expressible by a Boolean term.

Proof An easy induction over the given formula. In particular, (9v 2 r) g(v) ()
0 2 f0 : v 2 r : g(v)g: 2

Lemma 3 The function
                                               
                         if y then x1 else x2 = xx1 ifif yy 6=
                                                             =
                                                               0
                                                               0
                                                  2
is de nable

Proof
                                                                            
        TheUnique fv : v 2 fx1; x2g : (y 6= 0 ^ v = x1) _ (y = 0 ^ v = x2)g :
2
Lemma 4 Operations x [ y, T x, x y are de nable.


                                          23
Proof
                                  [
                       x [ y = fx; yg
                        \              [
                           x = fv : v 2 x : (8w 2 x)v 2 wg
                       x y = fw : w 2 x : w 2= yg
2
    The standard Kuratowski de nition of ordered pairs is

                               OP(x; y) = ffxg; fx; ygg:

Lemma 5 There are de nable functions P1 and P2 satisfying the following condition.
If z = OP(x; y), then P1(z) = x and P2(z ) = y.

Proof
                                \ 
         P1(z) = TheUnique z
                  [     \                          [                 \        
         P2(z) = if z = z then P1(z) else TheUnique( z                    z)
2
  We will use the following lemma. Every nonempty transitive set T is a natural
model of the vocabulary f2; ;g; this model will be also called T .

Lemma 6 There exists a formula PosInteger(x) in the vocabulary f2; ;g such that,
for every transitive set T ,

                   T j= PosInteger(x) () x is a positive integer:

Proof PosInteger(x) asserts that x is transitive and either 0 or of the form z [ fzg,
and the same is true for each y 2 x. 2

6.2 First-Order Semantics
The sequel of a given state with respect to a given program can be described in the
given state by means of rst-order formulas [Glavan and Rosenzweig 1993]. We need
here a related result.


                                          24
Lemma 7 For every rule R and every dynamic function name f , there is a rst-order
formula UpdateR;f (x; y) such that

                   A j= UpdateR;f (x; y) () (f; x; y) 2 Den(R; A)
for all appropriate expanded states A.
   The appropriateness of A means that A is appropriate for R and its vocabulary
contains the name f which may or may not occur in R.
Proof Induction on R. If R is Skip or an update rule with head name di erent from
f , then UpdateR;f is any logically false formula. If R is f (t) := t0, then UpdateR;f
is (x = t ^ y = t0). If R is \if g then R1 else R2 endif", then UpdateR;f is (g =
true ^ UpdateR1;f ) _ (g = false ^ UpdateR2 ;f ).
     If R is \do-forall u 2 r, R0(u) enddo", then UpdateR;f is

                           :ClashR ^ (9u 2 r)UpdateR0(u);f
where ClashR = Wh2 ClashR;h and ClashR;h is
                          h                                                         i
     (9u; u0 2 r)9z9w9w0 UpdateR+(u);h(z; w) ^ UpdateR+(u );h(z; w0) ^ w 6= w0
                                                             0




Here Length(z) = Arity(h). 2

6.3 Time-Explicit Programs
Call a PTime program  time-explicit if every positive integer i is active in all runs
of  of length  i.
Lemma 8 Every PTime program can be simulated by a time-explicit PTime program.
Proof Just alter the given program  to
do-in-parallel
   
   if not(Halt) then
      CT  :=
           CT    [f g
                CT
   endif
enddo

where CT (an allusion to Current Time) is a fresh nullary dynamic function name
(automatically initialized to 0, according to our conventions). 2
                                          25
6.4 Fixed-Point De nability
Fix a PTime program  = (; p(n); q(n)) where  is time-explicit. Let I range over
input structures for . De ne Active(I ) to be the collection of active objects in the
run of  on I . It is easy to see that Active(I ) is transitive. We also denote by
Active(I ) the structure (Active(I ); 2; ;; R ) where R stands for all the relations of the
input structure I .

Theorem 4 (First Fixed-Point Theorem) Let hAi : i  li be the run of  on an
input structure I . Relations

                          Df (i; x; y) () Ai j= f (x) = y 6= 0;
where f range over DynamicVoc(), are uniformly FO+LFP de nable in Active(I ).

   The uniformity means that the de ning formulas are independent of I .
                                                        S
Proof Notice that
              S
                  if i is a positive integer then i 1 =   i. For clarity, we will use
i 1 instead of i in the situations where i is a positive integer.
     Call a rst-order formula ' simple if every atomic subformula of ' has the form
f (x) = t where x is a tuple of variables and t is either a variable or true or false .
It is easy to see that every rst-order formula whose vocabulary consists of function
names is logically equivalent to a simple formula. Without loss of generality, we may
assume that the formulas UpdateR;f (x; y), constructed in the previous subsection, are
simple.
     By simultaneous recursion, we de ne relations Df , where f ranges over the dy-
namic function names of :

             Dfh(i; x; y) () PosInteger(i) ^                                 i
                   Df (i 1; x; y) ^ :(9z 6= y)Uf (i 1; x; z) _ Uf (i 1; x; y)

Here Uf (j; x; y) is the formula Update;f (x; y) where each atomic subformula h(u) = t
is replaced with Dh(j; u; t). 2

   The First Fixed-Point Theorem remains true if the computation time of the given
program is bounded by any other function (not necessarily a polynomial) or is not
bounded at all. Also, we get the same de nability in any transitive T that includes
Active(I ).

                                             26
Theorem 5 (Second Fixed-Point Theorem) Restrict attention to input struc-
tures I such that  halts on I . Then the set Active(I ) is uniformly FO+LFP de nable
in HF(BaseSet(I )).

Proof The desired FO+LFP formula '(x) asserts that x is an atom, or x 2 f0; 1g,
or the following is true for some dynamic function f where k = Arity(f ).
                               h                                                    i
              (9i; v0; : : :; vk ) Df (i; v0; : : :; vk ) ^ (v0 = x _    _ vk = x)
2

7 On the Extent of C~ PTime
We show, in particular, that PTime abstract state machines are more powerful than
the PTime relational machines of Abiteboul{Vianu.

Theorem 6 For every PTime relational machine , there exists a PTime ASM pro-
gram  that accepts all input structures accepted by  and rejects all input structures
rejected by .

Proof If  has m instructions, then the desired program  is a do-in-parallel rule
with m components. Each component simulates one instruction of . 2

   Let 0 be an input vocabulary and let 1 be the extension of 0 with a unary
predicate U . If A is a structure with basic predicate U , let A0 be the 0-reduct of
the substructure of A with universe U .

Theorem 7 Let j be a positive integer and let K be the class of nite 1-structures
A where jA0j!  jAjj . For every PTime class K0 of 0-structures, there exists an
ASM program  with input vocabulary 1 that accepts all K -structures A with A0 in
K0 and rejects all K -structures A with A0 outside of K0.

Proof Suppose that A 2 K and let n = jA0j. There exists a Turing machine T
that, given an ordered version of A0, computes F (AjU ). The desired ASM program
 constructs all n! orderings of A0 in parallel and then runs in parallel n! simulations
of T . 2

   In particular, we have the case when 0 is empty, j = 1 and K0 is the class of
naked sets of even cardinality.

                                                27
Lemma 9 Let K be the class of all fU g structures A with jA0j!  jAj. There exists
no relational machine that accepts all K -structures A with jA0 j even and rejects all
K -structures A with jA0j odd.

Proof Relational machines recognize only classes de nable in FO+LFP [Abiteboul
and Vianu 1991]. It is easy to see that K admits quanti er elimination and that every
FO+LFP formula is equivalent to a quanti er-free rst-order formula. It follows that
parity is not FO+LFP de nable. 2

    Thus PTime abstract state machines are more powerful than PTime relational
machines.
    Remark. In the case when 0 is empty, j = 1 and K0 is the class of naked
structures of even cardinality, the theorem above can be strengthened by replacing
the restriction jA0j!  jAjj with more liberal restriction 2jA0 j  jAjj . The idea is to
compute the set of pairs of 2-element subsets of U , then extend it with the set of all
4-element subsets of U , then extend the result with the set of all 6-element subsets
of U , and so on. When this computation converges, check if the result contains U .
    Remark. Theorem 7 and its proof can be extended to cover the situation where
U is not merely a subset of the input structure but rather a set that can be produced
in polynomial time by an ASM. For example, if the intput structures are graphs G
then U might be the commutator subgroup G0 of the quotient G=G0 .

8 The Support Theorem
The goal of this and the next sections is to show that the parity of a naked set is not
C~ PTime computable. Thus the inclusion of C~ PTime in PTime (see Theorem 1) is
proper; \choiceless" is a real restriction. The present section is devoted to establishing
a limitation on the sets that can be activated by a C~ PTime computation over a naked
set. This limitation is used in the next section to prove the negative result about
parity. The same method will also yield other negative results.
    Consider a PTime program  and let I be an input structure for . The recipe
(x) = f(y) : y 2 xg extends any automorphism  of I to an automorphism of the
whole initial state State(I ) generated by I . It is easy to see that every automorphism
of State(I ) can be obtained this way. Indeed, an automorphism 0 of State(I ) coin-
cides, on I , with some automorphism  of I ; by induction on Rank(x), check that
0(x) = (x) for all x 2 State(I ).

De nition 3 A set X of atoms of I is a support of an object y 2 State(I ) if every
automorphism of I that pointwise xes X xes y as well. 2

                                           28
   Let Active(I ) be the set of active objects in the run of  on I . It is easy to see that
Active(I ) is transitive and closed under automorphisms of State(I ). Let Active+ (I )
be the substructure of State(I ) with base set Active(I ).

Theorem 8 (Support Theorem) Assume that the input vocabulary of  is empty.
There exists a number k such that, for all suciently large I , every object in Active(I )
has a support of cardinality  k .

    To avoid interruption of the natural ow of the proof, we start with a known
(except we do not know a proper reference) combinatorial lemma which will be used
later in the proof. Recall that a -system is a collection K of sets such that X \ Y
is the same set for all X 6= Y in K .

Lemma 10 Any family F of  l!pl+1 sets, each of size  l, includes a -system of
p sets.

Proof Induction on l. If l = 0, then F itself is a -system. Assume that l > 0 and
the results holds for l 1.
    Case 1: There exists a point x that belongs to  (l 1)!pl sets in F , say sets Xi,
i 2 I . Apply the induction hypothesis to the family fXi fxg : i 2 I g, to extract
a -system of p sets fXi fxg : i 2 J g. The family fXi : i 2 J g is the desired
-system.
    Case 2: Each point belongs to < (l 1)!pl sets in F . In this case, we nd p pairwise
disjoint members of F ; they form the desired -system. Notice that each member of
F intersects < l(l 1)!pl = l!pl other members and that Card(F )=(l!pl)  p. Pick
a member X1 arbitrarily, and then eliminate those members that meet X1. Pick
a member X2 among the remaining members arbitrarily, and then eliminate those
members that meet X2. And so on. 2

   Let I be a naked set and let A = Active(I ).

Lemma 11 If X1; X2 support y and X1 [ X2 6= I , then X1 \ X2 supports y as well.
Proof Suppose that X1 ; X2 support y. Fix an atom a 2 I (X1 [ X2). Let b
range over I (X1 \ X2) and b be the transposition of atoms that takes a to b.
For each b, either b 2= X1 or b 2= X2. In the rst case b pointwise xes X1 , and in
the second it pointwise xes X2. In either case, it xes y. It is easy to see that the
transpositions b generate all permutations of atoms which pointwise x X1 \ X2.
Hence the automorphisms induced by permutations b generate all automorphisms of
A that x X1 \ X2 . Hence every such automorphism xes y. 2

                                            29
   Let n = Card(I ). Lemma 11 justi es the following de nition. If object y has a
support X with jX j < n=2, then the set
                               \
                   Supp(y) = fX : X supports y and jX j < n=2g:
is the smallest support of X .
                               ! a bound n on Card(A). Fix such a k and assume
    Since  is PTime, there exists        k

that n is so large that k +n 1 > nk .

Lemma 12 If x 2 A has a support of size < n=2, then jSupp(x)j  k.
Proof Suppose that x has a support of size < n=2 and s = jSupp(x)j. If an au-
tomorphism  moves x to some y, then it moves Supp(x) to Supp(y). If s > k, we
have

                     nk  Card(A)  Cardf(x) :  2 Aut(A)g
                         Card
                            !
                               f(Supp(x!)) :  2 Aut(A)g
                        = ns  k +  n > nk
                                      1
2
    In order to prove the theorem, it suces to prove the following lemma.
Lemma 13 If n is suciently large, then every member of A has a support of size
< n=2.
Proof Toward a contradiction, assume that the lemma fails and let x be an object
of minimal rank without support of size < n=2. Clearly, x is a set and each member
of x has a support of size < n=2. Let m = bn=(4k)c.
Claim 1 There exists a sequence h(j ; yj ; zj ; Yj ; Zj ) : 1  j  mi such that every
initial segment h(i ; yi ; zi; Yi; Zi ) : 1  i  j i satis es the following conditions:

     j is an automorphism of A, and yj ; zj are objects in A, and Yj = Supp(yj ),
      Zj = Supp(zj ).
     yj 2 x, zj 2= x.
     j xes Yi [ Zi pointwise for all i < j , and j (yj ) = zj , and j maps Yj onto Zj .
                                            30
Proof of the claim. We construct the tuples by induction on j . Suppose that a
sequence h(i; yi; zi; Yi; Zi) : 1  i < j i, satisfying all the conditions, has been con-
structed. By the minimality of x, each yi has a support of size < n=2. Since zi is an
automorphic image of yi, the same applies to zi. By the previous lemma, jYij; jZij  k.
    Let Xj = Si<j (Yi [ Zi ). We have jXj jS (j 1)  2k < (n=4k)  2k = n=2. If
every automorhism  that pointwise xes i<j (Yi [ Zi ) xes x as well, then x has
a support of size < n=2 and we have the desired contradiction. Suppose that there
exists an automorphism  that pointwise xes Xj but moves x. It follows that there
exists y 2 x such that the element z = (y) does not belong to x. (Otherwise
(x) = fy : y 2 xg = f(y) : y 2 xg = x.) Since (y) = z,  maps Supp(y) onto
Supp(z). Choose, j = ; yj = y and zj = z. 2

   Let p be the largest integer with (2k)!p2k+1  m. As n grows, both m and p grow
(but k is xed). For large enough n, we have
                       h                       k i     h             i
               2p 1 > (2k)!(p + 1)2k+1  4k             (m + 1)  4k k > nk
   Assume that n is suciently large, so that 2p 1 > nk .

Claim 2 There exists a sequence h(j ; yj ; zj ; Yj ; Zj ) : 1  j  pi such that
    every initial segment h(i; yi; zi; Yi; Zi ) : 1  i  j i of the given sequence satis es
      the three conditions of Claim 1, and
    The sets Yi [ Zi form a -system.
Proof of the claim. Let h(j ; yj ; zj ; Yj ; Zj ) : 1  j  mi be as in Claim 1. By the
induction hypothesis, eachy Yi is of cardinality  k. Since Zi is an automorphic image
of Yi, the same applies to Zi . Thus Yi [ Zi  2k. Now apply Lemma 10. 2

    Fix a sequence h(j ; yj ; zj ; Yj ; Zj ) : 1  j  pi as in Claim 2, and let X0 =
(Yi [ Zi ) \ (Yj [ Zj ) for all i 6= j in [1; : : :; p]. Let U be the integer interval [2::p]. If
i 2 U , then i pointwise xes Y1 [ Z1 and therefore pointwise xes X0 .

Claim 3 For each V  U , there exists an automorphism V such that
    if i 2 V , then zi = V (zi).
    if i 2 U V , then zi = V (yi).


                                               31
Proof of the claim. Construct a permutation (a) of atoms as follows. If a 2 X0
then (a) = a. If a 2 Yi [ Zi for some i 2 V , then (a) = a. If a 2 Yi for some
i 2 U V but a 2= X0, then (a) = i(a), so that  maps Yi onto Zi. We do not care
how  behaves on the remaining atoms. The desired V is the automorphism induced
by . 2
   Let the automorphisms V be as in Claim 12.
Claim 4 If V; W are di erent subsets of U , then V (x) 6= W (x).
Proof of the claim. Suppose that V and W are distinct. Without loss of generality,
V W=   6 ;. Pick some i 2 V W . We show that zi 2 W (x) V (x).
  Since zi 2= x, V (zi) 2= V (x). Since i 2 V , zi = V (zi) 2= V (x).
  Since yi 2 x, W (yi) 2 W (x). Since i 2 U W , zi = W (yi) 2 W (x). 2
   By Claim 3, there are 2p 1 di erent automorphic images of x. Recall that n is
suciently large, so that 2p 1 > nk . Hence Card(A)  2p 1 > nk  Card(A). This
gives the desired contradiction. The Support Theorem is proved. 2
    De ne a colored set to be an input structure with only unary relations, called
colors, which partition the base set, so that every atom (that is every element of the
base set) belongs to exactly one color.
Corollary 3 Assume that input structures for the PTime program  are colored sets.
There exists a number k , depending only on , satisfying the following condition. If
every color in a given input structure I is suciently large, then every object in
Active (I ) has a support of cardinality  k .

Proof The proof is similar to the proof of the theorem. We indicate the more
important changes. In Lemma 11, require that I (X1 [ X2) contains at least one
atom of every color.
   In the de nition of Supp(y), replace jX j < n=2 with the requirement
   jX \ C j < jC j=2 for all colors C                                           (*)
Accordingly, in Lemma 12 and Lemma 13, instead of supports of size < n=2, speak
about supports satisfying (*). In the de nition of m, replace n with the minimum of
the color sizes. The rest of the proof remains valid. 2
    Finally, let us note that, over some input structures, a PTime program can activate
sets with no bounded support, so that the minimal support size depends on the input
structure I , not only on the PTime program.
                                          32
Example Let I be the disjoint union of (i) a vector space V over the two-element
 eld and (ii) a disjoint set S of size  2jV j. Let the program do the following with a
dynamic nullary function Q. Initialize Q to ff0gg where 0 is the zero of V . Thereafter,
for each q 2 Q and each v 2 V q, put into Q the subspace generated by q [ fvg,
except if this would make V 2 Q, in which case halt and accept. On the rst step,
the program activates all one-dimensional subspaces of V ; on the second, all two-
dimensional subspaces; on the third, all three-dimensional subspaces, and so on. The
length of the run equals the dimension of V . The number of active objects in the run
is

                  jV j + jS j + jSubspaces of(V )j  jV j + 2jS j < 2jI j:
Thus a PTime version of  accepts I . Notice that every hyperplane H of V is
activated. But H has no support smaller than dim(V ) 1. 2

9 The Equivalence Theorem
Fix an input vocabulary 0 and let I; J denote input structures of vocabulary 0.
Recall that every automorphism of I naturally extends to an automorphism of HF(I )
and that a subset X of BaseSet(I ) supports an object y 2 HF(I ) if every automor-
phism of I that pointwise xes X also xes y. Given a positive integer k, call an
object y 2 HF(I ) k-symmetric if every z 2 TC(y) has a support of size  k. This
terminology makes sense in the case of interest to us when many permutations of I
 x a k-symmetric object y. Notice that every atom has a support of size one and
thus is k-symmetric. Let Ik denote the collection of k-symmetric objects in HF(I ) as
well as the corresponding structure of vocabulary 0 [ f2; ;g.
   We are interested in a special case when 0 is impty and thus I; J are naked sets.

Theorem 9 (Equivalence Theorem) Fix positive integers k and m. If naked sets
I; J are suciently large, then structures Ik and Jk are Lm1;! -equivalent.

    The theorem is proved in the rest of this section. We drop the subscript k and
abbreviate \k-symmetric" to \symmetric". Without loss of generality, m  3. We
assume that the naked sets I; J have size  km and construct a winning strategy for
the Duplicator in Gamem(I; J). The idea is to represent every relevant object x as
a combination of a form and matter. The form of an object x re ects a de nition
of x independent from the underlying sets of atoms. The matter of x is an ordered
support of x.



                                            33
9.1 Matter
Molecules A molecule over a naked set I is an injective map  : k ! I . In other
words, a molecule is a sequence of k distinct atoms.

The Con guration of a Sequence of Molecules Consider a naked set I . The
con guration C () of a nite sequence  = (0; : : : ; l 1) of molecules over I is the
equivalence relation on l  k given by

                             (i; p)C ()(j; q) () i(p) = j (q):
The con guration describes how the ranges of the molecules overlap. By the injec-
tivity, (i; p)C ()(i; q) () p = q. Notice that C () is uniquely determined by the
con gurations C (i; j ).

Abstract Con gurations Let l be a natural number. An l-ary con guration is
an equivalence relation E on l  k such that (i; p)E (i; q) () p = q. Every
C (0; : : :; l 1) is an l-ary con guration, and every l-ary con guration can be realized
in this way. To prove the latter, assign a di erent atom [i; p] to every equivalence
class (i; p)E of E . Then construct i(p) = [i; p].

Lemma 14 Suppose that
  l 2 m, and 0; : : :; l are molecules over I , and 1; : : :; l are molecules over J ;
   Q = C (0; : : : ; l) and Q0 = C (1; : : :; l) = C (1; : : :; l).
There exists a molecule 0 over J with C (0; : : :; l) = Q.

Proof De ne the desired 0 by setting
                                        8
                                        >
                                        >
                                        >
                                          1(q1)        if (0; p)Q(1; q1)
                                        <  (q )        if (0; p)Q(2; q2)
                              00 (p) = > : 2: : 2
                                        >
                                        >
                                        :
                                           l ( ql )    if (0; p)Q(l; ql)
and then extending 00 to a full molecule 0 by using distinct values in J
Sl
  i=1 Range(i ). It is obvious that C (0 ; : : :; l ) = Q provided that 0 is well-de ned.
                         
Recall that Card(J ) km and thus there exist enough distinct values to extend 00
to 0. In the rest of the proof, we check that 00 is well-de ned.
     First, we check that each 00 (p) is de ned uniquely. Let 1  i; j  l and suppose
(0; p)Q(i; q) and (0; p)Q(j; s). Then (i; q)Q(j; s), (i; q)Q0(j; s), and therefore i(q) =
j (s).
                                                   34
      Second, we check that 00 is injective. Let 1  i; j  l and suppose that 00 (p) =
00 (p0) where 00 (p) = i(q) and 00 (p0) = j (s). By the de nition of 00 , we have
(0; p)Q(i; q) and (0; p0)Q(j; s). Further, i(q) = 00 (p) = 00 (p0) = j (s), and hence
(i; q)Q0(j; s) and therefore (i; q)Q(j; s). Putting this together, we have

                            (0; p) Q (i; q) Q (j; s) Q (0; p0 )
which implies p = p0. 2

9.2 Forms
The De nition of Forms Fix a list c0; c1; : : :; ck 1 of new symbols. The set of
forms is the smallest set containing the symbols cp and containing every nite set
of pairs ('; E ) where ' is a form and E is a binary con guration. If ' = cp then
Rank(') = 0; otherwise

                 Rank(') = 1 + maxfRank( ) : some ( ; E ) 2 'g:

Denotations A form ' and a molecule  over a naked set I uniquely de ne an
object ' I  2 HF(I ). The subscript may be omitted in I if the naked set is clear
from the context. The de nition is given by induction on '.
    cp   = (p).
    If ' is a set, then '   = f   : ( ; C (; )) 2 'g.
Permutations Any permutation  of I extends to an automorphism, also called ,
of the structure (HF(I ); 2) by means of the following rule: (x) = f(y) : y 2 xg.
It is easy to see that every automorphism of HF(I ) is obtained this way.
Lemma 15 If  is a permutation of I , then ('  ) = '  .
Proof by induction on '. (cp  ) = (p) = ()(p) = cp  (). If ' is a set, then

      ('  ) = f   : ( ; C (; )) 2 'g = f(   ) : ( ; C (; )) 2 'g
               = f   : ( ; C (; )) 2 'g (by induction hypothesis)
               = f   : ( ; C ( 1; )) 2 'g ( =  )
               = f   : ( ; C (; )) 2 'g (see below)
               = '  
                                            35
    It remains to verify that C ( 1; ) = C (; ):

                   (0; p)C ( 1; )(1; q) () ( 1)(p) = (q) ()
                   (p) = ()(q) () (0; p)C (; )(1; q)
2
Corollary 4 Every ' I  is symmetric and thus belongs to I.
Proof Indeed, every ' I  is supported by Range() and thus has a support of size
 k. The same conclusion applies to the members of ' I . 2
    Recall that I is a naked set of cardinality  km.

Lemma 16 Every symmetric object x over I is equal to ' I  for some form ' and
some molecule  over I .

Proof Any atom x equals c0   where  is an arbitrary molecule with (0) = x.
Proceeding inductively, suppose that x is a symmetric set with elements y = y  y .
Since x is symmetric, there is a molecule  whose range supports x. We will prove
that x = '   where ' = f( y ; C (y ; )) : y 2 xg. One inclusion is easy. Suppose
that y 2 x. By the de nition of I , '   = f   : ( ; C (; )) 2 'g. By the
de nition of ', ( y  C (y ; )) 2 '. Hence y = y  y 2 '  .
   For the dicult direction, consider any z 2 '  . By the de nition of I , z is
a composition   such that ( ; C (; )) 2 '. By the de nition of ', there exists
a y such that = y and C (; ) = C (y ; ). The latter equality does not imply
that  = y and we are not going to prove that z = y. Instead we construct an
automorphism  of I that pointwise xes  and moves y to z. Since  supports x, 
 xes x; hence z 2 x. It remains to construct such .
   We want that y =  and that  pointwise xes Range(). To this end, de ne a
function 0 : Range(y ) [ Range() ! I by
                                    
                             0(a) = a(p) ifif aa =
                                                   = y (p);
                                                      (q )
Even though the two cases are not mutually exclusive, 0 is well-de ned. Indeed,

       y (p) = (q) ) (0; p)C (y ; )(1; q) ) (0; p)C (; )(1; q) ) (p) = (q):

                                           36
    Furthermore, 0 is injective. Indeed, assume that 0(a) = 0(b). If 0(a) =
(p1); 0(b) = (p2) then p1 = p2 (because  is injective) and therefore a = y (p1) =
y (p2) = b. In case a = (q1); b = (q2), we have a = 0(a) = 0(b) = b. Finally
suppose that a = y (p); b = (q). Then

                  0(a) = 0(b) ) (p) = (q) ) (0; p)C (; )(1; q) )
                  (0; p)C (y ; )(1; q) ) y (p) = (q) ) a = b
   Thus, function 0 is one-to-one. Extend it to a permutation  over I in an
arbitrary way. Since  extends 0, it pointwise xes Range() and y = . In the
standard way,  extends to an automorphism of I which will be denoted  as well.
Since  supports x (by the choice of ), (x) = x. By Lemma 15,

                    (y) = ( y  y ) = y  (y ) = y   = z:
    2

9.3 The In and Eq Relations
Lemma 17 There are ternary relations Eq and In such that, in every I,
                       2 '   () In( ; '; C (; ))                             (1)
                      = '   () Eq( ; '; C (; ))                              (2)
for all forms '; and all molecules ;  .
   The crucial points here are that  and  are involved in In and Eq only via their
con gurations and that In and Eq don't depend on I .
Proof We de ne In( ; '; E ) and Eq( ; '; E ) by recursion on Rank( ) + Rank(').
        In( ; '; E ) () ' is a set and (9 form )
                        (h9 ternary con guration Q with iQ12 = E )
                          (; Q02) 2 ') and Eq( ; ; Q10)
                                                 h                            i
        Eq( ; '; E ) ()      either (9p; q 2 k) = cp ^ ' = cq ^ (0; p)E (1; q) ;
                             or '; are sets and (8 form )
                           (h8 ternary con guration Q with Q12 = E )
                             if (; Q02) 2 ' then In(; ; Q01); and
                           if (; Q01) 2 then In(; '; Q02)]
                                            37
    Proof of (1). If ' is a symbol cp, then '   is an atom, so the left side of (1) is
false. So is the right side, by the de nition of In. Thus, we may assume from now on
that ' is a set.
    Suppose rst that   2 '  . By the de nition of I ,   =    for some ; 
with (; C (; )) 2 '. By the induction hypothesis, Eq( ; ; C (; )). We check that
this  and the ternary con guration Q = C (; ; ) witness In( ; '; C (; )). Indeed,
Q12 = C (; ), (; Q02) = (; C (; )) 2 ', and Eq( ; ; Q10) is Eq( ; ; C (; )).
    Conversely, suppose that In( ; '; C (; )) is witnessed by  and Q. By Lemma 14,
there exists  such that Q = C (; ; ). We have:
    (; C (; )) = (; Q02) 2 ', so that    2 '  ; and
    Eq( ; ; Q10) holds, that is Eq( ; ; C (; )) holds.
By the induction hypothesis,   =    2 '  . Part (1) is proved.
    Proof of (2). Both sides of (2) are false if one of ; ' is a symbol cp while the
other is a set. If ' = cq ; = cp, then

                 = '   ()  (p) = (q) () (0; p)C (; )(1; q)
                           () Eq( ; '; C (; ))
So we may assume from now on that both and ' are sets.
   Suppose rst that   = '  . Let  be any form and Q be any ternary
con guration with Q12 = C (; ). We must prove

                           (; Q02) 2 ' ) In(; ; Q01)
                           (; Q01) 2 ' ) In(; ; Q02)

    By symmetry, it suces to prove only the rst of these two implications. So
assume (; Q02) 2 '. By Lemma 14, there exists  such that C (; ; ) = Q. Then
(; C (; )) = (; Q02) 2 ', so    2 '   =   . By the induction hypothesis,
In(; ; C (;  )), that is In(; ; Q01), as required.
    Conversely, suppose that Eq( ; '; C (; )) holds. By symmetry, it suces to prove
only that    '  . Let   , with (; C (;  )) 2 , be an arbitrary element of
    . Apply the de nition of Eq( ; '; C (; )) with this  and with Q = C (; ; ),
which satis es Q12 = C (; ). Since Q01 = (; C (;  )) 2 , we have In(; '; Q02),
that is In(; '; C (; )). By the induction hypothesis,    2 '  , as required. 2


                                          38
9.4 The Winning Strategy
Now we are ready to construct a winning strategy for the Duplicator in the
Gamem(I; J). The strategy is to ensure that, after every step, there exist forms
'i, I -molecules i and J -molecules i, i 2 m, such that
     xi = 'i  i; yi = 'i  i; C () = C ( )                                             (*)
where xi; yi are elements covered by pebbles i in I; J respectively. (Without loss of
generality, we assume that, in the beginning, all 2m pebbles are on the board with
all xi = yi = ;.)
     First we check that Duplicator can always play in the required manner. Clearly
(*) holds in the initial position, as we can take all 'i = ;, all i = j and all
i = j . Now suppose that, after some number of steps, (*) holds witnessed by
';
   ; , and then Spoiler moves. By symmetry, we may assume that Spoiler moves
pebble 0 on I from x0 to x00. By Lemma 16, x00 = '00 I 0 for some form '00 and
some molecule 00 over I. By Lemma 14, there exists a molecule 00 over J such that
C (00 ; 1; : : : ; m 1) = C (00 ; 1; : : : ; m 1). Duplicator can move pebble 0 on J from
y0 to y00 = '00 J 00 and (*) will be restored.
     Second, we check that (*) ensures that the map xi 7! yi is a partial isomorphism
and thus the proposed strategy of Duplicator is winning. For each i; j 2 m, (*)
implies C (i; j ) = C (i; j ). By Lemma 17,

              xi 2 xj () 'i  i 2 'j  j () In('i; 'j ; C (i; j ))
                      () In('i; 'j ; C (i; j )) () 'i  i 2 'j  j
                      () yi 2 yj
and similarly with = and Eq in place of 2 and In.
   The Equivalence Theorem is proved. 2

9.5 A Generalization
Until now we have considered the case when the input vocabulary 0 is empty. Now
we consider the case when 0 consists of unary predicates, say P0; : : :; Pc 1 . Restrict
attention to input structures where the c basic relations are pairwise disjoint; recall
that such input structures are called colored set with colors P0; : : : ; Pc 1 . An auto-
morphism of a colored set I is simply a color preserving permutation of the elements
of I . Recall that Ik is the collection of k-symmetric elements of HF(I ) as well as the
corresponding structure of vocabulary fP0; : : :; Pc 1 ; 2; ;g. We shall indicate how to
modify the proof of the Equivalence Theorem to obtain the following version of it for
colored sets.
                                               39
Corollary 5 Fix positive integers c; k; m. If I and J are colored sets, in each of which
all the colors P0; : : :; Pc 1 are suciently large, then Ik and Jk are Lm1;! -equivalent.

Proof To prove this, we need only to make the following changes in the proof of the
Equivalence Theorem for naked sets.
     First, a con gration should specify not only how the ranges of molecules overlap
but also the colors of the atoms in the molecules. Thus, the con guration C ()
of a nite sequence  = (0; : : :; l 1) of molecules should be de ned as a pair
(C=(); C()) where C=() is the equivalence relation on l  k that we previously
called the con guration and where C() is the function l  k ! c sending each pair
(i; p) to the unique r with i(p) 2 Pr . An abstract l-ary con guration is a pair E
whose rst component E= is what we previously called an abstract l-ary con guration
and whose second component E is a function from l  k into c that is constant on
every equivalence class of E= .
     Next, we check that Lemma 14 still holds with this new notion of con guration.
Two things must be added to the earlier proof of the lemma: 00 and 0 agree as to
colors, and 00 can be extended to 0 so as to maintain agreement with 0. The latter
is clear because the colors Pr in our input structures are large enough. As for the
former, we must prove that, if i  1 and (0; p)Q= (i; q) then i (q) has the same color
as 0(p). But from (0; p)Q= (i; q) we get 0(p) = i(q), and this element has the same
color as i(q) because C (1; : : : ; l) = C (1; : : :; l).
     In the statement of Lemma 15, \permutation" must be changed to \automor-
phism". The proof of that lemma is unchanged except that the computation veri-
fying that C ( 1; ) = C (; ) now veri es only that the C= components of the
con gurations agree. To get agreement of the C components, we use the fact that 
is an automorphism and thus preserves colors.
     The only other change in the earlier proof occurs in Lemma 16, where the dicult
direction involved constructing a certain permutation . In the colored situation, we
must make sure that  is an automorphism. For this purpose, we rst verify that
the 0 de ned in the earlier proof preserves colors. For atoms a with 0(a) = a, this
is trivial, so we consider an atom a for which a = y (p) and 0(a) = (p). Because
C (y ; ) = C (; si), in particular the C components agree. So y (a) has the same
color as (p). But these atoms are a and 0(a), so 0 preserves the color of a. Finally,
when extending the map 0 to an automorphism , we must choose the extension so
as to preserve colors, but this is trivially possible. 2




                                             40
10 Negative Results
10.1 Parity
Recall that a naked set is an input structure of the empty vocabulary.
Theorem 10 (Parity Theorem) Parity is not in CPTime.     ~         Moreover, suppose that
K1; K2 are disjoint in nite classes of naked structures, each containing structures of
                                                       ~
in nitely many cardinalities; then (K1 ; K2) is not CPTime.
Proof Let  be any PTime ASM program with empty input vocabulary. We show
that there are I1 2 K1 and I2 2 K2 such that  does not distinguish between I1 and
I2. By the Support Theorem in Section 8, there is a positive integer k such that, in
every run of  , every active set has a support of size  k.
    Let Active(I ) be as in Section 6. By the First Fixed-Point Theorem in Section 6,
there exists an FO+LFP sentence ' that asserts that  accepts I . (The sentence '
asserts that there exist i such that Df (i; true ) holds in Active(I ) where f is Output.)
By Proposition 2 in Section 2, there is m such that ' is expressible in Lm1;! . By the
Equivalence Theorem in Section 9, ' does not distinguish between any suciently
large input structures I1; I2. 2

10.2 Bipartite Matching is not in Choiceless PTime
Bipartite Matching is the following decision problem.
Instance: A bipartite undirected graph G = (V; E ) with the two parts (of boys
    and girls respectively) of the same size.
Question: Does there exists a perfect matching for G?
Recall that a perfect matching is a set F of edges such that every vertex is incident
to exactly one edge in F . A partial matching is an edge set F such that every vertex
is incident to at most one edge in F . The standard perfect-matching algorithm starts
with the empty partial matching F and then enlarges F in a number of iterations.
During each iteration, one constructs an auxiliary set D of directed edges, then seeks
a D-path P from an unmatched boy to an unmatched girl, and then modi es F by
means of P .
    We use variables b; g to vary over boys and girls respectively. If X is a set of edges,
let

                      Boys-to-girls(X ) = f(b; g) : fb; gg 2 X g
                      Girls-to-boys(X ) = f(g; b) : fb; gg 2 X g
                                            41
   And if X is a set of ordered pairs of the form (b; g) or (g; b), let

                 Unordered(X ) = ffb; gg : (b; g) 2 X _ (g; b) 2 X g:
    In Table 10.2, we give a self-explanatory program in the ASM language with the
the choice construct for the perfect matching algorithm. It is customary to omit
the keywords do-in-parallel/enddo. For readability, we take some little additional
liberties with the ASM syntax.
    The relation REACHABLE and the function PATH in the last transition rule are
external. In other words, we take for granted algorithms that, given a boy b, a girl g
and set D of directed edges over V , check whether there exists a D-path from b to g
and if yes then construct such a path. For simplicity, we identify a path with the set
of its edges.
    For the bene t of those unfamiliar with the algorithm, let us explain one iteration
of the algorithm in the case when the given bipartite graph has a perfect matching
M . Suppose that F is a current partial matching involving k boys, and there are
some F -unmatched boys. Abusing notation, let M (g) be the girl M -matched to b
and let F (g) be the boy F -matched to g. Let D be as in the Build-Digraph rule. For
any F -ummatched boy b0, there exists a D-path P from b0 to some F -unmatched
girl. Indeed, construct

                                 g1 = M (b0); b1 = F (g1)
                                 g2 = M (b1); b2 = F (g2)
                                 :::
                                 gk = M (bk 1); bk = F (gk )
                                 gk+1 = M (bk )
until you encounter an F -unmatched girl gk+1. It is easy to see that, if X =
Unordered(P ), then (F X ) [ (X F ) is a partial matching involving k + 1 boys.

Theorem 11 (Bipartite Matching Theorem)
                             ~
Bipartite Matching is not in CPTime.

Proof Given an even integer n = 2p > 2, we construct two bipartite graphs G0 and
G1 on a set

                         Vn = fb0; : : :; bn 1 g [ fg0; : : :; gn 1 g
of n boys and n girls. In G0 , (1) the rst p boys and the rst p girls form a complete
bipartite graph, (2) the last p boys and the last p girls form a complete bipartite

                                             42
if Mode = Initial then
      ;
  F := , Mode := Examine
endif

if Mode = Examine then
  if there is an unmatched boy then
    Mode := Build-Digraph
  else Output := true, Mode := Final
endif

if Mode = Build-Digraph then
  D := Girls-to-boys(F)[  Boys-to-girls(E-F)
  Mode := Build-Path
endif

if Mode = Build-Path then
  choose an unmatched boy b
          9
    if ( unmatched girl g) REACHABLED(b,g) then
      choose an unmatched girl g with REACHABLE(D,b,g)
        P := PATHD (b,g), Mode := Modify-Matching
      endchoose
    else Output := false, Mode := Final
  endchoose
endif

if Mode = Modify-Matching then
  F := (F - Unordered(P))  [(Unordered(P) - F)
  Mode := Examine
endif


                 Table 1: The perfect matching algorithm




                                   43
graph, and (3) there are no other edges. Clearly, G0 has a perfect matching. In G1,
(1) the rst p + 1 boys and the rst p girls form a complete bipartite graph, (2) the
last p 1 boys and the last p girls form a complete bipartite graph, and (3) there are
no other edges. Clearly, G1 has no perfect matching.
    Notice that the two graphs are essentially 4-colored sets; \adjacency" is de nable
from the colors. The rest of the proof is similar to the proof of the Parity Theo-
rem, except that, instead of the Support Theorem and Equivalence Theorem, we use
Corollary 3 and Corollary 5 respectively. 2

11 Revised Choiceless PTime
Enrich the computation model with a static nullary function InputSize. In the de ni-
tion of initial states with n atoms require that InputSize is the von Neumann ordinal
for n. That changes the notion of C~ PTime; indeed, there is an obvious PTime ASM
program with InputSize that accepts all naked sets of odd cardinality and rejects all
naked sets of even cardinality. Let us call the new complexity class C~ PTime+.
    C~ PTime+ is still de ned in terms of pairs (K1; K2) of classes of nite structures
of the same vocabulary which are disjoint but not necessarily complementary. But
the presence of InputSice allows us to augment each program with a polynomial clock
and thus ensure that every input is either accepted or rejected within polynomial
time. Thus we can return to the usual framework where a complexity class is de ned
in terms of classes of structures (rather than pairs of classes).
Theorem 12 There is a class of \standard" ASM programs with InputSize and the
following properties:
  1. Each standard program accepts or rejects every input within polynomial time.
  2. Every PTime program can be simulated by a standard program.
  3. There exists a PTime Turing machine that, given an ASM program, decides
     wether the program is or is not standard.

Proof A standard program is an arbitrary program  augmented with a clock that
bounds the number of microsteps in the computation of  by some polynomial p of
the InputSize. The clock is initialized to zero, is incremented at each microstep of ,
and stops the computation when it reaches p(InputSize). To satisfy the third claim,
use a standard format for the clock program. 2
   Fix a particular class of standard programs and rede ne C~ PTime+ as follows:
A class K of nite structures of the same vocabulary is C~ PTime+ if there exists a
standard program that accepts exactly the structures in K .
                                          44
                                                                       ~
Corollary 6 There is a PTime (two-valued) logic that expresses exactly CPTime+
properties.

Proof View standard programs as formulas. 2
   In the rest of this section, we show that:
    for input structures with just one unary relation U , the parity of jU j cannot be
     computed in C~ PTime+, and
    Bipartite Matching is outside C~ PTime+.
    For this purpose, we rst observe that Corollary 3, the Support Theorem for col-
ored structures, remains true when InputSize is allowed, as a static nullary function,
in programs. Indeed since the value of InputSize is a von Neumann ordinal, it in-
volves no atoms and is therefore xed by all permutations of the atoms. It follows
that, when any program  is run with a colored set I as the input structure, the set A
of active elements is invariant under all automorphisms of I . With this observation,
the proof of the Support Theorem for colored structures goes through as before.
    Recall from Section 9 that, for any colored set I and any positive integer k,
Ik denotes the set of k-symmetric elements of HF(I ) as well as the corresponding
structure with 2, ;, and the colors. For our present purposes, we must consider
the expansion (Ik; jI j) of the structure Ik where the cardinality jI j of the input set
is named by the nullary symbol InputSize. We show next that the only e ect of
this extra constant on the equivalence theorem is to restrict the result (as one might
expect) to input structures of equal cardinality.
Theorem 13 Fix positive integers c, k, and m. If I and J are c-colored sets of the
same cardinality, and if all the colors P0 , . . . , Pc 1 are suciently large in both of
them, then (Ik ; jI j) and (Jk ; jJ j) are Lm1;! -equivalent.

Proof Observe rst that, for each natural number n, there is a form 'n such that
'n   = n for every molecule . Such 'n can be de ned inductively by
              'n = f('r ; E ) j r < n and E is a binary con gurationg:
The veri cation that 'n   = n is a trivial induction on n.
     Now suppose I and J are as in the hypothesis of the theorem. The m-pebble game
for the structures (Ik ; jI j) and (Jk ; jJ j) is the same as the (m + 1)-pebble game for
Ik and Jk with one pebble located permanently at the natural number jI j = jJ j = n
in both structures. Since this number is the denotation of the same form 'n in both
structures, Duplicator can still use the winning strategy described in Section 9: match
the forms and the con gurations of molecules. 2
                                            45
   Let Subset Parity be the following decision problem.
 Instance: A structure (I; U ) where U is a unary relation on I (i.e., U  I ).
 Question: Is jU j odd?

Corollary 7 Subset Parity is not in CPTime
                                    ~      +.


Proof If Subset Parity were in C~ PTime+, then, by Proposition 2, Theorem 4, and
Corollary 3, there would be positive integers m and k such that, whenever (I; U ) is
a positive instance and (J; V ) a negative instance of Subset Parity, then Duplicator
has no winning strategy in the m-pebble game for (Ik ; jI j) and (Jk ; jJ j) (where I
abbreviates (I; U ) and similarly for J ).
    On the other hand, structures of the form (I; U ) can be regarded as 2-colored
sets, with colors U and I U . Thus, by Theorem ??, Duplicator has a winning
strategy provided jI j = jJ j and all of jU j, jV j, jI U j, and jJ V j are large enough.
This situation is clearly compatible with jU j being odd and jV j even, so we have a
contradiction. 2

Corollary 8 Bipartite Matching is not in CPTime
                                         ~      +.


Proof We can use exactly the same proof as in Section 10, because the two structures
used there had the same cardinality. 2

References
Abiteboul, Vardi and Vianu 1997 Serge Abiteboul, Moshe Y. Vardi and Victor
     Vianu, \Fixpoint Logics, Relational Machines, and Computational Complex-
     ity", Journal of ACM, to appear.
Abiteboul and Vianu 1991 Serge Abiteboul and Victor Vianu, "Generic Compu-
     tation and its Complexity", ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 1991,
     209{219.
Blass and Gurevich 1997 Andreas Blass and Yuri Gurevich, \The Linear Time
     Hierarchy Theorem for RAMs and Abstract State Machines", Journal of Uni-
     versal Computer Science (Springer), Vol. 3, No. 4 (1997), 247{278.
Chandra and Harel 1982 Ashok Chandra and David Harel, "Structure and Com-
     plexity of Relational Queries", J. Comput. and System Sciences 25 (1982),
     99{128.

                                           46
Ebbinghaus 1985 Heinz Dieter Ebbinghaus, \Extended Logics: The General
     Framework", \Model-Theoretical Logics" (ed. J. Barwise and S. Feferman),
     Springer-Verlag, 1985, 25{76.
Ebbinghaus and Flum 1995 Heinz-Dieter Ebbinghaus and Jorg Flum, "Finite
     Model Theory", Springer 1995.
Fagin 1993 Ron Fagin, "Finite Model Theory | A Personal Perspective", Theoret-
     ical Computer Science 116 (1993), 3{31.
Gurevich 1988 Yuri Gurevich, \Logic and the Challenge of Computer Science", In
     \Current Trends in Theoretical Computer Science" (Ed. E. Borger), Computer
     Science Press, 1988, 1{57.
Gurevich 1995 Yuri Gurevich, \Evolving Algebra 1993: Lipari Guide", in \Spec-
     i cation and Validation Methods", Ed. E. Boerger, Oxford University Press,
     1995, 9{36.
Gurevich 1997 Yuri Gurevich, \May 1997 Draft of the ASM Guide", Tech. Report,
     EECS Dept, University of Michigan, May 1997.
Glavan and Rosenzweig 1993 Paola Glavan and Dean Rosenzweig, \Communi-
     cating Evolving Algebras", in \Computer Science Logic", eds. E. Borger et al.,
     Lecture Notes in Computer Science 702, Springer, 1993, 182{215.
Immerman 1989 Neil Immerman, "Descriptive and Computational Complexity",
     Proc. of Symposia in Applied Math. 38 (1989), 75{91.
Kolaitis and Vardi 1992 Ph. G. Kolaitis and M. Y. Vardi, \In nitary Logic and
     0{1 Laws", Information and Computation 98 (1992), 258{294.
Leivant 1989 Daniel Leivant, \Descriptive Characterizations of Computational
     Complexity", Journal of Computer and System Sciences 39 (1989), 51{83.
Moschovakis 1974 Y. N. Moschovakis, "Elementary Induction on Abstract Struc-
     tures" North-Holland, 1974.




                                        47
