ACM SIGACT - Gödel Prize ACM Special Interest Group on Algorithms and Computation Theory Main News People Prizes Community Grants Conferences Publications Web Pages Main News People Prizes Community Grants Conferences Publications Web Pages Source Code Gödel Prize The 2026 Gödel Prize has been awarded to Ilias Diakonikolas, Gautam Kamath, Daniel Kane, Jerry Li, Ankur Moitra, and Alistair Stewart . The information below is for 2026, for which nominations are closed; watch this space regarding nominations for 2027. About the Prize The Gödel Prize for outstanding papers in the area of theoretical computer science is sponsored jointly by the European Association for Theoretical Computer Science (EATCS) and the Special Interest Group on Algorithms and Computation Theory of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM SIGACT). This award is presented annually, with the presentation taking place alternately at the EATCS International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP) and the ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC).
The 33nd Gödel Prize was awarded on June 25, 2025, at the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing in Prague, Czech Republic. The Prize is named in honor of Kurt Gödel in recognition of his major contributions to mathematical logic and of his interest, discovered in a letter he wrote to John von Neumann shortly before von Neumann’s death, in what has become the famous “P versus NP” question. The Prize includes an award of USD 5,000. Award Committee, 2026 The 2026 Award Committee consists of Mikołaj Bojańczyk (chair, University of Warsaw), Artur Czumaj (University of Warwick), Yuval Ishai (Technion), Anna Karlin (University of Washington), Jon Kleinberg (Cornell University), Marta Kwiatkowska (University of Oxford).. Eligibility Eligibility: The 2026 Prize rules are given below and they supersede any different interpretation of the generic rule to be found on websites of both SIGACT and EATCS. Any research paper or series of papers by a single author or by a team of authors is deemed eligible if: The main results were not published (in either preliminary or final form) in a journal or conference proceedings before January 1st, 2013. The paper was published in a recognized refereed journal no later than December 31, 2025. The research work nominated for the award should be in the area of theoretical computer science. Nominations are encouraged from the broadest spectrum of the theoretical computer science community so as to ensure that potential award winning papers are not overlooked. The Award Committee shall have the ultimate authority to decide whether a particular paper is eligible for the Prize. Nominations Nominations for the award should be submitted by email to the Award
Committee Chair: bojan@mimuw.edu.pl .
Please make sure that the Subject line of all nominations and related messages begin with “ Goedel Prize 2026 ”.
To be considered, nominations for the 2026 Prize must be received by April 11, 2026 . A nomination package should include: A printable copy (or copies) of the journal paper(s) being nominated, together with a complete
citation (or citations) thereof. A statement of the date(s) and venue(s) of the first conference or workshop publication(s) of the
nominated work(s) or a statement that no such publication has occurred. A brief summary of the technical content of the paper(s) and a brief explanation of its significance. A support letter or letters signed by at least two members of the scientific community. Additional support letters may also be received and are generally useful. The nominated paper(s) may be in any language. However, if a nominated publication is not in English, the nomination package must include an extended summary written in English. Those intending to submit a nomination should contact the Award Committee Chair by email well in advance. The Chair will answer questions about eligibility, encourage coordination among different nominators for the same paper(s), and also accept informal proposals of potential nominees or tentative offers to prepare formal nominations. The committee maintains a database of past nominations for eligible papers, but fresh nominations for the same papers (especially if they highlight new evidence of impact) are always welcome. Selection Process The Award Committee is free to use any other sources of information in addition to the ones mentioned above. It may split the award among multiple papers, or declare no winner at all. All matters relating to the selection process left unspecified in this document are left to the discretion of the Award Committee. Winners 2026 : Ilias Diakonikolas, Gautam Kamath, Daniel Kane, Jerry Li, Ankur Moitra, and Alistair Stewart 2025 : Eshan Chattopadhyay and David Zuckerman 2024 : Ryan Williams 2023 : Samuel Fiorini, Serge Massar, Sebastian Pokutta, Hans Raj Tiwary, Ronald de Wolf, and Thomas Rothvoss 2022 : Zvika Brakerski, Craig Gentry, Vinod Vaikuntanathan 2021 : Andrei Bulatov, Martin E. Dyer, David Richerby, Jin-Yi Cai, and Xi Chen 2020 : Robin A. Moser and Gábor Tardos 2019 : Irit Dinur 2018 : Oded Regev 2017 : Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith 2016 : Stephen Brookes and Peter W. O’Hearn 2015 : Daniel A. Spielman and Shang-Hua Teng 2014 : Ronald Fagin, Amnon Lotem, and Moni Naor 2013 : Antoine Joux, Dan Boneh, and Matthew K. Franklin 2012 : Elias Koutsoupias, Christos H. Papadimitriou, Tim Roughgarden, Éva Tardos, Noam Nisan, and Amir Ronen 2011 : Johan T. Håstad 2010 : Sanjeev Arora and Joseph S. B. Mitchell 2009 : Omer Reingold, Salil Vadhan, and Avi Wigderson 2008 : Dan Spielman and Shang-Hua Teng 2007 : Alexander A. Razborov and Steven Rudich 2006 : Manindra Agrawal, Neeraj Kayal, and Nitin Saxena 2005 : Noga Alon, Yossi Matias and Mario Szegedy 2004 : Maurice Herlihy and Nir Shavit / Michael Saks and Fotios Zaharoglou 2003 : Yoav Freund and Robert Schapire 2002 : Géraud Sénizergues 2001 : Sanjeev Arora, Uriel Feige, Shafi Goldwasser, Carsten Lund, László Lovász, Rajeev Motwani, Shmuel Safra, Madhu Sudan, and Mario Szegedy 2000 : Moshe Vardi and Pierre Wolper 1999 : Peter W. Shor 1998 : Seinosuke Toda 1997 : Joseph Halpern and Yoram Moses 1996 : Mark Jerrum and Alistair Sinclair 1995 : Neil Immerman and Róbert Szelepcsényi 1994 : Johan Håstad 1993 : László Babai, Shafi Goldwasser, Silvio Micali, Shlomo Moran, and Charles Rackoff © 2026 ACM SIGACT