0506R Is private PAC sample complexity polynomial in VC dimension and log-star Littlestone dimension? | Invited Open Problem: Does Differential Privacy Make PAC Learning Much Harder?
0507 Optimal Rates for Stochastic Decision-Theoretic Online Learning Under Differentially Privacy | COLT / PMLR
0508 What is the Complexity of Joint Differential Privacy in Linear Contextual Bandits? | COLT / PMLR
0509 Better Differentially Private Learning Algorithms with Margin Guarantees | COLT / PMLR
0510 Do you pay for Privacy in Online learning? | COLT / PMLR
1962 Is there a polynomial Pd (m) whose degree ⋆ (H) ≤ P (m) for every m? | A Unified Characterization of Private Learnability via Graph Theory
2063 Designing a private and computationally efficient density estimator for GMMs remains an open problem even in the one-dimensional setting. | Mixtures of Gaussians are Privately Learnable with a Polynomial Number of Samples
2069 However, the question of whether generic learners can be designed remains open. | On the Growth of Mistakes in Differentially Private Online Learning: A Lower Bound Perspective
3171 We leave it as an open problem to design a differentially private algorithm for computing this envelope. | (Nearly) Dimension Independent Private ERM with AdaGrad Rates\{via Publicly Estimated Subspaces
3312 The main question that we leave open is whether there exists a differentially private algorithm for this task which is polynomial in n and d? | How to Find a Point in the Convex Hull Privately
3361 Alternately, can we prove any non-trivial lower bound that holds also with interaction? | Pure Differentially Private Summation from Anonymous Messages
3936 We conjecture that the invertibility condition on the corruption functions can be relaxed for kl-UCB-CF as long as λa 6= ga (µ1 ) for all […] | Corrupt Bandits for Preserving Local Privacy
4950 Towards Separating Computational and Statistical Differential Privacy — Unresolved-question passage on page 20 / To the best of knowledge, it is unknown whether the assumptions of existence of plain-diO and the existence of pc-diO are comparable or not. | Towards Separating Computational and Statistical Differential Privacy
5018 Ramsey Theorems for Trees and a General 'Private Learning Implies Online Learning' Theorem — Explicit open question on PDF page 5 / Regarding the upper bound on the Ramsey number n provided above, we do not know whether it is tight. | Ramsey Theorems for Trees and a General 'Private Learning Implies Online Learning' Theorem
5141 Privately Estimating Graph Parameters in Sublinear Time — Unresolved-question passage on page 16 / We leave it as an open question to provide a tighter privacy vs time-complexity analysis. | Privately Estimating Graph Parameters in Sublinear Time
5197 Data Reconstruction: When You See It and When You Don't — Explicit open question on PDF page 2 / As a result, we do not know whether a precise answer to Question 1 exists, and leave it as an open question for | Data Reconstruction: When You See It and When You Don't
5198 Lower Bounds for Differential Privacy Under Continual Observation and Online Threshold Queries — Explicit open question on PDF page 6 / We do not know if our lower bound holds also for this alternative formulation of the model. | Lower Bounds for Differential Privacy Under Continual Observation and Online Threshold Queries
5236 Necessary Conditions in Multi-Server Differential Privacy — Explicit open question on PDF page 5 / Our work also leaves open the possibility of sample-efficient, non-interactive parity learning with computational differential privacy. | Necessary Conditions in Multi-Server Differential Privacy
5326 Multi-Party Protocols, Information Complexity and Privacy — Explicit open question on PDF page 2 / Put differently, is it always possible to compress the communication cost of a protocol to its information cost? | Multi-Party Protocols, Information Complexity and Privacy
5568 Algorithms with More Granular Differential Privacy Guarantees — Explicit open question on PDF page 8 / However, for the special case of k-way conjunctions or parities it remains an open problem to devise a polynomial-time algorithm that comes close to matching […] | Algorithms with More Granular Differential Privacy Guarantees
5625 Differentially Private Nonparametric Regression Under a Growth Condition — Explicit open question on PDF page 2 / The other direction, namely whether online learnability of F in the regression setting implies private learnability, remains open. | Differentially Private Nonparametric Regression Under a Growth Condition
6040 Learning Coverage Functions and Private Release of Marginals — Explicit open question on PDF page 4 / Unfortunately, it is unknown how to compute this strong approximation even in subexponential time and even with value queries1 and the distribution is restricted to […] | Learning Coverage Functions and Private Release of Marginals
6451R Optimal private selection using only Gaussian queries | Nearly-Optimal Private Selection via Gaussian Mechanism
6452R Optimal private selection using only Laplace queries | Open Problem: Selection via Low-Sensitivity Queries
6631P Optimal Euclidean error for pure-DP statistical-query release | Research reference · differentialprivacy.org
6673P Optimal error for pure-DP continual counting | The Binary Tree Mechanism is Optimal for Approximate Differentially Private Continual Counting
