4: tions in pseudo-polynomial time. This brings us to our ﬁrst open problem. Open Problem 1. Can an EF1 and PO allocation be computed in polynomial time? 3 Envy-Freeness up to Any Good (EFX) While EF1 is easy t
4: -polynomial time. This brings us to our ﬁrst open problem. Open Problem 1. Can an EF1 and PO allocation be computed in polynomial time? 3 Envy-Freeness up to Any Good (EFX) While EF1 is easy to achieve, in m
4: rithms, the ex- istence of EFX allocations is a challenging open problem. Procaccia [2020] in fact referred to this as “fair division’s most enigmatic question”. In the past few years, a sequence of works have 
4: allocations for three agents in polynomial time is still an open problem. 4 
5:  result still remains elusive. This brings us to our second open problem, which is one of the most important open problems in fair division. Open Problem 2. Does an EFX allocation exist for instances with n ≥ 
5:  one of the most important open problems in fair division. Open Problem 2. Does an EFX allocation exist for instances with n ≥ 4 agents and unrestricted additive valuations? Relaxations of EFX Instead of focu
5: ropriate pre-processing. To this end, we have the following open question: Open Problem 3. What is the best possible α for which α-EFX allocations exist? A positive answer to Open Problem 2 would establi
5: cessing. To this end, we have the following open question: Open Problem 3. What is the best possible α for which α-EFX allocations exist? A positive answer to Open Problem 2 would establish that α = 1 in
5: r which α-EFX allocations exist? A positive answer to Open Problem 2 would establish that α = 1 in Open Problem 3, but a negative answer would make the latter open problem very meaningful in its own right
5: tive answer to Open Problem 2 would establish that α = 1 in Open Problem 3, but a negative answer would make the latter open problem very meaningful in its own right. Additionally, as is the case for all of the
5: Open Problem 3, but a negative answer would make the latter open problem very meaningful in its own right. Additionally, as is the case for all of these notions, the next natural question is whether existence c
6: can be computed in polynomial time. This motivates the next open problem. Open Problem 4. Is it possible to achieve an exact EFX allocation by donating a sublinear number of goods? 4 Maximin Share Fairness (
6:  in polynomial time. This motivates the next open problem. Open Problem 4. Is it possible to achieve an exact EFX allocation by donating a sublinear number of goods? 4 Maximin Share Fairness (MMS) Besides th
7: s of valuations (such as submodular, XOS, and subadditive). Open Problem 5. Is it possible to improve upon the bound of 3/4 + 1/(12n) for additive valuations? Is there a stronger inapproximability bound than 39
7: at least as much as the value of all lesser goods combined. Open Problem 6. Are there other classes of structured valuations for which MMS is guaranteed to exist, such as when there are only a few (but more tha
7: t a 0.73-EFR allocation can be computed in polynomial time. Open Problem 7. Does an EFR allocation always exist? PMMS and GMMS: Several variations of MMS have also been considered. Caragiannis et al. [2019b] de
8: at their exact versions are actually incomparable. The main open problem here is the following. Open Problem 8. Does a PMMS allocation always exist? Interestingly, showing the existence of PMMS allocations is
8: incomparable. The main open problem here is the following. Open Problem 8. Does a PMMS allocation always exist? Interestingly, showing the existence of PMMS allocations is at least as hard as showing the exis
8:  least as hard as showing the existence of EFX allocations (Open Problem 2), as PMMS implies EFX. For approximate PMMS, the best known result is 0.781 by Kurokawa [2017]. An even stronger notion, which imp
8: relations between (approximate versions of) these notions. Open Problem 9. What is the best possible α for which α-GMMS allocations exist? Prop1, PropX and PropM: A line of work has also focused on relaxation
9: 1 with respect to the (unknown) true values of the agents. Open Problem 10. Are there mechanisms that always have pure Nash equilibrium allocations with stronger guarantees than EF1? 6.3 Notable Variants of