Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol 125:1–5, 2020               33rd Annual Conference on Learning Theory




             Open Problem: Model Selection for Contextual Bandits

Dylan J. Foster                                                                            DYLANF @ MIT. EDU
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Akshay Krishnamurthy                                                               AKSHAY @ CS . UMASS . EDU
Microsoft Research NYC
Haipeng Luo                                                                             HAIPENGL @ USC . EDU
University of Southern California


Editors: Jacob Abernethy and Shivani Agarwal


                                                        Abstract
     In statistical learning, algorithms for model selection allow the learner to adapt to the complexity
     of the best hypothesis class in a sequence. We ask whether similar guarantees are possible for
     contextual bandit learning.


1. Introduction
Model selection is the fundamental statistical task of choosing a hypothesis class using data, with
statistical guarantees dating back to Vapnik’s structural risk minimization principle. Despite decades
of research on model selection for supervised learning and the ubiquity of model selection procedures
such as cross-validation in practice, very little is known about model selection in interactive learning
and reinforcement learning settings where exploration is required. Focusing on contextual bandits,
a simple reinforcement learning setting, we ask: Can model selection guarantees be achieved in
contextual bandit learning, where a learner must balance exploration and exploitation to make
decisions online?

2. Problem Formulation
We consider the adversarial contextual bandit setting (Auer et al., 2002). The setting is defined by a
context space X and a finite action space A ∶= {1, . . . , K}. The learner interacts with nature for T
rounds, where in round t: (1) nature selects a context xt ∈ X and loss `t ∈ [0, 1]A , (2) the learner
observes xt and chooses action at , and (3) the learner observes `t (at ). We allow for an adaptive
adversary, so that xt and `t may depend on a1 , . . . , at−1 . In the usual problem formulation, the
learner is given a policy class Π ⊂ (X → A), and the goal is to minimize regret to Π:
                                                             T     T
                                 Reg(Π) ∶= max E[∑ `t (at ) − ∑ `t (π(xt ))].
                                                 π∈Π         t=1   t=1

When Π is finite,
           √ the well-known Exp4 algorithm (Auer et al., 2002) achieves the optimal regret
bound of O( KT log∣Π∣).




© 2020 D.J. Foster, A. Krishnamurthy & H. Luo.
                     O PEN P ROBLEM : M ODEL S ELECTION FOR C ONTEXTUAL BANDITS




The Model Selection Problem. In the contextual bandit model selection problem, we assume that
the policy class under consideration decomposes as a nested sequence:1

                                               Π1 ⊂ Π2 ⊂ ⋯ ⊂ ΠM = Π.

The goal of the learner is to achieve low regret to all classes in the sequence simultaneously, with the
regret to policy class Πm scaling only with log ∣Πm ∣. Intuitively, this provides a luckiness guarantee:
if a good policy lies in a small policy class, the algorithm discovers this quickly.
     To motivate the precise guarantee we ask for, let us recall what is known in the simpler full-
information online learning setting, where the  √learner gets to see the entire loss vector `t at the end
of each round. Here, the minimax rate is O( T log∣Π∣), and it can be shown (Foster et al. (2015);
see also Orabona and Pál (2016)) that a variant of the exponential weights algorithm guarantees
                                      √
                     Reg(Πm ) ≤ O( T (log∣Πm ∣ + log m)), for all m ∈ [M ].                            (1)

In other words, by paying a modest additive overhead of log m, we can compete with all M policy
classes simultaneously. The most basic variant of our open problem asks whether the natural analogue
of Eq. (1) can be attained for contextual bandits.
Open Problem 1a Design a contextual bandit algorithm that for any sequence Π1 ⊂ Π2 ⊂ ⋯ΠM
ensures
             T            T                  √
       max E[∑ `t (at ) − ∑ `t (π(xt ))] ≤ O( KT (log∣Πm ∣ + log m)),                            for all m ∈ [M ].            (2)
       π∈Πm       t=1            t=1

We also welcome the following weaker guarantees.
Open Problem 1b Design a contextual bandit algorithm that for any sequence Π1 ⊂ Π2 ⊂ ⋯ΠM
ensures either:
                                           √
   1. Reg(Πm ) ≤ O(poly(K, M, log log∣Π∣) ⋅ T log∣Πm ∣) for all m ∈ [M ].
   2. Reg(Πm ) ≤ O(poly(K, M, log log∣Π∣) ⋅ T α log1−α ∣Πm ∣) for all m ∈ [M ], where α ∈ [1/2, 1).
Alternatively, prove that no algorithm can achieve item 2 above for any value α ∈ [1/2, 1).
The first item here differs from Open Problem 1a only in the dependence on K, M , and log log∣Π∣
factors, which we do not believe represent the most challenging aspect of the problem. The second
item is a further relaxation of the original guarantee.
                                                   √     Here we simply ask that the model selection
algorithm has regret sublinear in T whenever T log∣Πm ∣ is sublinear. In other words, if policy
class Πm is learnable on its own, the model selection algorithm should have sublinear regret to
it. To attain this behavior it is essential that the exponents α and 1 − α sum to one. Indeed, it is
relatively easy to design algorithms with exponents that do not sum to one,2 but we do not know of
an algorithm satisfying item 2 above for any α ∈ [1/2, 1). This stands in contrast to other problems
involving adaptivity and data-dependence in contextual bandits (Agarwal et al., 2017a), where
attaining adaptive guarantees
                      √         with suboptimal dependence on T is straightforward, and the primary
challenge is to attain T -type regret bounds. We also welcome a lower bound showing that this type
of model selection guarantees is not possible for contextual bandits.
 1. It is also natural to consider infinite
                                         √ sequences of policy classes, but we restrict to finite sequences for simplicity.
 2. For example we can attain regret T ⋅ log∣Πm ∣ for all m by running Exp4 with a particular prior over policies.


                                                              2
                     O PEN P ROBLEM : M ODEL S ELECTION FOR C ONTEXTUAL BANDITS




Stochastic Setting. The model selection problem for contextual bandits has yet to be solved
even for the stochastic setting, and even when the model is well-specified. Here, we assume: (1)
{(xt , `t )}Tt=1 are drawn i.i.d. from a fixed distribution D; (2) Each class Πm is induced by a class
of regression functions Fm ⊂ (X × A → [0, 1]), in the sense that Πm = {πf ∣ f ∈ Fm }, where
πf (x) ∶= argmina∈A f (x, a); (3) The problem is realizable/well-specified in the sense that there
exists index m⋆ and regression function f⋆ ∈ Fm⋆ such that E[`(a) ∣ x] = f⋆ (x, a), for all x, a.
     The final version of our open problem asks for a model selection guarantee when the problem
is stochastic and well-specified. Note that these assumptions imply that the optimal unconstrained
policy (in terms of expected loss) is πf⋆ . As such, here we only ask for a regret bound against class
Πm⋆ . From an algorithmic perspective, this is the easiest version of the problem.

Open Problem 2 For some value α ∈ [1/2, 1), design an algorithm for contextual bandits that for
any sequence F1 ⊂ F2 ⊂ ⋯FM = F, whenever data is stochastic and realizable, ensures
                T             T
           E[∑ `t (at ) − ∑ `t (πf⋆ (xt ))] ≤ O(poly(K, M, log log∣F∣) ⋅ T α log1−α ∣Fm⋆ ∣).                            (3)
               t=1            t=1

Alternatively, prove that no algorithm can achieve this guarantee for any value of α ∈ [1/2, 1).

    We offer $300 for the first solution to either Open Problem 1 or Open Problem 2.

3. Challenges and Partial Progress
Many natural algorithmic strategies for model selection fail under bandit feedback. These include
(a) running Exp4 over all policies with a non-uniform prior adapted to the nested policy class
structure, (b) the Corral aggregation strategy (Agarwal et al., 2017b), and (c) an adaptive version
of the classical -greedy strategy (Langford and Zhang, 2008). These strategies all require tuning
parameters (e.g., the learning rate ) in terms of the class index m of interest, and naive tuning gives
guarantees of the form Õ(T α logβ ∣Πm ∣) for α + β > 1. Adaptive online learning algorithms like
AdaNormalHedge (Luo and Schapire, 2015) and Squint (Koolen and Van Erven, 2015) also fail
because they do not adequately handle bandit feedback.3 We refer the reader to Foster et al. (2019)
for more details on these strategies in the context of model selection. The main point here is that
model selection for contextual bandits appears to require new algorithmic ideas, even when we are
satisfied with weak O(T α log1−α ∣Πm ∣)-type rates where α > 1/2.
     In a recent paper (Foster et al., 2019), we showed that a guarantee of the form Eq. (3) is achievable
when Fm consists of linear functions in dm dimensions, under distributional assumptions on D. Our
strategy was inspired by the fact that if the optimal loss L⋆ = E [`(πf⋆ (x))] is known, one can test if
a given class Fm contains the optimal policy by running a standard contextual bandit algorithm and
checking whether it substantially underperforms relative to L⋆ . In our linear setup, we showed that
one can estimate a surrogate for the optimal loss L⋆ at a “sublinear” rate, which allowed us to run
this testing strategy and achieve a guarantee akin to Eq. (3) with no prior information. However, we
do not know if this strategy can succeed beyond specialized settings where sublinear loss estimation
is possible. Along these lines, Locatelli and Carpentier (2018) also observe that knowledge of L⋆
can enable adaptive guarantees in Lipschitz bandits, where adaptivity is not possible in the absence
of such information (such lower bounds do not appear to carry over to the contextual case).
 3. Their regret bounds do not contain the usual “local norm” term used in the analysis of Exp4 and other bandit algorithms.


                                                            3
                   O PEN P ROBLEM : M ODEL S ELECTION FOR C ONTEXTUAL BANDITS




    For (non-contextual) multi-armed bandits, several lower bounds demonstrate that model selection √
is not possible. Lattimore (2015) shows that for multi-armed
                                                         √                                   √ O( T )
                                                                 bandits, if we want to ensure
regret against a single fixed arm instead of the usual O( KT ) rate, we must incur Ω(K T ) regret
to one√of the remaining arms in the worst case. This precludes a model selection guarantee of the
form T ∣Am ∣ for nested action sets A1 ⊂ A2 ⊂ . . ., which is a natural analogue of Eq. (2) for
bandits.4 Related lower bounds are also known for Lipschitz bandits (Locatelli and Carpentier, 2018;
Krishnamurthy et al., 2019). On the positive side, Chatterji et al. (2019) show that, with distributional
assumptions, it is possible to adapt between multi-armed bandits and linear contextual bandits.

4. Consequences and Connections to Other Problems
Switching Regret for Bandits. In full-information online learning, algorithms for switching regret
(Herbster and Warmuth, 1998) simultaneously
                                     √            ensure that for all sequences of actions a⋆1 , . . . , a⋆T ,
E[∑t=1 `t (at ) − ∑t=1 `t (at )] ≤ O( S(a⋆1∶T ) ⋅ T ), where S(a⋆1∶T ) denotes the number of switches
     T             T        ⋆

in the sequence. In the (non-contextual) multi-armed bandit setting, with no prior knowledge of
the number of switches S, the best guarantee we are aware of is E[∑Tt=1 `t (at ) − ∑Tt=1 `t (a⋆t )] ≤
    √
O( S(a⋆1∶T ) ⋅ KT + T 3/4 ) which can be attained by combining the Bandits-over-Bandits strategy
from Cheung et al. (2019) with Exp3.5 A solution   √ to Open Problem 1a would immediately yield
a nearly-optimal switching regret bound of O(  ̃ S(a⋆ ) ⋅ KT ) for bandits by choosing the mth
                                                             1∶T
policy class Πm to be the set of all sequences a⋆1 , . . . , a⋆T with at most m switches.6 Solving Open
Problem 1a would also lead to similar improvements in switching regret for contextual bandits.
Second-Order Regret Bounds for Online Learning. Consider full-information online learning,
and let Pt denote the algorithm’s distribution over policies at time t. An unresolved COLT 2016
open problem
         √ of Freund (2016) asks whether there exists an algorithm for this setting with regret at
most O(     ∑Tt=1 Varπ∼Pt (`t (π(xt ))) ⋅ log(1/ε)) against the top ε-quantile of policies for all ε > 0
simultaneously. A slight strengthening of Freund’s open problem asks for the following bound:
                                               ¿
  T                                          ⎛Á T                                      ⎞
 ∑ Eπ∼Pt `(π(xt )) − Eπ∼Q `t (π(xt )) ≤ O⎜Á    À∑ Var
                                                        π∼Pt (`t (π(xt ))) ⋅ KL(Q∥P1 )⎟,    ∀Q ∈ ∆Π .
 t=1                                         ⎝ t=1                                     ⎠
                                                                                                     (4)
Eq. (4) implies the weaker quantile bound by choosing Q to be uniform over the top ε-fraction of
policies and P1 to be the uniform distribution over all policies. While the log(1/ε)-type quantile
bound does not seem to imply Eq. (4) directly, historically KL-based bounds have quickly followed
quantile bounds (Chaudhuri et al., 2009; Luo and Schapire, 2015; Koolen and Van Erven, 2015).
     The guarantee in Eq. (4) would immediately yield a positive resolution to Open Problem 1a via
the following reduction: (1) Choose P1 (π) ∝ ∣Πm1∣m2 for all π ∈ Πm ; (2) To handle bandit feedback,
                                                              ` (a)
draw at ∼ pt and feed importance weighted losses `ˆt (a) ∶= t 1I{at = a} into the full-information
                                                                     pt (a)
algorithm at each round, where pt (a) ∶= ∑π∈Π Pt (π) 1I{π(xt ) = a}. Conversely, a lower bound
showing that Eq. (2) is not attainable would imply that no full-information algorithm can achieve Eq.
(4), which strongly suggests that the quantile bound in Freund’s open problem is also not attainable.
 4. This does not preclude a guarantee of√the form Eq. (2), however, since we pay for the maximum number of actions.
                                       ̃ S ⋅ KT ), but only when a bound S on the switches is known a-priori.
 5. Auer et al. (2002) achieves regret O(
 6. Formally, this is accomplished by setting X = [T ] and π(t) = a⋆t .


                                                         4
                  O PEN P ROBLEM : M ODEL S ELECTION FOR C ONTEXTUAL BANDITS




References
Alekh Agarwal, Akshay Krishnamurthy, John Langford, Haipeng Luo, and Robert E. Schapire. Open problem:
  First-order regret bounds for contextual bandits. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2017a.

Alekh Agarwal, Haipeng Luo, Behnam Neyshabur, and Robert E Schapire. Corralling a band of bandit
  algorithms. Conference on Learning Theory, 2017b.

Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Yoav Freund, and Robert E. Schapire. The nonstochastic multiarmed bandit
  problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 2002.

Niladri S Chatterji, Vidya Muthukumar, and Peter L Bartlett. OSOM: A simultaneously optimal algorithm
  for multi-armed and linear contextual bandits. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, 2019.

Kamalika Chaudhuri, Yoav Freund, and Daniel J Hsu. A parameter-free hedging algorithm. In Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2009.

Wang Chi Cheung, David Simchi-Levi, and Ruihao Zhu. Learning to optimize under non-stationarity. In
 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2019.

Dylan J Foster, Alexander Rakhlin, and Karthik Sridharan. Adaptive online learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pages 3375–3383, 2015.

Dylan J Foster, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Haipeng Luo. Model selection for contextual bandits. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.

Yoav Freund. Open problem: Second order regret bounds based on scaling time. In Conference on Learning
  Theory, 2016.

Mark Herbster and Manfred K Warmuth. Tracking the best expert. Machine learning, 1998.

Wouter M Koolen and Tim Van Erven. Second-order quantile methods for experts and combinatorial games.
 In Conference on Learning Theory, 2015.

Akshay Krishnamurthy, John Langford, Aleksandrs Slivkins, and Chicheng Zhang. Contextual bandits with
  continuous actions: Smoothing, zooming, and adapting. Conference on Learning Theory, 2019.

John Langford and Tong Zhang. The epoch-greedy algorithm for multi-armed bandits with side information.
  In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2008.

Tor Lattimore. The pareto regret frontier for bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2015.

Andrea Locatelli and Alexandra Carpentier. Adaptivity to smoothness in X-armed bandits. In Conference on
  Learning Theory, 2018.

Haipeng Luo and Robert E Schapire. Achieving all with no parameters: Adanormalhedge. In Conference on
  Learning Theory, 2015.

Francesco Orabona and Dávid Pál. Coin betting and parameter-free online learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2016.




                                                     5
