Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol 247:1–5, 2024                     37th Annual Conference on Learning Theory




                        Open problem: Direct Sums in Learning Theory


Steve Hanneke                                                                     STEVE . HANNEKE @ GMAIL . COM
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University

Shay Moran                                                                        SMORAN @ TECHNION . AC . IL
Departments of Mathematics, Computer Science, and Data and Decision Sciences, Technion, and Google Research

Tom Waknine                                                           TOM . WAKNINE @ CAMPUS . TECHNION . AC . IL
Department of Mathematics, Technion



Editors: Shipra Agrawal and Aaron Roth




1. Introduction
In computer science, the term ’direct sum’ refers to fundamental questions about the scaling of computa-
tional or information complexity with respect to multiple task instances. Consider an algorithmic task T
and a computational resource C. For instance, T might be the task of computing a polynomial, with C
representing the number of arithmetic operations required, or T could be a learning task with its sample
complexity as C. The direct sum inquiry focuses on the cost of solving k separate instances of T , particu-
larly how this aggregate cost compares to the resources needed for a single instance. Typically, the cost for
multiple instances is at most k times the cost of one, since each can be handled independently.
     However, there are intriguing scenarios where the total cost for k instances is less than this linear re-
lationship. These cases suggest more efficient methods for simultaneously handling multiple instances of
a task than addressing them one by one. As an example, consider an n × n matrix A and the objective of
calculating its product with an input column vector x, where the computational resource C is the number
of arithmetic operations. For a single vector x, it is easy to see that Θ(n2 ) operations are necessary and
sufficient. However, if instead of one input vector x, there are n input vectors x1 , . . . , xn then one can do
better than n × Θ(n2 ) = Θ(n3 ). Indeed, by arranging these n vectors as columns in an n × n matrix B,
computing the product A · B is equivalent to solving the n products A · xi . This task can be accomplished
using roughly nω ≤ n2.37 arithmetic operations with fast matrix multiplication algorithms. Direct sum
questions are well-studied in information theory and complexity theory. For more background we refer the
reader to the thesis by Pankratov (2012) or the books by Wigderson (2019) and Rao and Yehudayoff (2020).

Direct Sum in Learning Theory. Natural direct sum questions can also be posed in learning theory. To
formalize these, we use the notion of cartesian product of concept classes: consider two concept classes, C1
and C2 , defined over domains X1 and X2 , and label spaces Y1 and Y2 respectively. Their product, C1 ⊗ C2 ,
has domain X1 ⊗ X2 and label space Y1 ⊗ Y2 . Each concept c in C1 ⊗ C2 is parameterized by a pair of
concepts c1 ∈ C1 and c2 ∈ C2 , and is defined as c((x1 , x2 )) = (c1 (x1 ), c2 (x2 )). Thus, learning c effectively
means learning both c1 and c2 simultaneously.
                                       Nr        This definition naturally extends to direct sums of multiple
concept classes
              Nr allowing us to define       C
                                          i=1 i  where   each Ci is a concept class. For a concept class C we
          r
denote C = i=1 C its direct sum with itself r times.

© 2024 S. Hanneke, S. Moran & T. Waknine.
                                          H ANNEKE M ORAN WAKNINE




2. Technical Background
We now present basic definitions from supervised classification in the PAC model. These definitions are
stated in the slightly more general context of list learning, which will be useful later on. Let X denote the
domain and Y denote the label space. A k-list function (or k-list concept) is a function c : X → Yk ,
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                 X
where Yk denotes the collection of all subsets of Y of size k. A k-list concept class C ⊆ Yk
          
                                                                                                    is a set of
k-list functions. Note that by identifying sets of size one with their single elements, 1-list concept classes
correspond to standard concept classes.
                                                          X
    A k-list learning rule is a map A : (X × Y)∗ → Yk , i.e. it gets a finite sequence of labeled examples
as input and outputs a k-list function. A learning problem D is a distribution over X × Y. The population
loss of a k-list function c with respect to D is defined by LD (c) = E(x,y)∼D [1y∈c(x)
                                                                                 /     ].
    We quantify the learning rate of a given learning rule on a given learning problem using learning curves:
The learning curve of a learner A with respect to a learning problem D is the sequence {εn (D|A)}∞        n=1 ,
where                                                      h         i
                                        εn (D|A) = E LD A(S) .
                                                     S∼Dn

In words, εn (D|A) is the expected error of the learner A on samples of size n drawn from the distribution D.
ForP a sequence S of labeled examples, the empirical loss of a k-list function c with respect to S is LS (c) =
 1
|S|    (x,y)∈S 1y ∈c(x)
                  /     . A sequence S ∈ (X × Y)n is realizable by a k-list function c if y ∈ c(x) for every
(x, y) ∈ S. It is realizable by a concept class C if it is realizable by some concept c ∈ C. A learning problem
D is realizable by a concept class C if for any n ∈ N, a random sample S ∼ Dn is realizable by C with
probability 1. We say that a concept class C is agnostically k-list learnable if there exists a k-list learning rule
                          n→∞
A and a sequence εn −−−→ 0 such that for every learning problem D, (∀n) : εn (D|A) ≤ inf c∈C LD (c)+εn .
If the latter only holds for C-realizable distributions then we say that C is k-list learnable in the realizable
case. The k-list realizable PAC learning curve of a concept class C is defined as follows:

                                           ε(n|C) = inf sup εn (D|A),
                                                      A       D

where the infimum is taken over all k-list learning rules A and the supremum over all distributions D that
are realizable by C.

3. Direct Sum Questions
3.1. Direct Sum of Learning Rates
One of the most natural questions regarding direct sums of learning problems is the following question:
given two learning tasks, can we learn both of them in a faster way than learning each individuality? Perhaps
the simplest case is of multiple instances of the same learning task. Let C be a concept class and recall that
for r ∈ N, the r’th power of C is denoted by C r = C ⊗ C · · · ⊗ C .
                                                    |     {z     }
                                                              r times

                  How does the learning rate of C r scale in terms of the learning rate of C?
This problem can be investigated with respect to various formulations of ‘learning rate’, for example:

Open Question Let C ⊆ Y X be a concept class,with a realizable PAC learning curve ε(n|C), By a union
bound, learning each component independently we have the following bound

                                              ε(n|C r ) ≤ r · ε(n|C).

Can this upper bound be asymptotically improved for some classes C?

                                                          2
                              O PEN PROBLEM : D IRECT S UMS IN L EARNING T HEORY




Another natural version of the above is assuming a fixed marginal distribution D: Let D be a fixed distribu-
tion over the domain X and let C be a concept class. For any c : X → Y let Dc be the distribution in which
(x, y) ∼ Dc satisfies x ∼ D and y = c(x). Define the fixed-marginal learning curve ε(n|D, C) by

                                           ε(n|D, C) = inf sup εn (Dc |A)
                                                           A c∈C

where the infimum is taken over all learning rules A. Note that for any c ∈ C we have that Dc is a realizable
distribution, hence ε(n|D, C) ≤ ε(n|C) always holds. For any r > 0, let Dr be the product measure over
X r.

Open Question 1 Similarly to the case of the PAC learning curve, a simple union bound will give the upper
bound ε(n|Dr , C r ) ≤ r · ε(n|D, C). Can the upper bound be asymptotically improved for some concept
classes C and marginal distributions D?

    One can ask similar questions about agnostic learning curves and uniform convergence. However, in
these cases the baseline additive upper bound does not apply. The reason is because these curves concern
relative quantities (indeed, the agnostic learning curve measures the excess loss and uniform convergence
curve measures the maximum difference between the empirical and population losses).
    For instance, given a distribution D over the product space (X 2 ×Y 2 ) defined with marginal distributions
D1 , D2 over (X × Y) wehave by the union bound that LD (h1 ⊗ h2 ) ≤ LD1 (h1 ) + LD2 (h2 ). Similarly if S =
{ (xi,1 , xi,2 ), (yi,1 , yi,2 ) }ni=1 , letting Sb = {(xi,b , yi,b )}ni=1 , we have LS (h1 ⊗ h2 ) ≤ LS1 (h1 ) + LS2 (h2 ).
These bounds, however, do not allow us to bound the difference |LD (h1 ⊗ h2 ) − LS (h1 ⊗ h2 )| as needed to
bound the uniform convergence rate. Define the uniform convergence rate of C by

                                    εUC (n|C) = sup E [sup|LD (h) − LS (h)|]
                                                     n
                                                   D S∼D          h∈C

where the supremum is over all distributions D.

Open Question 2 How does εUC (n|C r ) scale as a function of εUC (n|C) and r?

   A similar phenomenon happens in the case of agnostic learning: define the agnostic learning curve of a
concept class C by

                                     εagn (n|C) = inf sup(LD,n (A) − LD (C)),
                                                     A    D

where the infimum is taken over all learning rules A, the supremum is taken over all distributions, LD,n (A) =
ES∼Dn [LD (A(S))], and LD (C) = inf c∈C LD (c). Here again we do not have simple bounds to the agnostic
learning curve of C r in terms of the agnostic learning curve of C.

Open Question 3 Let εagn (n|C) be the agnostic PAC learning curve of C. How does εagn (n|C r ) scale as a
function of εagn (n|C) and r?

3.2. Direct Sum of Learnability Parameters
Another important resource in the context of list learning is the minimal list size k for which a given class C
is k-list PAC learnable. This raises the following questions:

Open Question 4 Let C1 , C2 be concept classes and assume k1 and k2 are the minimal integers such that
C1 is k1 -list PAC learnable and C2 is k2 -list PAC learnable. What is the minimal integer k such that C1 ⊗ C2
is k-list PAC learnable? How does it scale as a function of k1 and k2 .

                                                              3
                                         H ANNEKE M ORAN WAKNINE




It is not hard to see that k ≤ k1 · k2 by just learning each component independently and taking all possible
pairs of labels in the marginal lists. We also show that k ≥ (k1 − 1) · (k2 − 1) (see Equation (1) below).
However, it remains open to determine tight bounds on k.
     We raise the parallel question regarding compressibility:
Open Question 5 Let C1 , C2 be concept classes and assume k1 and k2 are the minimal integers such that
C1 is k1 -list compressible and C2 is k2 -list compressible. What is the minimal integer k such that C1 ⊗ C2 is
k-list PAC learnable? How does it scale as a function of k1 and k2 .
A natural way to approach questions such as the ones above and in Section 3 is by analyzing combinatorial
parameters that capture the corresponding resources.
Open Question 6 Let F, G be concept classes, and let dim(·) be either the Graph dimension, the Natarajan
dimension, the Littlestone dimension, or the Daniely-Shwartz dimension. How does dim(F ⊗ G) scale in
terms of dim(F) and dim(G)?
We next state some preliminary results whose proofs can be found in Hanneke, Moran, and Waknine (2024).
Proposition 1 Let dN (·) be the Natarajan dimension, and let F and G be concept classes. Then,
                            dN (F) + dN (G) − 2 ≤ dN (F ⊗ G) ≤ dN (F) + dN (G).
Proposition 2 Let LS(·) be the Littlestone dimension, then for any F, G concept classes we have
                                         LS(F ⊗ G) = LS(F) + LS(G)
    The following lemma utilizes the concept of the Daniely-Shwartz (DS) dimension, which character-
izes PAC learnability in the multiclass setting. This DS dimension-based characterization extends the VC
dimension-based characterization used in the binary case, see Brukhim et al. (2022); Charikar and Pabbaraju
(2022).
Proposition 3 Let F, G be partial function classes, and let k, k ′ ≥ 1. Denote DSk (C) the k-Daniely-
Shwartz (DS) dimension of a concept class C. Then,
                                             
  1. DSk·k′ (F ⊗ G) ≥ min DSk (F), DSk′ (G) .
   2. DSmin(k,k′ ) (F ⊗ G) ≥ DSk (F) + DSk′ (G)−1.
    Note that Lemma 3 has direct implications relevant to Open Question 4. Specifically, it implies that if
F is not k-list learnable and G is not k ′ -list learnable then F ⊗ G is not k · k ′ -list learnable. Conversely we
know that if F is k-list learnable and G is k ′ list learnable then F ⊗ G is k · k ′ -list learnable. Thus, letting
K(C) denote the minimal k such that a concept class C is k-list learnable (or infinity if there is no such k)
we can summarize the above as
                           (K(F) − 1)(K(G) − 1) ≤ K(F ⊗ G) ≤ K(F) · K(G)                                       (1)
We may also ask similar questions about compressibility, an answer to which would be relevant to Open
Question 5.
    Lemma 3 also has implications to Open Question 3.1 for (1-list) PAC learnable classes. Indeed, let C be
a PAC learnable class. Then, by Item 2 in Lemma 3, it follows that DS1 (C r ) ≥ rDS1 (C). Hence, since the
Daniely-Shwartz dimension lower bounds the PAC learning curve (Charikar and Pabbaraju, 2022) we get
                                                 DS1 (C r )   r · DS1 (C)−r
                                     ε(n|C r ) ≥            ≥               .
                                                     n              n
Thus, if it turns out that the realizable PAC learning curve is Θ DSn1 then the above in combination with the
                                                                        

naive union bound argument mentioned in Open Question 3.1 would answer this question up to universal
multiplicative constants.

                                                        4
                          O PEN PROBLEM : D IRECT S UMS IN L EARNING T HEORY




References
Nataly Brukhim, Daniel Carmon, Irit Dinur, Shay Moran, and Amir Yehudayoff. A characterization of
  multiclass learnability. In 63rd IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS
  2022, Denver, CO, USA, October 31 - November 3, 2022, pages 943–955. IEEE, 2022. doi: 10.1109/
  FOCS54457.2022.00093. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS54457.2022.00093.

Moses Charikar and Chirag Pabbaraju. A characterization of list learnability. Proceedings of the 55th Annual
 ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
 CorpusID:253420830.

Steve Hanneke, Shay Moran, and Tom Waknine. List sample compression and uniform convergence. CoRR,
  abs/2403.10889, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2403.10889. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/
  arXiv.2403.10889.

Denis Pankratov. Direct sum questions in classical communication complexity. Master’s thesis, University
  of Chicago, 2012.

Anup Rao and Amir Yehudayoff. Bibliography, page 244–249. Cambridge University Press, 2020.

A. Wigderson. Mathematics and Computation: A Theory Revolutionizing Technology and Science. Prince-
  ton University Press, 2019. ISBN 9780691189130. URL https://books.google.co.il/
  books?id=-WCqDwAAQBAJ.




                                                     5
