Unique Decoding of Reed–Solomon and Related
Codes for Semi-Adversarial Errors
Joshua Brakensiek # Ñ
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA

Yeyuan Chen # Ñ
Department of EECS, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Manik Dhar # Ñ
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA

Zihan Zhang # Ñ
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA

      Abstract
Motivated by recent developments in coding theory, particular in list-decoding, we introduce a new
error model which we call semi-adversarial errors. This error model bridges between fully random
errors and fully adversarial errors by allowing some symbols of a message to be corrupted by an
adversary while others are replaced with uniformly random symbols.
    As our main quest, we seek to understand optimal efficient unique decoding algorithms in the
semi-adversarial model. For interleaved Reed–Solomon (IRS), folded Reed–Solomon (FRS) and
univariate multiplicity codes, we design decoding algorithms running in near-linear time for most
mixtures of random and adversarial errors. Our analysis matches the information-theoretic optimum
for semi-adversarial errors.
    Our algorithm for interleaved Reed–Solomon codes is an improved implementation of the
decoding algorithm by Bleichenbacher–Kiayias–Yung (BKY) for fully random errors. We use a
novel monomial-tracking technique to analyze its performance in this new semi-adversarial errors.
Inspired by the BKY algorithm, we use novel interpolations to extend our approach to the settings
of folded Reed–Solomon and multiplicity codes, resulting in fast algorithms for unique decoding
against semi-adversarial errors. Our new decoders for FRS and multiplicity codes replace the
sophisticated root-finding step in traditional algorithms, such as the Guruswami–Wang algorithm,
with a straightforward polynomial long division. Analysis of these algorithms requires more robust
monomial-tracking arguments than IRS codes.
2012 ACM Subject Classification Mathematics of computing → Coding theory; Computing meth-
odologies → Algebraic algorithms
Keywords and phrases coding theory, interleaved codes, Reed-Solomon codes, semi-random models,
unique decoding
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2026.43
Category Track A: Algorithms, Complexity and Games
Related Version Full Version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.10399
Funding Joshua Brakensiek: Supported in part by the Simons Investigator award of Venkatesan
Guruswami and NSF grants CCF-2211972 and DMS-2503280.
Yeyuan Chen: Partially supported by the National Science Foundation grant No. CCF-2236931.
Zihan Zhang: Partially supported by the National Science Foundation grant No. CCF-2440926.

Acknowledgements We thank Sivakanth Gopi and Venkatesan Guruswami for many helpful discus-
sions and much encouragement while writing this paper. We thank Matteo Abbondati, Eleonora
Guerrini, and Romain Lebreton for taking the time to explain to us the contributions of [1–3, 24].
Zihan Zhang also thanks Gabrielle Beck for some helpful discussions. We thank Rishabh Kothary
for some valuable corrections to the paper.
             © Joshua Brakensiek, Yeyuan Chen, Manik Dhar, and Zihan Zhang;
                                                                                                       EA




             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
                                                                                                       TC S




53rd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2026).
Editors: Sayan Bhattacharya, Danupon Nanongkai, Michael Benedikt, and Gabriele Puppis;
Article No. 43; pp. 43:1–43:19
                     Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                     Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
43:2   Unique Decoding of Reed–Solomon and Related Codes for Semi-Adversarial Errors


           1       Introduction

       The primary goal of this investigation is to better understand the error-correcting properties
       of Reed–Solomon (RS) codes [45], the most fundamental class of algebraic error-correcting
       codes. To define a Reed–Solomon code, we consider a finite field Fq as well as distinct
       evaluation points α1 , . . . , αn ∈ Fq . An [n, k] RS code over Fq is then

                                                   f (α1 ), . . . , f (αn ) : f (X) ∈ Fq [X], deg(f ) < k ⊆ Fnq .
                                                                          
               RSn,k,q (α1 , . . . , αn ) :=

            One of the most fundamental questions one can ask about Reed–Solomon codes is their
       decodability. In particular, consider a protocol in which a sender picks ⃗c ∈ RSn,k,q (α1 , . . . , αn )
       and transmits ⃗c across a channel, which is received as a corrupted message ⃗y ∈ Fnq . We
       seek to understand under what circumstances ⃗c can be recovered from ⃗y . For instance, the
       Berlekamp–Welch decoder [55] can efficiently recover ⃗c if and only if the Hamming distance
       (i.e., the number of distinct symbols) between ⃗c and ⃗y is at most (n − k)/2. This algorithm
       is information-theoretically optimal because RSn,k,q has distance n − k + 1, i.e., it attains
       the Singleton bound [51] and thus is an MDS code.
           However, there are many other questions one can ask about the structure of Reed–Solomon
       codes. For example, what if the corruptions are sampled uniformly at random? Or what if
       the number of corruptions exceeds the unique-decoding radius of (n − k)/2, and we can only
       decode to a list? For decoding problems like these, a central open problem is to find efficient
       decoding algorithms which match the information-theoretic optimum for these problems. For
       instance, the Guruswami-Sudan  √ [29] can efficiently list-decode any Reed–Solomon code up
       to the Johnson radius of 1 − R, where R := k/n is the rate of the Reed–Solomon code.
       However, a recent line of work has surprisingly established that most Reed–Solomon codes
       can be list-decoded up to the generalized Singleton bound, which asymptotically tends to
       the channel capacity of 1 − R [5, 16, 26, 50].
           Although closing the gap between such combinatorial and algorithmic results currently
       seems out of reach, we note that an analogous result has been known for decades in the
       random error setting. More precisely, for a special class of Reed–Solomon codes known as
       subfield evaluation RS codes or interleaved RS codes, the result of Bleichenbacher, Kiayias,
       and Yung [13] proved that for an s-interleaved RS code one can efficiently uniquely decode
         s
       s+1 (n−k) random errors. In particular, as the interleaving grows, one can efficiently uniquely
       decode random errors up to a radius approaching capacity.1 Given the success of the BKY
       algorithm in the random error model, is there any hope of generalizing it to improve our
       understanding of the adversarial model?
           The main mission of this paper is to lay the groundwork of a pathway for translating
       results into the random error model back into a setting with adversarial errors. As a primary
       contribution, we introduce a new error model, which we call the semi-adversarial error model
       which hybridizes the fully random and fully adversarial error regimes. Studying such a model
       allows us to integrate approaches used in the decoding literature for fully adversarial and
       fully random errors, with the benefit that we are able to understand tight tradeoffs between
       information-theoretic bounds and fast (i.e., near-linear time) decoding algorithms.



       1
           Of note, a contemporaneous algorithm by Coppersmith and Sudan [19] is believed to also attain capacity,
           but its current analysis has a decoding radius of only 1 − 2R in the limit. We discuss this open problem
           in Section 2.
J. Brakensiek, Y. Chen, M. Dhar, and Z. Zhang                                                                  43:3


1.1      The Semi-Adversarial Error Model
We now proceed to define the error models (i.e., channels) we examine in this paper. Formally,
 given a code C ⊆ Σn , we define a channel to be a function Ψ which takes as input a codeword
⃗c ∈ C and returns as output a probability distribution Ψ(⃗c) over messages ⃗y ∈ Σn . We let
∆(Σn ) denote the set of probability distributions over Σn , so a channel can be viewed as a
 function Ψ : C → ∆(Σn ). We then define an error model E to be a set of channels. We say
 that an algorithm A can decode E with probability p, if for every ⃗c ∈ C, Ψ ∈ E, the algorithm
 A when given input a sample ⃗y ∼ Ψ(⃗c) outputs ⃗c with probability at least p.
     For each i ∈ [n], we let yi denote the i-th symbol of ⃗y . Given I ⊆ [n], we let Ψ(⃗c)|I
 denote the marginal distribution where we restrict to the coordinates of the output string
 indexed by I. We start by defining the well-studied adversarial and random error models.
▶ Definition 1 (Adversarial Errors). We say that a channel Ψ : C → ∆(Σn ) has at most e
adversarial errors if for every transmitted string ⃗c ∈ C, every ⃗y ∈ supp Ψ(⃗c) (i.e., the strings
with nonzero probability) have Hamming distance at most e from ⃗c.
▶ Definition 2 (Random Errors). We say that a channel Ψ : C → ∆(Σn ) has e random errors
if for every ⃗c, there exists I ⊆ [n] with |I| ≥ n − e such that Ψ(⃗c) has the following properties.
(1) For every ⃗y ∈ supp Ψ(⃗c), ci = yi for all i ∈ I.
(2) Ψ(⃗c)|[n]\I is the uniform distribution on Σ[n]\I .
▶ Remark 3. The ability for an algorithm to decode a family of channels with success
probability p is equivalent to the algorithm being able to decoding with probability p any
convex combination of these channels (i.e., sample a random channel then sample the output
of that channel).
▶ Remark 4. In our random error model, we assume that the set I of non-errors can be
adversarially chosen. Note this coincides with the random error model of Coppersmith–
Sudan [19], but deviates from Bleichenbacher et al. [13] where the set I is chosen uniformly at
random. However, as we shall see, the decoding algorithm considered in [13] applies equally
well in this stronger error model.
 ▶ Remark 5. To simplify the notation later in the paper, we often keep the choice of Ψ
 implicit and exclusively refer to the transmitted codeword ⃗c and the sampled codeword
⃗y ∼ Ψ(⃗c). For example, we will say that ⃗y is received with at most e random errors if the
 implicit channel Ψ comes from the at most e random errors model.
    Note the random error channel is weaker than the corresponding adversarial error channel
in the sense that for the same number of errors, the random error channel can be viewed
as a special case of the adversarial error channel where the adversary chooses to corrupt
each symbol uniformly at random. However, we have a tighter understanding of the random
error model – the unique decoding radius in the random error model (approximately)
coincidences with the capacity of the channel. This was proven combinatorially by Rudra
and Uurtamo [47] who showed that any MDS code (i.e., code attaining the Singleton bound)
is uniquely decodable up to (1 − R − ε)n random errors.2
    For any alphabet Σ, radius e ≥ 0 and length-n string ⃗y ∈ Σn , we define the Hamming
ball B(⃗y , e) with center ⃗y as the set of all length-n strings that have Hamming distance at
most e from ⃗y . That is, they differ with ⃗y on at most e positions.


2
    This is not restricted to MDS codes. Generally, for a code with relative distance δ, it is possible to
    uniquely decode it from (δ − ε)n random errors. For simplicity we state the result according to MDS
    codes here.




                                                                                                             ICALP 2026
43:4   Unique Decoding of Reed–Solomon and Related Codes for Semi-Adversarial Errors


       ▶ Proposition 6 ([47, Theorem 1]). Consider parameters 0 < ε, R < 1, n > Ω(1/ε), any
       alphabet Σ with size at least 2Ω(1/ε) , and any MDS code C ⊆ Σn with rate R. For any
       codeword ⃗c ∈ C, let ⃗y denote the received word after applying e = (1 − R − ε)n random errors
       to ⃗c. Then, with probability at least 1 − |Σ|−Ω(εn) , we have B(⃗y , e) ∩ C = {⃗c}.

           However, if we inspect the proof of Rudra and Uurtamo [47], we can observe that, in
       fact, unique-decoding is still possible even when the errors are a mixture of adversarial errors
       and random errors, which implies similar unique-decoding bounds (and as we shall soon
       discuss, corresponding algorithms) could be further generalized to stronger error models.
       This motivates us to consider a partial-adversarial/partial-random error model, which we
       call the semi-adversarial error model.


       1.1.1    Semi-Adversarial Errors
       We now present the primary error model we study in this paper: the semi-adversarial error
       model. It particular, it can be viewed as a composition of the channels defined in the
       adversarial and random error models.

       ▶ Definition 7 (Semi-Adversarial Errors). We say that a channel Ψ : C → ∆(Σn ) has
       (e0 , e)-semi-adversarial errors (where 0 ≤ e0 ≤ e) if for every ⃗c ∈ Σn there exist a set of
       non-adversarial indices I ⊆ [n] with |I| = n − e0 , a set of agreement indices J ⊆ I with
       |J| ≥ n − e, and an adversarial corruption string ⃗z ∈ Σn−|I| with the following properties.
       (Agreement indices uncorrupted): For every ⃗y ∈ supp Ψ(⃗c), ⃗c|J = ⃗y |J .
       (Adversarial corruptions applied) For every ⃗y ∈ supp Ψ(⃗c), ⃗y |[n]\I = ⃗z.
       (Random errors after adversarial corruptions): The distribution Ψ(⃗c)|I\J is uniform over
            Σ|I\J| .

       ▶ Remark 8. In our analysis of decoding algorithms for semi-adversarial errors, we make use
       of some more fine-grained notation. In particular, for the given I ⊆ [n] with |I| = n − e0 we
       assume that the “true” adversarial errors occur in some subset K ⊆ [n]\I with eA := |K| ≤ e0 .
       Formally, we define K such that for any position j ∈ [n] \ I, j ∈ K iff yj =
                                                                                  ̸ cj . Note that it
       may be the case K ̸= [n] \ I, as some of the “corruptions” ⃗z can equal the corresponding
       coordinates in the original coordinates ⃗c. We also often use the notation K ′ := I \ J
       with eR := |K ′ | to denote the coordinates for which random errors are applied. We then
       let e := eA + eR ≤ e denote the number of positions which are truly corrupted during
       transmission.
       ▶ Remark 9. We note that (e, e)-semi-adversarial errors are equivalent to exactly e adversarial
       errors, while (0, e)-semi-adversarial errors are equivalent to e random errors.
       ▶ Remark 10 (Comparison to recent and concurrent work.). A recent paper [24] has studied
       hybrid error models in connection to the closely related problem of rational function decoding.
       Some follow-up papers [1, 3] deal with the same problem over number fields as opposed to
       function fields. The stated results in [24] are for semi-adversarial errors where the adversarial
       errors are for valuation errors which do not exist in the IRS case so the statement does not
       directly imply results in our setting. The results for number fields (like Q) in [3] do work
       for any kind of adversarial errors, but this work was done concurrently and independently
       of us. A later work [2] generalizes techniques of [3, 24] and gives results for IRS codes in
       the semi-adversarial model. Although [2] was posted later than our work, it is developed
       independently. We compare their results with ours.
J. Brakensiek, Y. Chen, M. Dhar, and Z. Zhang                                                       43:5


   For decoding (e0 , e) semi-adversarial errors for IRS codes, [2] requires e0 ≤ n − k − e −
   (e − e0 )/s, while our bound e0 ≤ n − k − e is better and actually optimal. This difference
   could be ignored if one allows s being arbitrarily large, with the cost of larger alphabet.
   Unlike our work, [2] does not include results for folded RS codes and multiplicity codes,
   but they can handle a family of interleaved rational function codes that we do not consider.
   The success probability of decoding algorithms in [2] is larger than ours, but both two
   papers achieve 1 − on (1) success probability when the field size q = ω(n).

   For any number of total errors e, when the number e0 of adversarial errors gets larger,
the task of unique-decoding (with high success probability) gets more difficult. As our first
nontrivial observation about the semi-adversarial error model, we show that in any MDS
code the number e0 of adversarial errors must be bounded by

   e0 ≤ min(e, (1 − R)n − e).

In particular, to uniquely decode e errors in the semi-adversarial model, the maximum
number of adversarial errors that could occur e0 = min(e, n − k − e). Our formal result is as
follows.

▶ Proposition 11. For any MDS code C ⊆ Σn over alphabet Σ with rate R, block length
n, e0 > (1 − R)n − e, there exists some word ⃗z ∈ Σn , |B(⃗z, e0 ) ∩ C| ≥ 1 and K ⊆ [n], |K| =
e − e0 such that any received word ⃗y that differs with ⃗z only on positions in K satisfies
|B(⃗y , e) ∩ C| ≥ 2.

We should regard ⃗y as the real received word by adding e − e0 random errors upon the
adversarial received word ⃗z. From Proposition 11 we can see that if e0 > (1 − R)n − e, then
no matter the content of random errors the unique-decoding is impossible. As a side remark,
Proposition 11 is a special case of Proposition 17.
     On the other hand, by slightly adapting the proof of Rudra and Uurtamo [47], we can
actually get the following positive combinatorial bound that states with high probability
it is possible to uniquely decode from any e0 ≤ min (e, (1 − R − ε)n − e) adversarial errors,
which approaches the optimal bound (1 − R)n for diminishing constant ε. Formally, we have
the following combinatorial unique-decodability.

▶ Proposition 12. Consider parameters 0 < ε, R < 1, n > Ω(1/ε), any alphabet Σ with
size at least 2Ω(1/ε) , and any MDS code C ⊆ Σn with rate R. For any codeword ⃗c ∈ C,
let ⃗y denote the received word after applying (e0 , e)-semi-adversarial errors to ⃗c where
e0 ≤ min(e, (1 − R − ε)n − e), e ≤ (1 − R)n. Then, with probability at least 1 − |Σ|−Ω(εn) , we
have B(⃗y , e) ∩ C = {⃗c}.

    Motivated by these observations, a very natural question to ask is how to design unique-
decoding algorithms in semi-adversarial error model that match the combinatorial bound
(1 − R − ε)n − e from Proposition 12 or even achieve the optimal bound (1 − R)n − e. In this
paper, we provide unique-decoding algorithms from semi-adversarial errors for (a subclass of)
Reed–Solomon and related codes that match the counting-based or even the optimal bound.
In particular, our algorithm for interleaved Reed–Solomon codes builds upon the approach
of Bleichenbacher, Kiayias, and Yung [13] and Alekhnovich [4] and our algorithms for folded
Reed–Solomon and multiplicity codes are entirely new.

1.2    Our Results
We now proceed to discuss our results on the unique decoding of variants of Reed–Solomon
codes in the semi-adversarial error model. All of our results are algorithmically efficient,
running in Õ(n) time. Moreover, for most tradeoff regimes between adversarial and random

                                                                                                  ICALP 2026
43:6   Unique Decoding of Reed–Solomon and Related Codes for Semi-Adversarial Errors


       errors, our results are either information-theoretically optimal or near-optimal. In particular,
       our results pertain to three variant of Reed–Solomon codes: interleaved RS codes (equivalently
       subfield evalaution RS codes), folded RS codes, and multiplicity codes. For each result, we
       briefly define the variant of RS codes we are considering along with the guarantees of our
       algorithm.

       1.2.1       Interleaved Reed–Solomon Codes
       Interleaving is a common technique in coding theory that was initially used to design codes
       and decoders with enhanced burst error-correction capabilities. By dispersing these errors,
       interleaving transforms them into random errors that are easier to correct. An important
       subfamily of Reed–Solomon codes is that of interleaved Reed–Solomon (IRS) codes (e.g.,
       [13, 19, 36, 49]).
           Given polynomials f1 , . . . , fs ∈ Fq [x], we define the s-interleaved                  encoding map         
                                                                      n
       I(f1 , f2 , . . . , fs ) to be (C1f , C2f , . . . , Cnf ) ∈ Fsq , where Cif := f1 (αi ), f2 (αi ), . . . , fs (αi ) .
       With this encoder, we define a [n, k] s-interleaved RS code for any distinct α1 , . . . αn ∈ Fq as
       follows.
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                               n
         IRSn,k,q,s (α1 , . . . , αn ) := I(f1 , f2 , . . . , fs ) : fi ∈ Fq [x], deg fi < k, and i ∈ [s] ⊆ Fsq ,

       where [s] := {1, 2, . . . , s}. Although an IRS code is technically not an RS code, we show
       in the full version that IRS codes have decoding properties identical to those of a class of
       subfield Reed–Solomon codes. That is, if we let Fqs be the s-degree extension of Fq , then
       RSn,k,qs (α1 , . . . , αn ) ⊆ Fnqs has identical decoding properties in the semi-adversarial model.
           We now state our main decoding theorem for IRS codes in the semi-adversarial model.
       See Figure 1 for a visual summary of our result.

       ▶ Theorem 13 (Informal Version). Consider integers s, n, k ≥ 1. For any interleaved Reed–
       Solomon code RSn,k,qs (α1 , . . . , αn ) with α1 , . . . , αn ∈ Fq , there exists an efficient unique
       decoding algorithm that, with high probability, can correct (e0 , e)-semi-adversarial errors for
       any
                  s
            e≤       (n − k)       and     e0 ≤ min(e, n − k − e).
                 s+1

       The running time of the algorithm is at most O sO(1) n log2 (n) log log(n) .
                                                                                 

           In particular, note that we smoothly interpolate between the algorithms of Berlekamp–
       Welch for adversarial errors and the algorithm of BKY for random errors. Furthermore, note
                            s
       that as long as e ≤ s+1 (n−k), our decoding bound perfectly matches the combinatorial bound
                                                                      √
       of Proposition 11 and Proposition 12. Furthermore, for e > n − nk we “break” the Johnson
       bound3 in the sense that our result is not implied by a combination of Guruswami-Sudan
       with a combinatorial bound on the list size.

       1.2.2       Folded Reed–Solomon (RS) Codes
       Another common variant of RS codes which we study is that of folded Reed–Solomon (FRS)
       codes [28]. In contrast to IRS codes which bundle the evaluations of the same point α ∈ Fq
       at s different polynomials, FRS codes bundle s correlated evaluations of the same polynomial.

                                                                                           √
       3
           In this paper “Johnson bound” refers to the error/rate tradeoff of e ≤ n −       nk. We do not improve on
           Guruswami-Sudan algorithm in the adversarial model.
J. Brakensiek, Y. Chen, M. Dhar, and Z. Zhang                                                                 43:7


 # of adversarial errors (e0 )
                                           Guruswami–Sudan (GS) Algorithm
          √
     n−       nk

                                                          Johnson Bound
           n−k
            2
                                                          Our Result

     √
         nk − k                                               Bleichenbacher–Kiayias–Yung (BKY) Algorithm
    1
   s+1 (n − k)
               0                                     √
                                     n−k
                                                n−       nk   n−k                 # of total errors (e)
                                      2

                                                       s
   Berlekamp–Welch (BW) Algorithm                     s+1 (n − k)


    Figure 1 This figure is a comparison between our result with BW Algorithm, GS Algorithm, and
the original BKY Algorithm for [n, k] Reed–Solomon codes over alphabet Fqs with n evaluation
points chosen from Fq . The horizontal axis depicts the total number of errors e allowed in the
semi-adversarial model, and the vertical axis depicts the number of adversarial errors e0 . The region
below the two orange lines is where unique-decoding is combinatorially possible by Proposition 12.
It is impossible to achieve unique decoding above the two orange lines by Proposition 11.



More precisely, let γ be a multiplicative generator of Fq and consider s ≥ 1. We say that
α1 , . . . , αn ∈ Fq are appropriate if the sn values {γ j−1 αi : i ∈ [n], j ∈ [s]} are distinct
                                                                                              n [18].
Given f ∈ Fq [x], we define our evaluation map to be C(f ) := (C1f , C2f , . . . , Cnf ) ∈ Fsq , with
                                              
Cif := f (αi ), f (γαi ), . . . , f (γ s−1 αi ) . Then, for parameters n, k and appropriate evaluation
points α1 , . . . , αn ∈ Fq , we define our (s, γ)-folded RS code to be
                                                                             
                                                                                          n
    FRSs,γ
       n,k,q (α1 , α2 , . . . , αn ) :=       C(f ) : f ∈ Fq [x], deg f < k       ⊆ Fsq        .


    We now state our results which apply to folded Reed–Solomon codes.

▶ Theorem 14 (Informal Version). Consider integers s, L, n, k ≥ 1 and a generator γ of F×             q
where s ≥ L. For any appropriate (s, γ)-folded Reed–Solomon code FRSs,γ      n,k (α1 , . . . , αn ) over
the alphabet Fsq , there exists an efficient unique decoding algorithm that, with high probability,
can correct (e0 , e)-semi-adversarial errors for any
                                                                                            
        L                   k                                               k
    e≤                 n−                      and    e0 ≤ min e, n − e −                          .
       L+1                s−L+1                                           s−L+1

The running time of the algorithm is at most O sO(1) n log2 (n) log log(n) .
                                                                          


    Compared to the well-known Guruswami–Wang algorithm [23,27,30,34] , a key advantage
of our novel algorithm is that it replaces the less-efficient root-finding step with a straightfor-
ward polynomial long division, resulting in a substantial efficiency boost. However, this is in
tradeoff to the fact that the Guruswami–Wang algorithm can handle fully adversarial errors,
whereas our approach is limited to semi-adversarial errors.



                                                                                                            ICALP 2026
43:8   Unique Decoding of Reed–Solomon and Related Codes for Semi-Adversarial Errors


       1.2.3      Multiplicity Codes
       Our final main result is for another popular variant of RS codes known as (univariate)
       multiplicity codes (e.g., [30, 33, 35]). Again, multiplicity codes are similar to IRS codes
       except this time instead of evaluating a point α at s different polynomials, multiplicity codes
       evaluate s Hasse derivatives of the same polynomial at α. In particular, given f ∈ Fq [x]
       and symbolic variable z, we define f (i) (x) (the i-th Hasse derivative) to be the coefficient
       of z i in the expansion of f (x + z). From this, we     can define our evaluation function             to be
                                                n
       M(f ) := (C1f , C2f , . . . , Cnf ) ∈ Fsq , with Cif := f (αi ), f (1) (αi ), . . . , f (s−1) (αi ) . Then, for
       parameters n, k, s and distinct evaluation points α1 , . . . , αn ∈ Fq , our multiplicity code is
       defined to be
                                                                                
                   s
                                                                                                n
           MULTn,k (α1 , α2 , . . . , αn ) := M(f ) : f ∈ Fq [x], deg f < k ⊆ Fsq .

       ▶ Remark 15. RS, IRS, FRS, and MULT codes all coincide when s = 1.

       ▶ Theorem 16 (Informal Version). Consider integers s, L, n, k ≥ 1 and n distinct evaluation
       points α1 , . . . , αn ∈ Fq . If Char(Fq ) > s, then for any multiplicity code MULTsn,k (α1 , . . . , αn )
       over the alphabet Fsq , there exists an efficient unique decoding algorithm that, with high
       probability, can correct (e0 , e)-semi-adversarial errors for any
                                                                                      
                  L                  k                                               k
          e≤                 n−            −1       and e0 ≤ min e, n − e −                 .
               L+1              s−L+1                                            s−L+1

       The running time of the algorithm is at most O sO(1) n log2 (n) log log(n) .
                                                                                       

           As in Theorem 14, Theorem 16 has the advantage of the work of Guruswami–Wang
       algorithm [23, 27, 30, 34] of replacing the less-efficient root-finding step with a straightforward
       polynomial long division, resulting in a substantial efficiency boost.

       1.3     Literature Overview
       In this subsection, we provide an overview of previous work on both unique and list decoding
       of variants of Reed–Solomon (RS) codes, including RS codes themselves. In particular, we
       discuss the state-of-the-art decoding algorithms in both the adversarial and random error
       models.

       1.3.1      Decoding Reed–Solomon Codes
       Since the 1960s, efficiently decoding Reed–Solomon (RS) codes has become a central subject
       of study in coding theory, due to its importance in both practical error-correction applications
       and fundamental theoretical research in algorithms, complexity, and cryptography (e.g.,
       [6, 8–10]). For an [n, k] Reed–Solomon code, it can uniquely correct up to (n − k)/2
       adversarial errors. During the past half century, numerous algorithms have been developed
       to uniquely decode Reed–Solomon codes up to this bound in the adversarial error model
       (e.g., [12, 20, 22, 39, 42, 55]). Among these many algorithms, two of the most popular are the
       Berlekamp–Welch algorithm [55] and the Berlekamp–Massey algorithm [39].
           The Berlekamp–Welch algorithm, with a running time complexity of O(n3 ), employs a
       clever algebraic technique to decode Reed–Solomon codes, using polynomial interpolation
       to identify and correct errors. More concretely, [55] approaches the decoding problem by
       transforming it into a task of finding two polynomials: an error locator polynomial E(x) and
J. Brakensiek, Y. Chen, M. Dhar, and Z. Zhang                                                                43:9


a numerator polynomial Q(x). For a received word represented as points (αi , yi ), where αi
are distinct evaluation points and yi are the received (corrupted) values, the algorithm sets
up a system of linear equations based on the condition Q(αi ) = yi E(αi ) for all i. Here, E(x)
has degree equal to the number of errors e, and Q(x) has degree less than k + e, where k is
the dimension of the code. When the number of errors e is at most (n − k)/2, this system
has a unique solution up to scaling. Solving it allows the decoder to determine E(x), whose
roots indicate the error locations, and subsequently recover the original message polynomial
as Q(x)/E(x).
    Unlike an interpolation-based framework, the Berlekamp–Massey algorithm [39], with a
better running time complexity of O(n2 ), takes a different approach by directly processing the
syndrome sequence to find the error locator polynomial, taking advantage of shift registers
for multiplication. Their method is recognized as a standard syndrome-based decoding
framework. By building on these two algorithms, more efficient algorithms have been
developed with a running time complexity of O(n · poly(log n)) (e.g., [38, 44, 54]).
    Beyond unique decoding, to correct more than (n − k)/2 errors in the adversarial error
model, list decoding algorithms are involved (e.g., [4, 29, 46, 53, 56]). In 1997, inspired by the
Berlekamp–Welch algorithm, Sudan [53] provided   √ the first list decoding algorithm of Reed–
Solomon codes capable of correcting up to n − 2nk errors. Later, by introducing the notion
of multiplicity, Guruswami √  and Sudan [29] designed an improved list decoding algorithm
that can correct up to n − nk errors, matching the Johnson bound [32]. Two follow-up
works by Roth–Ruckenstein [46] and Alekhnovich [4] showed some fast implementations of
the Guruswami–Sudan algorithm in time O(n2 ) and O(n · poly(log n)) respectively. Most
recently, a long line of works [5, 16, 26, 48, 50] have shown that Reed–Solomon codes can
achieve list decodability beyond the Johnson bound, reaching up to list decoding capacity.
However, it remains an open problem to design a list decoding algorithm for any subclasses of
Reed–Solomon codes capable of correcting adversarial errors beyond the Johnson bound. We
emphasize that our result on interleaved Reed–Solomon codes (see Theorem 13) addresses
this question in the semi-adversarial error model.

1.3.2       Decoding Interleaved Reed–Solomon Codes
Over the past two decades, considerable attention has been devoted to develop (unique)
decoder (e.g., [13, 19, 36, 43, 49, 57]) for interleaved RS codes – an important subclass of RS
codes – especially under the random error model. In particular, two independent seminal
works – one by Coppersmith and Sudan [19] and the other by Bleichenbacher, Kiayias,
and Yung [13] – proposed two remarkable (probabilistic) unique decoding algorithms that
demonstrate surprisingly large error correction capabilities under the random error model.4
    Coppersmith–Sudan is in some sense the dual of the multivariate interpolation decoding
algorithm developed by Parvaresh Vardy [41] (although Coppersmith Sudan predates the
Parvaresh Vardy algorithm).
    The well-known Guruswami-Sudan algorithm does bivariate interpolation (i.e., a poly-
nomial in (X, Y )) on the space of points of the form {(αi , yi ) : i ∈ [n]}, where αi is the
i-th evaluation point and yi is the i-th received symbol. They   √ use this interpolation to list
decode Reed Solomon codes up to an error threshold of 1 − R. Multivariate interpolation
decoding extends this idea to interleaved Reed-Solomon codes where one interpolates a s + 1


4
    Although BKY’s result is only stated in the weaker model in which the errors locations are randomly
    located, the proof can be adapted to also handle adversarial error locations. This fact was recently
    observed by [1, 24], where they adapted the BKY algorithm for rational evaluation codes.




                                                                                                           ICALP 2026
43:10   Unique Decoding of Reed–Solomon and Related Codes for Semi-Adversarial Errors


        variate polynomial over (X, Y1 , . . . , Ys ), where (Y1 , . . . , Ys ) corresponds to the s components
        of each received symbol. If the error threshold is 1 − Rs/(s+1) then one can show that
        the interpolated polynomials will lie in the ideal ⟨Y1 − f1 , . . . , Ys − fs ⟩. In general, this is
        not enough for decoding as Yi − fi (x), i ∈ [n] may have many algebraic dependencies, but
        experimentally that occurs with negligible probability. Parvaresh and Vardy conjecture that
        for the setting of random errors multivariate interpolation decoding will succeed up to the
        error rate 1 − Rs/(s+1) with high probability (around 1 − n−cn ). The only theoretical result
        studying this is a follow up work of, Parvaresh, Taghavi, and Vardy [40] which shows that
        this algorithm succeeds for s = 2 with error rate 1 − (6R)2/3 − O(R5/3 ) and with failure
        probability at most n−cn .
            Interpolating over X, Y1 , . . . , Ys for n evaluation points α1 , . . . , αn without multiplicity
        can be set up as finding an element in the row-kernel of a matrix where the columns are
        indexed by i ∈ [n] and the rows are indexed by monomials m in X, Y1 , . . . , Ys with the entries
        being m evaluated at X = αi and (Y1 , . . . , Ys ) equals the i-th letter in the received word.
        Coppersmith-Sudan [19] picks an element in the column kernel of this matrix and uses its
        support (the coordinates j ∈ [n] which are non-zero in the chosen vector) to help decode the
        codeword. Using multiplicities, they get further improvements. In the end, they obtain a
                                                            s
        (unique) decoder capable of correcting 1 − R s+1 − R fraction of random errors with a failure
        probability at most O(ns /q).
            In contrast, Bleichenbacher, Kiayias, and Yung [13] draw inspiration from the original
        Berlekamp–Welch unique decoder [55], providing a (unique) decoder capable of correcting
          s
         s+1 (1 − R) fraction of random errors with a failure probability at most O(n/q). The failure
        probability of [13] was further reduced to O(1/q) by Brown, Minder, and Shokrollahi [17].
            Later, inspired by another famous unique decoder of Berlekamp and Massey [11, 39],
        Schmidt, Sidorenko, and Bossert [49] proposed a faster syndrome-based unique decoder5
                                 s
        capable of correcting s+1  (1 − R) fraction of random errors with a failure probability at most
        O(1/q). The running time of their algorithm is Os (n2 ) (i.e., n2 times some function of s).
        More recently, using power decoding techniques, Puchinger and Nielsen [43] proposed an
        improved algorithm with a conjectured error correction capability that can correct up to
                s
        1 − R s+1 fraction of random errors. However, although [43] has demonstrated numerous
        simulations for a wide variety of parameters that support the heuristic correctness of their
        approach, a formal proof of the theoretical correctness of their proposed algorithm remains
        open. Therefore, from a theoretical perspective, for R > 1/3 and s > 2, the relative
                           s
        decoding radius s+1   (1 − R) for s-interleaved RS codes of rate R remains state-of-the-art, as
        demonstrated in [13, 36, 49].


        1.3.3       Decoding Folded Reed–Solomon and Multiplicity Codes
        Folded Reed–Solomon (RS) codes and multiplicity codes are two prominent variants of
        RS codes, with list decoders (e.g., [23, 27, 28, 30, 33, 34]) that achieve the list decoding
        capacity even in the presence of adversarial errors. The first folded RS code list decoder was
        introduced in the seminal work of Guruswami and Rudra [28], building on the ideas of the
        Guruswami–Sudan list decoder. The first list decoder for multiplicity codes was introduced
        independently by Guruswami–Wang [30] and Kopparty [33], and it remains the most widely
        used framework in this domain.


        5
            The IRS codes considered in [49] require a cyclic restriction on their evaluation points.
J. Brakensiek, Y. Chen, M. Dhar, and Z. Zhang                                                             43:11


     In fact, Guruswami and Wang [27, 30] proposed a unified linear algebraic list decoding
algorithm for folded RS and multiplicity codes capable of correcting adversarial errors up to
capacity. However, for codes of rate R and block length n, the list size guarantee from [30] is
O n1/ε when decoding up to radius 1 − R − ε. A follow-up work by Kopparty, Ron-Zewi,
Saraf, and Wootters [34] introduced a randomized algorithm for the root-finding step under
the Guruswami–Wang decoding framework, significantly improving its efficiency and reducing
                                     O(1/ε)
the list size guarantee to 1/ε               . Another follow-up work by Goyal, Harsha, Kumar, and
Shankar [23] adapted the approach of Alekhnovich [4] into the Guruswami–Wang               decoding
framework, improving the running time to quasi-linear, which is O         e 2poly(1/ε) · n .
     As a side remark, very recently, two concurrent and independent works by Srivastava [52]
                                                                                               O(1/ε)
and Chen–Zhang [18] provided          dramatic improvements, reducing the list size from 1/ε
to O(1/ε2 ) and O 1/ε , respectively. Moreover, the Chen–Zhang bound almost matches
the generalized Singleton bound [50] up to a constant multiplicative factor. It is worth
noting that both proofs of Srivastava and Chen–Zhang are purely combinatorial, and turning
them into efficient algorithms remains an open problem. For further details, the reader is
referred to the most recent comprehensive survey by Garg, Harsha, Kumar, Saptharishi, and
Shankar [21].
     Meanwhile, current efficient decoding algorithms for folded Reed–Solomon and multiplicity
codes are heavily based on the Guruswami–Wang decoder framework [27, 30]. It is an
interesting open problem to design alternative, more efficient decoding algorithms for folded
RS and multiplicity codes that do not rely on the Guruswami–Wang framework, and a
primary contribution of this paper is making progress toward this exact question.
     As previously mentioned, we define folded Reed–Solomon codes in the sense of Guruswami–
Rudra [28]. However, the term “folded Reed–Solomon codes” was first coined in a paper by
Krachkovsky [37]. The codes defined in both papers are constructed by bundling s classical
Reed–Solomon codes, but they choose evaluation points in different ways. Concretely,
recall that for the folded Reed–Solomon codes defined in [28], for each i ∈ [n] and message       
polynomimal f , the i-th symbol in the encoding of f is f (αi ), f (γαi ) . . . , f (γ s−1 αi ) ∈
Fsq , where αi ∈ Fq and γ is a generator of F×          q . On the other hand, [37] defined it as
 f (αi ), f (αi+n ) . . . , f (αi+(s−1)n ) ∈ Fsq , where α has order exactly sn in F× q . This special
choice on evaluation points enables [37] to perform FFT-related algorithms and obtain a
syndrome-based decoding algorithm for random “phased burst” errors.
     Subsequent to the first posting of our work, Ashvinkumar, Habib, and Srivastava [7]
presented new algorithms for decoding folded Reed-Solomon codes in the adversarial error
model.

1.4     Proof Overview
We now give an overview of the main technical contributions of our paper.

1.4.1     Interleaved Reed–Solomon Codes
We begin by discussing our new algorithm for interleaved Reed–Solomon codes (Theorem 13).
Our algorithm and analysis builds on the techniques used by Bleichenbacher, Kiayias, and
Yung [13], but we deviate from their methods in a few significant ways. In this IRS decoding
algorithm, our main technical contribution is that we use a novel monomial-tracking argument
to analyze the performance of this algorithm in the new semi-adversarial error setting.
    To describe these improvements, we first discuss the interpolation algorithm of [13]
(henceforth the “BKY algorithm”). Consider the s-interleaved Reed–Solomon code
C := IRSn,k,q,s (α1 , . . . , αn ) with distinct α1 , . . . , αn ∈ Fq \ {0}. We choose polynomials


                                                                                                         ICALP 2026
43:12   Unique Decoding of Reed–Solomon and Related Codes for Semi-Adversarial Errors


        f1 (X), . . . , fs (X) of degree at most k − 1 as our message, encoding them according to C and
        transmit them across the channel. Assume that our received word ⃗y := (⃗y1 , ⃗y2 , . . . , ⃗yn ) ∈
        (Fsq )n , where ⃗yi := (yi,1 , yi,2 , . . . , yi,s ) ∈ Fsq .
             The BKY algorithm begins by assuming ē of the n coordinates of ⃗y are corrupted. To
        identify these ē coordinates, the BKY algorithm adapts the Berlekamp-Welch algorithm by
        solving the following interpolation problems. Let E(X) be a polynomial of degree at most
        ē with unknown coefficients and let A1 (X), . . . , As (X) be polynomials of degree at most
        k − 1 + ē with unknown coefficients. We seek to solve the following interpolation equations:

             Ah (αi ) = yi,h E(αi )    ∀i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}, ∀h ∈ {1, 2, . . . , s}.                     (1)

        To analyze this system of equations, we consider the block matrix

                                      −N1
                                          
                  M
                       M             −N2 
           B :=                        ..  ,                                                             (2)
                                          
                             ..
                               .        . 
                                      M    −Ns
                        n×(k+e)
        where M ∈ Fq               such that Mi,j = αij−1 , and for each h ∈ [s] we have that Nh ∈ Fn×e
                                                                                                      q
                                   j
        with (Nh )i,j = yi,h αi . For the purposes of this overview, assume for simplicity that B
        is a square matrix. That is, s(k + e) + e = sn. In this scenario, one can prove that the
        interpolation (1) succeeds if and only if, we have that det B ̸= 0. That is, it suffices to bound
        the probability that det B ̸= 0 over the random errors in the channel. By the Schwartz-Zippel
        lemma, it suffices to replace the random errors yi,h with corresponding symbolic variables
        Yi,h to create a symbolic matrix BSYM and argue that det BSYM ̸= 0.
            Bleichenbacher, Kiayias, and Yung [13] proceeded to argue this by substituting fixed
        values for some of the Yi,h ’s and then using an ad-hoc analysis of the determinant to argue
        that it is nonzero. We improve on the BKY algorithm and analysis in two significant ways.
        First, we improve the runtime of the algorithm from roughly O(n4 ) time to near-linear time
        by using the interpolation framework of Alekhnovich [4] to solve (1) efficiently.6 In particular,
        the interpolation framework automatically finds the optimal choice of ē rather than doing a
        brute-force search like in the BKY algorithm.
            Second, we streamline the analysis of the determinant of (2). By applying a series of
        column operations to B, we can transform the rightmost blocks N1 , . . . , Ns into diagonal
        matrices D1 , . . . , Ds , where each Dh corresponds precisely to the errors which occur in the
        transmission of the codeword. The exact sequence of column operations needed to reveal
        these errors depends on the original polynomials f1 , . . . , fs , but we can assume polynomials
        are known for the purposes of analyzing the rank of B.
            By having the errors be presented transparently as diagonal matrices, arguing that
        det BSYM ̸= 0 can be done in a much more straightforward manner. In particular, it suffices
        to identify an explicit monomial Yi1 ,h1 · · · Yiℓ ,hℓ with the following properties:
        P1. There is exactly one expansion of the last e columns of BSYM which produces that
            monomial.
        P2. The minor induced by that monomial choice has nonzero determinant.
        In the purely random error model, finding such a choice of monomials is straightforward–any
        choice of monomials from distinct columns for which an equal number of variables appear in


        6
            After the initial posting of our work, we also learned that the use of Alekhnovich [4] and similar
            techniques for fast polynomial interpolation have appeared in related works [25, 58].
J. Brakensiek, Y. Chen, M. Dhar, and Z. Zhang                                                                             43:13


each row block will work. However, the true power of this perspective is that it gives us a
foothold for analyzing a mixture of adversarial and random errors, i.e., the semi-adversarial
error model. More precisely, depending on the exact choices for the adversarial errors, the
set of monomials which satisfy both P1 and P2 can change significantly. In particular, there
is no “oblivious” choice for the monomial. Instead, we give a procedure which constructs a
monomial based on the pattern of the adversarial errors–which we may assume we know for
the purposes of the analysis. At a high level this procedure is a greedy algorithm, we iterated
through the row blocks of B and in each block we pick the maximal number of monomials
possible such that P1 and P2 can still hold.

1.4.2      Folded Reed–Solomon Codes
Next, we describe the algorithm and analysis leading to Theorem 14. The new decoding
algorithm is inspired by the previous IRS algorithm plus the Guruswami-Wang [30] inter-
polation. The analysis for semi-adversarial errors follows the similar framework as in the
IRS case. However, the monomial-tracking is more difficult for FRS codes and we therefore
use a new “greedy algorithm” to find the special monomial. This is the main challenge of
extending the analysis for IRS to FRS.
    Let C := FRSs,γ                                   s n
                    n,k,q (α1 , α2 , . . . , αn ) ⊆ (Fq ) and consider a polynomial f (X) of degree at
most k − 1. After encoding f according to C and transmitting it through the (e0 , e)-semi-
adversarial channel, let ⃗y := (⃗y1 , ⃗y2 , . . . , ⃗yn ) ∈ (Fsq )n , where ⃗yi := (yi,1 , yi,2 , . . . , yi,s ) ∈ Fsq
is the received message. Pick parameters e ∈ [n] and L ∈ [s] and consider the following
L-length interpolation equations:

    Ah (γ i−1 αj ) = yj,i+h−1 E γ i−1 αj
                                                 
                                                    i ∈ [s − L + 1], j ∈ [n], h ∈ [L].                             (3)

Like for BKY interpolation, these interpolation equations can be solved in near-linear time
using the techniques of Alekhnovich [4]. To the best of our knowledge, our interpolation
is novel, blending characteristics of both BKY and Guruswami–Wang [30] interpolation.
In particular, compared to other list-decoding algortihms for folded Reed–Solomon codes
(such as Guruswami–Wang), the lower-order terms in the runtime for our approach are
much smaller. More concretely, our running time is Õ(poly(s)n), while the current best
implementation of the Guruswami–Wang algorithm takes time Õ(2poly(s) n) [23]. A key
advantage of our algorithm is that it eliminates the need for the root-finding step required
in the Guruswami–Wang algorithm. Instead, after our new interpolation, only a simple
polynomial long division is necessary.
     To analyze these interpolation equations, we construct a block matrix similar to that
of (2). Now, the number of rows in each block is (s − L + 1)n, which we index by a pair
                                       (s−L+1)n×(k+e)
(i, j) ∈ [s − L + 1] × [n]. Then, M ∈ Fq               has the structure M(i,j),ℓ = (γ i−1 αj )ℓ−1
and for each h ∈ [s], we have that (Nh )(i,j),ℓ = yj,i+h−1 (γ i−1 αj )ℓ .
     Using the techniques of Bleichenbacher, Kiayias, and Yung [13], this matrix would be
very difficult to analyze directly, but by applying analogous simplifications to the ones we
used for interleaved Reed–Solomon codes, we can again transform the last block-column of
B to consist only of diagonal matrices. However, since our interpolation is L-length, we now
have the extra challenge that each error can appear in up to L diagonal matrices (since each
yj,i+h−1 can appear up to L times).
     Like in the IRS case, we transform B into a symbolic matrix BSYM with symbolic variables
as substitutes for the random variables. We then seek to find a monomial in BSYM satisfying
the aforementioned properties P1 and P2. With the combination of repeated symbolic
variables as well as the presence of adversarial errors in the semi-adversarial model, the



                                                                                                                         ICALP 2026
43:14   Unique Decoding of Reed–Solomon and Related Codes for Semi-Adversarial Errors


        procedure of identifying a valid monomial becomes significantly more complex. It is still
        fundamentally a greedy algorithm like in the IRS case, but much more bookkeeping is needed
        to ensure that P1 and P2 remain satisfied.

        1.4.3      Multiplicity Codes
        Next, we describe the adaptations of Theorem 14 which led to Theorem 16. Fundamentally,
        the interpolation is similar to that of (3), except we now replace multiplication by γ with
        taking a derivative of the message polynomial f . That is, our length-L interpolation equations
        are of the form,
                              i−1         
              (i−1)
                              X     i+h−2−ℓ
             Ah     (αj ) =                    yj,i+h−1−ℓ E (ℓ) (αj )   i ∈ [s − L + 1], j ∈ [n], h ∈ [L].
                                    h−1
                              ℓ=0
                                                                                                        (4)

        where E again has degree at most e. Again, this interpolation can be done in near-linear
        time by using the interpolation algorithm of Alekhnovich [4]. Note that due to the chain
        rule for derivatives, the error term in (4) turns into a sum. As a result, if we build an
        interpolation matrix B similar to that of (2) to analyze (4), we cannot use column operations
        to simplify the final column block to only consist of diagonal matrices. Instead, we will have
        block-diagonal matrices for which each block is a lower triangular matrix. The corresponding
        symbolic matrix BSYM will have each variable appear numerous times, with repetition coming
        both from the “length-L” of the interpolation as well as the repeated terms arising from the
        chain rule.
            Again, we seek to identify a symbolic monomial in the expansion of det BSYM which
        satisfies properties P1 and P2. The key observation is that within one of these lower triangular
        matrices, variable appearing in the lower left corner appears exactly once. Thus, by using a
        greedy algorithm which starts by taking monomials from these lower left corners, we have
        much more control over the uniqueness of the monomial selected.

         2      Conclusions and Future Directions
        In this paper, we proposed a new error model, semi-adversarial errors, for studying the
        efficient decodability of error-correcting codes. Bridging between the adversarial and fully
        random error models, our interpolation and analysis techniques leveraged ideas from both
        models to obtain new results in the semi-adversarial model. First, we improved the analysis
        of Bleichenbacher–Kiayias–Yung’s decoding algorithm for interleaved Reed–Solomon codes to
        show that the algorithms achieves the optimal unique decoding radius for most combinations
        of adversarial and random errors in the semi-adversarial model. Second, we found a novel
        application of Alekhnovich’s interpolation algorithm to extend BKY’s interpolation algorithm
        to the settings of folded Reed–Solomon codes and multiplicity codes. By extending our
        analysis methods for interleaved Reed–Solomon codes, we were able to show near information-
        theoretically optimal decoding for folded Reed–Solomon and multiplicaty codes as well. We
        conclude the paper by discussing some directions for future research.

        2.1     Coppersmith–Sudan in the semi-adversarial model
        This paper primarily focused on understanding the limits of the Bleichenbacher–Kiayias–
        Yung algorithm [13] in the semi-adversarial model. However, contemporaneous to the BKY
        algorithm, Coppersmith and Sudan [19] independently came up with a different interpolation
J. Brakensiek, Y. Chen, M. Dhar, and Z. Zhang                                                         43:15


algorithm – the CS algorithm – for uniquely decoding interleaved Reed–Solomon codes. As
discussed in the literature overview, the CS algorithm uses the interpolation matrix for a
generalization of the Guruswami Sudan algorithm for interleaved Reed-Solomon codes. It has
non-linear terms in the received word in this matrix unlike BKY which only has linear terms.
This linearity was very helpful in the analysis of our algorithm, and the lack of it poses a
challenged for analyzing CS in the semi-adversarial model. Furthermore, CS algorithm only
decodes to the distance 1 − Rs/(s+1) − R, which is incomparable with BKY (CS beats the
             s
BKY rate s+1   (1 − R) for small R for a fixed s). In future work, we plan to tackle these
challenges and explore the limits of the CS algorithm in the semi-adversarial model.


2.2    Unique Decoding up to 1 − Rs/(s+1) distance under random errors
A related problem would be to analyze the Multivariate Interpolation Decoding algorithm of
Parvaresh and Vardy [41]. They conjecture that it should be able to decode up to a 1−Rs/(s+1)
distance with high probability. Power decoding algorithms [43] are also conjectured to decode
with high probability to this radius. The CS algorithm is also conjectured to decode to a
1 − Rs/(s+1) distance. Currently, no algorithm has been theoretically proven to achieve this
guarantee.


2.3    List-decoding in the semi-adversarial model
 So far, we have only discussed the limits of unique decodability in the semi-adversarial model.
A natural question is to what extent these results can be extended to the setting of list
 decoding. To approach this question, a natural first task is to explore the combinatorial
 limits of list-decoding in the semi-adversarial model.
     Recall that a code C ⊆ Σn is (e, L)-list-decodable (in the adversarial model) if for any
 message ⃗y ∈ Σn we have that at most |C ∩ B(⃗y , e)| ≤ L. The generalized Singleton bound of
 Shangguan and Tamo [50] says that for any L ≥ 1, if a code C ⊆ Σn is (e, L)-list decodable
              L
 then e ≤ L+1    (n − k).
     This bound can be extended to the semi-adversarial model. In particular, given 0 ≤
 e0 ≤ e ≤ n, we say that a code C is (e0 , e, L)-list-decodable if for any ⃗c ∈ C, when sending
⃗c through the (e0 , e)-semi-adversarial channel, the output message ⃗y satisfies |B(⃗y , e)| ≤ L
with high probability, no matter what choices the adversary makes in the channel. We state
 the generalized semi-adversarial Singleton bound as follows.

▶ Proposition 17 (GSSB: Generalized Semi-adversarial Singleton Bound). Consider any code
                         |C|
C ⊆ Σn with R := nlog log |Σ| such that k := Rn is integral. For any (e0 , e, L) with L + 1 ≤ |Σ|
and ⌊ eL0 ⌋ > (1 − R)n − e, there exists some word ⃗z ∈ Σn such that |B(⃗z, e0 ) ∩ C| ≥ 1 as well
as K ⊆ [n], |K| = e − e0 such that any received word ⃗y ∈ Σn that differs with ⃗z only on
positions in K satisfies |B(⃗y , e) ∩ C| ≥ L + 1.

    In other words, there exists ⃗c ∈ C such that sending ⃗c through the (e0 , e)-semi-adversarial
channel results a message ⃗y for which there are at least L other codewords of C which
are within the minimal ball centered at ⃗y containing ⃗c. For MDS codes, observe that
Proposition 11 is a special case of Proposition 17 when L = 1.
    Proposition 17 naturally interpolates the known combinatorial decoding bounds for
fully
     adversarial and fully random errors. In particular, when e0 = e, we get precisely the
   L
  L+1 (n − k), L generalized Singleton bound (GSB) of Shangguan and Tamo [50]. Further,
when e0 = 0, we get an upper bound of n − k, which is consistent with the fact that



                                                                                                     ICALP 2026
43:16   Unique Decoding of Reed–Solomon and Related Codes for Semi-Adversarial Errors


        combinatorially random errors can be uniquely decoded up to capacity.7 As a result, we can
        view Proposition 17 as suggesting that one can break the generalized Singleton bound when
        we are promised that the channel is not entirely adversarial.
            However, to understand the sharpness of the GSSB, one needs to determine whether there
        exist codes which attain the GSSB, particularly Reed–Solomon codes. In the adversarial
        case, through a series of papers, [5, 16, 26, 50], we now that the GSB can be attained
        by Reed–Solomon codes with random evaluation points, even when the field size is O(n).
        For
         arbitrary subfield
                              evaluation points (i.e., s-interleaved RS codes), we only know that
             s             γsn
            s+1 (n − k), q       list decodability is possible [31], where γ is a constant in (0, 1). However,
        a recent         and Zhang [18] shows that explicit s-folded Reed-Solomon codes are
                work by Chen
            L         k
           L+1 n − s−L+1 , L list-decodable. For random evaluation points, some broader families
        of codes also attain the GSB [14, 15]. We leave extending these results to the GSSB as the
        topic of future work.


                References
            1   Matteo Abbondati, Eleonora Guerrini, and Romain Lebreton. Decoding simultaneous rational
                evaluation codes. In Jonathan D. Hauenstein, Wen-shin Lee, and Shaoshi Chen, editors,
                Proceedings of the 2024 International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation,
                ISSAC 2024, Raleigh, NC, USA, July 16-19, 2024, pages 153–161. ACM, 2024. doi:10.1145/
                3666000.3669686.
            2   Matteo Abbondati, Eleonora Guerrini, and Romain Lebreton. Simultaneous rational function
                codes: Improved analysis beyond half the minimum distance with multiplicities and poles,
                2025. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2508.05284.
            3   Matteo Abbondati, Eleonora Guerrini, and Romain Lebreton. Simultaneous rational number
                codes: Decoding beyond half the minimum distance with multiplicities and bad primes. J.
                Symb. Comput., 132:102481, 2026. doi:10.1016/J.JSC.2025.102481.
            4   Michael Alekhnovich. Linear Diophantine equations over polynomials and soft decoding of
                Reed-Solomon codes. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 51(7):2257–2265, 2005. doi:10.1109/TIT.
                2005.850097.
            5   Omar Alrabiah, Venkatesan Guruswami, and Ray Li. Randomly punctured Reed-Solomon
                codes achieve list-decoding capacity over linear-sized fields. In STOC’24—Proceedings of the
                56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 1458–1469. ACM, New York,
                2024. doi:10.1145/3618260.3649634.
            6   Gal Arnon, Alessandro Chiesa, Giacomo Fenzi, and Eylon Yogev. STIR: Reed-Solomon
                proximity testing with fewer queries. In Advances in cryptology—CRYPTO 2024. Part X,
                volume 14929 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 380–413. Springer, Cham, [2024] ©2024.
                doi:10.1007/978-3-031-68403-6_12.
            7   Vikrant Ashvinkumar, Mursalin Habib, and Shashank Srivastava. Algorithmic improvements
                to list decoding of folded reed-solomon codes. In Kasper Green Larsen and Barna Saha,
                editors, Proceedings of the 2026 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
                SODA 2026, Vancouver, BC, Canada, January 11-14, 2026, pages 880–898. SIAM, 2026.
                doi:10.1137/1.9781611978971.35.
            8   Eli Ben-Sasson, Iddo Bentov, Yinon Horesh, and Michael Riabzev. Fast reed-solomon interactive
                oracle proofs of proximity. In Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Christos Kaklamanis, Dániel Marx,
                and Donald Sannella, editors, 45th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
                Programming, ICALP 2018, Prague, Czech Republic, July 9-13, 2018, LIPIcs, pages 14:1–14:17.
                Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2018.
                14.


        7
            This can be seen by taking the decoding radius of s+1
                                                               s
                                                                  (n − k) for s-interleaved Reed–Solomon by the
            BKY algorithm to the limit as s → ∞.
J. Brakensiek, Y. Chen, M. Dhar, and Z. Zhang                                                          43:17


 9   Eli Ben-Sasson, Dan Carmon, Yuval Ishai, Swastik Kopparty, and Shubhangi Saraf. Proximity
     gaps for Reed-Solomon codes. J. ACM, 70(5):Art. 31, 57, 2023. doi:10.1145/3614423.
10   Eli Ben-Sasson, Lior Goldberg, Swastik Kopparty, and Shubhangi Saraf. DEEP-FRI: Sampling
     Outside the Box Improves Soundness. In 11th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science
     Conference (ITCS 2020), volume 151 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
     (LIPIcs), pages 5:1–5:32. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020. doi:
     10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2020.5.
11   Elwyn Berlekamp. Algebraic coding theory. World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.,
     Hackensack, NJ, revised edition, 2015. doi:10.1142/9407.
12   Elwyn R. Berlekamp. Bounded distance+1 soft-decision reed-solomon decoding. IEEE Trans.
     Inf. Theory, 42(3):704–720, 1996. doi:10.1109/18.490539.
13   Daniel Bleichenbacher, Aggelos Kiayias, and Moti Yung. Decoding of interleaved Reed Solomon
     codes over noisy data. In Automata, languages and programming, volume 2719 of Lecture
     Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 97–108. Springer, Berlin, 2003. doi:10.1007/3-540-45061-0_9.
14   Joshua Brakensiek, Manik Dhar, and Sivakanth Gopi. Generalized GM-MDS: Polynomial
     Codes Are Higher Order MDS. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on
     Theory of Computing, pages 728–739, Vancouver BC Canada, June 2024. ACM. doi:10.1145/
     3618260.3649637.
15   Joshua Brakensiek, Manik Dhar, Sivakanth Gopi, and Zihan Zhang. AG codes achieve list-
     decoding capacity over constant-sized fields. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 71(8):5935–5956,
     2025. doi:10.1109/tit.2025.3577506.
16   Joshua Brakensiek, Sivakanth Gopi, and Visu Makam. Generic Reed-Solomon codes achieve list-
     decoding capacity. In STOC’23—Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
     Computing, pages 1488–1501. ACM, New York, [2023] ©2023. doi:10.1145/3564246.3585128.
17   Andrew Brown, Lorenz Minder, and Amin Shokrollahi. Probabilistic decoding of interleaved
     rs-codes on the q-ary symmetric channel. In Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE International
     Symposium on Information Theory, ISIT 2004, Chicago Downtown Marriott, Chicago, Illinois,
     USA, June 27 - July 2, 2004, page 327. IEEE, 2004. doi:10.1109/ISIT.2004.1365363.
18   Yeyuan Chen and Zihan Zhang. Explicit folded reed-solomon and multiplicity codes achieve
     relaxed generalized singleton bounds. In Michal Koucký and Nikhil Bansal, editors, Proceedings
     of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2025, Prague, Czechia,
     June 23-27, 2025, pages 1–12. ACM, 2025. doi:10.1145/3717823.3718114.
19   Don Coppersmith and Madhu Sudan. Reconstructing curves in three (and higher) dimensional
     space from noisy data. In Lawrence L. Larmore and Michel X. Goemans, editors, Proceedings
     of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, June 9-11, 2003, San Diego,
     CA, USA, pages 136–142. ACM, 2003. doi:10.1145/780542.780563.
20   Shuhong Gao. A new algorithm for decoding reed-solomon codes. In Communications,
     information and network security, pages 55–68. Springer, 2003.
21   Abhibhav Garg, Prahladh Harsha, Mrinal Kumar, Ramprasad Saptharishi, and Ashutosh
     Shankar. An exposition of recent list-size bounds of FRS codes. CoRR, abs/2502.14358, 2025.
     doi:10.48550/arXiv.2502.14358.
22   Daniel Gorenstein and Neal Zierler. A class of error-correcting codes in pm symbols. J. Soc.
     Indust. Appl. Math., 9:207–214, 1961.
23   Rohan Goyal, Prahladh Harsha, Mrinal Kumar, and Ashutosh Shankar. Fast list decoding of
     univariate multiplicity and folded Reed-Solomon codes. In 2024 IEEE 65th Annual Symposium
     on Foundations of Computer Science—FOCS 2024, pages 328–343. IEEE Computer Soc., Los
     Alamitos, CA, 2024. doi:10.1109/FOCS61266.2024.00028.
24   Eleonora Guerrini, Kamel Lairedj, Romain Lebreton, and Ilaria Zappatore. Simultaneous
     rational function reconstruction with errors: Handling multiplicities and poles. J. Symb.
     Comput., 116:345–364, 2023. doi:10.1016/J.JSC.2022.10.007.




                                                                                                      ICALP 2026
43:18   Unique Decoding of Reed–Solomon and Related Codes for Semi-Adversarial Errors


        25   Eleonora Guerrini, Romain Lebreton, and Ilaria Zappatore. Polynomial linear system solving
             with random errors: New bounds and early termination technique. In Frédéric Chyzak and
             George Labahn, editors, ISSAC ’21: International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic
             Computation, Virtual Event, Russia, July 18-23, 2021, pages 171–178. ACM, 2021. doi:
             10.1145/3452143.3465548.
        26   Zeyu Guo and Zihan Zhang. Randomly punctured Reed-Solomon codes achieve the list
             decoding capacity over polynomial-size alphabets. In 2023 IEEE 64th Annual Symposium on
             Foundations of Computer Science—FOCS 2023, pages 164–176. IEEE Computer Soc., Los
             Alamitos, CA, 2023. doi:10.1109/FOCS57990.2023.00019.
        27   Venkatesan Guruswami. Linear-algebraic list decoding of folded Reed-Solomon codes. In 26th
             Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity, pages 77–85. IEEE Computer Soc.,
             Los Alamitos, CA, 2011. doi:10.1109/CCC.2011.22.
        28   Venkatesan Guruswami and Atri Rudra. Explicit capacity-achieving list-decodable codes
             or decoding up to the Singleton bound using folded Reed-Solomon codes. In STOC’06:
             Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 1–10. ACM,
             New York, 2006. doi:10.1145/1132516.1132518.
        29   Venkatesan Guruswami and Madhu Sudan. Improved decoding of reed-solomon and algebraic-
             geometric codes. In 39th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS
             1998, Palo Alto, California, USA, November 8-11, 1998, pages 28–39. IEEE Computer Society,
             1998. doi:10.1109/SFCS.1998.743426.
        30   Venkatesan Guruswami and Carol Wang. Linear-algebraic list decoding for variants of Reed-
             Solomon codes. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 59(6):3257–3268, 2013. doi:10.1109/TIT.2013.
             2246813.
        31   Venkatesan Guruswami and Chaoping Xing. Optimal rate list decoding over bounded alphabets
             using algebraic-geometric codes. J. ACM, 69(2):Art. 10, 48, 2022. doi:10.1145/3506668.
        32   Selmer M. Johnson. A new upper bound for error-correcting codes. IRE Trans. Inf. Theory,
             8(3):203–207, 1962. doi:10.1109/TIT.1962.1057714.
        33   Swastik Kopparty. List-decoding multiplicity codes. Theory Comput., 11:149–182, 2015.
             doi:10.4086/TOC.2015.V011A005.
        34   Swastik Kopparty, Noga Ron-Zewi, Shubhangi Saraf, and Mary Wootters. Improved list
             decoding of folded reed-solomon and multiplicity codes. SIAM J. Comput., 52(3):794–840,
             2023. doi:10.1137/20M1370215.
        35   Swastik Kopparty, Shubhangi Saraf, and Sergey Yekhanin. High-rate codes with sublinear-time
             decoding. J. ACM, 61(5):28:1–28:20, 2014. doi:10.1145/2629416.
        36   V Yu Krachkovsky and Yuan Xing Lee. Decoding for iterative reed-solomon coding schemes.
             IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, 33(5):2740–2742, 1997.
        37   Victor Y. Krachkovsky. Reed-Solomon codes for correcting phased error bursts. IEEE Trans.
             Inform. Theory, 49(11):2975–2984, 2003. doi:10.1109/TIT.2003.819333.
        38   Sian-Jheng Lin, Tareq Y. Al-Naffouri, and Yunghsiang S. Han. FFT algorithm for binary
             extension finite fields and its application to Reed-Solomon codes. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
             62(10):5343–5358, 2016. doi:10.1109/TIT.2016.2600417.
        39   James L. Massey. Shift-register synthesis and BCH decoding. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
             IT-15:122–127, 1969. doi:10.1109/tit.1969.1054260.
        40   Farzad Parvaresh, Mohammad H. Taghavi, and Alexander Vardy. On the performance
             of multivariate interpolation decoding of reed-solomon codes. In 2006 IEEE International
             Symposium on Information Theory, pages 2027–2031, 2006. doi:10.1109/ISIT.2006.261905.
        41   Farzad Parvaresh and Alexander Vardy. Multivariate interpolation decoding beyond the
             guruswami-sudan radius. In Proceedings of the 42nd Allerton Conference on Communication,
             Control and Computing, 2004.
        42   W. Wesley Peterson. Encoding and error-correction procedures for the bose-chaudhuri codes.
             IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, 6(4):459–470, 1960. doi:10.1109/TIT.1960.1057586.
J. Brakensiek, Y. Chen, M. Dhar, and Z. Zhang                                                           43:19


43   Sven Puchinger and Johan Rosenkilde. Decoding of interleaved reed-solomon codes using
     improved power decoding. In 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory,
     ISIT 2017, Aachen, Germany, June 25-30, 2017, pages 356–360. IEEE, 2017. doi:10.1109/
     ISIT.2017.8006549.
44   Irving S. Reed, Robert A. Scholtz, T. K. Truong, and Lloyd R. Welch. The fast decoding of
     Reed-Solomon codes using Fermat theoretic transforms and continued fractions. IEEE Trans.
     Inform. Theory, IT-24(1):100–106, 1978. doi:10.1109/tit.1978.1055816.
45   Irving S. Reed and Gustave Solomon. Polynomial codes over certain finite fields. Journal of the
     Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 8(2):300–304, 1960. doi:10.1137/0108018.
46   Ron M. Roth and Gitit Ruckenstein. Efficient decoding of reed-solomon codes beyond half the
     minimum distance. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 46(1):246–257, 2000. doi:10.1109/18.817522.
47   Atri Rudra and Steve Uurtamo. Two theorems on list decoding - (extended abstract). In
     Maria J. Serna, Ronen Shaltiel, Klaus Jansen, and José D. P. Rolim, editors, Approxim-
     ation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, 13th
     International Workshop, APPROX 2010, and 14th International Workshop, RANDOM 2010,
     Barcelona, Spain, September 1-3, 2010. Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
     696–709. Springer, 2010. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-15369-3_52.
48   Atri Rudra and Mary Wootters. Every list-decodable code for high noise has abundant near-
     optimal rate puncturings. In David B. Shmoys, editor, Symposium on Theory of Computing,
     STOC 2014, New York, NY, USA, May 31 - June 03, 2014, pages 764–773. ACM, 2014.
     doi:10.1145/2591796.2591797.
49   Georg Schmidt, Vladimir R. Sidorenko, and Martin Bossert. Collaborative decoding of
     interleaved Reed-Solomon codes and concatenated code designs. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
     55(7):2991–3012, 2009. doi:10.1109/TIT.2009.2021308.
50   Chong Shangguan and Itzhak Tamo. Generalized Singleton Bound and List-Decoding Reed–
     Solomon Codes Beyond the Johnson Radius. SIAM Journal on Computing, 52(3):684–717,
     June 2023. doi:10.1137/20M138795X.
51   Richard C. Singleton. Maximum distance q-nary codes. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, IT-
     10:116–118, 1964. doi:10.1109/tit.1964.1053661.
52   Shashank Srivastava. Improved list size for folded Reed-Solomon codes. In Proceedings of
     the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 2040–2050.
     SIAM, Philadelphia, PA, 2025. doi:10.1137/1.9781611978322.64.
53   Madhu Sudan. Decoding of reed solomon codes beyond the error-correction bound. J. Complex.,
     13(1):180–193, 1997. doi:10.1006/JCOM.1997.0439.
54   Nianqi Tang and Yunghsiang S. Han. A new decoding method for reed-solomon codes
     based on FFT and modular approach. IEEE Trans. Commun., 70(12):7790–7801, 2022.
     doi:10.1109/TCOMM.2022.3215998.
55   Lloyd R Welch and Elwyn R Berlekamp. Error correction for algebraic block codes, December 30
     1986. US Patent 4,633,470.
56   Yingquan Wu. New list decoding algorithms for reed-solomon and BCH codes. IEEE Trans.
     Inf. Theory, 54(8):3611–3630, 2008. doi:10.1109/TIT.2008.926355.
57   Jiun-Hung Yu and Hans-Andrea Loeliger. Simultaneous partial inverses and decoding in-
     terleaved reed-solomon codes. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 64(12):7511–7528, 2018. doi:
     10.1109/TIT.2018.2868701.
58   Ilaria Zappatore. Simultaneous Rational Function Reconstruction and applications to Algebraic
     Coding Theory. PhD thesis, Université Montpellier, 2020.




                                                                                                       ICALP 2026
