                                                      Deterministic and Exact Fully-dynamic Minimum Cut
                                                      of Superpolylogarithmic Size in Subpolynomial Time
                                                                Antoine El-Hayek∗                 Monika Henzinger†                 Jason Li‡


                                              Abstract. We present an exact fully-dynamic minimum cut algorithm that runs in no(1) deterministic update
arXiv:2512.13105v1 [cs.DS] 15 Dec 2025




                                                                                               3/4−c
                                         time when the minimum cut size is at most 2Θ(log            n)
                                                                                                        for any c > 0, improving on the previous algorithm
                                         of Jin, Sun, and Thorup (SODA 2024) whose minimum cut size limit is (log n)o(1) . Combined with graph
                                         sparsification, we obtain the first (1 + ϵ)-approximate fully-dynamic minimum cut algorithm on weighted graphs,
                                                             3/4−c
                                         for any ϵ ≥ 2−Θ(log       n)
                                                                      , in no(1) randomized update time.
                                              Our main technical contribution is a deterministic local minimum cut algorithm, which replaces the
                                         randomized LocalKCut procedure from El-Hayek, Henzinger, and Li (SODA 2025).

                                              1 Introduction We consider the minimum cut problem in an undirected, unweighted graph: find a set of
                                         edges of minimum size whose removal disconnects the graph. This is a basic problem in combinatorial optimization
                                         with a rich body of work, and its study has led to the discovery of many fundamental concepts in graph
                                         algorithms, such as randomized contractions [12] and graph sparsification [9]. The randomized running time
                                         was famously settled by Karger [11], who also posed as an open problem whether a fast deterministic algorithm
                                         exists. That problem proved notoriously difficult and resisted progress for 20 years, until a recent sequence of
                                         works [13, 15, 14, 5] finally obtained a deterministic algorithm that is optimal up to polylogarithmic factors.
                                              However, on dynamic graphs undergoing edge insertions and deletions, this problem is much less understood.
                                         For a long time, the state of the art algorithm for √ (1 + o(1))-approximate minimum cut was due to Thorup [19],
                                         which is Monte-Carlo randomized and runs in Õ( n) worst-case update time. Recently, El-Hayek, Henzinger, and
                                         Li [5] improved the running time to no(1) amortized update time [2], also by apMonte-Carlo randomized algorithm.
                                         In comparison, the fastest deterministic approximation algorithm is the 2 + o(1)-approximate algorithm of
                                         Thorup and Karger [20], which runs in O(λ2 polylog(n)) time where λ is the minimum cut of the graph, but is
                                         only capable of outputting the (approximate) cut-size of the minimum cut. For larger approximations, Goranci,
                                         Räcke, Saranurak and Tan [4], then van den Brand, Chen, Kyng, Liu, Meierhans, Gutenberg, and Sachdeva [21]
                                         gave an no(1) -approximate algorithm that runs in no(1) worst-case deterministic update time, in unweighted
                                         and weighted graphs respectively. For exact minimum cut, Jin, Sun, and Thorup [8] obtained no(1) worst-
                                         case deterministic update time when the minimum cut-size is (log n)o(1) , while Goranci, Henzinger, Nanongkai,
                                         Saranurak, Thorup, and Wulff-Nilsen [3] obtained the first sublinear-time algorithm for all cut-sizes, which takes
                                         Õ(n) worst-case randomized time or Õ(m30/31 ) amortized deterministic time, which was further improved by
                                         de Vos and Christiansen to O(m11/12 ) update time with a deterministic algorithm. Overall, the randomized
                                         running times are notably better than the deterministic ones, which suggests that deterministic minimum cut is
                                         notoriously difficult even in the dynamic setting.
                                              In this paper, we significantly advance the state of the art for exact algorithms, obtaining an algorithm in
                                                                                                                            3/4−c
                                         no(1) amortized deterministic update time for minimum cut-sizes up to 2Θ(log             n)
                                                                                                                                     for any c > 0. This is a
                                                                           o(1)
                                         significant leap over the (log n)      cut-size limit of Jin, Sun, and Thorup [8], at a cost of amortized instead of
                                         worst-case update time. Most notably, due to the increased minimum cut-size that our algorithm can handle,
                                         we can use the standard approach of sparsifying the graph to reduce the minimum cut-size to O( log       n
                                                                                                                                                ϵ2 ) and then
                                         applying our algorithm on the resulting graph. This leads to the first (1 + o(1))-approximate dynamic minimum
                                         cut algorithm even on weighted graphs in no(1) update time.

                                           ∗ Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria. email: antoine.el-hayek@ist.ac.at
                                           † Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria. email: monika.henzinger@ist.ac.at
                                           ‡ Carnegie Mellon University. email: jmli@cs.cmu.edu




                                                                                                       1
    To construct our deterministic algorithm, we replace the randomized LocalKCut procedure of [2] with an
entirely new algorithm based on tree packing and color coding, based on the techniques of Lokshtanov, Saurabh,
and Surianarayanan [16]. This new deterministic LocalKCut procedure is one of our main technical contributions.
                                                                3/4−c
Furthermore, to increase the minimum cut-size bound to 2Θ(log         n)
                                                                         for any c > 0, we adapt an idea from the
static setting [5] to the dynamic setting.
    Our main result and its applications. We next describe our main result as well as its applications. Since
our main result is about proper cuts, we need to generalize the minimum cut problem to the minimum proper cut
problem.
    Definition 1.1 (Minimum Proper Cut). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and F ⊂ E be a subset of edges. F is
said to be a proper cut of G if the removal of F strictly increases the number of connected components of G, and
is minimal for this property. Equivalently, a set U ⊂ V of nodes is said to be a proper cut if it is connected and
has at least one outgoing edge.
Thus, a minimum proper cut is the smallest non-zero cut in a potentially disconnected graph. Our data structure
will work recursively, where in each level of the recursion only a subset of the cuts is analyzed. To do so, certain
edges have been removed from the graph, which might lead to a disconnected subgraph on this level. Instead
of starting a new data structure for each connected component, which is what is usually done in this case, we
maintain one data structure per level, representing the subgraph on this level. This is crucial for achieving our
improvements, but in turn we need for each level an algorithm that is able to maintain a minimum proper cut.
     More specifically, our main technical contribution is a deterministic algorithm that solves the dynamic
minimum proper cut problem for specific parameter ranges:
    Problem 1.1 (Bounded Dynamic Minimum Proper Cut). Let G be an unweighted fully dynamic graph with
                                                                                               3/4−c
n nodes under edge updates, and let λmin < λmax ∈ N be two values with λmax ≤ 1.2λmin = 2O(log       n)
                                                                                                        for some
c > 0. Assume that the minimum proper cut of G is at least λmin at all times. The Bounded Dynamic Minimum
Proper Cut problem is to maintain a data structure that, depending on the value of the minimum proper cut λ,
gives the following output:
  1. If λmin ≤ λ ≤ λmax , outputs the (exact) value of the minimum proper cut. Moreover, a partition achieving
     the minimum proper cut should be stored implicitly.
  2. If λ > λmax , outputs “λ > λmax ”.
    Theorem 1.2. There exists a deterministic algorithm that solves Problem 1.1 in no(1) update time.
   Before we delve into the main techniques we developed to prove this theorem, we first discuss its implications.
                                                                           3/4−c
The first one is an exact algorithm for dynamic minimum cut for λ < 2Θ(log       n)
                                                                                    for any c > 0:
     Theorem 1.3 (Fully Dynamic Exact Mincut).          There exists a deterministic algorithm that solves the
minimum cut problem exactly on a fully dynamic unweighted graph in no(1) update time, as long as the value
                                 3/4−c
of the minimum cut is λ < 2Θ(log       n)
                                          for some c > 0. It outputs the value of the minimum cut and stores a
partition achieving the minimum cut implicitly.
      To prove Theorem 1.3 from Theorem 1.2, simply run a connectivity algorithm and additionally O(log n) many
instances of the algorithm from Theorem 1.2, one per range where λmin = 1.2i and λmax = 1.2i+1 , for all ranges,
i.e., all values of i ∈ [0, ⌈2 log n⌉]. Note that each instance is built for the whole graph, whether it is connected
or disconnected, there is not one instance per connected component and range – in fact, we ensure, as we discuss
below, that the input for every instance is connected at all times, by delaying updates to the different instances
to ensure connectivity guarantees. Whenever the connectivity algorithm returns that the graph is disconnected,
simply output that the minimum cut is 0. Otherwise, we need to find the minimum proper cut, which is equal to
the minimum cut. To ensure that the minimum proper cut is at least λmin for every instance, we give first the
initial graph to the instance with smallest index i = 0. If that instance returns “λ > λmax ”, this ensures that
λ ≥ 1.2i+1 which is the λmin of the next instance. We thus give the graph to the next instance, and do that
iteratively until one instance returns a value for the minimum proper cut that is in its range. We then store for
each instance an integer “Last update time”, that is either 0 if it has been instantiated, or −1 otherwise. To
handle an update, we proceed similarly, updating the connectivity algorithm first, and if it returns that the graph
is connected, updating or instantiating all the instances in increasing order of indices, and stopping when one


                                                         2
instance returns “λ > λmax ”. During that phase, when considering an instance, we know that before updating it,
either the instance has not been instantiated, or the graph it is considering – which might be out of date – satisfies
λ ≥ λmin . In the first case, since we know from the instance with lower index that λ ≥ λmin in the current graph,
we can instantiate the instance with the current graph. In the latter case, we know, since the graph is connected
(from the connectivity algorithm), that handling all edge insertions then all edge deletions since the last update
to the instance, will bring the instance up to date, and ensure that λ ≥ λmin throughout. We then update the
variable “Last update time” accordingly. To answer the query, we report the value of the one algorithm that
outputs a value inside its range and is up to date. We update the instances in this way as we have to guarantee
that the minimum proper cut in any instance is at least λmin at all time.
     A note on the maximum value of λ, λmin and λmax : It is worth discussing briefly why we require
                   3/4−c
λmin = 2O(log             n)
                             for any c > 0, as opposed to having an algorithm valid for all values of λ that runs in
time poly(λmin ) · no(1) . As we discuss below, our algorithm is in fact a (1 + δ)-approximate algorithm, for
                3/4−c
δ = 2−O(log           n)
                         . Said differently, our algorithm can only be exact for values of λmax that are less than 1/δ.
We cannot decrease our approximation ratio, as our algorithm is recursive, and the graph size (number of edges
in the graph) and recourse         for each recursive call depends on δ and λmax : more precisely, the recourse per level
                                 √                                                              √
is Õ( ρλδmax
          3   )  with   ρ  =  2O( log n)
                                         for any c > 0, and after a recursive depth of r = 4 log n, the goal is to have a
                       1−c
recourse of 2O(log n) = no(1) . Thus, making δ too small or λmax too high would make the overall recourse too
high.
     Note also that our algorithm relies on the dynamic expander decomposition of Goranci, Räcke, Saranurak and
                                                                                                           3/4
Tan [4]. This algorithm maintains an expander hierarchy with expander parameter ϕ = 2−Θ(log n) and recourse
             1/2
ρ =√2Θ(log n) . Our cluster decomposition achieves then the same depth as their expander hierarchy, a depth of
O( 4 log n), which is a direct consequence√
                                                    of the choice of the value of ϕ, as the number of edges is multiplied by ϕ
                                         a 4 log n
from a level to the next, and mϕ                   = 1 for a√constant a that is large enough. Importantly,
                                                                                                   √        their recourse per
                                                                                                    4
level is truly smaller than ϕ1 , and hence, after O( 4 log n) many levels, the recourse is ρO( log n) = no(1) . One could
hope for other dynamic expander decompositions with different tradeoffs for ϕ and ρ. In that case, our algorithm
would adapt very effectively: For example, let γ > 0 be a real value and assume that we have an algorithm that
maintains an expander decomposition for ϕ = n−O(γ) . The depth of recursion would then be O( γ1 ), and assume
the recourse per level is ρ for a new value of ρ. Then our recourse per level would be Õ( ρλδmax   3  ), and over O( γ1 )
                                    O( γ1 )                                    O(1)
levels, this would add up to ρλmaxδ           . Each update requiring ρλϕδ    max
                                                                                        time to be processed, this would
                                   O( γ1 )             O( γ1 )
yield a total update time of ρλmaxδ
                                               1
                                              ϕ =
                                                    ρλmax
                                                      δ            nγ . This could be leveraged to get different tradeoffs
between running time and largest acceptable λmax .
    The second implication of our algorithm is an approximation algorithm for the dynamic minimum cut problem,
where there are no restrictions on the size of λ nor on the edges being unweighted. Note that this is the first
algorithm that maintains a (1 + ϵ)-approximate minimum cut in weighted graphs:
    Theorem 1.4 (Fully Dynamic Approximate Mincut). Let Gw be a weighted fully dynamic graph with n
                                                3/4−c
nodes under edge updates, and let ϵ ≥ 2−Θ(log         n)
                                                         for any c > 0. There exists a dynamic algorithm that
maintains a (1 + ϵ)-approximation of the value of the minimum cut in no(1) update time. Moreover, a partition
achieving the minimum cut is stored implicitly.
    The algorithm is randomized and works against an oblivious adversary, and is correct with high probability.

    Let us quickly discuss how we obtain Theorem 1.4 from Theorem 1.2. Our first step is to sparsify the graph
                                                                            Θ(log3/4−c n)
as to ensure that the minimum cut value is reduced to at most O( log n
                                                                   ϵ2 ) < 2               for some c > 0 using the
edge-sampling approach of Karger [10]. It samples each edge with a probability p aptly chosen as described in
the following lemma:
    Theorem 1.5 (Theorem 2.1 and Corollary 2.1 of [10]). Let G be any graph with minimum cut λ, let ϵ > 0,
and let p ≥ 54ϵ2lnλn . Let G(p) be the graph obtained from G by sampling each edge independently with probability p.
Then with high probability, the minimum cut S in G(p) will correspond to a (1 + ϵ)-minimum cut of G. Moreover,
also with high probability, the value of any cut S in G(p) has value no less than (1 − ϵ) and no more than (1 + ϵ)
times its expected value.


                                                              3
    We adapt this sparsifying technique to weighted graphs, and sparsify the graph for different values of estimates
of λ λ0 , . . . , λlog1.1 (n2 · U ) where λi = L · 1.1i for every i ∈ [log1.1 (n2 · U
                                                                                    L )]. We then run the algorithm from
                                L
Theorem 1.2 on each sparsified graph, and return the value of the algorithm with the correct estimate.
    Organization. The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we formally define the problem and introduce
definitions and notations. In Section 3, we give a technical overview of our work. In Section 4, we present our
deterministic LocalKCut. In Section 5, we present our fragmenting algorithm. In Section 6, we present the Cluster
decomposition and Hierarchy. In Section 7, we discuss how to maintain mirror cuts, a building block of our data
structure. In Section 8, we present a static algorithm for the minimum proper cut problem for a specific range,
and make this algorithm dynamic in Section 9. In Section 10, we present the last details needed for our data
structure. And finally, in Section 11, we discuss how to deal with weighted graphs.
    2 Preliminaries
    Problem Definition. We are given an undirected unweighted graph G = (V, E), where V is the set of vertices,
and E is the set of edges. Every vertex subset ∅ ⊊ S ⊊ V is also called a cut of G. We denote by vol(S) the
sum of the degrees of the nodes in S. We define, for every T ⊆ V , a cost associated with T , that we call the
boundary-size of T , or equivalently, the (cut-)size of T :

                                                   ∂T = |E(T, V \ T )|

    Typically, we will use the term “cut-size” when T is a candidate to be the minimum cut, while we will prefer
the term “boundary-size” when T is a cluster in our cluster decomposition (which is the internal data structure
that we introduce later on), and thus ∂T is a value that we do not wish to compare (yet) to the cut-sizes of other
cuts.
    A minimum proper cut of G is a set M C(G) ⊊ V that minimizes the cut-size, while still being non-zero:
M C(G) ∈ arg min∅⊊T ⊊V,∂T ̸=0 (∂T ). Note that there are dynamic algorithms with polylogarithmic time per
operation that maintain the connected components of a graph (See e.g. Holm, de Lichtenberg, and Thorup [6]).
However, we do not rely on them. Our algorithm detects connected components itself.
    We study the problem in the dynamic setting under edge updates, that is, at every time step, an edge can be
either inserted or deleted.
    Remark 2.1. We allow parallel edges. All our running times that include the number of edges count their
multiplicities. For example, in a graph with two nodes and 3 parallel edges between them, we have that m = 3.
     Definitions and Notations. For any sets A, B ⊆ V , with A ∩ B = ∅, we use E(A, B) to denote the set of
edges going from A to B and w(A, B) to denote |E(A, B)|.
     For any subset C ⊆ V , G/C is the graph where the set C is contracted to a single node, adding parallel edges
if necessary. No self-loops are allowed.
     Let H = (VH , EH ) with VH ⊆ V and EH ⊆ E, be a subgraph of G. We define the boundary ∂H T of a set
T ⊆ VH to be the boundary of T in H. If EH is not defined explicitly, by convention we mean H is the subgraph
of G induced by VH . We also identify VH and H.
     A cluster is a set of vertices that are “highly connected”. It is defined in more detail below.
    Definition 2.1 (Crossing and uncrossing). We say that a cut S crosses cluster C if both S ∩ C and C \ S
are nonempty. A cut S ′ uncrosses a cut S in a cluster C if S crosses C and S ′ either equals S ∪ C or S \ C.
    Our algorithm only uncrosses a cut S in a cluster C when S ∩ C is not (1 − δ)-boundary sparse (see
Definition 3.1) in C, which will imply that S ′ is a (1 + O(δ))-approximation of S.
    Definition 2.2. For any subset U ⊆ V , G[U ] is the subgraph induced by U , and G[U ]r for r ∈ R is the
subgraph induced by U where for every boundary edge {v, x}, v ∈ U, x ∈
                                                                     / U we add ⌈r⌉ self-loops to v.
    Definition 2.3. The conductance of a cut U ⊊ V in the graph G is

                                                          w(U, V \ U )
                                       ϕG (U ) =                                 .
                                                   min{volG (U ), volG (V \ U )}

    A graph G is a ϕ-expander if every cut in G has conductance at least ϕ.


                                                            4
    Definition 2.4 ((α, ϕ)-Expander, Definition 4.1 of [4]). For a graph G = (V, E) and parameters α, ϕ ∈α (0, 1)
and H ∈ R, a subgraph U ⊂ V is (α, ϕ)-boundary-linked expander with slack H in G if the graph G[U ] ϕ is a
ϕ/H-expander.
We will maintain a partition of the graph into vertex-disjoint expanders, called expander decomposition. An
inter-expander edge is an edge whose endpoints belong two different expanders. We will further maintain a pre-
cluster decomposition and a cluster decomposition that is a refinement of the expander decomposition. In the
pre-cluster decomposition, each cluster is a set of vertices and any edge that lies between two different clusters
is an inter-cluster edge. A cluster decomposition is a refinement of the pre-cluster decomposition, and any edge
that lies between two clusters of the cluster decomposition but inside a cluster of the pre-cluster decomposition
is a “fragmented” edge.
     To compute and maintain the expander decomposition under edge insertions and deletions we use the following
result from Goranci, Räcke, Saranurak and Tan [4]. In this theorem, the term contracted graph refers to the graph
obtained from the original graph by merging all nodes in an expander into one (for each expander). Recourse is
the number of changes made to the contracted graph, which correspond to the number of edges that switch from
being intra-cluster edges to inter-cluster edges or vice-versa.
                                                                                                      3/4
    Theorem 2.5 (Dynamic Expander Decomposition, Lemma 7.3 of [4]). Let ϕ′ = 2−Θ(log n) . Suppose
a graph G initially contains m edges and undergoes a sequence of at most O( mϕ  ρ ) adaptive updates such that
V (G) ≤ n and E(G) ≤ m always hold. Then there exists an algorithm that maintains an (α, ϕ′ )-expander
                                      1/2
decomposition with slack 38h = 2−O(log n) and its contracted graph with the following properties:
                          2h
  1. update time: Õ( ψ38
                       ϕ2 )
  2. preprocessing time: Õ( m
                             ϕ)
  3. initial volume of the contracted graph (after preprocessing): Õ(ϕm)
  4. amortized recourse (number of updates to the contracted graph): O(ρ)

    Since the amortized recourse is O(ρ), and the algorithm can handle O( mϕ      ρ ) updates, this shows that overall
the number of edges that are initially or became inter-cluster edges during the given sequence of updates is O(mϕ).
                                                                                               3/4−c
    Choice of parameter values. Throughout the paper we assume c > 0, δ = 2O(log                      n)
                                                                                                         ≤ 0.04. We set
                 3/4−c                                           1/2            ′            3/4                1/2
          Θ(log        n)                            h    −O(log     n)        ϕ      −Θ(log     n)
λmin = 2                  and λmax ≤ 1.2λmin , H = 38 = 2               , ϕ = 38h = 2               , ρ = 2Θ(log n) and
α = poly1log n .
    3   Technical Overview
     3.1 Overview of [2] As our result builds up on the work of El-Hayek, Henzinger and Li [2], we start by
giving an overview of their techniques first. The core of their algorithm is a fully-dynamic subroutine that takes
as input two parameters, λmin and λmax , and is able to maintain the value of the minimum cut if that value
falls in the range [λmin , λmax ]. If it falls outside of this range, then it simply outputs “λ < λmin ” or “λ > λmax ”
accordingly.
     Let G be a graph. The starting point of the algorithm is the expander decomposition of Goranci, Räcke,
Saranurak and Tan [4]. Then, the key point is to realize that any cut S of cut-size at most λmax in G leads to a
cut of cut-size at most λmax in the graph induced by any of the expanders in the expander decomposition of G.
                                                        w(C∩S,C\S)
Recall that for any ϕ-expander C, we have min{vol(C∩S),vol(C\S)}         ≥ ϕ, which implies an upper bound of λmax /ϕ
on the volume of the smaller side of the cut in the expander. Finding these cuts of small volume can be efficiently
done using the algorithm from Nalam and Saranurak [6], the so-called LocalKCut algorithm. Thus, refining the
expander decomposition by repeatedly cutting expanders along cuts of cut-size at most λmax and of volume at
most λmaxϕ   ensures that if the minimum cut has value at most λmax , it does not cut any cluster obtained from
that refined decomposition.
     The problem with this approach, however, is that cutting along all such cuts can lead to a decomposition
that is “too fine-grained”: In the extreme case, each vertex forms its own cluster, meaning that the contracted
graph is identical to the original graph. This is problematic, as the algorithm then contracts each cluster in
the decomposition and calls itself recursively on the contracted graph, that, for efficiency reasons, needs to be
“sufficiently smaller” than the original graph. To guarantee that the contracted graph is indeed “small enough”,


                                                          5
the idea of [2] is to filter the cuts returned by the LocalKCut algorithm and to only cut along cuts that are
(1 − δ)-boundary sparse, a concept introduced by Henzinger, Li, Rao, and Wang [5]:
    Definition 3.1 (Boundary-Sparse. Def. 2.3 of [5]). For a set C ⊊ V and parameter δ ≤ 1, a cut U ⊊ C is
(1 − δ)-boundary sparse in C iff
                               w(U, C \ U ) < (1 − δ) min{w(U, V \ C), w(C \ U, V \ C)}
     Intuitively, the cut U ⊊ C is boundary sparse1 in C if the number of edges connecting it to the rest of C is
a (1 − δ) factor smaller than the number of edges that connect it to V \ C and, for symmetry, C \ U also fulfills
this property. Thus, if the minimum cut S is such that S ∩ C = U , one can “uncross” S into S \ C or S ∪ C,
whichever results in a cut of smaller cut-size, and the resulting near-minimum cut will only gain a (1 + O(δ))
factor in cut-size. Therefore, from the expander decomposition, if one decomposes the expanders further along
cuts that have volume at most λmax ϕ , cut-size at most λmax and are (1 − δ)-boundary sparse, then in most cases
the minimum cut can be approximated by a cut that does not cross any cluster. The only case where this does
not happen is when the minimum cut is contained in at most two expanders. In that case, one can show that
this cut can be retrieved by looking at the minimum cut of small volume in the so-called mirror clusters, where
a mirror cluster of a cluster C is obtained from G by contracting all nodes outside of C into one node.
     Therefore, the algorithm maintains the following invariant for its cluster decomposition: at no point in time
does there exist a cut in a cluster that (1) has volume at most λmax
                                                                  ϕ    in the cluster and (2) cut-size at most λmax
and (3) is (1 − δ)-boundary sparse. It also maintains the mirror clusters and the cuts of small volume in it.
     3.2 Our techniques To prove Theorem 1.2 we (1) derandomize the LocalKCut algorithm and (2) improve
the approximation ratio of the algorithm in [2] which we described above.
                                                               3/4−c
     Throughout this paper, λmax is set to be at most 2O(log         n)
                                                                      √with c > 0. As discussed below, this is because
the √recourse of our algorithm is dependent on λmax . Over r = 4 log n many levels of recursion, this is at most
  O( 4 log n)
λmax          . However to achieve an no(1) update time, this value has to be no(1) , which in turn requires that λmax
                   3/4−c
is at most 2O(log        n)
                            with c > 0.
     3.2.1 A deterministic LocalKCut algorithm The input of the LocalKCut algorithm is a vertex v, a
volume ν and a cut-size λmax , and a cluster C and its goal is to return all cuts in C that contain v, are of volume
(in G[C]) at most ν, are of cut-size at most λmax , and are connected. The LocalKCut algorithm by Nalam and
Saranurak [17] heavily relies on randomization, as at its core, the algorithm starts at v, and randomly explores
the graph checking at each step if the set of all vertices visited until that point form a cut that satisfies the desired
conditions or not. They show that with a “high enough” probability, any cut that satisfies the desired conditions
is found in this way, and thus, running this algorithm enough times guarantees that all such cuts are found whp.
     We, thus, have to develop a whole new technique to derandomize it. For that, we rely on the greedy tree
packing technique developed by Karger [11]. The tree packing technique works as follows: start with the graph
itself, assign to each edge a weight of 0, and create an empty set of trees, called the tree packing. Then iteratively
find a minimum spanning tree of the graph, add it to the tree packing, and increase the weight of every edge in
that tree by 1.
     Karger showed that if we choose enough trees in the tree-packing, then for every minimum cut S, there must
be a tree that 2-respects S, that is, the edges of the minimum cut intersect the edges of the tree at most twice.
We show an immediate generalization of this result: for any β-approximation of the minimum cut, there exists
a tree that 2β-respects the cut for a suitable integer constant β. Assume for the moment that any cut in G of
cut-size at most λmax is a β-approximation of the minimum cut.
     We discuss below how to guarantee this condition for the graphs on which LocalKCut is executed.
     Now we implement a deterministic version of LocalKCut inspired by techniques of Lokshtanov, Saurabh, and
Surianarayanan [16] for approximate minimum k-cut as follows: A red-blue edge coloring is a coloring of the edges
where every edge is either red or blue, but not both. We assume for the moment that we are given a family F1
of red-blue edge colorings and also a family F2 of green-yellow edge colorings and discuss later how we find and
maintain such colorings efficiently. The first family F1 consists of a collection of red-blue edge colorings such that
for any two disjoint edge sets Fr , Fb with |Fr | ≤ 2β and |Fb | ≤ ν, there exists a coloring in F1 with all edges

  1 Boundary sparseness indicates sparseness in comparison to the boundary.




                                                              6
in Fr red and all edges in Fb blue. The second family F2 consists of a collection of green-yellow edge colorings
such that for any two disjoint edge sets Fg , Fy with |Fg | ≤ 2β − 1 and |Fy | ≤ λmax , there is a coloring in F2 with
all edges in Fg green and all edges in Fy yellow. We use the term pair of colorings to denote a pair of colorings
consisting of one coloring of F1 and one of F2 .
     The algorithm maintains during the sequence of edge updates a greedy tree packing of G, and the two edge
coloring families F1 and F2 .
     Then, whenever LocalKCut is started on a vertex v it performs, for every pair of colorings and every tree T ,
a breadth-first search using only the blue edges that belong to T and the green edges that do not belong to T . Red
edges and yellow edges are ignored. If the BFS visits nodes of total volume more than ν, LocalKCut stops the
current BFS, and moves to the next pair of colorings. If the BFS cannot visit any new vertices and is still below
the volume threshold of ν, LocalKCut checks whether the resulting cut induced by the visited vertices fulfills the
desired conditions on cut-size and volume (i.e. has edge capacity at most λmax and volume at most ν) and if so,
it adds the cut to the collection of cuts to be returned. It then moves on to the next pairs of colorings.
     We claim that this deterministic version of LocalKCut finds every cut S that contains v, is connected, has
volume at most ν, and cut-size at most λmax using the following argument and setting β ≥ 8, as long as S is a
β-approximation of the minimum cut in C.
     As, by assumption, S is β-approximation of the minimum cut in C, we are guaranteed that there exists a tree
T in our tree packing that 2β-respects S, i.e., at most 2β of the edges of T cross the cut induced by S. Choose
Fr to be these cut edges and choose Fb to be all the edges of T with both endpoints in S. By the conditions
that S fulfills, it follows that |Fr | ≤ 2β and |Fb | ≤ ν. Hence there exists a blue-red coloring in F1 where all edges
in Fr are red, and all edges in Fb are blue. As the edges in Fb are edges of T (that spans the cluster C) and
they are connected by at most 2β (red) tree edges to the rest of T , they can form at most 2β distinct connected
components. As S is connected, these components can be connected by at most 2β − 1 edges of G. Let Fg
be a minimum-cardinality set of edges that connect these components. Then |Fg | ≤ 2β − 1 and all these edges
have both endpoints in S. Furthermore, let Fy = E(S, V \ S). Note that |Fy | ≤ λmax . Therefore, there exists a
green-yellow coloring in F2 where all the edges in Fy are yellow and all edges in Fg are green. As a result it holds
that Fb ∪ Fg spans S and all tree edges leaving S are red and and all non-tree edges leaving S are yellow. Recall
that the algorithm explores the graph in BFS fashion using only the blue tree edges and the green non-tree edges
for all trees in our tree packing and all pairs of edge colorings in F1 × F2 . Thus, when our algorithm described
above runs with that particular tree and these particular colorings it is guaranteed to find S as Fb ∪ Fg spans S
and none of the tree edges leaving S are blue and none of the non-tree edges leaving S are green.
     In the above argument we used the fact that every cut in G of cut-size at most λmax is a β-approximation of
the minimum cut. Note that our algorithm in [2] only runs LocalKCut on either clusters or mirror clusters, and
not on arbitrary graphs G. Therefore, if we can ensure that the minimum cut-size is at least λmax    β  in every cluster
and mirror cluster, and then run our deterministic LocalKCut algorithm on every cluster and mirror cluster, we
are guaranteed to find all cuts that we need.
     To ensure this property we note that if a cut in a cluster has cut-size smaller than λmaxβ  with β > 3, and if the
graph has minimum cut at least λmin , then the cut must be (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in the cluster. Note that the
correctness proof for the cluster decomposition [2] (and we will we will also base our correctness proof on it) does
not place any conditions on cutting clusters other than requiring that the cuts are (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse. Thus,
our algorithms is allowed to cut the cluster along any cut of cut-size smaller than λmax β , and do so repeatedly until
no such cut remains. After recursively cutting all these small cuts the cluster has the desired property and we
can run our deterministic LocalKCut routine on it.
     The question remains on how to efficiently (1) find such cuts and (2) how many colorings are needed and how
to find and maintain them dynamically.
     (1) We need determine new cuts that fulfill the requirements of our LocalKCut algorithm after each edge
update and if an update splits a custer, we need to run our LocalKCut algorithm recursively on the new clusters.
To do so we maintain a LocalKCut data structure that allows to quickly output all desired cuts after an edge
update. However, after an update a cluster C might be split into two clusters that are not connected with each
other in C, rendering the LocalKCut data structure for this cluster useless since it only works for β-approximations
of the minimum cut in that cluster, which is now 0. We could create a separate LocalKCut data structure for
each cluster, creating new LocalKCut data structures whenever a cluster is split into two, but this proves to be
too slow.


                                                           7
    Instead, our solution is to not run and maintain one LocalKCut data structure per cluster, but instead build
one LocalKCut data structure for all clusters, i.e., for the whole graph. Thus, to split a cluster it suffices to
simply delete from the data structure the edges that connect the two new clusters. This also works fine with
our constructions in general, although one needs to be careful. For example, the greedy tree packing for our
LocalKCut data structure now needs to be replaced by a greedy forest packing, which is a greedy tree packing on
each of the connected components. The resulting LocalKCut data structure maintains a subgraph G′ of G and
implements the following operations:
    Definition 3.2. Let G be a graph that is updated by a sequence of edge insertions and deletions. A LocalKCut
data structure parametrized by ν ∈ N, s ∈ N, β ∈ N maintains a subgraph G′ of G and implements the following
operations:
    (i) LocalKCut query(v): Return all connected cuts in G′ containing v of volume (in G′ ) at most ν and cut-size
in G′ at most s, that are a β-approximation of the minimum proper cut of G′ .
    (ii) DeleteEdge(e): Remove the edge e from G′ .
    (iii) InsertEdge(e): Add the edge e to G′ .
    For our LocalKCut data structure the time for each LocalKCut query is Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ). The amortized
time for every DeleteEdge and InsertEdge operations is Õ β 4 (λmax ν)O(β) . Using β = O(1) and λ, ν = no(1) we
get that every operation takes amortized time no(1) .
    (2) Let us now discuss how to find the red-blue and yellow-green colorings. For that, we use the following
lemma which was shown by Chitnis, Cygan, Hajiaghayi, Pilipczuk and Pilipczuk [1] and that guarantees the
existence of a family of colorings of a set of elements and gives a fast algorithm for finding them. In our case each
element is an edge.
     Lemma 3.3 (Lemma 1.1 of [1]). Given a set U of cardinality n, and integers 0 ≤ a, b ≤ n, one can in
time 2O(min(a,b) log(a+b)) n log n construct a family F of at most 2O(min(a,b) log(a+b)) log n subsets of U , such that the
following holds: for any sets A, B ⊆ U , A ∩ B = ∅, |A| ≤ a, |B| ≤ b, there exists a set S ∈ F with A ⊆ S and
B ∩ S = ∅.
     In our case, U is the set of edges, and a and b are respectively 2β and ν for the red-blue coloring, and 2β − 1
and λmax for the green-yellow coloring. Plugging in λmax , ν = no(1) and β = O(1) we have that at most no(1)
many of these colorings are necessary to ensure the properties that we need.
     Another feature of this construction is that it is remarkably robust against updates: indeed, if an edge is
deleted, the colorings do not have to change, and the properties we require still hold. If another edge is then
inserted, then it can take over the colors of the deleted edge, and the properties still hold, as it is a set-theoretic
result, and not a graph-theoretic one. Therefore, when computing colorings, one can do so for 2m many edges,
and assign only the first m colors of a coloring to the existing edges, sparing the m other ones for potential edge
insertions. These colorings will thus be valid until the number of edges in the graph doubles. When this happens
we can afford to compute new family of colorings. Overall, we spend m1+o(1) time to compute these colorings,
that we can amortize over at least m updates, for an update time of at most no(1) .
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                           1
     3.2.2 Getting a better approximation ratio In [2], the approximation ratio is 1 + Θ( √log               n
                                                                                                               )  . As a
consequence,
      √        if we want to use this algorithm to compute an exact answer, the minimum cut can only be as large
as O( log n), as otherwise the approximation ratio is not small enough to guarantee that the answer is exact.
     The reason for such a weak approximation ratio is that cutting along (1 − δ)-boundary sparse cuts is done
in an arbitrary order. As a result, we only achieve an upper bound on the total number of inter-cluster edges
                                                                                        1
created between any two rebuilds of the expander decomposition of roughly M 2O( δ ) , where M is the number
                                                                                                3/4
of inter-expander edges in the expander decomposition, which is typically mϕ = m2−Θ(log n) . We need ϕ to
               1                                                                                             3/4
dominate 2O( δ ) to ensure that the total number of inter-cluster edges can still be bounded by m2−Θ(log n) and,
                                                                                                  3/4−c
                                                    1
thus, in [2] δ cannot be truly smaller than Ω( log3/4  n
                                                         ). In this work we aim for δ = 2−O(log         n)
                                                                                                           with c > 0,
                                                        M
and thus need a cluster decomposition with at most O( poly(δ) ) many inter-cluster edges. Since M = O(mϕ), the
                                                          3/4                          3/4−c
                          1
ϕ factor dominates the poly(δ) factor, as ϕ = 2−Θ(log           n)
                                                                     and δ = 2−O(log           n)
                                                                                                    . We are, thus, able to show
                                            3/4−c
                                   −O(log           n)
an approximation ratio of 1 + 2               , which implies that our new algorithm gives an exact solution for
              3/4−c
λmax = 2O(log       n)
                       with c > 0, improving on the result of [2].


                                                            8
     We now explain how to achieve a better approximation ratio. Henzinger, Li, Rao, and Wang, who presented
the first near-linear time deterministic static exact minimum cut algorithm in weighted graphs [5], also cut clusters
                                                                                 M
along (1 − δ)-boundary sparse cut. They are able to get the desired O( poly(δ)      ) upper bound on the number of
inter-cluster edges by performing the cuts in a different manner than [2]: If the cluster has high boundary-size
(say, at least 3λmax ), they cut the cluster along any boundary sparse cuts; if, however, the cluster has small
boundary-size, then they call a subroutine, which we name fragmenting, which carefully selects the order in which
the (1 − δ)-boundary sparse cuts are performed, and outputs which edges need to be cut to get the decomposition
– that is, which edges need to become inter-cluster edges. Fragmenting runs in time polynomial in the volume of
the cluster that is decomposed, but this is not a problem for them as the clusters they consider have only volume
polylogarithmic in n.
     We cannot run this algorithm in a black-box manner for the following reasons: (a) The cluster we want to
fragment might have large volume as they might be the expanders of the expander decomposition, and (b) their
algorithm is static and not dynamic. Thus, we instead adapt their fragmenting algorithm to our needs, solving
both problems simultaneously: we give a static deterministic algorithm that runs in no(1) time on clusters of
                                                                 λmax
boundary-size O(λmax ) = no(1) and has output of size Õ( poly(δ)     ) = no(1) . This is fast enough so that we can
simply rerun it after every update on each affected cluster. Running the algorithm from scratch after every update
                                                    λmax
makes it dynamic: Since its output is of size Õ( poly(δ) ), which corresponds to the cut-size of the cuts along which
                                                        λmax
the cluster has to be partitioned, the recourse is Õ( poly(δ) ). Its static running time of no(1) translates then in a
no(1) time per update on clusters of boundary-size at most O(λmax ).
     To speed up the algorithm we rely on two observations: the first one is that, for clusters C of small boundary-
size, that is, ∂C = O(λmax ), the running time of the fragmenting algorithm is dominated by the time needed to
find the set of all (1 − δ)-boundary sparse cuts in the cluster. We can replace this step by running our version of
LocalKCut instead, only looking at cuts of small volume. Since any (1−δ)-boundary sparse cut must have at least
one boundary edge, it thus suffices to run LocalKCut from every node incident to a boundary edge. This takes
no(1) time per LocalKCut query. As the number of queries is O(λmax ) = no(1) exploring only volume ν = no(1) in
C, this leads to a λmax no(1) = no(1) overall running time for the fragmenting algorithm.
     The second observation is that the number of edges that our fragmenting algorithm cuts, that is, the number
of inter-cluster edges that it creates, is Õ( ∂C                                                      1
                                                 δ 2 ), as we can show that it creates at most Õ( δ 2 ) many clusters of
cut-size at most ∂C = O(λmax ) each. This number increases the recourse of our cluster decomposition. As long
                3/4−c                       3/4−c
as δ = 2−O(log        n)
                         and λmax = 2O(log        n)
                                                     , the additive increase in the recourse is still dominated by ϕ1 , and
thus we can afford such a recourse increase for the cluster decomposition. We can therefore run our fragmenting
algorithm from scratch on every cluster that is affected by an update of the dynamic expander decomposition as
both the running time and the recourse stay sufficiently bounded.
     Overall, to maintain our cluster decomposition, we run three dynamic algorithms back-to-back: the dynamic
expander decomposition, the pre-cluster decomposition that cuts along (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cuts arbitrarily
as long as the clusters have boundary-size at least Ω(λmax ), and the fragmenting algorithm that only runs on
clusters of boundary-size O(λmax ) and that chooses which  √
                                                                 (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cuts to cut and in which order.
The expander decomposition has recourse ρ = 2O( log n) , the pre-cluster decomposition has recourse O( 1δ ) for
each update caused by the expander decomposition, while the fragmenting algorithm has recourse Õ( λmax           δ 2 ) for
each update caused by any of the prior two decomposition algorithms. Overall we thus get a recourse which is
                                                                    3/4−c
a product of these three factors, i.e., of Õ( ρλδmax 3  ) = 2O(log       n)
                                                                             per level of recursion. As we show that the
                                  √                                                  1−c
recursive depth is at most O( log n), this yields a total recourse of 2O(log n) , which we can process in no(1)
                                   4

                           o(1)
time per change, thus n         overall time.
     Hence, we get an algorithm that in no(1) time per update maintains a cluster hierarchy, that is, a collection
of graphs associated to a cluster decomposition each, where each graph is obained from the previous graph by
contracting each cluster. As in [2], we show that any minimum proper cut is well-approximated by a cut of small
volume in a graph of this hierarchy. We thus maintain additionally, for each vertex v, the best proper cut of small
volume in which v is contained if there exists one small enough, store them in a heap data structure, and simply
return the cut of smallest cut-size among all these cuts to obtain our result and return an approximate minimum
cut.




                                                            9
    4 A deterministic LocalKCut data structure In this section, we present a deterministic LocalKCut
data structure that achieves the following bounds:
    Theorem 4.1. For any parameters λmax , ν, β ∈ N+ with λmax < ν, there is a deterministic, fully dynamic
LocalKCut data structure that outputs, on each LocalKCut query specified by a vertex v ∈ V , a collection S of
cuts S ⊆ V containing v such that
  1. Each cut S ⊆ V satisfies ∂S ≤ λmax , vol(S) ≤ ν, and G[S] is connected.
  2. S contains all β-approximate mincuts S ⊆ V satisfying condition (1).
                                                                                         
The data structure runs in Õ(mβ 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) preprocessing time, Õ β 4 (λmax ν)O(β) amortized update time and
Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) query time.
   The goal is to set β = O(1), λmax = no(1) and ν = no(1) so that the preprocessing time is m1+o(1) and the
update and query time are no(1) .
    4.1 Description of the algorithm and proof of correctness The full description of the algorithm can
be found in Algorithm 4.1, but we present it step by step here. We begin with some preliminaries from [20].
    A tree packing is an assignment of weights to spanning trees of G so that each edge e gets load
                                                     X
                                              ℓ(e) =    w(T ) ≤ 1.
                                                       T ∋e
                                  P
The value of the tree packing is T w(T ). We let τ denote the value of the maximum tree packing of G. The
classic Nash-Williams’ theorem relates τ to the mincut λ of the graph.
    Theorem 4.2 (Nash-Williams [18]). λ/2 ≤ τ ≤ λ.
                                              P
    A tree packing is (1 + ϵ)-approximate if T w(T ) ≥ τ /(1 + ϵ). In order to use the same parameters as prior
work, we slightly abuse the notation in this section: The ϵ in this section is independent from the ϵ from all other
sections.
    Theorem 4.3 (Generalisation of [11]). For any β-approximate mincut and any (1 + ϵ)-approximate tree
packing, there is a tree in the packing that ⌊2(1 + ϵ)β⌋-respects the β-approximate mincut.
                                                                       P
    Proof. Since the tree packing T is (1 + ϵ)-approximate, we have T w(T ) ≥ τ /(1 + ϵ). If we sample a random
tree T ∈ T with probability proportional to w(T ), then the probability that the sampled tree contains a given
edge e is                              P
                                              w(T )        1             1
                                        PT ∋e       ≤P           ≤             .
                                           T w(T )       T w(T )    τ /(1 + ϵ)
For a given β-approximate mincut, the expected number of edges in the sampled tree is at most
                                                      1
                                          βλ ·              = (1 + ϵ)βλ/τ,
                                                 τ /(1 + ϵ)

which is at most 2(1 + ϵ)β by Nash-Williams’ theorem. It follows that there exists a tree T ∈ T that ⌊2(1 + ϵ)β⌋-
respects the β-approximate mincut.
     Our goal now is to have good approximate tree packings. An easy way to get an approximate tree packing is
by looking at Greedy Tree Packings, popularized by Karger and Thorup [20, 19]. Let H be a connected unweighted
graph. A greedy tree packing with k trees is a packing obtained using the following procedure: start with H with
weights 0 on all edges. Take a minimum spanning tree on H, add it to the packing, then increase the weights of
all edges included in that tree. Repeat the instructions in the former sentence until k trees are in the packing.
    Theorem 4.4 (Lemma 5 of [19]). A greedy tree packing with at least 6λ log m/ϵ2 trees is (1 + ϵ)-approximate.
    We modify this slightly and consider a Greedy Forest Packing, where we take the exact same procedure as for
greedy tree packings, but the graph G does not have to be connected, and the minimum spanning tree is replaced
by a minimum spanning forest, that is, a forest where each tree is a minimum spanning tree of its connected
component in G.


                                                         10
   The idea here is that a greedy forest packing is essentially a greedy tree packing on each of the connected
components of G, which has the nice properties discussed above that we will harness.
   We first discuss how to maintain a greedy forest packing dynamically:
    Theorem 4.5 (Theorem 8 of [7]).        There is a fully dynamic deterministic Minimum Spanning Forest
algorithm that for a graph with n vertices, starting with no edges, maintains a minimum spanning forest in
O(log4 n) amortized time per edge insertion or deletion.
   As discussed in Section 3.2 of [20], by adding priorities to the edges, one can ensure that there is a unique
minimum spanning forest in each graph. This leads to the following lemma, which we prove similarly to [20]:
    Lemma 4.6. Each insertion or deletion of an edge changes at most i edges in the i-th forest.
    Proof. We will consider only edge deletions, as the edge insertions are treated symmetrically.
    Let (u, v) be the deleted edge.

   • If the edge deletion disconnects a component, then the edge load drops to 0. On each connected component
     of G, the tree packing does not change, as otherwise the forest packing before the deletion was not greedy.
     We have thus only 1 edge change on the i-th forest, for each i.

   • If the edge deletion does not disconnect a component: For any edge e, we define ℓi (e) to be the number of
     forests with index smaller or equal to i that contain e. This is the load of e after forst i. We distinguish
     ℓold
      i (e) from ℓi
                    new
                        (e), the former being the load of e before the edge deletion, and the latter being the load
     of e after the edge deletion.
     Then we prove by induction that, for every j ≥ 1:
                                                           new(e)
                                               ℓold
                                                j (e) ≤ ℓj             ∀e ∈ E

     that is, the edge deletion only increases the loads for all j.
     This, coupled to the fact that for each j, the total load of the edges apart from (u, v) is equal to
     j · (n − number of components of G), proves that at most j edges e satisfy ℓold      new
                                                                                 j (e) < ℓj   (e).

        – Base case: for j = 1, if an edge is deleted within a component, this edge is replaced by another one in
          the acyclic matroid.
                                                                      new(e)
        – Induction step: Assume we have that ℓold
                                               j (e) ≤ ℓj                       ∀e ∈ E, and we want to show that
                       new(e)
           ℓold
            j+1 (e) ≤ ℓj+1      ∀e ∈ E. There are three cases:
             ∗ Either f = (u, v) is in the j + 1-th forest after the edge deletion. Then ℓnew         new
                                                                                          j+1 (f ) = ℓj   (f ) + 1 ≥
                old           old
               ℓj (f ) + 1 ≥ ℓj+1 (f ),
             ∗ or f = (u, v) was not in the j + 1-th forest before the edge deletion. Then ℓold                 old
                                                                                                    j+1 (f ) = ℓj (f ) ≤
                new        new
               ℓj (f ) ≤ ℓj+1 (f ),
             ∗ or f = (u, v) was in the j + 1-th forest before the deletion and is not in the forest after the deletion.
               This means that before the edge deletions, f was in the minimum spanning forest in G with weights
               ℓold
                j , but is not anymore after the deletions with weights ℓj
                                                                                new
                                                                                     . Since, by induction, none of the
                                                   old        new
               weights have decreased between ℓj and ℓj , this means that the load on f has strictly increased:
               ℓnew
                j   ≥ ℓold                new
                       j + 1. Hence: ℓj+1 (f ) = ℓj
                                                       new
                                                           (f ) ≥ ℓold           old
                                                                   j (f ) + 1 = ℓj+1 (f ).


   This, in turn, ensures that we can maintain a dynamic greedy forest packing with k trees in Õ(k 2 ) time per
update operations
    Theorem 4.7 (Direct Generalization of Theorem 4 of [20]). For any parameter λmax , there is a fully dynamic
algorithm that maintains a greedy forest packing of Õ(λmax /ϵ2 ) trees in Õ(λ2max /ϵ4 ) amortized time per update.
Whenever the graph has edge connectivity ≤ λmax , the tree packing is (1 + ϵ)-approximate. Whenever the edge
connectivity of the graph is > λmax , the tree packing has no guarantees.


                                                          11
                                                                                 1
    Our dynamic algorithm calls Theorem 4.7 with parameters λmax and ϵ = 3β        . Remember that we want to
find all cuts containing v that have volume smaller than ν, cut-size smaller than λmax and are β-approximations
of the minimum cut. By Theorem 4.3, this cut 2β-respects a tree in the forest packing. Therefore, it suffices to
implement the following dynamic data structure, and run the queries on each tree currently in the packing.
    Lemma 4.8. For any parameters λmax , ν, β ∈ N+ , there is a fully dynamic algorithm that outputs, on each
query specified by a vertex v ∈ V and a spanning tree T of the connected component of v, the collection of all cuts
S ⊆ V satisfying ∂S ≤ λmax , vol(S) ≤ ν, G[S] is connected, and S 2β-respects the tree T . The algorithm runs
in Õ(λmax ν)O(β) time per update and query.
     More precisely, the proof of Theorem 4.1 proceeds as follows: Given a query vertex v ∈ V , our dynamic
algorithm runs Lemma 4.8 on the queries (v, T ) for each T currently in the packing, and takes the union of all sets
S returned by the queries. The final running time is Õ(λmax ) many calls, one per tree, each taking Õ(λmax ν)O(β)
time, which is Õ(λmax ν)O(β) overall.
     It remains to prove Lemma 4.8. The algorithm is inspired by the fixed-parameter tractable (FPT) algorithm
for approximate minimum k-cut [16]. The algorithm maintains two families of 2-colorings of edges of the graph.
The first family consists of red-blue edge colorings such that for any disjoint sets Fr , Fb of edges with |Fr | ≤ 2β
and |Fb | ≤ ν, there is a coloring with all edges in Fr red and all edges in Fb blue. We discuss the size and
maintenance of this family later on. The second family consists of green-yellow edge colorings such that for any
disjoint sets Fg , Fy of edges with |Fg | ≤ 2β − 1 and |Fy | ≤ λmax , there is a coloring with all edges in Fg green and
all edges in Fy yellow.
     Algorithm for answering a LocalKCut Query. The algorithm iterates over all pairs of colorings, one red-blue
coloring and one green-yellow coloring. For each pair of colorings, the algorithm runs a depth-first search in the
subgraph H consisting of blue edges in the tree T and green edges from the graph that are not in T . If this
depth-first search for this pair of colorings encounters more than ν edges, then it terminates early, spending time
O(ν). Let S ⊆ V be the set of vertices visited by the search. If S satisfies ∂S ≤ λmax , vol(S) ≤ ν, G[S] is
connected, and S 2β-respects the tree T , then add it to the final collection S then proceeds to the next pair of
colorings.
     Correctness. We claim that any set S satisfying the above requirements is added to S for some pair of
colorings. To prove this, it suffices to show that S is precisely the connected component containing v in the
subgraph H on some pair of colorings, so that the depth-first search visits exactly the vertices in S. Since
|S| ≤ vol(S) ≤ ν, there are at most |S| − 1 ≤ ν − 1 many tree edges in G[S], and since S 2β-respects T , there
are at most 2β tree edges in ∂S. So there is a red-blue coloring with all tree edges in G[S] colored blue, and all
tree edges in ∂S colored red. Moreover, since S 2β-respects T , the tree edges in G[S] form at most 2β connected
components. Let 1 ≤ j < 2β be the number of connected components formed by the tree edges in G[S]. Then
these connected components are connected in G by exactly j − 1 non-tree edges E because G[S] is connected.
There is a green-yellow coloring such that the edges E (if E ̸= ∅) are green and all edges in ∂S are yellow (of
which there are at most λmax ). In the iteration where these two colorings are considered, by construction S is
the connected component containing v in the graph H, and we are done.
     It remains to bound the number of colorings. We use the lemma below.
     Lemma 4.9 (Lemma 1.1 of [1]). Given a set U of cardinality n, and integers 0 ≤ a, b ≤ n, one can in
time 2O(min(a,b) log(a+b)) n log n construct a family F of at most 2O(min(a,b) log(a+b)) log n subsets of U , such that the
following holds: for any sets A, B ⊆ U , A ∩ B = ∅, |A| ≤ a, |B| ≤ b, there exists a set S ∈ F with A ⊆ S and
B ∩ S = ∅.
     At the beginning of the algorithm, and at every point where the number of edges double compared to the
last recomputation, we set U to be a universe of elements of size at most 2m (where m is the number of edges
at this point in time) and associate each current edge of the graph with a unique element in U . On each edge
insertion, associate the new edge to an unassigned element in U . If there are no unassigned elements remaining,
then recompute U to be double the size. This way, the time spent recomputing is amortized among the edge
insertions.
     For the family of red-blue colorings, we set a = 2β and b = ν and map each set S ∈ F to the
coloring that colors all edges with associated element in S red and all other edges blue. This family has size
(2β)O(log ν) log n = ν O(β) log n. For the family of green-yellow colorings, we set a = 2β − 1 and b = λmax and map
each set S ∈ F to the coloring that colors all edges with associated element in S green and all other edges yellow.


                                                            12
                                              O(β)
This family has size (2β)O(log λmax ) log n = λmax log n.
    The pseudocode of the algorithm is given next.
    Algorithm 4.1 (Deterministic LocalKCut). Input:

  1. A dynamic unweighted graph G

  2. A maximum cut-size λmax ∈ N+

  3. A maximum volume ν ∈ N+ , ν > λmax

  4. An approximation ratio β ∈ N+ , β < λmax .

Preprocessing and maintained variables:
              1
  1. Set ϵ = 3β

  2. Start an instance of Theorem 4.7 – a greedy forest packing with 6λmax log m/ϵ2 forests.

  3. Create red-blue colorings of 2m edges with a = 2β and b = ν using Theorem 3.3.

  4. Create yellow-green colorings of 2m the edges with a = 2β, b = λmax using Theorem 3.3.

Processing an edge insertion:

  1. Feed it to Theorem 4.7, updating the greedy forest packing.

  2. Give it an unused color for each of the colorings. If there are no unused colors, create new colorings of
     double the size.

Processing an edge deletion:

  1. Give it to Theorem 4.7, updating the greedy forest packing.

  2. Free its colors in each coloring to make it available for a future edge insertion.

Processing a request on node v:

  1. S ← ∅

  2. For each forest, red-blue and yellow-green colorings:

      (a) Do a DFS starting at v, exploring edges that are blue if they are in the forest, yellow if not in the tree,
          capped at ν volume visited.
       (b) If the DFS terminates before the cap, let S be the set of explored vertices. If ∂S ≤ λmax , add S to S.

  3. return S.

    4.2   Running time analysis
    Lemma 4.10. The preprocessing time of Algorithm 4.1 is Õ(mβ 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ).
     Proof. Step 1 of preprocessing takes constant time. Step 2 takes O(m · log4 m · 6λmax log m/ϵ2 ). Indeed, we
initialize the forests by inserting each edge one by one in the first instance of Theorem 4.5, then on to the second
one, and so on until the last one. Each edge inserted takes O(log4 n) time, and there are O(m) many edge, each
                                                           1
inserted into 6λmax log m/ϵ2 many trees. Setting ϵ to 3β     we get that Step 2 takes Õ(mλmax β 2 ). Step 3 takes,
by Theorem 3.3, 2O(min(2β,ν) log(2β+ν)) m log m = Õ(mν O(β) ), where we use β < ν. Step 4 takes, by Theorem 3.3,
                                               O(β)
2O(min(2β,λmax ) log(2β+λmax )) m log m = Õ(mλmax ), where we use β < λmax .
                                                                                                   
    Lemma 4.11. The amortized update time of Algorithm 4.1 on an update is Õ β 4 (λmax ν)O(β) .


                                                            13
                                                                                                          1
    Proof. Let us first consider an edge insertion. Step 1 takes O(λ2max β 4 ) by Theorem 4.7, where ϵ = 3β . Step 2
takes O(1) time if we do not compute new colorings, but Õ(m(λmax ν)O(β) ) if we need to compute new ones, as
discussed in the previous proof. However, if it is the case, it means the number of edges have been doubled since
the last time colorings were computed, and thus we can amortize this recomputation over the last m  2 edges. This
yields an amortized update time of Õ((λmax ν)O(β) ).
    The case for edge deletions is similar (and easier as we do not need to recompute any colorings).
    Lemma 4.12. The query time of Algorithm 4.1 is Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ).
    Proof. For every forest in the forest packing, red-blue coloring and yellow-green coloring, we run a DFS that
can explore nodes of at most O(ν) volume. Hence, every DFS takes O(ν) time. There are Õ(β 2 λmax ) many
                                                                                                                  O(β)
forests, 2O(min(2β,ν) log(2β+ν)) = Õ(ν O(β) ) many red-blue colorings, and 2O(min(2β,λmax ) log(2β+λmax )) = Õ(λmax )
                                                                 2        O(β)
many yellow-green colorings, which means we run overall Õ(β (λmax ν)          ) many DFS.
     5 Fragmenting a Cluster In this section, we discuss how to fragment a cluster. Note that this algorithm
is static. This algorithm and its analysis closely follow Lemma 6.4 of [5]. For this section, we assume that the
data structure we present in Section 10 supports our cluster decomposition.
    Theorem 5.1 (Fragmenting, inspired by Lemma 6.4 of [5]). Let G be a graph, and C a cluster in that graph.
Let λmax , λmin , ν, δ, β be parameters and assume that:

  1. The minimum cut of G[C] is at least λmin ≥ λmax
                                                 β

  2. ∂C ≤ 6λmax .

  3. an instance of the LocalKCut data structure (Theorem 4.1) is running on the intracluster edges of G with
     parameters λmax , ν, β.

Then, there exists an algorithm that decomposes C into a disjoint union of clusters C1 , . . . , Ck for some k ∈ N,
such that:

  1. For any set S ⊆ C with vol(S) ≤ ν and ∂G[C] S ≤ λmax , there exists a partition A of {C1 , . . . , Ck } such that
     for each element A ∈ A (which is a subset of {C1 , . . . , Ck }), the set S ∩ (∪A′ ∈A A′ ) is not (1 − δ)-boundary
     sparse in ∪A′ ∈A A′ .

  2. There are at most O(δ −2 logO(1) |C|) many clusters, and each cluster satisfies ∂Ci ≤ ∂C.

The algorithm runs in Õ(δ −2 β 2 (νλmax )O(β) ) time.
    Definition 5.2. Let A be a set, C a set of subsets of A and S ⊆ A a subset of A. Then the intersection C ∩ S
of C and S is the set of subsets of S: C ∩ S = {T ∩ S : T ∈ C}.
    Algorithm 5.1.
Input:

  1. a graph G with a partition P

  2. a cluster C ∈ P

  3. access to a LocalKCut instance on G \ {e ∈ E(G) : label(e) = “intercluster”}

  4. A maximum cut value λmax , a maximum volume ν, an approximation ratio β, with λmax ≤ ν.

Algorithm:

  1. Run a LocalKCut query on every vertex v in the set C ∩ N (N (C)) of vertices in C incident to boundary
     edges of C, which outputs Cv = {U1 , . . . , Uℓ }, a collection of cuts returned for v.

  2. Let C be the collection of cuts obtained by taking the union of the collection of cuts returned by LocalKCut:
     C = ∪v∈N (C) Cv .


                                                          14
   3. Trim(C, C)
Trim(C ′ , C ′ )
   1. Remove from C ′ all cuts that are not (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in C ′ (we call this the pruning step).
   2. If there is a D ∈ C ′ that crosses C ′ such that ∂G[C ′ ] D ≤ 0.4λmax , remove C ′ from P, add C ′ \ D and D to
      P and recursively call Trim(C ′ \ D, C ′ ∩ (C ′ \ D)) and Trim(D, C ′ ∩ D).
   3. Otherwise, if C ′ ̸= ∅, choose the set D ∈ C ′ with minimum min{|D| , |C ′ \ D|} (in other words, D is the
      most unbalanced – cardinality wise – cut in C ′ ). Remove C ′ from P, add C ′ \ D and D to P and recursively
      call Trim(C ′ \ D, C ′ ∩ (C ′ \ D)) and Trim(D, C ′ ∩ D).
     5.1    Correctness
     Proof of Property (1). Consider a set S ⊆ C with vol(S) ≤ ν and ∂G[C] S ≤ λmax .
     Case 1: If S = ∅ or S = C, then Property (1) is trivial because ∅ and C are always non-(1 − δ)-boundary-
sparse in C, and we can set A = {{C1 , . . . , Ck }}.
     Case 2: If w(S, V \ C) = 0, then similarly, S is trivially non-(1 − δ)-boundary-sparse in C, and we can set
A = {{C1 , . . . , Ck }}.
     Case 3: Thus we are left to consider the case S ̸= ∅,S ⊊ C, and w(S, V \ C) > 0. Since ∂G[C] S ≤ λmax and
w(S, V \ C) > 0, there exists an edge (u, v) with u ∈ S ∩ C, v ∈ V \ C. Querying LocalKCut on v, as Trim does
in the first step, finds S, by Theorem 4.1. Therefore, we have that S ∈ C, the collection of cuts found at the root
instance Trim(C, C). Moreover, the property S ∩ C ′ ∈ C ′ holds recursively along the recursion tree as long as
Step 1 of Trim does not apply.
     We now prove Property (1) for S ′ = S ∩ C ′ ∈ C ′ by bottom-up induction on the recursion tree of the Trim
subroutine, starting at the calls where S ′ = S ∩C ′ is pruned from C ′ in Step 1. As base cases, we consider instances
of Trim with first parameter C ′ where S is removed from C ′ in the initial pruning step of Trim. Since S ′ is removed
from C ′ , it is non-(1 − δ)-boundary sparse in C ′ , that is, we can set A = {{Ci ⊆ C ′ }, {C1 , . . . , Ck } \ {Ci ⊆ C ′ }}.
     For the induction step, we consider sets S ′ , where S ′ survives the initial pruning step of Trim. Then C ′ ̸= ∅
after Step 1. This implies that C ′ is replaced by D and C ′ \ D for some D ⊊ C ′ . By induction on the recursive
instances Trim(C ′ \D, C ′ ∩(C ′ \D)) and Trim(D, C ′ ∩D), there exist two partitions PD and PC ′ \D of {C1 , . . . Ck },
the first of {C1 , . . . Ck } ∩ D ⊊ {C1 , . . . Ck } and the latter of {C1 , . . . Ck } ∩ C ′ \ D ⊊ {C1 , . . . Ck }, where for each
collection A ∈ PD ∪ PC ′ \D , such that S ∩ (∪A′ ∈A A′ ) is not (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in ∪A′ ∈A A′ . Thus, we simply
set A = PD ∪ PC ′ \D .
    The rest of this subsection is devoted to prove Property (2), focusing on the Trim subroutine. We start by
showing that the boundary-size of the clusters only gets smaller as we run Trim.
   Observation 5.1. If Trim decomposes C ′ into D and C ′ \ D in Step (2), then ∂D ≤ ∂C ′ − 0.04λmin and
∂(C \ D) ≤ ∂C ′ − 0.04λmin .
     ′

     Proof. Recall that λmax = 1.2 min. In Step (2) we have that

  w(D, V \ C ′ ) = ∂D − w(D, C ′ \ D) ≥ λ − 0.4λmax ≥ λmin − 0.4λmax = 0.52λmin
               ⇒ ∂(C ′ \ D) = ∂C ′ − w(D, V \ C ′ ) + w(D, C ′ \ D) ≤ ∂C ′ − 0.52λmin + 0.4λmax ≤ ∂C ′ − 0.04λmin
and by symmetry, we also obtain ∂D ≤ ∂C ′ − 0.04λmin . In other words, the boundary-size decreases by at least
0.04λmin on both recursive instances.
    Observation 5.2. If Trim decomposes in Step (3) into D and C ′ \ D, then ∂D ≤ 0.4δλmin and ∂(C ′ \ D) ≤
0.4δλmin .
     Proof. If the algorithm decomposes in Step (3), then since D is (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in C ′ ,

  ∂(C ′ \ D) = ∂C ′ − w(D, V \ C ′ ) + w(D, C ′ \ D)
                                     1
                        ≤ ∂C ′ −        w(D, C ′ \ D) + w(D, C ′ \ D) ≤ ∂C ′ − δw(D, C ′ \ D) ≤ ∂C ′ − 0.4δλmax
                                   1−δ
where we used that w(D, C ′ \ D) ≥ 0.4λmax since we are not in Step (2). By symmetry, ∂D ≤ ∂C ′ − 0.4δλmax ≤
∂C ′ − 0.4δλmin .


                                                                15
     The two observations together show that the boundary-size of the cluster C ′ Trim is called on decreases by
at least min{0.04λmin , 0.4δλmin } on both recursive instances D and C ′ ∩ D.
     We now upper bound the number of clusters by tracking the following three parameters of a cluster C ′ as
Trim is called on it:

   1. The boundary-size ∂C ′ ,

   2. The maximum cut-size within C ′ of a cut in C ′ after the pruning step (Step 1 of Trim), defined by

                                                     c(C ′ ) = max′ ∂G[C ′ ] D
                                                               D∈C
                                                               after
                                                              pruning


      which we define as 0 if C ′ = ∅,

   3. The cluster cardinality |C ′ |.

     We will give an upper bound on the number of clusters parametrized by those three parameters, by casing
on the value of the maximum cut-size within C ′ and a double induction on the other two parameters.
     We claim that the first two parameters are at most 6λmax and λmax respectively. The first parameter is
always at most 6λmax since originally ∂C ≤ 6λmax by assumption, and we have shown in the two observations
above that boundary-size never increases upon recursion. The second parameter is at most λmax originally (since
it is the parameter given to LocalKCut) and it never increases upon recursion since the value ∂G[X] D decreases
as X gets replaced by smaller (inclusion-wise) and smaller clusters upon recursion and C ′ can only lose elements
as one walks down the recursion tree.
     Let f (b, c, d) be the maximum number of clusters in the final decomposition starting from a cluster C ′ with
∂C ′ ≤ b, c(C ′ ) ≤ c and |C ′ | ≤ d. Our goal is to show that
                                                              2                    !
                                                           b              O(b/λmin )
                                       f (b, c, d) ≤ O            (log d)              .
                                                         δλmin

    We recursively bound f (b, c, d) by stepping through each case of the Trim algorithm. To do so, we first make
two observations.
      Observation 5.3. If Trim decomposes in Step (2) into D and C ′ \ D, then the maximum number of clusters
in the final decomposition of each recursive instance is upper bounded by f (b − 0.04λmin , c, d), i.e., we have
f (b, c, d) = 2f (b − 0.04λmin , c, d).
    Proof. This observation follows directly from Observation 5.1 as it shows that ∂D, ∂(C ′ \ D) ≤ ∂C ′ −
0.04λmin ≤ b − 0.04λmin .
    Observation 5.4. If Trim decomposes in Step (3), let D′ = D if |D| = min{|D| , |C ′ \ D| and D′ = C ′ \ D
otherwise. Then we must have |D′ | ≤ |C ′ | /2. Moreover, all sets U ∈ C ′ that cross D′ must also cross C ′ \ D′ .
    Proof. The first statement is trivial. For the second statement, recall that D ∈ C ′ when this step is executed.
Suppose for contradiction that there exists U ∈ C ′ that crosses D′ but not C ′ \ D′ . Note that this implies that
U ̸= D′ and U ̸= C ′ \ D′ . Furthermore it either implies that U ⊊ D′ or C ′ \ D′ ⊊ U . The latter is equivalent
to C ′ \ U ⊊ D′ . This contradicts that D is chosen in Step (3) to minimize min{|D| , |C ′ \ D|}, as U would have
smaller cardinality.
    Observation 5.5. If Trim decomposes in Step (3), we obtain the recursive bound

          f (b, c, d) ≤ max{1,   2f (b − 0.04λmin , c, d) + f (b, c, d/2),   f (b, 0.6c, d) + f (b − 0.4δλmin , c, d)}

    Proof. Suppose that Trim decomposes in Step (3) into D′ and C ′ \ D′ , with D′ defined as in Observation 5.4.
By that observation, we have that |D′ | ≤ |C ′ | /2 and moreover, all sets U ∈ C ′ that cross D′ must also cross C ′ \D′ .
We case on whether c(D′ ) ≥ 0.6c(C ′ ), i.e., whether there exists U ∈ C ′ that crosses D′ with ∂G[D′ ] U ≥ 0.6c(C ′ ).


                                                             16
  1. If such a set U exists, then from ∂G[D′ ] U +∂G[C ′ \D′ ] U ≤ ∂G[C ′ ] U , we obtain ∂G[C ′ \D′ ] U ≤ ∂G[C ′ ] U −∂G[D′ ] U ≤
     c(C ′ ) − 0.6c(C ′ ) ≤ 0.4c(C ′ ). Since U also crosses C ′ \ D′ , it follows that the recursive instance C ′ \ D′
     must go through Step (2). Let U1 , U2 be the decomposition of C ′ \ D′ . Then by Observation 5.1,
     ∂U1 ≤ ∂(C ′ \ D′ ) − 0.04λmin ≤ ∂C ′ − 0.04λmin and ∂U2 ≤ ∂(C ′ \ D′ ) − 0.04λmin ≤ ∂C ′ − 0.04λmin .
     Also by Observation 5.4 |D′ | ≤ |C ′ |/2 ≤ d/2. By induction on clusters D′ , U1 , U2 , the total number of
     clusters at the end is at most
                                              2f (b − 0.04λmin , c, b) + f (b, c, d/2)

  2. Otherwise, we have c(D′ ) < 0.6c(C ′ ) ≤ c/2. By Observation 5.2, we have that ∂(C ′ \ D′ ) ≤ ∂C ′ − 0.4δλmin .
     By induction on D′ and C ′ \ D′ , the total number of clusters at the end is at most

                                                 f (b, 0.6c, d) + f (b − 0.4δλmin , c, d)

Overall, if the algorithm decomposes by Step (3), we obtain the recursive bound

            f (b, c, d) ≤ max{1,    2f (b − 0.04λmin , c, d) + f (b, c, d/2),   f (b, 0.6c, d) + f (b − 0.4δλmin , c, d)}
    Next, we state the base cases for our induction that bounds f (b, c, d).
  1. Since we always have ∂C ′ ≥ λ ≥ λmin , we have the vacuous bound f (b, c, d) = 0 for b < λmin .
  2. If C ′ = ∅, no further recursion is necessary. Thus, f (b, 0, d) = 1.
  3. If |C ′ | = 1, the cluster cannot be cut any further. Thus, f (b, c, 1) = 1.
    We now bound f (b, c, d) using a case analysis depending on the value of the second parameter. As shown
by Observation 5.3 and Observation 5.5, the value of the second parameter never increases. Furthermore, if it
drops to at most 0.4λmax on a set C ′ , then the algorithm always executes Step (2) on subsets of C ′ . Thus, we
can bound this setting first.
    Case 1. If c(C ′ ) ≤ 0.4λmax , then Trim either takes Step (2) or does nothing (in the case C ′ = ∅), so

                              f (b, c, d) ≤ max{1, 2f (b − 0.04λmin , c, d)}      for   c ≤ 0.4λmax

     Every recursive call with first parameter D still has c(D) ≤ 0.4λmin , so all recursive calls made in the subtree
of the call with first parameter C ′ is made in Step (2). We bound f (b, c, d) by bounding the number of recursive
calls of Trim as eachl call increases
                               m       the number of clusters in P by 1. The number of recursive calls in Step (2)
                          b−λmin          b           b
doubles for at most      0.04λmin   ≤ 0.04λ min
                                                ≤ 25 λmin levels of recursion and 2x ≥ 1 for all positive x, so it holds
                    25b/λmin
that f (b, c, d) ≤ 2    .
    Case 2. For c ∈ (0.4λmax , 0.61λmax ], Trim either takes Step (2) or Step (3), or does nothing. Note that by
Observation 5.3 and Observation 5.5, in both cases we have

            f (b, c, d) ≤ max{1,    2f (b − 0.04λmin , c, d) + f (b, c, d/2),   f (b, 0.6c, d) + f (b − 0.4δλmin , c, d)}

    We show the following bound by double induction on b and d.

                                                              b
(5.1)                                     f (b, c, d) ≤            (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin .
                                                          0.4δλmin
     The base case is trivially true if either b < λmin or d = 1. For the induction step, note that 0.6c ≤
0.6 · 0.61λmax ≤ 0.4λmax , so that a call on a set with second parameter 0.6c guarantees that Step (2) is executed
on this call and we can apply the bound from Case 1. Now by Observation 5.5 it holds that:

        f (b, c, d) ≤ max{1
(5.2)                    2f (b − 0.04λmin , c, d) + f (b, c, d/2),
(5.3)                    f (b, 0.6c, d) + f (b − 0.4δλmin , c, d)}


                                                                  17
We apply the induction hypothesis (Equation (5.1)) to both terms of Equation (5.2) and the second term of
Equation (5.3), while we apply the bound of Case 1 to the first term of Equation (5.3):

        f (b, c, d) ≤ max{1,
                                  b                                              b              d
(5.4)                     2·           (2 + 2 log d)25(b−0.04λmin )/λmin +            (2 + 2 log )25b/λmin ,
                              0.4δλmin                                       0.4δλmin           2
                            25b/λmin   b − 0.4δλmin                25b/λmin
(5.5)                     2          +               (2 + 2 log d)          }
                                         0.4δλmin

We develop the exponent in the first term of Equation (5.4), and develop the logarithm in its second term. We
upper bound 2 by 2 + 2 log d in Equation (5.5):

                 ≤ max{1,
                                  b                                    b
                          2·           (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin −1 +           (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin −1 · (2 + 2 log d − 2),
                             0.4δλmin                              0.4δλmin
                                                    b − 0.4δλmin
                          (2 + 2 log d)225b/λmin +                (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin }
                                                      0.4δλmin
                              b
                 =                  (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin .
                          0.4δλmin

                                                     b
where the last equality comes from the fact that 0.4δλ min
                                                           (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin ≥ δλbmin 225b/λmin ≥ 1δ 225 ≥ 1.
   Case 3. For c ∈ [0.61λmax , λmax ], Trim either takes Step (2) or Step (3), or does nothing. Note that by
Observation 5.3 and Observation 5.5, in both cases we have

            f (b, c, d) ≤ max{1,      2f (b − 0.04λmin , c, d) + f (b, c, d/2),        f (b, 0.6c, d) + f (b − 0.4δλmin , c, d)}

    We show the bound
                                                                        2
                                                                  b
(5.6)                                    f (b, c, d) ≤                        (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin
                                                              0.4δλmin

by induction on b and d.
    The base case is trivially true if either b < λmin or d = 1. For the induction step, note that 0.6c ≤ 0.6λmax ,
which implies that a call on a set with second parameter 0.6c guarantees that the bound from Case 2 can be
applied to this call. Now by induction on b ≥ λmin and d > 1, it holds that


         f (b, c, d) ≤ max{1
(5.7)                      2f (b − 0.04λmin , c, d) + f (b, c, d/2),
(5.8)                      f (b, 0.6c, d) + f (b − 0.4δλmin , c, d)}

We apply the induction hypothesis (Equation (5.6)) to both terms of Equation (5.7) and the second term of
Equation (5.8), while we apply the bound of Case 2 to the first term of Equation (5.8):

                  ≤ max{1,
                                              2                                                          2
                                        b                                                            b                     d
(5.9)                      2·                       (2 + 2 log d)25(b−0.04λmin )/λmin +                          (2 + 2 log )25b/λmin ,
                                    0.4δλmin                                                     0.4δλmin                  2
                                                                                       2
                               b                                         b − 0.4δλmin
(5.10)                              (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin +                                  (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin }
                           0.4δλmin                                        0.4δλmin


                                                                     18
We develop the exponent in the first term of Equation (5.9), and develop the logarithm in its second term. We
upper bound b − 0.4δλmin by b in Equation (5.10):

                 ≤ max{1,
                                       2
                                   b
                         2·                  (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin −1
                               0.4δλmin
                                              2
                                        b
                         +                        (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin −1 (2 + 2 log d − 2),
                                    0.4δλmin
                                                                                         
                              b                                b − 0.4δλmin          bλmin
                                    (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin +                                   (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin }
                         0.4δλmin                                 0.4δλmin         0.4δλmin
                                     2
                                b
                 =                        (2 + 2 log d)25b/λmin .
                            0.4δλmin

    Since for the set C on which the algorithm was run we know that b ≤ 6λmax , c ≤ λmax , d ≤ |C| and
λmax ≤ 1.2λmin , we obtain the desired bound O(δ −2 logO(1) |C|) on the number of clusters, which concludes the
proof of Property (2).
    5.2    Running Time analysis
    Lemma 5.3. The running time of Algorithm 5.1 is Õ(δ −2 β 2 (νλmax )O(β) ).
      Proof. Step (1) of Algorithm 5.1 makes O(λmax ) many requests to LocalKCut. By Theorem 4.1, this takes
Õ(β 2 (νλmax )O(β) ) time. In particular, we know that we have at most Õ(β 2 (νλmax )O(β) ) many cuts in C in Step (2)
of Algorithm 5.1, each of volume ν.
      It remains to bound the time for Step (3) of Algorithm 5.1. Since we proved in the correctness proof that the
algorithm added at most O(δ −2 logO(1) |C|) many clusters to P at termination, the recursion tree is binary and
each recursive call increases the number of clusters in P by 1, we know that Trim is run at most O(δ −2 logO(1) |C|)
times. It thus suffices to show that a run of Trim takes Õ(β 2 (νλmax )O(β) ) time.
      In Step (1), for every cut in C ′ , it takes O(ν) time to check whether a cut is boundary sparse by Theorem 10.1,
and thus Õ(β 2 (νλmax )O(β) ) to check all cuts. Similarly, in Step (2), it takes O(ν) time for each cut to decide
if a cut satisfies the if condition, Õ(β 2 (νλmax )O(β) ) overall. Removing C ′ and adding D and C ′ \ D takes O(ν)
time, as this is encoded by simply changing the labels of the boundary edges to inter-cluster. Creating C ′ ∩ D
and C ′ ∩ (C ′ \ D) takes Õ(β 2 (νλmax )O(β) ) time, as there are Õ(β 2 (νλmax )O(β) ) cuts of volume ν each to intersect
with another set.
      Similarly, in Step (3), it takes O(ν) time for each cut to find its cardinality and the one of its complement,
thus Õ(β 2 (νλmax )O(β) ) overall to find the minimum. Removing C ′ and adding D and C ′ \ D takes O(ν) time,
as this is encoded by simply changing the labels of the boundary edges to inter-cluster. Creating C ′ ∩ D and
C ′ ∩ (C ′ \ D) takes Õ(β 2 (νλmax )O(β) ) time, as there are Õ(β 2 (νλmax )O(β) ) cuts of volume ν each to intersect with
another set.
    6 The Cluster Decomposition and the Cluster Hierarchy In this section, we lay out the main
definitions and data structures that we maintain throughout our algorithm. The central object we maintain is
the cluster hierarchy, a hierarchy of cluster decompositions.
                                                                                              3/4−c
    Choice of parameter values. We remind the reader that we have c > 0, δ = 2O(log                  n)
                                                                                                        ≤ 0.04. We set
                 3/4−c                                          1/2            ′           3/4                1/2
          Θ(log        n)                            h   −O(log     n)        ϕ     −Θ(log     n)
λmin = 2                  and λmax ≤ 1.2λmin , H = 38 = 2              , ϕ = 38h = 2              , ρ = 2Θ(log n) and
α = poly1log n .
    6.1    Cluster Decomposition
    Definition 6.1 (Pre-Cluster Decomposition). Let α, ϕ, δ, H ∈ R, λmax , ∈ N. An (α, ϕ, λmax , H, δ)- pre-
cluster decomposition of a graph G is a partition {Cj }j∈[ℓ] of the vertex set of G, for some ℓ ∈ N+ . Moreover,
that partition satisfies, for each j ∈ [ℓ]:
   i. Cj is connected.
  ii. Cj is contained in an (α, ϕ′ = ϕH)-boundary linked expander.


                                                             19
 iii. Cj satisfies either:
      (a) it contains no (1 − δ)-boundary sparse cut S with ∂G (S) ≤ λmax and vol(S) ≤ λmax
                                                                                        ϕ , or
      (b) it satisfies ∂Cj ≤ 6λmax .
    Definition 6.2 (Cluster Decomposition). Let α, ϕ, δ ∈ R, λmax , λmin ∈ N. An (α, ϕ, λmax , H, δ)-cluster
decomposition of a graph G is a partition {Cj }j∈[ℓ] of the vertex set of G, for some ℓ ∈ N+ , obtained from
an (α, ϕ, λmax , H, δ)-pre-cluster decomposition, where each cluster Cj that does not satisfy Condition iii.a is
fragmented using Algorithm 5.1 (see Theorem 5.1).
As α, ϕ, λmax , H and δ do not change, we simply use cluster decomposition to denote an (α, ϕ, λmax , H, δ)-cluster
decomposition in the following.
    The main point of the cluster decomposition is that it can approximate most minimum proper cuts, that is,
in most cases, if S is a minimum proper cut in G of cut-size λ with λmin ≤ λ ≤ λmax , then we can uncross S by
a cut S ′ that consists of the union of some clusters, and that is an approximate minimum proper cut.
    Let us now talk about the corner cases. In fact, given a cluster decomposition we can always uncross a cut S
into a set S ′ . However, S ′ is not guaranteed to be a proper cut, that is, we could have ∂S ′ = 0. In this case, we
show S is a local cut in a mirror cluster, defined next.
    Definition 6.3. A local cut is a cut of volume at most 4 λmax
                                                              ϕ .

    Local cuts are central in our analysis, as they are easier to find and maintain than non-local cuts. To deal
with the local cuts, we introduce mirror clusters, one for each cluster.
    Definition 6.4 (Mirror Clusters, Graphs and Cuts). The mirror cluster C ′ of a cluster C in graph G is the
graph G/(V \ C), that is, the graph where all nodes outside of C have been contracted into one node.
    A mirror graph GP1 of G according to partition P1 is the graph that is the collection of all mirror clusters of
the clusters in P1 .
    A mirror cut Sv of a vertex v ∈ V of a graph G, given a partition P1 , a volume ν and a maximum cut value
λmax , is defined as follows. Let Cv ∈ P1 be the cluster of G such that v ∈ Cv . Then Sv is a proper cut of smallest
cut-value among proper local cuts S ⊊ Cv of cut-value at most λmax and that contain v. Note that many cuts can
be mirror cuts of v, and that such a cut may also not exist.
    Mirror clusters have the nice property that all local cuts can be found by running LocalKCut on them. We
can thus state the main property of a cluster decomposition:
    Proposition 6.5 (Cluster Decomposition Uncrossing). Let {Cj }j∈[ℓ] be an (α, ϕ, λmax , H, δ)-cluster decom-
position of a graph G. If λmin ≤ λ ≤ λmax , then every minimum proper cut S of value λ can be (1 + 2δ)-
approximated by a cut S ′ , that can be one of two cases:
  1. S ′ is a cut of G and S ′ crosses no cluster.
  2. There exists a cluster Cj such that S ′ is a local cut in the mirror cluster of Cj .
We prove this proposition in the rest of this section.
    We let {Cj }j∈[ℓ] be a cluster decomposition as defined in Theorem 6.5, and first show that any minimum cut
can cross at most two clusters using the following lemmata.
    Lemma 6.6. Let {Cj }j∈[ℓ] be an (α, ϕ, λmax , H, δ)-cluster decomposition of a graph G with α > ϕ. Let S be
                                                                                         vol(Cj )
a cut of G, and let Cj be a cluster that S crosses. Let X equal S ∩ Cj if vol(S ∩ Cj ) ≤    2     , and let X equal
                                           ∂S
Cj \ S otherwise. We have that vol(X) ≤ ϕ .
    In particular, if S is a minimum proper cut of cut-size at most λmax , we have that vol(X) ≤ λmax ϕ .

    Proof. As Cj is a cluster in the expander decomposition, Cj is contained (or equal to) a cluster in the pre-
cluster decomposition, which itself is contained in an (α, ϕ′ )-boundary linked expander as per Condition ii. of
                                                                                                          α
Definition 6.1. Let C be this expander. All volumes in this proof are the volumes of the sets in G[C] ϕ′ , which
                                                         α
are an upper bound of the volumes in G. We use G[C] ϕ′ as this is the graph on which we have the guarantee of
being a ϕ-expander as per Theorem 2.5.
                                                                                   α
    Let X ′ = S ∩ C if vol(S ∩ C) ≤ vol(C)
                                       2   , and X ′ = C \ S otherwise. Since G[C] ϕ′ is a ϕ-expander, we have that
vol(X ′ ) ≤ w(X,C\X)
                ϕ     ≤ ∂S                     ′         ∂S
                         ϕ . Therefore, vol(X ∩ Cj ) ≤ ϕ . Recall that vol(X) = min{vol(S ∩ Cj ), vol(Cj \ S)}.



                                                         20
If X ′ = S ∩ C then vol(X) ≤ vol(S ∩ Cj ) ≤ vol(S ∩ C) = vol(X ′ ) ≤                           ∂S
                                                                                                ϕ .   If X ′ = C \ S then
vol(X) ≤ vol(Cj \ S) ≤ vol(C \ S) = vol(X ′ ) ≤ ∂S
                                                 ϕ . Thus, the result follows.

    For the rest of this paper, we will thus simply call our (α, ϕ′ )-boundary linked expanders as ϕ-expanders.
    Corollary 6.7. Let P1 be a pre-cluster decomposition, and let Cj be a cluster in that decomposition. Let
S ⊆ Cj be a proper cut of G of cut-size Λ. Then there exists in the mirror cluster of Cj a cut of cut-size ∂S, of
volume at most 3 Λ
                 ϕ (in G).

    Proof. By Lemma 6.6, we have that either S or Cj \S has volume at most Λ                                    Λ
                                                                                 ϕ . In the case where vol(S) ≤ ϕ , the
claim is trivial. In the case where vol(Cj \S) ≤ Λϕ , note that in the mirror cluster, we have that X = (Cj \S)∪{v}
has boundary-size equal to ∂S = Λ, where v is the vertex representing the contracted G \ Cj . It remains to show
that vol(X) ≤ 3 Λ                                                Λ
                   ϕ . Note that vol(v) ≤ vol(Cj \ S) + ∂S ≤ 2 ϕ , and thus vol(X) ≤ vol(v) + vol(Cj \ S) ≤ 3 ϕ .
                                                                                                                   Λ


    Lemma 6.8. Let P1 be an (α, ϕ, λmax , H, δ)-pre cluster decomposition, and P2 be its associated cluster
decomposition. Let f : P2 7→ P1 be the mapping that maps each cluster C ∈ P2 to the cluster it is contained in
in P1 . Let S be a minimum proper cut S of cut-size at most λmax . Let C1′ , . . . , Ck′ ∈ P2 be the clusters that S
crosses. Then |{f (C1′ ), . . . , f (Ck′ )}| ≤ 2.
    Proof. Recall that δ ≤ 31 . Assume by contradiction that |{f (C1′ ), . . . , f (Ck′ )}| ≥ 3, and wlog assume the
clusters C1 , C2 and C3 belong to {f (C1′ ), . . . , f (Ck′ )}. Since S is a minimum proper cut, we know that w(S, V \S) ≤
λmax . As the clusters are vertex disjoint, w(S ∩ C1 , C1 \ S) + w(S ∩ C2 , C2 \ S) + w(S ∩ C3 , C3 \ S) ≤ w(S, V \ S)
                                                                          \S)
and thus there exists a Ci such that w(S ∩ Ci , Ci \ S) ≤ w(S,V         3     .
    We have two cases. Either Ci satisfies Condition iii.a of Definition 6.1, which means Ci contains no (1 − δ)-
boundary sparse cut of volume at most λmax      ϕ     and of cut-size at most λmax , or it satisfies Condition iii.b.
   1. In the first case, since Ci contains no (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cuts of cut-size at most λmax and of volume
      at most λmax
                 ϕ , and as by Lemma 6.6, S ∩ Ci has volume at most
                                                                         λmax
                                                                           ϕ , we have that S ∩ Ci is not (1 − δ)-
      boundary-sparse:
                w(S, V \ S)
                            ≥ w(S ∩ Ci , Ci \ S) ≥ (1 − δ) min{w(S ∩ Ci , V \ Ci ), w(V \ (S ∩ Ci ), V \ Ci )}
                     3
                                                   \S)         \S)
      And hence either w(S ∩ Ci , V \ Ci ) ≤ w(S,V
                                              3(1−δ)   ≤ w(S,V
                                                             2     and S ∩ Ci is a cut of cut-size at most
                                                       \S)         \S)
      w(S ∩ Ci , Ci \ S) + w(S ∩ Ci , V \ Ci ) ≤ w(S,V
                                                     3     + w(S,V
                                                                 2     , a contradiction to S being a minimum proper
      cut (remember that Ci is connected by definition of a pre-cluster decomposition and thus S ∩ Ci is a proper
                                          \S)   w(S,V \S)                                                \S)         \S)
      cut), or w(Ci \ S, V \ Ci ) ≤ w(S,V
                                     3(1−δ) ≤       2      and Ci \ S is a cut of cut-size at most w(S,V
                                                                                                       3     + w(S,V
                                                                                                                   2     ,
      also a contradiction to S being a minimum proper cut.
   2. If Ci satisfies Condition iii.b, then let {A1 , . . . , Aκ } ⊊ P2 be the partition of Ci obtained by fragmenting
      Ci , and let Aj ∈ {C1′ , . . . , Ck′ } ∩ {A1 , . . . , Aκ } be one of the fragmented clusters that S crosses. Then S ∩ Aj
      is a proper cut. By Theorem 5.1, there is a subset of indices Q ⊆ [κ] such that A = ∪q∈Q Aq satisfies that
      S ∩ A is not (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in A. Similarly to the first case, we then have:
       w(S, V \ S)
                   ≥ w(S ∩ Ci , Ci \ S) ≥ w(S ∩ A, A \ S) ≥ (1 − δ) min{w(S ∩ A, V \ A), w(V \ (S ∩ A), V \ A)}
            3
                                             w(S,V \S)             \S)
      And hence either w(S ∩ A, V \ A) ≤      3(1−δ)    ≤ w(S,V  2     and S ∩ A is a cut of cut-size at most
                                          w(S,V \S)    w(S,V \S)
      w(S ∩ A, A \ S) + w(S ∩ A, V \ A) ≤     3     +      2     , a contradiction to S being a minimum proper
      cut (S ∩ A must be a proper cut of A as otherwise it cannot be non (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse in A), or
                              \S)    w(S,V \S)                                              \S)         \S)
      w(A \ S, V \ A) ≤ w(S,V
                          3(1−δ) ≤       2     and A \ S is a cut of cut-size at most w(S,V
                                                                                          3     + w(S,V
                                                                                                      2     , also a
      contradiction to S being a minimum proper cut.

     Corollary 6.9. Let P1 be an (α, ϕ, λmax , H, δ)-pre-cluster decomposition, and P2 be its associated cluster
decomposition. Let f : P2 7→ P1 be the mapping that maps each cluster C ∈ P2 to the cluster that contains it in
P1 . Let S be a minimum proper cut S of cut-size at most λmax . Let C1′ , . . . , Ck′ ∈ P2 be the clusters S crosses, if
any. We have 3 cases:


                                                              21
 (1) |{f (C1′ ), . . . , f (Ck′ )}| = 0.
 (2) |{f (C1′ ), . . . , f (Ck′ )}| = 1
 (3) |{f (C1′ ), . . . , f (Ck′ )}| = 2.

     If we are in Case (1) of Corollary 6.9, then we trivially are in Case 1. of Theorem 6.5 by simply setting
S ′ = S, as {f (C1′ ), . . . , f (Ck′ )} being empty can only mean that S crosses no cluster. If on the other hand we are
in either case (2) or (3), we need to uncross S to get S ′ . Next we show that in those two cases there exists a cut
S ′ of cut cut-size at most (1 + 2δ)λ that crosses no cluster. The proofs exploit the definition of (1 − δ)-boundary
sparseness and Lemma 6.6.
    Lemma 6.10. If we are in Case (2) of Corollary 6.9, then there exists a cut S ′ that is a (1+2δ)-approximation
of S, and satisfies either:

   i. volG/(V \C1 ) (S ′ ) ≤ 4λmax , where C1 is a cluster of P1 , and S ′ is a cut of G/(V \ C1 ), or
  ii. S ′ ⊊ V crosses no cluster and S ′ is a cut of G.

    Proof. Wlog, assume that S is connected. Also, wlog, let C1 be the unique element of {f (C1′ ), . . . , f (Ck′ )}.
We have two cases. Either C1 satisfies Condition iii.a, which means C1 contains no (1 − δ)-boundary sparse cut
of volume at most λmax
                    ϕ  and of cut-size at most λmax , or it satisfies Condition iii.b.

   1. Since C1 contains no (1 − δ)-boundary sparse cut of volume at most λmax  ϕ   and of cut-size at most λmax , and
                                     λmax
      S ∩ C1 has volume at most ϕ by Lemma 6.6, we have that w(S ∩ C1 , C1 \ S) ≥ (1 − δ) min{w(C1 ∩ S, V \
      C1 ), w(C1 \ S, V \ C1 )}. Let X be the set among C1 ∩ S, C1 \ S that satisfies w(X, V \ C1 ) = min{w(C1 ∩
      S, V \ C1 ), w(C1 \ S, V \ C1 )}. Note that w(X, V \ C1 ) ≤ w(S ∩ C1 , C1 \ S)/(1 − δ) = w(X, C1 \ X)/(1 − δ),
      which implies that w(X, V \ C1 ) − w(X, C1 \ X) ≤ δ · w(X, V \ C1 ) ≤ (δ/(1 − δ))w(S ∩ C1 , C1 \ S) ≤
      (3δ/2) · w(S ∩ C1 , C1 \ S).
      Let’s now temporarily set S ′ = S ∪ X if X ̸⊂ S, or S ′ = S \ X otherwise, i.e., we “uncross” S. Then we have
      that w(S ′ , V \ S ′ ) ≤ w(S, V \ S) − w(X, C1 \ X) + w(X, V \ C1 ) ≤ w(S, V \ S) + 3δ/2 · w(S ∩ C1 , C1 \ S) ≤
      (1 + 3δ/2)w(S, V \ S).
      If S ′ is a proper cut (∂S ′ ̸= 0), we are in Case ii.
      If ∂S ′ = 0, let K be the connected component of G that contains S. Then either S = X (and S ′ = ∅) or
      S = K \ X (and S ′ = K). We conclude by Corollary 6.7 that we are in Case i..

   2. If C1 satisfies Condition iii.b, then let {A1 , . . . , Aκ } ⊊ P2 be the partition of Ci obtained by fragmenting
      Ci , and let Aj ∈ {C1′ , . . . , Ck′ } ∩ {A1 , . . . , Aκ } be one of the fragmented clusters that S crosses. Then S ∩ Aj
      is a proper cut. By Theorem 5.1, there is a subset of indices Q ⊆ [κ] such that A = ∪q∈Q Aq satisfies that
      S ∩ A is not (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in A.
      Similarly to the first case, we have that w(S ∩ A, A \ S) ≥ (1 − δ) min{w(A ∩ S, V \ A), w(A \ S, V \ A)}. Let
      X be the set among A∩S, A\S that satisfies w(X, V \A) = min{w(A∩S, V \A), w(A\S, V \A)}. Note that
      w(X, V \A) ≤ w(S ∩A, A\S)/(1−δ) = w(X, A\X)/(1−δ), which implies that w(X, V \A)−w(X, A\X) ≤
      δ · w(X, V \ A) ≤ (δ/(1 − δ))w(S ∩ A, A \ S) ≤ (3δ/2) · w(S ∩ A, A \ S).
      Let’s now temporarily set S ′ = S ∪ X if X ̸⊂ S, or S ′ = S \ X otherwise, i.e., we “uncross” S. Then we
      have that w(S ′ , V \ S ′ ) ≤ w(S, V \ S) − w(X, A \ X) + w(X, V \ A) ≤ w(S, V \ S) + 3δ/2 · w(S ∩ A, A \ S) ≤
      (1 + 3δ/2)w(S, V \ S).
      If S ′ is a proper cut (∂S ′ ̸= 0), we are in Case ii.
      If ∂S ′ = 0, let K be the connected component of G that contains S. Then either S = X (and S ′ = ∅) or
      S = K \ X (and S ′ = K).
      We conclude by Corollary 6.7 that we are in Case i..

   Lemma 6.11. If we are in Case 3 of Corollary 6.9, then there exists a cut S ′ of either G/(V \C1 ) or G/(V \C2 )
({C1 , C2 } = {f (C1′ ), . . . , f (Ck′ )}) that is a (1 + 34 δ)-approximation of S, and satisfies volG/(V \Ci ) (S ′ ) ≤ 4λmax
(where j ∈ {1, 2} depending on where S ′ exists).


                                                               22
    Proof. Let λ = w(S, V \ S). We have that w(C1 ∩ S, C1 \ S) + w(C2 ∩ S, C2 \ S) ≤ w(S, V \ S) = λ. Assume
thus wlog that w(C1 ∩ S, C1 \ S) ≤ λ2 .
    Again, we have two cases:
  1. If C1 satisfies Condition iii.a, it contains no (1 − δ)-boundary sparse cuts of volume at most λmax ϕ   of
     cut-size at most λmax , and thus we have that S ∩ C1 is not (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in C1 . Thus
     w(S ∩ C1 , C1 \ S) ≥ (1 − δ) min{w(C1 ∩ S, V \ C1 ), w(C1 \ S, V \ C1 )}. Let X be the set among
     C1 ∩ S, C1 \ S that satisfies w(X, V \ C1 ) = min{w(C1 ∩ S, V \ C1 ), w(C1 \ S, V \ C1 )}. It follows
     that w(X, C1 \ X) = w(S ∩ C1 , C1 \ S) ≥ (1 − δ)w(X, V \ C1 ). We thus have that w(X, V \ X) =
                                                                      2−δ              δ
     w(X, V \ C1 ) + w(X, C1 \ X) ≤ ((1/(1 − δ) + 1)w(X, C1 \ X) ≤ ( 2(1−δ) )λ = (1 + 2−2δ )λ ≤ (1 + 3δ/4)λ.
     We conclude by Corollary 6.7.
  2. If C1 satisfies Condition iii.b, then let {A1 , . . . , Aκ } ⊊ P2 be the partition of C1 obtained by fragmenting
     C1 , and let Aj ∈ {C1′ , . . . , Ck′ } ∩ {A1 , . . . , Aκ } be one of the fragmented clusters that S crosses. Then S ∩ Aj
     is a proper cut. By Theorem 5.1, there is a subset of indices Q ⊆ [κ] such that A = ∪q∈Q Aq satisfies that
     S ∩ A is not (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in A, and Aj ⊆ A.
     Similarly to the first case, we have that S ∩ A is not (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in A. Thus w(S ∩ A, A \ S) ≥
     (1−δ) min{w(A∩S, V \A), w(A\S, V \A)}. Let X be the set among A∩S, A\S that satisfies w(X, V \A) =
     min{w(A ∩ S, V \ A), w(A \ S, V \ A)}. It follows that w(X, A \ X) = w(S ∩ A, A \ S) ≥ (1 − δ)w(X, V \ A).
                                                                                                      2−δ
     We thus have that w(X, V \ X) = w(X, V \ A) + w(X, A \ X) ≤ ((1/(1 − δ) + 1)w(X, A \ X) ≤ ( 2(1−δ)     )λ =
            δ
     (1 + 2−2δ )λ ≤ (1 + 3δ/4)λ. We conclude by Corollary 6.7 that we are in Case i..
     Note that both lemmata show the existence of a proper cut S ′ , i.e., S ′ is required to be both nonempty and
different from V . This concludes the proof of Theorem 6.5.
    6.2 Cluster Hierarchy The (α, ϕ, λmax , H, δ)-cluster decomposition and the mirror clusters are the
building blocks of the cluster hierarchy, defined as follows:
     Definition 6.12 (Cluster Hierarchy). Let ℏ be a positive integer. An h-cluster hierarchy is a set of graphs
G1 , . . . , Gℏ with G1 = G with vol(Gℏ ) ≤ λmax
                                             ϕ , together with ℏ many (α, ϕ, λmax , H, δ)-cluster decompositions,
one for each Gj , j ∈ [ℏ], and a mirror cluster for each cluster of the pre-cluster decomposition of each graph.
Moreover, each Gj , j > 1 is obtained from Gj−1 by contracting each cluster in the cluster decomposition.
    The main point of the ℏ-cluster hierarchy is to ensure that we only have to maintain local cuts and their
cut-sizes, in other words, to transform any minimum cut into a local cut, if not on this level of the hierarchy then
further down in the hierarchy.
    We will use the ℏ-cluster hierarchy as follows: Let S be a minimum proper cut of cut-size in [λmin , λmax ].
Assume for the moment, that we have access to all local cuts. By Theorem 6.5 there exists in G1 an approximate
cut S1′ that is either local or that crosses no cluster. In the former case, we are done. In the latter, S1′ induces a
cut in G2 . Again by Theorem 6.5 there exists in G2 an approximation S2′ of S1′ that is either local or that crosses
no cluster. Again, if it is local, we are done. If it is not, then we move on to G3 . Following this logic, we arrive
the following proposition:
     Proposition 6.13. Let ℏ be a positive integer. In an ℏ-cluster hierarchy of G, there exists a local cut S ′ in
a mirror cluster C of the pre-cluster decomposition of a collapsed graph Gj or in the final collapsed graph, that is
a (1 + 2δ)ℏ approximation of the minimum proper cut S. Moreover, there exists a corresponding cut S in G such
that S and S ′ have the same cut-size. If, in addition, δ < 2∂S
                                                              1
                                                                , then ∂S = ∂S ′ , that is, S ′ is a minumum proper
cut.
     Proof. It suffices to apply Theorem 6.5 iteratively starting at G until we end up in Case 2. of that proposition.
If we never arrive in Case 2, it follows that the recursion reaches the graph Gℏ , which has volume λmaxϕ . Thus, all
its cuts are local. Once a local cut is found, to find the corresponding cut in G, since all graphs (including mirror
clusters) in the hierarchy are contractions of graphs from the level above, it suffices to uncontract the graph.
Uncontracting all the way to the top gives the result. The approximation value comes from the fact that on each
level, the cut-size of the cut increases by a factor of at most (1 + 2δ).
The goal of further sections will thus be to compute and maintain such a cluster hierarchy.


                                                             23
    7 The Mirror Cuts Data Structure In this section, we present the Mirror Cuts Data Structure, which
maintains the mirror graph and mirror cuts under a sequence of batch edge updates. A batch update is an update
that includes many edge insertions and deletions at once.
    It is necessary to consider batch updates, as the data structure is designed to handle the refinement of clusters,
that is, replacing a cluster C by S ⊊ C and C \ S. Typically, this is done by deleting all of the edges between
S and C \ S. Doing so one by one proves to not work, as our data structure relies on the LocalKCut algorithm,
which is only guaranteed to be correct if at every request, one can ensure that the minimum cut of the cluster is
large enough. However, by deleting the edges one by one, the two clusters are only considered two different ones
by the LocalKCut when they are not connected anymore, and thus C is still a cluster, with minimum cut exactly
1 just before the deletion of the last edge. This breaks our data structure.
    Hence, we introduce batch updates, so all of the edge deletions can be forwarded to the LocaKCut algorithm
before any request to it is made.
    The results in this section rely on the results of Section 4, and we assume that the data structure we present in
Section 10 supports our cluster decomposition. First, we remind the reader about mirror clusters, mirror graphs
and mirror cuts:
    Definition 7.1 (Mirror Clusters, Graphs and Cuts). The mirror cluster C ′ of a cluster C in graph G is the
graph G/(V \ C), that is, the graph where all nodes outside of C have been contracted into one node.
    A mirror graph GP1 of G according to partition P1 is the graph that is the collection of all mirror clusters of
the clusters in P1 .
    A mirror cut Sv of a vertex v ∈ V of a graph G, given a partition P1 , a volume ν and a maximum cut value
λmax , is defined as follows. Let Cv ∈ P1 be the cluster of G such that v ∈ Cv . Then Sv is a proper cut of smallest
cut-value among proper local cuts S ⊊ Cv of cut-value at most λmax and that contain v. Note that many cuts can
be mirror cuts of v, and that such a cut may also not exist.
    Theorem 7.2 (Mirror Cuts). Let GP1 = (V, E) be a fully-dynamic mirror graph under batch updates
(updates with up to m many insertions or deletions) of a graph G and partition P1 and λmax , ν, β ∈ N+ satisfying
β ≤ λmax ≤ ν, and no mirror cluster C ′ ⊆ GP1 strictly contains a cut S with ∂C ′ S ≤ λmax  β .
    There exists a data structure that maintains, for each vertex v ∈ V , one of its mirror cuts Sv . It can return
in constant time the value of the smallest mirror cut Svmin , a pointer to vmin and in |Svmin | pointers to the vertices
of Svmin .
    The algorithm runs in Õ((m + n)β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) preprocessing time, Õ(β 4 (λmax ν)O(β) ) update time per edge
update, Õ(K · β 4 (λmax ν)O(β) ) update time for an update with K edge updates, and O(1) request time.
    The idea is as follows. We run an instance of LocalKCut (Theorem 4.1) on GP1 , with parameters λmax , ν, β,
updating it as updates arrive. As no mirror cluster C ′ ⊆ GP1 strictly contains a cut S with ∂C ′ S ≤ λmax
                                                                                                        β , any
request on a node v ∈ Cv′ yields all cuts S ⊊ Cv′ with vol(S) ≤ ν, ∂Cv′ S ≤ λmax and v ∈ S.
    When an edge is deleted, what can happen is that this edge used to contribute to a cut that was too large to
be the only mirror cut of a node v, and thus was not necessarily the one maintained by the data structure, but it
now needs to be one. This cut is easily found by formulating a request on both endpoints of that edge, and then
can be stored at any vertex it includes for which it is a mirror cut.
    When an edge is inserted, it might contribute to a cut that was a mirror cut, and thus maintained, but is
not anymore after the insertion. In fact, there might be many such cuts, but we show below that there cannot
be too many of them. We must then formulate a request to LocalKCut from all those vertices whose maintained
cut has changed due to that edge insertion.
    Finally, we deal with set deletions by simply deleting all the edges in the set in a batch update.
    7.1   Data Structure and Algorithm Description We store these cuts using the following data structure:
   • For each mirror cut, we keep pointers to all the vertices for which it is the mirror cut. We also keep pointers
     to all the vertices it contains. We moreover keep the cut-size of the cut. We delete the cut once it is not a
     mirror cut anymore, as described in Algorithm 7.1.
   • For each vertex in a cluster C we keep a pointer to one of its mirror cuts and its corresponding cut-size.
     We also keep pointers to all the mirror cuts of other vertices that it is contained in.
   • We also maintain a heap of the mirror cuts, prioritized by their cut-sizes.


                                                          24
     Algorithm 7.1 (Deleting a mirror cut). Whenever the mirror cut of a node u changes from S to S ′ , we
remove u from the list of nodes stored at S, for which S is the mirror cut. We check if this list becomes empty. If
it is the case, we delete all pointers from and to the nodes it contains and then delete the mirror cut and update
the heap accordingly.
    Lemma 7.3. Algorithm 7.1 takes O(ν) time as a mirror cuts has volume O(ν).
The high-level description of the Mirror Cuts Data Structure is as follows: During preprocessing of this data
structure, we build this data structure. To process an edge insertion, we note that the edge insertion might
increase the cut-size of the mirror cuts it is incident to. We must therefore request LocalKCut on all the vertices
whose stored cut has been affected by this insertion, as the stored cut might not be the mirror cut anymore. Note
that we can ensure that not many such nodes exist. To process an edge deletion, we note that the deletion can
decrease the cut-size of a cut that was not a mirror cut before the deletion, but becomes one after this deletion.
We can find all such cuts by running LocalKCut from the endpoints of the deleted edge.
    We next give the details of this algorithm.
    Algorithm 7.2 (Mirror Cuts Data Structure).
Input:
  1. A mirror graph GP1 of graph G, where edges can be inserted and deleted in batches
  2. A maximum cut value λmax
  3. A maximum volume value ν
  4. An approximation ratio β
Data Structure:
  1. For every node, we maintain its Mirror Cut and the corresponding value.
  2. For every Mirror Cut, we maintain pointers from and to the vertices it contains in a sorted list.
  3. A LocalKCut data structure for GP1 with parameters λmax , ν, β
  4. A heap on the vertices prioritized by the cut-size of the associated mirror cut
Preprocessing:
  1. Instantiate the LocalKCut data structure
  2. Process every node using Algorithm 7.3.
  3. Instantiate the heap
Handling updates:
  1. Update the LocalKCut data structure.
  2. For every insertion of an edge (u, v):
         (a) Update the value of all maintained mirror cuts that contain exactly one of its endpoints u or v. Update
             the heap accordingly.
         (b) Mark for processing all the nodes u whose maintained mirror cut has seen its value increase because of
             the update.
  3. For every deletion of an edge (u, v):
         (a) Update the value of all maintained mirror cuts that contain either u or v but not both. Update the heap
             accordingly.
         (b) Mark for processing the endpoints of the deleted edge.


                                                          25
  4. Call Algorithm 7.3 for all the nodes marked for processing.

    Algorithm 7.3 (Processing). Input: a vertex v.

  1. Issue a LocalKCut query for v, which returns a set of cuts S.

  2. For every cut S ∈ S with ∂GP1 S ̸= 0, for every u ∈ S, if S is a smaller cut than the one maintained for u:

      (a) Build a data structure for S if S was no mirror cut before the update.
      (b) Store S as mirror cut of u.
      (c) Remove the old mirror cut of u

    We first show the correctness of the above algorithm and then analyze its running time.
    7.2   Correctness
    Lemma 7.4. The Mirror Cuts Data Structure (Algorithm 7.2) maintains a mirror cut of G for every vertex
v ∈ G according to partition P1 .
    Proof. We will prove this by induction on the number t of batch updates. The base case is clear, as after
preprocessing, after all nodes are processed, the minimum local cut around each node is found, as guaranteed
by Theorem 4.1 and then stored. For the induction step, assume that after update t, for t ≥ 0, we have that all
cuts stored are mirror cuts.
    Let u be a node and let S be its maintained mirror cut after the batch of updates t. Note that S could still be
a mirror cut of u at time t + 1, in which case there is nothing to do, and no processing can change S into another
cut. Indeed, Algorithm 7.3 will only overwrite it if it finds a smaller local cut, which is impossible. Assume next
that there exists a local cut S ′ such that u ∈ S ′ and ∂t+1 S ′ < ∂t+1 S. By definition, we have that ∂t S ≤ ∂t S ′ .
Then either we have that the cut value of S has increased, or the one of S ′ has decreased. In the first case, an
edge insertion (u, v) with u ∈ S ′ , v ∈
                                       / S ′ forces the processing of u. S ′ is then found by processing u, as S ′ has
small volume and thus is found by the request to LocalKCut. In the second case, an edge deletion (u, v) with
u ∈ S′, v ∈/ S ′ forces the processing of u, which finds S ′ . Both processing steps will update the cut associated
with u.
    7.3   Running time analysis
    Lemma 7.5. Processing a vertex with Algorithm 7.3 takes Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time.
     Proof. Each time we process a node, we make a request to LocalKCut. By Theorem 4.1, each request takes
Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time. It outputs at most Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) many cuts, and each cut can update at most ν
many vertices, which in turn could each enforce the deletion of one maintained cut, which takes O(ν) time by
Lemma 7.3. Hence, the deletions of maintained cuts can take time Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ).
     Moreover, each cut found by LocalKCut might need to be stored. In the worst case, each cut needs to be
created in the Mirror Cuts data structure, and be linked to all its vertices, this takes time O(ν). Overall, the
running time is Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ).
    Corollary 7.6. Preprocessing of the Mirror Cuts Data Structure (Algorithm 7.2) on a mirror graph GP1
with m edges and n nodes takes Õ((m + n)β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time.
    Proof. By Theorem 4.1, Step 1 of preprocessing takes Õ(mβ 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time. By Lemma 7.5, Step 2 takes
Õ(nβ 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time. Step 3 takes Õ(n) time.
    Corollary 7.7. Handling an edge deletion in Steps 3 and 4 in the Mirror Cuts Data Structure (Algo-
rithm 7.2) takes Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time.
     Proof. Let e = (u, v) be a deleted edge. We start by arguing that there are not many mirror cuts that need
to be updated in Step 3a. Consider a mirror cut S containing node u, that is, there exists a node u′ such that S
is the mirror cut of u′ , and u ∈ S. All of these cuts are found by a request on node u to LocalKCut, which takes
Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time, and thus there are at most Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) such cuts. Hence, deleting an edge can
affect at most Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) many cuts whose cut-size have to be updated. Finding those cuts in the data
structure is trivial as one can access all cuts including u or v from the endpoints of the deleted edge and check


                                                         26
in Õ(1) whether they include both or only one vertex by looking at the sorted list of nodes in each cut, and thus
Step 3a takes Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time.
     For Step 3b, the deleted edge marks two vertices for processing in Step 4. Processing both endpoints of the
deleted edge takes Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time by Lemma 7.5, hence the result follows.
    Corollary 7.8. Handling an edge insertion in Steps 2 and 4 in the Mirror Cuts Data Structure (Algo-
rithm 7.2) takes Õ(β 4 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time.
    Proof. Let e = (u, v) be an inserted edge. We start by arguing that there are not many mirror cuts that need
to be updated in Step 2a. As in the case for edge deletions, consider a mirror cut S containing node u, that is,
there exists a node u′ such that S is the mirror cut of u′ , and u ∈ S. All of these cuts would be found by a request
on node u to LocalKCut, which takes Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time, and thus there are at most Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) such
cuts. Hence, inserting an edge can affect at most Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) many cuts whose cut-size have to be updated.
Finding those cuts in the data structure is trivial as one can access all cuts including u or v from the endpoints
of the deleted edge and check in Õ(1) whether they include both or only one vertex by looking at the sorted list
of nodes in each cut, and thus Step 2a takes Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time.
    Each affected cut in Step 2a induces the marking in Step 2b for processing in Step 4 of all of the nodes it is
the mirror cut of, which there might be O(ν) of. Hence, inserting an edge can affect at most Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) )
many nodes that all need to be processed, which takes Õ(β 2 (λmax ν)O(β) ) time each by Lemma 7.5, hence the
result follows.
                                                                                                  
    Lemma 7.9. Handling a batch of updates with K edge updates takes Õ K · β 4 (λmax ν)O(β) amortized update
time.
                                             
    Proof. Step 1 takes Õ β 4 (λmax ν)O(β) per edge by Theorem 4.1. The times for Step 2 and Step 3 are
discussed in the two corrolaries just above.
    8 Static (1 + δ)-Approximate Minimum Proper Cut Algorithm for a Restricted Minimum
Cut Range For this section, we assume that the data structure we present in Section 10 supports our cluster
decomposition.
    Before diving into the dynamic algorithm, we present a simple static algorithm that we will dynamize in later
sections.
    Theorem 8.1. Let G be an unweighted undirected graph. Let c > 0. Let λmin and λmax be parameters
                                  3/4−c
with λmax ≤ 1.2λmin = 2O(log            n)
                                           , and assume that the minimum proper cut of G is at least λmin . Let
            3/4                     3/4−c
ϕ=2  −Θ(log     n)
                   and δ = 2 −Θ(log       n)
                                             . Then, there is an algorithm that, if vol(G) ̸= O( λmax
                                                                                                  ϕ ):

  1. Computes a pre-cluster decomposition P1 of G.

  2. Computes a corresponding cluster decomposition P2

  3. Creates the mirror graph GP1 .

  4. Calls itself recursively on the contracted graph G/P2 .

  5. If the minimum proper cut of G is at most λmax , returns a (1 + δ)-approximation of the minimum proper
     cut value.

  6. If the minimum proper cut of G is at most λmax , maintains pointers to the cut that achieves the minimum
     proper cut, and can return on request the nodes of the side S of smaller volume in time Õ(|S|) or the
     cut-edges in time λmax no(1) .

  7. If the value of the minimum proper cut is strictly larger than λmax , report “λ > λmax ”.

If vol(G) = O( λmax
                 ϕ ), the algorithm simply returns the minimum proper cut.
    This algorithm runs in m1+o(1) time.
    The main idea is as follows: we first decompose the graph into expanders, then decompose the expanders
further into smaller connected graphs, called clusters, so that every minimum proper cut S in the graph can be


                                                         27
uncrossed for each cluster that it cuts. This step is decomposed into two substeps, one is to compute the pre-
cluster decomposition P1 , and then compute the cluster decomposition P2 . In the end, S can be approximated
either by a cut that consists of a union of (full) clusters or by a local cut. We then contract the clusters and
recurse on the resulting graph, as clustering only once reduces the number of edges by an no(1) factor only, and
thus we need to recurse multiple times before we get a graph of volume no(1) on which we can run any static
algorithm.
    We describe below first the data structure that the algorithm maintains during its computation on the static
graph. We then describe the algorithm, called ApproxMinCut algorithm, which basically instantiates the data
structures it uses to compute the partition P2 and then calls itself recursively on the contracted graph. The main
work in initializing and updating these data structures is done in the subroutine UpdatePartition , which is
presented afterwards. Note that we maintain one ApproxMinCut data structure for each λmax , i.e., for each i.
                                            3/4
    Recall that α = poly1log n , ϕ = 2−Θ(log n) and that δ ≤ 2λmax
                                                                1
                                                                     with δ ≤ 0.04, which holds by our above choice
                     3/4−c                                       3/4−c                                                 1/2
of c > 0, δ = 2O(log        n)
                               ≤ 0.04. We set λmin = 2Θ(log              n)
                                                                              and λmax ≤ 1.2λmin , H = 38h = 2−O(log         n)
                                                                                                                                  ,
     ϕ′     −Θ(log3/4 n)             1/2
ϕ = 38h = 2              , ρ = 2Θ(log n) and α = poly1log n .
    Note that α
              ϕ ≥ 1. We also set γ = 6.

    Algorithm 8.1 (Static Algorithm). The static algorithm works as follows:
Input:

  1. An unweighted undirected graph G with possibly parallel edges.

  2. An integer λmin such that the minimum proper cut of G is no less than λmin .
                                                      3/4−c
  3. An integer λmax with λmax ≤ 1.2λmin = 2Θ(log               n)
                                                                     with c > 0.

ApproxMinCut Data Structure:
   If G has volume Ω( λmax
                       ϕ ):

  1. An approximation value β = 8.
                                       ′             3/4
                                 ϕ       −Θ(log            n)
  2. An expansion parameter ϕ = 38 h == 2


  3. A two-level partition P1 , P2 of G defined by a labeling of the edges as “intercluster”, “intracluster” or
     “fragmented”.

  4. A labeling of each cluster C as either “well-connected”, “poorly-connected”, or “fragmented”.

  5. A labeling of each node as “checked” or “unchecked”.

  6. An instance of Algorithm 10.1 which maintains the mirror graph GP1 and the contracted graph G/P2 . (See
     Theorem 10.1).

  7. An instance of LocalKCut (Algorithm 4.1) on G where “intercluster” edges have been removed, and
     λmax , ν = 4 λmax
                   ϕ , β. (See Theorem 4.1)

  8. An instance of Algorithm 7.2, the Mirror Cuts Data Structure, on GP1 and λmax , ν = 4 λmax
                                                                                            ϕ , β. (See
     Theorem 7.2)

  9. A recursive call of the dynamic algorithm on G where “intercluster” edges have been removed, with
     λmin = 1.2i and λmax = 1.2i+1 for all i ∈ N0 satisfying 1.2i ≤ λmax
                              
                                                                     8 .

 10. A recursive call of Algorithm 8.1 on the contracted graph G/P2 .

Rules for cluster classifications:

  1. Initially, every cluster is “well-connected”.

  2. Any cluster C that satisfies ∂C ≤ 3λmax becomes “poorly-connected”


                                                            28
  3. In P2 , any cluster that is created by the fragmenting algorithm (Algorithm 5.1) becomes “fragmented”
     (note that a “poorly-connected” cluster that goes through the fragmenting algorithm untouched still becomes
     “fragmented”). This overrides other rules.
Processing:
 (1) If the graph has volume O( λmaxϕ ), run a connectivity algorithm then a static minimum cut algorithm ([5])
     on all connected components. If the graph has no edges, output “λ > λmax ”. In any case, stop this call to
     the algorithm.
 (2) Compute an (α, ϕ′ )-boundary-linked expander decomposition of G, using the algorithm in [4].
 (3) Run UpdatePartition (given below) to instantiate the ApproxMinCut data structure.
 (4) Run Algorithm 8.2 on each expander, which computes a pre-cluster decomposition P1 . Every time
     Algorithm 8.2 splits a cluster it calls UpdatePartition to guarantee that the ApproxMinCut data
     structure reflects the current P1 .
 (5) Run the fragmenting algorithm (Algorithm 5.1) on each “poorly connected” cluster from P1 to get a cluster
     decomposition P2 . Update the data structure accordingly.
 (6) Call Algorithm 8.1 recursively on the contracted graph G/P2 .
 (7) Return the smallest cut value found among the recursive call in Step (6) and the request on the Mirror Cuts
     Data Structure (Algorithm 7.2), if this value is smaller than λmax . Store the pointer to the cut that achieved
     this value (if the algorithm is required to return cuts).
     If either no cut is found or the smallest found cut is strictly larger than λmax , then report “λ > λmax ”.
UpdatePartition:
  1. If not yet instantiated, instantiate P1 by setting the label of every edge to “intracluster”.
  2. Update P1 , by changing the labels of the intercluster edges to “intercluster”. Update or instantiate Items 4
     and 6. Mark the vertices adjacent to a newly “intercluster” edge as “unchecked”.
  3. Update or instantiate the recursive calls of the ApproxMinCut algorithm that maintains Item 9 of the
     ApproxMinCut data structure in increasing order of i, i.e. for all suitable i starting from 0.
     Stop this call to UpdatePartition whenever a recursive call returns a cut, cut the partition along this cut
     and run UpdatePartition from scratch.
  4. Update or instantiate every other structure in the ApproxMinCut data structure.
     8.1 Correctness of Algorithm 8.1 First, let’s argue about the base case. For a graph with volume
O( λmax
     ϕ ), the result holds by correctness of the algorithms we call. This trivially satisfies the requirements of our
algorithm.
     Let us now argue in the general case. Note that if λ > λmax , the algorithm cannot find a cut smaller than
λmax (as such a cut does not exist), and will report that λ > λmax .
     If λ ≤ λmax , then we need to show that for any minimum proper cut S in G, we can find a (1+2δ)-approximate
mincut S ′ in G with either the calls to the Mirror Cuts Data Structure (Algorithm 7.2) in Step 8 or the recursive
call of Step (6). For this we rely on the following lemma.
    Lemma 8.2. In Algorithm 8.1, the contracted graph of Item (6) and the mirror clusters of Item 8 preserve
the cut values of the corresponding non-contracted cuts of G and given a cut in one of them, one can reconstruct
the corresponding cut in G.
    Proof. This is immediate as they are contractions of the original graph, and thus preserve cuts.
     As we prove in Lemma 8.7 in Section 8.2, the graph is decomposed into a valid cluster pre-decomposition
P1 . As we show in Section 7, Algorithm 7.2 in Item 8 of our data structure correctly finds all local cuts in the
mirror graph GP1 at this level of the cluster hierarchy. Step (6) of the ApproxMinCut algorithm calls itself
recursively, which ensures the full cluster hierarchy is built until only one or two nodes are left. In the case
where λmin ≤ λ ≤ λmax , by Proposition 6.13, the minimum proper cut can be approximated by a local cut in a
mirror graph or in the most-collapsed graph of the cluster hierarchy. Since all such local cuts are computed in
Item 8, and their minimum is returned in Step (7), this completes the correctness proof if λ ≤ λmax . Note that


                                                         29
ApproxMinCut algorithm only returns a value in Step (7) and that it only returns the value of an existing cut
in G. In the case where λ > λmax , since the algorithm only returns the value of an existing cut, it either outputs
a value strictly larger than λmax , or reports that λ > λmax . This concludes correctness.
     8.2 Decomposing Expanders In this subsection, we present an algorithm, called Algorithm 8.2, that
implements Step (4) in Algorithm 8.1. It takes as input an expander decomposition, and outputs a decomposition
such that every cluster C with ∂C ≥ 3λmax contains no (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut S with ∂G (S) ≤ λmax and
vol(S) ≤ λmax /ϕ. It also maintains or instantiates an instance of the Mirror Cuts Data Structure (Algorithm 7.2)
for GP1 by calling UpdatePartition when needed.
     This algorithm is very similar to the one in [2], but works with a different data structure, described in
Section 10. We include the new analysis here for completeness.
     Algorithm 8.2 takes as input an expander decomposition, initializes the data structures, and then repeatedly
calls Algorithm 8.3 on each cluster until no cluster with an unchecked vertex exists. Algorithm 8.3 performs the
actual cut finding and graph cutting.
     Each node stores a boolean value, which represents whether it is checked or unchecked. Intuitively, node
v being checked means that LocalKCut has already been executed at v and the cut-size of the returned cuts
has already been taken into account, while being unchecked means that LocalKCut needs to be executed at
v. Algorithm 8.2 runs as subroutine Algorithm 8.3 that takes a cluster decomposition, a cluster C of that
decomposition together with a set of unchecked vertices in C as input and (a) either cuts the cluster along a
(1 − δ)-boundary sparse cut or (b) certifies that no cut is (1 − δ)-boundary sparse. Algorithm 8.2 repeats this
procedure until no cluster with minimum cut at least λmin containing a (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut exists. Our
algorithm will maintain the following invariant:
    Invariant 8.1. For every cluster C and every cut S ⊊ C such that S is (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse in C,
vol(S) ≤ λmax
          ϕ , and λmin ≤ w(S, C \ S) ≤ λmax , there exists a node v ∈ S such that v is unchecked.

     The goal of the algorithm is not to miss any (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut. We use procedure LocalKCut to
find such cuts. Checking node v refers to executing LocalKCut with v as starting point. As we will show, it
suffices to make sure that for every cut that might be boundary-sparse there is at least one node in the cut on
which the subroutine LocalKCut is requested to guarantee that the cut is found.
     Note that if a set S ⊆ C has no edges leaving C, then w(S, V \ C) = 0 ≤ w(S, C \ S) and, thus, S cannot
be (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse in C. Thus, vertices in C that are not incident to a boundary edge of C do not need
to be checked in C, i.e., we do not need to mark them as unchecked. Hence, only vertices that are incident to a
boundary edge are marked as unchecked, all others are marked as checked.
     We call the decomposition of the vertex set after the algorithm terminates the pre-cluster decomposition.
    Algorithm 8.2 (Decomposing Expanders). Input:

   • an (α, ϕ′ )-boundary-linked expander decomposition V1 , . . . , Vℓ , specified by edge labels.

   • Access to a LocalKCut instance on the graph where intercluster edges have been removed.

   • The parameters λmax , λmin , ν, δ.

  1. set C ← {V1 , . . . , Vℓ }.
  2. Mark every node incident to an inter-expander edge as unchecked, and all other nodes as checked.
  3. While there exists in C a cluster C satisfying ∂C ≥ 3λmax and containing an unchecked vertex, we run the
     Find and Cut subroutine (Algorithm 8.3) on C, which might change C.

    Algorithm 8.3 (Find and Cut Subroutine). Input:

   • a pointer to a graph G, with a partition P1 of G defined by a labeling of the edges.

   • a pointer to a set C ∈ P1

   • a set of unchecked vertices satisfying Invariant 8.1

   • an instance of LocalKCut on G where intercluster edges have been removed.


                                                           30
For every unchecked vertex v in C:
  1. Make a request to LocalKCut on v. Let S be the set of outputs from all LocalKCuts.
  2. For every S ∈ S:
     Check if S is (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse. If it is the case, cut the cluster along S, and run UpdatePartition
     thereby removing C and creating two new clusters S and C \ S in P1 , and mark any node incident to a
     newly cut edge as unchecked. The node v remains unchecked. End the current call to Algorithm 8.3.
  3. Mark the node v as checked and move on to the next unchecked vertex in C.
    8.2.1 Correctness We need to show that Invariant 8.1 holds at the termination of Algorithm 8.2. For
that, we start by showing that the invariant holds before the while loop in Algorithm 8.2, and that each step
of Algorithm 8.3 which is called in the while loop of Algorithm 8.2 maintains Invariant 8.1. Thus, the invariant
holds after Algorithm 8.2 has terminated. As there are no unchecked nodes left in clusters C with ∂C ≤ 3λmax
at that point in time, it follows that every cluster C with ∂C ≤ 3λmax contains no (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut
S with ∂G (S) ≤ λmax and vol(S) ≤ λmax /ϕ.
    Lemma 8.3. Right after Step 2 in Algorithm 8.2, Invariant 8.1 holds.
    Proof. Right after Step 2 every cluster is an expander in the expander decomposition. Thus, any cut S in a
cluster C can only be (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse if it contains a node v that is incident to an inter-expander edge,
that is, if w(S, V \ Vi ) ̸= 0 as we have (1 − δ)w(S, V \ Vi ) > w(S, Vi \ S) ≥ 0, by the definition of boundary-sparsity.
As all the nodes incident to all inter-expander edges were marked as unchecked in Step 2, Invariant 8.1 holds.
    Lemma 8.4. Cutting a cluster C along a (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut C ′ , then marking every node adjacent
to an edge in E(C ′ , C \ C ′ ) as “unchecked” maintains Invariant 8.1.
      Proof. To show Invariant 8.1 we need to show that every (1 − δ)-boundary sparse cut S in C ′ with
vol(S) ≤ λmax  ϕ   and w(S, C ′ \ S) ≤ λmax contains an unchecked vertex. By symmetry the same claim follows
for C \ C ′ .
      Assume by contradiction that there exists a (1 − δ)-boundary sparse cut S with vol(S) ≤ λmax              ϕ   and
w(S, C ′ \ S) ≤ λmax such that no vertex in S is unchecked after marking every node adjacent to an edge in
E(C ′ , C \ C ′ ) as “unchecked” , i.e. every vertex in S is checked. As cutting does not change the marking of
the vertices, this implies that (a) every vertex in S was also checked in C, and (b) no edge incident to S was
cut, i.e., became a new inter-cluster edge as the endpoints of such edges are marked “unchecked” in Step 2 of
Algorithm 8.3. Specifically, there exists no edge from a node in S to a node in C \ C ′ . To achieve a contradiction
we will show that S must have been (i) a (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut in C, (ii) that S has volume at most λmax /ϕ,
and (iii) λmin ≤ w(S, C \ S) ≤ λmax . As, by assumption, Invariant 8.1 was satisfied in C before Step 2, it follows
that S must have contained an unchecked vertex in C, leading to a contradiction.
      It remains to show (i) to (iii). We first show (i). Recall that C ′ ⊂ C. Then we know that
w(S, C ′ \ S) = w(S, C \ S), as otherwise there would be an edge from a node in S to a node in C \ C ′ . Thus
w(S, C \ S) = w(S, C ′ \ S) and w(S, V \ C ′ ) = w(S, V \ C). Since C ′ is a (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut in C, we
have that w(C ′ , C \ C ′ ) ≤ (1 − δ)w(C \ C ′ , V \ C) < w(C \ C ′ , V \ C). Also since S is (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in
C ′ , it holds that w(S, C ′ \ S) ≤ (1 − δ)w(C ′ \ S, V \ C ′ ).
      Therefore,

                    w(S, C \ S) = w(S, C ′ \ S) ≤ (1 − δ)w(C ′ \ S, V \ C ′ )
                                                  ≤ (1 − δ) (w(C ′ \ S, V \ C) + w(C ′ \ S, C \ C ′ ))
                                                  ≤ (1 − δ) (w(C ′ \ S, V \ C) + w(C ′ , C \ C ′ ))
                                                  < (1 − δ) (w(C ′ \ S, V \ C) + w(C \ C ′ , V \ C))
                                                  = (1 − δ)w(C \ S, V \ C)

Furthermore, since S is (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in C ′ , it also holds that

                          w(S, C \ S) = w(S, C ′ \ S) ≤ (1 − δ)w(S, V \ C ′ ) = w(S, V \ C)

Thus S is (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in C.


                                                            31
   We next show (ii). As S ⊂ C ′ ⊂ C, it follows that the volume of S is the same, and thus, it is at most λmax /ϕ.
   Finally we show (iii). As there exists no edge from a node in S to a node in C \ C ′ it follows that
w(S, C ′ \ S) = w(S, C \ S) and, thus, w(S, C \ S) = w(S, C ′ \ S) ≤ λmax .
   Thus (i) to (iii) hold, completing the proof of the lemma.
    Lemma 8.5. If UpdatePartition cuts along a cut C ′ in a cluster C, C ′ is (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in C.
     Proof. UpdatePartition cuts along cuts that are returned by a recursive call from Item 9, that is,
where the cut-size is at most λmax                                                            ′
                                8 . More specifically, in a cluster C, it cuts along a cut C which satisfies
     ′       ′     λmax                ′      ′          ′
w(C , C \ C ) ≤ 8 . However, w(C , C \ C ) + w(C , V \ C) ≥ λmin by the assumptions of Theorem 8.1,
and therefore, w(C ′ , V \ C) ≥ λmin − λmax8   ≥ 0.7λmax (where we use that λmax ≤ 1.2λmin ). Similarly,
w(C \ C ′ , V \ C) ≥ 0.7λmax . This proves that C ′ is (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse in C for δ ≤ 0.82, which holds
for our choice of δ.
    Lemma 8.6. Each execution of Algorithm 8.3 maintains Invariant 8.1 if there are no cuts of cut-size at most
λmax
 8   in the cluster C given as second parameter.
     Proof. Step 1: Step 1 of Algorithm 8.3 neither affects the marking of vertices nor the cluster decomposition
and, thus, does not affect Invariant 8.1.
     Step 2: We will next show that the invariant is maintained in Step 2. In Step 2 a cluster C is cut along a
(1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut C ′ ⊊ C into a new cluster C ′ and into C \ C ′ and the endpoints of new inter-cluster
edges are marked as unchecked, whether this happens in Algorithm 8.3 itself or the call to UpdatePartition
(Lemma 8.5), which by Lemma 8.4 maintains the invariant.
     Step 3: It remains to show that the invariant is maintained in Step 3. If this step is executed, (a) the status
of only one node can change, namely the one of v and (b) the execution of the for-loop for v modified neither
the cluster decomposition nor the status of any other unchecked node. Thus Invariant 8.1 continues to hold for
all clusters that do not contain v. We need to argue that it also holds for the (unique) cluster Cv that contains
v. For that, we will start by making the following claim, which is crucial to ensure that LocalKCut finds all the
cuts necessary for our analysis:
    Claim 8.1. For any cluster C and any subset ∅ ⊊ S ⊊ C, at any point outside of UpdatePartition, we
have that ∂C S ≥ λmax
                  8 .
     Proof. Note that apart from inside UpdatePartition , the only two steps in the algorithm where P1 changes
is in Steps (2) and (4). Any change is immediately followed by a call to UpdatePartition , which then runs
until ∂C S ≥ λmax
               8  for all C ∈ P1 , S ⊆ C, hence the claim.
     We now continue arguing about Step 3. Assume by contradiction that a cut S exists in cluster Cv at the
end of Step 3 such that S (a) is (1 − δ)-boundary sparse in Cv , (b) has volume at most λmax /ϕ, (c) satisfies
w(S, Cv \ S) ≤ λmax , and (d) contains only checked vertices. As Invariant 8.1 held at the beginning of Step 3,
S must have had an unchecked vertex then and as v is the only vertex whose status changed since then, v must
belong to S.
     By Claim 8.1, in C there are no cuts of cut-size at most λmax
                                                                 8 , and we have that ∂C S ≤ λmax . Hence S
is a 8-approximate minimum cut in C, and a call to LocalKCut with vertex v and β = 8 is guaranteed to find
S. and that LocalKCut is run with approximation parameter β = 8 by Theorem 4.1. But then, as S is found,
Algorithm 8.3 would have cut it instead in Step 2 instead of proceeding to Step 3 and of unchecking v, and thus
we have a contradiction.
    Now we can finish the correctness proof.
    Lemma 8.7. It holds that (a) at the termination of Algorithm 8.2 Invariant 8.1 holds; (b) the partition P1
computed by Algorithm 8.2 satisfies that no cluster C with ∂C ≥ 3λmax contains a (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut of
cut-size at most λmax and volume at most λmaxϕ , and thus P1 is a pre-cluster decomposition.
    Proof. Since we only uncheck a vertex if it is contained in no cuts that are (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse with cut
value at most λmax and volume at most λmax  ϕ , this lemma relies on Invariant 8.1. By Lemma 8.3, the invariant
holds at the beginning of the while loop in Algorithm 8.2.
    We now have to show that the invariant holds until the end of the while loop. This is now immediate as the
while loop is simply a call to Algorithm 8.3, and Algorithm 8.3 does not affect the invariant by Lemma 8.6.


                                                        32
    The fact that the while loops in Algorithm 8.2 ends when each cluster C either satisfies ∂C < 3λmax or
contains no unchecked vertex, together with Invariant 8.1, concludes the proof.
   8.2.2 Bounding the number of inter-cluster edges This subsection is dedicated to the analysis of the
number of inter-cluster edges in our final cluster decomposition, i.e., it proves Proposition 8.8.
    Proposition 8.8. Let M be the number of inter-expander edges after the expander decomposition in
Algorithm 8.1. Then there are Õ M
                                 δ3 many inter-cluster edges in the cluster decomposition after the execution
of Step (5) of Algorithm 8.2.
    Consider the following rooted forest F in which each node represents a cluster of G at some point during the
computation: the roots are the expanders output by the expander decomposition. For each node representing a
cluster, its two children (if any) are the clusters formed by splitting the corresponding cluster. By slight abuse of
notation we do not distinguish between clusters of the cluster decomposition and nodes in the forest.
    Note that a cluster is always split along a (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut, whether it is in UpdatePartition,
Algorithm 8.3 or Algorithm 5.1.
    We first show that the boundary-size of a node is always smaller than the one of its parent by at least δλmin /2.
    Lemma 8.9. Let C be a node in F and let S, C \ S be its children. Then we have that ∂C ≥ max{∂S, ∂(C \
S)} + (δλmin )/2.
        Proof. Since S is a (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut, we have that

                               w(S, C \ S) ≤ (1 − δ) min{w(S, V \ C), w(C \ S, V \ C)},

which implies that w(C \ S, V \ C) > w(C \ S, S). As it holds that w(C \ S, V \ C) + w(C \ S, S) = ∂(C \ S) ≥ λmin ,
it follows that w(C \ S, V \ C) ≥ λmin
                                    2 .
     The boundary-sparseness of S also implies that

           ∂S = w(S, V \ C) + w(S, C \ S) ≤ w(S, V \ C) + (1 − δ)w(C \ S, V \ C) = ∂C − δw(C \ S, V \ C)

i.e.,
                                    ∂C ≥ ∂S + δw(C \ S, V \ C) ≥ ∂S + δλmin /2.
        The same bound holds by symmetry for ∂(C \ S) and the result follows.
Nonte that the lemma implies that ∂C > ∂S and ∂(C \ S). Thus, along any path in F from a root to a leaf
the boundary-size of the clusters strictly decreases. Specifically, if a cluster has boundary-size less than some
value, let’s say 3λmax , then all its descendants in F has boundary-size less than 3λmax . We now look only at
the subforest F ′ of F created from F by deleting from F all internal nodes with boundary at most 3λmax . More
formally, F ′ is defined as follows: All roots of F are also in F ′ , and moreover, for every C ∈ F ′ with ∂C ≥ 3λmax ,
all its children in F are also in F ′ . However, for C ∈ F ′ with ∂C < 3λmax , their children do not belong to F ′ ,
i.e., C is a leaf in F ′ . As discussed, F \ F ′ contains no node of boundary larger than 3λmax .
   Lemma 8.10. The total number of inter-cluster edges of the leaves of F ′ is at most O( M
                                                                                          δ ), where M is the
number of inter-expander edges output by the expander decomposition.
     Proof. We count the number of inter-cluster edges by bounding the sum of the boundary-sizes for every
cluster that is a descendant of a root cluster Vi . Any inter-cluster edge that is created at some descendant of Vi
is also an inter-cluster edge at a leaf descendant of Vi in F ′ since clusters are never merged. Thus, it suffices to
bound the sum of the boundary-sizes of the leaf descendants of Vi in F ′ . Let Cf contain exactly these clusters.
We bound this sum by splitting Cf into two sums that we will analyze separately:
                                 X                X                      X
                                     ∂C =                   ∂C +                   ∂C
                                 C∈Cf            C∈Cf ,∂C≤2.2λmax        C∈Cf ,∂C>2.2λmax


and we define
                                                       X
                                        S1 : =                      ∂C
                                                 C∈Cf ,∂C≤2.2λmax




                                                               33
and
                                                   X
                                    S2 : =                      ∂C.
                                             C∈Cf ,∂C>2.2λmax

                                                                P
To proceed we will analyze the potential function Φ(C) :=          C∈C Φ(C) were Φ(C) = max{0, ∂C − 2.1λmax }.
Right after the computation of the expander decomposition the cluster decomposition of Vi only consists of Vi
itself (that is, an expander from the expander decomposition). While computing the cluster decomposition, the
algorithm might partition a descendant C of Vi , replacing it by two new clusters C1 and C2 and making C1 and
C2 its children in F ′ . We show next that the sum of the potentials of the two children clusters is at least (δλmin )/2
smaller than the potential of C. To do so we analyze three cases:

  1. If both C1 and C2 satisfy ∂C1 , ∂C2 ≥ 2.1λmax , then the total potential changes by:

         Φ(C1 ) + Φ(C2 ) − Φ(C) = ∂C1 − 2.1λmax + ∂C2 − 2.1λmax − ∂C + 2.1λmax
                                                      = −2.1λmax + 2w(C1 , C2 ) ≤ −2.1λmax + 2λmax ≤ −0.1λmax

  2. If wlog C1 and C2 satisfy ∂C1 ≤ 2.1λmax ≤ ∂C2 , then the total potential changes by:

         Φ(C1 ) + Φ(C2 ) − Φ(C) = 0 + ∂C2 − 2.1λmax − ∂C + 2.1λmax = ∂C2 − ∂C ≤ −(δλmin )/2

       where the last inequality follows from Lemma 8.9.

  3. If both C1 and C2 satisfy ∂C1 , ∂C2 ≤ 2.1λmax , then the total potential changes by:

                               Φ(C1 ) + Φ(C2 ) − Φ(C) = 0 + 0 − ∂C + 2.1λmax ≤ −0.9λmax

     It follows that the potential drops by at least (δλmin )/2 each time when a cluster is split into two smaller
clusters.
     We now bound the number of clusters in Cf as follows: Since the potential drops by δλmin /2 each time a
cluster is split, and splitting a cluster only increases the number of clusters by one, we know that the total number
                                      i })
of clusters in Cf is at most 2Φ({V          2∂Vi
                                 δλmin ≤ δλmin   . As every cluster contributing to S1 contributes at most 2.2λmax , it
                                                        
follows that S1 is at most λmax δλmin = O ∂Vδλi λmin
                                    4.4∂Vi           max
                                                           .
    For the second sum, S2 , note that if ∂C ≥ 2.2λmax , then ∂C = O(Φ(C)). Recall that the sum of potentials of
the two children of a node in F ′ is less than the potential of the parent. It follows by induction that for any set of
descendants of Vi such that none is an ancestor of the other, the sum of their
                                                                             P potentials is less than the potential
of Vi . As the clusters in Cf fulfill this condition, it follows that S2 =          C∈Cf    O(Φ(C)) = O(Φ({Vi })) =
                                                                              ∂C>2.2λmax
O ∂Vδλi λmin
          max
                .
      Summing over all expanders, and using that λmax = O(λmin ), we get the result.
    We now look at the forest F ′′ = (F \ F ′ ) ∪ leaves(F ′ ). The leaves of F ′ are the roots of F ′′ . By the lemma
                                                                      ′′                 M
                                                                                           
above, we know that the sum of the boundaries of the roots of F is at most O δ . We moreover know that
any cluster C with children in F ′′ satisfies ∂C < 3λmax , and thus the decomposition is made by fragmenting
(Algorithm 5.1). This gives the following lemma, which is a direct consequence of Theorem 5.1:
    Lemma 8.11. The sum of the boundaries of the leaves of F ′′ is at most Õ M
                                                                                         
                                                                                      δ 3 , where M is the number of
inter-expander edges output by the expander decomposition.
      8.2.3   Running Time Analysis Now we are ready to analyze the running time of the static algorithm.
    Definition 8.12. Let u be a vertex. We say that u is responsible for a cluster S if, in Algorithm 8.3, S was
cut from its parent cluster after being found by LocalKCut requested on vertex u.
      Lemma 8.13. Let u be a vertex. Vertex u is responsible for at most O( ϕ1 ) many clusters in F .


                                                           34
    Proof. The first cut u is responsible for will reduce the volume of the cluster u is in to at most λmax
                                                                                                        ϕ . Then
every further cut will reduce this volume by at least λmin as it cuts a at least λmin edges out of the cluster. As
λmax /λmin = O(1) the lemma follows.
    This lemma is important, as after checking a node, it is not guaranteed to become unchecked, as if a boundary-
sparse cut of cut-size at least λmin is found, a cut is made, but the node stays unchecked. Hence this bounds
how many times a vertex is being checked, that is, how many times we need to run LocalKCut on any individual
vertex. It follows that we can bound the total number of call to LocalKCut.
                                                                                         
    Lemma 8.14. The total number of calls to LocalKCut in Algorithm 8.2 is Õ M         1
                                                                                     δ ϕ , where M = O(mϕ) is
                                                                                      3

the number of inter-expander edges.
     Proof.  A vertex only becomes unchecked when it is incident to an inter-cluster edge. By Lemma 8.11 we have
O M
       
    δ3   inter-cluster edges, and, thus, this bounds the total number of times that a vertex becomes unchecked.
From each unchecked vertex u we run a call to LocalKCut requested on u in Item 1 of Algorithm 8.3. As
Lemma 8.13 shows, after O( ϕ1 ) such executions of Item 1 vertex u must become checked. Thus the total number
of calls to LocalKCut is as stated in the lemma.
                                                                                               3/4−c
                                                                                                                    1
    We remind the reader of the following constants: c > 0, λmax ≤ 1.2λmin = 2O(log                    n)
                                                                                                            , δ ≤ 2λmax with
                       3/4
δ ≤ 0.04., ϕ = 2−Θ(log n) and α = poly1log n .
     Let us now discuss the number of recursive calls. Remember that G is the original graph with m edges. We
say that an instance of the algorithm is on level ℓ if it is run on a graph G′ that is obtained from G by contracting
it ℓ times in Item 10. For example, the instance A0 of original call contracts the graph and calls recursively the
instance A1 , which calls instance A2 on the same contracted graph with smaller λmin and λmax in Item 9. This
instance then calls instance A3 on another contracted graph, and A3 calls A4 in Item 9. A0 is on level 0, A1 and
A2 are on level 1, A3 and A4 are on level 2.                                                
     We also assign label i to each node in that tree where its λmax parameter is 1.2i+1 .
    Lemma 8.15. The number of levels of Algorithm 8.1 is O(log1/4 n).
    Proof. Let A be the number of edges input to an instance of the algorithm. Step (2) of the algorithm creates
M = Õ(Aϕ) many interexpander edges, as proven in [4]. Lemma 8.11 shows that then the number of intercluster
edges, which is the number of edges in the input graph of the ℓ + 1-th recursive call is Õ(Aϕ · δ13 ) ≤ a logA3/4 n for
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                 m
some a ∈ R+ . Hence, the number of edges at the r-th level of the cluster decomposition is at most ar log          3/4 n .
                                                                                                                   2
This shows that after r = a1 log1/4 n levels, the number of edges drops to less than Õ(1).
    Lemma 8.16. Let Ai be an algorithm indexed on i that calls itself recursively, where Ai calls Aj each at most
once for every 0 ≤ j < i. Overall, a call to Ai runs at most 2i many instances of the algorithm.
    Proof. We prove the statement by induction on i. The case i = 0 is straightforward. For the inductive step,
assume that a call to Aj runs 2j many instances of the algorithm for all j ≤ i, and let us prove the statement for
the case i + 1.
    Let us consider a call to Ai+1 . We thus have a call to all of Aj for 0 ≤ jP< i + 1. By the induction hypothesis,
we have that the total number of instances called recursively is at most 0≤j<i+1 2j = 2i+1 − 1. Adding the
instance Ai+1 to that total concludes the proof.
    Lemma 8.17. Let us consider an instance labeled i on level ℓ. This instance calls overall at most 2i many
instances on level ℓ.
                                                                                                            
    Proof.
         Remember
                       that a call on such an instance calls recursively on the same graph with λmin = 1.2i and
λmax = 1.2i+1 for all i ∈ N0 with 1.2i ≤ λmax /8. We can ignore all recursive calls on the contracted graphs, as
those will only create calls on higher levels.
    Let us look at the tree of recursive calls, Note that any children labeled j of a node labeled i must satisfy
                                ⌊1.2i+1 ⌋      i+1    i+1
j + 10 ≤ i as we have 1.2j ≤        8     ≤ 1.28 ≤ 1.2
                                                    1.211 . We relax this condition and note that j + 1 ≤ i. Then,
by Lemma 8.16, this creates at most 2i many recursive calls.
    Lemma 8.18. The total number of recursive calls is no(1) .


                                                           35
     Proof.√Note that every instance on level ℓ calls immediately exactly one instance on level ℓ + 1 in the limit
of ℓ = O( 4 log n) many levels, by Lemma 8.15. Moreover, every call on level ℓ and index i generates overall 2i
many instances on level ℓ, by Lemma 8.17.
     Therefore, the initial call on level 0 and label i = O(log λ) creates at most 2i many instances on level 0.
By induction, it is straightforward to see that there are at most 2i(ℓ+1) many √ instances on level ℓ. Plugging in
   i                                                                          O( 4 log n)         1−c
1.2 = O(λmax ) we have that the total number of recursive calls is equal to λmax          = 2O(log n) .
    Theorem 8.19. The total running time of Algorithm 8.1 is O(m1+o(1) ).
   Proof. Let us first analyze one level of the recursion: Step (2) takes O(m1+o(1) ) as proven in [4]. It creates
M = mϕ inter-expander edges.
   Step (3) takes O(m) time.                                   
                                                              M 1
    By Lemma 8.14, Step (4) runs LocalKCut a total of Õ      δ3 ϕ   times, each instance taking no(1) , for a total of
O(m1+o(1) ) time overall.
    By Theorem 5.1, Step (5) takes O(no(1) ) per intercluster edge at most. Steps (6), and (7) take O(m) time
(excluding the recursive call).
    By Theorem 10.1, the rest of the data structure can be maintained in O(m1+o(1) ), as the number of updates
is upper-bounded by m and the volume is no(1)
    By Lemma 8.15, the number of levels is no(1) . Hence the claim follows.
    9 The Dynamic Algorithm The dynamic algorithm works as follows: at the beginning, the algorithm
runs the static algorithm, which sets up the data structure. In particular, on each layer, it provides a pre-cluster
decomposition P1 and a corresponding cluster decomposition P2 .
    We then maintain this data structure on each layer, by realizing that each intracluster edge insertion and
intercluster edge deletion cannot create any (1−δ)-boundary-sparse cut, while for any other update, only a limited
number of calls to LocalKCut suffice to find all newly created (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cuts.
    In fact, we will simply mark a few nodes after each update as unchecked, so as to make sure that Invariant 8.1
holds, and then run the corresponding part of the algorithm again. The goal is to have after each update a cluster
decomposition as in Theorem 6.5.
                                                           3/4−c                                          3/4
    Remember that we set c > 0, λmax ≤ 1.2λmin = 2O(log          n)         1
                                                                    , δ ≤ 2λmax with δ ≤ 0.04. ϕ = 2−Θ(log n) and
                                                                                              1/2
α = poly1log n . Note that α
                           ϕ ≥ 1 and that we assume δ ≤ 0.04. We further set ψ = 2
                                                                                   Θ(log            n)
                                                                                                         , h = Θ(log1/2 m),
              1/2
and ρ = 2Θ(log n) .
    For this section, we assume that the data structure we present in Section 10 supports our cluster
decomposition.
    We describe below the main structure of the dynamic algorithm:
    Algorithm 9.1. Data Structure: The data structure is the same as the one of the static algorithm
(Algorithm 8.1).
    Preprocessing:

  1. Run Algorithm 8.1

    Processing updates:

  1. If the graph has O( λmax
                            ϕ ) nodes, run a connectivity algorithm then a static algorithm ([5]) on all connected
     components, and return the minimum cut found. If the graph has no edges, output “λ > λmax ”. In any
     case, stop this call to the algorithm.
  2. Run Algorithm 9.2. Algorithm 9.2 is the dynamic algorithm that maintains the pre-cluster decomposition
     and the cluster decomposition
  3. Maintain the contracted graph where each cluster output by Algorithm 9.2 is contracted into a node, and
     call recursively Algorithm 9.1 on that contracted graph (as described in Section 10)
  4. Output the value of the minimum proper cut found among the cut returned by the recursive call and the
     mirror clusters, if that value falls in [λmin , λmax ]. Store pointers to the corresponding cut. If the smallest
     cut found is larger than λmax (or no cut is found), report “λ > λmax ”.


                                                        36
    Since the cluster decomposition satisfies the conditions of Theorem 6.5 at every point, this proves correctness.
    The subsections below will prove the following lemma:
    Lemma 9.1. In Algorithm 9.2:
  1. The amortized recourse2 per updated edge is Õ δρ3 λmax
                                                             

  2. At every time step, and every
                               level,
                                      if m̃ is the number of edges input on that level, the number
                                                                                                 of  intercluster
                                m̃ϕ                                                              m̃ϕ
     edges in P2 is at most Õ δ3 , and thus the recursive call will have as input at most Õ δ3 edges.
  3. The amortized update time is no(1) on each level – excluding recursive calls.
     Let us now discuss the number of recursive calls. Remember that G is the original graph with m edges. As
for the static algorithm, we say that an instance of the algorithm is on level ℓ if it is run on a graph G′ that is
obtained from G by contracting it ℓ times in Item 10 of Algorithm 8.1. For example, the instance A0 of original
call contracts the graph and calls recursively the instance A1 , which calls instance A2 on the same contracted
graph with smaller λmin and λmax in Item 9. This instance then calls instance A3 on another contracted graph,
and A3 calls A4 in Item 9. A0 is on level 0, A1 and A2 are on level 1, A3 and A4are onlevel 2.
     We also assign label i to each node in that tree where its λmax parameter is 1.2i+1 .
    Lemma 9.2. The number of levels of Algorithm 9.1 is O(log1/4 n).
    Proof. Let A be the number
                              of edges input to an instance of the algorithm. By Lemma 9.1, the number of
edges on the next level is Õ m̃ϕ
                               δ 3 . Hence, the number of edges at the r-th level of the cluster decomposition is
at most        m
                  3/4 n   for some a ∈ R. This shows that after r = a1 log1/4 n levels, the number of edges drops to less
          2ar log
than Õ(1).
    Lemma 9.3. Let us consider an instance labeled i on level ℓ. This instance calls overall at most 2i many
instances on level ℓ.
                                                                                                            
    Proof.
         Remember
                       that a call on such an instance calls recursively on the same graph with λmin = 1.2i and
λmax = 1.2i+1 for all i ∈ N0 with 1.2i ≤ λmax /8. We can ignore all recursive calls on the contracted graphs, as
those will only create calls on higher levels.
    Let us look at the tree of recursive calls, Note that any children labeled j of a node labeled i must satisfy
                                ⌊1.2i+1 ⌋      i+1    i+1
j + 10 ≤ i as we have 1.2j ≤        8     ≤ 1.28 ≤ 1.2
                                                    1.211 . We relax this condition and note that j + 1 ≤ i. Then,
by Lemma 8.16, this creates at most 2i many recursive calls.
    Lemma 9.4. The total number of recursive calls is no(1) .
     Proof.
       √ Note that every instance on level ℓ calls immediately exactly one instance on level ℓ + 1 in the limit of
ℓ = O( 4 log n) many levels, by Lemma 9.2. Moreover, every call on level ℓ and index i generates overall 2i many
instances on level ℓ, by Lemma 9.3.
     Therefore, the initial call on level 0 and label i = O(log λ) creates at most 2i many instances on level 0.
By induction, it is straightforward to see that there are at most 2i(ℓ+1) many √ instances on level ℓ. Plugging in
   i                                                                          O( 4 log n)         1−c
1.2 = O(λmax ) we have that the total number of recursive calls is equal to λmax          = 2O(log n) .
    Lemma 9.5. The amortized recourse computed over all recursion levels is no(1) .
                                                                                                       1
    Proof. The total recourse on the i-th level is Õ ( δρ3 λmax )i−1 , as per Lemma 9.1. As i = O(log 4 n) by the
                                                                     
                                                     1−c
lemma above, we get that Õ ( δρ3 λmax )i−1 = 2O(log n) = no(1) . Summing over all levels of recursion gives us
                                           

the desired result.
    Lemma 9.6. The amortized running time over all levels is no(1) in Algorithm 9.2.
    Proof. Each recursion level receives an amortized number of no(1) updates as per the previous lemma, and
requires no(1) amortized time to process the update, by Lemma 9.1. Hence, on each level, after one update on
the top level, the time to process that update is no(1) . Summing over all levels gives us the desired result.

  2 the recourse is the number of modifications to the edges of the contracted graph




                                                                37
    Lemma 9.7. In Algorithm 9.2, the total approximation ratio after all calls is 1.
    Proof. Each recursive call degrades the quality of the solution by a factor (1 + 2δ) at most, by Theorem 6.5.
                                     1
    Note that since we chose δ < 2λmax  , all cuts smaller than λmax are thus preserved by our algorithm. This
shows that our algorithm is exact on every level, and thus is exact overall.
    9.1 Proof of Lemma 9.1 In this subsection, we are given a graph with updates, and our goal is to
maintain a cluster decomposition of this graph such that no cluster contains a cut of cut-size at most λmax that is
(1 − δ)-boundary sparse. As in the static setting the main idea is to maintain a dynamic expander decomposition
which we refine further.
    Definition 9.8. We say that an edge e = (u, v) is incident to a cluster C if either u or v (or both) are in C.
    Algorithm 9.2 (Maintaining the cluster decomposition). Preprocessing: We run the static algorithm on
the initial graph, with the preprocessing of Theorem 2.5 for the expander decomposition.
    Handling updates: We give the next O( mϕ  ρ ) updates to the dynamic expander decomposition algorithm. Every
change output by that algorithm is then processed in the following way:
   1. Run UpdatePartition (from Algorithm 8.1), which updates the partition P1 , and the classification of the
      clusters as “well-connected”, “poorly-connected” or “fragmented”.
   2. Mark the endpoints of the updated edges as unchecked.
   3. Then, for each affected “well-connected” cluster C (i.e. containing an endpoint of an affected edge), find
      2λmax intercluster edges leaving that cluster whose endpoint in C is checked, and mark their incident vertices
      in the cluster as unchecked.
   4. While there exists in C (the cluster decomposition) a “well-connected” cluster C with an unchecked vertex,
      we run the Find and Cut subroutine (Algorithm 8.3) on C, which might change C.
   5. For every affected “poorly-connected” or “fragmented” cluster C, revert any “fragmented’ edges it contains
      to “intracluster”, and run Algorithm 5.1 on C.
    Every O( mϕ
              ρ ) updates, we restart from scratch, i.e., we run the preprocessing step on the full graph.
Rules for Cluster Classification:
   1. By default, every cluster is “well-connected”
   2. Any cluster C that satisfies ∂C ≤ 3λmax becomes “poorly-connected”
   3. Any cluster C that satisfies ∂C ≥ 6λmax becomes “well-connected”
   4. In P2 , any cluster that is the result of the fragmenting algorithm becomes “fragmented” (note that a “poorly-
      connected” cluster that goes through the fragmenting algorithm untouched still becomes “fragmented”). This
      overrides other rules.
    We start by showing the correctness of the algorithm.
    9.1.1     Correctness
      Lemma 9.9. Let C ∈ P1 be a cluster that satisfies Invariant 8.1 at time t. Assume that between times t and
t′ , C is subject to updates, and that the Find and Cut subroutine (Algorithm 8.3) is not run in between t and t′
on the cluster3 . If we mark every node incident to an edge insertion or deletion as well as the nodes incident
to 2λmax intercluster edges incident to C apart from the edges inserted between t and t′ as unchecked, then C
satisfies Invariant 8.1 at time t′ .
    Proof. Let S be, at time t′ , a (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut in C, with w(S, C \ S) ≤ λmax , and vol(S) ≤ λmax
                                                                                                                ϕ .
                                                                    ′
We need to show that S contains an unchecked vertex at time t . We have multiple cases:
    Case 1: S contains an unchecked vertex at time t:
    In that case, the same vertex is still unchecked at time t′ . Indeed, since the Find and Cut subroutine was not
run between t and t′ , no unchecked vertex becomes checked between the two times.

   3 This can either be because the cluster is poorly-connected, fragmented, or because t′ is the first time after t where an update is

incident to C



                                                                  38
      Case 2: There is an edge with at least one endpoint in S that was inserted or deleted. That update causes
the corresponding endpoint to become unchecked. Since the Find and Cut subroutine was not run between t and
t′ , this endpoint is still unchecked at time t′ .
      Case 3: If all vertices of S were checked at time t and no edge update was incident to S between t and t′ : It
follows by Invariant 8.1 that S was either:
 (a) Not (1 − δ)-boundary sparse at time t, or
 (b) w(S, C \ S) > λmax at time t, or
 (c) vol(S) > λmax
                ϕ  at time t.
As at time t′ we have that w(S, C \ S) and no edge update was incident to S between t and t′ , case (b) is
impossible.
     As at time t′ we have that vol(S) ≤ λmaxϕ   and no edge update was incident to S between t and t′ , case (c) is
impossible.
     Let us thus look at case (a): At time t, w(S, C \ S) ≥ (1 − δ) · min{w(S, V \ C), w(C \ S, V \ C)}.
     Since no edge update was incident to S between t and t′ , we have that w(S, V \ C) and w(S, C \ S) remain
unchanged between t and t′ .
     At time t′ , by boundary sparseness, we have that w(S, C \ S) < (1 − δ)w(S, V \ C). This inequality
also holds at time t, and since S is not (1 − δ)-boundary sparse at time t, we must have that at time t:
w(S, C \ S) ≥ (1 − δ)w(C \ S, V \ C).
     But, as we are not in case (b), at time t, we have that λmax ≥ w(S, C \ S) ≥ (1 − δ)w(C \ S, V \ C). Therefore
                      1
w(C \ S, V \ C) < 1−δ   λmax < 2λmax as δ ∈ [0, 12 ].
     We have two cases: (i): E(C, V \ C) contains at least 2λmax many edges. As at least 2λmax many edges in
E(C, V \ C) have their endpoints in C unchecked, and there are strictly less than 2λmax in E(C \ S, V \ C), at
least one edge in E(S, V \ C) has its endpoint in C unchecked. That endpoint is in S which concludes the proof.
     (ii): E(C, V \ C) contains at most 2λmax many edges. Since all of those edges have their endpoints unchecked,
it remains to show that one of them has an endpoint in S. This is straightforward as S is boundary sparse at
time t′ , which implies that w(S, V \ C) > 1−δ1
                                                 w(S, C \ S) ≥ 0.
    Remark 9.1. One can apply Lemma 9.9 for exactly one update between t and t′ , which is what we do when
the cluster is “well-connected” both before and after the update.
     Corollary 9.10. Assume that Invariant 8.1 holds at some time t. Assume the graph is subject to t′ − t
updates. Then, in the partition P1 maintained by Algorithm 9.2 at time t′ no “well-connected” cluster C contains
a cut S that is (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse and such that w(S, C \ S) ≤ λmax and vol(S) ≤ λmax
                                                                                         ϕ . In other words, P1
is a pre-cluster decomposition.
    Proof. This is a direct consequence of Lemma 8.6 and Lemma 9.9, as since there are no cuts at time t′ in G that
are strictly smaller than λmin , and Algorithm 9.2 ensures no unchecked vertex remains in any “well-connected”
cluster.
    Lemma 9.11. The partition P2 maintained by the algorithm is a cluster decomposition associated to the pre-
cluster decomposition P1 .
    Proof. By Corollary 9.10, P1 is a pre-cluster decomposition. As we rerun the fragmenting algorithm on any
cluster that has been modified in P1 , this ensures P2 is the cluster decomposition associated to P1 .
    This, together with Theorem 6.5 shows correctness.
    9.1.2 Bounding the number of intercluster edges We now take a look at the number of intercluster
edges just before a new rebuild, and aim to bound that number. For that, as for the static algorithm we build
below a forest of all the clusters that existed since the last rebuild, and analyze carefully the number of intercluster
edges at each node of this forest.
    Formally, let M be the initial number of interexpander edges (after running the first static expander
decomposition) and R (for recourse) be the number of changes output by the dynamic expander decomposition.
We aim to bound the number of intercluster edges after all of the updates before the next rebuild.
    For that, let T be a time after an update. We build a forest F of all the clusters ever created between the last
rebuild before T and time T . The parent of each cluster is the cluster it was cut off from when it was created.


                                                          39
The roots are the expanders as output by the static expander decomposition. We will denote by t(C) the time
of cluster C, that is, the update at which C was split (if it is an internal node), or T otherwise, and ∂C(t) the
boundary of cluster C after update t. Let wt (A, B) be the number of edges between A and B at time t. Here, we
assume that each update corresponds to one change output by the dynamic expander decomposition.
     For each cluster C let L(C) be its boundary-size when it was split into two (if it is an internal cluster) or its
boundary-size at time T (if it is a leaf).
     We will then, for the analysis, add marks to each cluster in P1 as follows: A cluster C that is a root gets
mark ⊕ if L(C) ≥ 3λmax and ⊙ otherwise. Then, in BFS fashion, each cluster C whose parent is marked ⊕ gets
marked ⊕ if L(C) ≥ 3λmax , and ⊙ otherwise. If its parent is marked ⊙, it gets marked ⊕ if L(C) ≥ 6λmax , and
⊙ otherwise
     Intuitively, a ⊕ labeled node is a cluster that is “well-connected” at the time it is split in two or at time T ,
and a ⊙ is a “poorly-connected” cluster at time T .
     The goal is to show that the sum of the labels of the leaves is at most O( M δ+R ). As M = O(mϕ) and
R = O(mϕ), this will yield at most O( mϕ   δ ) many intercluster edges, which is crucial for bounding the recourse,
as well as the running time (which depends on the number of intercluster edges).
     We look at the following potential:

                                       Φ(C) = max{0, ∂C(t(C)) − 2.1λmax }

and the total potential:                                  X
                                                 Φ{C} =         Φ(C)
                                                          c∈C

    Let C0 be a node of F that is marked ⊕ that is either a root of F or has a parent labeled ⊙. We start with
C = {C0 } and at each step, we will replace one element from C marked ⊕ with its two children until all elements
of C = Cf are either leaves of F or marked ⊙.
    Lemma 9.12. Let C be a node in F marked ⊕ and S, C \ S its children, where S is (1 − δ)-boundary sparse
in C. Then we have that ∂C(t(C)) ≥ max{∂S(t(C)), ∂(C \ S)(t(C))} + δλ2min .
    Proof. In this proof, all quantities are considered at time t(C).
    Since S is a (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut, we have that w(S, C \ S) ≤ (1 − δ) min{w(S, V \ C), w(C \ S, V \ C)}.
Therefore, ∂S = w(S, V \ C) + w(S, C \ S) ≤ w(S, V \ C) + (1 − δ)w(C \ S, V \ C) ≤ ∂C − δw(C \ S, V \ C).
    But w(C \S, V \C)+w(C \S, S) = ∂(C \S) ≥ λmin . Since w(C \S, V \C) > w(C \S, S) (by boundary-sparsity
of S), we have that w(C \ S, V \ C) ≥ λmin2   and the result follows by symmetry for ∂(C \ S).
    Lemma 9.13. Let C ∈ F be a set in C replaced with S and C \ S. Let u(C), u(S) and u(C \ S) be the number
of updates to S and C \ S respectively for updates between t(C) (excluded) and t(S), t(C \ S) (included).
    Then Φ(S) + Φ(C \ S) ≤ Φ(C) − δλ2min + u(S) + u(C \ S) + 2u(C).
    Proof. Recall that ∂C(t(C)) ≥ 3λmax , which imply that Φ(C) ≥ 0.9λmax . We then have five cases:
   • if both ∂S(t(S)), ∂(C \ S)(t(C \ S)) ≤ 2.1λmax :
                                                                           δλmax
                                         Φ(S) + Φ(C \ S) = 0 ≤ Φ(C) −
                                                                             2
     as Φ(C) − δλmax
                 2   ≥ 0.9λmax − δλmax
                                   2   > 0.
   • if both ∂S(t(S)), ∂(C \ S)(t(C \ S)) > 2.1λmax , and S is a cut that stems from the recourse of the expander
     decomposition or other updates to the partition:

        Φ(S) + Φ(C \ S) = ∂S(t(S)) + ∂(C \ S)(t(C \ S)) − 2 × 2.1λmax
                             (i)
                             ≤ ∂S(t(C)) + ∂(C \ S)(t(C)) − 2 × 2.1λmax + u(S) + u(C \ S)
                          ≤ ∂C(t(C)) + 2wt(C) (S, C \ S) − 2 × 2.1λmax + u(S) + u(C \ S)
                                                                          δλmax
           ≤ Φ(C) + 2λmax + 2u(C) − 2.1λmax + u(S) + u(C \ S) ≤ Φ(C) −          + u(S) + u(C \ S) + 2u(C)
                                                                            2


                                                         40
     Where (i) stems from the fact that between times t(C) and t(S), at most u(S) many edges got added to S
     and therefore ∂S.

   • if both ∂S(t(S)), ∂(C \ S)(t(C \ S)) > 2.1λmax , and S is a (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut of cut-size at most
     λmax :

        Φ(S) + Φ(C \ S) = ∂S(t(S)) + ∂(C \ S)(t(C \ S)) − 2 × 2.1λmax
                            (i)
                             ≤ ∂S(t(C)) + ∂(C \ S)(t(C)) − 2 × 2.1λmax + u(S) + u(C \ S)
                            ≤ ∂C(t(C)) + 2wt(C) (S, C \ S) − 2 × 2.1λmax + u(S) + u(C \ S)
                                                                                    δλmax
                            ≤ Φ(C) + 2λmax − 2.1λmax + u(S) + u(C \ S) ≤ Φ(C) −            + u(S) + u(C \ S)
                                                                                      2
     Where (i) stems from the fact that between times t(C) and t(S), at most u(S) many edges got added to S
     and therefore ∂S.

   • if wlog ∂S(t(S)) ≤ 2.1λmax and ∂(C \ S)(t(C \ S)) > 2.1λmax , and S is a (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse cut:


                Φ(S) + Φ(C \ S) = 0 + ∂(C \ S)(t(C \ S)) − 2.1λmax
                                  ≤ 0 + ∂(C \ S)(t(C)) + u(C \ S) − 2.1λmax
                                  ≤ ∂C(t(C)) − wt(C) (S, V \ C) + wt(C) (S, C \ S) + u(C \ S) − 2.1λmax
                                  (ii)
                                  ≤ Φ(C) − δwt(C) (S, V \ C) + u(C \ S)


     Where (ii) follows from the (1 − δ) boundary-sparsity of S at time t(C). We conclude using the following
     claim:
     Claim 9.1. For any cluster C and (1 − δ)-boundary sparse cut S ⊊ C, we have that w(S, V \ C) ≥ λmin
                                                                                                     2 .

     Proof. Assume by contradiction that we have w(S, V \ C) < λmin2 . We are going to show that in that case,
     ∂S < λmin holds, a contradiction. By boundary sparsity, we have that w(S, C \ S) < (1 − δ)w(S, V \ C) <
     (1 − δ) λmin
              2 , and therefore, ∂S = w(S, C \ S) + w(S, V \ C) < λmin .

   • if wlog ∂S(t(S)) ≤ 2.1λmax and ∂(C \ S)(t(C \ S)) > 2.1λmax , and S is a cut that stems from the recourse
     of the expander decomposition or other updates to the partition, that is not boundary-sparse:


                Φ(S) + Φ(C \ S) = 0 + ∂(C \ S)(t(C \ S)) − 2.1λmax
                                  ≤ 0 + ∂(C \ S)(t(C)) + u(C \ S) − 2.1λmax
                                  ≤ ∂C(t(C)) − wt(C) (S, V \ C) + wt(C) (S, C \ S) + u(C \ S) − 2.1λmax
                                  (ii)
                                  ≤ Φ(C) − δλmax + 2u(C) + u(C \ S)


     Where (ii) follows from the the fact that S is non-boundary sparse and thus u(C) ≥ wt(C) (S, C \ S) ≥
     (1 − δ)wt(C) (S, V \ C) and thus u(C) ≥ λmin
                                              2 .

                                                                                    M +R
                                                                                           
    Lemma 9.14. The sum of all the labels of the leaves of F does not exceed O        δ        .
    Proof. Let us consider one cluster C0 be a node of F that is marked ⊕ that is either a root of F or has a parent
labeled ⊙, and we consider all elements of F that are reachable form C0 only through paths with innner nodes
marked ⊕. We start with Φ(C0 ) = O(∂C0 (t0 ) + u(C0 )), where t0 is the time of the last rebuild. By Lemma 9.13,


                                                        41
the potential decreases by at least δλ2min − u(S) − u(C \ S) + 2u(C) every time we replace a cluster C by its
children S and C \ S. Therefore, after X manyP        replacements each of which increases the number of clusters by
1, the potential is at most Φ(C0 ) − X δλ2min + 3 C∈F (C0 ) u(C) ≤ Φ(C0 ) + U (C0 ) − X δλ2min , where F (C0 ) is the
                                                                         P
component of C0 with inner nodes marked ⊕ in F and U (C0 ) = 3 C∈F (C0 ) u(C). The potential being positive,
                                                                            
we have that X = O Φ(C0δλ)+U  min
                                 (C0 )
                                         , and thus we have O   Φ(C0 )+U (C0 )
                                                                   δλmin         many clusters descendents of C0 in F as
described above.
    Let Cf (C0 ) be the set of all leaves in the component of C0 in F . Recall that L(C) = ∂C(t(C). We then have:
                     X                      X                   X
                            L(C) =                  L(C) +               L(C)
                  C∈Cf (C0 )          C∈Cf (C0 )                C∈Cf (C0 )
                                    L(C)≤2.2λmax              L(C)>2.2λmax

                                                                                                             
                                                                                             Φ(C0 )+U (C0 )
In the first sum, we know the that the total number of clusters is at most O                    δλmin             . For the second sum,
note that if L(C) ≥ 2.2λmax , then L(C) = O(Φ(C)).
                                                             
                                           Φ(C0 ) + U (C0 )                       X
                                  ≤O                              2.2λmax +                  O(Φ(C))
                                               δλmin
                                                                                C∈Cf (C0 )
                                                                              L(C)>2.2λmax
                                                                                                                 
                                           Φ(C0 ) + U (C0 )                                  Φ(C0 ) + U (C0 )
                                  ≤O                              + O(Φ(Cf (C0 ))) = O
                                                  δ                                                 δ


    For the last equality, recall that the sum of potentials of the two children of a node in F is less than
the potential of the parent to which we add the number of updates made to the children. It follows by
induction that for any set of descendants of C0 such that none is an ancestor of the other, the sum of their
potentials
P          is less than the potential of C0 + U (C0 ). As the clusters in Cf (C0 ) fulfill this condition, it follows that
   C∈Cf (C0 ) O(Φ(C)) = O(Φ({C0 } + U (C0 )).
  ∂C>2.2λmax
     Summing over all such choices of C0 in F , we get that the sum of the boundaries of all leaves of F with a
parent marked ⊕ does not exceed O(Φ({C0 } + U (C0 )), where C0 is the set of all C0 as described in the beginning
of this proof.
     Let us now estimate Φ(C0 ). In C0 , we have the roots in F that are an output from the static expander
decomposition, as well as nodes marked ⊕ whose parents are marked ⊙. The sum of the boundaries of the
expanders is M initially, and does not exceed M + R when they are cut. The sum of the boudaries of the nodes
marked ⊕ whose parents are marked ⊙ is at most O(R), as they have ancestors with boundary-size at most 3λmax
while they have boundary-size at least 6λmax . This boundary increase can only be due to the recourse R.
     Therefore Φ(C0 ) = O(M + R).
     Finally, notice that all other leaves of F have boundary at most O(M + R) as well, as all nodes that are
marked ⊙ who are roots or have a node marked ⊕ have boundary at most O(M + R) by the above analysis. The
boundary of their children can only increase due to the partition changing, which is due to recourse, and thus the
boundary-size of their descendents is at most O(M + R) as well.
     Lemma 9.15. The number of intercluster edges in P1 is O M δ+R .
                                                                           

     The number   of intercluster edges in P2 (that is, edges labeled “intercluster” or “fragmented” in our algorithm)
is Õ Mδ+R
            
         3    .
     Proof. The first statement is immediate from Lemma 9.14.
     For the second statement, by Theorem 5.1, fragmenting a cluster increases its boundary-size by at most a
 1
δ 2 poly log n factor. Applying that on all “poorly-connected” clusters in P1 gives the result.
    9.1.3    Running time
    Lemma 9.16. The total number of times, over the O( mϕ
                                                        ρ ) updates to the input of Algorithm 9.2, we process
                         M +R λmax
an unchecked vertex is O( δ    ϕ ).



                                                                  42
    Proof. Let us first estimate the number of nodes that get marked as unchecked overall (counting a node that
has been unchecked multiple times with multiplicity):
    We divide the nodes that were unchecked at some point in two categories: nodes that were adjacent to an
edge update, and nodes that we adjacent to an edge that became an intercluster edge. Any edge that was an
intercluster edge and then deleted belongs to the first category.
    Nodes that were adjacent to an edge update are at most R many. Nodes that were adjacent to an edge
that was cut are at most O( M δ+R ) many, as there are O( M δ+R ) many such edges in the decomposition P1 by
Lemma 9.15, and any intercluster edge in a prior decomposition is either a deleted edge or an intercluster edge
in P1 , as we do not merge clusters.
    In the worst case, all updates are made to a “well-connected” cluster in G, and thus we need to add 2λmax
unchecked nodes. Moreover, while processing an unchecked node, we might find a cut that needs to be split from
the original cluster. In that case, we have to process the node again, but this can happen at most ϕ1 times as per
Lemma 8.13.
    Lemma 9.17. The total number of times, over the O( mϕ
                                                        ρ ) updates to the input of Algorithm 9.2, we run the
fragmenting algorithm is O( M δ+R ).
    Proof. Each intercluster edge in P1 can result in at most two runs of the fragmenting algorithm (one the
cluster at each endpoint). Moreover, any edge update can also result in at most two runs of the fragmenting
algorithm. Since there are at most O( M δ+R ) of these edges, the result follows.
     Corollary 9.18. The total recourse of the algorithm over the O( mϕ
                                                                      ρ ) updates to the input of Algorithm 9.2
            
       mϕ
is Õ δ3 λmax .

    Proof. At any given time, there are at most O( mϕ  δ ) many intercluster edges in P1 , by Lemma 9.15. Since P1
only gets refined over time, this yields O( mϕ
                                             δ ) recourse.
    Moreover, there are at most O( M δ+R ) calls to the fragmenting algorithm, and as many reversions of whatever
changes these calls made. Each of these calls make at most Õ( λmax
                                                                  δ 3 ) changes by Theorem 5.1, hence the result.

     Corollary 9.19. As λmax = no(1) and ϕ = n−o(1) , the total running time of Algorithm 9.2 between two
rebuilds, excluding recursive calls, is (M + R) · no(1) = m1+o(1) .
                                                                                                            
     Proof. As per Theorem 4.1, amortized update time and request time to LocalKCut is Õ β 4 (λmax ν)O(β)
with β = O(1), and therefore all calls to LocalKCut – outside of the fragmenting algorithm – need
Õ( M δ+R β 4 (λmax ν)O(β) ) = (M + R) · no(1) time. This is also an upper bound to the number of nodes that
need to be unchecked, as each LocalKCut is ran on an unchecked vertex. Furthermore, we need to update the
data structure, which takes amortized time no(1) per update, by Theorem 10.1, as the graph has initial volume
m and is subject to updates of volume mϕ between two rebuilds.
    This proves the following lemma:
    Lemma 9.20. In Algorithm 9.2:
  1. The amortized recourse4 per updated edge is Õ δρ3 λmax
                                                             

  2. At every time step, and every
                               level,
                                      if m̃ is the number of edges input on that level, the number
                                                                                                 of  intercluster
                                m̃ϕ                                                              m̃ϕ
     edges in P2 is at most Õ δ3 , and thus the recursive call will have as input at most Õ δ3 edges.
  3. The amortized update time is no(1) on each level – excluding recursive calls.
    Proof. Item 1. is immediate from Corollary 9.18 as we can amortize the recourse over all updates between
two rebuilds.
    Item 2. is a direct application of Lemma 9.15, where we note that between two rebuilds, the decomposition
is only refined, and thus the number of intercluster edges just before the next rebuild is an upper bound on the
number of intercluster edges at any point since the last rebuild.
    Item 3. is proven in Corollary 9.19.

  4 the recourse is the number of modifications to the edges of the contracted graph




                                                                43
    10    Data Structure This section is dedicated to proving the following theorem:
    Theorem 10.1. Consider a fully-dynamic graph G, two (dynamic) partitions P1 and P2 of G. G can be
subject to edge insertions or deletions, and P1 can only be subject to splits (that is, replace a cluster C ∈ P1
by C \ S and S for some S ⊊ C), while in P2 , in addition to splits, clusters of volume at most ν (for some
parameter ν ∈ N+ ) are allowed to merge back to larger clusters. P1 and P2 are encoded by a labeling of the edges
as “intracluster”, “intercluster”, and “fragmented”, that is, P1 is formed by the connected components formed by
looking only at the edges labeled “intracluster” and “fragmented”, while P2 , a refinement of P1 , is formed by the
connected components formed by looking only at the edges labeled “intracluster”. Each vertex, if it is a vertex
obtained by the contraction of other vertices, has a label representing the inner volume of the contracted cluster it
represents.
    There exists a data structure that maintains the mirror graph GP1 and the contracted graph G/P2 of G. G/P2
should have, as vertex labels, the inner volume of the cluster the vertex represents. Over U many edge updates, it
has Õ(m + U ν) running time (preprocessing + update handling). Moreover, for any request on a set S ⊆ C for
C ∈ P2 , it can output in time Õ(vol(S)) whether or not S is (1 − δ)-boundary-sparse. It can also store for each
node, edge and cluster a set of constant size of parameters accessible in constant time.
    We need a data structure that enables us to efficiently compute all the values and get the correct pointers
at all times. This includes, for every cluster C, access to its boundary edges, and its boundary-size. We should
also be able to compute efficiently, for any cut S of volume at most O(ν) inside C, whether or not it is boundary
sparse, that is we need w(S, C \ S) and w(S, V \ C). We also need for each node to know in which cluster it is,
and whether it is checked or unchecked.
    For that, we have the following algorithm:
    Algorithm 10.1.
Input: A fully-dynamic graph G under edge insertions, deletions, update of vertex and edge labels.
Maintained variables:

   • for each node:

         – a pointer to the cluster it is currently in
         – a pointer to each of the edges it is incident to
         – other node parameters

   • for each edge:

         – a pointer to its endpoints
         – Whether it is an “intercluster”, “intracluster” or “fragmented” edge
         – other edge parameters

   • for each cluster C in P1 or P2 :

         – a list of the nodes that constitute this cluster
         – the boundary-size of the cluster
         – the inner volume of the cluster
         – a list of all edges on its boundary
         – other cluster parameters

   • for each cluster C in P1 :

         – a mirror cluster C ′ = G/(G \ C)

   • an instance of Minimum Spanning Forest (Theorem 4.5) on intracluster and fragmented edges which can
     output whether or not two nodes are in the same P1 component in Õ(1) time.


                                                          44
   • an instance of Minimum Spanning Forest (Theorem 4.5) on intracluster edges which can output whether or
     not two nodes are in the same P2 component in Õ(1) time.

   • a contracted graph G/P2

Preprocessing:

  1. Instantiate the Minimum Spanning Forests

  2. Compute the connected components (or clusters) of the graph G where only edges labeled “intracluster” or
     “fragmented” are considered, to get P1 .

  3. Compute the connected components (or clusters) of the graph G where only edges labeled “intracluster” are
     considered, to get P2 .

  4. Traverse each cluster in P1 , creating its mirror cluster.

  5. Create a node to represent each cluster in P1 or P2 and add pointers from and to all the nodes it contains.

  6. Traverse each cluster in P2 to create the contracted graph.

Handling a split (in either P1 or P2 or both) specified by a set of edges changing their labels:

  1. Update the Minimum Spanning Forests

  2. Choose an updated edge, explore in lockstep the connected component on each side of that edge (for both/either
     P1 and/or P2 ). Once one connected component S is completely uncovered, stop the exploration.

  3. Create a new node for the new (smaller) cluster, and update all the pointers to the nodes it contains to
     the new cluster, as well as the edges on its boundary. This also updates the old cluster into the new bigger
     cluster.

  4. Update the edges in the mirror graph if P1 changes.

  5. Update the edges in the contracted graph if P2 changes.

  6. Compute the boundary and inner volume of the smaller cluster, store them and use it to update the boundary
     and inner volume of the bigger cluster.

Handling an edge deletion:

  1. Update the inner volume of the cluster it is in, and the corresponding label in the contracted graph.

  2. Update the mirror cluster in which the edge is, if necessary

  3. Update the Minimum Spanning forest

  4. If the two endpoints are now in different connected components of the minimum spanning forest, run the
     steps in “Handling a split specified by a set of edges changing their label”.

Handling an “intracluster” or “fragmented” edge insertion in P1 , or an “intracluster” edge insertion in P2 :

  1. In P1 , if one of its endpoints is an isolated vertex, add it to the cluster of the other endpoint, updating the
     pointers accordingly

  2. In P2 , look if the two endpoints are in the same connected component. If they are not, explore in
     lockstep the connected components of both endpoints. When one component is completely explored, delete
     the corresponding cluster and add the vertices to the cluster of the other endpoint. Update the pointers
     accordingly.

  3. Update the inner volume of the corresponding cluster and that volume in the contracted graph


                                                         45
  4. Update the mirror graph accordingly
  5. Update the Minimum Spanning Forest
Handling any other update:
  1. Trivially update all data structures related to that update.
      We start by arguing that only allowing cluster splits (ignoring merging of components in P2 for the moment)
allows us to ensure the update time can be amortized to the preprocessing time. We call the union graph between
two updates t1 and t2 the graph that is the union of all edges that appears at least once between updates t1 and
t2 , that is, an edge that either exists already at update t1 , or is inserted at any point between times t1 and t2 .
      One main argument that is useful throughout is the fact that if we maintain this data structure on a
decomposition of the graph, such that the only allowed operations are to rebuild from scratch the whole
decomposition or to split a cluster such that splitting a cluster only takes time proportional to the smaller
side of the cut, then the data structure can be maintained efficiently:
    Lemma 10.2. Let P be a (dynamic) partition of G, where G has U many updates and initially contains m
edges. Suppose that P starts as P = {V }, and can be subject to splits during those updates, that is, an element C
in P can be replaced by C \ S and S, for some S ⊊ C. Let D be a data structure on G and P with preprocessing
time mT such that it takes time T · min{vol(S), vol(C \ S)} to handle a split, for some T > 0.
    Then over all the updates, maintaining D takes Õ((m + U )T ) time overall.
     Proof. Let us consider the union graph over the updates. This graph has m + U edges at most. For any set
X, let vol∗ (X) be the volume of X in the union graph. Then, at any point in time, vol(X) ≤ vol∗ (X).
     Let us now consider a split of C into S and C \ S, and assume it happens after update t. Assume that,
w.l.o.g., at time t, we have that vol(S) ≤ vol(C \ S). Then, at time t, we have that vol(S) ≤ vol∗ (S) and
vol(C \ S) ≤ vol∗ (C \ S). In particular, vol(S) ≤ vol∗ (C \ S) and thus vol(S) ≤ min{vol∗ (S), vol∗ (C \ S)}.
     Hence, if we look at the union graph, each split costs at most the side of the smallest volume (up to a factor
T ). Whenever a split is made, assign to each edge on the smaller side of the cut a cost of T , where the sum of
all the costs is thus higher than the time spent processing the split. Consider the half-edges (also called stubs),
where each half-edge of an edge is assigned to one of the incident vertices. Then the volume of a node is the
number of half-edges assigned to it, and the volume of a subset is the number of half-edges assigned to one of
its vertices. Since each half-edge can only be on the smallest side of the split log(m + U ) times, each half-edge
is assigned at most cost log(m + U )T . Summing over all half-edges and adding the preprocessing time concludes
the proof.
    Corollary 10.3. Let P be a dynamic partition of G, where G has updates of total volume U and initially
contains m edges. Suppose that P starts as C = {V } and can be subject to splits during those updates, as well as
merges where the volume of the smaller cluster being merged is at most ν.
    Let D be a data structure on G and P that with preprocessing time mT such that it takes time T ·
min{vol(S), vol(C \ S)} to handle a split, for some T > 0. Then, over all updates, maintaining D takes
Õ((m + U ν)T ) time overall.
     Proof. Whenever a merge is observed, simply simulate it by deleting the smaller cluster to merge, and inserting
it again inside the cluster it is merged to.
    Lemma 10.4. Algorithm 10.1 handles a split of a cluster C into S and C \ S with vol(S) ≤ vol(C \ S) in
Õ(vol(S)) time.
    Proof. Let us first consider that the split is encoded by a change of labels of the edges:
    Step 1 takes O(vol(S) log4 n) by Theorem 4.5, as there are at most vol(S) many edges deleted from the
instance. Steps 2, 3 4 and 5 take O(vol(S)) time as well. In Step 6, computing the boundary and the inner
volume of S takes O(vol(S)) time, and the inner volume and boundary-size of the new bigger cluster C \ S can
be computed in O(vol(S)) time from the values for C using volin (C) = volin (C \ S) + volin (S) + w(S, C \ S) and
∂C = ∂S + ∂C \ S − w(S, C \ S).
    If the split is encoded as an intracluster edge deletion, note that the first three steps take Õ(1) time, and the
fourth step is the same as the ones analyzed above.


                                                         46
    Lemma 10.5. For P1 , Algorithm 10.1 handles any update other that a split in Õ(1) time.
    Proof. This is immediate as every step takes Õ(1) time.
    Lemma 10.6. For P2 , Algorithm 10.1 handles any update other that a split in Õ(ν) time.
    Proof. This is immediate as every step takes Õ(1) time, apart from when the update merges two clusters
back together, which takes time O(ν̄) where ν̄ is the volume of the smaller of the two clusters. as ν̄ ≤ ν, the
result follows.
    These three lemmata together with Lemma 10.2 prove the running time claimed in Theorem 10.1. It remains
to show that we can compute whether a cut is (1 − δ)boundary sparse efficiently.
   Lemma 10.7. With our data structure, checking whether a cut S in cluster C is (1 − δ)-boundary sparse takes
O(vol(S)) time.
    Proof. We need to compute three quantities: w(S, C \ S), w(S, V \ C) and w(C \ S, V \ C). The first two
ones can be trivially computed in O(vol(S)). The third one can be computed using the value stored at C as ∂C:
∂C = w(C \ S, V \ C) + w(S, V \ C).
     11 Dealing with Weighted Graphs In this section, we will present a way to sample a graph where edges
have integer weights. For that, we extend the weight function described above so that w(e) is the weight of edge
e. Again, we will rely on the edge-sampling approach of Karger [10] to solve the problem.
     The idea is as follows: If we estimate the minimum cut to be between λi = 1.1i and λi+1 = 1.1i+1 , sampling
for each edge e a binomial random variable X(e) with parameters w(e) and pi = 54ϵ2ln     n
                                                                                       λi , and define G̃i to be the
graph obtained from G by replacing each edge with X(e) parallel edges. Then, with high probability, every cut
in G̃i has a value that is at most a (1 − ϵ) factor away from its expectation.
     However, a binomial distribution cannot trivially be sampled efficiently. The naive strategy, that is, to sample
w(e) many Binomial random variables with probability pi , takes O(w(e)) time, which can be too large. Instead,
we note that we only need to preserve the cuts whose value is at most λmax in G̃i . Indeed, for any cut that has
value strictly larger than λmax in G̃i , we do not mind that its value is a (1 − ϵ) factor away from its expected
value, we only need that it stays above λmax so that our algorithm discards it. Therefore, we only need to exactly
compute Y (e), the random variable defined as follows: Y (e) = X(e)1[X(e) ≤ λmax ] + (λmax + 1)1[Xe > λmax ],
and define Gi to be the graph obtained from G by replacing each edge with Y (e) parallel edges.
     The rest of this section formalizes these ideas.
    Definition 11.1. In the case of integer weights, the sampled graph Gi is defined as follows. Let pi = 54ϵ2ln
                                                                                                               λi
                                                                                                                 n

                       54 ln n
and λmax = 1.1(1 + ϵ) ϵ2 . For every edge e ∈ E(G), let X(e) be an independent Binomial random variable of
parameters w(e), pi . Define Y (e) as follows:
                                                (
                                                 X(e)     if X(e) ≤ λmax
                                        Y (e) =
                                                 λmax + 1 X(e) > λmax

Let G̃i be the graph obtained from G by replacing each edge with X(e) parallel edges, and Gi to be the graph
obtained from G by replacing each edge with Y (e) parallel edges.
Note that we will only compute Y (e) for every edge e, and thus only compute Gi , not G̃i . However, G̃i and X
will be useful for our analysis.
     Lemma 11.2. In Gi , let S be a cut of value c ≤ λmax . Then, with high probability, its value in G is in
[(1 − ϵ) pci , (1 + ϵ) pci ]. Moreover, if S also is the minimum cut of Gi , then with high probability, it is a minimum
cut of G.
     Proof. If c ≤ λmax , then for every cut-edge e, we have that Y (e) ≤ λmax , and thus X(e) ≤ λmax . Therefore,
the value of the cut is the same in Gi and G̃i . By Theorem 1.5, we thus have that if c′ is the value of the cut
S in G, then with high probability, (1 − ϵ)pi c′ ≤ c ≤ (1 + ϵ)pi c′ . This translates to c′ ≤ pi (1−ϵ)
                                                                                                   c
                                                                                                        ≤ pci (1 + ϵ) and
c′ ≥ pi (1+ϵ)
         c
              ≥ pci (1 − ϵ).
     In the case where S is also the minimum cut of Gi , note that any other cut S ′ falls in one of two cases: Either
all its cut edges e satisfy Y (e) ≤ λmax and thus ∂G̃i S ′ = ∂Gi S ′ ≥ ∂Gi S = ∂G̃i S. Or there exists a cut edge e such


                                                           47
that Y (e) = λmax + 1 and thus ∂G̃i S ′ ≥ X(e) > λmax ≥ ∂Gi S = ∂G̃i S. Therefore S is also a minimum cut in G̃i ,
and by Theorem 1.5, it corresponds to the minimum cut in G.
    Lemma 11.3. We can sample Gi in O(mλ2max ) time.
    Proof. For each edge e of weight w(e), we will show that we can sample Y (e) in λ2max time. For that, note
that:                                            (
                                                    w(e)
                                                          k
                                                     k    pi (1 − pi )k if k ≤ λmax
                                 P (Y (e) = k) =
                                                   λmax + 1              otherwise

    Writing w(e)    = w(e)×···×(w(e)−k+1) , we can see that every w(e)
                                                                          k
               k            k×···×1                                    k   pi (1 − pi )k can be computed in O(k) =
O(λmax ) time for every k ≤ λmax . Hence, computing every probability P(Y (e) = k) for k ≤ λmax takes O(λ2max )
time, and P(Y (e) = λmax + 1) can be deduced in O(λmax ) time.
    To sample Y (e), all we have to do is thus sample uniformly at random y(e) in [0, 1], and set Y (e) to be the
                             Pj
smallest integer j such that i=0 P(Y (e) = k) > y(e).
    We now discuss how to sample Gi in the case where real weights are allowed, but no parallel edges are. First
note that any edge of weight at most ϵλ                                                   2
                                     n2 can be discarded. Indeed, for any cut S, at most n edges cross the cut,
                                        i


and thus at most ϵλi weight could have been discarded. This preserves the (1 + ϵ)-approximation.
                                                                                    l m
                                                                                                         n2
    We then replace each weight with the closest integer multiple of x1i , where xi =                    ϵλi    . Indeed, this ensures
                                                                                                     ϵλi
that the difference between any old weight and newly assigned weight is at most                      n2 .
                                                                                        Similarly to before, this
ensures that it only affects the cut-size of the cut by a (1 + ϵ) factor.
    Finally, we multiply each edge weight by xi to get integer weights, sample as above with pi = ϵ542 λlni xni . Notice
how we reduce pi to correct for the fact that the weights got multiplied by xi .
                                                                                                                   l 2m
                                                                                                                    n
    Definition 11.4. In the case of real weights, the sampled graph Gi is defined as follows. Define xi = ϵλ          i

and ŵi (e) ∈ N such that ŵxi (e)
                               i
                                   ≤ w(e) < ŵi (e)+1
                                                 xi   . Let pi = ϵ542 λlni xni and λmax = 1.1(1 + ϵ) 54ϵln
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                             . For every edge
e ∈ E(G), let X(e) be an independent Binomial random variable of parameters ŵi (e), pi . Define Y (e) as follows:
                                                  (
                                                    X(e)       if X(e) ≤ λmax
                                         Y (e) =
                                                    λmax + 1 X(e) > λmax

Let Ĝi be G with ŵi as a weight function. Let G̃i be the graph obtained from G by replacing each edge with X(e)
parallel edges, and Gi to be the graph obtained from G by replacing each edge with Y (e) parallel edges.
     Lemma 11.5. In Gi , let S be a cut of value λmin ≤ c ≤ λmax . Then, with high probability, its value in G is
in [(1 − ϵ) picxi , (1 + ϵ)3 picxi ]. Moreover, if S also is the minimum cut of Gi , then with high probability, it is a
(1 + ϵ)2 -approximation of the minimum cut of G.
     Proof. If c ≤ λmax , then for every cut-edge e, we have that Y (e) ≤ λmax , and thus X(e) ≤ λmax . Therefore,
the value of the cut is the same in Gi and G̃i . By Theorem 1.5, we thus have that if c′ is the value of the cut S
in Ĝi , then with high probability, (1 − ϵ)pi c′ ≤ c ≤ (1 + ϵ)pi c′ . This translates to c′ ≤ pi (1−ϵ)
                                                                                                   c
                                                                                                        ≤ pci (1 + ϵ) and
 ′        c      c
c ≥ pi (1+ϵ) ≥ pi (1 − ϵ).
     Let us now compare c′ with c′′ , the value of the cut S in G. There are at most n2 cut edges in S, and thus:

            c′        X          ŵi (e)        X                             X         ŵi (e) + 1   c′ + n 2   c′
               =                         ≤                 w(e) = c′′ ≤                             ≤          ≤    + ϵλi
            xi                     xi                                                        xi          xi      xi
                   e∈E(S,V \S)               e∈E(S,V \S)                  e∈E(S,V \S)

                              λmin ϵ2 λi xi           (1−ϵ)54 ln nϵ2 λi xi                                  ′
However, c′ ≥   c
                pi (1 − ϵ) ≥    54 ln n     ≥             ϵ2 54 ln n         ≥ (1 − ϵ)λi xi and thus xci ≥ (1 − ϵ)λi .         Hence
c′    ′′ c′        ϵ
xi ≤ c ≤ xi (1 + 1−ϵ ). We therefore have:

                                          ′
                                 (
                                  c′′ ≥ xci ≥ picxi (1 − ϵ)
                                          ′
                                  c′′ ≤ xci (1 + 1−ϵ
                                                  ϵ            c
                                                     ) ≤ pi xi (1−ϵ)       ϵ
                                                                     (1 + 1−ϵ ) ≤ picxi (1 + ϵ)3


                                                                   48
      In the case where S is also the minimum cut of Gi , note that any other cut S ′ falls in one of two cases: Either
all its cut edges e satisfy Y (e) ≤ λmax and thus ∂G̃i S ′ = ∂Gi S ′ ≥ ∂Gi S = ∂G̃i S. Or there exists a cut edge e such
that Y (e) = λmax + 1 and thus ∂G̃i S ′ ≥ X(e) > λmax ≥ ∂Gi S = ∂G̃i S. Therefore S is also a minimum cut in
G̃i , and by Theorem 1.5, it corresponds to the minimum cut in Ĝi . Let a′ be the value of the minimum cut C in
Ĝi , a′′ the value of C in G, c′ the value of S in Ĝi , and c′′ the value of S in G. We then have that c′ ≤ a′ with
                                                             ′               ′              ′
high probability as S is the minimum cut of Ĝi , c′′ ≤ xci (1 + 1−ϵ ϵ
                                                                       ) ≤ xci (1 + ϵ)2 ≤ xai (1 + ϵ)3 . We also have that
        ′
a′′ ≥ xai as we round down the weights to get Ĝi , which concludes the proof.
    Observation 11.1. Note that Lemma 11.3 still holds in the weighted case, as we simply add a rounding step
before applying the same algorithm, and where the value of w(e) for each edge e does not intervene in the proof.
    Observation 11.2. Note that after sampling, our graph is unweighted, and thus, in all other sections, the
graph can be assumed to be unweighted.
   We now discuss how to find a dynamic algorithm that finds an approximate minimum cut in weighted graphs,
where U and L are respectively the maximum and minimum weight allowed for the algorithm:
      Algorithm 11.1 (Global Weighted Dynamic Algorithm). Define O(log1.1 (n2 · U                          L )) many estimates of λ:
λ0 , . . . , λlog1.1 (n2 · U ) where λi = L · 1.1i for every i ∈ [log1.1 (n2 · U
                                                                               L )]. Define   for every i, Gi , pi and xi as described
                           L
in Definition 11.4. Run Algorithm 9.1 on every Gi with λmin = (1 − ϵ) ϵ2 , λmax = 1.1(1 + ϵ) 54ϵln
                                                                                        2 54 ln n
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                                            .
      For initialization, initialize the instances in increasing order of index i, and stop whenever an algorithm
reports a value in their range.
      Feed every update to every instance in increasing order of index i, initializing new instances whenever needed.
Stop whenever an algorithm reports a value in their range.
      Let j be the smallest i such that the return value of Algorithm 9.1 on Gi is in [λmin , λmax ]. Return this value
multiplied by pj1xj .

    Lemma 11.6. For every i such that λi ≤ λ, if the return value of Algorithm 9.1 on Gi is smaller than λmax ,
then this value multiplied by pi1xi is at most a (1 + ϵ)4 multiplicative factor away from the minimum cut value in
G.
     Proof. The argument is as follows: we will show that if λi ≤ λ and the return value of Algorithm 9.1 is smaller
than λmax , then in Gi the minimum cut is of value between λmin and λmax . This in turn ensures that the cut
found by Algorithm 9.1 is a (1+ϵ)-approximation of the minimum cut of Gi , and the fact that λi ≤ λ ensures that
pi is large enough – that is, we sampled enough edges – so that we can ensure with high probability that the found
cut in an approximate minimum cut of Ĝi , which in turn is an approximate minimum cut of G. Let µ be the value
of the minimum cut in Ĝi . We have that µ ≤ λxi ≤ µ + n2 and thus µ ≥ λxi − n2 ≥ λxi − ϵλi xi ≥ (1 − ϵ)λi xi .
We have that pi = ϵ542 λlni xni ≥ 54 ln n
                                  ϵ2 λxi , and thus by Theorem 1.5, with high probability the minimum cut in Gi is at
most a (1 + ϵ) or (1 − ϵ) factor away from pi µ, and thus is at least (1 − ϵ)pi µ ≥ (1 − ϵ)2 λxi ϵ542 λlni xni ≥ λmin .
     If moreover Algorithm 9.1 finds a cut of value at most λmax , this ensures that the minimum cut of Gi is
of cut-size at most λmax , and thus ensures that Algorithm 9.1 found a (1 + ϵ)-aproximate minimum cut of Gi .
Multiplying the cut value by pi1xi gives the desired result, by Lemma 11.5.
     12 Acknowledgements Funded by the European union. Views and opinions expressed are however those
of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Research Council
Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.
     This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (MoDynStruct, No. 101019564)                   and the Austrian
Science Fund (FWF) grant DOI 10.55776/I5982. For open access purposes, the author has applied a CC BY
public copyright license to any author-accepted manuscript version arising from this submission.
    References

 [1] R. Chitnis, M. Cygan, M. Hajiaghayi, M. Pilipczuk, and M. Pilipczuk, Designing fpt algorithms
     for cut problems using randomized contractions, SIAM Journal on Computing, 45 (2016), pp. 1171–1229.


                                                                 49
 [2] A. El-Hayek, M. Henzinger, and J. Li, Fully dynamic approximate minimum cut in subpolynomial time
     per operation, in Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA
     2025, New Orleans, LA, USA, January 12-15, 2025, Y. Azar and D. Panigrahi, eds., SIAM, 2025, pp. 750–784,
     https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611978322.22, https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611978322.22.

 [3] G. Goranci, M. Henzinger, D. Nanongkai, T. Saranurak, M. Thorup, and C. Wulff-Nilsen,
     Fully dynamic exact edge connectivity in sublinear time, in Proceedings of the 2023 ACM-SIAM Symposium
     on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2023, Florence, Italy, January 22-25, 2023, N. Bansal and V. Nagarajan,
     eds., SIAM, 2023, pp. 70–86, https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611977554.CH3, https://doi.org/10.1137/1.
     9781611977554.ch3.

 [4] G. Goranci, H. Räcke, T. Saranurak, and Z. Tan, The expander hierarchy and its applications to
     dynamic graph algorithms, in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
     SODA 2021, Virtual Conference, January 10 - 13, 2021, D. Marx, ed., SIAM, 2021, pp. 2212–2228,
     https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611976465.132, https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611976465.132.

 [5] M. Henzinger, J. Li, S. Rao, and D. Wang, Deterministic near-linear time minimum cut in weighted
     graphs, in Proceedings of the 2024 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2024, Alexandria,
     VA, USA, January 7-10, 2024, D. P. Woodruff, ed., SIAM, 2024, pp. 3089–3139, https://doi.org/10.1137/1.
     9781611977912.111, https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611977912.111.

 [6] J. Holm, K. de Lichtenberg, and M. Thorup, Poly-logarithmic deterministic fully-dynamic algorithms
     for connectivity, minimum spanning tree, 2-edge, and biconnectivity, J. ACM, 48 (2001), pp. 723–760,
     https://doi.org/10.1145/502090.502095, https://doi.org/10.1145/502090.502095.

 [7] J. Holm, K. De Lichtenberg, and M. Thorup, Poly-logarithmic deterministic fully-dynamic algorithms
     for connectivity, minimum spanning tree, 2-edge, and biconnectivity, Journal of the ACM (JACM), 48 (2001),
     pp. 723–760.

 [8] W. Jin, X. Sun, and M. Thorup, Fully dynamic min-cut of superconstant size in subpolynomial time,
     in Proceedings of the 2024 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2024, Alexandria, VA,
     USA, January 7-10, 2024, D. P. Woodruff, ed., SIAM, 2024, pp. 2999–3026, https://doi.org/10.1137/1.
     9781611977912.107, https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611977912.107.

 [9] D. R. Karger, Using randomized sparsification to approximate minimum cuts, in Proceedings of the Fifth
     Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms. 23-25 January 1994, Arlington, Virginia, USA,
     D. D. Sleator, ed., ACM/SIAM, 1994, pp. 424–432, http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=314464.314582.

[10] D. R. Karger, Using randomized sparsification to approximate minimum cuts, in Proc. 5th Symp. on
     Discrete Algorithms, vol. 424, 1994, p. 432.

[11] D. R. Karger, Minimum cuts in near-linear time, Journal of the ACM (JACM), 47 (2000), pp. 46–76.

[12] D. R. Karger and C. Stein, A new approach to the minimum cut problem, Journal of the ACM (JACM),
     43 (1996), pp. 601–640.

[13] K.-i. Kawarabayashi and M. Thorup, Deterministic global minimum cut of a simple graph in near-
     linear time, in Proceedings of the forty-seventh annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing, 2015,
     pp. 665–674.

[14] J. Li, Deterministic mincut in almost-linear time, in Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT
     Symposium on Theory of Computing, 2021, pp. 384–395.

[15] J. Li and D. Panigrahi, Deterministic min-cut in poly-logarithmic max-flows, in 2020 IEEE 61st Annual
     Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), IEEE, 2020, pp. 85–92.

[16] D. Lokshtanov, S. Saurabh, and V. Surianarayanan, A parameterized approximation scheme for min
     k-cut, SIAM Journal on Computing, (2022), pp. FOCS20–205.


                                                      50
[17] C. Nalam and T. Saranurak, Maximal k-edge-connected subgraphs in weighted graphs via local random
     contraction, in Proceedings of the 2023 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2023,
     Florence, Italy, January 22-25, 2023, N. Bansal and V. Nagarajan, eds., SIAM, 2023, pp. 183–211,
     https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611977554.CH8, https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611977554.ch8.

[18] C. S. J. Nash-Williams, Edge-disjoint spanning trees of finite graphs, Journal of the London Mathematical
     Society, 1 (1961), pp. 445–450.
[19] M. Thorup, Fully-dynamic min-cut, Combinatorica, 27 (2007), pp. 91–127.
[20] M. Thorup and D. R. Karger, Dynamic graph algorithms with applications, in Scandinavian Workshop
     on Algorithm Theory, Springer, 2000, pp. 1–9.
[21] J. van den Brand, L. Chen, R. Kyng, Y. P. Liu, S. Meierhans, M. P. Gutenberg, and
     S. Sachdeva, Almost-linear time algorithms for decremental graphs: Min-cost flow and more via duality,
     in 65th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2024, Chicago, IL, USA,
     October 27-30, 2024, IEEE, 2024, pp. 2010–2032, https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS61266.2024.00120, https:
     //doi.org/10.1109/FOCS61266.2024.00120.




                                                     51
