                                         Almost-Optimal Approximation Algorithms for Global Minimum Cut
                                                               in Directed Graphs
                                                                                       Ron Mosenzon∗



                                                                                          Abstract
                                                   We develop new (1 + ϵ)-approximation algorithms for finding the global minimum edge-cut
                                               in a directed edge-weighted graph, and for finding the global minimum vertex-cut in a directed
                                               vertex-weighted graph. Our algorithms are randomized, and have a running time of O m1+o(1) /ϵ
                                               on any m-edge n-vertex input graph, assuming all edge/vertex weights are polynomially-bounded.
                                               In particular,
                                                            for any constant ϵ > 0, our algorithms have an almost-optimal running time of
                                               O m1+o(1) . The fastest previously-known running time for this setting, due to (Cen et al., FOCS
arXiv:2512.09080v3 [cs.DS] 20 Jul 2026




                                                                               √                                        
                                               2021), is Õ min n2 /ϵ2 , m1+o(1) n for Minimum Edge-Cut, and Õ n2 /ϵ2 for Minimum Vertex-
                                               Cut.
                                                   Our results further extend to the rooted variants of the Minimum Edge-Cut and Minimum
                                               Vertex-Cut problems, where the algorithm is additionally given a root vertex r, and the goal is to
                                               find a minimum-weight cut separating any vertex from the root r.
                                                   In terms of techniques, we build upon and extend a framework that was recently introduced by
                                               (Chuzhoy et al., SODA 2026) for solving the Minimum Vertex-Cut problem in unweighted directed
                                               graphs. Additionally, in order to obtain our result for the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem,
                                               we develop a novel black-box reduction from this problem to its rooted variant. Prior to our work,
                                               such reductions were only known for more restricted settings, such as when all vertex-weights are
                                               unit.




                                           ∗
                                             Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago. Email: ron.mosenzon@ttic.edu. Supported in part by NSF grant
                                         CCF-2402283.
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                             1
  1.1   Our Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
  1.2   Technical Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     6
        1.2.1   Rooted Minimum Cut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         6
        1.2.2   Reducing Global Minimum Vertex-Cut to Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut. . . . .                   7
  1.3   Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9

2 Preliminaries                                                                                            9
  2.1   Submodularity of Cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     11
  2.2   Fast Algorithms for s-t Minimum Cut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         11
  2.3   Selecting Terminals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11

3 Algorithm for Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut: Proof of Theorem 1.5                                             12
  3.1   Execution of a Single Iteration: Proof of Claim 3.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
        3.1.1   Implementation of ApproxBatchSparsify for i > 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          16

4 From Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut to Global Minimum Vertex-Cut: Proof of
  Theorem 1.4                                                           19
  4.1   Implementing Step 2: Proof of Claim 4.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
  4.2   Implementing Step 1: Proof of Claim 4.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22

A Algorithm for Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut: Proof of Theorem 1.6                                           25
  A.1 Execution of a Single Iteration: proof of Claim A.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         27
        A.1.1 Implementation of VertexApproxBatchSparsify for i > 1.            . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
        A.1.2 Step 2: Proof of Claim A.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        32

B Reducing Dependence on W                                                                                33

C Missing Proofs from Section 2                                                                           35

D Missing Proofs from Section 3                                                                           36

E Removing the Assumption w(L∗ ) ≤ w(R∗ ) in the Proof of Theorem 1.4                                     36

F Extension to Non-Negative Weights                                                                       37
1       Introduction
In recent years, there has been widespread success in the design of almost-linear time algorithm for
various graph-based optimization problems. Following this trend, we consider the design of almost-
linear-time approximation algorithms for two classical problems: the (directed) Global Minimum Edge-
Cut problem, and the related problem of (directed) Global Minimum Vertex-Cut. In the (directed)
Global Minimum Edge-Cut problem, we are given a directed n-vertex m-edge graph G = (V, E) with
positive integral weights w(e) on the edges e ∈ E, and must find a partition of the vertices into two
non-empty sets (X, Y ) so as to minimize the total weight of edges going from X to Y . Meanwhile,
in the problem of (directed) Global Minimum Vertex-Cut, we are given a directed n-vertex m-edge
graph G = (V, E) with positive integral weights w(v) on the vertices v ∈ V , and must find a vertex-cut
of G – a partition of V into three sets (L, S, R) with L, R ̸= ∅ and with no edges e ∈ E from L to R –
which minimizes the total weight of vertices in S.
    The Global Minimum Edge– and Vertex-Cut problems have been extensively studied over many
decades, resulting in almost-linear time algorithms for several restricted settings and edge-density
regimes. For example, in the undirected setting, the Global Minimum Edge-Cut problem has been
known to admit near-linear time exact algorithms for over 25 years [Kar00], with a more recent
deterministic almost-linear time algorithm being achieved by [LP20], using the breakthrough Max-
Flow result of [VDBCK+ 23]. For the Global Minimum Vertex -Cut problem in undirected graphs, Li
et al. [LNP+ 25] recently introduced the first almost-linear time exact algorithm in the special case
where all vertex-weights are unit. In the most general setting of directed graphs with arbitrary (positive
integral) weights, the (1 + ϵ)-approximation algorithms of Cen et al. [CLN+ 22] achieve time1 Õ(n2 /ϵ2 )
for both Minimum Edge-Cut and Minimum Vertex-Cut, which is near-linear when the input graph is
dense and ϵ is large. Furthermore, if all edge-weights/vertex-weights are unit, then an exact Minimum
Edge-Cut can be found in time Õ(n2 ) [CQ21], and an exact Minimum Vertex-Cut can be found
in time O n2+o(1) [LNP+ 25], with the latter result having recently been simplified by [FJMY26].
There have also been several algorithms for the unit-weight versions of these problems whose running
times are parameterized by the value k of the optimal solution, and that run in almost-linear time
when this value is sufficiently small; namely, the well-known directed  Minimum Edge-Cut algorithm of
Gabow [Gab91] runs in time Õ(m·k), while a time of O m      1+o(1) · k was recently achieved by both the
directed Minimum Vertex-Cut algorithm of Chuzhoy et al. [CMT26], and the deterministic undirected
Minimum Vertex-Cut algorithm of Jiang et al. [JNSY25]. However, despite all of this progress, when
the optimal solution value is unrestricted and the weights are arbitrary positive integers, there are
no known constant-approximate algorithms for the directed version of either problem which run in
             √
o(min{n2 , m n}) time, for any edge-density regime. In fact, the Global Minimum Vertex -Cut problem
is not even known to admit o(n2 )-time constant-approximate algorithms for sparse graphs.
    In this paper, we present almost-linear time constant-approximate randomized algorithms for both
the Global Minimum Edge-Cut and the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problems, in the most general
setting of directed graphs with arbitrary (positive integral) weights. More generally, given any ϵ > 0,
our algorithms can compute a (1 + ϵ)-approximate solution in time O m1+o(1) /ϵ , directly improving
                                                                                 

over the Õ n2 /ϵ2 running time of [CLN+ 22] in cases where the input graph is not too dense, and in
                   

cases where ϵ is small. Furthermore, by choosing ϵ = 1/k, our algorithms can produce exact solutions
in time that matches (up to subpolynomial factors) the aforementioned unit-weight algorithms of
Gabow [Gab91] and Chuzhoy et al. [CMT26], while not requiring the unit-weight assumption. We
also note that for the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem with arbitrary positive integral vertex-
weights, our algorithm beats the best known constant-approximate algorithms even in the undirected
    1
   In this section, when stating the running times of algorithms, we omit factors that are polylogarithmic in the
maximum edge-weight/vertex-weight.



                                                       1
setting. See Table 1 for a more comprehensive summary of the state-of-the-art running times of (1+ϵ)-
approximation (and exact) algorithms for the Global Minimum Edge-Cut and Vertex-Cut problems.
(As far as we are aware, all state-of-the-art approximation algorithms for these problems provide a
(1 + ϵ) approximation guarantee.)
    In terms of techniques, we build upon and extend     a framework that was recently introduced by
Chuzhoy et al. [CMT26] for their O m1+o(1) · k -time unit-weight Minimum Vertex-Cut algorithm.
                                                  

We discuss this framework and our new contributions to it in Section 1.2.1. Using this framework,
we are able to design algorithms for the Rooted variants of the Minimum Edge-Cut and Minimum
Vertex-Cut problems: in the Rooted variant of the Minimum Edge-Cut (resp. Vertex-Cut) problem,
the input additionally consists of a ”root” vertex r, and we must search for an edge-cut (X, Y ) (resp.
vertex-cut (L, S, R)) of minimum weight only among those cuts that satisfy r ∈ Y (resp. r ∈ R).2 In
the case of the Minimum Edge-Cut problem, there is a simple well-known reduction from its Global
variant to its Rooted variant, and we use this reduction to achieve our result for the Global variant of
this problem. However, in the case of the Minimum Vertex -Cut problem, translating between these
two variants is not as straightforward: while several reductions from Global Minimum Vertex-Cut
to Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut exist in the literature, they all either are limited to the unit-weight
setting (such as the one implicitly used by the aforementioned algorithm of Chuzhoy et al.), or are
algorithm-specific (such as the one used by Chekuri and Quanrud [CQ21]).3 Therefore, in order
to achieve our result for the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem, we introduce a novel black-box
reduction from the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem,
that works in the arbitrary-weight setting on directed graphs. We hope that this reduction will be
useful in the design of future algorithms for the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem, in both the
approximate and non-approximate settings.

Independent work. Concurrently and independently of our work, [Qua26] obtained randomized
(1+ϵ)-approximate algorithms for the global and rooted versions of Minimum Edge-Cut and Minimum
Vertex-Cut in directed weighted graphs, and [JLSW25] obtained a randomized O(log5 n)-approximate
algorithm for the Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut problem in weighted directed graphs. The Minimum
Edge-Cut algorithms of [Qua26] run in the time of O(log4 (n)/ϵ) single-commodity Max-Flow calls, and
their Minimum Vertex-Cut algorithms run in the time of O(log5 (n)/ϵ)     single-commodity Max-Flow
calls; by [VDBCK+ 23], these running times are at most O m1+o(1) /ϵ , matching our algorithms for
these problems. The algorithm of [JLSW25] runs in time O(m1+o(1) ), matching our running time for
the case of ϵ = Θ(1), albeit with a somewhat worse approximation factor.

1.1    Our Results
The following two theorems summarize our main results for the Global Minimum Edge-Cut and Global
Minimum Vertex-Cut problems.

   2
      We note that the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem is usually defined with the constraint that the root must
lie in L, rather than
                     in R. However,
                                       we use the formulation with r ∈ R in this paper so as to be consistent with the
aforementioned O m1+o(1) · k -time algorithm of Chuzhoy et al., which implicitly uses a reduction to this version of the
problem. Similarly, the Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut problem is usually defined with the constraint that r must lie in X,
rather than in Y , but we use the formulation with r ∈ Y in order to be consistent between the edge-cut and vertex-cut
settings.
    3
      There are also many existing reductions from the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem to the s-t Minimum Vertex-
Cut problem that can easily be modified in order to instead reduce to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem.
However, all of these either suffer from one of the aforementioned drawbacks, or can increase the total running time by
an mΩ(1) multiplicative factor.




                                                           2
Table 1: Best previously-known randomized running times for computing (1 + ϵ)-approximate (and
exact) Global Minimum Cut in different settings.
                                                                               Problem
                Weights                            Minimum Edge-Cut                   Minimum Vertex-Cut
                Arbitrary Weights (the total       O(nm2/3+o(1) ) [CLN+ 22]           O(min{mn0.976 , n2.677 }) [CMT26]
 Directed                                                       √
                weight is denoted by W )           O(m1+o(1) n) [CLN+ 22]             Õ(n2 /ϵ2 ) [CLN+ 22]
                                                   Õ(n2 /ϵ2 ) [CLN+ 22]              Õ(nW/ϵ) [CQ21]
                                                   O(m1+o(1) /ϵ) this paper           O(m1+o(1) /ϵ) this paper

                Unit Weights                       Õ(n2 ) [CQ21]                     O(n2+o(1) ) [LNP+ 25, FJMY26]
                                                   Õ(m · k) [Gab91]                  O(m1+o(1) · k) [CMT26]
                                                   O(m1+o(1) /ϵ) this paper           Õ(min{mk 2 , mk/ϵ}) [NSY19]
                                                                                      Õ(n2 /ϵ) [CQ21]
                                                                                      O(m1+o(1) /ϵ) this paper

                Arbitrary Weights (the total       Õ(m) [Kar00]                      O(min{m3/2+o(1) , n2.677 }) [CT25, CMT26]
 Undirected
                weight is denoted by W )                                              Õ(n2 /ϵ2 ) [CLN+ 22]
                                                                                      Õ(nW/ϵ) [CQ21]
                                                                                      O(m1+o(1) /ϵ) this paper

                Unit Weights                       Õ(m) [Kar00]                      O(m1+o(1) ) [LNP+ 25]
                                                                                      Õ(min{m + nk 3 , m · k/ϵ}) [NSY19]
                                                                                      Õ(n2 /ϵ) [CQ21]

 This table shows the state-of-the-art randomized running times for achieving (1 + ϵ) approximation for the Global
Minimum Edge-Cut and Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problems on an n-vertex m-edge graph, where k denotes the value
of the optimal solution, and W denotes the sum of weights. Our new algorithms are listed in those settings where they
provide an improvement upon the previous state-of-the-art for some choice of parameters n, m, k, ϵ.
 Running times without dependence on ϵ are for exact algorithms. The Õ notation is used to hide polylog(m) factors.
In all algorithms for the arbitrary-weight setting, the running time hides an additional polylogW multiplicative factor.
 We note that in the unit-weight setting, the value k of the optimal solution can be no larger than the average degree
2m/n. This means, for example, that in the directed unit-weight setting for Minimum Edge-Cut, it is possible to achieve
                                √
time Õ(min{n2 , m · k}) ≤ Õ(m n) by combining the results of [CQ21] and [Gab91].
 A survey of deterministic algorithms for these problems can be found, for example, in Jiang et al. [JNSY25].


Theorem 1.1 There is a randomized algorithm that, given a directed m-edge graph G with positive
integral weights w(e) ≤ W on the edges e ∈ E(G), as well as a precision parameter ϵ ∈ (0, 1), outputs
an edge-cut (X, Y ) in G such that, with probability at least 12 , w(EG (X, Y )) ≤ (1+ϵ)OPTE holds, where
OPT    denotes the
   E1+o(1)         weight of the global minimum edge-cut in G. The running time of the algorithm is
    m       ·log W
O         ϵ         .

Theorem 1.2 There is a randomized algorithm whose input is a directed m-edge graph G with positive
integral weights w(v) ≤ W on the vertices v ∈ V (G), such that G contains some vertex-cut, as well
as a precision parameter ϵ ∈ (0, 1). The algorithm outputs a vertex-cut (L, S, R) in G such that,
with probability at least 12 , w(S) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTV holds, where OPT
                                                                  V denotes the weight of the global
                                                                                 m1+o(1) ·log W
minimum vertex-cut in G. The running time of the algorithm is O                        ϵ          .

We comment that the additional condition in Theorem 1.2 that the input graph G ”has some vertex-
cut” is equivalent to requiring that G is not a complete graph; furthermore, this condition can be
verified in O(m) time. We also comment that the running times of the algorithms from Theorem 1.1
and Theorem 1.2 are dominated by calls to the almost-linear time exact s-t Maximum Flow procedure


                                                           3
                                                                                          
of [VDBCK+ 23], while all other parts of these algorithms can be implemented in Õ m·log
                                                                                       ϵ
                                                                                         W
                                                                                             time.
This means that if a near-linear time maximum s-t flow algorithm will be discovered in the future,
then
    plugging
             it into our algorithms would allow Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 to be implemented in time
    m·log W
Õ     ϵ     .
    As mentioned earlier, we achieve Theorem 1.2 by using a new reduction from the Global Minimum
Vertex-Cut problem to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem, that works in the vertex-weighted
directed setting. This reduction is our other main result. More formally, this reduction shows that, in
order to solve the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on an n-vertex m-edge graph, it suffices to
solve the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on O m     n different n-vertex graphs, that together have
O(m) edges overall. Furthermore, if an approximate algorithm is used to solve the Rooted Minimum
Vertex-Cut instances, then the reduction obtains an approximate solution to the Global Minimum
Vertex-Cut problem, with the same approximation factor. We formulate this reduction as an oracle
algorithm, with access to an oracle for the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem; so we begin by
defining this oracle. As can be seen by the following definition and theorem, all the instances of the
Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem that our reduction must solve have the same vertex-weights as
the input instance of the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem.
Definition 1.3 (Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut Oracle) Consider any set V of vertices, any weight
function w assigning positive integral weights w(v) ≤ W to the vertices v ∈ V , and any precision pa-
rameter ϵ ≥ 0. A (1 + ϵ)-Approximate Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut oracle on V with weight function
w is an oracle that implements the following type of query: given any directed graph G′ with V (G′ ) = V ,
and any vertex y ∗ ∈ V , such that there exists some vertex-cut (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) in G′ with y ∗ ∈ R, the oracle
returns a vertex-cut (L, S, R) in G′ such that y ∗ ∈ R and such that, with probability at least 21 , the
inequality w(S) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTG′ ,y∗ holds, where OPTG′ ,y∗ denotes the minimum possible weight of a
vertex-cut (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) in G′ with y ∗ ∈ R′ .
Theorem 1.4 (Reduction from Global to Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut) There is a random-
ized algorithm whose input consists of a directed m-edge n-vertex graph G with positive integral weights
w(v) ≤ W on the vertices v ∈ V (G), such that G has some vertex-cut, as well as a precision parameter
ϵ ≥ 0. The algorithm is further given access to a (1 + ϵ)-Approximate Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut
oracle on V (G) with the aforementioned vertex-weights. The output of the algorithm is a vertex-cut
(L, S, R) in G such that, with probability at least 12 , w(S) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTG holds, where OPTG denotes
the weight of the global minimum vertex-cut in G. The algorithm makes at most O (m/n) queries to
the oracle, and the overall number of edges in the graphs from these queries is O(m). The algorithm
spends at most Õ(m log W ) time outside of oracle queries.

    We emphasize that, by setting ϵ = 0, the above algorithm can be used to reduce the exact Global
Minimum Vertex-Cut problem to the exact Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem. The above theorem
also allows values of ϵ that are larger than 1, as well as values that depend on the size of the graph G.
    Lastly, in the next two theorems, we summarize the guarantees of our algorithms for the rooted
variants of the Minimum Edge-Cut and Minimum Vertex-Cut problems. These are essentially identical
to Theorems 1.1 and 1.2, except that they deal with the rooted variants of the Minimum Edge-Cut
and Vertex-Cut problems, rather than with the global variants of these problems.
Theorem 1.5 There is a randomized algorithm whose input consists of a directed m-edge graph G
with positive integral weights w(e) ≤ W on the edges e ∈ E(G), as well as a precision parameter
ϵ ∈ (0, 1), and a root vertex y ∗ ∈ V (G). The output of the algorithm is an edge-cut (X, Y ) in G such
that y ∗ ∈ Y and, with probability at least 21 , w(EG (X, Y )) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTE,y∗ holds, where OPTE,y∗
denotes the minimum     possible weight
                     1+o(1)           of an edge-cut (X ′ , Y ′ ) in G with y ∗ ∈ Y ′ . The running time of
                             ·log W
the algorithm is O m       ϵ          .

                                                     4
Theorem 1.6 There is a randomized algorithm whose input consists of a directed m-edge graph G with
positive integral weights w(v) ≤ W on the vertices v ∈ V (G), as well as a precision parameter ϵ ∈ (0, 1),
and a root vertex y ∗ ∈ V (G) such that there exists some vertex-cut (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) in G with y ∗ ∈ R′ . The
output of the algorithm is a vertex-cut (L, S, R) in G such that y ∗ ∈ R and, with probability at least
1
2 , w(S) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTV,y holds, where OPTV,y denotes the minimum possible weight           of a vertex-cut
                           ∗                     ∗

                                                                               m1+o(1) ·log W
(L′ , S ′ , R′ ) in G with y ∗ ∈ R′ . The running time of the algorithm is O         ϵ          .

    We also comment that, even though all of our theorems are stated and proved for the setting
in which edge-weights and vertex-weights are not allowed to be zero, it is possible to convert our
algorithms to the setting in which zero-weight edges and vertices are allowed, via a standard reduction.
For the sake of completeness, we describe this reduction in Section F.

Completing the proofs of Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 We complete this subsection by demonstrating
how to prove our Global Minimum Cut theorems (Theorems 1.1 and 1.2) using our Rooted Minimum
Cut theorems (Theorems 1.5 and 1.6) and our reduction theorem (Theorem 1.4).
    To prove Theorem 1.2, we simply use the reduction from Theorem 1.4, and, whenever it makes a
query to the (1 + ϵ)-Approximate Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut oracle, we answer this query using a
call to Theorem 1.6. It is not hard to verify that Theorem 1.6 satisfies the guarantees required by the
oracle, and that this reduction results in a Global Minimum Vertex-Cut algorithm exactly as specified
by Theorem 1.2.
     The proof of our Global Minimum Edge-Cut theorem (Theorem 1.1) follows from our Rooted
Minimum Edge-Cut theorem via standard techniques. Specifically, given an input to Theorem 1.1
consisting of a graph G with weights w(e) on the edges e ∈ E(G), and a precision parameter ϵ ∈ (0, 1),
we first compute the ”reversed graph” G that is obtained from G by reversing the direction of all
edges; we then fix any vertex r ∈ V (G) as the root, and make two calls to the Rooted Minimum
Edge-Cut algorithm of Theorem 1.5 – one call is on the graph G with root r, while the other call is on
the reversed graph G with the same root r; both calls use the precision parameter ϵ from the input.
                                                                                 ′  ′
Let (X, Y ) denote the edge-cut in G obtained by the first call, and let (X , Y ) denote the edge-cut in
                                                         ′            ′
G obtained by the second call. Define X ′ = Y and Y ′ = X – it is not hard to verify that (X ′ , Y ′ )
                                                                                                        ′ ′
is an edge-cut in G whose value w(EG (X ′ , Y ′ )) is the same as the value of the edge-cut (X , Y ) in
                                                            ′   ′
the reverse graph G, namely, the same as w(EG (X , Y )). Lastly, we return the edge-cut whose value
in G is smallest among the two edge-cuts (X, Y ) and (X ′ , Y ′ ). Therefore, to prove the correctness of
the algorithm, it must be shown that with probability at least 21 , at least one of the two edge-cuts
(X, Y ) and (X ′ , Y ′ ) has value at most (1 + ϵ)OPTE , where OPTE denotes the weight of the global
minimum edge-cut in G. For the analysis, consider any global minimum edge-cut (X ∗ , Y ∗ ) in G. The
analysis can then be divided into two cases based on whether r ∈ Y ∗ or r ∈ X ∗ : in the case where
r ∈ Y ∗ , it follows from the guarantees of our Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut algorithm that the weight
of the edge-cut (X, Y ) satisfies w(EG (X, Y )) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTE with probability at least 21 , as needed; in
the complementary case where r ∈ X ∗ , it can be verified using a similar argument that the edge-cut
                                                   ′   ′
(X ′ , Y ′ ) satisfies w(EG (X ′ , Y ′ )) = w(EG (X , Y )) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTE with probability at least 12 – namely,
this holds because the edge-cut (Y ∗ , X ∗ ) in the reversed graph G is a solution of value OPTE to the
Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut instance on G with root r. This concludes the proof of Theorem 1.1 using
Theorem 1.5.




                                                      5
1.2     Technical Overview
1.2.1    Rooted Minimum Cut

We now give an overview of the techniques used in our Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut and Rooted
Minimum Vertex-Cut algorithms     (Theorems 1.5 and 1.6). Our algorithms are inspired by techniques
from the O m1+o(1) · k -time exact algorithm of [CMT26] for the unit-weight Global Minimum Vertex-
                      

Cut problem, so we begin with a discussion of some ideas used by that algorithm. Then, we discuss our
algorithms and how they relate to these ideas. We note that, while [CMT26] solve the Global Minimum
Vertex-Cut problem rather than its rooted variant, their algorithm implicitly begins by reducing the
problem to the rooted variant, using a reduction that is tailored to the unit-weight setting. We now
describe the setup for the techniques used by [CMT26] for solving the resulting Rooted Minimum
Vertex-Cut instance.
    Consider an input instance of the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem, consisting of a graph G
with weights w(v) on the vertices v ∈ V (G), and a root vertex y ∗ . Let OPT denote the value of the
optimal solution to this instance. Observe that, in order to (exactly) solve this problem, it suffices
to find some vertex v for which the weighted v-y ∗ vertex-connectivity, κG (v, y ∗ ), is equal to OPT –
once such a vertex is found, an optimal solution to the problem can be extracted using a single call to
an s-t Minimum Cut subroutine. A common paradigm for finding such a vertex v is to first sample
some set T of terminals so that, with high probability, there exists some terminal x∗ ∈ T satisfying
κG (x∗ , y ∗ ) = OPT; then, for every terminal x ∈ T , construct a sparsifier graph Gx , so that a single
call to an s-t Max-Flow subroutine on the sparsifier Gx suffices to distinguish between        the case where
x = x∗ and the case where κG (x, y ∗ ) > OPT. Thus, as long as the total size x∈T |E(Gx )| of the
                                                                                        P
sparsifiers is sufficiently small, it is possible to efficiently find a terminal x ∈ T with κG (x, y ∗ ) = OPT,
by calling an s-t Max-Flow subroutine once on eachP        sparsifier. The main challenge is thus to efficiently
construct such sparsifiers while guaranteeing that x∈T |E(Gx )| is small.
    The work of [CMT26] introduced a new technique for constructing such sparsifiers, which we
describe next. At a high level, the technique of [CMT26] shows that in order to construct the desired
collection of sparsifiers, it suffices to have an efficient subroutine, which we refer to as BatchSparsify,
that solves the following problem: given a set B ′ of terminals, a subset B ⊆ B ′ , and a graph GB ′ that
simultaneously serves as a sparsifier for the whole set B ′ of terminals (in a formalized sense, that we
choose to omit from this high-level overview), construct a small graph GB that serves as a sparsifier
for the set B of terminals, so that the size of GB is proportional to |B|. Furthermore, the running time
of this subroutine must be roughly equal to the size of the graph GB ′ , which may be smaller than G.
    More concretely, the algorithm of [CMT26] employs a divide-and-conquer approach consisting of
z ≈ log T phases: in Phase i, the algorithm considers a partition Bi of the set T of terminals, and
constructs a sparsifier GB for each part B ∈ Bi of this partition. (We refer to the parts B ∈ Bi of this
partition as batches.) Furthermore, for each i > 1, the partition Bi is a refinement of the partition Bi−1
that was considered in the previous phase, in the sense that every batch B ∈ Bi has a parent batch
B ′ ∈ Bi−1 which satisfies B ⊆ B ′ . Thus, the sparsifier GB for each batch B ∈ Bi can be computed by
          BatchSparsify subroutine on the sparsifier GB ′ of its parent batch. Then, forPeach i′ ∈ [z], the
using the P
total size B∈B ′ |E(GB )| of the sparsifiers constructed in Phase i is proportional to B∈B ′ |B| = |T |;
                  i                                                                              i
and, for every i > 1, by guaranteeing that each batch B ′ ∈ Bi−1 serves as the  P  parent   batch  of at most
2 batches of Bi , it follows that the total running time of Phase i is roughly B ′ ∈Bi−1 |E(GB ′ )|. Lastly,
the final sparsifier Gx for each terminal x is the one constructed for its batch in Phase z, where the
partition Bz consists only of constant-sized batches – it is then possible to use the fact that
                                                                                             P Bz has small
batches in order to upperbound the expression that    P  we  wanted  to minimize,
                                                                            P       namely,    x∈T |E(Gx )|.
Specifically, this expression is upper-bounded as x∈T |E(Gx )| ≤ O             B∈Bz |E(GB )| , because the
size |E(GB )| of each sparsifier {GB }B∈Bz is counted only O(1) times in the left-hand side of this


                                                       6
inequality. The key remaining part is the implementation of the BatchSparsify subroutine.
   The algorithm of [CMT26] (implicitly) provides a BatchSparsify subroutine that runs in time
O |E(GB ′ )|1+o(1) (in the unit-weight setting), and produces a sparsifier GB of size |E(GB )| =
Õ |B|
    |T | · m · OPT . (To achieve this, the sparsifiers must satisfy some additional technical proper-
ties.) Thus, the total size of the sparsifiers they construct in each phase is Õ(m · OPT), and the total
running time of their algorithm is O m1+o(1) · OPT .
                                                       

    In this paper, our main contribution is introducing a (1+ϵ)-approximate
                                                                             version of the BatchSparsify
                                                                   |B|      1
subroutine, which produces a sparsifier GB of size |E(GB )| = Õ |T | · m · ϵ , using different techniques
than those of [CMT26]. (See Section 3.1 for    a comparison of these techniques.) The running time of
this subroutine is O |E(GB ′ )|1+o(1) · log W , where W denotes the maximum vertex-weight. Further-
more, we extend the divide-and-conquer framework of [CMT26] to the approximate setting, so that
it can be used together with this approximate subroutine in order to approximately solve the Rooted
Minimum Vertex-Cut problem. (We also slightly simplify this framework by omitting one technical
notion that was used in [CMT26], which stated that certain batches become ”invalid” throughout the
execution of the algorithm.) Thus, the total size of the sparsifiers that our    algorithm constructs in
                   m
                                                                           m1+o(1) ·log W
each phase is Õ ϵ , and the total running time of our algorithm is O             ϵ         , as promised in
Theorem 1.6.4 We furthermore observe that all of the algorithms mentioned above have straightfor-
ward analogues in the edge-cut setting, thus allowing us to obtain our result for the Rooted Minimum
Edge-Cut problem (Theorem 1.5).

1.2.2     Reducing Global Minimum Vertex-Cut to Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut.

Consider an instance of the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem, consisting of a directed m-edge
graph G with positive integral weights w(v) on the vertices v ∈ V (G). Let OPT denote the weight of
the global minimum vertex-cut on G.
    A common paradigm for solving the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem, is to reduce it to
several instances of the s-t Minimum Vertex-Cut problem ([LNP+ 25, JNSY25]). This kind of reduction
consists of two steps. In the first step, the algorithm constructs a collection {(si , ti )}ℓi=1 of pairs of
vertices from G, which naturally induces a collection of ℓ instances of the s-t Minimum Vertex-Cut
problem on the graph G, such that every feasible solution of any of these instances is also a feasible
solution to the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on G. Furthermore, the algorithm constructs the
collection {(si , ti )}ℓi=1 such that with high probability, there exists some global minimum vertex-cut
(L, S, R) of G and some i ∈ [ℓ] such that si ∈ L and ri ∈ R holds; whenever this happens, it follows
that the optimal solution value of the i’th instance of s-t Minimum Vertex-Cut is exactly equal to
OPT. In that case, an optimal solution to the original problem can be obtained by solving these
ℓ instances of s-t Minimum Vertex-Cut, and selecting the minimum-weight vertex-cut among these
solutions. However, explicitly solving these instances is often prohibitively expensive, as their total
size is ℓ·m. Therefore, the second step of the paradigm consists of ”sparsifying” each of these instances
– that is, for each i ∈ [ℓ], the algorithm finds a graph Gi such that the si -ti minimum vertex-cut in Gi
has the same weight as the si -ti minimum vertex-cut in G, and any si -ti vertex-cut in Gi can be easily
transformed into an si -ti vertex-cut in G of the same value. Then, these new sparsified instances of
the s-t Minimum Vertex-Cut problem can be solved instead of the instances on G. By guaranteeing
that the total size of the graphs {Gi }i∈[ℓ] is sufficiently small, algorithms that use this method are able
   4
     Actually, to achieve the probability bound stated in Theorem 1.6, we must amplify         the success probability using
                                                                              1+o(1)
                                                                                     ·polylogW
polylog(mW ) many repetitions, thus ending with a running time of O m                 ϵ
                                                                                                . However, we then transform
                                             1+o(1)        
                                                     ·log W
this algorithm into one that runs in time O m      ϵ
                                                              , by using a standard reduction that we discuss in Section B.



                                                              7
to solve all s-t Minimum Vertex-Cut instances faster than the time it would take to explicitly solve
them on the original graph G.
    At a very high level, our reduction in Theorem 1.4 follows a paradigm similar to the above, except
we reduce to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem instead of to the s-t Minimum Vertex-Cut
problem. Specifically, in the first step of the reduction, we construct an appropriate set T ⊆ V (G) of
ℓ ”root” vertices, which naturally induces a collection of ℓ instances of the Rooted Minimum Vertex-
Cut problem on the graph G, such that any solution of these instances is also a feasible solution to
the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on G. Furthermore, if there exists some global minimum
vertex-cut (L, S, R) of G and some root r ∈ T ∩ R, then one of these implicit instances of the Rooted
Minimum Vertex-Cut problem has the same optimal solution value as that of the Global Minimum
Vertex-Cut instance on G. In the second step, we sparsify each of these instances by constructing, for
each root r ∈ T , a sparsified graph Gr with V (Gr ) = V (G), such that the set of feasible solutions of
the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on Gr with root r is exactly the same as that on G with
root r. The key challenge is in making sure that the total size of all sparsified graphs Gr is small,
while at the same time selecting sufficiently many roots into the set T so as to guarantee that with
high probability, there exists some global minimum vertex-cut (L, S, R) of G with T ∩ R ̸= ∅. Next,
we explain our approach to overcoming this challenge.
     For the sake of simplicity of this overview, we will make the additional assumption that some global
minimum vertex-cut (L, S, R) of G has w(R) ≥ w(L) – it is not difficult to get rid of this assumption,
and we explain how to do this in Section E. Our     strategy for overcoming the aforementioned challenge
is inspired by techniques from the O m1+o(1) n -time deterministic Global Minimum Vertex-Cut algo-
rithm of Jiang et al. [JNSY25]. The algorithm of [JNSY25] follows the earlier-mentioned paradigm of
reducing the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem to the s-t Minimum Vertex-Cut problem; further-
                                                                                           ℓ
more, one of the key ideas in their algorithm is to construct the collection  {(si , tin)}i=1 of source-sink
                                                                                                          o
                                                                                          w(u)
pairs such that each vertex u ∈ V (G) serves as the source si in at most Õ n · min                ,1
                                                                                     w(V (G))−OPT
many pairs. Using this guarantee, as well as some clever analysis that is beyond the scope of this high-
level overview,
              they are able to create sparsified graphs of total size O(mn), which suffices for their
O m1+o(1) n -time deterministic algorithm. At a high level, our key  n idea is to sample
                                                                                      o each vertex u
                                                                              w(u)
into our set T of roots independently with probability roughly min                    ,1   , which is n-fold
                                                                         w(V (G))−OPT
smaller than the number of times that u serves as the source vertex in the reduction of [JNSY25].
Then, by using a similar sparsification method to the one used by [JNSY25], we can guarantee that
the expected total size of our sparsified graphs is O(m) – an n-fold improvement over the total size
achieved by [JNSY25]. It is also not difficult to verify that this method of sampling ensures that for
some global minimum vertex-cut (L, S, R), we have a constant probability of sampling a root from the
set R: indeed, observe that w(L∪R) = w(V (G))−OPT holds for every global minimum vertex-cut, and
so, by our earlier assumption that some global minimum vertex-cut (L, S, R) satisfies w(R) ≥ w(L),
it follows that this cut satisfies w(R) ≥ (w(V (G)) − OPT) /2; it can then be verified that with prob-
ability Ω(1), at least one vertex of R is sampled into T . To summarize, our n-fold improvement over
the reduction of [JNSY25] comes both from leveraging the power of random sampling, which could
not be used by the deterministic algorithm of [JNSY25], and, perhaps even more crucially, from the
fact that we are reducing to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem rather than the s-t Minimum
Vertex-Cut problem – this means that our sampling procedure only needs to guarantee that for some
global minimum vertex-cut (L, S, R), it samples a vertex r ∈ R, rather than having to sample a pair
of vertices (s, t) that simultaneously satisfies s ∈ L and t ∈ R.




                                                     8
1.3    Organization
We cover preliminaries in Section 2. In Section 3, we present our algorithm for the Rooted Minimum
Edge-Cut problem – we choose to present this algorithm before the vertex-cut version, as its analysis
is simpler. Furthermore, as these two algorithm are very similar, we defer the presentation of the
Rooted Minimum Vertex -Cut algorithm to Section A. Finally, in Section 4, we present our reduction
from Global Minimum Vertex-Cut to Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut (Theorem 1.4).
    In Section B we describe a standard method, that is used in our algorithms for both the Rooted
Minimum Edge-Cut and the Rooted          Minimum Vertex-Cut problems, which allows transforming an
                                    1+o(1)
                                     m      ·polylogW
algorithm with running time O                ϵ        for these problems into one that has running time
    1+o(1)        
    m       ·log W
O         ϵ          . Section C covers missing proofs from Section 2; Section D covers a missing proof
from Section 3; and Section E explains how to remove an additional assumption that we make in
Section 4. Lastly, Section F explains how our main results can be extended to the setting in which
weights are allowed to be 0.


2     Preliminaries
All logarithms in this paper are base 2. All graphs considered in this paper are directed, and without
self-loops. Furthermore, graphs are assumed to be without parallel edges unless explicitly specified
otherwise. We use the Õ and Ω̃ notations to hide polylog(m) factors. For any natural number n, we
use [n] to denote the set {1, . . . , n}.

Basic Graph-Theoretic Notation. Consider a directed graph G. We use V (G) and E(G), re-
spectively, to denote its set of vertices and its set edges. For every two sets A, B ⊆ V (G) of vertices,
we use EG (A, B) ⊆ E(G) to denote the set of edges that begin at A and end at B. For every ver-
                                               +
tex v ∈ V (G), its set of outgoing edges is δG   (v) = EG ({v} , V (G)), and its set of incoming edges is
 −
δG (v) = EG (V (G), {v}). The out-degree of a vertex v ∈ V (G) is deg+            +
                                                                        G (v) = |δG (v)|, and the in-degree
                               −          −
of a vertex v ∈ V (G) is degG (v) = |δG (v)|. The total degree of a vertex v ∈ V (G) is degG (v) =
                −
deg+G (v) + degG (v). Furthermore, for every vertex v ∈ V (G), its set of out-neighbors is NG (v) =
                                                                                                    +
                                                               −
{u ∈ V (G) | (v, u) ∈ E(G)}, and its set of in-neighbors is NG (v) = {u ∈ V (G) | (u, v) ∈ E(G)}.
                                                                                      +
    For every set A ⊆ V (G) of vertices, its set of outgoing boundary edges is ∂G       (A) = EG (A, V (G)\A),
                                                −
and its set of incoming boundary edgesP     is ∂G (A) = EG (V (G)\A, A). Additionally, for a set A ⊆ V (G) of
                                  +                   +                                                 −
vertices, its out-volume  is  vol G (A)  =    v∈A degG (v) = |EG (A, V (G))|, and its in-volume is volG (A) =
P          −                                              +                                 +
   v∈A degG (v) = |EPG (V (G), A)|. Observe      that volG (A) is not the same thing as |∂G (A)|. The volume
                                             +           −
of A is volG (A) = v∈ASdegG (v) = vol      G (A) + volG (A). Lastly, for every set   A ⊆ V (G),
                                                                                             S its set   of out-
                 +                   +                                             −                 −
neighbors is NG (A) =        v∈A GN    (v) \  A,  and its set of in-neighbors is NG  (A)  =       N
                                                                                               v∈A G   (v)   \ A.
When using the above notation, we often omit the subscript G when it is obvious from the context.

Weighted Graphs. In this paper, we deal with two different types of weight-functions on graphs.
The first is a weight function w that assigns weights w(e) to the edges e ∈ E(G) of a graph G, and
the second is a weight function w that assigns weights w(v) to the vertices v ∈ V (G). When given
a weight Pfunction w of the former type, then, for every set E ′ ⊆ E(G) of edges, we use the notation
w(E ′ ) = e∈E ′ w(e). Similarly, when given a weight Pfunction w of the latter type, then, for every set
V ′ ⊆ V (G) of vertices, we use the notation w(V ′ ) = v∈V ′ w(v).

Edge-Cuts and Edge-Connectivity. Consider a graph G with weights w(e) on the edges e ∈
E(G). An edge-cut in G is an (ordered) pair (X, Y ) such that (X, Y ) is a partition of the set V (G),

                                                       9
and X, Y ̸= ∅. The weight of this cut, also known as its value, is w(EG (X, Y )). For any pair
u, v ∈ V (G) of vertices, we say that an edge-cut (X, Y ) is a u-v edge-cut if u ∈ X and v ∈ Y ; if
the weight of (X, Y ) is minimal among all u-v edge-cuts, then we say that it is a minimum u-v edge-
cut. The (weighted) u-v edge-connectivity, denoted λG (u, v), is the maximum possible cardinality of
a (multi)set of u-v paths in G such that every edge e ∈ E(G) belongs to at most w(e) many of these
paths. By the Max Flow-Min Cut theorem, λG (u, v) is also equal to the weight of the minimum u-v
edge-cut in G.

Vertex-Cuts and Vertex-Connectivity. Consider a graph G with weights w(v) on the vertices
v ∈ V (G). A vertex-cut in G is an (ordered) triple (L, S, R) such that (L, S, R) is a partition of the
set V (G), and L, R ̸= ∅ (but S may be empty). The weight of this cut, also known as its value, is
w(S). For any pair u, v ∈ V (G) of vertices, we say that a vertex-cut (L, S, R) is a u-v vertex-cut if
u ∈ L and v ∈ R; if the weight of (L, S, R) is minimal among all u-v vertex-cuts, then we say that it is
a minimum u-v vertex-cut. The (weighted) u-v vertex-connectivity, denoted κG (u, v), is the maximum
possible cardinality of a (multi)set of u-v paths in G such that every vertex v ′ ∈ V (G) \ {u, v} belongs
to at most w(v ′ ) many of these paths. By Menger’s theorem, κG (u, v) is also equal to the weight of
the minimum u-v vertex-cut in G.

Global Minimum Edge-Cut and Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut. In the Global Minimum Edge-
Cut problem, the input is a directed graph G with integral weights w(e) > 0 on the edges e ∈
E(G). The goal of this problem is to produce an edge-cut (X, Y ) in G while minimizing the weight
w(EG (X, Y )) of this edge-cut. For such an instance of the Global Minimum Edge-Cut problem, we
say that any edge-cut (X, Y ) of G is a feasible solution to this instance.
   In the Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut problem, the input is a directed graph G with integral weights
w(e) > 0 on the edges e ∈ E(G), as well as a root vertex r ∈ V (G). A feasible solution to this
problem is an edge-cut (X, Y ) in G with r ∈ Y . (We note that this problem is usually defined with
the constraint r ∈ X instead of r ∈ Y , but we use the symmetric version with r ∈ Y in this paper.)
The goal of the problem is to compute a feasible solution (X, Y ) while minimizing the weight of the
edge-cut (X, Y ).

Global Minimum Vertex-Cut and Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut. In the Global Minimum
Vertex-Cut problem, the input is a directed graph G with integral weights w(v) > 0 on the vertices
v ∈ V (G), such that G contains some vertex-cut. The goal of this problem is to produce a vertex-cut
(L, S, R) in G while minimizing the weight w(S) of this vertex-cut. For such an instance of the Global
Minimum Vertex-Cut problem, we say that any vertex-cut (L, S, R) of G is a feasible solution to this
instance.
    In the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem, the input is a directed graph G with integral weights
w(v) > 0 on the vertices v ∈ V (G), as well as a root vertex r ∈ V (G). A feasible solution to this
problem is a vertex-cut (L, S, R) in G with r ∈ R. (We note that this problem is usually defined with
the constraint r ∈ L instead of r ∈ R, but we use the symmetric version with r ∈ R in this paper.)
The goal of the problem is to compute a feasible solution (L, S, R) while minimizing the weight of this
vertex-cut.

Algorithmic Representation of Graphs. In this paper, whenever we say that an algorithm
receives a graph G as part of its input, or that the algorithm is given access to a graph G, we mean
that the algorithm is given access to G in all of the following forms: adjacency-list access, that, given
a vertex v ∈ V (G), allows accessing a linked-list containing all its outgoing edges, as well as another


                                                   10
linked-list containing all its incoming edges; adjacency matrix access, that, given an ordered pair (u, v)
of vertices, declares in time Õ(1) whether a u-v edge exists in G, as well as the weight of the edge
if applicable (or a pointer to a linked-list containing all such edges, in the case of multigraphs); and,
degree access, that allows querying the out-degree and in-degree of any vertex v ∈ V (G) in O(1) time.
We note that, using standard techniques, data-structures implementing these types of access can be
constructed and maintained at the cost of only a Õ(1) multiplicative blowup in the running time of
our algorithms.

2.1   Submodularity of Cuts
A folklore result that is often useful when dealing with cuts in graphs, is that the weight of edge-
cuts and vertex-cuts is a submodular function when viewed as a function of one side of the cut.
Our algorithms will use a corollary of this submodularity property, which is stated in the next two
lemmas for the cases of edge-cuts and vertex-cuts, respectively. The proofs of these lemmas follow
from standard arguments, and are deferred to Section C.

Lemma 2.1 Consider a graph G with weights w(e) on the edges e ∈ E(G), as well as a pair s, t of
vertices in G, and a minimum s-t edge-cut (S, T ) in G. Furthermore, let X ⊆ V (G) be any set of
                   +               +
vertices. Then w(∂G  (X ∩ S)) ≤ w(∂G (X)).

Lemma 2.2 Consider a graph G with weights w(v) on the vertices v ∈ V (G), as well as a pair s, t of
vertices in G, and a minimum s-t vertex-cut (L, S, R) in G. Furthermore, let X ⊆ V (G) be any set
of vertices. Then w(NG+ (X ∩ L)) ≤ w(NG+ (X)).

2.2   Fast Algorithms for s-t Minimum Cut
Our algorithms use the recent result of [VDBCK+ 23] which solves the Min-Cost s-t Maximum Flow
problem in deterministic almost-linear time, and in particular shows that the s-t Minimum Edge-Cut
and s-t Minimum Vertex-Cut problems can be solved in deterministic almost linear time.

Lemma 2.3 ([VDBCK+ 23]) There is a deterministic algorithm that, given an instance of the s-t
Minimum Edge-Cut problem on an m-edge directed graph G with weights w(e) ≤ W on the edges
e ∈ E(G), produces an exact solution to this instance in time O(m1+o(1) · log W ).

Lemma 2.4 ([VDBCK+ 23]) There is a deterministic algorithm that, given an instance of the s-t
Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on an m-edge directed graph G with weights w(v) ≤ W on the vertices
v ∈ V (G), produces an exact solution to this instance in time O(m1+o(1) · log W ).

2.3   Selecting Terminals
Consider an m-edge graph G. In some of our algorithms, it will be useful to select a small set
T ⊆ V (G) of terminals, such that at least one terminal belongs to a certain target set A ⊆ V (G) of
vertices, where A is not known
                              to the algorithm. In this case, we will
                                                                    employ
                                                                           the following approach,
                             1                                          m
which, with probability Ω log m , selects such a set T of size O vol+ (A) : first, guess an estimate
µ of vol+
        G (A) by picking µ uniformly at random among the integral powers of 2 in the range [1, m];
then, sample 2mν vertices into T , where each vertex is sampled with probability proportional to its
out-degree. The following lemma describes the guarantees of the sampling step in more detail. For
the sake of convenience, we also state this lemma so that, if the algorithm knows a set F of vertices
that do not belong to A, then it can guarantee that these vertices do not get sampled.


                                                   11
Lemma 2.5 There is a randomized algorithm whose input is an m-edge graph G, as well as a parame-
ter 1 ≤ ν ≤ m, and a set F ⊂ V (G) of forbidden vertices. The output of the algorithm is a non-empty
set T ⊆ V (G) of at most 2m
                          ν vertices called terminals, such that T ∩ F = ∅. The algorithm guarantees
that, for every set A ⊆ V (G) \ F of vertices with vol+                                            1
                                                       G (A) ≥ ν, the inequality Pr[A ∩ T ̸= ∅] ≥ 100
holds. The running time of the algorithm is Õ(m).

    Proof: The algorithm from the lemma is implemented by sampling 2m
                                                                               
                                                                                 ν   edges from E(G) inde-
pendently uniformly at random with repetition, and then choosing T to be the set of those vertices
u ∈ V (G) \ F that have at least one outgoing sampled edge. To prove the correctness of the algorithm,
fix any set A ⊆ V (G) \ F with vol+                                                         1
                                      G (A) ≥ ν, and we will prove that Pr[A ∩ T ̸= ∅] ≥ 100 . Indeed, since
                                                                     1
A ⊆ V (G) \ F , it suffices to show that with probability at least 100 , there is at least one sampled edge
in the set EG (A, V (G)) of edges outgoing from vertices of A. Now, since each sampled edge indepen-
                               vol+ (A)    ν
                                             to belong to EG (A, V (G)), and since we sampled 2m       ≥ m
                                                                                                  
dently has a probability of Gm ≥ m                                                                 ν      ν
edges, it follows that the probability of at least one edge being sampled from EG (A, V (G)) is at least
                                          ν m/ν    1   1
                                     1− 1−        ≥1− ≥     .
                                           m         e  100
This concludes the proof of Lemma 2.5.


3    Algorithm for Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut: Proof of Theorem 1.5
In this section, we describe and analyze the algorithm implementing Theorem 1.5 – our main result
for the Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut problem. As explained in Section 1.2.1, our algorithm employs a
hierarchical divide-and-conquer technique due to [CMT26]. We now formally describe the algorithm.
    Recall that the input to the algorithm consists of a directed m-edge graph G with positive integer
weights w(e) ≤ W on the edges e ∈ E(G), as well as a precision parameter ϵ ∈ (0, 1), and a root vertex
y ∗ ∈ V (G). Let OPTE,y∗ denote the minimum value of an edge-cut among all edge-cuts (X ′ , Y ′ ) of G
with y ∗ ∈ Y ′ . Furthermore, for the sake of the analysis, fix one such edge-cut achieving this minimum
value, and denote it by (X ∗ , Y ∗ ) – we refer to (X ∗ , Y ∗ ) as the distinguished cut. Our goal is to output
an edge-cut (X, Y ) of G with w(EG (X, Y )) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTE,y∗ .
    It will also be convenient for us to assume that OPTE,y∗ > 0, and we indeed make this assumption
in the remainder of this section. This assumption can be removed via the following standard technique:
before running the algorithm, we check whether OPTE,y∗ > 0 by performing a BFS from y ∗ in the
reverse graph G of G; if the BFS reaches all vertices of G, then OPTE,y∗ > 0 must hold, in which
case we run the algorithm; otherwise, we can use the set of vertices reached by the BFS in order to
construct and output an edge-cut (X, Y ) of G with w(EG (X, Y )) = 0 and y ∗ ∈ Y – specifically, Y is
the set of vertices reached by the BFS, and X = V (G) \ Y .

Estimates of OPTE,y∗ and vol+         ∗
                                  G (X ), and a Set of Terminals. Our algorithm begins by guessing
              [ of OPTE,y∗ , and an estimate ν of vol+ (X ∗ ) – specifically, it picks OPT
an estimate OPT                                                                        [ uniformly at
                                                        G
random among the integral powers of 2 in the range [1, m · W ], and it picks ν uniformly at random
among the integral powers of 2 in the range [1, m]. Let E estimates denote the good event in which
                                       +
OPTE,y∗                                    ∗
              [ ≤ OPTE,y∗ and volG (X ) < ν ≤ vol+ (X ∗ ) both hold. Observe that Pr[E estimates ] ≥
  2      <  OPT
                                       2              G
        1
                                                        V (G) of O m
                                                                     
Ω log2 (m·W )
                . Next, our algorithm  picks a set T ⊆             ν    terminals, using the procedure
                                                        ∗
from Lemma 2.5 with parameter ν and the set F = {y } of forbidden vertices. Let E denote the good



                                                      12
event that event E estimates occurred and T ∩ X ∗ ̸= ∅ holds. By Lemma 2.5, Pr[E | E estimates ] ≥ 100
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                       ,
and therefore                                                                          
                                                                                1
                     Pr[E] = Pr[E | E estimates ] · Pr[E estimates ] ≥ Ω      2           .         (1)
                                                                           log (m · W )

Hierarchical Partition of the Terminals. Our algorithm constructs a hierarchical partition of
the set T of terminals, which is identical to the hierarchical partition used by [CMT26]. For the sake
of completeness, we now describe this construction. Let z = ⌈log |T |⌉. For each integer 0 ≤ i ≤ z, the
algorithm creates a partition of the set T of terminals into at most 2i level-i batches, that each contain
at most 2z−i terminals. The partition of T into level-i batches is referred to as the level-i partition, and
the set of all level-i batches is denoted by Bi . Specifically, the level-0 partition has only a single batch,
and this batch contains all the terminals of T . For each 1 ≤ i ≤ z, the algorithm creates the level-i
                                                                                                    ′  ′′
partition by splitting
                  l m eachj batch k B ∈ Bi−1 of the level-(i − 1) partition into two parts B , B ⊆ B
whose sizes are |B|  2   and |B|                                        ′       ′′
                                2 , respectively, and adding both B and B to Bi as level-i batches; we
say that the batch B is the level-(i − 1) parent batch of the level-i batches B ′ and B ′′ . (The exception
is when the batch B ∈ Bi−1 is of size |B| = 1; in this case, we only create a single level-i batch whose
level-(i − 1) parent batch is B – this level-i batch is equal to B.) The next observation is useful in the
following parts of this section.
                                                                                            m
                                                                                               
Observation 3.1 For every 0 ≤ i ≤ z, every level-i batch B ∈ Bi has size |B| = O ν·2          i .



    Proof: By the description of the i’th level partition, every    level-i batch has size at most 2z−i ,
where z = ⌈log |T |⌉. Thus, the size of every level-i batch is O |T
                                                                  2i
                                                                    |
                                                                        . The observation follows since the
                        m
                          
set T has size |T | = O ν .

Main Loop of the Algorithm. Our algorithm consists of z phases. For each 1 ≤ i ≤ z, the goal
of Phase i is to construct, for each level-i batch B ∈ Bi , a graph GB and positive integral weights
wB (e) ≤ W on the edges e ∈ E(GB ), that together satisfy the following properties:

                                               m
                                                      
 P1. the graph GB contains at most Õ         2i ·ϵ
                                                          edges and vertices, and no more than the number of
     edges and vertices in G;

 P2. {y ∗ } ⊆ V (GB ) ⊆ V (G);
                                                               +                +
 P3. for every set X ′ ⊆ V (GB ) \ {y ∗ }, the inequality wB (∂G B
                                                                   (X ′ )) ≥ w(∂G (X ′ )) holds – in particular,
     for every terminal x ∈ B ∩ V (GB ), the x-y edge-connectivity λGB (x, y ∗ ) in GB is at least as
                                                       ∗

     large as the edge-connectivity λG (x, y ∗ ) in G;

 P4. if there exists a terminal x∗ ∈ B such that x∗ ∈ X ∗ and the good event E occurred, then
     x∗ ∈ V(GB ) holds and the x∗ -y ∗ edge-connectivity λGB (x∗ , y ∗ ) in GB satisfies λGB (x∗ , y ∗ ) ≤
       1 + iϵz OPTE,y∗ – furthermore,   there exists an x∗ -y ∗ edge-cut (X ′ , Y ′ ) in GB of value
     wB (EGB (X ′ , Y ′ )) ≤ 1 + iϵz OPTE,y∗ that additionally satisfies the condition vol+        ′
                                    
                                                                                              G (X ) ≤ 2ν.


Each phase will be partitioned into iterations, where each iteration computes the graph GB for a single
batch B. The main technical component of our algorithm is the following claim, which states that
                                                    1+o(1)
each iteration of Phase i can be performed in O m 2i ·ϵ·log W time. The proof of this claim- and the
description of procedure implementing it- are presented in Section 3.1.




                                                            13
Claim 3.2 There is a deterministic procedure that we refer to as ApproxBatchSparsify, that, given
an integer 1 ≤ i ≤ z, a batch B ∈ Bi , the parameters
                                                1+o(1)
                                                              [ and access to the graph G, computes
                                                       ϵ, ν, OPT,
                                                 m        ·log W
the graph GB satisfying Properties P1-P4 in O         2i ·ϵ
                                                                   time. If i > 1, then the procedure also
requires access to the graph GB ′ corresponding to the level-(i − 1) parent batch B ′ of B.

The following corollary of Claim 3.2 summarizes the running time of each phase.
                                                                           1+o(1)        
                                                                                   ·log W
Corollary 3.3 Each phase of the algorithm can be implemented in time O m         ϵ          .

   Proof: Observe that for every 1 ≤ i ≤ z, Phase i consists of at most 2i iterations – one for
each level-i batch B ∈ Bi . Furthermore, each iteration can be implemented using a single call to the
ApproxBatchSparsify subroutine. Thus, this corollary follows from Claim 3.2.

Termination. We now describe how our algorithm proceeds after the final phase. For each terminal
x ∈ T , let B (x) ∈ Bz denote the level-z batch that contains x. Furthermore, let T ′ ⊆ T denote the set of
all terminals x such that x ∈ V (GB (x) ). After the final phase, for each terminal x ∈ T ′ , our algorithm
uses Lemma 2.3 on the graph GB (x) in order to determine the edge connectivity λG (x) (x, y ∗ ). Then,
                                                                                         B
our algorithm picks the terminal x̃ that achieves the minimum edge-connectivity λG (x) (x, y ∗ ) among
                                                                                         B
all the terminals of T ′ ; computes a minimum x̃-y ∗ edge-cut (X, Y ) in G using Lemma 2.3, and outputs
this edge-cut. (If the set T ′ is empty, then the algorithm instead outputs an arbitrary edge-cut (X, Y )
with y ∗ ∈ Y .) Observe the following.
Observation 3.4 If T ′ ̸= ∅, then the value of the edge-cut (X, Y ) returned by the algorithm is at
most minx∈T ′ λG (x) (x, y ∗ ).
                  B


    Proof: As (X, Y ) is selected to be a minimum x̃-y ∗ edge-cut in G, it suffices to prove that
λG (x̃, y ∗ ) ≤ minx∈T ′ λG (x) (x, y ∗ ). Indeed, Property P3 guarantees that λG (x̃, y ∗ ) ≤ λG (x̃) (x̃, y ∗ ),
                           B                                                                     B
and the choice of x̃ guarantees that λG (x̃) (x̃, y ∗ ) = minx∈T ′ λG (x) (x, y ∗ ).
                                           B                          B
The next corollary follows from the above observation.
Corollary 3.5 If the good event E occurs, then the edge-cut (X, Y ) returned by the algorithm has
value at most (1 + ϵ) OPTE,y∗ .

    Proof: Suppose that the good event E occurs. In this case, by the definition of this event, there
                                                                                                               ∗
exists a vertex x∗ ∈ T ∩ X ∗ . Now, consider the graph GB (x∗ ) corresponding to the level-z batch B (x ) .
By Property P4, this graph satisfies that x∗ ∈ V (GB (x∗ ) ) and that λG (x∗ ) (x∗ , y ∗ ) ≤ (1 + ϵ) OPTE,y∗ .
                                                                                B
In other words, x∗ is a vertex of T ′ that satisfies λG (x∗ ) (x∗ , y ∗ ) ≤ (1 + ϵ) OPTE,y∗ . Therefore, T ′ ̸= ∅
                                                       B
and minx∈T ′ λG (x) (x, y ∗ ) ≤ (1 + ϵ) OPTE,y∗ . The corollary now follows from Observation 3.4.
                 B



Running TimeAnalysis. We         now prove that the total running time of the algorithm described in
                  m1+o(1)
this section is O    ϵ    · log W . We begin by upper-bounding the running time of the main loop: by
                                                                            1+o(1)        
                                                                                    ·log W
Corollary 3.3, each phase of the main loop of the algorithm runs in O m                      time, so the total
                                                                1+o(1)         ϵ
                                                                        ·log W
time of all z = O(log n) phases is also upper-bounded by O m          ϵ         . It remains to upper-bound
the time spent after the last phase. Indeed, after the last phase, the algorithm makes at most one call
to Lemma 2.3 on each of the graphs GB constructed during Phase z; observe that, by Property P1,
                                           1+o(1)
the running time of each such call is O( m 2z ·ϵ·log W ). So, the total time spent on calls to Lemma 2.3
                                                                   1+o(1)               1+o(1) ·log W
after the end of the final phase is upper-bounded by O(|T | · m 2z ·ϵ·log W ) = O( m         ϵ          ), as needed.
(In the last equality, we used the definition of z as z = ⌈log |T |⌉.)

                                                       14
Correctness Analysis. By the description of the algorithm, it always outputs an edge-cut (X, Y )
in G such that y ∗ ∈ Y . Furthermore, by Corollary 3.5, whenever event E occurs, this       edge-cut 
                                                                                                1
has value at most (1 + ϵ)OPTE,y∗ ; by Equation (1), this happens with probability Ω log2 (m·W       )
                                                                                                        .
                                                             1+o(1)        
                                                                     ·log W
Thus, the algorithm described in this section runs in time O m     ϵ          , and the output edge-cut
                                                                                 1
(X, Y ) satisfies w(EG (X, Y )) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTE,y∗ with probability at least polylog(mW ) . By repeating the
algorithm polylog(mW ) many times and choosing the lowest-value cut among the obtained edge-cuts,
                                                          1
we can
      boost the success
                        probability of the algorithm to 2 , at the cost of increasing
                                                                                         the running
                                                                                                     time
         1+o(1)
             ·polylogW                                                             m1+o(1) ·log W
to O m        ϵ        . We can then reduce the running time back to O                   ϵ          using the
reduction from Section B.

3.1   Execution of a Single Iteration: Proof of Claim 3.2
In this section, we describe the ApproxBatchSparsify procedure from Claim 3.2. We firstly deal with
the easy special case where i = 1: in this case, the procedure simply lets GB be the entire graph
G; it can be easily verified that in this case, selecting GB = G guarantees that GB satisfies all four
Properties P1-P4.
    In Section 3.1.1, we present the formal description and analysis of the procedure ApproxBatchSparsify
for the case of i > 1. In the remainder of the current section, we present an informal overview of the
techniques used in this procedure, and put them in the context of prior work.

Overview of Techniques. Consider an input to ApproxBatchSparsify. Using standard techniques
(that we describe in Claim 3.6), the problem of computing the graph GB can be reduced to the problem
of computing a set AB ⊆ V (G) which satisfiestwo properties, (defined later as Properties Q1 and Q2):
the first property is that vol+             m
                              G (AB ) = Õ 2i ·ϵ ; the second property is that, if there exists a terminal
x ∈ B ∩ X and the good event E occurred, then there exists an x∗ -y ∗ edge-cut (X, Y ) in G with
  ∗          ∗

X ⊆ AB and vol+                                                     iϵ
                 G (X) ≤ 2ν, whose value is w(EG (X, Y )) ≤ 1 + z OPTE,y . We use this reduction.
                                                                                ∗

(Indeed, a vertex-analogue of this reduction is also used by the algorithm of [CMT26].) Thus, the
main challenge is computing such a set AB ⊆ V (G) of vertices.
    Consider the graph GB ′ corresponding to the parent batch B ′ of B, and suppose for the sake
of intuition that event E occurred, and that there exists some terminal x∗ ∈ B ∩ X ∗ ⊆ B ′ ∩ X ∗ .
Then, by Property P4 of                                     ∗ ∗            ′      ′
                         the graph
                                   GB ′ , there exists an x -y edge-cut (XB ′ , YB ′ ) in GB ′ of value
             ′ , Y ′ )) ≤ 1 + (i−1)ϵ OPT                                                      +   ′
wB ′ (EGB′ (XB ′  B′             z         E,y ∗ that additionally satisfies the condition volG (XB ′ ) ≤ 2ν.
We now describe a simple method for attempting to compute the set AB , which is instructive for
understanding our techniques, but which does not work as-is: begin by transforming the graph GB ′
into a graph HB ′ by introducing a new ”super-source” vertex s, and adding edges from s to every
vertex of B; then, compute a minimum s-y ∗ edge-cut (A, A′ ) in HB ′ , and output the set AB = A \ {s}.
Using the submodularity of cuts, it can be shown that as long as the edges leaving s have sufficiently
large weight, the set AB must satisfy Property Q2 – specifically, it can be shown that the edge-cut
(X, Y ) = (XB ′ ∩ A , Y ′ ∪ A′ ) is an x∗ -y ∗ edge-cut in G with value no larger than the value of the
                ′    B   B′                                      
           ′ , Y ′ ) in G ′ , which in turn is at most 1 + (i−1)ϵ OPT
edge-cut (XB ′  B′       B                                    z       E,y ∗ . The issue with this method
is that it does not provide any upper-bound on the out-volume vol+
                                                                 G (AB ); thus, some changes must
be made to the method in order to guarantee Property Q1.
    At a high-level, we deal with this issue by ”disincentivizing” the s-t Minimum Edge-Cut subroutine
from picking a cut (A, A′ ) where A \ {s} has high out-volume – specifically, we add low-capacity edges
from each vertex of HB ′ (except s) to y ∗ , where the capacity of each new edge (v, y) is proportional
to the out-degree deg+G (v). We then show that these extra edges only slightly distort the values of the


                                                     15
cuts that we care about, meaning that the value of the edge-cut (XB       ′ ∩ A , Y ′ ∪ A′ ) in G will be
                                                                           ′     B   B′
                             ′      ′                          ϵ·OPTE,y∗
larger than the value of (X B ′ , YB ′ ) in GB ′ by at most a     z     additive factor, so it will still be
                        iϵ
upper-bounded by 1 + z OPTE,y , as needed.
                                         ∗




Comparison to [CMT26]. The algorithm of [CMT26] can also be thought of as using a variation
of the method described above, but it uses a different and more involved approach for dealing with the
issue of bounding vol+G (AB ). Furthermore, the approach of [CMT26] only provides an upper-bound
         \
of Õ( m·OPT ) on vol+ (A ), and it is unclear whether this approach can be improved to yield better
        2i            G   B
upper-bounds.

Relation to Local Cut. We note that our technique for bounding vol+        G (AB ) is very similar to a
                                                                          +
technique used by the ”(1+ϵ)-Approximate Local Cut” subroutine of [FNY 20]. Indeed, our algorithm
for finding AB can be thought of as first solving an Approximate Local Cut problem (see [FNY+ 20]) in
the graph HB ′ to obtain an approximately minimum s-y ∗ cut (A, A′ ) where vol+G (A) is small, and then
setting AB = A \ {s}. However, we could not use the approximate Local Cut subroutine of [FNY+ 20]
as-is, since it is too slow in our setting.

3.1.1   Implementation of ApproxBatchSparsify for i > 1.

Fix some 1 ≤ i ≤ z. We now formally describe how the algorithm computes the graph GB for a single
batch B ∈ Bi during Phase i of the algorithm. The computation of the graph GB is performed in two
steps. In the first step, we compute a set AB ⊆ V (G) \ {y ∗ } of vertices that satisfies the following two
properties.

 Q1. vol+               m
                           
         G (AB ) = Õ 2i ·ϵ ; and

 Q2. if there exists a terminal x∗ ∈ B ∩ X ∗ and the good event E occurred, then there exists a subset
     X ′ ⊆ AB with x∗ ∈ X ′ and vol+      ′                               ′           ′
                                         ) ≤ 2ν such that the edge-cut (X , V (G) \ X ) in G has value
                                     G (X
               ′           ′         iϵ
     w(EG (X , V (G) \ X )) ≤ 1 + z OPTE,y∗ .

In the second step, we compute the graph GB so that it is equal to the graph obtained from G by
merging all vertices outside of AB into the vertex y ∗ , and then removing any resulting self-loops, as
well as any edges outgoing from y ∗ in the resulting graph. (We note that the resulting graph GB may
have parallel edges.) This second step is summed up in the following claim, whose proof is deferred
to Section D.

Claim 3.6 Consider a set AB ⊆ V (G) \ {y ∗ } that satisfies properties Q1-Q2, and consider the graph
GB that is obtained from G by merging all vertices outside of AB into y ∗ and then removing any
resulting self-loops, as well as any edges outgoing from y ∗ in the resulting graph. Then, the graph GB
must satisfy Properties   P1-P4.
                                Furthermore, given such a set AB , we can construct the graph GB in
            +               m
                    
time O volG (AB ) = Õ 2i ·ϵ .

In order to complete the description of the iteration, it now suffices to describe the procedure for
computing the set AB of vertices. We do this next.

Obtaining the set AB . We now describe how our algorithm computes the set AB ⊆ V (G) \ {y ∗ }
of vertices satisfying Properties Q1-Q2 with respect to a level-i batch B ∈ Bi during an iteration of
Phase i. Let B ′ ∈ Bi−1 denote the level-(i − 1) parent batch of B. In order to compute AB , we will
use the graph GB ′ that we computed for batch B ′ in the previous phase. To compute AB , we first

                                                     16
construct a graph HB ′ from GB ′ as follows: for every vertex v ∈ V (GB ′ ) whose out-degree deg+    G (v)
                                                               ϵ· \ ·deg+ (v)
                                                                  OPT
in G is non-zero, we add to GB ′ an edge (v, y ∗ ) of capacity      z·2ν
                                                                         G
                                                                              ; furthermore, we add a new
super-source vertex s, and we connect s to each vertex of B ∩ V (GB ′ ) via an edge of capacity 4OPT.[
In the remainder of this section, we will overload notation and use wB ′ to refer to the edge-weight
function in both GB ′ and HB ′ , as these two functions agree on all edges that are shared by these two
graphs. The next observation about the graph HB ′ follows immediately from the construction of this
graph.
Observation 3.7 For every set X̂ ⊆ V (HB ′ ) \ {s, y ∗ } of vertices, the difference between the total
weight of edges outgoing from X̂ in HB ′ and the total weight of edges outgoing from X̂ in GB ′ is
                                        \ ·vol+ (X̂)
                                      ϵ·OPT
       +                   +
wB ′ (∂H ′
           (X̂)) − wB ′ (∂
                          G ′ (X̂)) =     z·2ν
                                               G
                                                     .
       B                    B

To conclude the computation of AB , we use Lemma 2.3 in order to compute a minimum s-y ∗ edge-cut
(A, A′ ) in the graph HB ′ , and we let AB = A \ {s}. This concludes the description of the algorithm,
and it now only remains to analyze it. Before proving that the set AB satisfies Properties Q1-Q2, we
first present the next two observations about the edge-cut (A, A′ ) in the graph HB ′ .
Observation 3.8 Thevalue wB ′ (EHB′ (A, A′ )) of the edge-cut (A, A′ ) in the graph HB ′ satisfies
                               \
                            m·OPT
wB ′ (EHB′ (A, A′ )) = O      ν·2i
                                     .

   Proof: Recall that (A, A′ ) is chosen to be aminimum    ∗
                                                        s-y edge-cut in HB ′ ; thus, it suffices to
                                                    \
show that some s-y ∗ edge-cut in H ′ has value O m·OPT . Indeed, by the construction of the graph
                                         B                ν·2i
HB ′ , there are at most |B| edges outgoing from the vertex s, and the capacity of each such edge
             [ – therefore, the value of the s-y ∗ edge-cut ({s} , V (HB ′ ) \ {s}) in HB ′ is at most
is exactly 4OPT         
                     \
                   m·OPT
|B| · 4OPT ≤ O
       [
                     ν·2i
                          , where the last inequality follows from Observation 3.1. This concludes the
proof of Observation 3.8.
Observation 3.9 The set A contains every terminal x ∈ B ∩ V (GB ′ ) whose edge-connectivity to y ∗
in HB ′ satisfies λHB′ (x, y ∗ ) < 4OPT.
                                    [

    Proof: Suppose towards contradiction that some terminal x ∈ B ∩ V (GB ′ ) does not belong to A,
and yet has λHB′ (x, y ∗ ) < 4OPT.
                              [ Then, there must exist an x-y ∗ edge-cut (X̂, Ŷ ) in HB ′ with value
                    [ To complete the proof of the observation, we will now show that the edge-cut
wB ′ (∂H ′ (X̂)) < 4OPT.
       B
(A∪ X̂, A′ ∩ Ŷ ) in HB ′ has a smaller value than the edge-cut (A, A′ ), contradicting the choice of (A, A′ )
as a minimum s-y ∗ edge-cut in HB ′ : indeed, recall that the graph HB ′ contains an edge (s, x) of weight
               [ > wB ′ (∂H ′ (X̂)); furthermore, observe that, as x ∈ X̂ \ A, this edge exits the set A
wB ′ (s, x) = 4OPT              B
but not the set A∪ X̂, meaning that ∂HB′ (A∪ X̂) ⊆ ∂HB′ (X̂)∪∂HB′ (A)\{(s, x)}. Therefore, the value of
the edge-cut (A∪ X̂, A′ ∩ Ŷ ) in HB ′ is wB ′ (∂HB′ (A∪ X̂)) ≤ wB ′ (∂HB′ (A))+wB ′ (∂HB′ (X̂))−wB ′ (s, x) <
wB ′ (∂HB′ (A)). This concludes the proof of Observation 3.9.
   Next, we show that the set AB computed by the above procedure indeed satisfies Properties Q1-Q2.
We begin by proving that AB satisfies Property Q1.
Claim 3.10 The set AB satisfies Property Q1. That is, vol+             m
                                                                           
                                                         G (AB ) = Õ 2i ·ϵ .


    Proof: Recall that for each vertex v ∈ AB , if deg+    G (v) > 0, then the graph HB ′ contains an edge
                        \      +
                      ϵ·OPT·degG (v)
(v, y ∗ ) of capacity     z·2ν       , and this edge must cross the edge-cut (A, A′ ) in HB ′ . Therefore, the

                                                     17
                                                                                      \ ·vol+ (A )
                                                                                    ϵ·OPT
value wB ′ (EHB′ (A, A′ )) of the edge-cut (A, A′ ) in HB ′ is at least as large as      z·2ν
                                                                                              G B
                                                                                                   , meaning
        +                                  +                           ′      z·2ν
that volG (AB ) is upper-bounded by volG (AB ) ≤ wB ′ (EHB′ (A, A )) · \ . By plugging the upper-
                                                                          ϵ·OPT
                                       \
                                       OPT
                         ′
bound wB ′ (EHB′ (A, A )) = O       m·
                                             from Observation 3.8 into this last inequality, we get that
                                      ν·2i

vol+             z·m
                     
   G (AB ) ≤ O ϵ·2i . The corollary now follows as z = Õ(1).
   Next, we prove that the set AB satisfies Property Q2.
Claim 3.11 The set AB satisfies Property Q2.

   Proof: Suppose that there exists a terminal x∗ ∈ B such that x∗ ∈ X ∗ , and suppose that the good
                                                                                             +
event E occurred. We need to prove that there exists a subset X ′ ⊆ AB with x∗ ∈ X ′ and vol    ′
                                                                                           G (X ) ≤ 2ν
                         ′           ′                            ′         ′          iϵ
such that the edge-cut (X , V (G) \ X ) in G has value w(EG (X , V (G) \ X )) ≤ 1 + z OPTE,y∗ .
   As x∗ ∈ B ∩ X ∗ and as B ′ is the parent batch of B, it follows that x∗ ∈ B ′ ∩ X ∗ . Thus, by Property
P4 of the graph GB ′ , x ∈
                          V (GB ′ ) holds,
                                           and there exists an x∗ -y ∗ edge-cut (XB
                                                                                   ′ , Y ′ ) in G ′ of value
                                                                                     ′   B′      B
             ′ , Y ′ )) ≤ 1 + (i−1)ϵ OPT                                       +   ′
wB ′ (EGB′ (XB ′  B′             z      E,y ∗ , that additionally satisfies volG (XB ′ ) ≤ 2ν.

   Let X ′ = A ∩ XB     ′ , and observe that X ′ ⊆ A ∩ V (G ′ ) = A . We now prove that x∗ ∈ X ′
                          ′                                    B       B
         +
and volG (X ) ≤ 2ν, and that the edge-cut (X ′ , V (G) \ X ′ ) in G has value w(EG (X ′ , V (G) \ X ′ )) ≤
              ′

 1 + iϵz OPTE,y∗ . Indeed, the fact that vol+      ′                                  ′       ′
                                              G (X ) ≤ 2ν follows from the fact that X ⊆ XB ′ , and that
   +
volG (XB ′ ) ≤ 2ν. It remains to prove that x ∈ X , as well as that the edge-cut (X , V (G) \ X ′ ) in
         ′                                       ∗     ′                                 ′

G has value w(EG (X ′ , V (G) \ X ′ )) ≤ 1 + iϵz OPTE,y∗ . We begin by proving the latter statement.
Specifically, this latter statement follows directly from the next claim.
                                                                      +                     +
Claim 3.12 The three inequalities w(EG (X ′ , V (G) \ X ′ )) ≤ wB ′ (∂H    (X ′ )) ≤ wB ′ (∂H      ′ )) ≤
                                                                                                 (XB ′
                                                                        B′                    B′
     iϵ
        
 1 + z OPTE,y∗ all hold.

   Proof: We begin by proving the first inequality of the claim. That is, we begin by proving that
                                      +
w(EG (X ′ , V (G) \ X ′ )) ≤ wB ′ (∂H      (X ′ )). Indeed, by Property P3 of the graph GB ′ , the value of the
                                       B′
edge-cut (X ′ , V (G) \ X ′ ) in G is no larger than the value of the edge-cut (X ′ , V (GB ′ ) \ X ′ ) in GB ′ .
Furthermore, by the construction of the graph HB ′ , this latter value is no larger than the value of the
                                                            +
edge-cut (X ′ , V (HB ′ ) \ X ′ ) in HB ′ , which is wB ′ (∂H  ′
                                                                 (X ′ )).
                                                            B

    Next, we prove the second inequality from Claim 3.12. Indeed, since X ′ is defined as X ′ = A∩XB
                                                                                                   ′ ,
                                                                                                     ′
                                                ′           ′
this inequality follows from Lemma 2.1 (with XB ′ , A, and A in place of X, S, and T ).
   Lastly, we now prove the third inequality from Claim 3.12. Recall we are assuming that event
E occurred, which means that OPT     [ ≤ OPTE,y∗ ; therefore, since vol+ (X ′ ′ ) ≤ 2ν, it follows from
                                                                               G    B
                               +      ′             +       ′       ϵ· \
                                                                      OPT    ϵ·OPTE,y∗
Observation 3.7 that wB ′ (∂H ′ (XB ′ )) − wB ′ (∂G ′ (XB ′ )) ≤       z   ≤      z       . So, by the choice of
                                 B                    B                   
  ′ , Y ′ ) as an edge-cut in G ′ whose value is at most 1 + (i−1)ϵ OPT
(XB ′  B′                          B                                     z        E,y ∗ , it follows that
                                                                                   
                       +     ′               +     ′        ϵ · OPTE,y∗          iϵ
                wB ′ (∂H ′ (XB ′ )) ≤ wB ′ (∂G ′ (XB ′ )) +              ≤ 1+         OPTE,y∗ .
                        B                     B                   z              z
This concludes the proof of Claim 3.12.
     We now continue the proof of Claim 3.11. To prove this claim, it now remains to prove that
x∗ ∈ X ′ .   As X ′ = A ∩ XB   ′ and x∗ ∈ X ′ , it suffices to prove that x∗ ∈ A. We do this next, by
                                 ′              B′
first proving that λHB′ (x , y ) < 4OPT, and then using Observation 3.9. Indeed since x∗ ∈ XB
                             ∗   ∗     [                                                          ′ and
                                                                                                   ′
  ∗
y ∈     ′                                                                ∗  ∗
    / XB ′ , it follows by the third inequality of Claim 3.12 that the x -y edge-connectivity in HB ′ is
                                                                 
                            ∗ ∗             +      ′           iϵ
                     λHB′ (x , y ) ≤ wB ′ (∂H ′ (XB ′ )) ≤ 1 +      OPTE,y∗ ≤ 2OPTE,y∗ .              (2)
                                             B                 z

                                                       18
Recall also that we are assuming that event E occurred, which, by the definition of this event, means
                  [ By plugging this inequality into Equation (2), it follows that λH ′ (x∗ , y ∗ ) <
that OPTE,y∗ < 2OPT.                                                                      B
 [ Since x∗ ∈ B ∩ X ′ ′ ⊆ B ∩ V (GB ′ ), it now follows from Observation 3.9 that x∗ ∈ A. Thus,
4OPT.                      B
x∗ ∈ A ∩ XB′ = X ′ , as we needed to prove. This concludes the proof of Claim 3.11, and thus concludes
             ′

the analysis of ApproxBatchSparsify.


4     From Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut to Global Minimum Vertex-
      Cut: Proof of Theorem 1.4
In this section, we prove Theorem 1.4 – our reduction from the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem
to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem.
    Consider an input to Theorem 1.4. That is, the input consists of a parameter ϵ ≥ 0, as well as a
directed m-edge n-vertex graph G with positive integer weights w(v) ≤ W on its vertices v ∈ V (G),
such that G contains some vertex-cut. Let OPTG denote the weight of the global minimum vertex-
cut in G. Our goal is to design an algorithm implementing Theorem 1.4. That is, upon receiving
the aforementioned input, as well as access to a (1 + ϵ)-approximate Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut
oracle as specified in Theorem 1.4, the algorithm must output a vertex-cut (L, S, R) such that, with
probability at least 12 , the inequality w(S) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTG holds. Furthermore, the algorithm must
make at most O m   n queries to the oracle, and the graphs in these queries must together contain at
most O(m) edges. Outside of these queries, the running time of the algorithm must be Õ(m log W ).
    The algorithm that we design in the remainder of this section, which we refer to as AlgGlobalVertexCut,
will actually only guarantee that the output vertex-cut (L, S, R) satisfies w(S) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTG with
probability Ω(1), rather than with probability 21 . To boost the probability of the event w(S) ≤
(1 + ϵ)OPTG , we run the algorithm O(1) times with independent randomness, and select the lowest-
weight cut among the obtained vertex-cuts. In the design and analysis of the algorithm, we furthermore
make the assumption that G has some global minimum vertex-cut (L∗ , S ∗ , R∗ ) with w(R∗ ) ≥ w(L∗ ).
This assumption can be removed using standard techniques, and we show how to do this in Section E.
    We are now ready to present the algorithm AlgGlobalVertexCut. In the majority of this section, we
consider the case in which every vertex of G has at least one outgoing edge – in the complementary
case where there exists a vertex v ∈ V (G) with no outgoing edges, the algorithm simply returns the
vertex-cut ({v} , ∅, V (G) \ {v}). Observe that this condition can be checked in time O(m), and if there
indeed exists a vertex v with no outgoing edges, then the cut ({v} , ∅, V (G) \ {v}) can be computed
in time O(n); furthermore, this cut must be a global minimum vertex-cut in G, because its weight is
w(∅) = 0. So, from now on, we assume that every vertex of G has at least one outgoing edge. In this
case, the algorithm AlgGlobalVertexCut consists of four steps, described next. In the following parts of
this section, we discuss the implementation of each step.

    1. select a set T ⊆ V (G) of ”roots”, such that, with probability at least 41 , there exists some vertex
       of T that also belongs to R∗ . Furthermore, for every root y ∈ T , there must exist some feasible
       solution to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on G with root y;

    2. construct, for every root y ∈ T , a subgraph Gy of G with V (Gy ) = V (G), such that any feasible
       solution to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on graph Gy with root y is also a feasible
       solution to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on G with root y, and vice versa;

    3. for each root y ∈ T , query the (1 + ϵ)-approximate Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut oracle on the
       graph Gy with root y, and let (Ly , Sy , Ry ) denote the vertex-cut returned by this query; lastly,



                                                     19
   4. output the minimum-weight vertex-cut among the obtained feasible solutions {(Ly , Sy , Ry )}y∈T .
      If the set T is empty, then instead find and output any vertex-cut in G.

It is not hard to see that the output of AlgGlobalVertexCut satisfies the required guarantees. We
formally prove this in the next claim.

Claim 4.1 The output (L, S, R) of the above algorithm is a vertex-cut in G, and, with probability at
least 81 , its weight is w(S) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTG .

    Proof: We begin by arguing that (L, S, R) is indeed a vertex-cut in G. Indeed, by the description
of steps 2 and 3, it can be seen that for every root y ∈ T , the triplet (Ly , Sy , Ry ) is a feasible solution
for the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on graph G with root y, which means in particular
that it is a vertex-cut in G. Thus, by the description of Step 4, the output of the algorithm must
be a vertex-cut in G. Next, we show that w(S) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTG holds with probability at least 81 .
By the description of Step 4, it suffices to show that with probability at least 18 , there exists some
y ∈ T for which w(Sy ) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTG . Indeed, by the description of Step 1, with probability at
least 41 , there exists some y ∗ ∈ T that also belongs to R∗ , and, by the description of Step 2, the
global minimum vertex-cut (L∗ , S ∗ , R∗ ) in G is a feasible solution to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut
problem on Gy∗ with root y ∗ . Furthermore, conditioned on the event that such a vertex y ∗ exists,
there is a probability of 12 that the corresponding query to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut oracle
outputs a vertex-cut (Ly∗ , Sy∗ , Ry∗ ) with w(Sy∗ ) ≤ (1 + ϵ) · w(S ∗ ). Therefore, with probability at
least 41 · 12 = 18 , there exists such y ∗ ∈ T and the corresponding vertex-cut (Ly∗ , Sy∗ , Ry∗ ) has weight
w(Sy∗ ) ≤ (1 + ϵ) · w(S ∗ ) = (1 + ϵ)OPTG . This concludes the proof of Claim 4.1.
    To complete the proof of Theorem 1.4, it now remains to describe how to implement each step of
AlgGlobalVertexCut P in time Õ(m log W ), while also guaranteeing that the total number of edges in the
graphs {Gy }y∈T is y∈T |E(Gy )| = O(m), and that there are at most O m         n such graphs. In order
to do so, we first need to impose some additional constraints on the set T of roots selected in Step 1,
and on the graphs {Gy }y∈T generated in Step 2. For this purpose, it is convenient to use the following
notation of ”far-away sets”.

Definition 4.2 (Far-Away Sets) For every vertex v ∈ V (G), we define the ”forward far-away set
of v”, denoted F + (v), to be the set F + (v) = V (G) \ ({v} ∪ NG+ (v)) of all vertices that cannot be reached
from v by traversing at most 1 edge. Similarly, define the ”backward far-away set of v”, denoted F − (v),
to be the set F − (v) = V (G) \ ({v} ∪ NG− (v)) of all vertices that cannot reach v by traversing at most
1 edge.

   We are now ready to define the additional constraints that we will have on the output of steps 1
and 2 of AlgGlobalVertexCut. Specifically, in our implementation   of the algorithm, we will guarantee
                                                    P         +   −
that the set T of roots selected in Step 1 satisfies y∈T vol (F (y)) = O(m); as well as that each
graph Gy generated in Step 2 satisfies |E(Gy )| = vol+ (F − (y)) + deg−
                                                                      G (y). The next two claims state
that steps 1 and 2 can be implemented in the correct running time, while satisfying these additional
constraints.

Claim 4.3 Step 1 of AlgGlobalVertexCut  P can be implemented in time Õ(m log W ), while also guaran-
teeing that the selected set T satisfies y∈T vol+ (F − (y)) = O(m).

Claim 4.4 Step 2 of AlgGlobalVertexCut can be implemented so that the constructed graph Gy for each
y ∈ T satisfies |E(Gy )| = vol+ (F − (y)) + deg−
                                               G (y), and the time required for constructing each graph
Gy is Õ(|E(Gy )| + n).


                                                      20
   We defer the proof of Claim 4.3 to Section 4.2, and the proof of Claim 4.4 to Section 4.1. We now
complete the proof of Theorem 1.4 using the above two claims.
    We now specify our exact implementation of AlgGlobalVertexCut: we implement steps 1 and 2 using
Claim 4.3 and Claim 4.4; steps 3 and 4 can then be implemented in a straightforward manner in time
Õ(|T | · n), and we indeed implement them as such.
    To complete the proof of Theorem 1.4, it now remains to prove that this implementation of
AlgGlobalVertexCut guarantees that the graphs {Gy }y∈T on which we query the oracle have at most
O(m) edges overall; and that there are at most O m
                                                    
                                                  n such graphs; as well as that the whole imple-
mentation runs in time Õ(m log W ). The following claim shows that the total number of edges in
these graphs is indeed O(m).
                                                                                 P
Claim 4.5 After implementing steps 1 and 2 as above, the total number of edges y∈T |E(Gy )| in
the sparsified graphs {Gy }y∈T is O(m).

   Proof: Indeed, by the guarantees of claim 4.4, the number of edges in each sparsified graph Gy is
deg−           +   −
   G (y) + vol (F (y)). Thus, the total number of edges in all sparsified graphs is
                                                                     
  X                                 X                   X                          X
       deg−           +   −
                                         deg−              vol+    −
                                                                                     vol+   −
                              
           G (y) + volG (F (y) ≤            G (y)
                                                 +
                                                               G (F (y)
                                                                        =m+
                                                                                        G (F (y)).
                                 
  y∈T                                y∈V (G)                 y∈T                               y∈T

                                                                    +
                                                                        (F − (y)) = O(m), it then follows that
                                                         P
Since
P     our implementation of Step 1 guarantees that        y∈T vol
  y∈T |E(Gy )| = O(m).
                                                                             m
                                                                                 
   Next, in the following claim, we prove that there are at most O           n       graphs in the set {Gy }y∈T .

Claim 4.6 The size of the set |T | is |T | = O m
                                                 
                                               n .
                                                  P
    Proof: Since Claim 4.5 guarantees that y∈T |E(Gy )| = O(m), it suffices if we prove that each
graph Gy contains Ω(n) edges; we indeed prove this next: consider some y ∈ T ; by Claim 4.4,
the number of edges in the graph Gy is exactly vol+ (F − (y)) + deg−       G (y). It remains to prove that
vol+ (F − (y)) + deg− G (y)  =  Ω(n).  Recall  that  we  are assuming   each  vertex of G has at least one
                                     +
outgoing edge, implying that vol (F (y)) ≥ |F (y)|. Furthermore, by the definition of F − (y), the
                                         −            −

size of this set is |F − (y)| = n − 1 − deg−
                                           G (y), as it contains exactly those vertices of G that are not in
the set NG− (y) ∪ {y}. To summarize, vol+ (F − (y)) + deg−              −           −
                                                             G (y) ≥ |F (y)| + degG (y) ≥ n − 1 = Ω(n), as
we needed. This concludes the proof of Claim 4.6.
    Lastly, we must show that the running time of AlgGlobalVertexCut is Õ(m log W ). Our implemen-
tation of Step 1 has the correct running time based on the statement of Claim 4.3. By the statement
of Claim 4.4, and by our implementation of steps 3 and 4, the total time required for steps 2-4 is
             P
Õ |T | · n + y∈T |E(Gy )| – based on Claim 4.5 and Claim 4.6, this running time is Õ(m). This
concludes the analysis of the running time. Now, to complete the proof of Theorem 1.4, it remains
only to prove Claim 4.4 and Claim 4.3. We do this in the next two subsections. (We choose to prove
Claim 4.4 first, as its proof is shorter.)

4.1     Implementing Step 2: Proof of Claim 4.4
To implement Step 2 of AlgGlobalVertexCut as specified by Claim 4.4, we construct each graph Gy
so that it is equal to the graph obtained from G by removing all edges outgoing from vertices of
                                                                                             −
NG− (y) ∪ {y}, except those edges ending at y. In other words, V (Gy ) = V (G) and E(Gy ) = δG (y) ∪
      −                                                                +   −         −
EG (F (y), V (G)). Then, it is not hard to verify that |E(Gy )| = volG (F (y)) + degG (y) holds, as

                                                    21
                                                                −
required by Claim 4.4. (Indeed, recall that the sets of edges δG  (y) and EG (F − (y), V (G)) are disjoint,
                             −
based on the definition of F (y).) Furthermore, it is also not hard to construct each graph Gy in time
Õ(|E(Gy )| + n), as required in Claim 4.4: the set F − (y) can be computed in time O(n), and then the
set of edges in Gy can be enumerated by going over the lists of outgoing edges of all vertices in F − (y),
and the list of incoming edges of y.
    Next, to complete the proof of Claim 4.4, we show that constructing the graphs Gy in this manner
indeed satisfies the requirements of Step 2. Specifically, we must show that any feasible solution to
the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on graph Gy with root y is also a feasible solution to the
Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on graph G with root y, and vice versa. We prove the first
direction in the next claim.
Claim 4.7 any feasible solution to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on Gy with root y must
also be a feasible solution to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on G with root y.

    Proof: Consider any feasible solution (L, S, R) to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on
Gy with root y. We need to show that (L, S, R) is also a feasible solution to the Rooted Minimum
Vertex-Cut problem on G with root y. Specifically, as y ∈ R clearly holds, it remains to show that
(L, S, R) is valid vertex-cut in the graph G; that is, it remains to show that NG+ (L) ⊆ S. Since
(L, S, R) is a valid vertex-cut in Gy , the graph Gy must satisfy NG+y (L) ⊆ S, so it suffices to prove that
NG+y (L) = NG+ (L), which is what we will do. Indeed, recall that for every vertex v ∈ F − (y), the set of
edges outgoing from v in Gy is exactly the same as the set of edges outgoing from v in G. Therefore,
it suffices to show that L ⊆ F − (y): by the construction of Gy , every vertex outside of F − (y) belongs
to NG−y (y), so it suffices to show that L ∩ NG−y (y) = ∅; indeed, this follows directly from the fact that
(L, S, R) is a feasible solution to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on Gy with root y.
    For the ”vice versa” direction, we need to prove that any feasible solution to the Rooted Minimum
Vertex-Cut problem on G with root y must also be a feasible solution to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-
Cut problem on Gy with root y. However, this holds trivially as E(Gy ) ⊆ E(G): indeed, consider any
vertex-cut (L, S, R) in G, meaning that no edge of G goes from L to R; then, as E(Gy ) ⊆ E(G), it
follows that no edge of Gy goes from L to R, so (L, S, R) is also a vertex-cut of Gy . This concludes
the proof of Claim 4.4.

4.2   Implementing Step 1: Proof of Claim 4.3
In this section, we implement Step 1 of AlgGlobalVertexCut, with the added constraint imposed in
Claim 4.3. Recall that, the goal of Step 1 of AlgGlobalVertexCut is to construct a set T ⊆ V (G) of
vertices such that with probability at least 41 , at least one vertex of T belongs to R∗ , and furthermore,
for every y ∈ T , the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on G with root y must have a feasible
solution. In order to satisfy the latter condition, we will guarantee that every vertex y ∈ T has a
non-empty backward far-away set F − (y), as this guarantees that (F − (y), N − (y), {y}) is a feasible
solution to the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem on G with root y. The main challenge lies in
making
     P sure that T satisfies the additional constraint imposed by Claim 4.3. That is, in making sure
that y∈T vol+ (F − (y)) = O(m).
    The procedure that we describe next for constructing T will only guarantee that y∈T vol+ (F − (y)) =
                                                                                         P
                                                                         hP                    i
                                                                                    +    − (y)) ≤ 2m holds,
O(m) holds in expectation. More formally, it will guarantee that E          y∈T vol   (F
and
P that + Pr [T ∩ R∗ ̸= ∅] ≥ 12 . To transform the obtained set T into one that is guaranteed to satisfy
      vol (F − (y)) = O(m), we can simply remove all elements from T in the case where the quantity
Py∈T     +   −                                                                                        1
  y∈T vol (F (y)) exceeds 8m. By Markov’s inequality, this only occurs with probability at most 4 ,
so the probability of the event T ∩ R∗ ̸= ∅ remains at least 41 . Furthermore, observe that the value of

                                                    22
            +
            (F − (y)) can be computed in O(m) time, as the value of vol+ (F − (y)) can be computed for
P
  y∈T vol
each vertex y in time O(deg(y)) using the equality vol+ (F − (y)) = m − v∈{y}∪N − (y) deg+ (v).
                                                                            P
                                                                                        G
                                                                    hP                     i
                                                                                +    −
    Next, we describe how to construct the set T such that E            y∈T vol   (F   (y))  ≤ 2m. To do
this, we guarantee that each vertex v ∈ V (G) belongs in expectation to at most two of the sets
{F − (y)}y∈T . Specifically, observe that for every two vertices v, y ∈ V (G), the vertex v belongs to
F−  (y) if and   only  if y belongs to the set F + (v) = V (G) \ {v} ∪ N + (v) . Thus, to guarantee that
  hP                      i                                              G
               +    − (y)) ≤ 2m, it suffices to choose T such that for every v ∈ V (G), the expected size
E     y∈T  vol   (F
of the intersection T ∩ F + (v) is at most 2. Our algorithm for constructing T works as follows:

 1.a. calculate the value w∗ = maxv∈V (G) w(F + (v));
                                                                                              n         o
 1.b. construct T by selecting each vertex y ∈ V (G) into T independently with probability min 1, 2w(y)
                                                                                                   w∗
        (note that w∗ > 0 must hold5 ); and lastly,

 1.c. remove from T any vertex y with F − (y) = ∅.

Based on the description of this algorithm, it is easy to see that for every vertex v ∈ Vh(G), the inequal- i
                             +
ity E [|T ∩ F + (v)|] ≤ 2w(Fw∗ (v)) ≤ 2 holds. By the above discussion, this means that E           +   −
                                                                                          P
                                                                                            y∈T vol (F (y)) ≤
2m.
     Next, we describe how to implement the above algorithm efficiently, and then prove that Pr [T ∩ R∗ ̸= ∅] ≥
1                         ∗                                            +
2 . Indeed, to calculate w in time O(m), it suffices to calculate w(F (v))
                                                     +
                                                                          P for each v ∈ V (G) in time
O(deg(v)), which we can do using the equality w(F (v)) = w(V (G)) − u∈{v}∪N + (v) w(u). Step 1.b.
can be implemented using standard techniques for generating Bernoulli random variables. Finally, to
implement Step 1.c., we can check for each vertex y whether F − (y) = ∅ in time O(1) by using the
equality |F − (y)| = n − 1 − deg−G (y), which takes O(n) ≤ O(m) time overall. (Observe that n ≤ m
holds by the assumption that every vertex has out-degree at least 1.)
    In order to complete the description of step 1, it remains only to prove that the set T obtained by
the above procedure satisfies Pr [T ∩ R∗ ̸= ∅] ≥ 21 . Since vertices are selected into T with probability
proportional to their weight, it is useful to first prove a lower-bound on w(R∗ ), which we do in the
following claim.
                          ∗
Claim 4.8 w(R∗ ) ≥ w2 .

    Proof: Recall that w∗ is defined as w∗ = maxv∈V (G) w(F + (v)), and consider the vertex v that
attains this maximum. Since w(F + (v)) = w∗ > 0, it follows that F + (v) ̸= ∅, and thus the triplet
({v} , N + (v), F + (v)) is a valid vertex-cut in G. Since (L∗ , S ∗ , R∗ ) was chosen to be a global minimum
vertex-cut in G, it follows that w(S ∗ ) ≤ w(N + (v)), and thus that w(L∗ ∪R∗ ) ≥ w(V (G))−w(N + (v)) =
w({v} ∪ F + (v)) ≥ w(F + (v)) = w∗ . Since we chose (L∗ , S ∗ , R∗ ) to be a global minimum vertex-cut
                                                                ∗     ∗       ∗
satisfying w(L∗ ) ≤ w(R∗ ), it follows that w(R∗ ) ≥ w(L 2∪R ) ≥ w2 , as we needed to prove. This
concludes the proof of Claim 4.8.
We are now ready to prove that Pr [T ∩ R∗ ̸= ∅] ≥ 12 .

Claim 4.9 When choosing T according to steps 1.b.-1.c., the inequality Pr [T ∩ R∗ ̸= ∅] ≥ 12 holds.
    Indeed, every vertex v ∈ L∗ must have R∗ ⊆ F + (v) and thus F + (v) ̸= ∅, which means that w(F + (v)) > 0 since we
    5

are assuming that vertex-weights are positive.




                                                         23
    Proof: Firstly, observe that if any vertex y ∈ R∗ is selected into T during Step 1.b. of the
procedure, then it will not be removed during Step 1.c., since any such vertex satisfies L∗ ⊆ F − (y).
Thus, it suffices to show that with probability at least 12 , some vertex of R∗ is selected into T in Step
1.b.. In other words, if we let E denote the bad event in which no vertex of R∗ is selected into T in
Step 1.b., nthen it suffices
                     o       to show that Pr[E] ≤ 21 . We do this next. Indeed, for every vertex y ∈ R∗ , let
py = min 1, 2w(y)
              w∗    denote the probability of y being selected into T . Since each vertex y is selected
into T independently with probability py , we get that
                                                                           
                                                       y
                                Y               Y                   X
                       Pr[E] =     (1 − py ) ≤      e−p = exp −         py  .
                                  y∈R∗            y∈R∗                  y∈R∗


Since exp(−1) ≤ 21 , it now suffices to prove that
                                                     P
                                                    y∈R∗ py ≥ 1, which we do next. Consider two cases:
                                                                                              ∗)
the first case is where every y ∈ R∗ satisfies py = w∗ , and in this case y∈R∗ py = 2w(R
                                                   2w(y)                   P
                                                                                           w∗    ≥ 1 holds
                                                 ′   ∗           2w(y)
by Claim 4.8;nthe second o case is where some y ∈ R has py ̸=          – in this case, since py′ is defined
                                                            ′      ∗
                   2w(y)                                      P w
as py′ = min 1, w∗ , it follows that py′ = 1 and thus that y∈R∗ py ≥ 1, as needed. This concludes
the proof of Claim 4.9, and thus concludes the proof of Claim 4.3.




                                                     24
A     Algorithm for Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut: Proof of Theo-
      rem 1.6
In this section, we describe and analyze the algorithm implementing Theorem 1.6 – our main result
for the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem. This algorithm is a fairly straightforward adaptation
of the one from Section 3 to the vertex-cut setting – indeed, the only non-trivial task is in adapting the
ApproxBatchSparsify subroutine, which we do in Section A.1. Recall that the input to the algorithm
consists of a directed m-edge graph G with positive integer weights w(v) ≤ W on the vertices v ∈ V (G),
as well as a precision parameter ϵ ∈ (0, 1), and a root vertex y ∗ ∈ V (G), such that there exists some
vertex-cut (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) in G with y ∗ ∈ R′ . Let OPTV,y∗ denote the minimum value of a vertex-cut
among all vertex-cuts (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) of G with y ∗ ∈ R′ . Furthermore, for the sake of the analysis, fix one
such vertex-cut achieving this minimum value as the distinguished cut, and denote it by (L∗ , S ∗ , R∗ ).
Our goal is to output a vertex-cut (L, S, R) of G with w(S) ≤ (1 + ϵ)OPTV,y∗ .

Assumption that OPTV,y∗ > 0. As in Section 3, it will be convenient for us to assume that the
value of the optimal solution is positive, and we indeed make this assumption in the remainder of
this section. This assumption can be removed via the following standard technique: before running
the algorithm, we check whether OPTV,y∗ > 0 by performing a BFS from y ∗ in the reverse graph G
of G; if the BFS reaches all vertices of G, then OPTV,y∗ > 0 must hold, in which case we run the
algorithm; otherwise, we can use the set of vertices reached by the BFS in order to construct and
output a vertex-cut (L, S, R) of G with w(S) = 0 and y ∗ ∈ R – specifically, we let S = ∅, let R be the
set of vertices reached by the BFS, and let L = V (G) \ R.

Estimates of OPTV,y∗ and vol+            ∗
                                     G (L ), and a Set of Terminals. Our algorithm begins by guessing
an estimate OPT[ of OPTV,y∗ , and an estimate ν of vol+ (L∗ ), similarly to what was done in Section 3
                                                                  G
                         [ uniformly at random among the integral powers of 2 in the range [1, n · W ],
– specifically, it picks OPT
and it picks ν uniformly at random among the integral powers of 2 in the range [1, m]. Similarly to
                                                                                                               +
                                                                     OPTV,y∗         [ ≤ OPTV,y∗ and volG (L ) <
                                                                                                                  ∗
Section 3, let E estimates denote the good event in which                 2      <  OPT                       2
ν ≤ vol+     ∗
        G (L ) both hold, and observe that Pr[E
                                                         estimates ] ≥ Ω           1
                                                                             log2 (m·W )
                                                                                           . Next, our algorithm picks
                           m
                             
a set T ⊆ V (G) of O ν terminals, using the procedure from Lemma 2.5 with parameter ν and the
set F = {y ∗ } ∪ NG− (y ∗ ) of forbidden vertices. (The difference compared to Section 3 is that the set F
now also includes the vertices of NG− (y ∗ ).) Let E denote the good event that event E estimates occurred
and T ∩ L∗ ̸= ∅ holds. By Lemma 2.5, Pr[E | E estimates ] ≥ 100         1
                                                                           , and therefore
                                                                                              
                                          estimates          estimates                 1
                        Pr[E] = Pr[E | E            ] · Pr[E           ]≥Ω                       .                  (3)
                                                                                 log2 (m · W )

Hierarchical Partition of the Terminals. Our algorithm constructs a hierarchical partition of
the set T of terminals with z = ⌈log |T |⌉ levels, exactly as in Section 3.

Main Loop of the Algorithm. As in Section 3, our algorithm consists of z phases, where for each
1 ≤ i ≤ z, the goal of Phase i is to construct a sparsifier graph GB for each level-i batch B ∈ Bi . The
properties that this sparsifier graph must satisfy are:

                                                  m
                                                         
P’1. the graph GB contains at most Õ            2i ·ϵ
                                                             edges and vertices, and no more than the number of
     edges and vertices in G;


                                                               25
P’2. {y ∗ } ⊆ V (GB ) ⊆ V (G);

P’3. for every set L′ ⊆ V (GB ) \ ({y ∗ } ∪ NG−B (y ∗ )), the inequality wB (NG+B (L′ )) ≥ w(NG+ (L′ )) holds
             / NG+ (L′ ) – in particular, for every terminal x ∈ B ∩ V (GB ), the x-y ∗ vertex-connectivity
     and y ∗ ∈
     κGB (x, y ∗ ) in GB is at least as large as the vertex-connectivity κG (x, y ∗ ) in G;

P’4. if there exists a terminal x∗ ∈ B ∩ L∗ and the good event E occurred, then x∗ ∈ V (GB ) \
     NG−B (y ∗ ) holds and the x∗ -y ∗ vertex-connectivity κGB (x∗ , y ∗ ) in GB satisfies κGB (x∗ , y ∗ ) ≤
       1 + iϵz OPTV,y∗ – furthermore, there exists an x∗ -y ∗ vertex-cut (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) in GB of value
              

     wB (S ′ ) ≤ 1 + iϵz OPTV,y∗ that additionally satisfies the condition vol+     ′
                                                                                G (L ) ≤ 2ν.


The following claim is analogous to Claim 3.2, and is the main technical component of our algorithm.
The proof of this claim- and the description of procedure implementing it- are presented in Section A.1.

Claim A.1 There is a deterministic procedure that we refer to as VertexApproxBatchSparsify, that,
given an integer 1 ≤ i ≤ z, a batch B ∈ Bi , the parameters
                                                           ϵ,
                                                                  [ and access to the graph G,
                                                               ν, OPT,     
                                                            m1+o(1) ·log W
computes the graph GB satisfying Properties P’1-P’4 in O        2i ·ϵ
                                                                             time. If i > 1, then the
procedure also requires access to the graph GB ′ corresponding to the level-(i − 1) parent batch B ′ of B.

The following corollary of Claim A.1 summarizes the running time of each phase.
                                                                           1+o(1)        
                                                                                   ·log W
Corollary A.2 Each phase of the algorithm can be implemented in time O m         ϵ          .


   Proof: The proof is exactly the same as that of Corollary 3.3, except using the procedure
VertexApproxBatchSparsify instead of ApproxBatchSparsify.

Termination. We now describe how our algorithm proceeds after the final phase. This is exactly
analogous to how the algorithm from Section 3 operates after its final phase. For each terminal x ∈ T ,
let B (x) ∈ Bz denote the level-z batch that contains x. Furthermore, let T ′ ⊆ T denote the set of all
terminals x such that x ∈ V (GB (x) ). After the final phase, for each terminal x ∈ T ′ , our algorithm uses
Lemma 2.4 on the graph GB (x) in order to determine the vertex connectivity κG (x) (x, y ∗ ). Then, our
                                                                                    B
algorithm picks the terminal x̃ that achieves the minimum vertex-connectivity κG (x) (x, y ∗ ) among all
                                                                                      B
the terminals of T ′ ; computes a minimum x̃-y ∗ vertex-cut (L, S, R) in G using Lemma 2.4, and outputs
this vertex-cut. (If the set T ′ is empty, then the algorithm instead outputs an arbitrary vertex-cut
(L, S, R) with y ∗ ∈ R. Recall that, by the definition of the input of Theorem 1.6, such a vertex-cut is
guaranteed to exist, and observe that it can be found in time O(n).) Observe the following.

Observation A.3 If T ′ ̸= ∅, then the value of the vertex-cut (L, S, R) returned by the algorithm is at
most minx∈T ′ κG (x) (x, y ∗ ).
                 B



    Proof: The proof of this observation is exactly the same as that of Observation 3.4, except using
vertex connectivities instead of edge connectivities, and using Property P’3 instead of Property P3.
   The next corollary follows from the above observation.

Corollary A.4 If the good event E occurs, then the vertex-cut (L, S, R) returned by the algorithm has
value at most (1 + ϵ) OPTV,y∗ .

   Proof: The proof of this corollary is analogous to that of Corollary 3.5.


                                                    26
Running Time and Correctness Analysis. By the description of the algorithm, it always outputs
a vertex-cut (L, S, R) in G such that y ∗ ∈ R. Furthermore, by Corollary A.4, whenever event E occurs,
this
   vertex-cut
              has value at most (1 + ϵ)OPTV,y∗ ; by Equation (3), this happens with probability
          1
Ω             . Furthermore, an analogous running time analysis to the one from Section 3 shows
    log2 (m·W )                                         1+o(1)        
                                                                ·log W
that the running time of the above algorithm is O m           ϵ          . Thus, the algorithm described
                               1+o(1)        
                                       ·log W
in this section runs in time O m     ϵ          , and the output vertex-cut (L, S, R) satisfies w(S) ≤
                                                1
(1 + ϵ)OPTV,y∗ with probability at least polylog(mW ) . By repeating the algorithm polylog(mW ) times
and choosing the lowest-value cut among the obtained vertex-cuts, we can boost the success      probability
                     1                                                        m1+o(1) ·polylogW
of the algorithm to 2 , at the cost of increasing the running time to O                ϵ         . As we did
                                                                1+o(1)        
                                                                        ·log W
in Section 3, we can then reduce the running time back to O m         ϵ          using the reduction from
Section B.

A.1     Execution of a Single Iteration: proof of Claim A.1
In this section, we describe the VertexApproxBatchSparsify procedure from Claim A.1. In the
case where i = 1, this procedure simply returns the graph GB = G, as we did in the procedure
ApproxBatchSparsify from Section 3.1. It can be easily verified that when i = 1, this choice of
GB = G indeed satisfies Properties P’1-P’4. For the remainder of this section, we consider the case
where i > 1. We begin with a short high-level discussion, explaining the few non-trivial differences
between the implementation of VertexApproxBatchSparsify and that of ApproxBatchSparsify. We
then formally present and analyze the subroutine VertexApproxBatchSparsify in Section A.1.1.

High-Level Overview: Difference Between Edge-Version and Vertex-Version. The only
non-trivial task when adapting the algorithm from Section 3.1 to the vertex-version, is the construction
of the graph HB ′ . Recall that B ′ denotes the level-(i−1) parent batch of the input level-i batch B, and
recall that, in the edge-version of the ApproxBatchSparsify procedure, we constructed a graph HB ′
from GB ′ by introducing a new super-source vertex s, and connecting it to every vertex of B ∩ AB ′ via
                     [ (Here, AB ′ denotes the intermediate set that was used to construct GB ′ in
an edge of weight 4OPT.
the previous phase. In the edge-version of this procedure, B ∩ AB ′ was equal to B ∩ V (GB ′ ), while in
the vertex-version it will be equal to B ∩ (V (GB ′ ) \ NG− ′ (y ∗ )).) In the vertex-version of this procedure,
                                                           B
we will also construct a graph HB ′ that serves the same purpose – however, we can no longer give the
edges outgoing from s a weight of 4OPT,[ as the graph HB ′ needs to be vertex-weighted rather than
edge-weighted. One natural attempt at solving this would be the following: for each x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ ,
we introduce the edge (s, x), and then subdivide this edge with a new vertex, whose weight is 4OPT.        [
However, even this solution does not work, for a subtle reason that is described next. In the analysis
from Section 3.1, it was crucial that for every vertex x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ , if the x-y ∗ edge-connectivity in HB ′
                     [ then x will belong to the same side as s in every minimum s-y ∗ cut in HB ′ ;
was smaller than 4OPT,
conceptually, this happens because it is possible to ship min{λHB′ (x, y ∗ ), 4OPT}  [ units of flow from s
     ∗
to y using only flow-paths that exit s through the edge (s, x). (In reality, this condition by itself only
suffices to prove that x is on the same side as s in some minimum s-y ∗ cut, rather than in every such
cut. However, for the sake of simplicity, we will ignore this detail in this high-level overview.) Now,
the issue in the vertex-capacitated setting is that, even if we subdivide the edge (s, x) with a vertex
                                        [ and even if the x-y ∗ vertex-connectivity is large, we may
xcopy of weight greater or equal to 4OPT,
still not be able to ship much flow from s to y ∗ through x, because the vertex x itself may have very
low weight. We solve this issue via the same tactic as was employed by [CMT26]: that is, rather than
connecting the vertex xcopy to the vertex x, we instead connect xcopy directly to the out-neighbors


                                                      27
of x; it is then not hard to verify that min{κHB′ (x, y ∗ ), 4OPT}
                                                              [ units of flow can be shipped from s
    ∗
to y via the edge (s, x  copy ). Intuitively, this helps us guarantee that xcopy will belong to the same
side as s in the minimum s-y ∗ vertex-cut (LA , SA , RA ) that the procedure VertexApproxBatchSparsify
computes (which is analogous to the edge-cut (A, A′ ) from ApproxBatchSparsify). Then, if x ∈      / LA ,
we can simply move x from SA ∪ RA to LA , and it is not hard to see that the triple (LA , SA , RA ) still
remains a valid s-y ∗ vertex-cut in HB ′ .

A.1.1     Implementation of VertexApproxBatchSparsify for i > 1.

Fix some 1 ≤ i ≤ z. We now formally describe how the algorithm computes the graph GB for a single
batch B ∈ Bi during Phase i of the algorithm. The computation of the graph GB is performed in two
steps. In the first step, we compute a set AB ⊆ V (G) \ ({y ∗ } ∪ NG− (y ∗ )) of vertices that satisfies the
following two properties.

Q’1. vol+                 m
                                 
        G (AB ) = Õ     2i ·ϵ
                                     ; and

Q’2. if there exists a terminal x∗ ∈ B ∩ L∗ and the good event E occurred, then there exists a subset
     L′ ⊆ AB with x∗ ∈ L′ and vol+        ′
                                      G (L ) ≤ 2ν such that the vertex-cut (L′ , NG+ (L′ ), V (G) \ (L′ ∪
        +                           +
     NG (L′ ))) in G has value w(NG (L′ )) ≤ 1 + z OPTV,y∗ .
                                                  iϵ
                                                     


In the second step, we use this set AB in order to compute the graph GB satisfying Properties P’1-P’4
in time Õ(vol+
              G (AB )). The implementation of the second step is summed up by the following claim,
whose proof is deferred to Section A.1.2.

Claim A.5 There exists a procedure that, given a set AB ⊆ V (G) \ ({y ∗ } ∪ NG− (y ∗ )) satisfying Proper-
ties Q’1-Q’2, computes   a graph GB satisfying Properties P’1-P’4. The running time of the procedure
is O vol+                m
                 
         G (AB )   = Õ 2i ·ϵ
                              .

Obtaining the set AB . In the remainder of the current section, we describe the procedure for
computing the set AB ⊆ V (G) \ ({y ∗ } ∪ NG− (y ∗ )) of vertices. Let B ′ ∈ Bi−1 denote the level-(i − 1)
parent batch of B. In order to compute AB , we will use the graph GB ′ that we computed for batch
B ′ in the previous phase. Furthermore, for the remainder of this section, we let AB ′ denote the set
AB ′ = V (GB ′ )\({y ∗ }∪NG− ′ (y ∗ )). To compute AB , we first construct a graph HB ′ from GB ′ as follows:
                            B
we introduce a new ”super-source” vertex s, and, for every terminal x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ , we introduce a new
vertex xcopy of weight 4OPT,
                           [ as well as an edge (s, xcopy ), and edges from xcopy to all out-neighbors
of x in GB ′ ; Furthermore, for every vertex v ∈ AB ′ (including those in B ∩ AB ′ ), we introduce a new
                           \ ·deg+ (v)
                         ϵ·OPT
vertex v sink of weight       z·2ν
                                     G
                                         , as well as edges (v, v sink ) and (v sink , y ∗ );6 if v ∈ B ∩ AB ′ , then
we additionally introduce an edge (v copy , v sink ). The next observation about the graph HB ′ follows
immediately from the construction of this graph, and is analogous to Observation 3.7 from Section 3.
                                                                    +
Observation A.6 For every set L̂ ⊆ AB ′ of vertices, we have wB ′ (NH ′
                                                                        (L̂)) − wB ′ (NG+ ′ (L̂)) =
                                                                                      B                   B
  \ ·vol+ (L̂)
ϵ·OPT
    z·2ν
         G
               .

We will also use the following definition and observation, which do not have analogous versions in
Section 3.
   6
     Observe that the weight of v sink is positive, as the assumption that OPTV,y∗ > 0 implies that every vertex v ∈
V (G) \ {y ∗ } has deg+
                      G (v) > 0.




                                                         28
Definition A.7 Let AcompleteB′      denote the set Acomplete
                                                     B′       = AB ′ ∪ {xcopy | x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ } = V (HB ′ ) \
              −                                              complete
({y ∗ , s} ∪ NH ′ (y ∗ )). Furthermore, for every set L̂ ⊆ AB ′       , we define the completed version of L̂
               B                  n                         o n                           o
to be the set L̂ complete  = L̂ ∪ x copy | x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ ∩ L̂ ∪ x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ | xcopy ∈ L̂ that is obtained
from L̂ by adding to it each vertex xcopy for which the corresponding vertex x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ belongs to L̂,
as well as each vertex x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ for which the corresponding vertex xcopy belongs to L̂.
Observation A.8 For every set L̂ ⊆ Acomplete
                                    B′
                                                                   +
                                             of vertices, we have NH ′
                                                                                        +
                                                                       (L̂complete ) ⊆ NH ′
                                                                                            (L̂).
                                                                              B                   B



   Proof: This observation follows from the fact that for every x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ , the vertices x and xcopy
have the exact same out-neighbors in HB ′ , together with the fact that L̂ ⊆ L̂complete .

Continuing the computation of AB . We now continue the description of the algorithm computing
AB . The algorithm uses Lemma 2.4 in order to compute a minimum s-y ∗ vertex-cut (LA , SA , RA ) in
                                                   cA complete \ V copy , where L
the graph HB ′ , and chooses AB to be the set AB = L                            cA = LA \ {s} and where
                                                       complete
V copy = {xcopy | x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ }. (Observe that L
                                                cA ⊆ A ′
                                                            B    must hold because (LA , SA , RA ) is an
s-y ∗ vertex-cut in HB ′ and because Acomplete
                                          B′    = V (HB ′ ) \ ({y ∗ , s} ∪ NH −
                                                                                   (y ∗ )).) This concludes the
                                                                               B′
description of how we compute AB . Furthermore, it is not hard to verify that AB ⊆ V (G) \ ({y ∗ } ∪
NG− (y ∗ )) holds by using the fact that AB ⊆ AB ′ = V (G) \ ({y ∗ } ∪ NG− ′ (y ∗ )) as well as using Property
                                                                          B
P’3 of the graph GB ′ . It now remains to prove that this set indeed satisfies Properties Q’1-Q’2. The
next two observation will be useful for this task; these are analogous to Observations 3.8 and 3.9 from
Section 3.
Observation
         A.9 The value wB ′ (SA ) of the vertex-cut (LA , SA , RA ) in the graph HB ′ is wB ′ (SA ) =
     \
O m·OPT .
      ν·2i


    Proof: The proof of this observation is analogous to that of Observation 3.8: specifically, since
(LA , SA , RA ) is chosen to be a minimum s-y ∗
                                           vertex-cut in HB ′ , it suffices to prove that some s-
                                        \
y ∗ vertex-cut in H ′ has value O m·OPT ; furthermore, similarly to what we did in the proof
                     B                     ν·2i
of Observation 3.8, it can be verified that the triple ({s} , V copy , V (HB ′ ) \ ({s} ∪ V copy )) is such a
vertex-cut, where V copy = {xcopy | x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ }.
Observation A.10 The set LA contains every vertex xcopy ∈ V copy whose vertex-connectivity to y ∗
in HB ′ satisfies κHB′ (xcopy , y ∗ ) < 4OPT.
                                         [

     Proof: Suppose towards contradiction that some vertex xcopy ∈ V copy does not belong to LA ,
and yet has κHB′ (xcopy , y ∗ ) < 4OPT.
                                     [ Furthermore, fix one such vertex xcopy for the remainder of the
proof. We will demonstrate that in this case, there must exist an s-y ∗ vertex-cut (L̃, S̃, R̃) in HB ′ of
weight smaller than that of (LA , SA , RA ), in contradiction to the choice of (LA , SA , RA ) as a minimum
s-y ∗ vertex-cut in HB ′ . Specifically, by the assumption that κHB′ (xcopy , y ∗ ) < 4OPT,
                                                                                       [ there must exist
an xcopy -y ∗ vertex-cut (L̂, Ŝ, R̂) in HB ′ with wB ′ (Ŝ) < 4OPT;
                                                                [ we define the set S̃ of the vertex-cut
(L̃, S̃, R̃) to be S̃ = (SA \ {x  copy }) ∪ Ŝ. Before revealing the definition of the sets L̃ and R̃, we will
prove that the weight of S̃ is smaller than that of SA : indeed, since S̃ = (SA \ {xcopy }) ∪ Ŝ and
                     [ = wB ′ (xcopy ), it suffices to show that xcopy ∈ SA ; furthermore, recall that xcopy
since wB ′ (Ŝ) < 4OPT
was chosen as a vertex that does not belong to LA , and observe that xcopy ∈ LA ∪ SA holds because
(LA , SA , RA ) is an s-y ∗ vertex-cut in the graph HB ′ , and this graph contains an edge (s, xcopy ). This
concludes the proof that the weight of S̃ is smaller than that of SA .

                                                      29
      Next, we must show that there exist sets L̃, R̃ ⊆ V (HB ′ ) such that (L̃, S̃, R̃) is an s-y ∗ vertex-cut
in HB ′ . By the definition of S̃, it is not hard to verify that s, y ∗ ∈   / S̃. Therefore, it suffices to show
that every s-y ∗ path in HB ′ must traverse at least one vertex of S̃: we can then choose L̃ to be the
set of vertices that are reachable from s via paths that do not traverse vertices of S̃, and choose R̃
to be the set of remaining vertices in HB ′ . We show this now: indeed, consider any s-y ∗ path P in
HB ′ ; since (LA , SA , RA ) is an s-y ∗ vertex-cut in HB ′ , it follows that P must traverse a vertex v of SA ;
if v ̸= xcopy then v ∈ SA \ xcopy ⊆ S̃ and we are done; otherwise, v = xcopy , and as (L̂, Ŝ, R̂) is an
xcopy -y ∗ vertex-cut, it follows that the path P must visit some vertex of Ŝ ⊆ S̃ on the way from v to
y ∗ . This concludes the proof of Observation A.10.
    The following corollary of Observation A.10 will also be useful.
                                 complete
Corollary A.11 The set L    cA         contains every terminal x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ whose vertex-connectivity
    ∗                            ∗     [
to y in HB ′ satisfies κHB′ (x, y ) < 4OPT.


    Proof: Consider any terminal x ∈ B ∩ AB ′ with κHB′ (x, y ∗ ) < 4OPT.
                                                                       [ Since the out-neighbors of
x in HB ′ are exactly the same as the out-neighbors of xcopy , it follows that κHB′ (xcopy , y ∗ ) < 4OPT
                                                                                                      [
holds as well. Therefore, by Observation A.10, the set LA contains xcopy . Since L     cA is defined as
cA = LA \ {s}, it follows that xcopy ∈ L
L                                                        cA complete , as needed.
                                       cA , and thus x ∈ L
                                                     cA complete \ V copy satisfies Properties Q’1-Q’2.
   Recall that it remains to prove that the set AB = L
We begin by proving that it satisfies Property Q’1.

Claim A.12 The set AB satisfies Property Q’1. That is, vol+                 m
                                                                               
                                                            G (AB ) = Õ 2i ·ϵ .


    Proof: Recall that for every vertex v ∈ AB ⊆ AB ′ , the graph HB ′ contains a vertex v sink of weight
                   \ ·deg+ (v)
                 ϵ·OPT
wB ′ (v sink ) =     z·2ν
                          G
                               , as well as edges (v, v sink ) and (v sink , y ∗ ); and, if v ∈ B ∩ AB ′ , then the
graph HB ′ additionally contains the edge (v copy , v sink ). We begin the proof of the claim by showing
                                            +
that for each vertex v ∈ AB , the set NH      ′
                                                (LA ) must include the vertex v sink . Indeed, recall that for
                                              B

each vertex v ∈ AB = L    cA complete \ V copy , the set LA must include either v, or possibly v copy in the
case where v ∈ B ∩ AB ′ ; either way, the set LA contains some in-neighbor of v sink . Observe further
that LA cannot contain the vertex v sink itself, since (LA , SA , RA ) is an s-y ∗ vertex-cut in HB ′ , and this
                                                                                  +
graph includes an edge (v sink , y ∗ ). Thus, for each such v ∈ AB , the set NH       (LA ) must include v sink .
                                                                                   B′
                                                                                             +
The remainder of this proof is analogous to that of Claim 3.10; Specifically, as NH              (LA ) ⊆ SA , it
                                                                                              B′
                                                         \       +
                                                       ϵ·OPT·volG (AB )
                                                                        . This means that vol+
                                 sink
follows that wB ′ (SA ) ≥ wB ′ ( v      | v ∈ AB ) =        z·2ν                              G (AB 
                                                                                                    ) is upper-
                                                                                                              
                 +                          z·2ν                                                       m· \
                                                                                                          OPT
bounded by volG (AB ) ≤ wB ′ (SA ) · \ . By plugging the upper-bound wB ′ (SA ) = O                      ν·2i
                                          ϵ·OPT
from Observation A.9 into this last inequality, we get that vol+                     z·m
                                                                                         
                                                                        G (AB ) ≤ O ϵ·2i . The corollary now
follows as z = Õ(1).
    Lastly, it remains to prove that the set AB satisfies Q’2, which we do in the next claim. The proof
of this claim is similar to that of Claim 3.11.

Claim A.13 The set AB satisfies Property Q’2.

   Proof: Suppose that there exists a terminal x∗ ∈ B ∩ L∗ , and suppose that the good event E
occurred. We need to prove that there exists a subset L′ ⊆ AB with x∗ ∈ L′ and vol+           ′
                                                                                          G (L ) ≤ 2ν such
                           +                       +                           +
that the vertex-cut (L′ , NG (L′ ), V (G) \ (L′ ∪ NG (L′ ))) in G has value w(NG (L′ )) ≤ 1 + iϵz OPTV,y∗ .


                                                        30
    As x∗ ∈ B ∩ L∗ and as B ′ is the parent batch of B, it follows that x∗ ∈ B ′ ∩ L∗ . Thus, by
Property P’4 of the graph GB ′ , x∗ ∈ V (GB ′ ) \ NG− ′ (y ∗ ) = AB ′ ∪ {y ∗ } holds, and there exists an x∗ -y ∗
                                                       B               
                     ′ , R′ ) in G ′ of value w ′ (S ′ ) ≤ 1 + (i−1)ϵ OPT
vertex-cut (L′B ′ , SB ′  B ′     B            B    B  ′           z            V,y ∗ , that additionally satisfies
vol+   ′
   G (LB ′ ) ≤ 2ν.
     Let L′ = AB ∩ L′B ′ . We now prove that x∗ ∈ L′ and vol+              ′
                                                                       G (L ) ≤ 2ν,  and that the vertex-cut
   ′   +     ′          ′     +   ′                           +    ′             iϵ
(L , NG (L ), V (G) \ (L ∪ NG (L ))) in G has value w(NG (L )) ≤ 1 + z OPTV,y∗ . Indeed, the fact
that vol+      ′                                    ′       ′                     +    ′
          G (L ) ≤ 2ν follows from the fact that L ⊆ LB ′ , and that volG (LB ′ ) ≤ 2ν. It remains to
                                                              +
prove that x∗ ∈ L′ , as well as that the vertex-cut (L′ , NG (L′ ), V (G) \ (L′ ∪ NG+ (L′ ))) in G has value
w(NG+ (L′ )) ≤ 1 + iϵz OPTV,y∗ . We begin by proving the latter statement. Specifically, this latter
statement follows directly from the next claim.

Claim A.14 The three inequalities w(NG+ (L′ )) ≤ wB ′ (NH     +
                                                                  (L′ )) ≤ wB ′ (NH  +
                                                                                         (L′B ′ )) ≤ 1 + iϵz OPTV,y∗
                                                                                                            
                                                               B′                     B′
all hold.

    Proof: We begin by proving the first inequality of the claim. That is, we begin by proving that
w(NG+ (L′ )) ≤ wB ′ (NH
                      +
                           (L′ )). Indeed, by Property P’3 of the graph GB ′ , the weight w(NG+ (L′ ))
                        B′
is no larger than the weight wB ′ (NG+ ′ (L′ )) of the out-neighbors of L′ in GB ′ ; furthermore, by the
                                        B
                                                                                          +
construction of the graph HB ′ , this latter value is no larger than the weight wB ′ (NH      (L′ )) of the
                                                                                           B′
                   ′
out-neighbors of L in HB ′ . This concludes the proof of the first inequality.
    Next, we prove the second inequality from Claim A.14. Consider the set L′A = L              cA complete ∪ {s}
                                           ′ = N + (L′ ) and R′ = V (H ′ ) \ (L′ ∪ S ′ ). It is not
of vertices in HB ′ , as well as the sets SA        HB ′  A            A          B         A     A
                                   ′    ′
hard to verify that the triple (LA , SA , RA′ ) is an s-y ∗ vertex-cut in H ′ ; we prove next that it is
                                                                               B
a minimum s-y ∗ vertex-cut in HB ′ , as well as that the equality L′ = L′A ∩ L′B ′ holds; the second
inequality from Claim A.14 then follows from Lemma 2.2 (with L′B ′ , L′A , SA        ′ , and R′ in place of X,
                                                                                               A
L, S, and R). Thus, we must now prove that (L′A , SA       ′ , R′ ) is a minimum s-y ∗ vertex-cut in H ′ ,
                                                                A                                              B
which we do by proving that SA   ′ ⊆ S (Recall that (L , S , R ) is itself a minimum s-y ∗ vertex-cut
                                       A                   A    A    A
in HB ′ .): it is not hard to verify that S ′ ⊆ (N + (s) ∪ N + (L        cA complete )) \ L′ ; furthermore, by
                                                A        HB ′        HB ′                     A

Observation A.8, NH    +     cA complete ) ⊆ N + (L
                            (L                     cA ); so, as LA ⊆ L′ , it follows that S ′ ⊆ (N + (s) ∪
                        B ′                   HB ′                     A                   A       HB ′
  +                    +                                           ′   ′    ′                   ∗
NH ′ (LA ))\LA = NH ′ (LA ) ⊆ SA , as needed to show that (LA , SA , RA ) is a minimum s-y vertex-cut
       c
   B                     B
in HB ′ . Next, we must prove that L′ = L′A ∩ L′B ′ : indeed, recall that L′ is defined as L′ = AB ∩ L′B ′ ;
since L′B ′ ⊆ V (GB ′ ), it then suffices to show that L′A ∩ V (GB ′ ) = AB ∩ V (GB ′ ); this in turn holds
because AB = L  cA complete \ V copy = (L′ \ {s}) \ V copy = L′ ∩ V (GB ′ ). This concludes the proof of the
                                            A                   A
second inequality from Claim A.14.
    Lastly, we now prove the third inequality from Claim A.14. Recall we are assuming that event
E occurred, which means that OPT     [ ≤ OPTV,y∗ ; therefore, since vol+ (L′ ′ ) ≤ 2ν, it follows from
                                                                            G    B
                                +     ′           +     ′        ϵ· \
                                                                    OPT   ϵ·OPTV,y∗
Observation A.6 that wB ′ (∂H ′ (LB ′ )) − wB ′ (∂G ′ (LB ′ )) ≤        ≤           . So, by the choice of
                                 B                 B                z        z
          ′ , R′ ) as a vertex-cut in G ′ whose value is at most 1 + (i−1)ϵ OPT
(L′B ′ , SB ′  B′                       B                                 z         V,y ∗ , it follows that

                                                                                                   
                                                 ϵ · OPTV,y∗                 ϵ · OPTV,y∗         iϵ
        +
 wB ′ (NH    (L′B ′ )) ≤ wB ′ (NG+ ′ (L′B ′ )) +                      ′
                                                             ≤ wB ′ (SB ′) +             ≤    1+      OPTV,y∗ .
          B′                      B                 z                            z               z

This concludes the proof of Claim A.14.
   We now continue the proof of Claim A.13. The remainder of this proof is exactly analogous to
the final part of the proof of Claim 3.11. Specifically, to prove the claim, it now remains to prove
that x∗ ∈ L′ . As L′ = AB ∩ L′B ′ and x∗ ∈ L′B ′ , it suffices to prove that x∗ ∈ AB . We do this next,

                                                        31
by first proving that κHB′ (x∗ , y ∗ ) < 4OPT,
                                           [ and then using Corollary A.11. Indeed since x∗ ∈ L′ ′
                                                                                                       B
      ∗             +
and y ∈     ′             ′
         / LB ′ ∪ NH ′ (LB ′ ), it follows by the third inequality of Claim A.14 that the x∗ -y ∗ vertex-
                     B
connectivity in HB ′ is
                                                               
                           ∗ ∗             +    ′            iϵ
                   κHB′ (x , y ) ≤ wB ′ (NH ′ (LB ′ )) ≤ 1 +      OPTV,y∗ ≤ 2OPTV,y∗ .                (4)
                                            B                z

Recall also that we are assuming that event E occurred, which, by the definition of this event, means
                  [ By plugging this inequality into Equation (4), it follows that κH ′ (x∗ , y ∗ ) <
that OPTV,y∗ < 2OPT.                                                                      B
                ∗          ′
4OPT. Since x ∈ B ∩ L ′ ⊆ B ∩ AB ′ , it now follows from Corollary A.11 that x ∈ L
 [                                                                                    ∗     cA complete .
                             B
                                                      complete
Since x∗ ∈ V (G), it then follows that x∗ ∈ L
                                            cA       \ V copy = AB . Thus, x∗ ∈ AB ∩ L′B ′ = L′ ,
as we needed to prove. This concludes the proof of Claim A.13, and thus concludes the analysis of
VertexApproxBatchSparsify.

A.1.2    Step 2: Proof of Claim A.5

Consider a set AB ⊆ V (G)\({y ∗ }∪NG− (y ∗ )) of vertices that satisfies Properties Q’1-Q’2. We construct
the graph GB using AB as follows: choose the vertex-set of GB to be V (GB ) = AB ∪ NG+ (AB ) ∪ {y ∗ },
and construct the edge-set of GB by beginning with the set EG (AB , AB ∪ NG+ (AB )) of all edges of G
that originate inside AB , and then adding, for every vertex v ∈ NG+ (AB ), an edge (v, y ∗ ). Furthermore,
set the weight wB (v) of each vertex v ∈ V (GB ) to be exactly the same as the weight w(v) of this
vertex in G.
    This kind of construction was also used in [CMT26], and they referred to the resulting graph as
the graph derived from G via the vertex-set AB . It can easily verified that the above construction can
be implemented in Õ(vol+G (AB )) time. The following observation is immediate from the construction
of GB , and was also formally proved in [CMT26].

Observation A.15 For every set L′ ⊆ AB , we have wB (NG+B (L′ )) = w(NG+ (L′ )).

     Next, we show that the obtained graph GB indeed satisfies Properties P’1-P’4. Properties P’2
and P’3 follow directly from the construction of GB and from Observation A.15. (Indeed, for every
set X ′ ⊆ V (GB ) \ ({y ∗ } ∪ NG−B (y ∗ )) as described in Property P’3, it can be easily verified that
X ′ ⊆ AB must hold, so Observation A.15 applies for this set.) We now consider Properties P’1 and
P’4. It can be easily verified from the construction of GB that |E(GB )| = vol+                         +
                                                                                           G (AB ) + |NG (AB )| ≤
2 vol+G (AB ); so, the upper-bound on |E(GB )| required for Property P’1 of GB follows from Property Q’1
of AB ; furthermore, a similar upper-bound on |V (GB )| follows as |V (GB )| = |AB | + |NG+ (AB )| + 1 ≤
|E(GB )| + 1, where the last inequality is due to the fact that every vertex of AB must have at
least one-outgoing edge in G, which in turn holds by the assumption OPTV,y∗ > 0. It remains
to show that GB satisfies Property P’4, which we do next. Suppose that there exists a terminal
x∗ ∈ B ∩ L∗ and the good event E occurred; we need to prove that in this case, x∗ ∈ V (GB )
holds, and there exists an x∗ -y ∗ vertex-cut (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) in GB of value wB (S ′ ) ≤ 1 + iϵz OPTV,y∗ that
additionally satisfies the condition vol+         ′
                                              G (L ) ≤ 2ν. Indeed, in the aforementioned case, Property Q’2
of the set AB guarantees that there exists a subset L′ ⊆ AB with x∗ ∈ L′ and vol+                   ′
                                                                                                G (L ) ≤
                                                                                                        2ν such
                            ′    +    ′           ′    +   ′                       +     ′
that the vertex-cut (L , NG (L ), V (G) \ (L ∪ NG (L ))) in G has value w(NG (L )) ≤ 1 + iϵz  OPTV,y∗ .
Furthermore, by Observation A.15, this set L′ satisfies wB (NG+B (L′ )) = w(NG+ (L′ )) ≤ 1 + iϵz OPTV,y∗ .
Thus, if we define S ′ as S ′ = NG+B (L′ ) and R′ as R′ = V (GB ) \ (L′ ∪ S ′ ), then the vertex-cut
(L′ , S ′ , R′ ) in GB satisfies all the conditions required by Property P’4. Furthermore, since x∗ ∈ L′ and
L′ ⊆ AB ⊆ V (GB ) \ NG−B (y ∗ ), it follows that x∗ ∈ V (GB ) \ NG−B (y ∗ ), as needed. This concludes the
proof of Property P’4, and thus concludes the proof of Claim A.5.


                                                       32
B     Reducing Dependence on W
In this section, we describe a standard method that we use in our algorithms for both the Rooted
Minimum Edge-Cut and the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem, in order to reduce the dependence
of the running time on the maximum weight W from polylogarithmic to logarithmic. For the sake of
completion, we also provide a formal proof. Specifically, this methodallows us to transform
                                                                                              any (1+ϵ)-
                                                                      m1+o(1)
approximation algorithm for these problems that runs in time O            ϵ   polylogW on an m-edge
                                                                            1+o(1)
                                                                                                         
graph and has a success probability of 12 , to one that runs in time O m ϵ             polylog m
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                ϵ   log W
and has the same
              success probability.
                                   As long as 1ϵ ≤ poly(m), the latter running time is upper-
                  m1+o(1)
bounded by O        ϵ     log W   , as required by both Theorem 1.5 and Theorem 1.6. In the case where
the inequality 1ϵ ≤ poly(m) does not hold, and in particular whenever 1ϵ > m, we can instead solve
the Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut (resp. Vertex-Cut) problem with root y ∗ by explicitly computing the
minimum v-y ∗ edge-cut (resp. vertex-cut) for every vertex v, resulting in an algorithm with running
                                                       1+o(1)
time O(m1+o(1) · n · log W ) ≤ O(m2+o(1) log W ) ≤ O( m ϵ     log W ).
   The method that we describe in this section is applicable for a general class of problems, and
we will describe it using a general formulation that captures both the Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut
problem and the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem. We now present this formulation:
    Consider a fixed mapping φ that, given a universe U of elements and a bit-string s, maps these
to a set φ(U, s) of feasible solutions, where each element F of φ(U, s) is a pair F = (Q, s′ ) consisting
of a subset Q ⊆ U of elements, and a bit-string s′ . Now, consider the following optimization problem
Pφ . In this problem, the input consists of a universe U , a bit-string s, a positive integer W , and
weight-function w : U → {1, . . . , W } that assigns a positive integral weight w(e) ≤ W to each element
e ∈ U ; the goal is finding a feasible solution F = (Q, s′ ) ∈ φ(U, s) that minimizes the sum of weights
P
   e∈Q w(e).
   Since a graph can be represented as a bit-string, it is possible to formulate both the Rooted Mini-
mum Edge-Cut and the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problems as a problem Pφ for the appropriate
mapping φ. For example, in the case of Rooted Minimum Edge-Cut, the string s represents the graph
G and the root y ∗ ; the universe U is the set of edges U = E(G); and the set φ(U, s) of feasible solutions
consists of all pairs (Q, s′ ) such that s′ is a bit-string representing an edge-cut (X, Y ) with y ∗ ∈ Y ,
and Q is the set EG (X, Y ) of edges crossing this cut. The following theorem demonstrates that for
any minimization problem that is captured by the above setup, it is possible to reduce the running
time dependence of any algorithm on the parameter W from polylogarithmic to logarithmic.
Theorem B.1 Consider an optimization problem Pφ as defined above, and suppose there exists an
algorithm A that, given any instance (U, s, W, w) of this problem and any parameter ϵ ∈ (0, 1), outputs
a feasible solution F ∈ φ(U, s) so that with probability at least 12 , F is a (1 + ϵ)-approximate solution to
the instance (U, s, W, w) of the problem. Furthermore, suppose that there exists some function T (·, ·)
such that the running time of algorithm A on any instance (U, s, W, w) and parameter ϵ ∈ (0, 1) is
O (T (s, ϵ) ·polylog(W )). Then, there exists an algorithm      A′ that, given the same input as A, runs
in time O (T (s, ϵ) + |U |) · polylog( |Uϵ | ) · log(W |U |) and computes a feasible solution F ∈ φ(U, s) so
that with probability at least 12 , F is a (1 + O(ϵ))-approximate solution.

    Essentially, the algorithm A′ promised by Theorem 1.1 works by reducing the input instance
(U, s, W, w) to z ≈ log(W |U |) many instances (U, s, W ′ , w1 ), . . . , (U, s, W ′ , wz ) with a maximum weight
of W ′ = poly( |Uϵ | ), and then calling A to solve each of these instances. Informally, for each i ∈ [z],
the instance (U, s, W ′ , wi ) is designed to ”mimic” the original instance (U, s, W, w) in the case where
the optimal solution value OPT of the original instance falls in the range [2i , 2i+1 ). Specifically, the

                                                       33
instance (U, s, W ′ , wi ) is designed so that, if OPT ∈ [2i , 2i+1 ), then any (1 + ϵ)-approximate solution
to this instance is also a (1 + O(ϵ))-approximate solution to the original instance (U, s, W, w). Then,
after using A on each of the instances (U, s, W ′ , w1 ), . . . , (U, s, W ′ , wz ), there is a probability of 21 that
at least one of the obtained feasible solutions is also a (1 + O(ϵ))-approximate solution to the original
instance (U, s, W, w). Next, we provide a formal proof of Theorem B.1.

Proof of Theorem B.1. We begin by formally describing the algorithm A′ . Given an instance
(U, s, W, w) for problem Pφ , the algorithm first computes and writes down the values z = ⌈log(W |U | + 1)⌉
                                                                                |
and W ′ , where W ′ is the smallest integral power of 2 that is larger than 4|U
                                                                              ϵ . Then, for every i ∈ [z],
the algorithm explicitly computes and writes down the weight function wi : U → [W ′ ] defined as
follows:                                 (j w(e)·W ′ k
                                              2i+2
                                                            if w(e) < 2i+2 ,
                                wi (e) =
                                           W′               otherwise.
We discuss later how to efficiently compute these weight functions w1 , . . . , wz . Now, we call algorithm
A on each of the instances (U, s, W ′ , w1 ), . . . , (U, s, W ′ , wz ). For each i ∈ [z], let Fi = (Qi , s′i ) denote
the feasible solution that A returnedP         when it was ran on instance (U, s, W ′ , wi ). Observe that explicitly
computing the value val(Fi ) = e∈Qi w(e) of all z feasible solutions F1 , . . . , Fz w.r.t the weight function
w would require time that is quadratic in log(W ), which we cannot afford. Thus, we take                P a slightly
different approach, as described next. For each i ∈ [z], we compute the value vali (Fi ) = e∈Qi wi (e)
of Fi w.r.t the weight function wi . Since the values wi (e) assigned by the weight function wi are
written using just O(log(W ′ |U |)) bits, these computations together take a total time of only O(|U | ·
log(W ′ |U |) · z) = O(|U | · log( |Uϵ | ) · log(W |U |)). Let i∗ be the smallest i ∈ [z] for which vali (Fi ) < W ′ .
Then, for every i ∈ {i∗ , i∗ + 1, i∗ + 2}, our algorithm calculates the value val(Fi ) of Fi w.r.t the original
weight function w. Since we are computing val(Fi ) for only a constant number of feasible solutions
Fi , these computations can be performed in time O(|U | · log(W |U |)). The algorithm then outputs the
feasible solution that minimizes val(Fi ) among the three solutions {Fi | i ∈ {i∗ , i∗ + 1, i∗ + 2}}, and
outputs this feasible solution.
    We now analyze the above algorithm. For the analysis, let OPT denote the optimal solution value
                                                                                          ′              ′
of the original input instance (U, s, W, w), and let i′ be the unique integer for which 2i ≤ OPT < 2i +1
holds. Let E denote the good event in which the feasible solution Fi′ obtained from the call to A
on the instance (U, s, W ′ , wi′ ) is a (1 + ϵ)-approximate solution to the instance (U, s, W ′ , wi′ ). By
the guarantees of the algorithm A, event E happens with probability at least 12 . We will show that
whenever event E happens, our algorithm outputs a (1 + O(ϵ))-approximate solution to the original
instance. Since the output of the algorithm is the best feasible solution among Fi∗ , Fi∗ +1 , Fi∗ +2 , it
suffices to prove the following claim.

Claim B.2 Whenever event E happens, the feasible solution Fi′ must be a (1+2ϵ)-approximate solution
to the original instance (U, s, W, w), and i′ ∈ {i∗ , i∗ + 1, i∗ + 2} must hold.

    Proof: We begin by proving that if event E happens, then Fi′ is a (1 + 2ϵ)-approximate solution
to the instance (U, s, W, w). In other words, we show next that if event E happens, then val(Fi′ ) ≤
(1 + 2ϵ)OPT. To do this, we will first show that if E happens then vali′ (Fi′ ) must be small, and
then we will relate val(Fi′ ) to vali′ (Fi′ ). Indeed, recall the definition of the weight function wi′ , and
                                                                                           ′
observe that by this definition, every element e ∈ U satisfies wi′ (e) ≤ w(e)·W     2i′ +2
                                                                                             . Thus, the value
                                                       ′
of the optimal solution to the instance (U, s, W , w ′ ) must be at most          OPT   ·W ′
                                                                                             . Recall also that
                                                              i                         2i′ +2
if event E happens, then Fi′ must be a (1 + ϵ)-approximate solution to the instance (U, s, W ′ , wi′ ),
meaning that vali′ (Fi′ ) ≤ (1 + ϵ) OPT   ·W ′                                         ′

                                     2i′ +2
                                               . Since i′ is defined such that OPT < 2i +1 , and since ϵ < 1,


                                                         34
it follows in particular that vali′ (Fi′ ) < W ′ , meaning that Qi′ contains only elements e ∈ U with
             ′                                                                   i′ +2
w(e) < 2i +2 . Thus, by the definition of wi′ , it follows that w(e) ≤ 2W ′ (1 + wi′ (e)) holds for all
                          i′ +2
e ∈ Q ′ , so val(F ′ ) ≤ 2 (|U | + val ′ (F ′ )). Since we’ve seen that val ′ (F ′ ) ≤ (1 + ϵ) OPT·W , it follows
                                                                                                    ′
        i         i         W′         i   i                           i  i             2i′ +2
                     ′
                   2i +2 |U |                          ′                       i ′
that val(Fi′ ) ≤ W ′ + (1 + ϵ)OPT. Now, since i is defined such that 2 ≤ OPT, it follows that
vali′ (Fi′ ) ≤ 4OPT
                 W′
                     ·|U |
                           + (1 + ϵ)OPT ≤ (1 + 2ϵ)OPT, as we needed. (In the last inequality, we used the
definition of W ′ .)
    It remains to show that if event E happens, then i′ ∈ {i∗ , i∗ + 1, i∗ + 2} must hold. Recall
that i∗ is defined as the smallest integer i ∈ [z] for which vali (Fi ) < W ′ . Further recall that we’ve
already shown that if event E happens, then vali′ (Fi′ ) < W ′ holds. Thus, it only remains to show
that vali (Fi ) ≥ W ′ holds for every i < i′ − 2. Indeed, consider any i < i′ − 2, and consider the
solution Fi = (Qi , s′i ). If Qi contains any element e ∈ U with w(e) ≥ 2i+2j, then w               ′
                                                                                        k i (e) = W and
                                                                                             ′
thus vali (Fi ) ≥ W ′ holds. Otherwise, all elements e ∈ Qi satisfy wi (e) = w(e)·W
                                                                               2i+2
                                                                                    , meaning that
                     ′
val (F ) ≥ val(Fi )·W − |U | ≥ OPT·W − |U |. It remains to show that OPT·W − |U | ≥ W ′ . Indeed,
                                     ′                                       ′
    i    i    2i+2              2i+2                                     2i+2
           ′                          ′                i+2   i ′ −1
since i < i − 2, it must be that i ≤ i − 3, and thus 2     ≤2       ≤ OPT/2; it therefore follows that
OPT·W ′ − |U | ≥ 2W ′ − |U | ≥ W ′ . This concludes the proof of Claim B.2.
  2i+2
   In order to conclude the proof of Theorem B.1, it remains to show how to efficiently compute the
weight functions w1 , . . . , wz . We show this next.

Efficient computation of the Weight Functions.              We now describe how the algorithm computes
the weight functions w1 , . . . , wz in time O |U | · polylog( |Uϵ | ) · log(W |U |) . To do this, the algorithm
first writes the weight w(e) of each element e ∈ U using the standard binary representation of natural
numbers in ⌊1 + log W ⌋ bits, which can be done in time O(|U | · log W ). Furthermore, for each e ∈ U ,
the algorithm locates the most-significant non-zero bit of this representation in order to determine
the largest integer i for which w(e) ≥ 2i holds, and writes down this value, which we denote by ie .
Observe that for every e ∈ U and every i ∈ [z], if ie ≤ i +1, then all but the first (leastjsignificant)  k i +2
                                                                                                 w(e)·W ′
bits in the binary representation of w(e) are zero; in this case, the choice of wi (e) =           2i+2
                                                                                                           means
that the binary representation of wi (e) is equal to the substring of the binary representation of w(e),
beginning at the (i + 3 − log W ′ )’th least significant bit and ending at the (i + 2)’th least significant
bit. In the remaining case where ie ≥ i + 2, it follows that w(e) ≥ 2i+2 and thus wi (e) = W ′ , so
wi (e) can be computed by copying the value W ′ that the algorithm already wrote down beforehand.
                                                                                                            ′
    for a given element e,we can compute the values w1 (e), . . . , wz (e) in total time O(z · log(W )) =
Thus,
O polylog( |Uϵ | ) · log(W |U |) , as needed.


C        Missing Proofs from Section 2
Proof of Lemma 2.1. Consider a graph G with weights w(e) on the edges e ∈ E(G), as well as a
pair s, t of vertices in G, and a minimum s-t edge-cut (S, T ) in G. Furthermore, let X ⊆ V (G) be any
                                              +                 +
set of vertices. We need to prove that w(∂G     (X ∩ S)) ≤ w(∂G   (X)). Indeed, as (S, T ) is a minimum
                                  +           +
s-t edge-cut in G, we have w(∂G (S)) ≤ w(∂G (S ∪ X)). Thus, the desired inequality follows if we can
                  +                +                +             +
prove that w(∂G     (X ∩ S)) + w(∂G  (S ∪ X)) ≤ w(∂G  (X)) + w(∂G   (S)). Indeed, it is not hard to verify
that every edge that contributes its weight to the left side of this inequality must also contribute its
weight to the right side of this inequality, and that every edge which contributes its weight twice to
the left side of the inequality must also contribute its weight twice to the right side of the inequality.



                                                       35
Proof of Lemma 2.2 The proof of this lemma is essentially identical to that of Lemma 2.1, except
it uses the operator w(NG+ (·)) instead of w(∂G
                                              +
                                                (·)).


D     Missing Proofs from Section 3
Proof of Claim 3.6. Consider a set AB ⊆ V (G) \ {y ∗ } of vertices that satisfies properties Q1-Q2,
and define GB as stated in Claim 3.6. Specifically, GB is constructed from G by merging all vertices
outside of AB into y ∗ and then removing any resulting self-loops, as well as any edges outgoing from
y ∗ in the resulting graph. We need to prove that GB satisfies Properties P1-P4.
   We begin with Properties P2 and P3, which follow easily from the definition of the graph GB :
indeed, Property P2 holds because V (GB ) = AB ∪ {y ∗ }, and Property P3 is a special case of the next
observation.
                                                      +                +
Observation D.1 For every set X ′ ⊆ AB , we have wB (∂G B
                                                          (X ′ )) = w(∂G (X ′ )).

   Proof: Indeed, each edge exiting X ′ in G induces a corresponding edge in GB that also exits X ′ ,
and has the same weight; furthermore, each edge exiting X ′ in GB is induced by such an edge. This
concludes the proof of the observation.
    Next, we prove Property P1, which requires upper-bounding the number of edges and vertices in
                                                +
GB : it is easy to verify that |E(G   B )| = volG (AB ) holds; so, as the set AB satisfies Property Q1, it
follows that |E(GB )| = Õ 2m
                                 
                             i ·ϵ , as needed for Property P1. To bound the number of vertices in GB ,
we use the fact that V (GB ) = AB ∪ {y ∗ }, as well as the assumption that OPTE,y∗ > 0; based on this
assumption, every vertex v ∈ V (G) \ {y ∗ } must have at least one outgoing edge in G, and so, by the
construction of GB , every vertex of AB must have at least one outgoing edge in GB , meaning that
|E(GB )| ≥ |AB | = |V (GB )| − 1, and thus that |V (GB )| ≤ |E(GB )| + 1 = Õ 2m     i ·ϵ . It is also easily
verified that GB does not have more edges or vertices than G. This concludes the proof that GB
satisfies Property P1.
    It remains to prove that GB satisfies Property P4, which we do next. Suppose that there exists a
terminal x∗ ∈ B ∩ X ∗ and the good event E occurred; we need to prove that in this case, x∗∈ V (GB )
holds, and there exists an x∗ -y ∗ edge-cut (X ′ , Y ′ ) in GB of value wB (EGB (X ′ , Y ′ )) ≤ 1 + iϵz OPTE,y∗
that additionally satisfies the condition vol+        ′
                                              G (X ) ≤ 2ν. Indeed, in the aforementioned case, Property
Q2 of the set AB guarantees that there exists a subset X ′ ⊆ AB with x∗ ∈ X ′ and vol+              G (X ′ ) ≤ 2ν
                             ′            ′                                 ′          ′
such that the edge-cut (X , V (G) \ X ) in G has value w(EG (X , V (G) \ X )) ≤ 1 + z OPTE,y∗ .    iϵ
                                                                   +               +
Furthermore, by Observation D.1, this set X ′ satisfies wB (∂G      B
                                                                      (X ′ )) = w(∂G (X ′ )) = w(EG (X ′ , V (G) \
X )) ≤ 1 + z OPTE,y∗ . Thus, if we define Y as Y = V (GB ) \ X , then the edge-cut (X ′ , Y ′ ) in
  ′            iϵ                                      ′     ′                 ′
                  

GB satisfies all the conditions required by Property P4. Furthermore, since x∗ ∈ X ′ and X ′ ⊆ AB ⊆
V (GB ), it follows that x∗ ∈ V (GB ), as needed. This concludes the proof of Property P4, and thus
concludes the proof of Claim 3.6.


E     Removing the Assumption w(L∗ ) ≤ w(R∗ ) in the Proof of Theo-
      rem 1.4
In Section 4, we designed a procedure AlgGlobalVertexCut that implements Theorem 1.4 under the
following additional assumption:

Assumption E.1 The graph G in the input to Theorem 1.4 has some global minimum vertex-cut
(L∗ , S ∗ , R∗ ) with w(L∗ ) ≤ w(R∗ ).


                                                       36
This assumption can be removed using standard techniques: informally, we implement Theorem 1.4
by running the procedure AlgGlobalVertexCut once on the input graph G, and once on the reversed
graph G, and selecting the best of the two obtained solutions.
    For the sake of completion, we now explain this in detail. Observe that, by the guarantees of the
procedure AlgGlobalVertexCut, there exists some absolute constant C and some function T : N → N
satisfying T (m) = Õ(m), so that, when the procedure is given an input satisfying Assumption E.1
and oracle-access as described in Theorem 1.4, it runs in time at most T (m) · log W , and makes at
most C · mn queries to the oracle, such that the total number of edges in these queries is at most C · m.
Furthermore, in this case, the output of the procedure is a vertex-cut (L, S, R) in the input graph G
so that, with probability at least 12 , its weight is at most (1 + ϵ)OPTG , where OPTG is the value of
the global minimum vertex-cut in G.
    Then, to implement Theorem 1.4, we run two instances of this procedure AlgGlobalVertexCut; one
instance is given the input graph G, and the other is given the reversed graph G – this is the graph
obtained from G by reversing the direction of each edge. Both instances are given the same vertex-
weights, parameters, and oracle access. For each of these instances, we terminate it early if it: runs
for longer than T (m) · log W time; makes more than C · m      n oracle queries; or, makes oracle queries
whose total edge-count is larger than C · m. (If an instance is about to make a single query with more
than C · m edges, then we terminate it before it makes this query.) If an instance was not terminated
early, and if its output is a valid vertex-cut in G, then we say that it ”terminated naturally”. (Observe
that we can check in time O(m) whether the output is a valid vertex-cut in G.) Next, we continue the
description of the algorithm.
   If the instance on G terminated naturally, then let (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) be the vertex-cut obtained by it;
otherwise, let (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) be an arbitrary vertex-cut in G. Similarly, if the instance on G terminated
naturally, then let (L′′ , S ′′ , R′′ ) be the vertex-cut obtained by it; otherwise, let (L′′ , S ′′ , R′′ ) be an
arbitrary vertex-cut in G. Observe that (R′′ , S ′′ , L′′ ) must be a valid vertex-cut in G, and its weight,
w(S ′′ ), is the same as the weight of the vertex-cut (L′′ , S ′′ , R′′ ) in G. The algorithm outputs the
smaller-weight vertex-cut among the two cuts (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) and (R′′ , S ′′ , L′′ ) in G.
    For the analysis, it is not hard to verify that the value of the global minimum vertex-cut of the
reversed graph G is the same as of the original graph G, and that at least one of these two instances
of the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem must satisfy Assumption E.1; thus, by the guarantees of
AlgGlobalVertexCut, at least one of the calls to AlgGlobalVertexCut must terminate naturally, and, with
probability at least 12 , the vertex-cut obtained by this call has weight at most (1 + ϵ)OPTG . Therefore,
with probability at least 12 , at least one of the two vertex-cuts (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) and (L′′ , S ′′ , R′′ ) has weight
at most (1 + ϵ)OPTG , in which case the output of the algorithm is a vertex-cut in G with weight at
most (1 + ϵ)OPTG , as required.


F     Extension to Non-Negative Weights
In this section, we briefly explain how our main theorems can be extended to the setting in which
edges and vertices are allowed to have weight 0. We first note that this extension is trivial to achieve
for the Minimum Edge-Cut problem, as zero-weight edges do not affect the solution value or the set of
feasible solutions, and can thus be ignored. In order to extend the algorithms for the Minimum Vertex-
Cut problem to the setting of non-negative vertex-weights, we use a simple and standard reduction
from this setting to the positive-weight setting. The same reduction was also used in, for example,
[CMT26]; but we analyze the reduction again here in order to convince the reader that it also works for
approximate algorithms, rather than just for exact algorithms as was shown in [CMT26]. For the sake
of brevity, we will analyze only the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem, though the same reduction
also works for the Rooted Minimum Vertex-Cut problem.

                                                         37
   Consider an instance (V, E, w) of the Global Minimum Vertex-Cut problem in the non-negative
weight setting. To solve this instance, we transform it into an instance (V, E, w′ ) with only positive
weights, by setting the new weight of each vertex v to w′ (v) ← 4n2 w(v) + 1.
    Now, it is immediate to verify that any optimal solution of instance (V, E, w′ ) must also be an
optimal solution of instance (V, E, w), meaning that solving the instance (V, E, w) exactly can be
reduced to solving (V, E, w′ ) exactly. Demonstrating a similar relation for approximate solutions is
only a little more complicated: specifically, we show next that if one wishes to find a (1+ϵ)-approximate
solution to the original instance (V, E, w), then it suffices to find a (1 + ϵ′ )-approximate solution for
the new instance (V, E, w′ ), where ϵ′ = ϵ/2.
     Proof: Indeed, consider any optimal solution (L, S, R) of the original instance (V, E, w), and
observe that 4n2 w(S) ≤ w′ (S) ≤ 4n2 w(S) + n must hold. Suppose first that the weight of (L, S, R)
in the original instance (V, E, w) satisfies w(S) < 1ϵ – it is then easy to verify that every solution
(L′ , S ′ , R′ ) of the original instance with weight w(S ′ ) ≥ w(S) + 1 must have its weight in the new
instance satisfy w′ (S ′ ) ≥ 4n2 (w(S) + 1) > (1 + ϵ′ ) · (4n2 w(S) + n) ≥ (1 + ϵ′ )w′ (S), meaning that
every non-optimal solution of the original instance is also not a (1 + ϵ′ )-approximate solution of the
new instance. We now consider the remaining case, in which w(S) ≥ 1ϵ . In this case, w′ (S) ≤
(1 + 4n ϵ
            ) · 4n2 w(S) must hold, meaning that (1 − 4n ϵ
                                                           )w′ (S) ≤ 4n2 w(S). It then follows that for every
vertex-cut (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) in G with w(S ′ ) > (1 + ϵ)w(S), the inequality
                                                                    ϵ
                  w′ (S ′ ) > 4n2 · (1 + ϵ)w(S) ≥ (1 + ϵ) · (1 −      )w′ (S) ≥ (1 + ϵ′ )w′ (S)
                                                                   4n
holds, meaning that (L′ , S ′ , R′ ) is not a (1 + ϵ′ )-approximate solution of the new instance.




                                                      38
References
[CLN+ 22]   Ruoxu Cen, Jason Li, Danupon Nanongkai, Debmalya Panigrahi, Thatchaphol Sara-
            nurak, and Kent Quanrud. Minimum cuts in directed graphs via partial sparsification.
            In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
            pages 1147–1158. IEEE, 2022.
[CMT26]     Julia Chuzhoy, Ron Mosenzon, and Ohad Trabelsi. Faster algorithms for global min-
            imum vertex-cut in directed graphs. In Proceedings of the 2026 Annual ACM-SIAM
            Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 5586–5623. SIAM, 2026.
[CQ21]      Chandra Chekuri and Kent Quanrud. Faster Algorithms for Rooted Connectivity in
            Directed Graphs. In Nikhil Bansal, Emanuela Merelli, and James Worrell, editors, 48th
            International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2021),
            volume 198 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 49:1–
            49:16, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2021. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
[CT25]      Julia Chuzhoy and Ohad Trabelsi. Breaking the o(mn)-time barrier for vertex-weighted
            global minimum cut. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory
            of Computing, pages 144–155, 2025.
[FJMY26]    Olivier Fischer, Yonggang Jiang, Sagnik Mukhopadhyay, and Sorrachai Yingchareon-
            thawornchai. Directed and undirected vertex connectivity problems are equivalent for
            dense graphs. In 2026 SIAM Symposium on Simplicity in Algorithms (SOSA), pages
            413–420. SIAM, 2026.
[FNY+ 20]   Sebastian Forster, Danupon Nanongkai, Liu Yang, Thatchaphol Saranurak, and Sor-
            rachai Yingchareonthawornchai. Computing and testing small connectivity in near-
            linear time and queries via fast local cut algorithms. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
            Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 2046–2065. SIAM, 2020.
[Gab91]     Harold N Gabow. A matroid approach to finding edge connectivity and packing ar-
            borescences. In Proceedings of the twenty-third annual ACM symposium on Theory of
            computing, pages 112–122, 1991.
[JLSW25]    Yonggang Jiang, Yaowei Long, Thatchaphol Saranurak, and Benyu Wang. Crude ap-
            proximation of directed minimum cut and arborescence packing in almost linear time.
            arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.05300, 2025.
[JNSY25]    Yonggang Jiang, Chaitanya Nalam, Thatchaphol Saranurak, and Sorrachai Yingchare-
            onthawornchai. Deterministic vertex connectivity via common-neighborhood clustering
            and pseudorandomness. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory
            of Computing, pages 2293–2304, 2025.
[Kar00]     David R Karger. Minimum cuts in near-linear time. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
            47(1):46–76, 2000.
[LNP+ 25]   Jason Li, Danupon Nanongkai, Debmalya Panigrahi, Thatchaphol Saranurak, and Sor-
            rachai Yingchareonthawornchai. Vertex connectivity in poly-logarithmic max-flows.
            Journal of the ACM, 72(4):1–34, 2025.
[LP20]      Jason Li and Debmalya Panigrahi. Deterministic min-cut in poly-logarithmic max-
            flows. In 2020 IEEE 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
            (FOCS), pages 85–92. IEEE, 2020.

                                              39
[NSY19]      Danupon Nanongkai, Thatchaphol Saranurak, and Sorrachai Yingchareonthawornchai.
             Computing and testing small vertex connectivity in near-linear time and queries. arXiv
             preprint arXiv:1905.05329, 2019.

[Qua26]      Kent Quanrud. Approximating directed connectivity in almost-linear time. In Proceed-
             ings of the 58th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 1540–1547,
             2026.

[VDBCK+ 23] Jan Van Den Brand, Li Chen, Rasmus Kyng, Yang P Liu, Richard Peng, Maximil-
            ian Probst Gutenberg, Sushant Sachdeva, and Aaron Sidford. A deterministic almost-
            linear time algorithm for minimum-cost flow. In 2023 IEEE 64th Annual Symposium
            on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 503–514. IEEE, 2023.




                                               40
