                                                           From Incremental Transitive Cover to
                                                           Strongly Polynomial Maximum Flow
                                              Daniel Dadush1 , James B. Orlin2 , Aaron Sidford3 , and László A. Végh4
                                                     1
                                                         Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica and Utrecht University
                                                                2
                                                                  Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                                                         3
                                                                           Stanford University
arXiv:2510.20368v1 [cs.DS] 23 Oct 2025




                                                                         4
                                                                           University of Bonn


                                                                              October 24, 2025


                                                                                   Abstract
                                             We provide faster strongly polynomial time algorithms solving maximum flow in structured
                                         n-node m-arc networks. Our results imply an nω+o(1) -time strongly polynomial time algorithms
                                         for computing a maximum bipartite b-matching where ω is the matrix multiplication constant.
                                         Additionally, they imply an m1+o(1) W -time algorithm for solving the problem on graphs with
                                         a given tree decomposition of width W .
                                             We obtain these results by strengthening and efficiently implementing an approach in Orlin’s
                                         (STOC 2013) state-of-the-art O(mn) time maximum flow algorithm. We develop a general
                                         framework that reduces solving maximum flow with arbitrary capacities to (1) solving a sequence
                                         of maximum flow problems with polynomial bounded capacities and (2) dynamically maintaining
                                         a size-bounded supersets of the transitive closure under arc additions; we call this problem
                                         incremental transitive cover. Our applications follow by leveraging recent weakly polynomial,
                                         almost linear time algorithms for maximum flow due to Chen, Kyng, Liu, Peng, Gutenberg,
                                         Sachdeva (FOCS 2022) and Brand, Chen, Kyng, Liu, Peng, Gutenberg, Sachdeva, Sidford
                                         (FOCS 2023), and by developing incremental transitive cover data structures.
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                                         1
  1.1 Our results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
  1.2 Maximum flow via incremental transitive cover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          4
  1.3 Overview of the algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      8
       1.3.1 Essential arcs and the role of transitive cover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       9
       1.3.2 Incremental transitive cover algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      11
       1.3.3 Comparison to Orlin’s algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        13
  1.4 Overview of the paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14

2 Preliminaries                                                                                   14
  2.1 Residual capacities and safe capacities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
  2.2 Approximate flow solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

3 Incremental Transitive Cover Data Structures                                                        18

4 Arc Types and Valid Iterates                                                                       20
  4.1 Abundant and free arcs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
  4.2 Valid iterates and essential arcs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
  4.3 Series of valid iterates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

5 The Maximum Flow Meta-Algorithm                                                                   24
  5.1 Main subroutines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
  5.2 Rerouting using witness lists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

6 Analyzing the Maximum Flow Framework                                                              30
  6.1 Maintaining valid iterates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
  6.2 Bounding the number extension arcs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
  6.3 Correctness and running time of rerouting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
  6.4 Correctness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
  6.5 Bounding the number of essential arcs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
  6.6 Bounding the calls to transitive cover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
  6.7 Maintaining the basic data structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
  6.8 Running time estimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
  6.9 Strong polynomiality of the algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

7 Data Structures                                                                                    40
  7.1 Transitive closure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
  7.2 Tree-respecting updates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
  7.3 Node orderings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

8 Maximum Flow Algorithms                                                                          55
  8.1 General graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
  8.2 Bounded tree-depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
      8.2.1 Application to layered graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
  8.3 Ordered transitive closure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

A The Approximate Flow Subroutine                                                                     63

B Incremental Transitive Cover Lower Bounds via OMv                                                   65
1        Introduction
We consider the maximum flow problem on a directed graph or network G = (V, E) with n nodes
V and m edges E along with a source node s ∈ V , sink node t, and arc capacities u ∈ [0, ∞]E . The
goal in the maximum flow problem is to send as much flow as possible from s to t while satisfying
capacity restrictions and maintaining conservation of flow at all nodes other than s and t.
     The maximum flow problem has a long and rich algorithmic history; see [10] for a recent sur-
vey. Central to this history is the distinction between weakly polynomial and strongly polynomial
maximum flow algorithms. A weakly polynomial algorithm corresponds to the standard notion of a
polynomial algorithm in the Turing model: the running time is polynomially bounded in the descrip-
tion length of the instance, including the total bit length of the capacities. In contrast, a strongly
polynomial algorithm may only use basic arithmetic operations (+, −, ×, /) and comparisons (≤),
whose total number is polynomial in n and m; and further, it has to run in polynomial space. When
the capacity vector is integral, weakly polynomial runtimes typically depend polynomially on log U ,
where U = maxe∈E,ue <∞ ue is the maximum finite capacity. To simplify the discussion of runtimes
throughout the paper, we assume that all arithmetic operations require only O(1) time.
     Currently, the fastest weakly polynomial algorithms for maximum flow are either deterministic
and run in m1+o(1) log U time, due tovan den Brand, Chen, Peng, Kyng, Liu, Gutenberg, Sashdeva
and Sidford [50] or are randomized and run in (m + n1.5 )(log n)O(1) log U time, due to van den
Brand, Lee, Liu, Saranurak, Sidford, Song, and Wang [53] (which is faster on dense instances). The
almost-linear deterministic algorithm builds upon the randomized algorithm of Chen, Kyng, Liu,
Peng, Gutenberg and Sachdeva [8]. Deterministic almost-linear time algorithms for maximum flow in
both decremental and incremental settings have also been obtained [7, 49], where we note that [7, 49]
may improve upon the mo(1) -factor compared to [53, 50]. These algorithms are all based on highly
efficient implementations of interior point methods using dynamic data structures to amortize the
cost of the iterations. With these recent breakthroughs, we now have almost optimal maximum
flow solvers for networks with polynomially bounded integer capacities (i.e., U = poly(n)).
     In contrast, the state-of-the-art strongly polynomial algorithm is O(nm). This is obtained
by taking the better of two deterministic algorithms: the O(nm log n/ log( n log m
                                                                                   n )) time algorithm
of King, Rao and Tarjan [37], which used a sophisticated push-relabel scheme, and the O(nm +
m31/16 log2 m) time algorithm of Orlin [42]. Taking the best of both algorithm, [37] for m ≥ n1.06
and [42] for m ≤ n1.06 , the running time is O(nm) for all parameter ranges.
     Orlin’s algorithm can be viewed as a framework for efficiently reducing exact maximum flow to a
sequence of approximate maximum flow problems generated using an incremental transitive closure
data structure. The approximate maximum flow problem is that of computing a flow which routes
at least 1/2 the maximum flow value. Importantly, this can also be solved in almost-linear time even
for general capacities using weakly polynomial algorithms (see Section A for more details). A key
bottleneck in Orlin’s algorithm is Italiano’s O(nm) total update time algorithm from 1986 for the
incremental transitive closure problem [28], which remains state-of-the-art. Due to an additional
bottleneck in Orlin’s framework (see Section 1.2 for more details), an improved incremental transitive
closure data structure would not by itself be sufficient to improve his algorithm. We note that
Õ(nm)1 -time algorithms were known since the early 1980’s [18, 46], highlighting the difficulty of
speeding up strongly polynomial flow algorithms beyond polylogarithmic factors. A long-standing
open problem is to find a O((nm)1−ε )-time maximum flow algorithm, for any positive ε > 0.
    1
        We use Õ(.) notation to hide polylog(n) factors.



                                                            1
   While progress on the general problem remains elusive, an interesting line of inquiry is to un-
derstand which structured classes of maximum flow problems can be solved in strongly-polynomial
time faster than O(nm). With the exception of the extensively studied problem of maximum flow
on planar networks [6, 21, 24, 27, 41, 55], for which O(n log n)-time of Borradaile and Klein [6] is
nearly optimal, there has been surprisingly little work in this direction. The goal of this work is to
make significant progress on broad and interesting classes of flow problems.
Networks with Few Capacitated Arcs and Nodes. One broad class of flow problems we
consider are those involving a limited number of capacitated arcs, that is arcs with positive finite
capacity. Such networks also easily also encapsulate networks where there are also a limited number
of capacitated nodes, where we define a capacitated node as any node in which there is a finite
capacity on the total flow into or out of that node. A capacity uv on the flow into (or out of) a
node v can be encoded by an arc capacity by splitting v into two nodes v ′ and v ′′ , and then placing
a capacity of uv on arc (v ′ , v ′′ ).2 For additional details on such transformations, see e.g., Chapter 2
of [1]. Correspondingly, our algorithms assume that any node capacities have already been encoded
as arc capacities and we let mc denote the number of nodes plus the number of capacitated arcs.
    The parameter mc provides a useful way to parameterize the complexity of maximum flow
instances. In particular, an important class of problems we highlight are those for which mc = O(n)
(and therefore, the remaining arcs have infinite capacity). This problem class includes a variety of
canonical and previously studied problems including the following:

       • Maximum node-capacitated flow : given a maximum flow instance in which there are capacities
         on the nodes and there are no capacities on arcs, find the maximum flow from s to t. Using
         the aforementioned transformation from node capacities to arc capacities, a maximum node-
         capacitated flow problem on a n-node, m-arc network, can be transformed into a maximum
         flow problem on a 2n-nodes and (m + n)-arc network, of which only n arcs have capacities.

       • Maximum b-matching: given a bipartite network on n nodes with node capacities, send as
         much flow from left to right as possible without exceeding specified node capacities. This is a
         canonical special case of maximum node-capacitated flow and the reduction to the maximum
         node-capacitated flow problem simply adds a super source s and sink t to the network with
         the appropriate uncapacitated arcs from s and to t.

       • Maximum closure:       given a node weighted directed graph G = (V, E), w ∈ RV , find a set S ⊆ V
         maximizing i∈S wi , such that the out-degree of S is zero. The maximum closure problem
                       P
         can be formulated as a minimum cut problem in a flow instance with O(n) finite capacity
         arcs. An example of the maximum closure problem is the open pit mining problem, where
         the weights correspond to the profit of excavating a region and the arcs represent precedence
         relations (i.e., (i, j) ∈ E means j must be excavated before i), see [25, 26, 30].

    The state-of-the-art strongly polynomial maximum flow algorithms for graphs with a small
number of capacitated arcs were given by Orlin [42]. Orlin showed that one can significantly beat
O(nm) when mc /m is sufficiently small. Specializing to instances with m = Ω(n2 ) and mc = O(n)
for simplicity, [42] gave an O(n8/3 )-time algorithm for these instances which relies on fast matrix
multiplication based transitive closure.
   2
   It is also possible to transform an arc capacity on (i, j) into a node capacity. In this transformation, one first
adds a node v to the network and replaces arc (i, j) by uncapacitated arcs (v, i) and (v, j).


                                                         2
Networks with Sublinear Treewidth. Another broad class of maximum flow problems we
consider are those whose underlying undirected network have sublinear treewidth. Treewidth has
played a fundamental role in the study of fixed parameter tractability [11] and many interesting
classes of graphs have sublinear treewidth. In particular, graphs excluding a fixed minor, such as
                                                     √
planar or bounded genus graphs, have treewidth Õ( n) [3]. Furthermore, many maximum flow
problems on time-expanded networks naturally have sublinear treewidth (see Section 8.2.1 for more
details). For networks of bounded treewidth, Hagerup, Katajainen, Nishimura and Ragde [20] gave a
          2
O(2tw(G) n)-time dynamic programming based algorithm that computes the value of the maximum
flow, where tw(G) is the treewidth of the network. As most treewidth based algorithms have an
exponential dependence on treewidth, Fomin, Lokshtanov, Pilipczuk, Saurabh and Wrochna [15]
initiated the study of algorithms with polynomial dependence on treewidth for the sake of achieving
significant speedups for polynomial-time solvable problems. As one such example, they gave an
O(n · tw(G)2 log n) algorithm to compute a maximum number of internally node disjoint paths
from s to t, corresponding to maximum flow with unit node capacities (note that this is essentially
subsumed by the current fastest weakly polynomial solvers). Importantly, tree decompositions
of width O(tw(G)(log n)3 ) were recently shown to be computable in randomized m1+o(1) -time by
Bernstein, Gutenberg and Saranurak [4], and hence can be leveraged in designing fast algorithms.
1.1   Our results
We give substantially improved maximum flow algorithms for networks with a linear number of
capacitated arcs or having sublinear treewidth. We achieve our results by making significant im-
provements to Orlin’s transitive closure based framework, designing faster data structures and
applying the almost-linear time solver of [50]. We detail these results and their applications in this
section. In Section 1.2, we explain the guarantees of the improved framework, which is based on a
new incremental transitive cover data structure problem. A technical overview of our algorithm is
found given in Section 1.3, and a detailed comparison with Orlin’s original framework is given in
Section 1.3.3.
Networks with Few Capacitated Arcs and Nodes. For these networks, we apply fast matrix
multiplication, and thus our running times will depend on the matrix multiplication constant ω <
2.372 [13, 56]. Our main result is as follows:

Theorem 1.1 (Fast-Matrix Multiplication based Maximum Flow). There is a deterministic strongly
                                                                        1+o(1)
polynomial algorithm that computes a maximum flow in Õ(nω−1 mc + nmc          ) time for an input
instance (G, u) with n nodes, m arcs, and a bound mc on the number of nodes plus capacitated arcs.
Furthermore, using randomization, the running time can be reduced to Õ(nω−1 mc )-time.

    Note that the running time of the deterministic algorithm is Õ(nω−1 mc ) if ω > 2. The ran-
domized algorithm achieves this running time unconditionally using the approximate maximum
flow solver of [53] (this proof leverages that the approximate maximum flow instances solved in our
framework are sufficiently dense for these instances).
    Using that node-capacitated flow, b-matching, and maximum weight closure reduce to the case
mc = O(n), we have the following direct corollary.

Corollary 1.2. There are deterministic strongly polynomial nω+o(1) -time algorithms for the maxi-
mum node-capacitated flow problem, the maximum bipartite b-matching problem, and the maximum
weight closure problem on n-node networks.


                                                  3
    As in Theorem 1.1, the running time of Corollary 1.2 improves to Õ(nω ) if ω > 2 or if we
allow randomization. From Corollary 1.2, we solve the node-capacitated max flow problem, the
maximum b-matching problem, and the maximum weight closure problem in almost the current
time for computing the transitive closure of a dense n-node digraph once. Comparing with [42], if
Orlin had used the almost-linear time solvers, the running time of his algorithm for the the node-
capacitated max flow problem, the b-matching problem, and the maximum weight closure problem
would have improved to O(n1+2ω/3 ). Our algorithm is faster by a factor of n1−ω/3 > n1/5 for the
current bound on ω.
Networks with Sublinear Treewidth. For these networks, our algorithm more directly relies
on the notion of tree-depth, which is defined as follows:
Definition 1.3 (Tree-depth). The depth of a rooted spanning tree is the maximum number of nodes
on any path starting at the root. A graph G = (V, E) is said to have tree-depth at most D if there
is a rooted spanning tree T of depth D on the same node set such that for every arc (i, j) ∈ E,
either i is an ancestor or a descendant of node j in T . We call such a T is a representing tree for G
and we call the minimum D for which G has tree depth D the tree-depth of G.
    For any graph G on n-nodes, we have tw(G) ≤ td(G) ≤ tw(G) log n [5], where tw(G) is the
treewidth and td(G) is the tree-depth of G. As before, when working with directed graphs, the
quantities above are defined on the underlying undirected version. To compute such trees the ran-
domized m1+o(1) -time algorithm of [4] directly computes a tree representing G of depth tw(G) log3 n.
The previously mentioned result for treewidth is a direct corollary.
    Our main result for these networks is as follows:
Theorem 1.4 (Tree-depth based Maximum     Flow). There is a deterministic algorithm that computes
                         1+o(1)
                                  
a maximum flow in O m           D time for an input instance (G, u) with n nodes, m arcs with a
given depth-D representing tree for G.
    The runtime in Theorem 1.4 is substantially faster than O(nm) as long as tree-depth is at most
n1−ε for any ε > 0. As mentioned above, a suitable representing tree can in fact be computed at
the expense of randomization and additional mo(1) factors in the running time.
    As an application of this result, we derive a faster maximum flow algorithm for the family of
graphs excluding a Kr minor, the complete graph on r vertices.
Corollary 1.5. There is a randomized algorithm that solves maximum flow on networks excluding
                    √
a Kr minor in O(r3/2 nm1+o(1) )-time.
    Corollary 1.5 follows directly from well-known bounds in extremal graph theory, namely that
the treedwith of a Kr minor                   3/2 √n) [3]. Since the number of arcs in an n-node K
                        √ free graph is O(r                                       √                 r
minor free graph is O(r log rn) [48] this running time is also bounded by O(r5/2 log r · n3/2+o(1) ).
Interestingly, the linear dependence on tree-depth in Theorem 1.4 is important for achieving a
non-trivial speedup over general networks.
    As a final application in Section 8.2, we show that Theorem 1.4 also implies speedups for
maximum flow problems on time-expanded networks where each arc spans only a short time interval.
1.2   Maximum flow via incremental transitive cover
We now outline our improved framework and provide the guarantees of our framework informally in
Theorem 1.6. The guarantees of the framework depend on how we solve a particular data structure
problem and how we solve approximate flow problems.

                                                  4
      We start by explaining and explaining this data structure. The data structure is closely related
to the incremental transitive closure problem. The transitive closure of a graph G = (V, E) is the
graph Gtr = (V, E tr ), where E tr contains all arcs (i, j) ∈ RV ×V with i ̸= j such that there is a
directed path from i to j in G. The incremental transitive closure problem [28] is to maintain
a data structure that supports query access to the adjacency matrix (or adjacency lists) of Gtr
under m arc insertions. The running time is measured as a function of the number of arc insertions
and adjacency queries. One may also require that the data structure support path queries on the
underlying graph, which then also contribute to the running time.
      In his maximum flow algorithm, Orlin maintains the transitive closure of the subgraph of so-
called abundant arcs. These arcs are those whose residual capacity (i.e., capacity minus flow exceeds
the residual flow value (i.e., maximum flow value minus current flow value) by a suitable poly(n)-
factor and can be treated as essentially infinity capacity arcs (e.g., deleting the arc capacity does
not change the flow value).
      Orlin uses the transitive closure to suitably compress the routing information of these abundant
arcs, and thereby minimize the size of the networks on which an approximate maximum flow solver
is run. We note that for the almost-linear time solvers, only the number of arcs controls the running
time of the approximate maximum flow solver. The main operation used for this purpose is to
restrict the transitive closure to a subset of nodes S containing the endpoints of all relevant arcs
needed to decrease the optimality gap by a poly(n)-factor.
      For the sake of speeding up the approximate maximum flow solver, one may hope to encode the
reachability information on S using fewer arcs than the direct restriction of the transitive closure
to S. For this purpose, it may in fact be helpful to use nodes outside of S. This goal leads us to a
concept we call a transitive cover. For a graph G = (V, E) and a subset of nodes S ⊆ V , we say that
(V ′ , E ′ ) is a transitive cover of S with respect to G if it satisfies S ⊆ V ′ ⊆ V and (E ′ )tr [S] = E tr [S].
      The sparsity of the cover is the number of arcs |E ′ |. As mentioned above, the restriction
(S, E tr [S]) of the transitive closure to S is always a valid transitive cover; however, it may have
higher sparsity than the smallest cover. For example, if V = [2n + 1], and the nodes {1, . . . , n} all
have an outgoing arc to node 2n + 1, and if 2n + 1 has outgoing arcs to {n + 1, . . . , 2n}, then the
restricted closure on S = {1, . . . , 2n} has n2 arcs (it is complete bipartite) whereas the full graph
itself is a cover of sparsity 2n. More generally, note that any set S of nodes in a m arc network,
by taking the smaller of the full graph and restricted closure, the transitive cover sparsity at most
min{|S|2 , m}. This simple bound is one of the key reasons why Orlin’s algorithm spends less than
O(nm)-time solving approximate maximum flow problems on sparse networks. Importantly, this
bound can be substantially improved on networks with bounded tree-depth. In a network with
tree-depth D, the sparsity of the minimum transitive cover is at most 2D|S|, which is derived by
retaining S and the nodes on the paths from S the root and only keeping the transitive arcs that
are incident to S and that respect the representing tree (see Section 1.3.2 for more details). Note
that this improves on the quadratic bound when |S| > 2D.
      The above discussion motivates the formal study of the incremental transitive cover problem.
In this problem, one must maintain a data structure that supports arc insertions and transitive
cover queries on subsets. The running time of the data structure is measured as a function of the
number of arcs added and the sizes of the queried sets. Given      P a set of queries S1 , . . . , Sk , we define
the total query size to be the sum of the queried set sizes i∈[k] |Si |. A key quality measure of the
data structure is then the total sparsity of the transitive covers output, that is i∈[k] |Ei′ | where
                                                                                             P

E1′ , . . . , Ek′ are the arc sets outputted on the queries S1 , . . . , Sk respectively. We use this measure


                                                        5
to bound the time spent on solving approximate maximum flow problems.
    For the remainder of the introduction, we assume that we have a data structure that solves the
incremental transitive cover problem (which we call a ITCO more compactly). Let TCtime (n, g, h)
denote the time needed by a transitive cover data structure to process g arc insertions and set queries
of total size h on a graph with n nodes. Similarly, let TCarcs (n, g, h) denote the total sparsity of
the outputted transitive covers. (The more precise definition used later in the paper in given in
Section 6 includes an additional operation which we discuss shortly.) We will later specialize these
time and sparsity bounds based on the class of maximum flow instances we work on, as well as
the access and update pattern restrictions we can guarantee. We will assume in this work that the
transitive cover data structure must output the arcs of the cover one by one.
    Implicit representations of covers will not be used. Under this assumption, the processing time
TCtime (n, g, h) is always greater than or equal to the total sparsity TCarcs (n, g, h).
    Our main result regarding frameworks for solving maximum flow is that maximum flow can be
solved in time that depends only on the cost of implementing a ITCO and of solving maximum flow
instances approximately. Below in Theorem 1.6 we state an informal version of this meta theorem
when the maximum flow instances are solved approximately using almost-linear-time maximum flow
algorithms.

Theorem 1.6 (Meta Theorem (Informal)). The maximum flow on an input n-node, m-arc maxi-
mum flow instance with at most mc nodes plus capacitated arcs can be computed in time

                 TCtime (n, O(m), O(mc )) + (TCarcs (n, O(m), O(mc )) + m)1+o(1) .

    The formal version of Theorem 1.6 is provided by Theorem 6.1 in Section 6. There, TCtime
is defined to include additional time to handle operations involving a mathematical object that
we call a witness list and introduce shortly (see also Section 3). In words, we essentially reduce
the maximum flow problem to a transitive cover problem with O(m) insertions and O(mc ) total
query size plus approximate maximum flow problems with a total number of arcs equal to the total
sparsity of the outputted covers plus one additive factor of m. (We always assume n ≤ m; hence,
mc = O(m). Recall that mc is n plus the number of capacitated arcs.)
    The (TCarcs (n, O(m), O(mc )) + m)1+o(1) term in Theorem 1.6 is the total time needed to solve
the approximate maximum flow problems using the deterministic almost-linear time solver of [50].
The +m term inside the parentheses pays for the time to solve a single approximate maximum flow
on the full network, as well as the Õ(m) overhead cost associated with the improved framework.
    A crucial aspect of the framework we have not yet discussed is how to handle flows routed on arcs
output by the transitive cover calls, which we call transitive arcs. As already mentioned, transitive
arcs are used to build what we call auxiliary networks for the approximate maximum flow solves.
In Orlin’s framework, the cost of routing flows from the original network onto these networks and
back can be a bottleneck. The rerouting requires O(nmc )-time over the course of his algorithm.
At a high level, the dominant cost is the time needed to route flow from O(mc ) transitive arcs
along O(n)-length paths in the original network. Note that this can already be higher than the
O(m1+o(1) D) running time of our bounded tree-depth algorithm when mc = Ω(m).
    To circumvent this bottleneck in our framework, we add these transitive arcs to the original
network and only reroute the flow on them at the very end of the algorithm. This change allows
us to more effectively amortize the cost of rerouting, and also aids reduce the cost of moving flow
onto the auxiliary networks (see Section 1.3.3 for more details). Importantly, it requires significant


                                                  6
care to ensure that the flows obtained by this rerouting do not exceed the original arc capacities.
To manage the rerouting information, we require additional functionality from the transitive cost
data structure than described thus far. Specifically, we rely on the additional maintenance of what
we call a witness list (see Definition 3.2), which contains a witness for each transitive arc. The
witnesses are stored in order of appearance. The time to compute the final rerouting can be made
linear in the size of the witness list which is in turn at most linear in the running time of our ITCO
in each of our applications.
    Our formal definition of TCtime (n, O(m), O(mc )) in Section 6 also includes the time to maintain
the witness list. In all our implementations, the time to maintain these lists induces at most
polylogarithmic overhead (this occurs only in the data structure presented in Section 7.3; see the
discussion of “Witness List” there ).
    As mentioned previously, both Theorem 1.1 and Theorem 1.4 are derived from suitable ITCO
implementations combined with Theorem 1.6. In these implementations, we leverage the specific
restrictions on the updates and queries imposed by the maximum flow framework and the network
class itself. In particular, in Theorem 1.1, we leverage an intrinsic node ordering maintained by
the maximum flow algorithm. At a high level, nodes are ordered by the largest residual capacity
of a non-abundant arc to which they are incident. Updates and queries are guaranteed to occur
in prefixes of this order. For Theorem 1.4, we exploit the fact that the updates will always be
compatible with the network’s representing tree, which enables a simple and efficient tree-adapted
variant of Italiano’s algorithm. For additional details on the data structure implementations, please
see the overview in Section 1.3.2.
    The above two applications exemplify the framework’s flexibility, and motivates the search for
broader classes of maximum flow instances for which ITCO can be implemented in faster than
O(nm)-time.

New conceptual ingredients Our algorithm is inspired by and builds upon ideas of Orlin’s [42]
algorithm. We follow the high-level approach of his work, namely, reducing maximum flow to a
sequence of approximate maximum flow problems on ‘compact’ networks that are constructed with
the help of a transitive closure data structure, and charging the running time of these solvers to the
number of abundant arcs obtained.
    However, there are significant differences and a number of new conceptual ideas that enable us
to remove a number of bottlenecks inherent in Orlin’s algorithm, and to obtain significant running
time improvements for special settings; we now highlight three such ideas, and give a more detailed
discussion in Section 1.3.3, where we also provide running time comparisons.

 (i) Extending the instance by transitive closure arcs, and postponing flow rerouting to the final
     step of the algorithm.

 (ii) Maintaining highly structured flow iterates that enable fast auxiliary network constructions.

(iii) Using the more versatile transitive cover data structure instead of transitive closure, and
      developing a novel variant based on node orderings that relies on fast matrix multiplication.

Pathway to Faster Maximum Flow? We conclude this section by explaining the implications
of our framework to general maximum flow instances and speculate on possible improvements as
well as algorithmic barriers. We first give the maximum flow running time achieved by using an
ITCO based on Italiano’s algorithm [28]. (See Section 7.1 for details of the specific ITCO.)


                                                  7
Theorem 1.7 (Italiano Style ITCO). There exists an ITCO that for all n, m > 1 has

             TCtime (n, O(m), O(m)) = O(mn) and TCarcs (n, O(m), O(m)) = O(m1.5 ) .

Using that ITCO, there is a strongly polynomial O(mn + m1.5+o(1) ) time maximum flow algorithm.
    Given Theorem 1.7, ITCO remains the bottleneck for general maximum flow as long as m is
O(n2−ϵ ), for any positive ϵ > 0. Comparing to Orlin [42], a careful analysis of his framework
enhanced with the almost-linear approximate maximum flow solver reveals that the time spent on
approximate maximum flow computations would be m5/3+o(1) (see Section 1.3.3) compared to our
m3/2+o(1) . As mentioned previously, a more severe bottleneck in Orlin’s framework is the O(nm)-
time spent on flow rerouting from the auxilliary network to full network, which we reduce to O(n2 ).
    An immediate corollary of Theorem 1.6 is that an ITCO with faster runtime than what Italiano’s
algorithm suggest would directly imply a faster maximum flow algorithm as formalized in Corol-
lary 1.8. Given the aforementioned bottlenecks, a data structure improvement as in Corollary 1.8
would not be sufficient to improve maximum flow running times using Orlin’s original framework.
Corollary 1.8 (Conditional ITCO improvement). If for c ∈ (0, 1] and all n, m > 1, there exists an
ITCO satisfying TCtime (n, O(m), O(m)) = O(mn1−c ), then there exists an m1+o(1) n1−c strongly-
polynomial time maximum flow algorithm.
    Importantly, the online Boolean matrix multiplication conjecture (OMv conjecture) by Hen-
zinger, Krinninger, Nanongkai and Saranurak [22] (see Section B) gives conditional lower bounds
that restricts the range of possible improvements for ITCO. In the context of incremental transitive
closure, they prove (see [22, Corollary 4.8]) that any algorithm that can process O(m) updates and
O(n2 ) queries starting from any empty n-node graph in O(n1−ε m)-time, for any ε > 0, would break
the OMv conjecture. Additionally, a generalization of the OMV conjecture to a broader class of not
necessarily Boolean matrices was proven in [9].
    We note that transitive cover can simulate transitive closure queries by querying on sets of size
2 and performing a BFS. Since the processing time dominates the total sparsity of the outputted
covers, and hence also the BFS time, the same lower bound holds for transitive cover when replac-
ing the number of queries by the total size of the queried sets. However, the total query size in
Corollary 1.8 is only O(m), which can be much smaller than O(n2 ) for sparse graphs. By optimizing
their lower construction for O(m) insertions and queries, we only obtain a lower bound of Ω(m3/2 )
(see Section B for details). Surprisingly, this is precisely the time our current framework spends on
approximate maximum flow calls.
    Given the above, it remains unclear whether one can rule out the conditional improvement
in Corollary 1.8 for sparse graphs based on OMv alone. As already mentioned, the queries and
updates made by our framework have non-trivial additional structure that can be exploited in
the cases explored above. We leave it as an interesting research direction to explore the possible
landscape of lower bounds for ITCO and their implications for maximum flow.
1.3   Overview of the algorithm
Here we give a high-level overview of our algorithms and algorithmic contributions of our paper. For
formal definitions of concepts mentioned in this overview, see Section 2, Section 3, and Section 4.
     For a flow f in a maximum flow instance (G, u), let ufe denote the residual capacity of arc e, and
let ν(G, u) denote the maximum flow and minimum cut value. We assume the graph is symmetric,
i.e., the reverse ←
                  −
                  e = (j, i) of every arc e = (i, j) is also present (possibly with 0 capacity). Given the

                                                    8
input instance (G◦ , u◦ ), at a given iteration, the algorithm may create an extended graph (G, u) by
adding new arcs to the graph with ∞ capacity. The newly added arcs are guaranteed not to be in
any minimum cut, ensuring ν(G, u) = ν(G◦ , u◦ ); i.e., the maximum flow value is preserved. It also
ensures that any minimum cut in the extended graph is also a minimum cut in the input instance.
The algorithm finds a maximum flow and a minimum s–t cut S in the extended graph (G, u). By
rerouting flow from added arcs to original ones, the final maximum flow f in the extended graph
(G, u) is converted to a maximum flow f ⋆ in (G◦ , u◦ ). 3 .
    Our algorithm belongs to the broad family of scaling algorithms. At each iteration, we maintain
a flow f in the current instance (G, u), and a bound ε such that f is an ε-optimal flow; that is,
the flow value is val(f ) ≥ ν(G, u) − ε. The accuracy ε decreases by at least a factor Γ3 at each
iteration for the parameter Γ = 4n2 . At a high-level, the main progress in our algorithm is then
gradually learning redundant arc capacities by calling approximate flow solvers on suitable auxiliary
instances in every iteration. In an ε-optimal flow, we have ν(G, uf ) ≤ ε. Therefore, an arc with
ufe > ε cannot cross any minimum cut. Similarly to Orlin’s algorithm [42], we call arcs with high
residual flow value abundant. For technical reasons, we use a higher threshold, and call arcs e with
ufe ≥ Γε abundant for Γ as above. Once an arc becomes abundant, it remains so for the rest of the
algorithm. Arcs e = (i, j) such that the reverse arc ←   −
                                                         e = (j, i) is also abundant are called free.
    In an ε-optimal flow f , we define the set of free components P = Pf,ε as (a) the set of nodes
reachable from s on abundant paths, denoted as Ps ; (b) the set of nodes that can reach t on
abundant paths, denoted as Pt ; and (c) the connected components of free arcs (see Definition 4.5).
This partition is gradually coarsened throughout the algorithm, and every minimum cut is the union
of certain components of P. At termination, the component Ps containing s will have ufe = 0 on all
outgoing arcs and no incoming flow, at which point Ps will be a minimum cut.
1.3.1    Essential arcs and the role of transitive cover
A central concept in the design and analysis for our framework is essential arcs Eess , that is, arcs
between different free components with Γ−5 ε ≤ ufe < Γε. Essential arcs are not abundant but
within a poly(n) factor from the threshold. They play two key roles in the algorithm and analysis:

(1) In each iteration, it suffices to call an approximate maximum flow solver on an auxilliary instance
    constructed from Eess together with transitive arcs outputted by the transitive cover on the
    nodes incident Eess . The value of this instance will be sufficiently close to the value of the
    residual instance (G, uf ).

(2) The total number of essential arcs throughout is at most O(mc ).

The two points above imply that the total size of the nodes sets in the approximate maximum flow
calls is O(mc ). This is reflected in the TCtime (n, O(m), O(mc )) and TCarcs (n, O(m), O(mc )) terms
in Theorem 1.6. We now discuss these two points.
(1) The auxiliary graph. The auxiliary instance depends on the transitive cover on the set of
abundant arcs. Let R = V (Eess ) ∪ {s, t} denote the set of endpoints of the essential arcs together
with the source and the sink. We obtain a transitive cover (V ′ , H) of R from an ITCO. The auxiliary
instance (Ḡ, ū) is defined as Ḡ = (V ′ , Eess ∪ H), with residual capacities ūe = ufe for e ∈ Eess and
  3
     Note that while given a maximum flow, a minimum cut can be easily found using a breadth first search in the
residual graph, there is no known nearly-linear-time reduction in the other direction.




                                                       9
ūe = ∞ for e ∈ H.4 We call the approximate maximum flow solver in this instance, and map back
the flow to the original instance; this may involve adding new arcs to the instance.
    The total capacity of arcs with ufe < Γ−5 ε is at most n2 Γ−5 ε < Γ−4 ε. We now argue that
ν(Ḡ, ū) ≥ ν(G, uf ) − Γ−4 ε (see Lemma 6.3). For any s–t min cut S ′ ⊆ V ′ in (Ḡ, ū), we can consider
the set S ⊆ V reachable from S ′ on abundant arcs. Using the transitive cover property, it can be
shown that S ∩ V ′ = S ′ ; in particular, S is still an s–t cut. Now, every arc leaving S that did not
leave S ′ must have ufe < Γ−5 ε. Consequently, the cut value of S in (G, uf ) may be at most Γ−4 ε
higher than the value of S ′ in (Ḡ, ū), implying the bound.
(2) Bounding the number of essential arcs. The invariants of ‘valid iterates’ maintained
throughout the algorithm (see Definition 4.6) require that for any arc not incident to s or t between
two different free components, either ufe = 0 or uf←     −
                                                         e
                                                            = 0, or if both ufe > 0 and uf←−
                                                                                           e
                                                                                              > 0, then both
residual capacities will be large enough to guarantee that e becomes free in the next iteration. In
the latter case, the arc is referred to as a gap arc. If there are k gap arcs at an iterate, then the
number of free components decreases by at least k/2 at the next iteration. Thus, the total number
of gap arcs over all iterations is bounded by O(n). Further, the invariant on residual arc capacities
also implies each arc that is not incident to s or t with ue + u←      e < ∞ may be essential for at most
                                                                       −
two iterations. This implies that if total number of essential arcs not incident to s and t over all
iterations is O(mc ).
    We do not enforce the invariant on residual capacities for arcs incident to s or t, as they are
used to re-balance flow. Instead, we establish the following with respect to arcs incident to s (and a
similar result is true for arcs incident to t). If (s, i) is the only essential arc incident to a component
P ̸= Ps of Pf,ε , then within O(1) iterations, P will either be incident to a new essential arc that is
not incident to s or P gets merged into another free component. The former may happen O(mc )
times over all iterations, and the latter O(n) times overall.
Extending the instance and routing back flow. Note that the arcs H used in the auxiliary
instance are not necessarily part of the original arc set E. Still, the approximate solver may send
large values on such arcs. We extend the instance by adding these new arcs with ∞ capacity; adding
such arcs does not change the instance value ν(G, u).
    The transitive cover data structure includes TcWitList(·), which creates a ‘witness list’ at the
end of the algorithm. This witness list is used in the final subroutine WitRoute(·), which transfers
flow from arcs in the extension arc set F , which had been added to the original instance (G◦ , u◦ )
throughout the algorithm. Such a mapping is possible because when any arc (i, j) is added to F ,
there is an abundant path of original arcs and previously added extension arcs from i to j. If the
extension arc e = (i, j) was added in the ε-scaling phase, then every arc in the abundant path
of original arcs has residual capacity ≥ Γε. Further, following the ε-scaling phase, all subsequent
changes in the flow will be bounded as O(ε); i.e., we only need to reroute O(ε) final flow units from
e, and the underlying path still has nearly Γε residual capacity.
    The rerouting is carried out recursively, since flow from extension arcs may be moved to extension
arcs added earlier that in turn are routed on even older extension arcs. Still, the abundant threshold
≥ Γε is sufficient so that we can reroute the entire flow from all extension arcs simultaneously and
obtain a feasible flow in the original graph.
       In some applications such as maximum closure, applied in particular to open pit mining [25, 26,
   4
    The actual construction in Section 5 will be slightly different, by handling nodes in free components together,
and by using different capacities.


                                                        10
30], the goal is to find a minimum cut, and the maximum flow may not be necessary. In this case,
our algorithm can be significantly simplified. There is no need to map the maximum flow back to
the original instance, and consequently, the data structure does not need to maintain witnesses for
rerouting or create a witness list.
1.3.2   Incremental transitive cover algorithms
We now give an overview of the incremental transitive cover data structures (ITCOs) developed
in the paper. Below we explain how our data structures compute and output transitive covers.
Though we defer the details to Sections 3 and 7, we note here that these data structures support an
additional operation to allow flow on transitive arcs to be efficiently routed on the original graph.
Whenever an arc (i, j) is added to the transitive closure in these data structures, we maintain a
witness v such that (i, v) and (v, j) were already in the transitive closure. By ensuring that the
list arcs, transitive arcs, and witnesses are suitable stored in what we call a rooted witness list, we
are able to efficient move flow off arcs not in the original instance. As noted above, the witness
operations can be omitted if we only need to find a minimum cut.
Italiano’s transitive closure algorithm. In Section 7.1, we show how to adapt Italiano’s [28]
approach to transitive closure to design an ITCO. This data structure essentially maintains for each
node a tree corresponding to what nodes it can reach. Maintaining this tree for a single node over
m additions can be done in O(m) time; therefore, maintaining it for all nodes can be done in O(mn)
time. To compute a cover of S ⊆ V , our ITCO simply outputs either the closure with respect to S
or the entire graph, depending on which is presumed to be sparser.
Bounded tree-depth. In Section 7.2, we build upon Italiano’s approach to develop an ITCO
suitable for efficiently solving the maximum flow problem on graphs with bounded tree-depth. This
ITCO assumes that a rooted tree of depth D is given and that all arc insertions respect the tree,
meaning that one endpoint is an ancestor or a descendant of the other.
    Similarly to Italiano’s algorithm, this algorithm essentially maintains reachability trees from
nodes. It departs from Italiano’s algorithm in terms of what these trees are and how they are used.
This algorithm maintains for each node a, a reachability tree to its descendants using only arcs where
both endpoints are descendants of a. It also maintains a reachability tree from a’s descendants to
a using only arcs where both endpoints are descendants of a. Formally, the ITCO maintains the
following transitive arcs

                E∗ = (a, b) ∈ RV ×V | (a, b) ∈ E[descT (a)]tr or (a, b) ∈ E[descT (b)]tr ,
                      

where descT (a) is the set of descendants of a, and E is the set of currently added arcs. Leverag-
ing insights from Italiano’s approach regarding dynamically maintaining reachability from a single
source, we show that E∗ can be maintained over m insertions in O(mD) time, improving upon the
O(mn) time of Italiano’s algorithm.
    To compute the cover in this ITCO, we use the tree structure to output more efficient covers.
To output the cover of a set S, we simply output for each a ∈ S the arcs in E∗ where a is one
endpoint and the other endpoint is an ancestor of a. This graph contains O(|S|D) arcs and can be
output in O(|S|D) time. Interestingly, this set of arcs is a transitive cover of S that may be sparser
than the transitive closure of S.
    Additional related work: In our maximum flow framework, we generally know beforehand a
superset of the arcs that will be inserted into the ITCO: namely, the arcs and reversals of arcs in
the starting network (ignoring the transitive arcs potentially outputted by the cover). Our ITCO

                                                  11
for this case of bounded tree-depth leverages the structure of these arcs, even though the the precise
order in which these arcs will be added is unknown. Such a model was also studied by Italiano,
Karczmarz, Łacki and Sankowski [29] in the context of incremental transitive closure for planar
networks, where it was dubbed the “switch on” model. The fact that having small balanced vertex
separators is useful for transitive closure maintenance, which we heavily rely on in this bounded
tree-depth setting, was also already noticed by Karczmarz [31]. Karczmarz studied the potentially
more challenging decremental transitive problem and correspondingly, our tree-depth based variant
of Italiano’s algorithm is arguably simpler than Karczmarz’s data structure.
Node orderings. Finally, in Section 7.3, we give an ITCO suitable for efficiently solving the
maximum flow problem on graphs with bounded mc ; this ITCO supports our O(nω+o(1) ) time
maximum flow algorithms when mc = o(n). In addition to receiving arc additions, this data
structure maintains an ordering of the nodes and supports an operation where the position of nodes
in the ordering can be changed. We call such a data structure an ordered incremental transitive cover
data structure (OITCO). We give an implementation of an OITCO where the implementation cost
depends on how aligned arc additions, vertex re-orderings, and cover queries are with the ordering.
    This data structure periodically computes the transitive closure on subsets of the current arcs.
The data structure essentially maintains the transitive covers of the first Θ(2k ) nodes with respect
to the current node ordering for each k ∈ [K], where K = log2 n. It then periodically updates them,
leveraging that the transitive closure (and more broadly reachability trees) on k node graphs can
be computed using fast matrix multiplication (FMM) in O(k ω ) time.
    To explain the OITCO’s running time, suppose that there are a series of additions, re-orderings,
and queries and the i-th operation involves the first X (i) nodes in the ordering. Then if X = i X (i) ,
                                                                                                P
by carefully nesting and updating the covers, the cover corresponding to the first 2k nodes gets
updated at most Õ(X2−k ) times. Consequently, the data structure can be implemented in time:
                                                      
                X X                        X                                
                             k ω                 k(ω−1)             K(ω−1)           ω−1
                                                                                            
          Õ           · (2  )   = Õ X       2           = Õ   X2          = Õ Xn        .
                    2k
               k∈[K]                       k∈[K]

When applying this data structure for maximum flow, X is bounded by the total number of essential
arcs and thus X = O(mc ). Consequently, for the maximum flow problems in which mc = O(n), the
total running time required by the data structure is Õ(nω ), which is almost the same as the cost of
computing a single transitive closure of the entire graph.
    Additional related work: Our OITCO is closely related to a broader literature on dynamic
data structures that use algebraic techniques to maintain transitive closures, strongly connected
components, and reachability information [38, 43, 12, 44, 35, 54, 32, 34, 33, 52, 51, 23, 39, 19].
Particularly relevant to our approach are results on dynamic graph algorithms which use additional
ordering information, e.g., [36, 44, 35, 54, 51, 23, 39]. For example, [36, 44, 35, 54] considers related
problems where the order of operations is approximately known and [51, 23, 39] considers variants
of these problems where there is a prediction of the ordering of operations and runtimes depend on
the quality of the prediction. Our data structure perhaps differs slightly from individual prior works
in terms of how ordering information is handled (e.g., we allow the ordering to be changed for the
queried elements), the particular queries and updates supported (e.g., adding edges within a vertex
subset rather than updating a column of the matrix), the particular running time trade-offs we
obtain between operations, and in how we require supporting witness lists. However, the techniques
we apply, e.g., carefully applying FMM on geometrically growing subsets, is a standard approach

                                                   12
in the literature (see e.g., [44, 54]).
1.3.3   Comparison to Orlin’s algorithm
Our framework differs from Orlin’s algorithm in significant ways. We now elaborate on the three
aspects mentioned in Section 1.2, and give running time comparisons.
Structured flow iterates We maintain valid iterates (as in Definition 4.6) imposing much
stronger structural properties than in Orlin’s algorithm. A key feature is that in our algorithm,
most arcs between free components throughout will be at the lower or upper capacity bound. That
is, after contracting the free components, our flow will be close to a basic feasible flow. Specifically,
any arc between different free components that is not incident to s or t with positive residual ca-
pacities on both sides will become free (i.e., abundant in both directions) in the next iteration, that
is, it will merge two free components. The nearly basic flow structure ensures that we learn roughly
1 abundant arc per free component incident to an essential arc in each iteration (though proof is
rather technical). As we compute the transitive cover in each iteration on a set of representatives
nodes for each free component incident to an essential arc, this guarantee is what ensures that the
total size of the queries to the transitive cover data structure is bounded by O(mc ).
     To maintain the requisite sparsity of valid iterates, a post-processing in each iteration sacrifices
a small amount of flow amount by sending it towards the source or away from the sink. For this
purpose, we add infinite capacity arcs from all nodes to the source, and from the sink to all nodes.
This does not change the maximum flow value and allows us to easily deal with small with small
violations of flow conservation in a local manner. Another key technical idea in this context is to
use safe residual capacities: to ensure that some of the remaining arcs become abundant in the
next iteration, we artificially restrain the flow these arcs to a smaller interval while maintaining the
maximum flow value.
     Orlin’s framework however, using the present language, does not guarantee that free components
incident to essential arcs contribute one new abundant arc per iteration. In the network where free
components are contracted, there may be problematic nodes which are only used to route flows
on abundant paths (i.e., every arc on the path has infinite residual capacity) in the current flow.
As these abundant paths could potentially be rerouted to completely avoid any such node in the
next iteration, one cannot ensure that such a node will be incident to a new abundant arc. To
remove these “pass through” nodes when creating the auxilliary network, Orlin uses dynamic trees
to replace abundant flow paths by single edges (in essence, this replaces the flow on abundant arcs
by a corresponding b-matching), which results in O(m log n) overhead whenever Orlin constructs
an auxilliary network. Unfortunately, one may not be able to effectively amortize the cost of
this O(m log n) overhead to the abundant arcs learned in the next iteration, since the resulting
auxilliary network may have very few nodes. To overcome this difficulty in this case, Orlin created
an alternative auxiliary network with O(m1/3 ) nodes such that finding an optimal flow in this
network would result in learning a sufficient number of abundant arcs. To compute the optimal flow
in the alternative network, Orlin used the exact O(n3 )-time strongly polynomial solver of [40].
     Our algorithm is considerably simpler in this respect: we only need one type of auxiliary net-
work that is always fast to construct (essentially linear in the size of the network modulo the
transitive cover call), and we only require a fast weakly polynomial subsolver. Using the m1+o(1) -
time solver in Orlin’s algorithm (with suitable optimization of parameters), this improvement allow
us to reduce the time spent on approximate maximum flow computations on general networks from
                                                   √
O(mc m2/3+o(1) ) in Orlin’s framework to O(mc m) in our framework.


                                                   13
Extending the instance In both algorithms, the auxiliary instances include transitive closure
arcs supplied by the transitive closure/cover data structures. Whenever an approximate maximum
flow contains transitive arc with positive positive flow, Orlin’s algorithm transfers these flows to
flows on original arcs during an O(m log n + Kn) post-processing step of the auxiliary network,
where K is the number of nodes in the auxiliary network. Thus the transferring of flows adds
O(mc n) time to the running time of Orlin’s algorithm, another O(nm) bottleneck when most arcs
are capacitated. Our algorithm avoids this running time by delaying these transfers to a final stage
of the algorithm. Instead, it permits flows on transitive arcs at intermediate stages. Thus the first
maximum flow f ∗ obtained by our algorithm may include flows on transitive arcs. Our transitive
closure includes an operation TcWitList() that is used to transfer flow from the transitive arc flows
of f ∗ to flows on original arcs, resulting in a maximum flow on the original network. This transfer
takes only O(n2 ) time in the general case and O(nD)-time in the bounded tree-depth setting.
New dynamic data structures We introduce the versatile ITCO data structure. Using transi-
tive covers rather than closures enables more flexibility in the applications, in particular, it is the
key tool in the almost-linear algorithm for bounded tree-depth. In the context of data structures,
our main new contribution is developing the node-ordered variant using fast matrix multiplication
(FMM). While FMM already appeared in Orlin’s algorithm for b-matching, it only involved periodic
recomputation of the entire transitive closure from scratch. Our amortized recomputation scheme
is the key to the improved running time in this context.
1.4   Overview of the paper
In Section 2, we describe preliminaries of the algorithm. The ITCO is introduced in Section 3.
In Section 4, we develop the conceptual framework of the algorithm, including the concepts of
abundant and free arcs and valid iterates. In Section 5, we present the meta-algorithm and its sub-
routines. Section 6 presents and proves the main correctness and running time bound Theorem 6.1,
a formal version of Theorem 1.6. In Section 7, we describe the data structures for maintaining the
ITCO in the different cases, as well as prove correctness and running time bounds. In Section 8,
we combine the meta-algorithm with the particular implementations to prove the bounds in the
different settings, that is, Theorem 1.7, Theorem 1.1, and Theorem 1.4. Section A shows how a fast
weakly polynomial time algorithm for maximum flows can be used within a strongly polynomial
time algorithm to obtain an approximate maximum flow.

2     Preliminaries
R+∞ = R≥0 ∪ {∞}, and [k] = {1, 2, . . . , k} for k ∈ N. For v ∈ R, we let v + = max{v, 0} and
      def                      def                                                  def


v − = max{−v, 0}; note that v = v + − v − . For a vector x ∈ RX , we let supp(x) = {i ∈ X : xi ̸= 0}
    def                                                                          def


denote its support. For a subset S ⊆ X, we let x(S) = i∈S xi .
                                                      def P



Graphs. Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph; in this paper we allow directed graphs to have
parallel arcs but no self-loops. We let V (G) = V and E(G) = E refer to the nodes and arcs of G,
respectively. For F ⊆ E, we let V (F ) ⊆ V denote the set of endpoints of F . We say that j is the
head and i the tail of the arc e = (i, j).
    For S, T ⊆ V , we let ∂E (S, T ) = {e = (i, j) ∈ E : i ∈ S \ T, j ∈ T \ S} denote the set of arcs
                                     def


from S to T . Additionally, we let E[S] = {e = (i, j) ∈ E : i, j ∈ S}, and let G[S] = (S, E[S])
                                           def                                          def


denote the graph induced on S. We let F ⊎ H denote multiset union for arc sets.
    For x ∈ RE  +∞ , we let x(S, T ) = x(∂E (S, T )). For S ⊆ V , we let ∂E (S) = ∂E (V \ S, S)
                                       def                                    in    def




                                                  14
and ∂E  out (S) = ∂ (S, V \ S) denote the set of arcs entering and leaving S, respectively, and let
               def
                       E
         def
∂E (S) = ∂E     in (S) ∪ ∂ out (S). When S is a singleton, i.e., S = {i}, we write i for brevity, e.g.,
                           E
 in (i) def
∂E      = ∂E in ({i}), ∂ out (i) def
                                 = ∂Eout ({i}) and ∂ (i) def
                                                         = ∂E ({i}).
                         E                          E

Maximum flow instances. A maximum flow instance (or instance, for short) is (G, u), where
G = (V, E) is a directed graph with a source node s ∈ V , sink node t ∈ V , and arc capacities
u ∈ RE +∞ . s and t are fixed throughout and thus, we omit them from the instance notation.
     We assume that the arc set E in a maximum flow instance is symmetric: for every (i, j)-arc
e ∈ E, there is a (j, i)-arc ←−
                              e ∈ E called the reverse arc. The reverse mapping is an involution: if
               ←
               −                                          ←
                                                          − def −                                 ←−
h = e then h = e. For an arc subset F ⊆ E, we let F = {←
      ←−                                                         e : e ∈ F }. Thus, we have E = E .
For any f, g ∈ RE ≥0 , we define f ⊕ g ∈ R≥0 for all e ∈ E by (f ⊕ g)e = (fe − f←
                                           E
                                                                                e + ge − g←
                                                                                −          e) .
                                                                                           −  +

     In the input instance, we assume that for every e ∈ E, at least one of the capacities ue and u←−
                                                                                                    e
is finite; we also assume there is no (s, t) arc.5
     Furthermore, we assume that

            for each i ∈ V \ {s, t}, there exists arcs (i, s), (t, i) ∈ E with infinite capacities.                (1)

This assumption is without loss of generality; every instance can be easily transformed to an equiva-
lent one satisfying this assumption by adding O(|V |) arcs in O(|V |) time. In the bounded tree-depth
case, this may increase the tree-depth by at most 2. We discuss this further in Section 8.
    For a vector f ∈ RE and a set S ⊆ V , we let
                                                 def in            out
                                       exf (S) = f (∂E  (S)) − f (∂E   (S))

denote the excess of S;P  we use exf (i) for the singleton S = {i}. Note that exf (·) is a modular
function, i.e., exf (S) = i∈S exf (i).
   The flow polyhedron associated with (G, u) is

             FlowP(G, u) = f ∈ RE : 0 ≤ f ≤ u and exf (i) = 0 for all i ∈ V \ {s, t}                               (2)
                         def 
                                                                                                        .

A vector f ∈ FlowP(I) is called a feasible flow, or simply a flow. When clear from the context, we
let xij and uij denote the flow xe and capacity ue on the arc e = (i, j). (Note that there may be
parallel arcs, so this may not always be uniquely defined.) The value of a flow f is denoted as
                                                        def
                                                 val(f ) = −exf (s) .

Note that val(f ) = exf (t). We let
                                           def
                                  ν(G, u) = max{val(f ) : f ∈ FlowP(G, u)}

denote the maximum flow value in (G, u). We say that f ∈ RE is a maximum flow if f ∈ FlowP(G, u)
and val(f ) = ν(G, u). We say a instance (G, u) is bounded if ν(G, u) < ∞; note that (G, u) is
bounded if and only if there is no s–t path in E of arcs with infinite capacity. Throughout, we
assume that the instance is bounded as this can easily be checked in linear time.
   5
    Note that if both e = (i, j) and ← −
                                       e = (j, i) are infinite, then we can reduce to an equivalent smaller instance by
contracting i and j. All (s, t) arcs can be removed without loss of generality, as every maximum flow must saturate
them.


                                                          15
Minimum cuts. A set S ⊆ V \ {t} with s ∈ S is called an s–t cut. We call u(S, V \ S) the cut
capacity of S. An s–t cut is a minimum cut if it minimizes u(S, V \ S) over all s–t cuts. We recall
the maximum flow minimum cut theorem:

Theorem 2.1 (Maximum flow minimum cut). In any instance (G, u) with G = (V, E), ν(G, u)
equals the minimum capacity of an s–t cut.

    Given an instance (G, u) and ε ≥ 0, we say that a flow f is ε-optimal if f is feasible and
val(f ) ≥ ν(G, u) − ε. An s–t cut S is ε-optimal if u(S, V \ S) ≤ ν(G, u) + ε.
Acylic basic flows. A flow f in (G, u) is acyclic if supp(f ) does not contain any directed cycles.
Further, f is a basic flow if it cannot be written as a nontrivial convex combination of other
flows. Note that a basic flow is not necessarily acyclic as the support may include directed cycles
saturating an arc capacity; conversely, an acyclic flow is not necessarily basic. By an acylic basic
flow, we mean a basic flow that is also acyclic. The following lemma asserts that any flow can be
efficiently converted to an acyclic basic flow, and lists some useful properties.

Lemma 2.2. Given a flow f in the instance (G, u) on n nodes and m arcs, in O(m log n) time one
can find a basic acylic flow f¯ such that supp(f¯) ⊆ supp(f ), val(f¯) ≥ val(f ). Every acyclic basic
flow f¯ satisfies the following properties.

 (i) ∥f ∥∞ ≤ val(f¯).

 (ii) f¯e = 0 for all e ∈ ∂E
                           in (s) ∪ ∂ out (t).
                                     E

(iii) The set of arcs {e ∈ E : 0 < f¯e < ue } form a forest, with s and t belonging to different
      components.

(iv) For every e ∈ E, the flow value f¯e can be written in the form f¯e = e′ ∈E(G) χee′ ue′ , where
                                                                         P
      χee′ ∈ {0, ±1}.

    The proof is given in Section A; we give a brief outline here. One can obtain a basic acylic flow
by first computing an acyclic flow and then turning it into basic; both steps can be performed in
O(m log n) using link-cut trees [46]. Among the properties, (i) and (ii) hold for all acyclic flows and
follow using standard flow decomposition (Theorem A.1); (iii) is easy to show for all basic flows,
and implies (iv).
Instance extensions. Given (G, u) and two (possibly empty) arc sets Fone , Ftwo ⊆ V × V , we
define the instance (G, u) ⊕ (Fone , Ftwo ) = (G′ , u′ ) by adding all arcs in Fone with infinite capacity,
and all arcs in Ftwo with infinite capacity in both directions. Formally, we let G′ = (V (G), E ′ ),
                                                                                            def

                            ←−−            ← −−
where E ′ = E(G) ⊎ Fone ⊎ Fone ⊎ Ftwo ⊎ Ftwo denotes the multigraph obtained by adding Fone , Ftwo ,
←−−         ←−−
Fone , and Ftwo to E(G) as a multiset union. Further, we let u′e = ue for e ∈ E, u′e = ∞ for e ∈ Fone
                                                                    def                 def

                    ←−−
and u′e = 0 for e ∈ Fone , and u′e = u′←  = ∞ for e ∈ Ftwo .6
        def                              def
                                       −
                                       e

Definition 2.3 (Admissible extension). The instance (G′ , u′ ) = (G, u)⊕(Fone , Ftwo ) is an admissible
                                                 ←−−
extension of (G, u) if the arcs in Fone ∪ Ftwo ∪ Ftwo do not leave any minimum s–t cut in (G, u).

      Definition 2.3 implies that if (G′ , u′ ) is an admissible extension of (G, u), then ν(G′ , u′ ) = ν(G, u).
  6                                   ←−−
      We need to add the reverse arcs Fone to maintain symmetry of the instance.


                                                         16
2.1   Residual capacities and safe capacities
Given an instance (G, u) and a flow f ∈ RE , we define the residual capacity vector uf ∈ RE
                                                                                          +∞ by
 f def
                e . The instance (G, u ) is called the residual instance of f .
ue = ue − fe + f←
                −                     f


Lemma 2.4. Given an instance (G, u) and a feasible flow f , we have

                                    ν(G, u) = val(f ) + ν(G, uf ) .

Proof. We first show ν(G, uf ) ≥ ν(G, u) − val(f ). Let f ⋆ be a maximum flow of (G, u), i.e.,
val(f ⋆ ) = ν(G, u) and f ⋆ ∈ FlowP(G, u). Let h = f ⋆ ⊕ (−f ). Then, 0 ≤ h ≤ uf and exf (i) = 0 for
                                                   def


i ∈ V \ {s, t}; thus, h is a feasible flow in the residual instance (G, uf ), giving val(h) ≤ ν(G, uf ).
Further, exf ⋆ (s) = exf (s) + exh (s), giving val(h) = val(f ⋆ ) − val(f ) = ν(G, u) − val(f ). In the
other direction, let g denote a maximum flow in (G, uf ). Then, g ⊕ f is feasible in (G, u), and
val(g ⊕ f ) = val(g) + val(f ) ≤ ν(G, u).

   In the algorithm, it will be convenient to restrict the residual capacities, as long as this change
does not decrease the residual instance value. This is captured in the following definition.

Definition 2.5 (Safe Residual Capacities). Given an instance (G, u) and a flow f , we say that
r ∈ RE+∞ is a safe residual capacity vector with respect to f , or that r is safe with respect to f , if
0 ≤ r ≤ uf , and ν(G, uf ) = ν(G, r).

   We will also use the shorter expression ‘safe capacity vector.’ Note that in particular r = uf is
always a safe (residual) capacity vector.

Lemma 2.6. Given an instance (G, u) with a feasible flow f , the capacity vector 0 ≤ r ≤ uf is safe
w.r.t. f if and only if there exists a maximum flow f ⋆ in (G, u) with fe⋆ ≤ fe − f←  e + re for every
                                                                                      −
e ∈ E. Furthermore, if r is safe w.r.t. f then re = ufe for all e ∈ ∂E
                                                                     out (S) where S is a min-cut.


Proof. The first part is immediate by Lemma 2.4. The second part follows since every maximum
flow must have fe⋆ = ue for every arc e in a minimum cut in (G, u), which are the same as the
minimum cuts in (G, uf ) by Lemma 2.4.

2.2   Approximate flow solver
Definition 2.7 (Approximate Flow Solver). By a T (m, M )-time approximate-flow solver, we mean
a subroutine ApproxFlow(G, u, M ) that, for an instance (G, u) with |E(G)| = m and M ∈ R>0 , in
time T (m, M ) outputs an acyclic basic flow f in (G, u) along with an arc e⋆ ∈ E(G) such that

                                                                 ν(G, u)
                             ν(G, uf ) ≤ mufe⋆ ≤ mν(G, uf ) ≤            .
                                                                   M
    The arc e⋆ will serve as a certificate of the value of the residual flow, and will be particularly
useful to keep the bit-complexity of the algorithm bounded.
    Recent breakthrough results led to almost-linear time solvers for maximum flow (and more
generally, for min-cost flow). Following the randomized algorithm by Chen, Kyng, Liu, Peng,
Gutenberg, and Sachdeva [8], a deterministic almost-linear time algorithm was recently obtained
by van den Brand, Chen, Kyng, Liu, Peng, Gutenberg, Sachdeva, and Sidford [50].



                                                  17
Theorem 2.8 ([50]). There is a deterministic polynomial time algorithm that given an m-arc,
n-node instance (G, u) with integral capacities bounded by U , computes an integer valued exact
maximum flow in time m1+o(1) log U .

    We note that for dense instances, van den Brand, Lee, Liu, Saranurak, Sidford, Song, and Wang
[53] gave a a near-linear Õ((m + n1.5 ) log U ) algorithm. In Section A, we show a reduction from
Theorem 2.8 to a near-linear time approximate maximum flow solver, as stated next. The reduc-
tion uses standard techniques, including a subroutine MaxCap(G, u) that computes the maximum
capacity of an s–t path. This will also be instrumental in obtaining the arc e⋆ such that mufe⋆ is an
upper bound on the residual flow value. We use Theorem 2.8 for instances with integer capacities
O(m2 M ).

Theorem 2.9. There exists an m1+o(1) log M -time deterministic approximate maximum flow solver.

3    Incremental Transitive Cover Data Structures
We now introduce the incremental transitive cover data structure. Throughout this section (and
later when referring to general transitive closure data structures) the graph, G = (V, E), denotes an
arbitrary directed graph and not a maximum flow instance; we do not require G to be symmetric,
and it does not have arc capacities. We write G = (V, E) rather than G = (V, E) to clarify the
distinction. In the context of our maximum flow algorithm, G = (V, E) will model the graph of
abundant arcs, which are introduced in Section 4.1. In this setting V = V , however we use the
notation G = (V, E) as the development of our ITCOs is self-contained nature and potentially more
broadly applicable.
     Given a directed graph G = (V, E), the transitive closure graph G tr = (V, E tr ) contains all arcs
(i, j) ∈ V × V for which there is a directed i–j path in G.

Definition 3.1 (Transitive cover). For a graph G = (V, E) and subset S ⊆ V, we say that the graph
(V ′ , F ) is a transitive cover of S (in G), if S ⊆ V ′ ⊆ V, F ⊆ E tr [V ′ ], and E tr [S] = F tr [S].

     Thus, a transitive cover of S is a subgraph (V ′ , F ) of G tr such that whenever G has an i–j path
between two nodes i and j in S, then there is an i–j path in F .
     A key ingredient of our maximum flow algorithms is a transitive cover data structure. This data
structure assumes an initial empty graph on n nodes V and processes a sequence of requests to
add arcs (TcAdd) and compute a transitive cover of a set of nodes (TcCover). The data structure
also supports an additional operation, TcWitList(), which outputs what we call a witness list. The
witness list certifies that all arcs in the output of TcCover(·) are indeed in the transitive closure
at that time. Later, we provide a procedure, WitRoute(·) (Algorithm 4), that uses the witness
list to efficiently transfer flows from transitive arcs to flows on original arcs. Our maximum flow
algorithm proceeds through a sequence of admissible extensions of the input graph, where new
artificial, transitive arcs are added using the transitive cover; WitRoute(·) is used in the final step
to reroute flow from the artificial arcs and obtain a maximum flow in the input graph.
     We call such a data structure an (incremental) transitive cover data structure where we use the
term incremental when we wish to emphasize that arcs are only added. In the remainder of this
section we introduce and formally define witness lists, and use them to define ITCO’s. In Section 7,
we design ITCO’s in different settings, some of which use specific properties of the input arcs, e.g.,
that they respect the hierarchy of a given bounded-depth tree as in the bounded tree-depth case.


                                                  18
Witness list. We start by formally defining a witness list as follows.

Definition 3.2 (Witness list). We call L = (ai , bi , wi )i∈[K] ∈ V × V × V a witness list on V, denoted
L ∈ W(V), if the K (ai , bi ) pairs are distinct with ai ̸= bi , and for each (ai , bi , wi ) with wi ̸= bi
there are ji , ki ∈ [i − 1] with (ai , wi ) = (aji , bji ) and (wi , bi ) = (aki , bki ). We define:

    • The transitive arcs of L: E∗ (L) = {(ai , bi ) | i ∈ [K]}.
                                             def




    • The arcs of L: E(L) = {(ai , bi ) | i ∈ [K], wi = bi }.
                                def




    • The first j arcs of L: E ≤j (L) = {(ai , bi ) ∈ E(L) | i ∈ [j]}.
                                           def




    • L’s witness for (ai , bi ) ∈ E∗ (L): witL (ai , bi ) = wi .
                                                            def


                                                    (
                                                     (ai , bi )                         if wi = bi
    • L’s walk for (ai , bi ): walkL (ai , bi ) =
                                                def

                                                     walkL (ai , wi ), walkL (wi , bi ) otherwise

Additionally, we say that such witness list is path-structured if walkL (ai , bi ) is a path for all i ∈ [K].

      A witness list, L, is simply a list of triples of nodes, (ai , bi , wi ) ∈ V × V × V for each i ∈ [K] that
satisfies certain properties. For such a list, we refer to the set of all (ai , bi ) pairs, denoted E∗ (L), as
transitive arcs and we refer to the subset of these pairs with wi = bi as arcs, denoted E(L). In our
ITCOs E(L) will correspond to arcs added to the data structure and E∗ (L) will correspond to both
these arcs as well as additional arcs in the transitive cover of these arcs that it computes.
      To be a valid witness list, the (ai , bi ) need to be distinct and L needs to provide a way to map
each non-arc of L, i.e., (ai , bi ) ∈ E∗ (L) \ E(L) to an ai –bi path on the arcs that appear earlier
than (ai , bi ) in the list, i.e., E ≤i−1 (L). A witness list ensures this simply by requiring that for each
(ai , bi ) ∈ E∗ (L) \ E(L), it is the case that (ai , wi ) and (wi , bi ) appear earlier in the list, i.e., there is
ji , ki ∈ [i − 1] with (ai , wi ) = (aji , bji ) and (wi , bi ) = (aki , bki ). We call wi the witness for (ai , bi ) and
the requirement is equivalent to there being an ai –bi path of length 2 through wi on the transitive
arcs before i in L. We let walkL (ai , bi ) denote the result of recursively applying such a substitution
and the following lemma shows that indeed, walkL (ai , bi ) is a ai –bi walk on E ≤i−1 (L). Finally, we
call a witness list, path-structured, if the walks it outputs are always paths; in all our applications,
witness lists have this property.

Lemma 3.3. walkL (ai , bi ) is an ai –bi walk on E ≤i (L) for any L = (ai , bi , wi )i∈[K] ∈ W(V) and
(ai , bi ) ∈ E∗ (L).

Proof. We prove by strong induction on i. For i = 1, Definition 3.2 implies that w1 = b1 (since [1 −
1] = ∅) and consequently, walk(a1 , b1 ) = (a1 , b1 ) ∈ E ≤1 (L). Now suppose the claim holds for all i <
i∗ ≤ K we prove it holds for i∗ . If wi∗ = bi∗ then, walk(ai∗ , bi∗ ) = (ai∗ , bi∗ ) ∈ E ≤i∗ (L), by definition,
and the claim follows. Otherwise, by definition, walk(ai∗ , bi∗ ) = walkL (aji∗ , bji∗ ), walkL (aki∗ , bki∗ )
for ji∗ , ki∗ ∈ [i∗ − 1] where (ai∗ , wi∗ ) = (aji∗ , bji∗ ) and (wi∗ , bi∗ ) = (aki∗ , bki∗ ). Consequently, by the
inductive hypothesis, walkL (aji∗ , bji∗ ) is an ai∗ –wi∗ walk on E ≤ji∗ (L) ⊆ E ≤i∗ (L) and walkL (aki∗ , bki∗ )
is an wi∗ –bi∗ walk on E ≤ki∗ ⊆ E ≤i∗ (L). The result follows as the concatenation of a ai∗ –wi∗ walk
and a wi∗ –bi∗ walk, both on E ≤i∗ (L), is an ai∗ –bi∗ walk on E ≤i∗ (L).




                                                           19
Incremental transitive cover. With witness lists established, we now formally define an ITCO.

Definition 3.4 (Incremental Transitive Cover). A data structure is an incremental transitive cover
(ITCO) data structure if it supports the following operations.

    • TcInit(V): initializes with finite set of n nodes V and sets E ← ∅.

    • TcAdd(F ⊆ V × V): for F with F ∩ E = ∅7 where no arc in F is a self-loop, sets E ← E ∪ F .

    • TcCover(S ⊆ V): outputs graph Gout = (Vout , Eout ) that is a transitive cover of S in (V, E).

    • TcWitList(): returns a path-structured witness list L = {(ai , bi , wi )}i∈[K] ∈ W(V) where
      E(L) ⊆ E and if (a, b) was output in TcCover(·), then (a, b) = (ai , bi ) for some i ∈ [K] and
      E ≤i (L) was added to E before (a, b) was output.

     An ITCO supports TcAdd(·) for adding arcs and TcCover(·) for computing transitive covers, as
described earlier. In addition, it supports the TcWitList() operation which returns a path-structured
witness list corresponding to the arcs added in TcAdd(·) and additional transitive arcs computed
in handling TcCover(·) operations. In particular, the arcs in the witness list L must returned by
TcWitList() must be arcs in the associated ITCO instance and any arc (a, b) output in TcCover()
must appear in the output witness list with the arcs that walkL (a, b) uses having been added in
TcAdd(·) before (a, b) was output (this encoded through the condition that “E ≤i (L) was added to
E before (a, b) was output” in Definition 3.4). These conditions allow flow on any (a, b) arc output
by TcCover() to be mapped to a flow on a–b path on arcs that were added to TcAdd(·) earlier.
We perform this transfer through the procedure WitRoute(·) which is described and analyzed in
Section 5.2; this self-contained procedure efficiently transfer flows on the transitive arcs of a witness
list to a flow using only the arcs of the witness list.

4     Arc Types and Valid Iterates
Throughout, we use n = |V ◦ | and m = |E ◦ | for a fixed input instance (G◦ , u◦ ) with G◦ = (V, E ◦ ).
                         def              def


During the algorithm, new arcs may be added to G◦ . In particular, our ‘working instance’ will be
an admissible extension (G, u) = (G◦ , u◦ ) ⊕ (Fone , Ftwo ).
4.1    Abundant and free arcs
Given an instance (G, u) and ε ≥ 0, let f be an ε-optimal flow f in (G, u). Our next definitions are
motivated by the following observation: if ufe > ε for some e ∈ E, then Lemma 2.4 implies that e
is not an element of any s–t min-cut. If both ufe , uf←
                                                      −
                                                      e
                                                        > ε, then neither e nor ←
                                                                                −
                                                                                e may be an element
of any s–t min-cut. Equivalently, even if we increase the capacities of these arcs to ∞, it does not
affect the maximum flow value.
    Thus, arcs with large residual capacities are virtually uncapacitated, and they also impose
restrictions on the possible sets of s–t min-cuts. We call arcs with residual capacity at least 4n2 ε
abundant; our algorithm maintains the property that once an arc becomes abundant, it remains so
for the rest of the algorithm. The reason for choosing the higher threshold 4n2 ε instead of ε is that
whereas the existence of a maximum flow f ⋆ with ∥f ⋆ − f ∥∞ ≤ ε is guaranteed for every ε-optimal
   7
     The assumption that F ∩ E = ∅ was made to simplify theorem statements. The assumption can be removed by
increasing the time of implementing each TcAdd(·) by an additive O(|F |) (by simply maintaining E and in O(|F |)
time remove the elements that are already in E).



                                                      20
f (Lemma 2.6), our algorithm will only guarantee ∥f ⋆ − f ∥∞ ≤ 4n2 ε for the current ε-optimal flow
f and the final optimal flow f ⋆ returned.8
Definition 4.1 (Arc Types). For an ε-optimal flow f in instance (G, u) and ε ≥ 0 we define the
set of (f, ε)-abundant arcs Eabd (f, ε) ⊆ E and the set of (f, ε)-free arcs Efree (f, ε) ⊆ E as

  Eabd (f, ε) = e ∈ E : ufe ≥ Γε and Efree (f, ε) = {e ∈ E : e, ←   −
                  n               o
                                                                    e ∈ Eabd (f, ε)} where Γ = 4n2 .
              def                                  def                                          def




    When f and ε are clear from the context, for brevity, we simply refer to Eabd (f, ε) and Efree (f, ε)
as the abundant and free arcs respectively. As already noted, Lemma 2.4 implies that no (f, ε)-
abundant arc is in a min-cut in (G, u). The next proposition asserts a stronger claim.
Proposition 4.2. Let (G, u) be an instance with an ε-optimal flow f , where ε ≥ 0 and let S be an
s–t cut. If uf (S, V \ S) < Γε, then ∂Eout (S) ∩ E
                                                  abd (f, ε) = ∅. In particular, there is no s–t path in
Eabd (f, ε). Furthermore, if S is an ε -optimal s–t cut for ε′ ≥ 0, then uf (S, V \ S) ≤ ε′ + ε.
                                      ′


Proof. The first part is immediate by the definition of abundant arcs, and the second part by the
first. For the last part, note that by the definition of residual capacities,

           ν(G, u) + ε′ ≥ u(S, V \ S) = uf (S, V \ S) + f (∂E
                                                            out            in
                                                                (S)) − f (∂E  (S))
                          = uf (S, V \ S) + val(f ) ≥ uf (S, V \ S) + ν(G, u) − ε .

    Throughout our algorithm, if f is an ε-optimal flow at a current iteration in (G, u), then for
all subsequent iterations f ′ , we will have |fe − f←    ′    ′ | ≤ 2nε for all e ∈ E(G). Thus, the
                                                    e − fe + f←
                                                    −         −
                                                              e
following simple lemma guarantees that once an arc becomes abundant in our algorithm, it will
remain abundant in all subsequent iterations; the proof is immediate.
Lemma 4.3. Let (G′ , u′ ) be any admissible extension of the instance (G, u), and 0 ≤ ε′ ≤ ε/2. Let f
be an ε-optimal flow in (G, u) and let f ′ be a ε′ -optimal flow in (G′ , u′ ) such that |fe −f←   ′   ′ |≤
                                                                                               e −fe +f←
                                                                                               −       −
                                                                                                       e
                                                       ′
2nε for all e ∈ E(G). Then, Eabd (f, ε) ⊆ Eabd (f , ε ). ′


    For an instance (G, u) and an ε-optimal flow f , we let (V, Eabdtr (f, ε)) denote the transitive closure

of (V, Eabd (f, ε)). That is, (i, j) ∈ Eabd (f, ε) if and only if Eabd (f, ε) contains an i–j path.
                                        tr


Lemma 4.4. Let (G, u) be instance with an ε-optimal flow f for ε ≥ 0. Then, (G, u) ⊕ (Fone , Ftwo )
                                                     tr (f, ε) and F
is an admissible extension of (G, u) for any Fone ⊆ Eabd                         ←−    tr
                                                                    two ⊆ {e : e, e ∈ Eabd (f, ε)}.

Proof. The claim follows by showing that for any s–t min-cut S in (G, u), ∂Fout  one
                                                                                     (S) = ∅ and
∂Ftwo (S) = ∅. For a contradiction, assume e ∈ Fone leaves S; by the definition of the transitive
closure, there must be an abundant arc e′ ∈ Eabd (f, ε) also leaving S. This contradicts Proposi-
tion 4.2. The same argument holds for arcs in Ftwo .

Free components. We now define a key concept, (f, ε)-free components. These will correspond
to a coarsening sequence of partitions over the iterations in the algorithm, with the guarantee that
every s–t min-cut is the union of partition components.
Definition 4.5 (Free components). Let f be an ε-optimal flow in the instance (G, u) for ε ≥ 0. We
say that P ⊆ V is a (f, ε)-free component if
   8
     The factor 4n2 was chosen to leave enough slack for the flow rerouting arguments. It could be tightened; however,
this would not affect the asymptotic running times in our analysis.


                                                         21
   • P is the set of nodes reachable on an abundant path in Eabd (f, ε) from s; or

   • P is the set of nodes that can reach t on an abundant path in Eabd (f, ε); or

   • P is a connected component of Efree (f, ε) disjoint from the above two components.

We denote this partition of V as
                                                def
                                            Pf,ε = {Pi : i ∈ R} ,
where the index set R ⊆ V will be a set of roots, picking one representative node from each
component such that i ∈ Pi . We always let s and t be the root of the first and second components
listed above, respectively.

    Note that Proposition 4.2 guarantees that Ps ̸= Pt . For a node j ∈ V , we let root(j) denote the
root of the component containing j. Thus, j ∈ Proot(j) . Note that the indexing is not consecutive.
When two components Pi and Pj are merged during the algorithm into a new component Pi ∪ Pj ,
the new component will have root node i or j and will be denoted as Pi or Pj . When clear from
the context, we simply refer to the Pi sets as free components. We let EP (f, ε) ⊆ E denote the set
of arcs between different components. In particular, EP (f, ε) ∩ Efree (f, ε) = ∅.
4.2   Valid iterates and essential arcs
We now formalize properties of tuples (f, r, ε, R) of a flow, safe capacity vector, accuracy bound,
and root set appearing in the algorithm. We define the set of gap arcs as the set of arcs between
different components where the residual capacity is greater than the safe capacity by at least 2Γ−2 ε
in both directions:
                               n                                                       o
            Egap (f, r, ε) = e ∈ EP (f, ε) : ufe ≥ re + 2Γ−2 ε and uf←            −2
                           def
                                                                     −
                                                                     e
                                                                       ≥ r←−
                                                                           e + 2Γ    ε   .

In our algorithm, all such arcs will become free arcs in the subsequent iteration.
    For roots i ∈ R, the arcs (s, i) and (i, t) will play a special role in the algorithm: we use them
to restore flow balance of component Pi after arc adjustments. (Recall assumption (1) that all such
arcs are assumed to be present in the graph.) We call these boundary arcs:
                                      def
                       Ebound (R) = {(s, i), (i, s), (t, i), (i, t) : i ∈ R \ {s, t}} .

For a subset R′ ⊆ R, we will use Ebound (R′ ) to denote the corresponding subset.
    The invariants in the following definition will be satisfied at the beginning of each iteration.
Throughout, (G, u) will be a valid extension of the input instance (G◦ , u◦ ) and may include extension
arcs.

Definition 4.6 (Valid Iterate). We say that (f, r, ε, R) is a valid iterate in instance (G, u) if

(A) f is an ε-optimal feasible flow in (G, u);

(B) r are safe capacities for f .

(C) For every arc e ∈ EP (f, ε), at least one of the following hold: ufe = 0; uf←
                                                                                −
                                                                                e
                                                                                  = 0; e ∈ Egap (f, r, ε);
    or e ∈ Ebound (R).

(D) ufsi = 0 or ufit = 0 for i ∈ R.

                                                      22
(E) R forms a set of roots of the free components, i.e., every component of Pf,ε contains exactly
    one node from R, and s, t ∈ R.
    Property (C) is the following strong requirement: for any pair of non-boundary arcs e, ←
                                                                                           −
                                                                                           e between
different free components, the flow should be either at a capacity bound, or it should be a gap arc,
that is, the safe capacity should be less than the residual capacity on both sides by at least 2Γ−2 ε.
As shown below in Lemma 4.10, all gap arcs will become free in the subsequent iteration.
Definition 4.7 (Essential arcs and roots). Let f -be an ε-optimal flow in (G, u) for ε ≥ 0. We say
that e ∈ E is an essential arc if e ∈ EP (f, ε) and

                                    Γ−5 ε ≤ ufe < Γε or Γ−5 ε ≤ uf←
                                                                  −
                                                                  e
                                                                    < Γε .

Given the root set R, i ∈ R is an essential root if there is an essential arc incident to the component
Pi , i.e., there exists an essential arc e = (j, k) with i = root(j).
   The following lemma is immediate by the definition of essential arcs, part (C) in Definition 4.6,
                                 f    f
and by observing that ue + u←
                            e = ue + u←
                            −         −e
                                         holds for every arc.
Lemma 4.8. Let (f, r, ε, R) be a valid iterate in (G, u). For every essential arc e, either e ∈
Egap (f, ε, r), or e ∈ Ebound (R), or Γ−5 ε ≤ ue + u←
                                                    e < Γε.
                                                    −

4.3    Series of valid iterates
Our next definition formalizes the proximity property subsequent valid iterates will satisfy.
Definition 4.9 (Valid successors). Let (G′ , u′ ) = (G, u) ⊕ (Fone , Ftwo ) be an admissible extension of
(G, u). Let (f, r, ε, R) be a valid iterate in (G, u), and let (f ′ , r′ , ε′ , R′ ) be a valid iterate in (G′ , u′ ).
We say that (f ′ , r′ , ε′ , R′ ) is a valid successor of (f, r, ε, R) if the following hold:
(A) ε′ ≤ Γ−3 ε.

                                    e ≤ min{re , ε} + Γ ε < 2ε, and for every e ∈ E(G ) \ E(G),
(B) For every e ∈ E(G), fe′ − fe + f←
                                    −                  −2                            ′

    fe′ ≤ 3ε.
   The above definition guarantees that all gap arcs will become free in the next iterate, as shown
next.
Lemma 4.10. Let (f, r, ε, R) be a valid iterate in (G, u). Let (G′ , u′ ) be an admissible extension of
(G, u) with a valid iterate (f ′ , r′ , ε′ , R′ ) that is a valid successor of (f, r, ε, R).
  (i) Eabd (f, ε) ⊆ Eabd (f ′ , ε′ ) and Efree (f, ε) ⊆ Efree (f ′ , ε′ ).

 (ii) Every arc e ∈ Egap (f, r, ε) is (f ′ , ε′ )-free.
Proof. Part (i) is immediate by Lemma 4.3. For part (ii), consider an arc e ∈ Egap (f, r, ε). If
ue = ∞, then we immediately have e ∈ Eabd (f ′ , ε′ ). If ue < ∞, then by Definition 4.9(B) and by
the definition of gap arcs, we see that
                                         ′
                                      ufe ≥ ufe − re − Γ−2 ε ≥ Γ−2 ε ≥ Γε′ .

Thus, e ∈ Eabd (f ′ , ε′ ). A similar argument shows that ←
                                                          −
                                                          e ∈ Eabd (f ′ , ε′ ), and consequently, e ∈
Efree (f , ε ), as required.
        ′   ′



                                                            23
 Algorithm 1: Max-Flow
   Data: An instance (G◦ , u◦ ) with G◦ = (V, E ◦ ) and ν(G◦ , u) < ∞.
   Result: A maximum flow f ⋆ in (G◦ , u◦ ).
 1 (G, u) ← (G◦ , u◦ ) ; E ← E ◦ ; Fe ← ∅ ; Fs ← ∅ ;
 2 (f, r, ε, R) ← Initialize ;                            // Obtain initial valid iterate
 3 Ti ← ({i}, ∅) for all i ∈ V ;
 4 TcInit(V ) ; TcAdd(Eabd ) ;            // Initialize transitive cover data structure
 5 while ε > 0 do
                n                          o
 6     Eess ← e ∈ EP : Γ−5 ε ≤ ufe < Γε ;                                    // Essential arcs
 7     Ress ← roots of components with essential arcs incident;
                                                       n                         o
 8     if {e ∈ EP : ufe < Γ−5 ε} ̸= ∅ then δ1 ← n2 max ufe : e ∈ EP , ufe < Γ−5 ε ;
 9     else δ1 ← 0 ;
10     (Ḡ, ū, H) ← CreateAuxInstance(Ress , Eess ) ;
11     if s, t ∈ Ress then
12         (y, e⋆ ) ← ApproxFlow(Ḡ, ū, Γ5 );                     // see Definition 2.7
                          y
13         δ2 ← |E(Ḡ)|ūe⋆ ;
14         for e ∈ Eess do SendFlow(e, ye )                              // Add y to flow ;
                                                ←−
           for e = (i, j) ∈ H do E ← E ⊎ {e, e } ; ue ← ∞ ; u e ← 0 ; fe ← ye ; f←
15                                                           ←−                  e ←0 ;
                                                                                 −

16     else δ2 ← 0;
17     δ ← δ1 + δ 2 ;                                     // current flow is δ-optimal
18     PostProcess(δ, (Eess \ Ebound ) ⊎ H) ;
19     E ← E \ {e, ←  −
                      e : e ∈ H, fe = 0} ;    // Keep only new arcs with positive flow
20     Fe ← Fe ∪ (H ∩ supp(f )) ;
21     ε ← 2n2 δ ;
22     Update Eabd , Efree , P, EP and R ;
23     J ← set of newly abundant arcs ; TcAdd(J \ H) ;      // Update transitive cover
24     for k removed from R do RemoveRoot(k);
25 RerouteShortcut(Fs ) ;
26 L ← TcWitList(·) ;
                             ←
                             −
27 h ← WitRoute(L, f |Eabd , H ) ;                      // Map flow     back to original arcs
28 for e ∈ E ◦ do fe⋆ ← he if e ∈ Eabd and fe⋆ ← fe if e ∈
                                                         / Eabd ;
29 return f ⋆




5    The Maximum Flow Meta-Algorithm
Algorithm 1 takes a bounded input instance (G◦ , u◦ ) with G◦ = (V, E ◦ ). In every iteration it
maintains an admissible extension (G, u) = (G◦ , u◦ ) ⊕ (Fe , Fs ); we let E = E(G). Here, Fe is a set
of newly added arcs with ue = ∞, u←    e = 0; these will be called extension arcs. The arcs Fs have
                                       −
ue = u← −
        e =  ∞  and  will be called shortcut arcs; their role will be explained below. The node set
remains V (G) = V throughout.
    At the beginning of every iteration, we have a valid iterate (f, r, ε, R). The iterate at the
beginning of every iteration will be a valid successor of the iterates from all previous iterations. A
crucial subroutine is the approximate flow solver ApproxFlow(·) as in Definition 2.7.

                                                 24
     Throughout, we maintain the partition P = P(f, ε), the arc sets EP = EP (f, ε) and Eabd =
Eabd (f, ε). We also maintain pointers root(i) ∈ R such that i ∈ Proot(i) . In accordance with
Lemma 4.10, the set of abundant and free arcs may only be extended, and consequently, P may
only become coarser.
     In each of the components, we maintain a spanning subgraph Ti formed by abundant arcs. If
i∈ / {s, t}, then Ti will be a bidirected spanning tree formed by abundant arcs. That is, (j, k) ∈ Ti
if and only if (k, j) ∈ Ti , and the pairs of reverse arcs form a spanning tree. For i = s, Ts contains
an out-arboresence of abundant arcs from s, and the reverse abundant arcs of some of these arcs.
Similarly, for i = t, Tt contains an in-arboresence of abundant arcs to t, and the reverse abundant
arcs of some of the arcs.
     In Section 6.7, we show how the components and spanning subgraphs can be efficiently main-
tained throughout the algorithm in total time Õ(m).
     We also maintain a transitive cover data structure on (V, Eabd ) as in Definition 3.4 with subrou-
tines TcInit(·), TcAdd(·), TcCover(·), and TcWitList(·). These subroutines will be given in Section 7.
We will use different implementations for different subclasses of graphs. The subroutine WitRoute
is described in Section 5.2.
     We start by explaining some additional concepts and invariants used in the algorithm, and then
give a high level overview. Section 5.1 presents the main subroutines.
Shortcut arcs. Throughout, for each node i ∈       / R, we keep arcs (i, root(i)) in the shortcut arc set
Fs with ue = u← e = ∞. These arcs enable sending flow directly between a node and the root node
                −
of its component. Adding them does not change the flow value of the instance, since they are inside
free components (see Lemma 4.4). Moreover, these arcs will not be added to the transitive cover
data structure, and hence they do not need to be consistent with the specific graph structure such
as bounded tree-depth.
    These new arcs will be added when updating the components Pf,ε . When two components Pi
and Pj are merged, and |Pi | ≥ |Pj |, then we pick i to be the root of Pi ∪ Pj , unless j ∈ {s, t}. We
add new infinite capacity (k, i) and (i, k) arcs for all k ∈ Pj . The size of the component containing a
node k doubles each time root(k) changes until root(k) ∈ {s, t}, after which point it will not change
anymore. Consequently, |Fs | = O(n log n) throughout the algorithm.
Algorithm overview. The algorithm starts with the initialization subroutine Initialize that re-
turns an initial valid iterate (f, r, ε, R) with R = V . Note that simply setting f ≡ 0 may violate
Definition 4.6(C). We define the initial flow such that ufe = 0 or uf← −
                                                                       e
                                                                          = 0 for all arcs not incident
to s or t. This, as well as the other subroutines, are described in Section 5.1. Throughout, the
instance (G, u) and valid iterate (f, r, ε, R) are global variables that can be accessed and changed
in the subroutines.
    The main while cycle of the algorithm runs until ε = 0. At this point, f is a maximum flow in
the current instance (G, u). We then transform it to a maximum flow in the input instance (G◦ , u◦ )
as follows. First, RerouteShortcut(Fs ) reroutes the flow from the shortcut arcs to the spanning
subgraphs Ti inside each component. We call TcWitList(·) to create a path-structured witness list
L with E(L) ⊆ Eabd (see Definition 3.2). The subroutine WitRoute(.) uses this to reroute the flow
from the extension arcs to original arcs. We thus obtain a maximum flow f ⋆ in the input instance
(G◦ , u◦ ).
    We now describe the main while cycle. We let Eess and Ress denote the sets of essential arcs
and essential roots as in Definition 4.7. We define δ1 as n2 times the largest residual arc capacity
below the essential threshold Γ−5 ε.

                                                   25
     The subroutine CreateAuxInstance(Ress , Eess ) returns an auxiliary instance (Ḡ, ū) along with a
special arc set H ⊆ E(Ḡ). We call the transitive cover data structure to obtain a transitive cover
(V ′ , H) of Ress . The node set will be V̄ = V ′ ∪ V (Eess ), i.e., also including the endpoints of all
essential arcs. The arc set of Ḡ comprises of H, Eess , as well as the shortcut arcs between non-root
nodes i ∈ V̄ and the corresponding root(i).
     We call the approximate solver ApproxFlow(Ḡ, ū, Γ5 ) to obtain an approximate flow y and e⋆
such that y is δ2 -optimal in (Ḡ, ū) and δ2 ≤ Γ−5 ν(Ḡ, ū) for δ2 = |E(Ḡ)|ūfe⋆ . We (temporarily) add
the arc set H to our instance, and add y to the original flow f . In case s or t was not in Ress , we
skip these steps, keep f unchanged, and set δ2 = 0. In both cases, we set δ = δ1 + δ2 ; the current
flow f will be δ-optimal.
     We now call PostProcess(δ, (Eess \ Ebound ) ⊎ H). This is needed in order to restore the invariants
in Definition 4.6. In particular, for every arc e ∈ (Eess \ Ebound ) ⊎ H, we change the flow and set
safety capacities to satisfy either ufe = 0, or uf←
                                                  −
                                                  e
                                                    = 0, or ufe > re + δ and uf←     −
                                                                                     e
                                                                                       > re + δ. We set the
new value ε = 2n δ. 2

     We then remove all new arcs e ∈ H from E that do not carry flow, i.e., fe = 0. We update the
extension arc set Fe by adding H ∩ supp(f ) as the set of new arcs kept in the instance. We update
the set of abundant and free arcs, and free components. In the transitive cover data structure,
we add all new abundant arcs outside H (note that every e ∈ H was itself returned by the data
structure). The details of how these can be efficiently maintained are deferred to Section 6.7. For
all nodes k that are removed from R, we call the subroutine RemoveRoot(k). Let j be the new root
of k. We add new shortcut arcs (i, j) to Fs for every node i whose root changed from k to j. If
0 < ufsk < 2ε then (s, k) gets saturated, and if 0 < ufkt < 2ε then (k, t) gets saturated. Note that
arcs with ufsk > 2ε or ufkt > 2ε will become gap arcs in the next iteration.
5.1    Main subroutines
Initialization. The subroutine Initialize outputs a valid iterate (f, r, ε, R). In order to satisfy
Definition 4.6(C), we initialize in a way that either ufe = 0 or uf←   −
                                                                       e
                                                                         = 0 for all arcs not incident to s
or t.
    Namely, for every arc e ∈ E(G) not incident to s or t with ue = ∞, we set fe = 0 and f←        e = u←
                                                                                                   −      e.
                                                                                                          −
Recall that we require that at least one of ue and u←  −
                                                       e is finite for  every arc in an instance; thus, this
applies for at most one of e and ←  −
                                    e for each pair of arcs. For all pairs of arcs with ue , u← e < ∞, we
                                                                                                −
pick arbitrarily one arc in the pair, say e, and set fe = 0, f←  e = u←
                                                                 −       e.
                                                                         −
    Finally, for each i ∈ V (G) \ {s, t}, we set fsi = usi , fit = uit , and set at mostPone of the flow
values fti and fis to nonzero so that flow conservation is satisfied at i. We set ε = e∈E(G):ue <∞ ue
as the sum of all finite capacities and r = uf .
    By this choice of ε, the only abundant arcs those with ue = ∞. By the assumption that at most
one of e and ← −
               e can be infinite, there are no free arcs after initialization. and also no abundant arcs
leaving s or entering t. Thus, all free components are singletons and we accordingly set R = V .
The SendFlow subroutine. Recall that the graph is symmetric, and the residual capacities are
defined by taking both fe and f←e into account. For e ∈ E(G) and α ≥ 0 and a flow f in an instance
                                −
(G, u), the subroutine SendFlow(e, α) changes these flows so that fe − f←e increases by α. Namely,
                                                                         −
it decreases f←
              −
              e to α ′ = min{f←
                              −
                              e , α}, and increases fe to f e + α − α ′.

    This and subsequent subroutines are shown in Algorithm 2. We note that in this and other
subroutines, the instance (G, u) is implicitly taken as the instance where the flow f is defined,
which should always be clear from the context.

                                                    26
 Algorithm 2: Subroutines in Algorithm 1
 1 Procedure SendFlow(e, α)
 2   α′ ← min{f← e , α} ;
                 −
 3   f←−
       e ← f←−
             e − α′ ; fe ← f←
                            e +α−α
                            −      ′

 4 Procedure Saturate(e = (i, j))
 5   δ ← ufe ; fe ← ue ; f←
                          e ←0 ;
                          −
 6   p ← root(i) ; q ← root(j) ;
 7    if p ̸= i then SendFlow((p, i), δ);
 8    if q ̸= j then SendFlow((j, q), δ);
 9    if p ∈/ {s, t} then SendFlow((s, p), min{δ, ufsp }) and SendFlow((t, p), max{0, δ − ufsp }) ;
10    if q ∈/ {s, t} then SendFlow((q, t), min{δ, ufqt }) and SendFlow((q, s), max{0, δ − ufqt }) ;
11 Procedure CreateAuxInstance(Ress , Eess )
12   (V ′ , H) ← TcCover(Ress ) ;
13   V̄ ← V (Eess ) ∪ V ′ ;
14    Ē ← Eess ;
15    for e ∈ Ē do ūe ← re ;
16    for e ∈ H do Ē ← Ē ⊎ {e, ←   −
                                     e } ; ūe ← ∞ ; ū←   e ←0 ;
                                                           −
17                         ′
      for i ∈ V (Eess ) \ V do
18       Ē ← Ē ⊎ {(i, root(i)), (root(i), i)} ; ūi root(i) ← ∞ ; ūroot(i)i ← ∞
19    return (Ḡ, ū, H) where Ḡ = (V̄ , Ē).
20 Procedure PostProcess(δ, E ′ )
21   for e ∈ E ′ do
22        if 0 < uf←
                   −
                   e
                     < 2δ and ufe > 0 then
23            Saturate(←
                       −
                       e);
24            re ← min{ufe , 3δ} ; r←
                                    e ←0
                                    −

25        else re ← min{ufe , δ} ;




                                                   27
 Algorithm 3: Additional subroutines in Algorithm 1
 1 Procedure RemoveRoot(k)
 2     j ← root(k) ;                                                                     // new root
 3     for i whose root changed from k to j do
 4        E ← E ∪ {(i, j), (j, i)} ; Fs ← Fs ∪ {(i, j)} ;
 5        uij , uji , rij , rji ← ∞ ; fij , fji ← 0 ;
 6     if 0 < ufsk < 2ε then Saturate((s, k));
 7     if 0 < ufkt < 2ε then Saturate((k, t));
 8          / {s, t} then Join the tree Tk to Tj by a pair of abundant arcs between them;
       if j ∈
 9     if j = s then Merge Ts and Tk by adding an abundant arc from Ts to Tk ;
10     if j = t then Merge Tt and Tk by adding an abundant arc from Tk to Tt ;
11 Procedure RerouteShortcut(F )
12     for i ∈ V do d(i) ← 0;
13     for e = (i, j) ∈ F do
14                            e ;
          d(i) ← d(i) + fe − f←
                              −
15        d(j) ← d(j) − fe + f←e ;
                               −

16     for k ∈ R do
17        Select a leaf i of the underlying undirected tree of Tk ;
18        if d(i) > 0 and k ̸= s then
19            Let e = (i, j) be an outgoing arc in Tk ;
20            fe ← fe + d(i) ; d(j) ← d(j) + d(i) ;
21         if d(i) > 0 and k = s then fis ← fis + d(i) ;
22         if d(i) < 0 and k ̸= t then
23             Let e = (j, i) be an incoming arc in Tk ;
24             fe ← fe − d(i) ; d(j) ← d(j) − d(i) ;
25         if d(i) < 0 and k = t then fti ← fti − d(i) ;
26         Remove the leaf i and the incident arcs in Tk and iterate ;



The Saturate(·) subroutine. The subroutine Saturate(e) takes an arc e = (i, j) in the instance
(G, u) with the flow f . It saturates the arc e in f to attain ufe = 0, by sending flow from s/t to t/s
on paths via e. More precisely, let p = root(i) and q = root(j). We let δ = ufe , and set fe = ue ,
                                                                                  def



  e = 0. If p ∈   / {s, t}, then we send δ ′ = min{δ, ufsp } units of flow on (s, p), and δ − δ ′ units on
                                             def
f←−
(t, p). If p ̸= i, we send δ units on the shortcut arc (p, i). Similarly, if q ̸= j, then we send δ units
on the shortcut arc (j, q), and if q ∈ / {s, t}, then we send δ ′′ = min{δ, ufqt } units of flow on (q, t),
                                                                   def


and δ − δ ′′ units on (q, s).
Creating the auxiliary instance. The subroutine CreateAuxInstance(Ress , Eess ) returns an in-
stance (Ḡ, ū) with Ḡ = (V̄ , Ē) and an arc set H. We call TcCover(Ress ) from the transitive closure
data structure, to obtain a transitive cover (V ′ , H) of Ress , and let V̄ = Ress ∪ V (Eess ).
    We then obtain the arc set Ē and capacities ū as follows. Each arc e ∈ Eess is included with
ūe = re . For every e ∈ H, we include e, ←     −
                                                e ∈ Ē with ūe = ∞, ū←   e = 0. Finally, for all nodes
                                                                           −
i ∈ V̄ \ R, we include the shortcut arcs (i, root(i)) and (root(i), i) with infinite capacity. Note that


                                                    28
by the definition of Ress , for every e = (i, j) ∈ Eess , we have root(i), root(j) ∈ Ress ⊆ V̄ .
Postprocessing. The subroutine PostProcess(δ, E ′ ) adjusts the flow and safe capacities for δ > 0
and an arc set E ′ as follows. We process the arcs in E ′ one-by-one. If e ∈ E ′ has 0 < uf←  −
                                                                                              e
                                                                                                < 2δ and
  f                              ←−
ue > 0, then we call Saturate( e ) to set u← f
                                                = 0. For such arcs, we set the safe capacity re as the
                                             −e
               f
minimum of ue = ue + u e and 3δ, and the safe capacity of the reverse arc as r←
                           ←
                           −                                                         e = 0. For arcs not
                                                                                     −
meeting this criterion, we set re = δ.
    Note that the order in which a pair of arcs e and ←     −
                                                            e are processed may lead to a different
                            f   f
outcome. If initially 0 < ue , u←
                                −e
                                                      f
                                   < 2δ, then we set u←
                                                      −e
                                                         = 0 if e is processed first, and ufe = 0 if ←
                                                                                                     −
                                                                                                     e is
processed first. However, note that the flow on a pair of arcs will be changed at most once, either
for e or for ←
             −
             e.
Removing a Root. The subroutine RemoveRoot(k) (see Algorithm 3) is performed after the
component of a root k is merged into another component, and hence k leaves R. Let j = root(k)
be its new root. For every node i whose root has changed from k to j, we add a new shortcut arc
(i, j) along with the reverse (j, i), both with capacity ∞. Finally, if ufsk or ufkt is positive but less
than 2ε, we saturate these arcs. Note that by Definition 4.6(D), at most one of these flows could
have been positive. We merge Tk into Tj , connecting them by a pair of newly free arcs if j ∈    / {s, t}.
If j = s, then we merge Tk to Ts by an abundant arc from Ts to Tk . Similarly, if j = t, then we
merge Tk to Tt by an abundant arc from Tk to Tt .
Rerouting flow from shortcut arcs. After the end of the while cycle, RerouteShortcut(F ) is
called to reroute the flow from the shortcut arc set F = Fs to the abundant trees Tj . First, we
create a vector d(i) aggregating the total outgoing minus incomig flow on shortcut arcs at i. This
is obtained by making a pass through F , and for each e = (i, j) ∈ F , increasing d(i) by fe − f←  e,
                                                                                                   −
and decreasing d(j) by the same amount.
    We then consider the spanning subgraphs Tk one-by-one. In the underlying tree, we start from
a leaf i. Assume d(i) > 0. If i ̸= s, then there is an outgoing arc e = (i, j) in Tk . We increase fe
by d(i), set d(j) to d(i) + d(j). If i = s, we send d(i) units on e = (i, s). We update analogously
if d(i) < 0. We then remove i and the incident arcs and iterate, until all nodes in Pk = V (Tk ) are
processed.
5.2    Rerouting using witness lists
We now provide and analyze WitRoute(·), a procedure that is used in the final flow rerouting step.
The algorithm is described in Algorithm 4 and its main guarantees are provided later in Lemma 6.8
in Section 6.3. WitRoute takes as input a witness list, i.e., L = (ai , bi , wi )i∈[K] ∈ W(V) (see
Definition 3.2), assignments of real values to the transitive arcs of L, i.e., f ∈ RE∗ (L) , and a subset
of the arcs of L which we call reverse arcs, i.e., R ⊆ E(L). It is required that every reverse arc is
valid in the sense that each (ai , bi ) ∈ R, is preceded by its reverse in the witness list (hence the
term reverse arc). (However, every arc with this property need not be in R).

Definition 5.1 (Valid Reverse Arcs). For finite set V and L = (ai , bi , wi )i∈[K] ∈ W(V), R ⊆ E(L)
are valid reverse arcs (of L) if for all (ai , bi ) ∈ R there exists ji ∈ [i − 1] with (bji , aji ) = (bi , ai ).

    In the context of Algorithm 1, L will be a witness list formed by abundant arcs, and R is the
    ←−
set H , i.e., the reverses of extension arcs. As it is applied WitRoute(·) then modifies the flow on
abundant arcs only; note that the non-abundant arcs are not included in the ITCO.



                                                       29
    Algorithm 4: Routing: WitRoute(L, f, R)
 1 Finite set V ;                                                                       // global variables
 2 function WitRoute(L = (ai , bi , wi )i∈[K] ∈ W(V), f ∈ RE∗ (L) , R ⊆ E(L)):
 3      g ← f;
 4      for i = K to 1 do
 5         if (ai , bi ) ∈ R then g(bi ,ai ) ← g(bi ,ai ) − g(ai ,bi ) and then g(ai ,bi ) ← 0 ;
 6         if (ai , bi ) ∈
                         / E(L) then
 7             g(ai ,wi ) ← g(ai ,wi ) + g(ai ,bi ) and g(wi ,bi ) ← g(wi ,bi ) + g(ai ,bi ) ;
 8             g(ai ,bi ) ← 0 ;

 9      return g;



    More generally, WitRoute(·) iterates over the transitive arcs of L from (aL , bL ) to (a1 , b1 ) and
modifies f in two cases for the current iterate (ai , bi , wi ). If (ai , bi ) ∈ R, then the f(ai ,bi ) is removed
from (ai , bi ) and added to (bi , ai ). If this is not the case and (ai , bi ) ∈  / E(L), then f(ai ,bi ) is removed
from (ai , bi ) and added to each edge in walkL (ai , bi ) instead (counting multiplicity). In other words,
the procedure routes f on reverse arcs backwards and reroutes f on all other transitive arcs over a
path on the arcs of the graph. Since the reverse arcs are valid, whenever f is routed from reverse
arc (ai , bi ) to (bi , ai ) if (bi , ai ) is transitive, it is later routed over walkL (bi , ai ). Consequently, the
result of WitRoute(·) only has non-zero values of f on arcs of E(L) and can essentially be viewed as
rerouting f from reverse and transitive arcs onto E(L).
    Naïvely, implementing WitRoute(·) could be computationally expensive. A single walkL (·) can
be computed O(K) time and computing this for every transitive arc of L can be done in O(K 2 )
time. Instead, every iteration the implementation of WitRoute(·) in Algorithm 4 just removes f(ai ,bi )
from arc (ai , bi ) as needed and either adds it to (bi , ai ) or (ai , wi ) and (wi , bi ) as appropriate. This
procedure is easily implementable in O(K) and we prove in Lemma 6.8 that it has the same effect
as what is described in the preceding paragraph.

6     Analyzing the Maximum Flow Framework
Recall that for the input instance (G◦ , u◦ ), we have n = |V (G◦ )| and m = |E(G◦ )|. We assume
n ≥ 4. We further let mc denote the number of nodes and arcs with positive, finite capacity. denote
the number of finite capacity pairs of arcs plus the number of nodes. We introduce the following
notation:

     • Let Tsolv (m̃) denote the total running time of a sequence of calls to ApproxFlow on graphs with
       a total number of arcs at most m̃ and M = m̃O(1) . We also assume Tsolv (O(m̃)) = Ω(m̃).
       According to Theorem 2.9, there is a solver with Tsolv (m̃) = O(m̃1+o(1) ).

     • Let TCtime (n, g, h) be runtime of the transitive cover data structure and let TCarcs (n, g, h)
       be the total number of arcs output by transitive cover queries, for g additions and transitive
       cover queries on node sets of total size h, and final calls to TcWitList(·) and WitRoute(·).

We are ready to state the main theorem on the correctness and running time bounds on Algorithm 1.



                                                          30
Theorem 6.1. Algorithm 1 correctly terminates with a maximum flow in the input instance (G◦ , u◦ )
on n nodes, m arcs, and a total of mc nodes and arcs with positive, finite capacity. The following
bounds hold:

  (i) The total number of extension arcs Fe added to the instance throughout is at most 2n, and the
      total number of shortcut arcs Fs is at most O(n log n).

 (ii) The total number of essential arcs throughout all iterations is O(mc ).

(iii) Throughout Algorithm 1, the total number of arcs added in TcAdd is O(m). The total number
      of nodes queried in TcCover is O(mc ).

(iv) Algorithm 1 can be implemented in time

              TCtime (n, O(m), O(mc )) + O (Tsolv (O(mc )) + TCarcs (n, O(m), O(mc ))) + Õ(m) .

 (v) Algorithm 1 is strongly polynomial. For rational input, all values of f , ε, and r remain
     polynomially bounded in the input encoding length.

Notation Throughout the analysis, we use the following notation. Let T denote the total number
of calls to the while cycle. For τ = 1, 2, . . . , T , we let (G(τ ) , u(τ ) ) denote the instance (G, u) at the
beginning of the τ -th call of the main while cycle with E (τ ) = E(G(τ ) ), and let (f (τ ) , r(τ ) , ε(τ ) , R(τ ) )
denote the corresponding valid iterate. For τ = T + 1, let (f (T +1) , r(T +1) , ε(T +1) , R(T +1) ) be the
                                                                (τ )                                     (τ )
iterate at the end of the final while cycle. We let Eess denote the significant arc set, Ress the set
of essential roots, (Ḡ(τ ) , ū(τ ) ) the auxiliary instance. In particular, (G(1) , u(1) ) = (G◦ , u◦ ). Further,
                                                           (τ )
let H (τ ) denote the set H returned by TcCover(Ress ) in iteration τ .
    We say that an arc is a boundary, gap, or essential arc, or that a node is essential in a certain
iteration if it belongs to the corresponding set at the start of this iteration.
6.1    Maintaining valid iterates
We show that all (f (τ ) , r(τ ) , ε(τ ) , R(τ ) ) are valid iterates and moreover valid successors to each other.
The key step is showing that this property is maintained in every iteration.

Lemma 6.2. Assume (f, r, ε, R) is a valid iterate in (G, u) at the beginning of the while cycle of
Algorithm 1, and let (f ′ , r′ , ε′ , R′ ) denote the corresponding quantities at the beginning of the next
iteration in the instance (G′ , u′ ). Then, (f ′ , r′ , ε′ , R′ ) is a valid iterate that is a valid successor of
(f, r, ε, R). Moreover, the following stronger version of Definition 4.9(B) holds:

(B’) For every e ∈ E(G), fe′ − fe + f←                  −3                       ′
                                     e ≤ min{re , ε} + Γ ε, and for every e ∈ E(G ) \ E(G),
                                     −
     fe′ ≤ 2ε.

    The proof of Lemma 6.2 follows the statement and proof of our next lemma, which bounds the
value of the auxiliary instance.

Lemma 6.3. Given an instance (G, u) with a valid iterate (f, n r, ε, R), n
                                                                         let Ress be the setoo
                                                                                             of essential
                                                                  2         f     f     −5
nodes; let Eess be the set of essential arcs and let δ1 = max 0, n max ue : ue < Γ ε . For the
instance (Ḡ, ū) returned by CreateAuxInstance(G, u, r, Ress , Eess ), val(Ḡ, ū) ≥ val(G, uf ) − δ1 holds.
If s ∈
     / Ress or t ∈/ Ress , then val(Ḡ, ū) = 0.


                                                         31
Proof. Recall that by the definition of safe capacities, we have val(G, uf ) = val(G, r). First, let
(G′ , u′ ) denote the graph obtained from (G, r) by the following steps. First, delete all arcs e ∈ E
such that ue + u←                                                           ←
                                                                            −                        f
                     e < Γ ε. Next, for all arcs e ∈ E such that e ∈ Eabd (f, ε) and ue < Γ ε, set
                     −      −5                                                                              −5

u′e = 0. Further, for every abundant arc e, let us set u′e = ∞. Finally, for every other arc, we let
    def                                                           def


u′e = re .
    def


     We claim that val(G, uf ) ≥ val(G′ , u′ ) ≥ val(G, uf ) − δ1 . The lower bound follows since δ1
is an upper bound on the total amount of capacity decrease. The upper bound holds since we
only increased the capacity of abundant arcs, that could not have crossed any minimum cut in G
according to Proposition 4.2. Note that at this point, every arc e incident to a node V \ V (Eess )
will have capacity ue = ∞ or ue = 0.
     The auxiliary instance (Ḡ, ū) can be obtained from (G′ , u′ ) by restricting the node set from V
to V̄ that contains Ress , removing all arcs with ūe = ∞, and adding a transitive cover H for Ress .
Further, we keep the shortcut arcs (i, root(i)) and (root(i), i) for every i ∈ V̄ \ R. The proof is
complete by showing that val(Ḡ, ū) = val(G′ , u′ ).
     First, we show val(Ḡ, ū) ≤ val(G′ , u′ ). Deleting nodes and arcs may only decrease the flow value.
All new arcs added will be from the transitive closure of abundant arcs. By Proposition 4.2, these
new arcs cannot cross any minimum s–t-cut in G′ .
     Next, let us show val(Ḡ, ū) ≥ val(G′ , u′ ). Let S̄ ⊆ V̄ be a minimum s–t-cut in G′ such that |S̄|
is as small as possible, and let S be the set of nodes reachable from S̄ in V using ∞-capacity arcs
in G′ .
     Let us first define S ′ ⊆ S̄ as the set reachable on ∞-capacity arcs from S̄ ∩ Ress . The set S ′
clearly includes V (Eess ) ∩ S̄. We claim that S ′ = S̄. For a contradiction, assume that S̄ \ S ′ ̸= ∅.
Since (S̄ \ S ′ ) ∩ V (Eess ) = ∅, all arcs e incident to S̄ \ S ′ must have ūe = ∞ or ūe = 0. As no arc
with ∞ capacity leaves S ′ , it follows that ū(S̄, V̄ \ S̄) = ū(S ′ , V̄ \ S ′ ), a contradiction to the minimal
choice of S̄.
     Thus, S ′ = S̄. Next, we claim that t ∈     / S, i.e., S is an s–t cut in V . Using that S̄ = S ′ , every
path from S̄ to t can be extended to a path from a node i ∈ S̄ ∩ Ress to t. By the transitive cover
property, H must also contain an i–t path of arcs with ∞ capacity, a contradiction to val(Ḡ, ū) < ∞.
     Consequently, S is an s–t cut in (G′ , u′ ). Using again that all arcs incident to V \ V (Eess ) have
capacity 0 or ∞, it follows that u′ (S, V \ S̄) = ū(S̄, V \ S̄), proving that val(Ḡ, ū) ≥ val(G′ , u′ ).
     Finally, if s ∈/ Ress , then val(Ḡ, ū) = 0 follows because ū(∂Ē (Ps ∩ V̄ , V̄ \ Ps ) = 0. This follows
because according to Definition 4.5, no abundant arc is leaving Ps , and therefore we deleted all
outgoing arcs from Ps when creating (G′ , u′ ). The analogous argument holds for t ∈               / Ress .

Proof of Lemma 6.2. First, note that the new instance (G′ , u′ ) is a valid extension of (G, u). This
follows by Lemma 4.4, noting that all new arcs added either come from the transitive cover output
H, or are shortcut arcs added inside free components. In particular, ν(G′ , u′ ) = ν(G, u).
    Next, we show that (f ′ , r′ , ε′ , R′ ) is a valid iterate in (G′ , u′ ). If s ∈/ Ress or t ∈ / Ress , then
δ2 = 0 is set, and f is δ = δ1 -optimal by the last part of Lemma 6.3. Otherwise, let (y, e⋆ ) be the
                       ′

output of ApproxFlow(Ḡ, ū, Γ5 ), δ = |E(Ḡ)|ūye⋆ , and let fˆ be a flow obtained from f after adding y
(lines 14–15). First, we show that fˆ is δ-optimal for δ = δ1 + δ2 .
    By Lemma 6.3, val(Ḡ, ū) ≥ val(G, uf )−δ1 . By the definition of ApproxFlow(Ḡ, ū, Γ5 ), the output
(y, e⋆ ) is such that y is a δ2 -optimal flow in (Ḡ, ū) for δ2 = |E(Ḡ)|uye⋆ , that is, val(y) ≥ ν(Ḡ, ū) − δ2 .
Thus, after adding y to f , the current flow fˆ will δ-optimal for δ = δ1 + δ2 .
    In PostProcess(·), we consider the arc set (Eess \ Ebound ) ⊎ H, and change the flow by at most 2δ


                                                        32
on each arc, which may decrease the flow value by at most 2δ each time. This happens to at most
one among each pair e, ←  −
                          e of arcs, and the instance may contain at most two parallel set of pairs
between any two nodes. Thus, the total change is at most 2δn(n − 1), showing that the flow after
PostProcess(·) is (2n2 δ)-optimal. In RemoveRoot(i), we may only saturate (s, i) or (i, t); this may
only increase the flow value. Consequently, f ′ is ε′ -optimal for ε′ = 2n2 δ, verifying Definition 4.6(A).
    Next we show Definition 4.6(B), namely that r′ is a safe capacity vector. Before PostProcess(·),
we had a δ-optimal flow fˆ, meaning that there is a maximum flow f ⋆ with fe⋆ ≤ fˆe − fˆ←    e + δ for each
                                                                                             −
e ∈ E (Lemma 2.4). The safe capacity vector r is defined in PostProcess(·) for all arcs in E ∪ H;
                                                     ′

for the shortcut arcs added to Fs in RemoveRoot(·), the safe capacity is set to ∞. In PostProcess(·),
we change fˆ to f ′ such that |fˆe − fˆ←     ′    ′ )| ≤ 2δ for each arc e, and then set the safe capacity
                                       e − (fe − f←
                                       −          −
                                                  e
                     ′                                                                ′
as r = min{3δ, ue }. If f = fe , then the safe capacity is set as r′ = min{δ, ufe }. In both cases we
    e
     ′             f       ′
                              e
                                 ˆ
                                                                               e
see that fe∗ ≤ fe′ − f←
                      ′ + r ′ on every arc.
                      −
                      e    e
    Definition 4.6(C) is immediate by the execution of PostProcess(·), noting that δ < 2Γ−2 ε. In
RemoveRoot(i), flow will only change on boundary and shortcut arcs, an after the execution of this
subroutine, ufe > 0 for e = (s, i) or e = (i, t) only if ufe ≥ 2ε.
    Definition 4.6(D) holds for f , that is, ufsi = 0 or ufit = 0 for every i ∈ V . According to
Lemma 2.2(ii), y obtained in ApproxFlow does not send flow to s or from t, and therefore adding y
to f maintains this property. It is easy to see that this property is also maintained throughout the
subroutines PostProcess(·) and RemoveRoot(·). Finally, Definition 4.6(E) clearly holds for R′ .
    It remains to show that (f ′ , r′ , ε′ , R′ ) is a valid successor of (f, r, ε, R), with the stronger property
(B’). The bound ε′ ≤ Γ−3 ε follows since δ = δ1 +δ2 ≤ n2 Γ−5 ε+Γ−5 ε ≤ Γ−4 ε, and ε′ = 2n2 δ ≤ Γ−3 ε.
    To verify (B’), first, note that that ye ≤ min{re , ε} on every arc by the definition of (Ḡ, ū) and
Lemma 2.2(i). Subsequently, PostProcess(·) saturates arcs of residual capacity less than 2δ. The
operations in Saturate(·) may thus send in total at most 2n2 δ ≤ Γ−3 ε units of flow on shortcut
and boundary arcs. For new arcs e ∈ H added in E(G′ ) \ E(G), we have fe′ ≤ ye ≤ ε, noting also
that PostProcess(·) may only decrease the flow on such arcs. Finally, for the shortcut arcs added
in RemoveRoot(·) may only carry at most 2ε units of flow. The above observartions together imply
property (B’).

    We can now easily derive the following:
Lemma 6.4. For t = 1, 2, . . . , T +1, (f (τ ) , r(τ ) , ε(τ ) , R(τ ) ) is a valid iterate in the instance (G(τ ) , u(τ ) ),
                                        ′         ′                                                          ′       ′      ′  ′
and for each τ < τ ′ ≤ T +1, (G(τ ) , u(τ ) ) is an admissible extension of (G(τ ) , u(τ ) ), and (f (τ ) , r(τ ) , ε(τ ) , R(τ ) )
is a valid successor of (f (τ ) , r(τ ) , ε(τ ) , R(τ ) ).
Proof. Lemma 6.2 already shows that all these are valid iterates, and the valid successor property
for consecutive iterates τ ′ = τ + 1, with the stronger property (B’). The only remaining property to
show is Definition 4.9(B) for τ ′ > τ +1. This follows by using (B’) for all consecutive iterates between
τ and τ ′ , and that ε decreases at least by a factor Γ−3 between any two consecutive iterations.

    The next lemma states that input arcs with infinite capacity not incident to s or t remain at
the other capacity boud throughout the while cycle of the algorithm. We note that their flow may
be changed in the very final step, when RerouteShortcut and WitRoute reroute the flow to original
arcs from the shortcut arcs and the transitive closure arcs, respectively.
                                                                                                           (τ )
Lemma 6.5. For every arc e = (i, j) ∈ E ◦ with ue = ∞, {i, j} ∩ {s, t} = ∅, we have uf←
                                                                                      −
                                                                                      e
                                                                                        = 0 for
all τ = 1, 2, . . . , T .

                                                          33
Proof. This property holds in Initialize. In all subsequent iterations, note that such an arc e will
never be essential, since ue + u← e = ∞. The auxiliary graphs (Ḡ, ū) will only contain essential arcs
                                  −
and arcs from the set H. All arcs in H that carry flow will be added to Fe as new extension arcs.9
Since e is not a boundary arc nor a shortcut arc, the subroutines PostProcess(·) or RemoveRoot(·)
will not use it to route flow in calls to Saturate(·). Thus, uf←
                                                               −
                                                               e
                                                                 = 0 is maintained through each while
cycle.

Lemma 6.6. Let e be a shortcut arc added in RemoveRoot(·) at the end of iteration τ . Then,
 (τ ′ )
fe ≤ 4ε(τ +1) in all iterations τ ′ > τ .

Proof. At the point where e is added as a shortcut arc, we already set ε = ε(τ +1) as the new value.
RemoveRoot(i) may send at most 2ε(τ +1) units of flow on the newly added shortcut arcs (i, root(i))
                        (τ +1)
or (root(i), i). Thus, fe      ≤ 2ε(t+1) . This may subsequently change by at most 2ε(τ +1) according
to Lemma 6.4 and Definition 4.9(B).

6.2      Bounding the number extension arcs
We are ready to show Theorem 6.1(i).

Lemma 6.7. The total number of extension arcs Fe added to the instance throughout is 2n, and
the total number of shortcut arcs Fs is at most n log2 n.

Proof. Since the flow y returned by ApproxFlowis a basic acylic flow, by Lemma 2.2(iii), in every
iteration the set of arcs e ∈ H with ye > 0 is a forest. This is a superset of the new arcs added to
Fe in this iteration. Moreover, all new arcs added will be gap arcs or free arcs in the next iteration,
according to Lemma 6.4 and Lemma 4.10. Consequently, if γ (τ ) new arcs are added to Fe in iteration
τ , then the number ofP components decreases by at least γ (τ ) between iterations τ and τ + 2. Hence,
we can bound |Fe | = Tτ=1 γ (τ ) ≤ 2n.
     The bound on the number of shortcut arcs follows because every time a non-root node i is
connected to a new root j by a new shortcut arc (i, j), we have that either j ∈ {s, t}, in which case
root(i) will not change anymore, or |Proot(i) | has doubled by the choice that we always keep the
root of the larger component when merging components. Hence, at most log2 n shortcut arcs will
be created for every i ∈ V .

6.3      Correctness and running time of rerouting
In Section 5.2, we described the subroutine WitRoute(·) that is used at the end of the algorithm for
the final flow rerouting. Algorithm 4 describes an efficient rerouting procedure given a witness list.
We now show the correctness of this subroutine and bound its running time.

Lemma 6.8. For arbitrary witness list L = (ai , bi , wi )i∈[K] ∈ W(V), flow f ∈ RE∗ (L) and valid
reverse arcs R ⊆ E(L), let g (K) = f and iteratively define for all i = K to 1:
                     
                         (i)     (i)  ⃗            ⃗
                     g − g(ai ,bi ) (1(ai ,bi ) − 1(bi ,ai ) ) if (ai , bi ) ∈ R
                     
                     
                 g (i−1) ←    g (i)                                               if (ai , bi ) ∈ E(L) \ R        (3)
                             g (i) − g (i) (⃗1
                             
                                                             ⃗
                                       (ai ,bi ) (ai ,bi ) − 1walkL (ai ,bi ) )   if (ai , bi ) ∈ E∗ (L) \ E(L)
                             

  9
      This may create parallel copies if the arc was already present.



                                                                 34
where ⃗1W denotes the vector where each [⃗1W ]e is the number of times arc e is traversed in walk W .
Then g (0) = WitRoute(L, f, R) (Algorithm 4) and can be computed in O(K) time.10
Proof. Since K = |E∗ (L)| it is straightforward to implement Algorithm 4 in O(K) time by spending
O(K) time to mark which (ai , bi ) are in R and E(L) and then directly implementing the operations.
Therefore, in the remainder of this proof we let h(0) = WitRoute(L, f, R) and prove that h(0) = g (0)
                                                        def


by induction on K. When K = 1, (a1 , b1 ) ∈ E(L) \ R (since both (a, b) ∈ E∗ (L) \ E and (a, b) ∈ R
require E ≤1−1 (L) ̸= ∅) and therefore, WitRoute(L, f, R) outputs the desired h(0) = f = g (0) .
     Next, suppose that the claim holds for K = K∗ . We prove that it holds for K = K∗ + 1. Our
proof strategy is to reason about the the first iteration of the for loop (Algorithm 4) in WitRoute(·)
directly and then use the inductive hypothesis to reason about remaining iterations. Let h(K∗ )
be g at the start of the WitRoute(·) for loop (Algorithm 4) for i = K∗ (i.e., g after one iteration
of the for loop). Let L̂ = (ai , bi , wi )i∈[K∗ ] denote the first K∗ elements of the witness list, let
                           def


fˆ = h(K∗ ) |    denote h(K∗ ) ignoring the ē = (at +1 , bt +1 ) coordinate, let R̂ = R \ {ē}, and let
   def                                            def                                def
              E∗ (L̂)                                                ∗      ∗

ĝ = WitRoute(L̂, fˆ, R̂). Since the (ai , bi ) in a witness list are distinct, the simple iterative structure
  def

                                (0)      (K )         (0)
of WitRoute(·) implies that hē = hē ∗ and h               = ĝ. Consequently it suffices to reason about
                                                               E∗ (L̂)
 (K )
hē ∗ and ĝ.
    Moreover, since L̂ is a witness list of length K∗ , the inductive hypothesis applies to ĝ. For all
i ∈ [K∗ ] ∪ {0} let ĝ (i) denote g (i) as defined in (3) of Lemma 6.8 applied to WitRoute(L̂, fˆ, R̂) and
                            (i)   (K )
let h(i) ∈ RE∗ (L) have hē = hē ∗ and h(i) |E∗ (L̂) = ĝ (i) (this is consistent with the earlier definition
                                                                            (K )
of h(K∗ ) and h(0) ). The inductive hypothesis (and gē = hē ∗ and gE∗ (L̂) = ĝ) imply that g = h(0) .
   We now characterize h(k) −g (k) for all k ∈ (0, K∗ ] by considering two cases. First, when ē ∈ E(L)
                    ∗
then h(K∗ ) = g (K ) as (3) performs same changes to both h(k) and g (k) . Consequently, in this case
each h(i) = g (i) for all i ∈ [0, K∗ ] and h(0) = g (0) as desired.
   Second, consider the case when ē ∈     / E(L). In this case

                        h(K∗ ) = f − fē (⃗1ē − ⃗1(aK∗ +1 ,wK∗ +1 ) − ⃗1(wK∗ +1 ,bK∗ +1 ) ) whereas
                        g (K∗ ) = f − fē (⃗1ē − ⃗1walkL̂ (aK∗ +1 ,bK∗ +1 ) ) .

Let i < j ∈ [K∗ ] satisfy {(ai , bi ), (aj , bj )} = {(aK∗ +1 , wK∗ +1 ), (wK∗ +1 , bK∗ +1 )} and define ei =
                                                                                                                            def


(ai , bi ), ej = (aj , bj ), Wi = walkL̂ (ai , bi ), and Wj = walkL̂ (aj , bj ). Note that
               def              def                         def



                          ⃗1WK = ⃗1walk (a             + ⃗1walkL̂ (wK∗ ,bK∗ +1 ) = ⃗1Wi + ⃗1Wj
                              ∗        L̂ K∗ +1 ,wK∗ )


since walkL̂ (aK∗ +1 , bK∗ +1 ) = walkL̂ (aK∗ +1 ), walkL̂ (wK∗ , bK∗ +1 ). For all k ∈ (i, K∗ ], (ak , bk ) is not
in Wi or Wj , an thereofre iteration of Lemma 6.8 performs the same change to g (k) and

                          h(k) − g (k) = fē (⃗1ei − ⃗1Wi + ⃗1aj − ⃗1Wj ) for all k ∈ (i, K∗ ] .

Next if (ai , bi ) ∈ E then Wi = ei and, consequently, h(j) − g (j) = ⃗1(aj ,bj ) − ⃗1walkL̂ (aj ,bj ) . However, if
(ai , bi ) ∈ E∗ then we see that iteration i of Lemma 6.8 performs the same change to g (k) and h(k) other
  10
     This assumes standard graphical access to E∗ (L) in that given an (ai , bi , wi ) and x ∈ RE∗ (L) it is possible to lookup
and change the value associated xe for any e ∈ {(ai , bi ), (ai , wi ), (wi , bi )} ∈ E∗ (L) in O(1) time. This assumption is
met in our applications of Lemma 6.8.


                                                                35
 than also subtracting fē⃗1ei and adding fē⃗1Wi to h(k) . In both cases, h(i−1) − g (i−1) = fē (⃗1(aj ,bj ) −
⃗1Wj ). Additionally, by similar reasoning, since all k ∈ (i, K∗ ], (ak , bk ) is not in walk (ai , bi ) or
                                                                                                L̂
 walkL̂ (aj , wj ) and therefore the step in Lemma 6.8 performs the same operation to g (k) and h(k) we
 see that h(k) − g (k) = fē (⃗1aj − ⃗1Wj ) for all k ∈ (j, i). Repeating a similar argument to when k = i
 shows that h(k) − g (k) = ⃗0 for all k ∈ [0, j) completing the proof by induction.

6.4    Correctness
We start by showing that the output of Algorithm 1 is correct: if it terminates, it outputs a
maximum flow in the original instance.

Lemma 6.9. At termination, Algorithm 1 outputs a maximum flow in the input instance (G◦ , u◦ ).

Proof. Let (f, r, ε, R) = (f (T +1) , r(T +1) , ε(T +1) , R(T +1) ) be the iterate at the end of the last while
cycle; let (G, u) with G = (V, E) denote this final instance. Thus, ε = 0, and because this is a
valid iterate (Lemma 6.4), it follows that f is a maximum flow in the current instance (G, u). This
instance is an admissible extension of the original instance: (G, u) = (G◦ , u◦ ) ⊕ (Fe , Fs ). We then
                                                                                    ←
                                                                                    −
call RerouteShortcut(Fs ) to reroute the flow from shortcut arcs in Fs ∪ Fs to arcs in the abundant
trees Tk , as well as TcWitList and WitRoute to reroute the flow from the extension arcs in Fe to
original arcs using the transitive cover data structure; Lemma 6.8 shows its correctness. We need
to show that this results in a feasible flow f ⋆ in the input instance.
     Both subroutines may only change the flow on arcs that became abundant at some iteration
of the algorithm. Let ē ∈ E be an original arc that became abundant at the end of iteration τ .
           (τ +1)
Thus, ufē        ≥ Γε(t+1) , and by Lemma 6.4, ufē ≥ (Γ − 2)ε(t+1) . We show that RerouteShortcut(·)
may increase fē by at most 4nε(t+1) log2 n and WitRoute(·) by at most 6nε(t+1) . This implies that
fē⋆ ≤ ue because Γ = 4n2 > 4n log2 n + 6n + 2; recall the assumption n ≥ 4.
     Let us first start with the subroutine RerouteShortcut(Fs ). If ē is not contained in any of the
final spanning subgraphs Tk , fē will not be changed. Assume that for a final root k ∈ R, ē is an arc
in Tk . The arc ē will be on the fundamental cycle of shortcut arcs that were created in iteration τ
or later. These carry at most 4nε(t+1) log2 n amount of flow in total, according to Lemma         P 6.6.
     Let U1 and U2 be the node sets of the two components of Tk connected by ē. Thus, i∈U1 d(i) =
− i∈U2 d(i), and both these values are bounded as 4nε(t+1) log2 n. Hence, RerouteShortcut(Fs ) will
    P

change the flow on ē by at most 4nε(t+1) log2 n as claimed.
                                                                                 ←−
     We now turn to bounding the flow changes in WitRoute(L, f |Eabd , H ). In each iteration k, after
the new value of ε = ε(k+1) is set, we identify all newly abundant arcs with capacity at least Γε(k+1) ,
and call TcAdd for them. If an arc e is added to Fe from the transitive cover, then at the end of the
same or the next iteration, ←   −e will become abundant and added by TcAdd(·) (Lemma 4.10). Recall
that the shortcut arcs are not added by TcAdd(·) and hence WitRoute(·) will not use them to route
flow.
     For an arc e ∈ E \ E ◦ , let γ(e) denote the iteration when e was added to E. If γ(e′ ) < γ(e),
then e′ precedes e on the witness list L returned by TcWitList(·). For original input arcs e ∈ E ◦ ,
let γ(e) = 0. The witness list L contains the arcs in Fe in increasing order of γ(e), and WitRoute(·)
processes the arcs in the reverse order. For arcs with γ(e) = k, the total flow amount is at most
fe ≤ 3ε(k+1) (Lemma 6.4 and Definition 4.9(B)).
     The flow from an arc e = (i, j) is rerouted to a simple i − j path p of arcs e′ with γ(e′ ) < γ(e),
and such that e′ became abundant before iteration γ(e) (see Lemma 6.8)WitRoute(·) roots the

                                                      36
flow from every arc in Eabd on a simple path, by the requirement that witness list L is path-
structured (Definition 3.4). Therefore, if we track the flow from an arc e with γ(e) = k through
the sequence of reroutings, it may change the flow by at most nk−h−1 fe ≤ 3nk−h−1 ε(k) for an arc
e′ that became abundant in iteration h ≤ k − 1. Recall that for k ≥ h + 1, ε(k) ≤ Γ−3(k−h−1) ε(h+1)
(by Definition 4.9(A)), and that |Fe | ≤ 2n (Lemma 6.7).
    Consider now the original arc ē ∈ E that became abundant at the end of iteration τ ; we have
γ(e) =P0 as it is an original arc. Let ρk denote the number of extension arcs added in iteration k;
thus, Tk=1 ρk ≤ 2n. By the above, the total flow change on ē can be bounded as
                 T
                 X +1                                         T
                                                              X +1
                                k−τ −1 (k)
                        ρk 3n         ε         (τ +1)
                                             ≤ 3ε        ·            ρk nk−τ −1 Γ−3(k−τ −1) ≤ 6nε(τ +1) .
               k=τ +1                                        k=τ +1

using that Γ = 4n2 . This completes the proof.

6.5    Bounding the number of essential arcs
We next show Theorem 6.1(ii).

Lemma 6.10. The total number of essential arcs throughout all iterations is O(mc ).

Proof. Lemma 6.7, the total number of extension arcs is O(n). If an arc e ∈ H is added to the
instance a certain iteration, then it will be a gap arc in the next iteration and by Lemma 4.10, it will
be free in all subsequent ones. Hence, every extension arc can be essential in at most one iteration.
Shortcut arcs will never be essential arcs as they have ∞ capacity on both sides.
    It remains to bound the number of essential arcs among the original arcs in E ◦ . Let us call an
arc e regular at iteration τ if
                                      Γ−6 ε(τ ) ≤ ue + u←e < Γε
                                                         −      (τ )
                                                                     .
Since ε(τ +1) ≤ Γ−3 ε(τ ) (by Lemma 6.4), every arc can be regular arc for at most three subsequent
iterations. Thus, the total number of regular arcs is O(mc ) throughout the algorithm.
     By Lemma 4.8, every essential arc is either a gap arc, a boundary arc, or a regular arc. By
Lemma 6.4 and Lemma 4.10, every arc in E ◦ may be a gap arc in at most one iteration. Moreover,
Lemma 6.5 shows that if ue + u←          e = ∞, then e can only be gap arcs if it is incident to s or t. Hence,
                                         −
the total number of gap arcs in E ◦ throughout is O(n + mc ).
     It remains to bound the number of essential arcs that are boundary arcs. Let e = (s, i) be an
essential arc in iteration τ for some i ∈ R; the case e = (i, t) follows analogously. Let f = f (τ ) ,
                                                                                                        def


ε = ε(τ ) , f ′ = f (τ +3) , and ε′ = ε(τ +3) . Let Pi ∈ Pf,ε be the component with root i in iteration
   def          def                     def


τ . First, assume Pi ∈  / Pf ′ ,ε′ , i.e., Pi is merged with some other component by iteration τ + 3. The
total number of all such components Pi can be bounded as O(n).
     For the rest, let us assume Pi ∈ Pf ′ ,ε′ , i.e., the component has not been merged. Moreover,
assume that e is the only essential arc incident to Pi in iteration τ , and all arcs incident to Pi are
original arcs in E ◦ ; otherwise, we could charge e to an extension arc or to a non-boundary essential
arc, bounding the total number of such arcs as O(n + mc ).
                                                                                   ′
     Let α = ufe ≥ Γ−5 ε ≥ Γ4 ε′ since ε′ ≤ Γ−9 ε. We must have ufe < Γε′ ≤ Γ−3 α < α/2, as
            def


otherwise e would be abundant in iteration τ + 3, and thus Pi would have been merged into Ps .
By flow conservation, there must be an arc e′ ∈ ∂E          (τ +2) (Pi ) with fe′ − f←
                                                           out                 ′     ′ > f ′ − f←
                                                                                     −′   e     − + α/(2n2 ) >
                                                                                                e′
                                                                                            e




                                                               37
                                 f′                             ←
                                                                −′
fe′ − f←                         −′ > Γ α ≥ Γ ε , and therefore e ∈ Eabd (f , ε ). By the
       − + Γ−1 α. Consequently, u←     −1    3 ′                           ′ ′
       e′                              e
assumption that Pi is still a free component for (f ′ , ε′ ), it follows that e′ ∈
                                                                                 / Eabd (f ′ , ε′ ).
    We have ue′ + u←− > Γ α ≥ Γ ε. The proof is complete by showing that ue′ + u←
                    e′
                           −1       −6                                                         − < Γε. Thus,
                                                                                               e′
e is a regular arc incident to Pi , but we already assumed there are no such arcs.
 ′

    For a contradiction, assume ue′ +u← − ≥ Γε. By Definition 4.6(C) for (f, ε), e′ must be a boundary
                                        e′
arc, or e′ ∈ Egap (f, r, ε), or ufe′ = 0, or uf←
                                               −′ = 0. We already assumed there are no gap arcs incident
                                            e
ot Pi . Note that e′ cannot be a boundary arc, since the only outgoing boundary arcs are (i, s)
and (i, t). Clearly, e′ ̸= (i, s) = ←
                                    −
                                    e , and we had fit = uit , fti = 0 due to ufti = 0 asserted in
Definition 4.6(D). We have ufe′ > 0 by the choice of e′ . Thus, the remaining case is uf←
                                                                                        −′ = 0. If
                                                                                                 e
ue + u←− ≥ Γε, then e′ ∈ Eabd (f, ε), and consequently, e′ ∈ Eabd (f ′ , ε′ ) by Lemma 4.10(i). Together
     ←−′e
with e ∈ Eabd (f ′ , ε′ ) shown above, we get e′ ∈ Efree (f ′ , ε′ ), a contradiction again.

6.6    Bounding the calls to transitive cover
We now prove part (iii) of Theorem 6.1.

Lemma 6.11. Throughout Algorithm 1, the total number of arcs added in TcAdd is O(m).

Proof. Every original arc may be added in TcAdd at most once. Further, the reverse arcs of extension
arcs will also be added once; by Lemma 6.7, their total number is O(n). Thus, the total number of
                                                         (τ )            (τ )       (τ )
arcs added in TcAdd is O(m). When calling TcCover(Ress ), we have |Ress | ≤ 4|Eess |, since every
      (τ )
e ∈ Eess may contribute two endpoints and two corresponding roots. Thus, the total number of
nodes queried in TcCover is at most 4 times the total number of essential arcs, that is O(mc ) by
Lemma 6.10.

6.7    Maintaining the basic data structures
We now describe how essential arcs, components, and other quantities can be efficiently maintained
throughout the algorithm, and bound the running time of these operations.
Arc types and residual capacities We initialize the abundant arc set Eabd as the set of arcs
with ue = ∞; this includes all arcs (i, s) and (t, i). Initially, Efree = ∅. Arcs with u←
                                                                                        −e = ∞ that are
                                    f
not incident to s or t are set to ue = 0 at initialization and this property is maintained throughout
(see Lemma 6.5). Hence, such an e will never become abundant, free, or essential. Shortcut arcs Fs
will be by definition free throughout.
      We now consider the set of all other arcs E ′ . These include the mc arcs with ue + u← e < ∞, the
                                                                                             −
2n arcs of the form (s, i) and (i, t), and the O(n) extension arcs Fs . Thus, |E ′ | = O(mc ).
      For maintaining residual capacities, as well as the status of abundant, free, and essential arcs on
E ′ , we maintain the ufe values in a binary tree. In each iteration, we identify arcs with key values
between Γ−5 ε and Γε as essential arcs. Their endpoints and the corresponding roots will be the
essential nodes. The algorithm will also need the value δ1 that is n2 times the largest capacity of
the largest arc below the threshold Γ−5 ν(Ḡ, ū); this amounts to one additional search operation per
iteration.
      Flow values may only change on essential arcs, as well as on new extension arcs added in the
current iteration. We update the key values of essential arcs at the end of the iteration, and also
add to the data structure the new extension arcs to the binary tree. We identify the abundant arcs
as those with key values at least Γε.

                                                    38
   The amortized cost of these search and insert operations on E ′ is O(log m), that is O(log n).
Since the total number of essential arcs is O(mc ) (Lemma 6.7), the total running time of these
operations can be bounded as O(mc log n).
Free components, roots, and spanning subgraphs The components in Pf,ε are initialized
as the set of singletons, along with the root set R = V . We maintain the components in a heap
structure, with the roots corresponding to R. The pointers root(i) point to the root of the heap
containing i. The boundary arc set Ebound will be simply the arcs between R and {s, t}.
    Whenever an arc e = (i, j) is added to Efree and root(i) = k ̸= k ′ = root(j), then we merge
the components Pk and Pk′ . The root of the new component will become s or t if either of them
is in {k, k ′ }; otherwise, the root of the larger component (breaking ties arbitrarily). The other
root is then removed from R. Similarly, if a new arc e = (i, j) is added to Eabd with root(i) = s,
root(j) = k ′ ̸= s, we merge Pk′ into Ps . If a new arc e = (i, j) is added to Eabd with root(i) = k ′ ̸= t,
root(j) = t, we merge Pk′ into Pt . The spanning subgraphs Tk can be easily maintained during
these merging operations: the spanning subgraphs of the different components will be connected
by the free or abundant arcs identified when joining these components. There are at most n − 2
merging operations; maintaining the free components, roots, and spanning subgraphs can be done
in O(n log n).
6.8    Running time estimate
We next show part (iv) in Theorem 6.1. Recall the notation TCtime and TCarcs and corresponding
assumptions from the beginning of Section 6.
Lemma 6.12. Algorithm 1 can be implemented in time

          TCtime (n, O(m), O(mc )) + O (Tsolv (O(mc )) + TCarcs (n, O(m), O(mc ))) + Õ(m) .

Proof. By Lemma 6.11, the total number of arc additions is O(m) and the total number of nodes
queried in TcCover is O(mc ). The bound on the transitive cover operations follows.
    Let us bound the total number m̃ of arcs in the solver calls. In iteration τ , the solver ApproxFlow
                                      (τ )
is called on a graph with arc set Eess and H (τ ) , as well as at most two shortcut arcs for each arc
     (τ )                      (τ )                                                 (τ )
in Eess . Thus, g ≤ 3 τ =1 |Eess | + |H (τ ) |. By Lemma 6.10, we have Tτ=1 Eess = O(mc ) and by
                       PT                                                 P
            PT
definition, τ =1 |H (τ ) | = TCarcs (n, O(m), O(mc )). Thus, m̃ = O(mc ) + TCarcs (n, O(m), O(mc )),
and we obtain the second term in the bound on the total solver runtime.
    Let us now consider all arithmetic operations in the algorithm other than the solver calls and
the the transitive cover data structure. Maintaining arc types, residual capacities and components
takes O(m + mc log n) = Õ(m) as described in Section 4.1.
    In every iteration, the other main operations are the following. We need to construct the
auxiliary instance, add the flow y to the previous, add new arcs to the instance, PostProcess(·), and
                                                             (τ )
RemoveRoot(·). These all can be easily bounded as O(|Eess | + |H (τ ) |), which can be bounded as
O(mc ) + TCarcs (n, O(m), O(mc )). Using the assumption Tsolv (m̃) = Ω(m̃), these operations will be
dominated by the calls to the solver.

6.9    Strong polynomiality of the algorithm
We now complete the proof of Theorem 6.1 by proving part (v).
Lemma 6.13. The algorithm is strongly polynomial. For rational input, all values of f , ε, and r
remain polynomially bounded in the input encoding length.

                                                    39
Proof. The flow y returned by   PApproxFlow(Ḡ, ū) is a basic acylic flow, and hence all flow values can
be written in the form ye = e′ ∈E(G) χee′ ue′ , where χee′ ∈ {0, ±1} (Lemma 2.2). For the auxiliary
instances (Ḡ, ū), each ū is either a residual capacity with respect to an original capacity value, or
obtained from a safe P capacity. By induction, we show that all safe capacities and flow values arise
in the form f¯e = e′ ∈E(G) αee′ ue′ where αee′ is an integer with polynomially bounded encoding
length. Safe capacities are either ufe , or δ or 3δ. Here, δ = δ1 + δ2 , where δ1 is |E(Ḡ)| times the
residual capacity of a certain arc, and δ2 is obtained as n2 times the residual capacity ūye⋆ of an
arc e⋆ output by ApproxFlow. Thus, in every iteration, the flows and safe capacity values arise as
integer combinations of the original capacities, adding at most O(log n) bits to each coefficient in
every round.

7    Data Structures
In this section, we provide the ITCOs we use to obtain our maximum flow algorithms. More
precisely, we give different instantiations of the ITCO data structure (Definition 3.4) introduced
earlier in Section 3. In Section 7.1, Section 7.2, Section 7.3, and Section 7.3, we provide different
implementations of ITCOs with different guarantees. The ITCOs in Section 7.2 and Section 7.3
leverage additional information on where the queries and updates will be. In particular, Section 7.2
assumes that arc updates between ancestors and descendants of a tree with bounded depth and
Section 7.3 assumes that arcs updates occur consistently with certain ordering of the nodes.
    The main theorems and definitions in this section are written in a self-contained way, so that
the results of this section can be used just by referencing them. Below is a description of the only
definitions and theorems that are used in Section 8 to obtain the overall running times.
    • Section 7.1: Theorem 7.3 gives our guarantees on a general ITCO that makes no additional
      assumptions. This facilitates our O(mn) time maximum flow algorithms in Theorem 1.7.

    • Section 7.2: Corollary 7.8 gives our guarantees on an ITCO for updates that we call tree-
      respecting as defined in Definition 7.4 in the case that the relevant tree is depth D. Corol-
      lary 7.8 facilitates our O(m1+o(1) D) time maximum flow algorithm for bounded tree-depth
      graphs in Theorem 1.4.

    • Section 7.3: In Definition 7.13, we define OITCOs which specialize the definition of a ITCO to
      when node ordering information is available as defined in Definition 7.12. In Corollary 7.15 we
      give a simple, easy to use statement regarding our guarantees for an OITCO which facilitates
      our O(nω−1 mc ) time maximum flow algorithm in Theorem 1.1.
Corollary 7.8 and Corollary 7.15 follow from more general theorems of potential broader interest.
Corollary 7.8 follows from a more general bound in Theorem 7.6 which bounds the performance of
the IT CO in terms of a notion of size defined in Definition 7.5. Corollary 7.15 follows from a more
general Theorem 7.14.
    To facilitate our implementation of TcWitList(), each of our ITCOs will maintain a witness list
with the particular property that they are rooted, as defined below. This invariant essentially implies
that the witnesses form in- and out-arborescence to specific nodes.
Definition 7.1 (Rooted). In a witness list L ∈ W(V), we call (a, b) ∈ E∗ (L), a-out rooted if
(a, b) ∈ E(L) or (w, b) ∈ E(L), and (a, w) is a-out rooted for w = witL (a, b). Similarly, we say that
(a, b) ∈ E∗ (L) is b-in rooted if either (a, b) ∈ E(L), or (a, w) ∈ E(L) and (w, b) is b-in rooted for

                                                   40
w = witL (a, b). We call L out-rooted if every (a, b) ∈ E∗ (L) is a-out rooted and we call L rooted if
every (a, b) ∈ E∗ (L) is either a-out rooted or b-in rooted.

   We prove that any rooted witness list is path structured.

Lemma 7.2 (Rooted Implies Path Structured). If a witness list is rooted then it is path structured.

Proof. Let (a, b) ∈ E∗ (L) for a rooted witness list L ∈ W(V). Suppose, (a, b) is a-out rooted and
let S = {s ∈ V|(a, s) ∈ E∗ (L) and (a, s) is a-out rooted}. For each s ∈ S, let us define es = (a, s)
                                                                                               def


if (a, s) ∈ E(L) and es = (ws , s) otherwise, where ws = witL (a, s). Note that walkL (a, s) = es
                         def


if (a, s) ∈ E(L) and walkL (a, s) = walkL (a, ws ), es otherwise. By Lemma 3.3, walkL (a, b) is a a–b
walk. Additionally, the arcs of this walk are a subset of {es |s ∈ S}. However, each node in es has a
distinct head and therefore any walk using the es is simple, i.e., a path. By symmetry, if (a, b) is b-in
rooted the walk is simple. (In the symmetric argument the walk uses arcs with distinct tails.)

7.1   Transitive closure
Here, we briefly show how to adapt the approach in Italiano’s incremental transitive closure data
structure [28] to implement an ITCO. Though the ideas of the algorithm largely follow from [28],
we provide a complete description and analysis to fit our particular definition of an ITCO and
to facilitate our ITCO development in Section 7.2. Additionally, we make two more substantial
modifications of [28]. First, in TcCover(S) rather than just outputting the closure of S, we output
the smaller of the closure and all the arcs. Second, we maintain a witness list (Definition 3.2).
    Algorithm 5 presents the data structure. Whenever an arc e is added in TcAdd(·) the algorithm
checks for each a ∈ V if it is possible to use e to reach a node that it could not reach before through
a procedure, AddOut(a, e). If it can, it adds the arc to the closure and recursively checks whether a
can now use the arcs leaving the head of e to reach a new node. This algorithm essentially maintains
a tree from each a to what nodes it can reach (and therefore the transitive closure) in total time
linear in the size of all the trees. Algorithm 5 essentially follows this strategy adding the arcs of the
closure to a witness list. From the tree structure of these arcs, the witness list is out rooted. To
output the cover of S, the algorithm simply outputs either the closure restricted to S and the entire
graph depending on |S| and |E|. The guarantees of the algorithm are provided in Theorem 7.3.

Theorem 7.3 (Transitive Closure). Algorithm 6 is an ITCO and can be implemented with the
following properties, where Efinal is E after the last TcAdd(·):

   • TcInit(·) and TcAdd(·) run in total time O((n + |Efinal |)n).

   • TcCover(S ⊆ V) runs in O(min{|S|2 , |E|}) time and returns an O(min{|S|2 , |E|})-arc cover.

   • TcWitList() returns a witness list of length O(n2 ) in time O(n2 ).

Proof. Properties of E, E∗ , and L. First we establish several properties of E, E∗ , and L that hold
after the operations. Note that E is only updated on Definition 3.2 and algorithm 5. Additionally,
L is only updated on Algorithm 5; it is initialized to ∅ on Algorithm 5 and then elements are added
on Algorithm 5. On Algorithm 5, (u, v, v) is added to L thereby adding (u, v) to E(L) and on
Algorithm 5, (a, v, u) is added where v ̸= u (since (a, u) ∈ E∗ and (a, v) ∈
                                                                           / E∗ in the preceding line)
and therefore this line does not add to E(L). Consequently, after each TcAdd(·), TcCover(·), and
TcWitList(), E is the union of all arcs added in TcAdd(·) and E = E(L).


                                                   41
 Algorithm 5: Transitive Closure
     // Global variables
 1 V, E ⊆ V × V, E∗ ⊆ V × V ;                              // nodes, arcs, and transitive arcs
 2 L ∈ W(V) ;                                                 // witness list (Definition 3.2)
 3 function TcInit(V):      V ← V, E ← ∅, E∗ ← ∅, and L ← ∅ ;
 4 function TcAdd(F ⊆ V × V):
 5     for e = (u, v) ∈ F do
 6        E ← E ∪ {e}, E∗ ← E∗ ∪ {e}, and L ← L, (u, v, v) ;
 7        for a ∈ V do AddOut(a, e) ;

 8 function AddOut(a ∈ V, (u, v) ∈ E):
 9     if (a, u) ∈ E∗ and (a, v) ∈/ E∗ then
10         E∗ ← E∗ ∪ {(a, v)} and L ← L, (a, v, u) ;
11         for (v, w) ∈ ∂Eout (v) do AddOut(a, (v, w)) ;

12 function TcCover(S ⊆ V):
13    if |S|2 ≤ |E| then return (S, E∗ [S]) else return (V, E);

14 function TcWitList():      return L ;


    Next, note that AddOut(a, (u, v)) is only called for (u, v) ∈ E. Consequently, arcs are only added
to E∗ and E∗ (L) when they are added to E or on Algorithm 5. When an arc e = (a, v) is added to
E∗ and E∗ (L) on Algorithm 5 it is the case that (a, u) ∈ E∗ and (u, v) ∈ E. Consequently, L remains
an out-rooted witness list after each addition to it. Since TcCover(·) only outputs subsets of E∗ we
see that TcWitList() returns a witness list with the necessary properties of an ITCO.
    We now show that before and after each call to TcAdd(·) it is the case that E∗ = E tr . By the
reasoning in the preceding paragraph, E∗ ⊆ E tr , and therefore it suffices to show that e ∈ E tr implies
e ∈ E∗ . Proceed by contradiction and suppose that this is not the case after a call to TcAdd(·) (it
suffices to consider this case as after TcInit, E∗ = ∅ = E tr ). Pick (a, b) ∈ E tr \ E∗ such that the length
of the shortest path, P , from a to b using E is minimized. Note that the length of this path must
be at least 2 since E ⊆ E∗ . Let c be the last node before b on this a–b path. By the assumptions
there is an a–c path using E shorter than P and therefore (a, c) ∈ E∗ . This arc (a, c) was added
to E∗ on Algorithm 5. However, since (a, b) ∈    / E∗ and (c, b) ∈ E we see that (a, b) would have been
added during the recursive call to AddOut(·) on Algorithm 6 if (c, b) ∈ E was present at that time.
Consequently, (c, b) must have been added to E after (a, c) was added to E∗ . However, in that case
(a, b) would have been added to E∗ through a call to AddOut(a, (c, b)) on Algorithm 5, contradicting
       / E∗ .
(a, b) ∈
    Correctness. Leveraging the above properties of E, E∗ , and L, we show that Algorithm 5 is indeed
an ITCO with the properties specified in the statement. TcCover(S) returns either E∗ [S] = E tr [S]
by the invariants or (V, E) both are covers of S and have the specified number of arcs. Furthermore,
we have already argued that TcWitList() has the necessary properties for an ITCO. Additionally,
since |E∗ | ≤ n2 we see that the length of the witness list output by TcWitList() is at most n2 .
    Runtime. Finally, we analyze the running time for implementing the algorithm. We use stan-
dard adjacency matrix data structures to maintain E and E∗ so that TcInit(·) is implementable

                                                     42
in O(n2 ) and afterwards each of the operations involving these sets, e.g., adding an element and
checking membership, can be performed in O(1). This implies that TcCover(S) is implementable in
O(min{|S|2 , |E|}) time by maintaining |E| in O(1) per change to E and when |S|2 ≤ |E|, checking
if (u, v) ∈ E∗ for each u, v ∈ S when |S|2 ≤ |E|, and outputting (V, E) when this is not the case.
Additionally, we can store the witness list as a list so adding to it can be implemented in O(1) time.
Furthermore, since the list has at most n2 elements, implementing TcWitList() then can be done in
O(n2 ) time.
    Next, note that Algorithm 5 is called once for every arc in Efinal , which can be done O(|Efinal |)
time. Additionally, Algorithm 5 is called n times for each e ∈ Efinal which can be done in O(n|Efinal |)
time (ignoring the recursive cost). Furthermore, Algorithm 5 is called for a particular a ∈ V
and (v, w) ∈ E only when (a, v) was just added to E∗ . Consequently, for a particular (v, w) ∈ E
Algorithm 5 is called at most once for each possible a ∈ V. Therefore, this line is implementable
(ignoring the recursive cost) in O(n|Efinal |) time. Putting this altogether yields that TcInit(·) and
TcAdd(·) are implementable in total time O(n2 + n|Efinal |).

7.2   Tree-respecting updates
In this section we provide an ITCO, Algorithm 6, in the special case where added arcs are only
between what we call related pairs of nodes with respect to a known rooted spanning tree, that is
pairs of nodes that are either ancestors or descendants of each other. More formally, for a rooted
spanning tree T on nodes V, we define the following:
   • ancT (a) denotes the set of ancestors of a node a in T (including a)
   • descT (a) denotes the set descendants of a node a (including a).

   • relT (a) = ancT (a) ∪ descT (a) denotes what we call the set of nodes related to a in T .
              def



We design an ITCO where at initialization we are given a rooted spanning tree T on V and then all
F input in TcAdd(·) respect T as defined below.
Definition 7.4 (Tree Respecting). For rooted spanning tree T on nodes V we say that (a, b) ∈ V ×V
respects T if a ∈ relT (b) (or equivalently, b ∈ relT (a)). We let ETrel = {(a, b) ∈ V × V|a ∈ relT (b)}
                                                                         def


denote the set of related node pairs and we say that F ⊆ V × V respects T if F ⊆ ETrel .
   Given a rooted spanning tree T and arc additions that respect T , for every node a, our ITCO
(Algorithm 6 to be introduced later) maintains arcs to each node b that it can reach using E[descT (a)]
and arcs from each node b that can reach it using E[descT (a)]. Equivalently, the ITCO maintains
              E∗ = (a, b) ∈ RV×V | (a, b) ∈ E[descT (a)]tr or (a, b) ∈ E[descT (b)]tr .             (4)
                    

To answer TcCover(S) queries we show that it then suffices to output the arcs of E∗ restricted
to ∪a∈S ancT (a). We show how to efficiently maintain E∗ and using this, obtain runtimes that on
properties of the tree and its relationship to the edges added. Below we formally define a measure
of the set of arcs relative to a rooted tree and with this provide our main Theorem 7.6 regarding
our ITCO for tree respecting updates.
Definition 7.5 (Relative Tree Size). For rooted spanning tree T on nodes V and F ⊆ V × V we
define the size of F relative to T as
                     X
                         |ancT (a, b)| , where ancT (u, v) = ancT (u) ∩ ancT (v) for all u, v ∈ V .
                 def                                       def
      sizeT (F ) =
                    (a,b)∈F


                                                  43
Theorem 7.6 (Tree-respecting ITCO). Let T be a rooted spanning tree on n-element node set V.
Assume that for all calls TcAdd(F ), F ⊆ V × V respects T and let Efinal denote E after the last
TcAdd(·). Then, Algorithm 6 is an ITCO, and can be implemented with the following properties:

   • TcInit(·) and TcAdd(·) has total runtime bounded as O(sizeT (Efinal ) + a∈V |ancT (a)|).
                                                                            P

   • TcCover(S ⊆ V) has runtime, number
                                   P     of nodes in the graph output, and number of arcs in the
     graph output all bounded by O( a∈S |ancT (a)|) and all arcs output respect T .

   • TcWitList() returns a witness list of length O(sizeT (Efinal )) in time O(sizeT (Efinal )).

    Before describing Algorithm 6 and proving Theorem 7.6, we first provide helpful tools for apply-
ing and reasoning about Theorem 7.6. First we provide Lemma 7.7 which provides upper bounds
on the size of an arcs subset relative to a tree. Then we present and prove Corollary 7.8 using
Theorem 7.6 and Lemma 7.7. Theorem 7.6 is a specialization of Theorem 7.6 that assumes that T
has depth at most D and gives running time in terms of D; we use it to prove Theorem 1.4

Lemma 7.7 (Relative Tree Size Bound). sizeT (F ) ≤ min{D|F |, 2 a∈V |ancT (a)|2 } for any depth
                                                                  P
D rooted spanning tree T on n nodes V and F ⊆ V × V that respects T .

Proof. sizeT (F ) ≤ D|F | since |ancT (a, b)| ≤ D. Additionally,

              sizeT (F ) = |S| where S = {(a, b, c) ∈ V | (a, b) ∈ F and c ∈ ancT (a, b)}
                                        def




By assumption, a ∈ relT (b) for every (a, b) ∈ F . Therefore a ∈ ancT (b) or b ∈ ancT (a) and

 S ⊆ T1 ∪ T2 where T1 = {(a, b, c) ∈ V|{b, c} ∈ ancT (a)} and T2 = {(a, b, c) ∈ V|{a, c} ∈ ancT (b)} .

The result follows as |T1 | = |T2 | = a∈V |ancT (a)|2 .
                                     P

Corollary 7.8. Let T be a rooted depth-D spanning tree on n-element node set V. Assume that
for all calls TcAdd(F ), F ⊆ V × V respects T and let Efinal denote E after the last TcAdd(·); in
particular, |Efinal | = O(nD). Then, Algorithm 6 is an ITCO and can be implemented with the
following properties:

   • TcInit(·) and TcAdd(·) run in total time O((n + |Efinal |)D).

   • TcCover(S ⊆ V) has runtime, number of nodes in the graph output, and number of arcs in the
     graph output all bounded by O(|S|D) and all arcs output respect T .

   • TcWitList() returns a witness list of length O(D|Efinal |) in time O(D|Efinal |).

Proof. The result follows from Theorem 7.6 by using that, |ancT (a)| ≤ D for allPa ∈ V since T has
depth-D, using Lemma 7.7 to bound sizeT (Efinal ), and noting that |Efinal | = O( a∈V |ancT (a)|) =
O(nD)) since Efinal respects T .

    Though we only apply Corollary 7.8 (rather than Theorem 7.6) in later sections, we provide the
more general Theorem 7.6 as it elucidates the structure of the problem and can be faster in certain
settings. To see this, note that, depending on T , sizeT (F ) can be much lower than the O(D|Efinal |)
bound in Corollary 7.8. For example, suppose the root has n − (D − 2) children and one of those
children has a path of D − 2 children (i.e., each of its non-leaf descendants has exactly one child),

                                                   44
 Algorithm 6: Bounded tree-depth
     // Global variables
 1 V, E ⊆ V × V, E∗ ⊆ V × V ;                     // nodes, arcs, and transitive arcs
 2 depth D rooted spanning T of V ;    // invariant: a ∈ relT (b) for all (a, b) ∈ E ∪ E∗
 3 L ∈ W(V) ;                                        // witness list (Definition 3.2)
 4 Edesc (a) ⊆ V × V for all a ∈ V ;               // invariant: Edesc (a) = E[descT (a)]
 5 Ecov (a) ⊆ V × V for all a ∈ V ;  // invariant: Ecov (a) = {(b, c) ∈ E∗ |a = cdescT (b, c)}
 6 function TcInit(V ):
 7     V ← V, E ← ∅, E∗ ← ∅, L ← ∅, and Edesc (a) ← ∅ for all a ∈ V ;

 8 function TcAdd(F ⊆ V × V):
 9     for e = (u, v) ∈ F do
10        E ← E ∪ {e}, E∗ ← E∗ ∪ {e}, and L ← L, (u, v, v) ;
11        Ecov (cdescT (u, v)) ← Ecov (cdescT (u, v)) ∪ {(u, v)} ;
12        for a ∈ ancT (u, v) do Edesc (a) ← Edesc (a) ∪ {e}, AddOut(a, e), and AddIn(a, e) ;

13 function AddOut(a ∈ V, (u, v) ∈ Edesc (a)):
14     if (a, u) ∈ E∗ and (a, v) ∈/ E∗ then
15         E∗ ← E∗ ∪ {e}, Ecov (v) ← Ecov (v) ∪ {e}, and L ← L, (a, v, u) ;
16         for (v, w) ∈ Edesc (a) do AddOut(a ∈ V, (v, w)) ;

17 function AddIn(a ∈ V, (u, v) ∈ Edesc (a)):
18     if (v, a) ∈ E∗ and (u, a) ∈/ E∗ then
19         E∗ ← E∗ ∪ {e}, Ecov (u) ← Ecov (u) ∪ {e}, and L ← L, (u, a, v) ;
20         for (w, u) ∈ Edesc (a) do AddIn(a ∈ V, (w, u)) ;

21 function TcCover(S ⊆ V):
22     return (Sout , Eout ) where Sout = ∪a∈S ancT (a) and Eout = ∪a∈S Ecov (a)

23 function TcWitList():    return L ;


and F is all arcs with related endpoints, i.e., |F | = O(n + D2 ), then sizeT (F ) = O(n + D3 ), while
O(|F |D) = O(nD + D3 ).
   We now discuss Algorithm 6 and prove Theorem 7.6 in multiple steps. The algorithm and
analysis use the following additional notation on common ancestor and common descendants:
                             (                                        (
                              a if a ∈ ancT (b)                        a if a ∈ descT (b)
                                                and cdescT (a, b) =
                         def                                      def
            cancT (a, b) =                                                                .
                              b if b ∈ ancT (a)                        b if b ∈ descT (a)

    Algorithm 6 is closely related to the transitive closure algorithm we presented in Section 7.1
(which in turn is turn closely related to Italiano’s incremental transitive closure data structure
[28]). However, rather than maintaining transitive arcs corresponding to an out-tree from every
node, instead we maintain transitive arcs corresponding to in-trees and out-trees for restricted set
of nodes. More precisely, as arcs are added, for every a ∈ V we maintain Edesc (a) = E[descT (a)]
and add to E∗ every (a, b) ∈ E[descT (a)]tr and every (b, a) ∈ E[descT (a)]tr . Just as maintaining an

                                                 45
out-tree from a was implemented in O(|Efinal |) time in Section 7.1, similarly maintaining the in- and
out-tree for a single a ∈ V can be implemented in essentially, O(|Efinal [descT (a)]|) time. This gives
the desired time complexity for process TcAdd(·) by the following simple lemma.
                                                                   P
Lemma 7.9. If T is a spanning tree of V and F ⊆ V × V then a∈V |F [descT (a)]| = sizeT (F ).
       P                        P    hP                        i P        hP               i
Proof.    a∈V |F [descT (a)]| =  a∈V    (b,c)∈F |a∈ancT (b,c) 1 = (b,c)∈F    a∈ancT (b,c) 1  = sizeT (F ).


    Consequently, we can efficiently maintain E∗ as given in (4). However, it is perhaps not immedi-
ately clear why maintaining this E∗ yields an efficient ITCO data structure. Note that Lemma 7.9
and the algorithm for maintaining E∗ do not use the assumption that each arc of E is tree-respecting.
However, in the following Lemma 7.10 we show that when E is tree-respecting, then if u can reach v
using E then there is a path that goes through some a ∈ ancT (u, v) and only uses arcs in E[descT (a)].

Lemma 7.10 (Paths Through Common Ancestor). If T is a spanning tree of V and P is u–v path
using arcs in ETrel , then P passes through some a ∈ ancT (u, v) with (u, a), (a, v) ∈ E[descT (a)]tr .

Proof. Let a be a node in P of least depth (i.e., closest to the root). We claim that every node b
on P is in descT (a). Proceed by contradiction and assume there is a node b ∈    / descT (a), and let
b be the one nearest to a, i.e., all nodes on P between a and b are in descT (a). Thus, there is an
arc (b, w) or (w, b) in P with w ∈ descT (a). By the tree-respecting property, either b ∈ descT (w)
or w ∈ descT (b). The first case gives a contradiction because descT (w) ⊆ descT (a). In the second
case, since both b and a are ancestors of w, either b ∈ descT (a), a contradiction to the choice of b,
or a ∈ descT (b), a contradiction to the choice of a. Consequently, the parts of P between u and a
and between a and v are both in E[descT (a)], and thus the claim follows.

    By leveraging Lemma 7.10, there is a simple approach to answer TcCover(S) queries. The lemma
implies that we output every node that is an ancestor of S every arc in E∗ between a node of S and
its ancestor (in either direction) then the result is a transitive cover. Algorithm 6 gives an efficient
implementation of this strategy. It proceeds similarly to Algorithm 5 with a few modifications.
First, it carefully maintains Edesc (a) for all a as described calls a generalization of AddOut(·) and a
variant of it for in-trees, AddIn(·) within TcAdd(·). Additionally, it maintains Ecov (a) corresponding
to the arcs of E∗ between a and an ancestor of a.
    In the remainder of this section, we formally prove the main invariants that Algorithm 6 main-
tains in the setting of Theorem 7.6 and then put everything together to prove Theorem 7.6.

Lemma 7.11 (Invariants). In the setting of Theorem 7.6, after TcInit and each call to TcAdd(·),
TcCover(·), and TcWitList(), the following invariants hold:

  1. E = E(L) is the union of all arcs input to TcAdd(·) and Edesc (a) = E[descT (a)] for all a ∈ V.

  2. E∗ = E∗ (L) and Ecov (a) = {(b, c) ∈ E∗ |a ∈ cdescT (b, c)} for all a ∈ V.

  3. In every addition of (x, y, w) to L, the resulting L is rooted, (x, y) ∈ E∗ , and (x, y) is out-rooted
     in L if x ∈ cancT (x, y) and in-rooted in L if y ∈ cancT (x, y).

  4. E∗ satisfies (4), i.e., E∗ = {(a, b) ∈ RV ×V | b ∈ E[descT (a)]tr or a ∈ E[descT (b)]tr }



                                                   46
Proof. After TcInit(·), E = E∗ = Edesc (a) = Ecov (a) = L = ∅ for all a ∈ V. Therefore the invariants
hold trivially. Additionally, the only modifications to E, E∗ , Edesc (a), Ecov (a), and L occur through
calls to TcAdd(·). Consequently, to prove the claim it suffices to show that if items 1-4 hold before
TcAdd(·) then they hold after.
    Next, note that Algorithm 6 is the only line where E and Edesc (·) are modified and an element
(x, y, w) with y = w is added to L (since F contains no self-loops). Additionally, Algorithm 6 is the
only line in which Edesc (·) is updated. Invariant 1 follows straightforwardly from the nature of these
lines and Algorithm 6. Additionally, since such modifications happen one at a time (Algorithm 6
and Algorithm 6), we see that it suffices to prove that invariants 2-4 hold after an iteration of the
for loop (Algorithm 6 to Algorithm 6) provided that they hold before.
    Now we show that invariant 2 holds. After TcInit(·), E and E∗ are only updated on Line 10, 15,
and 19 which are also the only lines in which L is modified. By the nature of these lines E∗ = E∗ (L).
Additionally, after TcInit(·), each (x, y) added to E∗ is added to a single Ecov (a) in one of three cases:

   • In Algorithm 6 it is directly added to Ecov (cdesc(x, y)).

   • In Algorithm 6 it is added to Ecov (v) where v ∈ Edesc (a) and therefore added to Ecov (cdesc(x, y)).

   • In Algorithm 6 it is added to Edesc (cdesc(x, y)). (Similarly to the preceding case.)

Consequently, each (x, y) ∈ E∗ is in Ecov (cdesc(x, y)) and Ecov (a) = {(b, c) ∈ E∗ |a ∈ cdescT (b, c)}.
    Next, we show that invariants 3 and 4 hold. Note that arcs (x, y) are added to E∗ only on
Algorithm 6 (in which case they are in E and in E[descT (cancT (x, y)]) or added along with the
update L ← L, (x, y, w) with either x = a, y = v, and w = u on Algorithm 6 or x = u, y = a, and
w = v on Algorithm 6. In the former case, (u, v) ∈ Edesc (a) so u, v ∈ descT (a) and x = cancT (x, y)
and the input witness v satisfies (a, v) ∈ E∗ and v ∈ descT (a) (so a = cancT (a, v)). Similarly, in
the latter case, (u, v) ∈ Edesc (a) so y ∈ cancT (x, y) and the input witness v satisfies (v, a) ∈ E∗ and
v ∈ descT (a) (so v = cancT (a, v)). Consequently, the result follows by induction.
    Finally, it remains to prove that if (x, y) ∈ E[descT (x)]tr or (x, y) ∈ E[descT (y)]tr then (x, y) ∈ E∗ .
We prove the case when (x, y) ∈ E[descT (x)]tr as the other case follows similarly. Our proof is similar
to the proof that E∗ = E tr in the proof of Theorem 7.3. Proceed by contradiction and suppose that
not the case. Among all such (x, y) ∈ E[descT (x)]tr at that time let (a, b) be the one for which the
length of the shortest path, P , from a to b using E[descT (a)] is minimized. Note that the length of
this path must be at least 2 since E ⊆ E∗ by Algorithm 6. Let c be the last node before b on this
a–b path. By the assumptions there is an a–c path using E[descT (a)] shorter than P and therefore
(a, c) ∈ E∗ . However, since c ∈ descT (a) we see that (a, c) was added to E∗ on Algorithm 6. Since
       / E∗ and (b, c) ∈ E[descT (a)] we see that (a, c) would have been added during the recursive
(a, b) ∈
call to AddOut(·) on Algorithm 6 if (c, b) had been present at that time. Consequently, (c, b) must
have instead been added on Algorithm 6 after (a, c) was added to E∗ in which case (a, b) would been
added during the call to AddOut(·) on Algorithm 6, contradicting (a, b) ∈       / E∗ .

Proof of Theorem 7.6. First, we prove that Algorithm 6 is indeed an ITCO, i.e., that the output of
TcCover(·) and TcWitList() follow the specification of Definition 3.4.
TcCover(S) Correctness: Each Edesc (a) ⊆ E∗ ⊆ E tr by Lemma 7.11 and therefore Eout ⊆ E tr .
Additionally, clearly S ⊆ Sout . If (u, v) ∈ E tr for u, v ∈ S then by Lemma 7.10 there is a ∈ ancT (u, v)
with (u, a), (a, v) ∈ E[descT (a)]tr . Consequently, (u, a) ∈ Ecov (u) ⊆ Eout and (a, v) ∈ Ecov (v) ⊆ Eout
and there is a u–v path in (Sout , Eout ) as desired.

                                                     47
TcWitList() Correctness: By Lemma 7.11 we know that after each TcAdd(·), E = E(L) and
E∗ = E∗ (L) and that L is a rooted witness list. Additionally, note that L is only modified in
TcAdd(·) and when it is modified elements are added. Furthermore, the output of TcCover() is
always a subset of E∗ and E is the union of all arcs input to TcAdd(·). Putting these facts together
implies that TcWitList() meets the criteria for an ITCO.
  With the correctness established we now analyze each operation, describing its implementation,
and proving its properties:
TcInit(·) Properties. We use O(n) time to process T so that for any a ∈ V its parent and its
depth (distance along T to the root) can be computed in O(1). Additionally, for each a ∈ V we use
an P
   array of size O(|ancT (a)|) to store which (x, a) and (a, x) for x ∈ ancT (a) are in E∗ . This takes
O( a∈ancT (a) ) time and allows adding to E∗ and checking membership in E∗ to be done in O(1) time
(by checking if they are related and checking the array of the descendent, since E∗ only includes arcs
between related nodes by Lemma 7.11). Finally, we store L as a linked list so adding an element can
be added in O(1) and the list can be returned in time linear in its length. Consequently, TcInit(·)
can be implemented in O(n) time.
TcAdd(·) Properties. Ignoring the cost of the calls to AddOut(·) and AddIn(·) each iteration of
the for-loop (Algorithm 6 to Algorithm 6) can be implemented in O(ancT (a, b)) time. This can
be done by determining cancT (u, v) in O(1) time (by choosing the node with smaller depth) and
then repeatedly following parents to compute the nodes on the path from cancT (u, v) to the root to
compute ancT (u, v). Additionally, F \ E can be computed in O(|F |) time by checking membership
in E for each element of F . Since the for-loop on Algorithm 6 to Algorithm 6 considers each e ∈ E
once, the total cost of TcAdd(·) operation (ignoring the cost of AddOut(·) and AddIn(·) calls) is
O(n + sizeT (Efinal )).
    Next, consider AddOut(·). This operation is implementable in O(1), unless (a, u) ∈ E∗ and
       / E∗ . If (a, u) ∈ E∗ then a new (a, v) arc is added to E∗ and the cost of this operation is
(a, v) ∈
O(1 + |(v, w) ∈ Edesc (a)|) (by storing Edesc (a) as an adjacency listed). Since Edesc (a) = E[descT (a)]
by Lemma 7.11 The total time need for this operation, beyond the O(1) for initial calls accounted for
in the preceding paragraph, is O(∪v∈Efinal [descT (a)] |(v, w) ∈ Efinal [descT (a)]|) = O(|Efinal [descT (a)]|).
Similarly, the total additional time needed to implement AddOut(·) is P            also O(|Efinal [descT (a)]|).
Consequently, the total extra runtime for AddOut(·) and AddIn(·) is O( a∈V |Efinal [descT (a)]|) =
O(sizeT (Efinal )) by Lemma 7.9.
TcCover(·) PProperties. We can compute Sout simply by computing          the path from each a ∈ S to
the root in a∈S |ancT (a)| time and consequently Sout has a∈S |ancT (a)| nodes. Additionally, by
                                                              P
Lemma 7.11 each Ecov (a) = {(b, c) ∈ E∗ |a ∈ cdescT (b, c)} and therefore |Ecov (a)| ≤ ancT (a) yielding
the desired runtime and bound on the number of arcs output for this operation.
TcWitList() Properties. This operation can be implemented in time linear in the length of L which
is O(|E∗ |) since |E∗ | = |E∗ (L)| and L is a witness list by Lemma 7.11.However, by the preceding
TcAdd(·) analysis we see that |E∗ | ≤ sizeT (Efinal ) and therefore the length of L and the running time
for implementing this operation are O(sizeT (Efinal )).11
  11                                                                                             P
    Note that improved complexity bounds are obtainable in certain cases, for instance |E∗ | ≤ a∈V |ancT (a)|. How-
ever, given the runtime bounds for TcAdd(·) and that TcWitList() is called once in our applications, such improvements
don’t seem to immediately yield faster algorithms for maximum flow.




                                                         48
7.3       Node orderings
Here we provide a ITCO (Definition 3.4) in the special case where the data structure is given access
to an ordering of the nodes. We call such a data structure an ordered incremental transitive cover
data structure (OITCO) and its operations are the same as in the case without the ordering except
that (1) at initialization the data structure is given access to initial ordering values x ∈ RV , where
higher values of xa correspond to earlier positions for a ∈ V and (2) the ordering values can be
modified via a new procedure, TcReorder(·). We provide a data structure (Algorithm 7) that uses
fast matrix multiplication (FMM) to obtain runtimes that improve as arc additions, cover queries,
and re-orderings occur to nodes earlier in the ordering.
    In this section, we provide our node ordering notation (Definition 7.12), define OITCOs (Def-
inition 7.13), and state our main theorem about designing efficient OITCOs (Theorem 7.14) and
Corollary 7.15 that will be used to prove Theorem 1.1. We then explain Algorithm 7, which underlies
Theorem 7.14, and prove this theorem over several steps.

Definition 7.12 (Node Orderings). For n-element finite set V and x ∈ RV , we let v1x , . . . , vnx ∈ V
denote the ordering of V with xv1x ≥ · · · ≥ xvnx and ties broken consistently.12 We define,

          Vx (j) = {v1x , . . . , vjx } for all j ∈ [n] and Vx (S) = {i ∈ V : xi ≥ min xj } for all S ⊆ V .
                def                                            def

                                                                                    j∈S

Equivalently, Vx (S) = Vx (i) for the smallest i such that S ⊆ Vx (i).

Definition 7.13 (Ordered Incremental Transitive Cover). A data structure is an ordered incre-
mental transitive cover data structure (OITCO) if it supports the same operations as an ITCO
(Definition 3.1) with the following changes:

       • TcInit(V, x ∈ RV ) replaces TcInit(V) in Definition 3.1 and initializes the data structure on a
         finite set of n nodes V with initial ordering values x ∈ RV and sets E ← ∅.

       • TcReorder(S ⊆ V, y ∈ RS ): a new operation that sets xa ← ya for all a ∈ S for |S| > 1.

Theorem 7.14 (FMM for OITCO). For any n-element node set V, Algorithm 7 is an ordered tran-
sitive cover data structure (Definition 7.13) and can be implemented with the following properties:

       • TcInit(·) runs in amortized O(n2 ) time.

       • TcAdd(F ) runs in amortized Õ(|Vx (V(F ))|ω ) time.

       • TcCover(S ⊆ V) runs in amortized O(|Vx (S)|2 ) time and outputs a O(|Vx (S)|)-node graph.13

       • TcReorder(S ⊆ V, y ∈ RS ) runs in amortized Õ(|Vx (S)|nω−1 ) time.

       • TcWitList(·) runs in O(n2 ) time.
  12
     More formally, we assume that there is total ordering on the nodes and if xvix = xvi with vix appearing before vjx
                                                                                        j
in that node ordering then then i < j.
  13
     Note that from this output the transitive closure of S can be computed in an additional O(|Vx (S)|ω ) time.




                                                          49
Corollary 7.15 (Total Runtime for FMM OITCO). Algorithm 7 is an OITCO (Definition 7.13)
and can be implemented so that TcInit(·) followed by a sequence of TcAdd(·), TcCover(·), and
TcReorder(·) operations, and then a single call to TcWitList() run in O(Y nω−1 + n2 ) time and
ensure that the sum of the number of nodes in the sets output in TcCover(·) is O(Y ), where Y is the
sum of values of |Vx (V(F ))| and |Vx (S)| for each call to TcCover(·), TcAdd(·), and TcReorder(·).

Proof. This follows from the guarantees of Theorem 7.14.

   Before proving Theorem 7.14 we first give the following overview of the associated data structure
(Algorithm 7) and our analysis of it.
Data Structure Invariants. For input n-element V, the data structure maintains all arcs added,
E, as well as E∗ containing E and some transitive arcs, i.e., E ⊆ E∗ ⊆ E tr . Additionally, the data
structure maintains node subsets V1 ⊆ V2 ⊆ · · · ⊆ VK = V for K = ⌈log2 n⌉ of exponentially
                                                                             def


growing size; each |Vk | = vk = min{2k , n}. The Vk and E∗ are periodically updated during TcAdd(·)
                                 def


and TcReorder(·) through a procedure, Update(·), that we will describe. Each time Vk is updated,
we set Vk = Vx (vk ) and ensure that E∗ contains all transitive arcs between Vk by adding (at least)
E tr [Vk ] to E∗ . Vk is updated whenever an arc is added in TcAdd(·) outside of Vk . Additionally, we
keep a counter, tk , of the sum of the values of |Vx (S)| that have been the input to TcReorder(·) since
the last time Vk was updated and update so that after each operation, tk ≤ vk /2. Consequently,
E tr [Vk ] = E∗ [Vk ]tr and Vx (⌊vk /2⌋) ⊆ Vx (vk − tk ) ⊆ Vk after each operation. These key invariants
will be proved in Lemma 7.19.
Add and Cover. Maintaining these invariants facilitates a straightforward implementation of
TcAdd(·) and TcCover(·). For TcAdd(F ) it suffices to find the largest value k∗ for which V(F ) is not
contained in Vk∗ and update Vk for all k ∈ [k∗ ] (since Vk ⊆ Vk+1 for all k ∈ [K − 1]). For TcCover(·),
it suffices to find the smallest value of k∗ for which S ⊆ Vk∗ and then output (Vk∗ , E∗ [Vk ]) (since
E tr [Vk ] = E∗ [Vk ]tr by the invariants). In both cases, finding k∗ is straightforward to implement
in O(vk2∗ ) time by checking the Vk in sequence. Additionally, since the vk increase geometrically
and we update so that tk ≤ vk /2, we show that vk∗ = O(|Vx (V(F ))| in the case of TcAdd(·) and
vk∗ = O(|Vx (S)|) in the case of TcCover(·) (see Lemma 7.20 and Corollary 7.21). This implies the
desired runtime for implementing TcCover(·). To implement TcAdd(·), the Vi can be updated in
O(vkω∗ ) by using fast matrix multiplication to compute the transitive closure on (Vℓ∗ , E∗ [Vℓ∗ ]) for
ℓ∗ = max{k∗ + 1, K} (since Vx (k∗ ) is contained in Vℓ∗ by the invariants).
Reordering. To implement TcReorder(S, y) we update the values of x, compute Vx (S), and up-
date the tk values. If the invariant that tk ≤ vk /2 no longer holds for some k, we update all Vk up
to the largest k∗ for which tk∗ > vk∗ /2. Similarly to the analysis of TcAdd(·), this updating can be
done in O(vkω∗ ) = O(|Vx (S)|ω ) time. In both cases, procedure Update(k∗ ) in Algorithm 7 is called
to perform the updates. To analyze the total runtime of re-ordering, let X = i |Vx(i) (S (i) )| where
                                                                                   P
at the start of the i-th call to TcReorder(·), S (i) is the input S and x(i) is the value of x. We show
that the number ofP   times that k∗ = k is at mostP O(X/k) and consequently, these updates can be
implemented in O( k∈[K] (X/vk ) · vkω ) = O(X k∈[K] 2k(ω−1 )) = O(Xnω−1 ) time in total.
Witness List. Following the above approach yields the desired runtimes for all operations except
for TcWitList(). Algorithm 7, departs from this description and performs more work to in order to
implement TcWitList() in O(n2 ) time. Algorithm 7 maintains an out-rooted witness list L where
E(L) is every arc inserted in TcAdd(·) and E∗ (L) is every transitive arc computed. This suffices


                                                  50
to implement TcWitList() by Lemma 7.2 but we perform further modifications to maintain these
invariants which incurs extra polylogarithmic factors in the runtime of TcAdd(·) and TcReorder(·).
    To maintain such a witness list L, rather than just updating the Vk by computing a transitive
closure, we use that it is also possible to compute reachability trees from every node (what we call
a reachability forest) in an n-node graph in Õ(nω ) time (this is the source of the aforementioned
polylogarithmic factors).

Definition 7.16 (Reachability Trees). We call T ⊆ E a reachability tree from s ∈ V in graph
G = (V, E) if (V, T ) is an arborescence rooted at s and s can reach t ∈ V in (V, T ) if and only if s
can reach t in G. We call {Ta }a∈V a reachability forest in G if each Ta is a reachability tree from a.

Theorem 7.17 (Efficient Reachability Trees). There is a deterministic algorithm that computes a
reachability forest of any input n-node graph G = (V, E) in Õ(nω ) time.

Proof. In O(nω ) time it possible to compute A ∈ {0, 1}V×V such that Aa,b = 1 if and only if a
can reach b in G [14]. Additionally, by [2], in Õ(nω ) time it is possible to compute wa,b ∈ V for
all a, b ∈ V with wa,b = 1 such that path(a, b) defined recursively as (a, wa,b ) concatenated with
path(wa,b , b)14 for distinct a, b ∈ V with wa,b = 1 and path(a, a) = ∅ is an a–b path. Note that
Ta = {(wa,b , b)|b ∈ V, wa,b = 1} contains exactly one arc to every node that a can reach in G and, by
the properties of path, a can reach every node it can reach in G using the arcs in Ta . Consequently,
Ta is a reachability tree for a in G and we can obtain an algorithm with the desired properties by
simply computing A and the w and then outputting the Ta (in an additional O(n2 ) time).

      Reachability trees give a natural way to find witnesses. Perform a traversal15 of a reachability
tree T from a starting from a, every time we traverse (w, b) ∈ E and (a, b) ∈      / E∗ add w as the witness
for a transitive (a, b) arc, i.e., add (a, b, w) to L. If all additions to L occur this way, (a, b) will be
a-out rooted in L (Definition 7.1) since (w, b) ∈ E and (a, w) was added before traversing (w, b).
      In Algorithm 7 we apply a similar approach. Instead of just computing the transitive closure
of (Vℓ∗ , E∗ [Vℓ∗ ]) during Update (as described earlier) we compute a reachability forest, {Ta }a∈Vℓ∗ .
We then perform an traversal of each Ta from a to compute all transitive arcs from a along with
witnesses. However, it is possible that the (w, b) arc traversed is actually a transitive arc in E∗ \ E
(since we compute the reachability forest on (Vℓ∗ , E∗ [Vℓ∗ ]) and E∗ may contain transitive arcs).
Whenever this occurs, by repeatedly computing preceding witnesses, we can find a path bj − bj−1 −
. . . − b1 in E with b1 = b, (bi+1 , bi ) ∈ E and (a, bi ) ∈
                                                           / E∗ for all i ∈ [j − 1], and (a, bj ) ∈ E∗ . In this
case, we can then add the entire path and the associated transitive arcs to E∗ , and preserve that L
is an out-rooted witness list. We provide a procedure NewTransitive(·) which does this. The overall
cost of these operations can be bounded as O(n2 ), since there can be at most O(n2 ) transitive arcs
and the time to implement is O(1) per transitive arc.
   In the remainder of this section we prove Theorem 7.14. First, in Lemma 7.18 we give a lemma
about NewTransitive(·) which shows that it efficiently maintains E∗ = E∗ (L), E = E(L), and that L
   14
      The paper [2] refers to the wa,b as witnesses, similar to our usage of the term in witness maintainers. Also note
that [2] showed this for path(a, b) = path(a, wa,b )(wa,b , b). However, the claimed results can be obtained by applying
[2] to the graph with the arcs reversed and appropriately reversing the result.
   15
      We use the term “traversal” to refer to any procedure for exploring the arcs of the tree that from a single starting
node only follows arcs from the starting node or endpoints of arcs that have been followed. Traversals include breadth
first search, depth first search, and more.



                                                           51
 Algorithm 7: Transitive Cover with Node Ordering
     // Global variables
 1 G = (V, E), E∗ ⊆ V × V, x ∈ RV ;        // current      graph, transitive arcs, ordering
 2 K = ⌈log2 n⌉ and vk = min{2 , n} for all k ∈ [K] ;
                                k                                // subgraph sizes (n = |V|)
 3 V1 ⊆ V2 ⊆ · · · ⊆ VK = V ;                                     // node sets with |Vk | = vk
 4 t1 , . . . , t K ;                          // number of order changes since computed Gk
 5 L ∈ W(V) ;                                              // witness list (Definition 3.2)
 6 function TcInit(V, x ∈ RV ):
 7       V ← V , E ← ∅, E∗ ← ∅, set global x to x, n = |V|, and L ← ∅;
 8       K = ⌈log2 n⌉ and vk = min{2k , n} for all k ∈ [K] and then Update(K);

 9 function TcAdd(F ⊆ V × V):
10       for e = (a, b) ∈ F \ E do L ← L, (a, b, b), E ← E ∪ {e}, and E∗ ← E∗ ∪ {e} ;
11       Update(k∗ ) for the largest k∗ ∈ [K] such that V(F ) ̸⊆ Vk∗ if there is one;

12 function TcCover(S ⊆ V):
13       return (Vk∗ , E∗ [Vk∗ ]) for smallest k∗ ∈ [K] with S ⊆ Vk∗ ;

14 function TcWitList():       return L ;
15 function TcReorder(S ⊆ V, y ∈ RS ):
16       tk ← tk + |Vx (S)| for all k ∈ [K] and xa ← ya for all a ∈ S ;
17       Update(k∗ ) for largest k∗ ∈ [K] with tk∗ > vk∗ /2 if there is one ;

18 function Update(k∗ ∈ [K]):
19       Vk ← Vx (vk ) and tk ← 0 for all k ∈ [k∗ ] and ℓ∗ = min{k∗ + 1, K} ;
20       Compute reachability forest {Ta }a∈Vℓ∗ in Gloc = (Vℓ∗ , E∗ [Vℓ∗ ]) ; // see Theorem 7.17
21       for a ∈ V and then each (w, b) in a traversal (see Footnote 15) of Ta from a do
22                    / E∗ then NewTransitive(a, (w, b)) ;
            if (a, b) ∈

23 function NewTransitive(a ∈ V, (w, b) ∈ E∗ ):            // invariant: (a, w) ∈ E∗ , (a, b) ∈
                                                                                              / E∗
24       if (w, b) ∈ E then L ← L, (a, b, w) and E∗ ← E∗ ∪ (a, b) ;
25       else
26           v = witL (w, b) ;      // invariant: (v, b) ∈ E, (w, b) is w-out rooted in L
27           if (a, v) ∈
                       / E∗ then NewTransitive(a ∈ V, (w, v) ∈ E∗ );
28           L ← L, (a, b, v) ;



is an out-rooted witness list. We use Lemma 7.18 to prove Lemma 7.19 which gives the invariants
maintained by Algorithm 7. We then give, technical Lemma 7.20, and its Corollary 7.21; we use
these to analyze the runtime of Algorithm 7 and conclude with a proof of Theorem 7.14.

Lemma 7.18 (NewTransitive(·) Invariants). Consider a call to NewTransitive(a ∈ V, (w, b) ∈ E∗ )
on Algorithm 7 where (a, w) ∈ E∗ and (a, b) ∈  / E∗ . If at the start of the call E∗ = E∗ (L), E = E(L),
and L is out-rooted witness list then, these are still the case immediately after the call, and a set F
containing (a, b) is added to E∗ (L) through exactly |F | − 1 recursive calls to NewTransitive(·).


                                                    52
Proof. If (w, b) ∈ E the claim is trivial. Otherwise, the procedure computes v ∈ V such that
(v, b) ∈ E (since (a, b) is a-out rooted) and (w, v) ∈ E∗ , recursively calls NewTransitive(a, (w, v)) if
       / E∗ , and then adds (a, b) with witness v. This ultimately computes a path bj − bj−1 − . . . − b1
(a, v) ∈
in E with b1 = b, (bi+1 , bi ) ∈ E and (a, bi ) ∈
                                                / E∗ for all i ∈ [j − 1], and (a, bj ) ∈ E∗ . It then calls
W.NewTransitive((a, bi+1 ), bi ) from i = j − 1 to 1 over j − 1 recursive calls. Since each (bi+1 , bi ) ∈ E,
we see that L remains an out-rooted witness list.

Lemma 7.19 (OITCO Invariants). In Algorithm 7 after TcInit(·) and each subsequent TcAdd(·),
TcCover(·), TcWitList(), and TcReorder(·), the following invariants hold:

   • Graph: E is the union of all F input to TcAdd(·) and V1 ⊆ V2 ⊆ · · · ⊆ VK = V where
                def
     |Vk | = vk = min{2k , n} for all k ∈ K where K = ⌈log2 n⌉.

   • Closure: E∗ ⊆ E tr , E tr [Vk ] = E∗ [Vk ]tr , Vx (vk − tk ) ⊆ Vk , and tk ≤ vk /2 for all k ∈ [K].

   • Witness: E = E(L), E∗ = E∗ (L), L is an out-rooted witness list, and NewTransitive(a, (w, b))
     was called at most once for every (a, b) ∈ V × V.

Proof. We prove by induction. Note that the statement trivially holds after TcInit(·) as after this
operation E = ∅, Vk = Vx (vk ), E∗ [Vk ] = ∅, tk = 0, and the other variables are set accordingly. Now
suppose the invariant holds after TcInit and before one of the TcAdd(·), TcCover(·), TcWitList(),
and TcReorder(·) operations. We prove that it holds after. Since TcCover(·) and TcWitList() do not
change the relevant variables, it is suffices to prove this for TcAdd(·) and TcReorder(·).
     To analyze, TcAdd(·) and TcReorder(·), note that each operation updates the variables to pre-
serve the invariants and then call Update(k∗ ) for the largest k∗ for which the invariants do not hold
for Vk∗ . More precisely, TcAdd(F ) adds the arcs of F to W, E, and E∗ and then calls Update(k∗ ) for
the largest k∗ where F is not contained in Vk∗ . For all k ∈ [K] with k > k∗ all added arcs are within
Vk so E tr [Vk ] = E∗ [Vk ]tr is preserved. Similarly, TcReorder(·) updates tk and x in accordance with
the input and then calls Update(k∗ ) where for all k ∈ [K] with k > k∗ it is the case that tk ≤ vk /2.
     Consequently, it suffices to show that if all invariants hold, except for those involving Vk with
k < k∗ , then all invariants hold after calling Update(k∗ ). Consider such a call to Update(k∗ ) and
let ℓ∗ = max{k∗ + 1, K} and Gloc = (Vℓ∗ , E∗ [Vℓ∗ ]). If ℓ∗ = K then by the invariants (E∗ [Vk ] =
E∗ ⊆ E tr ) the transitive closure of Gloc is the transitive closure of G. On the other hand, if ℓ∗ < K,
then by the invariants vℓ∗ − tℓ∗ ≥ vℓ∗ /2 = vk∗ , Vx (vk∗ ) ⊆ Vx (vℓ∗ − tℓ∗ ) ⊆ Vℓ∗ and E tr [Vℓ∗ ] =
E∗ [Vℓ∗ ]tr . Consequently, in both cases, the transitive closure of Gloc contains the transitive closure
of G restricted to a superset of Vk for each k ∈ [k∗ ] and Vk = Vx (vk ) ⊆ Vℓ∗ .
     Due to how the V1 , . . . , Vk∗ are set, it only remains to show that after the call to Update(k∗ ), if
a can reach b in Gloc then (a, b) ∈ E∗ , E∗ ⊆ E tr , and the witness invariants are maintained. However,
NewTransitive(a, (w, b)) preserves invariants if (a, b) ∈   / E∗ and (a, w), (w, b) ∈ E∗ by Lemma 7.18.
Additionally, when an arc is (w, b) is traversed on Algorithm 7, provided (a, w) ∈ E∗ then afterwards
(a, b) ∈ E∗ (either by Lemma 7.18 and NewTransitive(a, (w, b)) or since it was before the traversal).
Since the arcs are explored in a traversal, (a, w) ∈ E∗ always holds by induction. Finally, since if a
can reach b in Gloc some (w, b) arc will be traversed the result follows.

Lemma 7.20 (Set Sizes). In the setting Theorem 7.14 after TcInit(·) and each subsequent TcAdd(·),
TcCover(·), TcWitList() for any i ∈ [n], the smallest k∗ with Vx (i) ⊆ Vk∗ satisfies |Vk∗ | ≤ 4i.

Proof. Let ℓ∗ = ⌈log2 (i) + 1⌉ and note that 2ℓ∗ ≤ 2log2 (i)+2 = 4i. Consider two cases:
               def




                                                     53
   • Case 1: ℓ∗ > K: In this case n < 2ℓ∗ ≤ 4i. Consequently, i ≥ n/4 and |Vk∗ | ≤ n ≤ 4i.

   • Case 2: ℓ∗ ≤ K: In this case ℓ∗ ∈ [K] and vℓ∗ /2 ≥ 2log2 (i)+1 /2 ≥ i. Since vℓ∗ − tℓ∗ ≥ vℓ∗ /2 and
     Vx (vℓ∗ −tℓ∗ ) ⊆ Vℓ∗ by Lemma 7.19, Vx (i) ⊆ Vx (ℓ∗ ) and therefore |Vk∗ | ≤ |Vℓ∗ | ≤ vℓ∗ ≤ 2ℓ∗ ≤ 4i.



Corollary 7.21 (Set Compute). In the setting Theorem 7.14, given access to the vix in order, in
a linked list, and input S ⊆ V there is an algorithm that computes the minimum k∗ ∈ [K] with
S ⊆ Vk∗ in O(vk∗ ) time where vk∗ = O(|Vx (S)|.

Proof. With O(|S|) pre-processing, so that checking membership in S can be done in O(1) time,
for any P
        k ∈ [K], in O(vk ) time we can check if S ⊆ Vk . Consequently, we can compute k∗ in
O(|S| + k∈[k∗ ] vk ) = O(|S| + vk∗ ) time by checking if S ⊆ Vk for increasing k. Since |S| ≤ |Vx (S)|
and vk∗ = O(Vℓ∗ ) for the minimum ℓ∗ ∈ [K] with Vx (S) ⊆ Vℓ∗ , Lemma 7.20 yields the result.

   We put everything together and show how to implement Algorithm 7 to prove Theorem 7.14.

Proof of Theorem 7.14. By the invariants of Lemma 7.19 we see that the output of TcCover(·) is as
desired and the size of the subgraph output follows from Corollary 7.21. Additionally, standard data
structures allow us to add to L in O(1), compute witL (w, b) in Algorithm 7 in O(1), and output L
in time linear in its length. Since after each operation L is an out-rooted witness list with E = E(L)
and E∗ = E∗ (L) by Lemma 7.19 (and E is the union of all arcs added in TcAdd(·) and only arcs of
E∗ are output in TcCover), Lemma 7.2 implies that the output TcWitList(.) is as desired. It only
remains to bound the runtime of implementing Algorithm 7.
    To efficiently implement Algorithm 7, we store E and E∗ as an adjacency matrix. We use a
balanced binary search tree to ensure that each change to xv can be implemented in O(log n), it
is possible to compute i such vix = v in O(log n) for any v ∈ V, and so that the v1x , . . . , vnx can be
traversed through a doubly linked list (computing next and previous nodes in O(1)). With these
data structures, we show how to implement each operation in the desired running time.
TcInit(·): At the end
                   P of this2k
                             operation each Ei = ∅ and each Vi = Vx (i). This can all be computed in
O( k∈[K] vk ) = O( k∈[K] 2 ) = O(22K ) = O(n2 ) time. The runtime of this operation is claimed
           2
   P
as amortized to cover the cost of future calls to NewTransitive(·).
TcAdd(·): Algorithm 7 is straightforward to implement O(|F |) = O(|Vx (V(F ))|). To implement
Algorithm 7, first in O(|F |) time we compute S = ∪(a,b)∈F {a, b}. Since, F = F [Vk ] if and only if
S ⊆ Vk , we can find k∗ by finding the minimum k∗ with S ⊆ Vk∗ . Therefore, using by Corollary 7.21,
k∗ can be computed in O(vk∗ ) time where vk∗ = O(|Vx (S)|) = O(|Vx (V(F ))|). Below, we show
that Update(k∗ ) can be implemented in amortized Õ(vkω∗ ) time. Since, O(vk∗ ) = O(|Vx (V(F ))|),
TcAdd(·), can be implemented in Õ(|Vx (V(F ))|ω ) time.
TcCover(·): By Corollary 7.21, computing k∗ can be done in O(vk∗ ) = O(|Vx (S)|) time. Since E
is stored as an adjacency matrix, computing E[Vk∗ ] can be done in O(vk2∗ ) = O(|Vx (S)|2 ) time and
therefore TcCover(·) can be implemented in O(|Vx (S)|2 time
TcWitList(): Since E∗ = E∗ (L) by Lemma 7.19 and |E∗ (L)| ≤ n2 , TcWitList() is implementable in
O(n2 ).




                                                   54
TcReorder(·): Let X = i |Vx(i) (S (i) )| where at the start of the i-th call to TcReorder(·), S (i) is
                            P
the input S and x(i) is the value of x. In O((|Vx(i) (S (i) )| + 1) log n) time, each step of the i-th
call of TcReorder(·), except for, Update(k∗ ), can be implemented. Therefore all TcReorder(·) calls,
ignoring Update(·) costs, can be implemented in O(X log n) total time.16 Additionally, as we show
below, Update(k∗ ) can be implemented in Õ(vkω∗ ) time. However, the number of times that k∗ = k
is O(X/vk ) for all k ∈ [K] and therefore all Update(k∗ ) calls can be implemented in
                                                       
                X X                        X                                
                              k ω                 k(ω−1)            K(ω−1)           ω−1
                                                                                           
           Õ           · (2  )   = Õ X       2          = Õ   X2          = Õ Xn
                      2k
                  k∈[K]                            k∈[K]

time in total. This is equivalent to the claimed amortized runtime.
Update(·): Using Theorem 7.17 and that E is stored as an adjacency matrix, Gloc and the Taa∈Vloc
can be computed in Õ(vℓω∗ ) = Õ(vkω∗ ). The breadth-first-searches can then be implemented in
O(vℓ2∗ ) = O(vk2∗ ) and below we show that the total cost of all calls to NewTransitive(·) P
                                                                                           is n2 . Finally,
by storing Gloc,∗ as an adjacency matrix computing G1 , . . . , Gk∗ can be done in O( k∈[k∗ ] vk2 ) =
O(vk2∗ ) time. Consequently, Update(·) is implementable in amortized Õ(vkω∗ ) time.
NewTransitive(·). By Lemma 7.19, NewTransitive(·) is called O(n2 ) times and each call can be im-
plemented in O(1) (not counting the recursive call). Consequently, the total runtime of NewTransitive(·)
is O(n2 ) and covered by the amortized runtime of TcInit(·).


8     Maximum Flow Algorithms
In this section we give the running times we achieve for strongly polynomial maximum flow frame-
work on a large variety of flow instances. We obtain these by combining Theorem 6.1 with the bounds
in Section 7 on the incremental transitive cover data structures. Recall that Tsolv (m̃) = m̃1+o(1) by
Theorem 2.9.
    In all cases below, we can make assumption (1), i.e., all nodes i ∈ V \{s, t} have ∞ capacity (t, i)
and (i, s) arcs. We simply add new such arcs if they are not present, increasing m by n. Consider
the case when G has tree-depth D, and is given by a representing depth-D tree T . Then, we obtain
a representing tree T ′ of the new graph by moving s and t to the top of the tree. This representation
has tree-depth at most D + 2.
    Finally, note that the maximum flow f output by our algorithm in the extended graph uses some
of the added (t, i) and (i, s) arcs. We can post-process f using the link-cut trees data structure
by Sleator and Tarjan [46]. This enables reducing f to an acyclic flow f ′ by removing flow around
directed cycles from the support in O(m log n) time. This f ′ will only use the arcs of the original
input instance.
8.1    General graphs
In this section, we show how our framework yields an O(nm) algorithm for arbitrary instance
(G, u), assuming the number of capacitated arcs is mc = O(n2−ε ) for some ε > 0. Recall that for
m = Ω(n log n), King, Rao, and Tarjan [37] already achieved O(nm), while Orlin’s algorithm [42] is
  16
     Logarithmic factor improvements may be possible. For example, rather than explicitly keeping K = O(log n)
different tk , a single counter could be used to more quickly ensure that each Update(k∗ ) is called at least every vk∗ /2
steps. However, in our applications, the logarithmic factors are subsumed by the those induced by Theorem 7.17.


                                                           55
                     16
O(nm) for m = O(n 15 −ε ). Our algorithm achieves this running time for all but very dense graphs.
More precisely, we could even have m = O(n2 ), assuming the number of capacitated arcs is less by
a factor nε .
     Further, we note that one could similarly obtain a randomized O(nm) algorithm up to mc =
O(n2 / logc n) for some c ≥ 1 using the randomized Õ((m + n1.5 ) log U ) solver by van den Brand et
al. [53].

Theorem 1.7 (Italiano Style ITCO). There exists an ITCO that for all n, m > 1 has

             TCtime (n, O(m), O(m)) = O(mn) and TCarcs (n, O(m), O(m)) = O(m1.5 ) .

Using that ITCO, there is a strongly polynomial O(mn + m1.5+o(1) ) time maximum flow algorithm.

Proof. We use Algorithm 1 with the transitive data structure as in Algorithm 5. From Theo-
rem 6.1(iii), we get madd = O(m) and Efinal = O(m), and the total size of the node sets S in
the calls to TcCover(S) is O(mc ). According to Theorem 7.3, the total time of TcInit(·), TcAdd(·)
is O(nm), and TcWitList(·) creates a witness list of size O(n2 ) in time O(n2 ). With a running
                                                                              √
time bound O(min{|S|2 , m}) in each call, we get an upper bound O(m · (mc / m)) = O(mc m1/2 )
on the calls to TcCover(.). By Lemma 6.8, WitRoute(·) takes O(n2 ) time. The total running
time of the data structure operations is therefore TCtime (n, O(m), O(mc )) = O(nm). We also
get TCarcs (n, O(m), O(mc )) = O(mc m1/2 ), leading to the claimed overall running time by Theo-
rem 6.1.

8.2     Bounded tree-depth
Let us now consider the bounded tree-depth case, i.e., when the input graph G has tree-depth
D, given with a representing rooted depth-D tree T . We use Algorithm 6, with the bounds in
Corollary 7.8.

Theorem 1.4 (Tree-depth based Maximum  Flow). There is a deterministic algorithm that computes
a maximum flow in O m1+o(1) D time for an input instance (G, u) with n nodes, m arcs with a
                                  

given depth-D representing tree for G.

Proof. We combine Corollary 7.8 with the bounds in Theorem 6.1(iii). All arcs in TcAdd(·) respect
the tree T . The total size of the node sets S in the calls to TcCover(S) is O(m), and TcWitList(·)
returns a witness list of size O(mD) in time O(mD). By Lemma 6.8, WitRoute(·) takes O(mD) time.
The bounds in Corollary 7.8 therefore gives TCtime (n, O(m), O(m)) = O(mD) for the running time
of the transitive cover data structure. We also get that the total size of the outputs to TcCover(S)
is TCarcs (n, O(m), O(m)) = O(mD). Theorem 6.1 yields the desired bounds.

8.2.1    Application to layered graphs
A natural application of the bounded tree-depth setting (Theorem 1.4) appears in the context of
layered graphs. Assume the node set of the graph G = (V, E) is partitioned as V = V1 ∪ V2 ∪ . . . ∪ Vℓ ,
with s ∈ V1 and t ∈ Vℓ , and such that for every arc (i, j) ∈ E with i ∈ Vp and j ∈ Vq , |p − q| ≤ K
for some k ≥ 1. Assume further that |Vp | ≤ n̄ for every p ∈ [ℓ]. It is then easy to verify that the
tree-depth is bounded as O(K n̄ log n).
    A common example of layered graphs are time-expanded graphs that appear in time-varying
network optimization. Assume that the arcs of a graph also have transit times; moreover, the


                                                  56
capacities, transit times (and possibly costs) may change in each time period. An early example
of such a model is by Gale in 1959 [17]; see [45] for details and references. Let G = (V, E) be the
underlying n-node m-arc graph. The maximum-flow problem over a time horizon T can be solved by
creating T + 1 layers, each with a copy of V (r) of V , and for each arc e = (i, j) that has transit time
τ (e, r) at time period r ∈ T , create an arc between the copy i(r) ∈ V (r) and j (r+τ (e,r)) ∈ V (r+τ (e,r))
if r + τ (e, r) ≤ T . We also add arcs between subsequent copies of the same node. This network has
T n nodes and O(T m) arcs, hence, the simple bound for a strongly-polynomial max flow algorithm
is O(T 2 nm). However, if all transit times are bounded as τ (e, r) ≤ K, then the       time expanded
graph has tree-depth O(Kn log n), and thus Theorem 1.4 gives Õ K(T m)1+o(1) n .
8.3    Ordered transitive closure
We now use Algorithm 7, i.e., transitive closure with node ordering. This maintains ordering values
x ∈ RV . Recall from Definition 7.12 that for S ⊆ V , Vx (S) is the set of nodes u such that
xu ≥ minv∈S xv .
   Recall that for v ∈ R, Pv denotes the free component with root i. We use the ordering values
x ∈ RV defined as follows:
                           (      n                          o
                             max ufe : e ∈ ∂(Pv ) , ufe < Γε , if v ∈ R ,
                      xv =                                                                      (5)
                             0,                                    otherwise.

We can maintain the residual capacities
                                  n                            o
                                    ufe : e ∈ ∂(Pv ) , ufe < Γε

for each v ∈ R in a heap data structure, for example, using binomial heaps. Thus, each arc will
be present in two or zero copies. In each iteration, these values may change for essential arcs, and
we may add new entries for new arcs in H; arcs that become abundant are deleted from the heap.
Note that all these operations can be carried out in O(log n) amortized time.
    The value of ufe may change at most O(1) times for a given arc e. This is because the value may
change while e is essential, which is only for O(1) iterations, or in the iteration when e is added as
a new extension arc. These updates take O(m log n) time altogether.
    When merging free components Pi and Pj , we need to merge the corresponding heaps and delete
the two copies of the arcs between these components. We can identify these as follows. For each
component Pi , the corresponding heap contains all arcs incident to Pi . Recall that the root of the
merged component will be the root of the larger component, or s or t if they are one of i and j.
Accordingly, when merging i and j, assume j ceases to be a root (that is, |Pi | ≥ |Pj | or i ∈ {s, t}).
We scan through all arcs in the heap of Pj . For those that are between Pi and Pj , we remove the
other copy from the heap of Pi ; and all others are added to the heap of Pi . Thus, we need to
process every arc at most O(log n) times. The overall running time of the heap operations will be
O(m log2 n).
    In the algorithm, the set of essential roots Ress is defined as the roots of components with
incident essential arcs. Equivalently,

                                      Ress = {v ∈ R : xv ≥ Γ−5 ε} .

The algorithm calls TcCover(Ress ), and modifies the flow on essential arcs as well as on new arcs
added between nodes in Ress . Consequently, xv is not changed for any v ∈   / Ress . Therefore, to

                                                     57
maintain the xv values in the data structure, it suffices to recompute their values on Ress , and call
TcReorder(Ress , y), where y is the set of new values, obtained from the heap. By definition of Ress ,
Vx (Ress ) = Ress .

Theorem 1.1 (Fast-Matrix Multiplication based Maximum Flow). There is a deterministic strongly
                                                                        1+o(1)
polynomial algorithm that computes a maximum flow in Õ(nω−1 mc + nmc          ) time for an input
instance (G, u) with n nodes, m arcs, and a bound mc on the number of nodes plus capacitated arcs.
Furthermore, using randomization, the running time can be reduced to Õ(nω−1 mc )-time.

Proof. We use Algorithm 1 with the transitive data structure as in Algorithm 7. We add a call to
TcReorder(Ress ) at the end of the while cycle. Thus, both TcCover(·) and TcReorder(·) are called
on the essential root set Ress in every iteration, and Vx (Ress ) = Ress . By Theorem 6.1(ii), the total
number of essential roots throughout is O(mc ).
    As noted above, the time for the heap operations is O(m log2 n). In each iteration, TcAdd is
called for an arc set on Ress . By Theorem 7.14, the total time of all operations TcInit, TcCover,
TcReorder, TcAdd (after the first call) can be bounded as Õ(nω−1 mc + m) = Õ(nω−1+o(1) mc ) since
mc ≥ n. We also get that TcWitList(·) returns a witness list of size O(n2 ) in O(n2 ) time. Since
ω ≥ 2 and mc = Ω(n), we also have O(n2 ) = O(nω−1 mc ). By Lemma 6.8, WitRoute(·) also takes
time O(n2 ). Thus, we get TCtime (n, O(m), O(mc )) = Õ(nω−1 mc ).
    To derive the overall bound in Theorem 6.1(iv), we will show that TCarcs (n, O(m), O(mc )) =
O(nmc ). Let S1 , . . . , Sk denote the sequence of sets on which the algorithm makes transitive cover
calls. Note that each Si corresponds to the essential roots at some iteration, and hence is always
a prefix in the order induced by x at that iteration. Therefore, the call to TcCover(S Pi ) guarantees
that the cover has at most O(|Si |2 ) edges. Since the total number of essential roots ki=1 |Si | = mc
, we have that the total number of edges is ki=1 |Si |2 ≤ n ki=1 |Si | = O(nmc ). In particular, the
                                                P              P
                                                                   1+o(1)
time spent on approximate flow calls is (nmc + m)1+o(1) = nmc             since mc = Ω(n) and m ≤ n2 .
The total running time is therefore

                                       Õ(nω−1 mc + nm1+o(1)
                                                      c      ).

Note that if ω > 2, then Õ(nω−1 mc ) is the dominant term in the running time.
    We now quickly sketch how to reduce the running time to Õ(nω−1 mc ) by instead using ran-
domized Õ(m + n1.5 )-time algorithm of [53] as our the approximate flow solver. Firstly, we note
that the TcCover(Si ), i ∈ [k], for Si as above, always return sparser option between the full
graph and a subgraph of the transitive closure on O(Si )-vertices. For simplicity, let us mod-
ify TcCover(Si ) to always return the latter option. In this case, the number nodes in the ap-
proximate flow call is O(Si ) and the number of arcs is O(|Si |2 ). In particular, the algorithm
of [53] solves these instances in randomized Õ(|Si |1.5 + |Si |2 ) = Õ(|Si |2 )-time. Therefore, using
the same calculation   as for the total number of arcs, the time spent on approximate flow calls is
Õ(n1.5 + m + ki=1 |Si |2 ) = Õ(n2 + nmc ) = Õ(nmc ) = Õ(nω−1 mc ). This completes the proof.
               P


Acknowledgements
Thank you to anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback and suggestions. Thank you to Jan
van den Brand for helpful feedback, suggestions, and discussions in particular, thank you for help
with the literature on algebraic methods for dynamic transitive closure and related problems. Part
of this work was completed while authors were participating in the 2021 HIM program Discrete

                                                  58
Optimization and while visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing. Daniel Dadush
was supported by European Research Council grant 805241-QIP. Aaron Sidford was supported in
part by a Microsoft Research Faculty Fellowship, NSF CAREER Award CCF-1844855, NSF Grant
CCF1955039, a PayPal research award, and a Sloan Research Fellowship. László A. Végh’s was
affiliated with the London School of Economics and Political Science for part of this work, where
he was supported by the European Research Council grant 757481-ScaleOpt.

References
 [1] R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin. Network Flows: Theory, Algorithms, and
     Applications. Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1993.

 [2] N. Alon, Z. Galil, O. Margalit, and M. Naor. Witnesses for boolean matrix multiplication
     and for shortest paths. In 33rd IEEAnnual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
     (FOCS). IEEE, 1992.

 [3] N. Alon, P. Seymour, and R. Thomas. A separator theorem for nonplanar graphs. Journal of
     the American Mathematical Society, 3(4):801–808, 1990.

 [4] A. Bernstein, M. P. Gutenberg, and T. Saranurak. Deterministic decremental sssp and ap-
     proximate min-cost flow in almost-linear time. In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on
     Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 1000–1008. IEEE, 2022.

 [5] H. L. Bodlaender, J. R. Gilbert, H. Hafsteinsson, and T. Kloks. Approximating treewidth,
     pathwidth, frontsize, and shortest elimination tree. Journal of Algorithms, 18(2):238–255,
     1995.

 [6] G. Borradaile and P. Klein. An O(n log n) algorithm for maximum s–t-flow in a directed planar
     graph. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 56(2):1–30, 2009.

 [7] L. Chen, R. Kyng, Y. P. Liu, S. Meierhans, and M. Probst Gutenberg. Almost-linear time
     algorithms for incremental graphs: Cycle detection, sccs, st shortest path, and minimum-cost
     flow. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages
     1165–1173, 2024.

 [8] L. Chen, R. Kyng, Y. P. Liu, R. Peng, M. P. Gutenberg, and S. Sachdeva. Maximum flow
     and minimum-cost flow in almost-linear time. In 2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on
     Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 612–623. IEEE, 2022.

 [9] R. Clifford, A. Grønlund, and K. G. Larsen. New unconditional hardness results for dynamic
     and online problems. In IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
     FOCS, pages 1089–1107. IEEE, 2015.

[10] O. Cruz-Mejía and A. N. Letchford. A survey on exact algorithms for the maximum flow and
     minimum-cost flow problems. Networks, 82(2):167–176, 2023.

[11] M. Cygan, F. V. Fomin, Ł. Kowalik, D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, M. Pilipczuk, M. Pilipczuk, and
     S. Saurabh. Parameterized algorithms. Springer, 2015.

[12] C. Demetrescu and G. F. Italiano. Trade-offs for fully dynamic transitive closure on dags:
     breaking through the o(n2 ) barrier. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 52(2):147–156, 2005.

                                               59
[13] R. Duan, H. Wu, and R. Zhou. Faster matrix multiplication via asymmetric hashing. In 2023
     IEEE 64th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 2129–2138.
     IEEE, 2023.

[14] M. J. Fischer and A. R. Meyer. Boolean matrix multiplication and transitive closure. In 12th
     Annual Symposium on Switching and Automata Theory (swat 1971), pages 129–131, 1971.

[15] F. V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, S. Saurabh, M. Pilipczuk, and M. Wrochna. Fully polynomial-
     time parameterized computations for graphs and matrices of low treewidth. ACM Transactions
     on Algorithms (TALG), 14(3):1–45, 2018.

[16] M. L. Fredman and R. E. Tarjan. Fibonacci heaps and their uses in improved network opti-
     mization algorithms. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 34(3):596–615, 1987.

[17] D. Gale. Transient flows in networks. Michigan Mathematical Journal, 6(1):59–63, 1959.

[18] Z. Galil and A. Naaman. An O(V E log2 E) algorithm for the maximal flow problem. J.
     Computer and System Sciences, 21:203–217., 1980.

[19] G. Goranci, A. Karczmarz, A. Momeni, and N. Parotsidis. Fully dynamic algorithms for transi-
     tive reduction. In 52nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming,
     ICALP, volume 334 of LIPIcs, pages 92:1–92:20. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für In-
     formatik, 2025.

[20] T. Hagerup, J. Katajainen, N. Nishimura, and P. Ragde. Characterizing multiterminal flow
     networks and computing flows in networks of small treewidth. Journal of Computer and System
     Sciences, 57(3):366–375, 1998.

[21] R. Hassin and D. B. Johnson. An O(n log2 n) algorithm for maximum flow in undirected planar
     networks. SIAM Journal on Computing, 14(3):612–624, 1985.

[22] M. Henzinger, S. Krinninger, D. Nanongkai, and T. Saranurak. Unifying and strengthening
     hardness for dynamic problems via the online matrix-vector multiplication conjecture. In Pro-
     ceedings of the 47th annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, (STOC), pages 21–30,
     2015.

[23] M. Henzinger, B. Saha, M. P. Seybold, and C. Ye. On the complexity of algorithms with
     predictions for dynamic graph problems. In 15th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science
     Conference, ITCS, volume 287 of LIPIcs, pages 62:1–62:25. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum
     für Informatik, 2024.

[24] M. R. Henzinger, P. Klein, S. Rao, and S. Subramanian. Faster shortest-path algorithms for
     planar graphs. journal of computer and system sciences, 55(1):3–23, 1997.

[25] D. S. Hochbaum. A new—old algorithm for minimum-cut and maximum-flow in closure graphs.
     Networks: An International Journal, 37(4):171–193, 2001.

[26] D. S. Hochbaum and A. Chen. Performance analysis and best implementations of old and new
     algorithms for the open-pit mining problem. Operations Research, 48(6):894–914, 2000.



                                               60
[27] A. Itai and Y. Shiloach. Maximum flow in planar networks. SIAM Journal on Computing,
     8(2):135–150, 1979.

[28] G. F. Italiano. Amortized efficiency of a path retrieval data structure. Theoretical Computer
     Science, 48:273–281, 1986.

[29] G. F. Italiano, A. Karczmarz, J. Łącki, and P. Sankowski. Decremental single-source reach-
     ability in planar digraphs. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on
     Theory of Computing, pages 1108–1121, 2017.

[30] T. B. Johnson. Optimum open pit mine production scheduling, 1968. No. ORC-68–11, Uni-
     versity of California, Berkeley, Operations Research Center.

[31] A. Karczmarz. Decremental transitive closure and shortest paths for planar digraphs and
     beyond. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Al-
     gorithms, pages 73–92. SIAM, 2018.

[32] A. Karczmarz, A. Mukherjee, and P. Sankowski. Subquadratic dynamic path reporting in
     directed graphs against an adaptive adversary. In 54th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on
     Theory of Computing, STOC, pages 1643–1656. ACM, 2022.

[33] A. Karczmarz and P. Sankowski. Fully dynamic shortest paths and reachability in sparse di-
     graphs. In 50th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP,
     volume 261 of LIPIcs, pages 84:1–84:20. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
     2023.

[34] A. Karczmarz and M. Smulewicz. On fully dynamic strongly connected components. In 31st
     Annual European Symposium on Algorithms, ESA, volume 274 of LIPIcs, pages 68:1–68:15.
     Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023.

[35] T. Kavitha. Dynamic matrix rank with partial lookahead. Theory of Computing Systems,
     55(1):229–249, 2014.

[36] S. Khanna, R. Motwani, and R. H. Wilson. On certificates and lookahead in dynamic graph
     problems. Algorithmica, 21(4):377–394, 1998.

[37] V. King, S. Rao, and R. Tarjan. A faster deterministic maximum flow algorithm. Journal of
     Algorithms, 17(3):447–474, 1994.

[38] V. King and G. Sagert. A fully dynamic algorithm for maintaining the transitive closure.
     In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 492–498.
     ACM, 1999.

[39] Q. C. Liu and V. Srinivas. The predicted-updates dynamic model: Offline, incremental, and
     decremental to fully dynamic transformations. In The 37th Annual Conference on Learning
     Theory, COLT, volume 247 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 3582–3641.
     PMLR, 2024.

[40] V. M. Malhotra, M. P. Kumar, and S. N. Maheshwari. An o(|v|3 ) algorithm for finding maxi-
     mum flows in networks. Information Processing Letters, 7(6):277–278, 1978.

                                               61
[41] G. L. Miller and J. Naor. Flow in planar graphs with multiple sources and sinks. SIAM Journal
     on Computing, 24(5):1002–1017, 1995.

[42] J. B. Orlin. Max flows in O(nm) time, or better. In Proceedings of the 45th annual ACM
     Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 765–774, 2013. Full version available at
     https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/88020.

[43] P. Sankowski. Dynamic transitive closure via dynamic matrix inverse. In 45th Symposium on
     Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS, pages 509–517. IEEE Computer Society, 2004.

[44] P. Sankowski and M. Mucha. Fast dynamic transitive closure with lookahead. Algorithmica,
     56(2):180–197, 2010.

[45] D. Sha and C. Wong. Time-varying network optimization, volume 103. Springer Science &
     Business Media, 2007.

[46] D. D. Sleator and R. E. Tarjan. A data structure for dynamic trees. Journal of Computer and
     System Sciences, 26(3):362–391, 1983.

[47] R. E. Tarjan. Efficiency of the primal network simplex algorithm for the minimum-cost circu-
     lation problem. Mathematics of Operations Research, 16(2):272–291, 1991.

[48] A. Thomason. The extremal function for complete minors. Journal of Combinatorial Theory,
     Series B, 81(2):318–338, 2001.

[49] J. Van Den Brand, L. Chen, R. Kyng, Y. P. Liu, S. Meierhans, M. P. Gutenberg, and
     S. Sachdeva. Almost-linear time algorithms for decremental graphs: Min-cost flow and more via
     duality. In 2024 IEEE 65th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
     pages 2010–2032. IEEE, 2024.

[50] J. Van Den Brand, L. Chen, R. Peng, R. Kyng, Y. P. Liu, M. P. Gutenberg, S. Sachdeva, and
     A. Sidford. A deterministic almost-linear time algorithm for minimum-cost flow. In 2023 IEEE
     64th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 503–514. IEEE,
     2023.

[51] J. van den Brand, S. Forster, Y. Nazari, and A. Polak. On dynamic graph algorithms with
     predictions. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA,
     pages 3534–3557. SIAM, 2024.

[52] J. van den Brand and A. Karczmarz. Deterministic fully dynamic SSSP and more. In 64th IEEE
     Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS, pages 2312–2321. IEEE, 2023.

[53] J. Van Den Brand, Y. T. Lee, Y. P. Liu, T. Saranurak, A. Sidford, Z. Song, and D. Wang.
     Minimum cost flows, MDPs, and ℓ1 -regression in nearly linear time for dense instances. In
     Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages
     859–869, 2021.

[54] J. van den Brand, D. Nanongkai, and T. Saranurak. Dynamic matrix inverse: Improved algo-
     rithms and matching conditional lower bounds. In 60th IEEE Annual Symposium on Founda-
     tions of Computer Science, FOCS, pages 456–480. IEEE, 2019.

                                               62
[55] K. Weihe. Maximum (s, t)-flows in planar networks in O(|V | log |V |) time. Journal of Computer
     and System Sciences, 55(3):454–475, 1997.

[56] V. V. Williams, Y. Xu, Z. Xu, and R. Zhou. New bounds for matrix multiplication: from alpha
     to omega. In Proceedings of the 2024 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
     (SODA), pages 3792–3835. SIAM, 2024.

A     The Approximate Flow Subroutine
In this section, we derive Lemma 2.2 and Theorem 2.9.
    We will use the fundamental flow decomposition theorem, which states that any flow can be
decomposed into path and cycle flows. A flow f ∈ RE  + is an s–t path flow if the support of f is an
s–t path P ⊆ E(G) and fe = fe′ > 0 for all e, e′ ∈ P . Similarly, f is a cycle flow if it is supported
on cycle C ⊆ E(G) and fe = fe′ > 0 for all e, e′ ∈ C. The following decomposition is well-known
and easy to verify using a greedy construction.

Theorem A.1. Let (G,P    u) be a maximum   flow instance with m arcs, and let f ∈ FlowP(G, u).
Then we can write f = i∈[kp ] f + i∈[kc ] f Ci , such that kc + kp ≤ m, f Pi ∈ RE
                                   P
                                       P
                                                                                   + is an s–t path
                                     i

                                                                C   E
flow supported on an s–t path Pi ⊆ E(G) for all i ∈ [kp ], and f ∈ R+ is a cycle flow supported on
                                                                 i

a cycle Ci ⊆ E(G) for all i ∈ [kc ].

Lemma 2.2. Given a flow f in the instance (G, u) on n nodes and m arcs, in O(m log n) time one
can find a basic acylic flow f¯ such that supp(f¯) ⊆ supp(f ), val(f¯) ≥ val(f ). Every acyclic basic
flow f¯ satisfies the following properties.

 (i) ∥f ∥∞ ≤ val(f¯).

 (ii) f¯e = 0 for all e ∈ ∂E
                           in (s) ∪ ∂ out (t).
                                     E

(iii) The set of arcs {e ∈ E : 0 < f¯e < ue } form a forest, with s and t belonging to different
      components.

(iv) For every e ∈ E, the flow value f¯e can be written in the form f¯e = e′ ∈E(G) χee′ ue′ , where
                                                                         P
      χee′ ∈ {0, ±1}.

Proof. Using the link-cut trees data structure by Sleator and Tarjan [46], every flow can be reduced
to an acylic flow of the same value by removing flow around directed cycles from the support
in O(m log n) time. Using a slight modification of this data structure, see also [47] , there is an
O(m log n) time algorithm that turns a flow f into a basic feasible flow of the same or better value by
setting some arcs with 0 < fe < ue to either of the two capacity bounds. Running these algorithms
one after the other results in an acyclic basic flow, by noting that the second algorithm cannot
create any new directed cycles in the support of the flow.
    Properties (i) and (ii) follow because f¯ is acyclic. Thus, a flow decomposition (Theorem A.1)
may only contain paths, and the total value carried along the paths is at most val(f¯). For (ii),
notice that any arc entering s or leaving t with positive flow would be contained in a cycle in the
flow decomposition. Property (iii) holds for any basic flow: if C is a cycle of arcs strictly between
the upper and lower capacity, then we can write f as the convex combination of two flows f − g
and f + g, where g is a flow sending some positive amount of flow around such a cycle. Similarly, if
s and t were in the same component of the forest, then we could set g as positive flow supported on

                                                  63
an s–t path. Property (iv) is also true for any basic flow and can be easily derived from property
(iii), or by the total unimodularity of the incidence matrix of directed graphs.

Theorem 2.9. There exists an m1+o(1) log M -time deterministic approximate maximum flow solver.

    The stated algorithm ApproxFlow(G, u, M ) is shown on Algorithm 8. It relies on the solver
FastMaxFlow(G, u) guaranteed in Theorem 2.8. For an instance (G, u) with m arcs and inte-
ger capacities ue at most U , this subroutine returns an integer maximum flow in running time
m1+o(1) log U . We also use the subroutine MaxCap(G, u) that computes the maximum capacity of
an s–t path in the instance (G, u), and returns an arc e⋆ ∈ E(G) with the same capacity. This
algorithm can be implemented in time O(m + n log n) in an instance with n nodes and m arcs,
using Fibonacci heaps [16]. Finally, let ConvertBasic(G, u, f ) denote the subroutine described in
Lemma 2.2 that converts a flow to an acyclic basic one. We will use the following simple lemma.

Lemma A.2. For a maximum flow instance (G, u) with m arcs, the maximum capacity of an s–t
path lies between ν(G, u)/m and ν(G, u).


 Algorithm 8: ApproxFlow
   Data: An instance (G, u) with ν(G, u) < ∞, and M ∈ R≥0 .
   Result: A flow f in (G, u) and e⋆ ∈ E(G) as in Definition 2.7.
 1 uē ← MaxCap(G, u) ;
 2 δ ← uē /(m2 M ) ;

                                  δ ,m M ;
                                ue  3
 3 for e ∈ E(G) do we ← min
 4 g ← δ · FastMaxFlow(G, w) ;
 5 f ← ConvertBasic(G, u, g) ;
 6 e⋆ ← MaxCap(G, uf ) ;
 7 return (f, e⋆ ) ;



     The algorithm computes the bottleneck arc ē by calling MaxCap(G, u). It then sets δ =
uē /(m2 M ) and rounds all capacities as we = min{⌊ue /δ⌋, m3 M }. We call FastMaxFlow(G, w)
to obtain an integer maximum flow, and set g as δ times this flow. Finally, we convert g into an
acylic basic flow f , and obtain the bottleneck arc e⋆ .
     Rounding the capacities to integer multiples of δ may decrease the instance value by at most mδ.
Since ν(G, u) ≤ muē (Lemma A.2), this decreases the instance value by at most ν(G, u)/(mM ).
Further, truncating capacities at m3 M δ = muē ≥ ν(G, u) does not change the maximum flow
value of the instance. Consequently, val(g) ≥ ν(G, u)(1 − 1/(mM )), and ν(G, uf ) ≤ ν(G, ug ) ≤
ν(G, u)/(mM ). Again by Lemma A.2, for the bottleneck arc e⋆ , ufe⋆ ≤ m val(f ) ≤ ν(G, u)/M .
Thus, (f, e⋆ ) satisfy the requirements in Definition 2.7.
Arithmetic operations As described above, Algorithm 8 uses additions, subtractions, multipli-
cations, integer divisions, and comparisons (beyond the operations in the other subroutines). We
show that all these can be replaced by using additions, subtractions, and comparisons only, while
keeping the same overall running time bound. Note that given α, expressions of the form tα for
integer t can be computed by O(log t) additions. We do not need to explicitly compute δ to compute
the capacities we . This is because we = k for the integer value k ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , M m3 } for the value



                                                    64
k where kuē ≤ M m2 ue < (k + 1)uē . Hence, these values can be computed using binary search in
O(log(m + M )) additions and comparisons.
    Let g ′ denote the output of FastMaxFlow(G, w); this is an integer flow. The algorithm would
set g = δg ′ , and then convert this to a basic flow f . However, since δ = uē /(M m2 ), this involves
division by M m2 . To avoid this, we can set g ′′ = uē g ′ = M m2 g; the value of this flow on every
                                                        def


arc is an integer multiple of the original capacity uē . Let u′′ = M m2 u; thus, g ′′ is a feasible flow in
                                                                      def


(G, u′′ ). We can use ConvertBasic(G, u′′ , g ′′ ) to convert g ′′ to an acyclic basic flow f ′′ . This solution
is uniquely defined by two arc sets E0 , E1 ⊆ E(G) and the conditions fe′′ = 0 for e ∈ E0 and fe′′ = u′′e
for e ∈ E1 ; the rest of the arcs forms a forest, with s and t being in different components. Using
these same two arc sets and the forest, we can compute the basic solution f in (G, u) such that
f = f ′′ /(M m2 ), without using division.

B     Incremental Transitive Cover Lower Bounds via OMv
In this section, we optimize a known lower bound for incremental transitive closure and adapt it to
the precise setting needed in Theorem 1.6 for incremental transitive cover.
The OMv Conjecture. As mentioned in the introduction, the lower bound is derived from
online Boolean matrix multiplication conjecture (OMv) of Henzinger, Krinninger, Nanongkai and
Saranurak [22]. The γ-OMv problem, for fixed γ > 0 is as follows. We are given a Boolean matrix
A of dimension n1 × n2 , where n1 = ⌊(n2 )γ ⌋ which we have poly(n1 , n2 )-time to preprocess. From
here, a Boolean matrix B = (b1 , . . . , bn3 ) of dimension n2 × n3 arrives online one column at a
time. After column bk arrives, k ≥ 1, the algorithm must output the Boolean product Abk before
any remaining vector arrives. The OMv conjecture states that for γ-OMv, no online algorithm as
above can compute the online matrix product in sub O(n1 n2 n3 )-time, which corresponds to the
trivial bound for computing the Boolean products one by one. By sub O(n1 n2 n3 )-time, the precise
                1 n2 n3 + n1 n2 n3 + n1 n2 n3 )-time, for any fixed ε > 0.
meaning is O(n1−ε             1−ϵ               1−ϵ

OMv based Incremental Transitive Closure Lower Bound. In [24, Corollary 4.8], Hen-
zinger, Krinninger, Nanongkai and Saranurak prove that any algorithm for the incremental tran-
sitive closure problem that processes O(m) updates and O(n2 ) queries in sub O(mn)-time would
break OMv for n1 = n3 = n and n2 = m/n.
    The reduction from OMv is as follows. Given A, B of dimensions n1 ×n2 and n2 ×n3 respectively,
one constructs a three layer graph as follows. The nodes are in layers L1 , L2 , L3 , where |Lr | = nr
for r ∈ [3]. The node labelled i in L1 and j in L2 are connected by a directed arc (i, j) iff Aij = 1.
The nodes are in L3 are initially isolated. We begin by inserting the arcs associated with A into the
incremental transitive cover data structure (these can technically be counted as OMv preprocessing).
    When the vector bk arrives, we add the arc (j, k) between the node labelled j in L2 and the
node labelled k in L3 , for all j such that (bk )j = 1. These corresponding arcs are inserted into the
data structure.
    To compute the Boolean matrix vector product Abk , we note that (Abk )i = 1, i ∈ [n1 ], if and
only if there is a directed path of length 2 from the node labelled i in L1 to the node labelled k in
L3 in the current network. This can be determined by asking the transitive closure data structure
if k is reachable from i in the current network.
    In the above reduction, the number of queries to the transitive closure data structure is precisely
n1 × n3 = n2 (the dimensions of AB), and the number of insertions is precisely the number of non-
zeros and A and B, which are at most n1 × n2 + n2 × n3 = 2(m/n)(n) = 2m. Furthermore, the


                                                      65
number of nodes in the graph is n1 + n2 + n3 = 2n + m/n = O(n) (noting that m ≤ n2 ). The OMv
conjecture therefore posits that the total query and update time cannot be sub-O(n1 n2 n3 ) = O(nm).
Optimizing the Lower Bound for Incremental Transitive Cover. As mentioned in the
introduction, one can run the above reduction using an incremental transitive cover data structure
in place of incremental transitive closure. Namely, for each (i, k) transitive query, one simply queries
for a transitive cover on the set {i, k}, and runs a BFS from i on this cover to see if it can reach
k. Since the BFS-time is linear in the number of arcs of the outputted cover, and the transitive
closure processing-time dominates the size of the outputted covers, the lower bound above extends
to transitive cover under the condition that the total size of query sets is O(n2 ).
    In Corollary 1.8, the number of arc insertions and the total query size are only O(m), noting that
the number of queries required above is Ω(n2 ). We now show that optimizing the above OMv lower
bound under these new conditions yields that the total processing time of incremental transitive
cover cannot be sub-O(m3/2 ).
    We recall that the upper bound on the number of inserted arcs n1 n2 + n2 n3 must be at most
O(m) and the number of nodes n1 +n2 +n3 must be O(n). Furthermore, the number of queries n1 n3
must also be O(m). Under these conditions, optimizing the lower bound simply means maximizing
the product n1 n2 n3 . By the AM-GM inequality, we have that
                                       3
                                            1           3
                                                             1           3
                                                                              1
                                             3                3                  3
                    n1 n2 n3 = (n1 n2 ) 2 )      (n2 n3 ) 2 )     (n1 n3 ) 2 )
                               1                                              
                             ≤    (n1 n2 )3/2 + (n2 n3 )3/2 + (n1 n2 )3/2 = O(m3/2 ),
                               3
using our assumption that each of n1 n2 , n2 n3 , n1 n3 is O(m). Furthermore, a feasible solution
                                               √
achieving this bound is simply n1 = n2 = n3 = m ≤ n.




                                                   66
