Volume 15, Issue 2, February 2025



Logic and Neural Networks (Dagstuhl Seminar 25061)
  Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, Daniel Neider,
   and Tom Yuviler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     1
Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR) (Dagstuhl Seminar 25062)
   Peter Haddawy, Anja Hennemuth, Ron Kikinis, Gabriel Zachmann, Mario Lorenz,
   and Anke Reinschlüssel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           21
Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design (Dagstuhl Seminar
25071)
   Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, Tom Demeulemeester, and Bettina Klaus . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization (Dagstuhl
Seminar 25072)
  Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind    63
Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic (Dagstuhl Seminar 25081)
  Guillermo Badia, Manfred Droste, Phokion G. Kolaitis, Carles Noguera, Sophie Brinke,
   Lovro Mrkonjić, and Gaia Petreni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Visualizing Data on Non-Flat, Non-Rectangular Displays (Dagstuhl Seminar 25082)
   Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, Wesley J. Willett, and Ricardo Langner                                                                      110
Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design (Dagstuhl Seminar 25091)
   Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo, Chadlia Jerad, Edward A. Lee, Claire Pagetti,
   and Shaokai Jerry Lin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications (Dagstuhl Seminar
25092)
   Josu Ceberio Uribe, Benjamin Doerr, John McCall, Carsten Witt,
   and Marcus Schmidbauer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158




   D a g s t u h l R e p or t s , Vo l . 1 5 , I s s u e 2                                                                  ISSN 2192-5283
ISSN 2192-5283

Published online and open access by                    Aims and Scope
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik      The periodical Dagstuhl Reports documents the
GmbH, Dagstuhl Publishing, Saarbrücken/Wadern,         program and the results of Dagstuhl Seminars and
Germany. Online available at                           Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshops.
https://www.dagstuhl.de/dagpub/2192-5283               In principal, for each Dagstuhl Seminar or Dagstuhl
                                                       Perspectives Workshop a report is published that
Publication date                                       contains the following:
October, 2025                                              an executive summary of the seminar program
                                                           and the fundamental results,
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche         an overview of the talks given during the seminar
Nationalbibliothek                                          (summarized as talk abstracts), and
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publica-         summaries from working groups (if applicable).
tion in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; detailed
bibliographic data are available in the Internet at This basic framework can be extended by suitable
https://dnb.d-nb.de.                                    contributions that are related to the program of the
                                                        seminar, e. g. summaries from panel discussions or
                                                        open problem sessions.
License
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
                                                        Editorial Board
Attribution 4.0 International license (CC BY 4.0).
                                                            Elisabeth André
                 In brief, this license authorizes each
                 and everybody to share (to copy,           Franz Baader
distribute and transmit) the work under the follow-         Goetz Graefe
ing conditions, without impairing or restricting the        Reiner Hähnle
authors’ moral rights:
                                                            Barbara Hammer
    Attribution: The work must be attributed to its
    authors.                                                Lynda Hardman
                                                           Steve Kremer
The copyright is retained by the corresponding au-         Rupak Majumdar
thors.
                                                           Heiko Mantel
                                                           Lennart Martens
                                                           Albrecht Schmidt
                                                           Wolfgang Schröder-Preikschat
                                                           Raimund Seidel (Editor-in-Chief )
                                                           Heike Wehrheim
                                                           Verena Wolf
                                                           Martina Zitterbart

                                                       Editorial Office
                                                       Michael Wagner (Managing Editor)
                                                       Michael Didas (Managing Editor)
                                                       Jutka Gasiorowski (Editorial Assistance)
                                                       Dagmar Glaser (Editorial Assistance)
                                                       Thomas Schillo (Technical Assistance)
                                                       Contact
                                                       Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik
                                                       Dagstuhl Reports, Editorial Office
                                                       Oktavie-Allee, 66687 Wadern, Germany
                                                       reports@dagstuhl.de
Digital Object Identifier: 10.4230/DagRep.15.2.i       https://www.dagstuhl.de/dagrep
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25061

Logic and Neural Networks
Vaishak Belle∗1 , Michael Benedikt∗2 , Dana Drachsler-Cohen∗3 ,
Daniel Neider∗4 , and Tom Yuviler†5
1      University of Edinburgh, GB. vaishak@ed.ac.uk
2      University of Oxford, GB. michael.benedikt@cs.ox.ac.uk
3      Technion, IL. ddana@ee.technion.ac.il
4      TU Dortmund University, DE. daniel.neider@tu-dortmund.de
5      Technion – Haifa, IL. tom.yuviler@campus.technion.ac.il

        Abstract
Logic and learning are central to Computer Science, and in particular to AI-related research.
Already Alan Turing envisioned in his 1950 “Computing Machinery and Intelligence” paper a
combination of statistical (ab initio) machine learning and an “unemotional” symbolic language
such as logic. The combination of logic and learning has received new impetus from the spectacular
success of deep learning systems.
    This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 25061 “Logic and
Neural Networks”. The goal of this Dagstuhl Seminar was to bring together researchers from
various communities related to utilizing logical constraints in deep learning and to create bridges
between them via the exchange of ideas. The seminar focused on a set of interrelated topics:
enforcement of constraints on neural networks, verifying logical constraints on neural networks,
training using logic to supplement traditional supervision, and explanation and approximation
via logic. This Dagstuhl Seminar aimed not at studying these areas as separate components, but
in exploring common techniques among them as well as connections to other communities in
machine learning that share the same broad goals.
    The seminar format consisted of long and short talks, as well as breakout sessions. We
summarize the motivations and proceedings of the seminar, and report on the abstracts of the
talks and the results of the breakout sessions.
Seminar February 02–07, 2025 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/25061
2012 ACM Subject Classification Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence; Computing
   methodologies → Machine learning approaches; Computing methodologies → Logical and
   relational learning; Theory of computation → Constraint and logic programming; Theory of
   computation → Models of learning; General and reference → Surveys and overviews; Theory
   of computation → Modal and temporal logics
Keywords and phrases machine learning, learning theory, logic, computational complexity,
   databases, verification, safety
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.2.1




∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector
            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Logic and Neural Networks, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15, Issue 2, pp. 1–20
Editors: Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, Daniel Neider, and Tom Yuviler
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
2   25061 – Logic and Neural Networks


        1    Executive Summary
    Vaishak Belle (University of Edinburgh, GB, vaishak@ed.ac.uk)
    Michael Benedikt (University of Oxford, GB, michael.benedikt@cs.ox.ac.uk)
    Dana Drachsler-Cohen (Technion, IL, ddana@ee.technion.ac.il)
    Daniel Neider (TU Dortmund University, DE, daniel.neider@tu-dortmund.de)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider


    Motivation
    Logic and learning are central to Computer Science, and in particular to AI-related research.
    Already Alan Turing envisioned in his 1950 “Computing Machinery and Intelligence” paper [1]
    a combination of statistical (ab initio) machine learning and an “unemotional” symbolic
    language such as logic. The combination of logic and learning has received new impetus
    from the spectacular success of deep learning systems. As part of these developments,
    several key roles for logical rules have been identified: As a means of expressing safety
    properties that a network should satisfy; As a way of providing “weak supervision”, that
    can be utilized in training, to augment or to substitute for direct supervision; As a means of
    explaining properties of networks, or explanations of the decisions produced by them. With
    the identification of these roles, a number of core challenges have arisen: Verifying logic-based
    properties of networks, Enforcing logic-based properties during training; Utilizing logic-based
    properties in tandem with traditional supervision within learning to train networks; and
    Producing logic-based explanations of neural network outcomes. Clearly, these challenges
    have significant synergy between them. The goal of this seminar was to bring together
    researchers from various communities related to utilizing constraints in deep learning, and to
    create bridges between them via the exchange of ideas.



    Design of the Seminar
    The seminar focused on a set of interrelated topics connected to logic and neural networks:
      Verifying logical constraints on neural networks. Despite being successful in
       various tasks, neural networks have also been shown to be susceptible to various attacks
      (e.g., adversarial attacks [2]) or prone to biased decisions (e.g., in Amazon’s systems1 ).
       To understand the resilience of networks to these phenomena, it is crucial to prove
       that networks satisfy safety properties, such as local robustness and fairness. These are
       captured via logical constraints, defined on specific inputs in a given dataset (e.g., local
       robustness) or universally on any input (e.g., fairness and global robustness). Many
       works have proposed verification systems for these properties [3], typically leveraging
       constraint solvers [4, 5] or static analysis [6, 7]. Constraints can derive from a number of
       motivations: security/safety, fairness, or interpretability. Despite the active research on
       verifying these properties, existing approaches still do not scale to very deep networks,
       which are ubiquitous in practice. We believe it is viable to understand how to push
       forward the analysis capabilities to use them for large and deep networks. This will
       have an impact both for academy and industry, since it will increase the users’ trust in
       practical neural network-based systems.


    1
        e.g., https://www.reuters.com/article/us-amazon-com-jobs-automation-insight-idUSKCN1MK08G
V. Belle, M. Benedikt, D. Drachsler-Cohen, D. Neider, and T. Yuviler                                  3


   Enforcement of constraints on neural networks. Logical rules can represent
   important safety properties and prior knowledge into the training of neural networks.
   For example, in a manufacturing setting, we may wish to encode that an actuator for a
   robotic arm does not exceed some threshold (e.g., causing the arm to move at a hazardous
   speed). Another example is a self-driving car, where a controller should be known to
   operate within a predefined set of constraints (e.g., the car should always stop completely
   when facing a human). In such safety-critical domains, machine learning solutions must
   guarantee to operate within distinct boundaries that are specified by logical, arithmetic,
   and geometric rules. Techniques include specialized loss functions [8], which can be
   augmented with additional layers within a neural architecture. These approaches compile
   the constraints into the loss function of the training algorithm, by quantifying the extent
   to which the output of the network violates the constraints. This is appealing as logical
   constraints are easy to elicit from people. However, the solution outputted by the network
   is designed to minimize the loss function – which combines both data and constraints
   – rather than to guarantee the satisfaction of the domain constraints. So this is an
   important open problem.
   Training using logic and traditional supervision. A major of impetus for a
   synthesis of logic and learning relates to paucity of supervision. In many regimes explicit
   supervision is extremely limited, and synthetic data generation may be infeasible. A
   promising approach to augment supervision is via the use of external knowledge. The
   approach has been used in domains as distinct as scene recognition [9] and parsing [10].
   Approaches that integrate constraint-based supervision with traditional supervision have
   arisen simultaneously in many areas of artificial intelligence. While the focus of our
   seminar is constraints expressed in general-purpose logics, we look for connections with
   constraint-based approaches to learning from other areas, such as physics.
   Explaining neural networks via logic. A critical issue with black box models,
   particularly neural networks, is understanding their decision boundaries. An important
   strategy employed in recent years involves attempting to extract decision trees, logical
   rules, and other deterministic machines from these neural networks [11, 12, 13, 14]. This
   can be seen as a strategy for post-hoc explanation [15]. Most approaches for rule extraction
   use template-based approaches to explore patterns in pre-trained models, with a focus
   on characteristics and properties of entities such as people, places, or things. However,
   template-based approaches do show sensitivity to template formulation, highlighting
   the need to explore alternative strategies to probe pre-trained models. They are often
   based on a combination of techniques from Bayesian Structure Learning, Inductive Logic
   Programming [16], and Distillation [15]. Explanation and approximation via logics have
   also arisen in Graph Neural Networks [17]. An interesting phenomenon is that one of
   the languages used for explanation is Datalog, which is also prominent in the verification
   community. The ability to approximate networks by logics is closely-related to attempts
   to understand the expressiveness of neural approaches in terms of logics [18, 19].



Summary of Seminar Activities
The seminar was attended by 38 researchers across various communities including logic, formal
verification, machine learning, deep learning, program synthesis, graph neural networks,
expressiveness, explainability, theorem proving, neural-symbolic learning, and databases. The
seminar participants included senior and junior researchers, including graduate students, post-




                                                                                                  25061
4   25061 – Logic and Neural Networks


    doctoral researchers, faculty members, and industry experts. The seminar was conducted
    through talks and breakout sessions, with breaks for discussion between the attendees.
    Overall, there were 19 talks, and two main breakout sessions. The talks included a range
    of presentations on recent advances in the interrelated fields of logic and neural networks,
    as previously discussed. Some talks also provided broader overviews of related areas, such
    as formal verification of neural networks and program synthesis. The first breakout session
    was divided into four groups based on the participants’ main areas of research: verification,
    expressivity, explainability, and learning with background knowledge and constraints. Each
    group discussed several topic-specific questions: (1) the open challenges, (2) the value
    proposition, (3) potential “killer applications” or teaching curricula, and (4) drafting a
    concise manifesto. The second breakout session was divided into three groups (based on
    participants’ choices), each focused on integrating interrelated topics: (1) verification and
    constraints, (2) explainability, expressiveness, and constraints, and (3) verification and
    explainability. Each group examined several issues concerning the interplay of these areas,
    including: (1) prior work, (2) open challenges, (3) real-world motivations and applications,
    and (4) short- and long-term project ideas.



    Conclusion
    We consider the seminar a success and believe it achieved several goals that will help
    strengthen connections among the fields of neural-network verification, logic, explainability,
    and expressivity. These include: (1) fostering links among the participating researchers,
    (2) generating a set of open challenges, goals, and future research directions, and (3) providing
    a more unified view of current approaches to these interrelated topics. We also hope the
    seminar will catalyze the further development of benchmarks for applying logic in neural
    networks. Finally, the seminar’s format – featuring talks, ample time for discussion, and
    breakout sessions – received positive feedback from participants.
    References
     1 A. M. Turing: Computing machinery and intelligence. In Mind, vol. LIX (1950)
     2 Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian J.
         Goodfellow, Rob Fergus: Intriguing properties of neural networks. In ICLR (2014).
     3 Linyi Li, Tao Xie, Bo Li. SoK: Certified robustness for deep neural networks. In IEEE
         Symposium on Security and Privacy (2023).
     4 Guy Katz, Clark W. Barrett, David L. Dill, Kyle Julian, Mykel J. Kochenderfer: Reluplex:
         a calculus for reasoning about deep neural networks. In Formal Methods Syst. Des. (2022).
     5 Vincent Tjeng, Kai Yuanqing Xiao, Russ Tedrake: Evaluating robustness of neural networks
         with mixed integer programming. In ICLR (2019).
     6 Timon Gehr, Matthew Mirman, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, Petar Tsankov, Swarat Chaudhuri,
         Martin T. Vechev: AI2: safety and robustness certification of neural networks with abstract
         interpretation. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (2018).
     7 Huan Zhang, Tsui-Wei Weng, Pin-Yu Chen, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Luca Daniel: Efficient neural
         network robustness certification with general activation functions. In NeurIPS (2018).
     8 Jingyi Xu, Zilu Zhang, Tal Friedman, Yitao Liang, Guy Van den Broeck: A semantic loss
         function for deep learning with symbolic knowledge. In ICML (2018).
     9 Eleonora Giunchiglia, Mihaela Catalina Stoian, Salman Khan, Fabio Cuzzolin, Thomas
         Lukasiewicz: ROAD-R: the autonomous driving dataset with logical requirements. In Mach.
         Learn. (2023).
V. Belle, M. Benedikt, D. Drachsler-Cohen, D. Neider, and T. Yuviler                                    5


10   Chen Liang, Jonathan Berant, Quoc V. Le, Ken Forbus, Ni Lao. Neural symbolic machines:
     Learning semantic parsers on freebase with weak supervision. In ACL (2017).
11   Jan Ruben Zilke, Eneldo Loza Mencía, Frederik Janssen: Deepred–rule extraction from
     deep neural networks. In DS (2016).
12   Robert Andrews, Joachim Diederich, Alan B Tickle: Survey and critique of techniques for
     extracting rules from trained artificial neural networks. In Knowledge-based systems (1995).
13   Tameru Hailesilassie: Rule extraction algorithm for deep neural networks: A review. In
     CoRR abs/1610.05267 (2016).
14   Hiroshi Tsukimoto: Extracting rules from trained neural networks. In IEEE Transactions
     on Neural networks (2000).
15   Vaishak Belle, Ioannis Papantonis. Principles and practice of explainable machine learning.
     In Frontiers in big Data (2021).
16   Stephen Muggleton, Luc De Raedt, David Poole, Ivan Bratko, Peter Flach, Katsumi Inoue,
     Ashwin Srinivasan: ILP turns 20. In Machine learning (2012).
17   David Tena Cucala, Bernardo Cuenca Grau, Boris Motik, and Egor V. Kostylev: On the
     correspondence between monotonic max-sum gnns and datalog. In KR (2023).
18   Floris Geerts, Juan L. Reutter: Expressiveness and approximation properties of graph
     neural networks. In ICLR (2022).
19   David Chiang, Peter Cholak, Anand Pillay: Tighter bounds on the expressivity of transformer
     encoders. In ICML (2023).




                                                                                                    25061
6   25061 – Logic and Neural Networks


     2      Table of Contents
    Executive Summary
      Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider . . . .                 2

    Overview of Talks
         Learning Symmetric Rules with SATNet
         Hongseok Yang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     8
         Query Languages for Machine Learning Models
         Pablo Barcelo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
         How to make logics neurosymbolic
         Luc De Raedt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
         Bridging Generalization and Expressivity of Graph Neural Networks
         Floris Geerts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
         Formal Verification of Machine Learning with the Industry: The Journey so Far,
         And the Future Ahead
         Julien Girard-Satabin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         Learning with Constraints: Fuzzy Methods
         Eleonora Giunchiglia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         Neural Continuous-Time Supermartingale Certificates
         Anna Lukina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     11
         Challenges for the Certification of AI in Railway Systems
         Pierre-Jean Meyer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     11
         Distinguished In Uniform: Self Attention Vs. Virtual Nodes
         Martin Ritzert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
         How Can Formal Methods Benefit Large Language Models
         Gagandeep Singh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
         Program Synthesis Present and Future
         Armando Solar-Lezama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         Refining Deep Generative Modelling using Background Knowledge
         Mihaela Stoian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         Expressive Power of Graph Neural Networks via Datalog
         David Tena Cucala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         Static Analysis Methods for Neural Networks
         Caterina Urban . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    14
         From Learning with Constraints to Partial Label Learning
         Zsolt Zombori . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
         Learning with Constraints: Probabilistic Methods
         Emile van Krieken . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

    Breakout Sessions
         Verification
         Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider . . . . 15
V. Belle, M. Benedikt, D. Drachsler-Cohen, D. Neider, and T. Yuviler                                    7


   Expressivity
   Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider . . . . 16
   Explainability
   Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider . . . . 16
   Learning with Background Knowledge & Constraints
   Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider . . . .           17
   Combining Verification and Constraints
   Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider . . . .           17
   Combining Explainability, Expressiveness, and Constraints
   Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider . . . . 18
   Combining Verification and Explainability
   Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider . . . . 18

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20




                                                                                                    25061
8   25061 – Logic and Neural Networks


     3     Overview of Talks
    3.1     Learning Symmetric Rules with SATNet
    Hongseok Yang (KAIST – Daejeon, KR, hongseok00@gmail.com)
          License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                   © Hongseok Yang
     Joint work of Hongseok Yang, Sangho Lim, Eungyeol Oh
    Main reference Sangho Lim, Eun-Gyeol Oh, Hongseok Yang: “Learning Symmetric Rules with SATNet”, in Proc. of
                   the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural
                   Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 –
                   December 9, 2022, 2022.
              URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/5642b9811a9ac5281be1cc84c275f251-Abstract-
                   Conference.html


    SATNet is a differentiable constraint solver with a custom backpropagation algorithm, which
    can be used as a layer in a deep-learning system. It is a promising proposal for bridging
    deep learning and logical reasoning. In fact, SATNet has been successfully applied to learn,
    among others, the rules of a complex logical puzzle, such as Sudoku, just from input and
    output pairs where inputs are given as images. In this talk, I explain our work on improving
    the learning of SATNet by exploiting symmetries in the target rules of a given but unknown
    logical puzzle or more generally a logical formula. I present SymSATNet, a variant of SATNet
    that translates the given symmetries of the target rules to a condition on the parameters
    of SATNet and requires that the parameters should have a particular parametric form that
    guarantees the condition. The requirement dramatically reduces the number of parameters to
    learn for the rules with enough symmetries, and makes the parameter learning of SymSATNet
    much easier than that of SATNet. I also describe a technique for automatically discovering
    symmetries of the target rules from examples. Our experiments with Sudoku and Rubik’s
    cube show the substantial improvement of SymSATNet over the baseline SATNet.



    3.2     Query Languages for Machine Learning Models
    Pablo Barcelo (PUC – Santiago de Chile, CL, pbarcelo@uc.cl)
          License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Pablo Barcelo


    Emerging challenges in machine learning (ML), such as explainability and verification,
    underscore the growing need for declarative query languages that enable users to extract
    relevant information from ML models and adapt it to diverse application-specific requirements.
    These query languages offer several advantages: they provide flexibility in information
    extraction, establish clear syntax and semantics for queries, and pave the way for query
    optimization. In this talk, we survey two recent proposals for query languages tailored to ML
    models – one designed for discrete classification models and another for real-valued models.
    We demonstrate how these languages can express meaningful queries over ML models, and
    we analyze their expressiveness and evaluation complexity. Our goal is to foster a productive
    discussion on advancing the development of practical query languages for ML models that
    can be effectively applied across a wide range of scenarios.
V. Belle, M. Benedikt, D. Drachsler-Cohen, D. Neider, and T. Yuviler                                                    9


3.3     How to make logics neurosymbolic
Luc De Raedt (KU Leuven, BE, luc.deraedt@kuleuven.be)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Luc De Raedt


Neurosymbolic AI (NeSy) is regarded as the third wave in AI. It aims at combining knowledge
representation and reasoning with neural networks. Numerous approaches to NeSy are being
developed and there exists an ‘alphabet-soup’ of different systems, whose relationships are
often unclear. I discuss the state-of-the art in NeSy and argue that there are many similarities
with statistical relational AI (StarAI). Taking inspiring from StarAI, and exploiting these
similarities, I argue that Neurosymbolic AI = Logic + Probability + Neural Networks. I
also provide a recipe for developing NeSy approaches: start from a logic, add a probabilistic
interpretation, and then turn neural networks into ‘neural predicates’. Probability is inter-
preted broadly here, and is necessary to provide a quantitative and differentiable component
to the logic. At the semantic and the computation level, one can then combine logical
circuits (aka proof structures) labelled with probability, and neural networks in computation
graphs. I illustrate the recipe with NeSy systems such as DeepProbLog, a deep probabilistic
extension of Prolog, and DeepStochLog, a neural network extension of stochastic definite
clause grammars (or stochastic logic programs).



3.4     Bridging Generalization and Expressivity of Graph Neural Networks
Floris Geerts (University of Antwerp, BE, floris.geerts@uantwerp.be)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Floris Geerts
 Joint work of Shouheng Li, Floris Geerts, Dongwoo Kim, Qing Wang
Main reference Shouheng Li, Floris Geerts, Dongwoo Kim, Qing Wang: “Towards Bridging Generalization and
               Expressivity of Graph Neural Networks”, in Proc. of the The Thirteenth International Conference on
               Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025, OpenReview.net, 2025.
          URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=BOQpRtI4F5


The expressive power of graph neural networks (GNNs) has been widely analysed through
their connection to the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler–Leman (1-WL) algorithm, a key tool for
addressing the graph isomorphism problem. While this link has deepened our understanding
of how GNNs represent complex structures, it provides limited insight into their generalisation
– specifically, their ability to accurately predict on unseen data. In this talk, we delve into the
relationship between GNNs’ expressive power and their generalisation capabilities, offering a
perspective that bridges these two critical aspects of GNN performance.




                                                                                                                    25061
10   25061 – Logic and Neural Networks


     3.5     Formal Verification of Machine Learning with the Industry: The
             Journey so Far, And the Future Ahead
     Julien Girard-Satabin (CEA de Saclay – Gif-sur-Yvette, FR, julien.girard2@cea.fr)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Julien Girard-Satabin
      Joint work of Julien Girard-Satabin, Augustin Lemesle, Julien Lehmann, Tristan Le Gall
     Main reference Augustin Lemesle, Julien Lehmann, Tristan Le Gall: “Neural Network Verification with PyRAT”,
                    CoRR, Vol. abs/2410.23903, 2024.
               URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2410.23903


     Since the third AI revolution in 2012, industry displayed a keen interest in the newfound
     capabilities of machine learning. However, in the field of critical systems, existing regulations
     and practices require some degree of formal specification (and verification). Furthermore,
     machine learning specification is implicitly defined by hyperparameters that are impossible
     to formalise (the dataset, the architecture, the objective function, the intended goal). To
     address those newfound challenges and fulfill its mission to support industrial actors, the
     French Atomic Energy Commission develop and maintain several tools for the specification
     and verification of machine learning systems. For seven years, those tools were applied in
     industrial settings, in national and international projects. Through this presentation mixing
     science and technical retrospective, we present the successes, the limitations and potential
     future paths for formal verification informed by the needs of the French industry.



     3.6     Learning with Constraints: Fuzzy Methods
     Eleonora Giunchiglia (Imperial College London, GB, e.giunchiglia@imperial.ac.uk)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Eleonora Giunchiglia
      Joint work of Eleonora Giunchiglia, Mihaela Catalina Stoian, Thomas Lukasiewicz
     Main reference Eleonora Giunchiglia, Mihaela Catalina Stoian, Thomas Lukasiewicz: “Deep Learning with Logical
                    Constraints”, in Proc. of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
                    IJCAI 2022, Vienna, Austria, 23-29 July 2022, pp. 5478–5485, ijcai.org, 2022.
               URL https://doi.org/10.24963/IJCAI.2022/767


     In this first segment of the tutorial I discuss methods based on fuzzy logic for learning
     with constraints. In this talk, I first provide an overview of the learning tasks where logical
     constraints can play a fundamental role. Then I introduce the most commonly used triangular
     norms, i.e., Gödel, Product and Lukasiewicz, describing their properties. This be followed by
     the introduction of “Logic Tensor Network” (LTN), which is one of the most famous methods
     to integrate constraints in neural networks’ loss functions and “Coherent-by-Construction
     Network” (CCN+), a method to integrate constraints in a neural layer. Both methods are
     based on triangular norms. After this overview, I also discuss how – thanks to the versatility
     of fuzzy logic – we can now build neural layers integrating constraints as expressive as
     disjunctions over linear inequalities, which hence model non-convex and disconnected spaces.
     I conclude the talk with a discussion with the pros and cons of using fuzzy methods in
     learning with constraints.
V. Belle, M. Benedikt, D. Drachsler-Cohen, D. Neider, and T. Yuviler                                                    11


3.7     Neural Continuous-Time Supermartingale Certificates
Anna Lukina (TU Delft, NL, A.Lukina@tudelft.nl)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Anna Lukina
 Joint work of Grigory Neustroev, Mirco Giacobbe, Anna Lukina
Main reference Grigory Neustroev, Mirco Giacobbe, Anna Lukina: “Neural Continuous-Time Supermartingale
               Certificates”, in Proc. of the AAAI-25, Sponsored by the Association for the Advancement of
               Artificial Intelligence, February 25 – March 4, 2025, Philadelphia, PA, USA, pp. 27538–27546, AAAI
               Press, 2025.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1609/AAAI.V39I26.34966


We introduce for the first time a neural-certificate framework for continuous-time stochastic dy-
namical systems. Autonomous learning systems in the physical world demand continuous-time
reasoning, yet existing learnable certificates for probabilistic verification assume discretization
of the time continuum. Inspired by the success of training neural Lyapunov certificates for
deterministic continuous-time systems and neural supermartingale certificates for stochastic
discrete-time systems, we propose a framework that bridges the gap between continuous-time
and probabilistic neural certification for dynamical systems under complex requirements.
Our method combines machine learning and symbolic reasoning to produce formally certified
bounds on the probabilities that a nonlinear system satisfies specifications of reachability,
avoidance, and persistence. We present both the theoretical justification and the algorithmic
implementation of our framework and showcase its efficacy on popular benchmarks.



3.8     Challenges for the Certification of AI in Railway Systems
Pierre-Jean Meyer (Gustave Eiffel University – Villeneuve d’Ascq, FR,
pierre-jean.meyer@univ-eiffel.fr)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Pierre-Jean Meyer


The trend of AI and desire to develop autonomous rail vehicles has led to a surge of interest
for the use of AI in the railway field, including in safety-critical functions. Traditionally in
the railway field, formal methods have been strongly recommended for the certification of
safety-related components, but currently applied approaches cannot be properly adapted
for the certification of AI functions. This talk gives a brief overview of current and desired
applications of AI in railway field, as well as the main identified challenges for the use of
formal verification to certify the good behaviors of AI functions within safety-related modules
in autonomous trains: primarily the computational complexity and the definition of formal
specifications.




                                                                                                                    25061
12   25061 – Logic and Neural Networks


     3.9     Distinguished In Uniform: Self Attention Vs. Virtual Nodes
     Martin Ritzert (Universität Göttingen, DE, ritzert@informatik.uni-goettingen.de)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Martin Ritzert
      Joint work of Eran Rosenbluth, Jan Tönshoff, Martin Ritzert, Berke Kisin, Martin Grohe
     Main reference Eran Rosenbluth, Jan Tönshoff, Martin Ritzert, Berke Kisin, Martin Grohe: Distinguished In
                    Uniform: Self-Attention Vs. Virtual Nodes. In ICLR (2024).
               URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AcSChDWL6V


     Graph Transformers (GTs) such as SAN and GPS are graph processing models that combine
     Message-Passing GNNs (MPGNNs) with global Self-Attention. They were shown to be
     universal function approximators, with two reservations: 1. The initial node features must
     be augmented with certain positional encodings. 2. The approximation is non-uniform:
     Graphs of different sizes may require a different approximating network. We first clarify that
     this form of universality is not unique to GTs: Using the same positional encodings, also
     pure MPGNNs and even 2-layer MLPs are non-uniform universal approximators. We then
     consider uniform expressivity: The target function is to be approximated by a single network
     for graphs of all sizes. There, we compare GTs to the more efficient MPGNN + Virtual Node
     architecture. The essential difference between the two model definitions is in their global
     computation method – Self-Attention Vs. Virtual Node. We prove that none of the models is
     a uniform-universal approximator, before proving our main result: Neither model’s uniform
     expressivity subsumes the other’s. We demonstrate the theory with experiments on synthetic
     data. We further augment our study with real-world datasets, observing mixed results which
     indicate no clear ranking in practice as well.



     3.10      How Can Formal Methods Benefit Large Language Models
     Gagandeep Singh (University of Illinois – Urbana-Champaign, US, ggnds@illinois.edu)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Gagandeep Singh
      Joint work of Isha Chaudhary, Qian Hu, Manoj Kumar, Morteza Ziyadi, Rahul Gupta, Gagandeep Singh
     Main reference Isha Chaudhary, Qian Hu, Manoj Kumar, Morteza Ziyadi, Rahul Gupta, Gagandeep Singh:
                    “Certifying Counterfactual Bias in LLMs”, in Proc. of the The Thirteenth International Conference
                    on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025, OpenReview.net, 2025.
               URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HQHnhVQznF


     Despite impressive performance, state-of-the-art Large Language Models (LLMs) often
     hallucinate, produce toxic responses, and leak sensitive information. While increasing model
     sizes, using more training data, compute resources, and prompt engineering have some
     marginal impact on LLM behavior, these ad-hoc methods do not solve the core problems.
     Further. These solutions are unsustainable due to their huge environmental impact. In this
     talk, I discuss how formal methods can be leveraged to develop principled and systematic
     approaches to improve LLM performance and alignment, offering a path forward that is both
     effective and sustainable.
V. Belle, M. Benedikt, D. Drachsler-Cohen, D. Neider, and T. Yuviler                                                   13


3.11      Program Synthesis Present and Future
Armando Solar-Lezama (MIT – Cambridge, US, asolar@csail.mit.edu)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Armando Solar-Lezama


Large Language Models have transformed the landscape of program synthesis, enabling us
to solve previously intractable problems and opening up new applications. In this talk I give
a high-level summary of the current state of the art in program synthesis and describe some
of the open problems and opportunities in the field.



3.12      Refining Deep Generative Modelling using Background Knowledge
Mihaela Stoian (University of Oxford, GB, mihaela.stoian@cs.ox.ac.uk)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Mihaela Stoian
 Joint work of Mihaela C. Stoian, Salijona Dyrmishi, Maxime Cordy, Thomas Lukasiewicz, Eleonora Giunchiglia
Main reference Mihaela C. Stoian, Salijona Dyrmishi, Maxime Cordy, Thomas Lukasiewicz, Eleonora Giunchiglia:
               “How Realistic Is Your Synthetic Data? Constraining Deep Generative Models for Tabular Data”, in
               Proc. of the The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna,
               Austria, May 7-11, 2024, OpenReview.net, 2024.
          URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=tBROYsEz9G


Synthesising realistic tabular data often relies on deep generative models. However, these
models fail to account for inherent relationships between features, encoded as background
knowledge, which synthetic samples must satisfy to be deemed realistic. Existing methods
handle non-compliant samples by discarding them, leading to potentially indefinite inference
times. In this talk, I present a novel approach that embeds a constraint layer into the
topology of deep generative models to account for the relationships between the features.
This layer automatically incorporates background knowledge and ensures compliance with
these constraints during both training and inference. I first present our method for handling
linear constraints and then discuss its extension to support quantifier-free linear real arithmetic
constraints. Experimental results show that our layer significantly improves the machine
learning efficacy of deep generative models without hindering sample generation times. This
framework is part of our broader goal of bringing neuro-symbolic AI onto the stage of
real-world applications.



3.13      Expressive Power of Graph Neural Networks via Datalog
David Tena Cucala (Royal Holloway, University of London, GB,
David.TenaCucala@rhul.ac.uk)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © David Tena Cucala


This talk discusses recent results on the expressive power of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
operating on relational datasets. We consider two sub-classes of GNNs: monotonic GNNs
and max GNNs, and then we identify Datalog fragments or extensions that realize the same
transformations as these GNNs. Monotonic GNNs are GNNs subject to restrictions ensuring
that their behaviour is monotonic under homomorphisms applied to their input. Max GNNs




                                                                                                                   25061
14   25061 – Logic and Neural Networks


     are subject to the restriction that they use the max function to aggregate information.
     Finally, we illustrate some applications of these results, in the areas of GNN verification and
     explanation of predictions.



     3.14      Static Analysis Methods for Neural Networks
     Caterina Urban (INRIA and ENS Paris, FR, caterina.urban@inria.fr)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Caterina Urban
      Joint work of Caterina Urban, Maria Christakis, Valentin Wüstholz, Fuyuan Zhang
     Main reference Caterina Urban, Maria Christakis, Valentin Wüstholz, Fuyuan Zhang: “Perfectly parallel fairness
                    certification of neural networks”, Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4(OOPSLA), pp. 185:1–185:30,
                    2020.
               URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3428253


     Formal methods provide rigorous guarantees of correctness for both hardware and software
     systems. Their use is well established in industry, notably to certify safety of critical
     applications subject to stringent certification processes. With the rising prominence of
     machine learning, the integration of machine-learned components into critical systems presents
     novel challenges for the soundness, precision, and scalability of formal methods. This talk
     serves as an introduction to formal methods tailed for machine learning software, with a focus
     on static analysis methods for neural networks. We present several verification approaches,
     highlighting their strengths and limitations, through the lens of different (hyper)safety
     properties. A neural network surrogate from a real-world avionics use case serves as a
     running example. We additionally survey the application of these verification approaches
     towards the additional goal of enhancing machine learning explainability. We conclude with
     perspectives on possible future research directions in this rapidly evolving field.



     3.15      From Learning with Constraints to Partial Label Learning
     Zsolt Zombori (Alfréd Rényi Institute of Mathematics – Budapest, HU, zombori@renyi.hu)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Zsolt Zombori
      Joint work of Zsolt Zombori, Agapi Rissaki, Kristóf Szabó, Wolfgang Gatterbauer, Michael Benedikt
     Main reference Zsolt Zombori, Agapi Rissaki, Kristóf Szabó, Wolfgang Gatterbauer, Michael Benedikt: “Towards
                    Unbiased Exploration in Partial Label Learning”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2307.00465, 2023.
               URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2307.00465


     In numerous learning setups, some background knowledge is available in the form of logical
     constraints. Such constraints can be useful both for increasing the safety of the trained
     models and for alleviating data shortage by making learning more effective. In this talk we
     review different types of constraints and how they can possibly be incorporated into the
     learning or inference process. We also identify a bias phenomenon that occurs during gradient
     descent based optimisation with constraints, preventing proper exploration of alternative
     options and making the dynamics of gradient descent overly sensitive to initialisation. We
     introduce a novel loss function that allows for unbiased exploration within the space of
     alternative outputs.
V. Belle, M. Benedikt, D. Drachsler-Cohen, D. Neider, and T. Yuviler                                                  15


3.16      Learning with Constraints: Probabilistic Methods
Emile van Krieken (University of Edinburgh, GB, Emile.van.Krieken@ed.ac.uk)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Emile van Krieken
 Joint work of Emile van Krieken, Thiviyan Thanapalasingam, Jakub M. Tomczak, Frank van Harmelen, Annette
               ten Teije
Main reference Emile van Krieken, Thiviyan Thanapalasingam, Jakub M. Tomczak, Frank van Harmelen, Annette
               ten Teije: “A-NeSI: A Scalable Approximate Method for Probabilistic Neurosymbolic Inference”, in
               Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural
               Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 – 16,
               2023, 2023.
          URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4d9944ab3330fe6af8efb9260aa9f307-Abstract-
               Conference.html


I discuss probabilistic methods for learning with constraints. First, I recap practical issues
with fuzzy methods. Then, I introduce the weighted model count (WMC), the central
equation underlying probabilistic methods for integrating constraints. The WMC gives
many theoretical guarantees. With the WMC at hand, I describe a popular constraint
loss method called “Semantic Loss”, and a constraint layer called “Semantic Probabilistic
Layers”. This part ends with a comparison of the strengths and weaknesses of probabilistic
and fuzzy methods. After this introduction to the core methods, I describe several issues
with constraint losses, starting with Reasoning Shortcuts. This is the phenomenon that
models may completely minimise the constraint training loss without learning underlying
concepts. I also discuss issues with a conditional independence assumption that is frequently
taken in practical setups. I end with a brief introduction of state-of-the-art methods for
tackling these issues, and a recap of the methods discussed in this two-part tutorial.



 4      Breakout Sessions
4.1     Verification
Vaishak Belle (University of Edinburgh, GB, vaishak@ed.ac.uk)
Michael Benedikt (University of Oxford, GB, michael.benedikt@cs.ox.ac.uk)
Dana Drachsler-Cohen (Technion, IL, ddana@ee.technion.ac.il)
Daniel Neider (TU Dortmund University, DE, daniel.neider@tu-dortmund.de)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider
 Joint work of All participants


Formal verification of ML is currently overly focusing on a very specific set of properties,
whose real-world applicability may not be fully correlated with the amount of work poured
into it. The community must extend towards the ML community and regulators to provide
expressive, sound tools that help better characterize complex systems (for instance, multiple
NNs or complex constraints on data) with expressive languages and principled compilation
toward provers. For this endeavor to be realized, languages should be accessible to non-experts
(possibly through constrained means). Furthermore, verifiers should scale to realistic settings,
and creative ways to devise specifications should be pursued, for instance by synthesizing
properties.




                                                                                                                  25061
16   25061 – Logic and Neural Networks


     4.2    Expressivity
     Vaishak Belle (University of Edinburgh, GB, vaishak@ed.ac.uk)
     Michael Benedikt (University of Oxford, GB, michael.benedikt@cs.ox.ac.uk)
     Dana Drachsler-Cohen (Technion, IL, ddana@ee.technion.ac.il)
     Daniel Neider (TU Dortmund University, DE, daniel.neider@tu-dortmund.de)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider
      Joint work of All participants


     Research on expressivity in advanced ML architectures highlights several open challenges,
     such as how Transformers handle compositions and whether components like positional
     encodings are truly necessary. The community must develop principled logical frameworks
     that clarify which expressions are learnable, while balancing “succinctness” and expressivity
     so that models remain trainable in realistic settings. Logical upper and lower bounds can
     guide the design of new architectures and help prevent unintended behaviors (e.g., through
     constrained losses or temporal constraints). Success stories such as the Weisfeiler-Lehman
     (WL) approach in graph learning show the value of bridging logical theory and ML practice,
     though some models (like k-WL) have proven impractical. Looking ahead, we should refine
     these analyses for GNNs, consider how different architectural features shape learning, and
     pursue sound yet accessible methods that integrate logic and machine learning across diverse
     applications.



     4.3    Explainability
     Vaishak Belle (University of Edinburgh, GB, vaishak@ed.ac.uk)
     Michael Benedikt (University of Oxford, GB, michael.benedikt@cs.ox.ac.uk)
     Dana Drachsler-Cohen (Technion, IL, ddana@ee.technion.ac.il)
     Daniel Neider (TU Dortmund University, DE, daniel.neider@tu-dortmund.de)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider
      Joint work of All participants


     Research on explainability in ML highlights challenging trade-offs between model performance
     and interpretability, particularly in high-stakes domains where trust and transparency are
     paramount. While methods such as SHAP or LIME offer partial insights, the community
     still grapples with fundamental questions about how to align expert understanding with
     possibly less accurate yet more transparent models. Practical benefits extend beyond
     improved decision-making: interpretable systems can foster scientific discovery by exposing
     the reasoning behind model predictions, enabling knowledge transfer across tasks, and
     ensuring that ethical constraints are thoroughly verified. Ultimately, progress in explainability
     hinges on identifying scenarios where transparent models demonstrably outperform black-box
     approaches, attracting broader funding and community engagement, and integrating reverse-
     engineerable explanations that help pinpoint out-of-distribution cases and other critical
     failures.
V. Belle, M. Benedikt, D. Drachsler-Cohen, D. Neider, and T. Yuviler                                  17


4.4    Learning with Background Knowledge & Constraints
Vaishak Belle (University of Edinburgh, GB, vaishak@ed.ac.uk)
Michael Benedikt (University of Oxford, GB, michael.benedikt@cs.ox.ac.uk)
Dana Drachsler-Cohen (Technion, IL, ddana@ee.technion.ac.il)
Daniel Neider (TU Dortmund University, DE, daniel.neider@tu-dortmund.de)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider
 Joint work of All participants


There are several key challenges and considerations in integrating constraints into AI systems,
particularly in enhancing performance across various metrics such as safety, data efficiency,
accuracy, model size, and generalizability. One of the main challenges identified is demon-
strating measurable improvements in real-world scenarios. The discussion also emphasized
the need for parametric synthetic datasets with controllable properties, particularly for
out-of-distribution (OOD) testing. Additionally, the topic of constraint discovery is high-
lighted, exploring how constraints can be learned and analyzed in terms of their expressivity,
complexity, and geometric properties. The value proposition centers on the advantages of
incorporating constraints into AI models beyond just improving accuracy. These advantages
include ensuring safer AI decisions, reducing the need for labeled data, enabling more compact
models, and improving robustness. The discussion extends beyond traditional models to
generative AI, emphasizing that constraints should not only enforce syntactic correctness
but also contribute to semantic understanding. We also outline potential teaching material
for conveying these neuro-symbolic (NeSy) concepts. The curriculum would begin with
a general motivation for NeSy, explaining the complementary strengths of symbolic and
statistical approaches. It would introduce key ingredients, including logic (e.g., knowledge
graphs, description logics, and logic programming), probabilistic methods, fuzzy logic, neural
predicates, and knowledge compilation. The discussion would then cover how these elements
integrate into different architectures, addressing aspects such as layers, loss functions, and
predicate grounding. A key theme underlying NeSy is encapsulated in the phrase “Why learn
what you already know?”, suggesting that constraints should guide AI systems by leveraging
prior knowledge efficiently.



4.5    Combining Verification and Constraints
Vaishak Belle (University of Edinburgh, GB, vaishak@ed.ac.uk)
Michael Benedikt (University of Oxford, GB, michael.benedikt@cs.ox.ac.uk)
Dana Drachsler-Cohen (Technion, IL, ddana@ee.technion.ac.il)
Daniel Neider (TU Dortmund University, DE, daniel.neider@tu-dortmund.de)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider
 Joint work of All participants


Research on combining constraints and verification in ML underscores the need to ensure
that critical requirements remain satisfied, especially when models are treated as black
boxes. While constraints can guide the design of more easily verifiable networks – by
reducing complexity or limiting nonlinearities – they often need verification to confirm that
these properties hold in practice. In turn, verification methods benefit from constraints by
narrowing the solution space or allowing for surrogate models that can more efficiently detect




                                                                                                  25061
18   25061 – Logic and Neural Networks


     potential errors. Challenges persist in communicating across different communities (e.g.,
     security experts operating in black/grey-box settings), devising effective regularizations that
     maintain performance while improving verifiability, and tackling relational constraints that
     are notoriously difficult to encode directly. Achieving progress in these areas will require
     deeper collaboration and possibly new architectures, loss functions, or partitioning strategies
     that streamline verification while preserving robust performance.



     4.6    Combining Explainability, Expressiveness, and Constraints
     Vaishak Belle (University of Edinburgh, GB, vaishak@ed.ac.uk)
     Michael Benedikt (University of Oxford, GB, michael.benedikt@cs.ox.ac.uk)
     Dana Drachsler-Cohen (Technion, IL, ddana@ee.technion.ac.il)
     Daniel Neider (TU Dortmund University, DE, daniel.neider@tu-dortmund.de)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider
      Joint work of All participants


     Negative results on expressiveness show that logical formulas can be difficult to apply
     for direct explainability. Traditionally, constraints are motivated by safety rather than
     explainability, but recent approaches use logical constraints to explain network internals
     – such as analyzing neuron correlations when given specific images. This strategy could
     simplify various explainability tasks by leveraging a suitable logical framework, potentially
     informed by knowledge representation techniques. Several open challenges include determining
     whether expressive architectures inherently complicate constraint enforcement, identifying
     parameter sets that minimize constraint violations, and discovering methods to isolate
     network components corresponding to specific constraints. Addressing these issues could
     lead to more transparent decision-making grounded in logic-based insights.



     4.7    Combining Verification and Explainability
     Vaishak Belle (University of Edinburgh, GB, vaishak@ed.ac.uk)
     Michael Benedikt (University of Oxford, GB, michael.benedikt@cs.ox.ac.uk)
     Dana Drachsler-Cohen (Technion, IL, ddana@ee.technion.ac.il)
     Daniel Neider (TU Dortmund University, DE, daniel.neider@tu-dortmund.de)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Vaishak Belle, Michael Benedikt, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, and Daniel Neider
      Joint work of All participants


     Formal explanation techniques from classical software – such as SMT solving and UNSAT cores
     – primarily focus on input/output properties and safety, yet they do not always capture the
     intricacies of neural networks. Meanwhile, gradient-based attributions in neural networks can
     be brittle or overly localized, raising questions about how to ensure explanations generalize
     to unseen instances and how to pinpoint “interventions” that actually shift predictions.
     Explainable AI (XAI) and verification both rely on abstraction to address these issues:
     verification uses abstraction to isolate properties that can be formally proven or disproven,
     whereas explanation refines the model’s salient behaviors so users can understand how inputs
     map to outputs. By capturing properties at a higher level, we obtain amenable properties
V. Belle, M. Benedikt, D. Drachsler-Cohen, D. Neider, and T. Yuviler                                19


for explanations, that can be more easily communicated and interpreted. Consequently,
joint XAI and verification efforts could devise abstractions that both enable rigorous checks
on model correctness and illuminate the model’s inner workings. This synergy fosters AI
systems that are trustworthy and interpretable, bridging the gap between formal correctness
and human-centered understanding.




                                                                                                25061
20   25061 – Logic and Neural Networks


            Participants
       Pablo Barcelo                 Matthias Lanzinger            Mislav Stojanovic
     PUC – Santiago de Chile, CL    TU Wien, AT                   TU Dortmund University, DE
       Vaishak Belle                 Anji Liu                      Lukas Struppek
     University of Edinburgh, GB    UCLA, US                      TU Darmstadt, DE
       Michael Benedikt              Anna Lukina
     University of Oxford, GB                                       David Tena Cucala
                                    TU Delft, NL                  Royal Holloway, University of
       Alexandra Bugariu                                          London, GB
                                      Pierre-Jean Meyer
     MPI-SWS – Kaiserslautern, DE
                                    Gustave Eiffel University –     Ashish Tiwari
       Luc De Raedt                 Villeneuve d’Ascq, FR
     KU Leuven, BE                                                Microsoft Corporation –
                                     Emmanuel Müller              Redmond, US
       Dana Drachsler-Cohen         TU Dortmund University, DE
     Technion – Haifa, IL                                           Caterina Urban
       Sophie Fellenz                Daniel Neider                INRIA & ENS Paris, FR
     RPTU                           TU Dortmund University, DE
                                                                    Jan Van den Bussche
     Kaiserslautern-Landau, DE       Ana Ozaki                    Hasselt University, BE
       Floris Geerts                University of Oslo, NO
                                                                   Frank van Harmelen
     University of Antwerp, BE       Martin Ritzert               VU Amsterdam, NL
       Julien Girard-Satabin        Universität Göttingen, DE
     CEA de Saclay –                                               Emile van Krieken
                                     Patrick Schramowski
     Gif-sur-Yvette, FR                                           University of Edinburgh, GB
                                    DFKI – Darmstadt, DE
       Eleonora Giunchiglia                                        Jonni Virtema
                                      Mahmood Sharif
     Imperial College London, GB                                  University of Sheffield, GB
                                    Tel Aviv University, IL
       Dominik Hintersdorf                                         Hongseok Yang
     TU Darmstadt, DE                 Gagandeep Singh
                                    University of Illinois –      KAIST – Daejeon, KR
       Vivian Holzapfel             Urbana-Champaign, US
     Leibniz Universität                                            Tom Yuviler
     Hannover, DE                    Armando Solar-Lezama         Technion – Haifa, IL
       Omri Isac                    MIT – Cambridge, US             Zsolt Zombori
     The Hebrew University of        Mihaela Stoian               Alfréd Rényi Institute of
     Jerusalem, IL                  University of Oxford, GB      Mathematics – Budapest, HU
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25062

Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR)
Peter Haddawy∗1 , Anja Hennemuth∗2 , Ron Kikinis∗3 ,
Gabriel Zachmann∗4 , Mario Lorenz†5 , and Anke Reinschlüssel†6
1       Mahidol University – Salaya, TH. peter.had@mahidol.ac.th
2       Charité – Berlin, DE. anja.hennemuth@mevis.fraunhofer.de
3       Harvard Medical School – Boston, US. kikinis@bwh.harvard.edu
4       Universität Bremen, DE. zach@cs.uni-bremen.de
5       TU Chemnitz, DE. mario.lorenz@mb.tu-chemnitz.de
6       Universität Konstanz, DE. anke.reinschluessel@uni-konstanz.de

        Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 25062 “Extended
Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR)”.
Seminar February 2–7, 2025 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/25062
2012 ACM Subject Classification Applied computing → Health informatics; Human-centered
   computing → Virtual reality
Keywords and phrases operating room, scientific roadmap
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.2.21



    1    Executive Summary
Peter Haddawy (Mahidol University – Salaya, TH)
Anja Hennemuth (Charité – Berlin, DE)
Ron Kikinis (Harvard Medical School – Boston, US)
Gabriel Zachmann (Universität Bremen, DE)
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Peter Haddawy, Anja Hennemuth, Ron Kikinis, and Gabriel Zachmann


The first day started with flash talks where participants could introduce themselves and
present their work relevant to the Dagstuhl Seminar. In the afternoon, we discussed the
overall outcome of the seminar in the group, a potential research roadmap paper, in order to
build a common understanding and engagement with the topic. We also showcased about 10
demos, which several participants brought, so that all participants could get an impression of
the current state of the art, and also in order to get everybody in the theme of the seminar.
This proved to be very successful, even though participants had to bring all the VR hardware
themselves.
    Tuesday morning was dedicated to introducing the pain points that surgeons face in
their daily work in the operating room to the non-medical attendees, i.e., the virtual reality
experts and researchers. We had four talks by four surgeons, each one followed by discussions
in order to gain a better understanding. The rest of the day was dedicated to generating a
large number of ideas, some of which addressed the pain points, but many of them also were
generated very creatively by the participants in break-out sessions using the brain-writing


∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector



            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR), Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15, Issue 2, pp. 21–40
Editors: Peter Haddawy, Anja Hennemuth, Ron Kikinis, Gabriel Zachmann, Mario Lorenz, and Anke Reinschlüssel
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
22   25062 – Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR)


     method. At the end of the day, participants presented their best ideas in the whole group.
     After dinner, the organizers sat down together in order to cluster all the ideas and create
     larger umbrella themes.
         On Wednesday, the day began by presenting the clusters to all attendees, and by
     partitioning the group so that each cluster could be taken care of in break-out sessions. The
     rest of the day was filled by fleshing out the cluster themes and providing more details with
     the overarching research themes. On Wednesday night, the organizers sat down to create a
     framework document, to be used on Thursday for starting the writing process.
         Thursday was dedicated to collaborative writing. To do so, each theme was further
     structured by the attendees, some themes were broken down into smaller sub themes, some
     of them were already narrow enough, so that in the end, we wrote in pairs on each and every
     topic.
         On Friday, we discussed a number of opportunities and possibilities that would allow us
     to continue this collaboration as a group. To do so, the organizers presented all the possible
     funding opportunities we were aware of, and we collected some more from the audience. We
     also discussed a timeline, in order to produce a research roadmap, and we discussed next
     steps.
         Future activities will include writing and publishing a collaborative paper, where each
     participant will contribute to one section. The paper is to provide perspectives on trends
     and future research on the seminar’s topic, and also it can serve as a guideline or roadmap
     for researchers who like to enter this field. Further activities will strive to establish and
     broaden a community around the seminar’s topic, by organizing workshops at prestigious
     VR conferences, such as IEEE VR. Eventually, we will apply for another Dagstuhl Seminar,
     with a broader participant list, and a somewhat broader topic.
P. Haddawy, A. Hennemuth, R. Kikinis, G. Zachmann, M. Lorenz and A. Reinschlüssel                            23


 2       Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Peter Haddawy, Anja Hennemuth, Ron Kikinis, and Gabriel Zachmann . . . . . .                      21

Overview of Talks
     Bringing Augmented Reality into the Operating Room: Challenges and Opportun-
     ities
     Philippe C. Cattin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     Interactive rendering techniques for mixed reality simulation, planning and guidance
     of surgical operations
     Simon Drouin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     XR Interaction in the Operation Room
     Tanja Döring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     Gabor Fichtinger: directions for future grants
     Gabor Fichtinger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
     Imaging data and preoperative planning as main components for XR in the operating
     room
     Tabea Flügge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
     LARACROFT: A Collaborative AR Platform for Enhancing Laparoscopic Training
     in the Operating Theater
     Joaquim A. Jorge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     Workflow Considerations for XR in the OR
     Luv Kohli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     Perspective on the Future Use of XR for OR
     Mario Lorenz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
     Experimenting with augmented reality in the operating room: lessons learned
     Javier Pascau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
     Personal perspective of seminar outcome
     Dirk Reiners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     31
     Multimodal Features and User Representation Considerations
     Anke V. Reinschluessel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     31
     Enhancing Liver Surgery and Hepatic Interventions with AI and XR Technologies
     Andrea Schenk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
     Towards task specific (physical) XR solutions
     Falko Schmid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
     XR and AI as collaborative tools for shared decision-making
     Siriwan Suebnukarn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       34
     Virtual and Augmented Reality in a Surgical Setting – Research at the University
     Clinic for Visceral Surgery, Pius-Hospital Oldenburg
     Verena Uslar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34
     Awake Craniotomy
     Gregory F. Welch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     37




                                                                                                         25062
24   25062 – Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR)


        Haptics for the OR
        Rene Weller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
        Remotely guided robotic surgery through extended reality
        Sudanthi Wijewickrema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

     Open problems
        Dagstuhl Seminar 2025 – XR in the OR: “Pain Points”
        Dirk Weyhe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

     Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
P. Haddawy, A. Hennemuth, R. Kikinis, G. Zachmann, M. Lorenz and A. Reinschlüssel                                      25


 3      Overview of Talks
3.1     Bringing Augmented Reality into the Operating Room: Challenges
        and Opportunities
Philippe C. Cattin (Universität Basel – Allschwil, CH)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Philippe C. Cattin


At XR4OR, Philippe C. Cattin presented his research on virtual reality (VR) planning for
complex surgical interventions using the Specto Volume Rendering application. He also
demonstrated how these planning tools can be transferred into the operating room. While
modern surgical loupes reduce eye strain and improve ergonomics during procedures, they
also limit the field of view, making it difficult for surgeons to maintain an overview of the
entire surgical scene. To address this limitation, integrating augmented reality (AR) into
surgical loupes offers a promising solution. AR overlays can provide real-time guidance –
such as anatomical landmarks, navigation cues, segmented tumors, or hemodynamic data –
without requiring the surgeon to look away from the operative field. By seamlessly blending
essential information into the surgeon’s line of sight, AR-enhanced loupes can improve
situational awareness, support better decision-making, and ultimately contribute to safer
and more efficient surgeries. However, no medically certified AR-enhanced surgical loupes
are currently available on the market. This needs to be addressed soon by the MedTech
Industry. Despite their potential, deploying VR and AR technologies for routine hospital
use remains challenging. Beyond their excellent visual experience, AR/VR systems must
prove their clinical effectiveness and efficiency. Medical professionals are only likely to adopt
these tools broadly if they demonstrably save time in their already busy schedules. One
major barrier is the time-consuming and often unreliable setup process. Connectivity issues
with AR/VR glasses, frequent system reboots, and general instability make these solutions
impractical for daily clinical use – issues that may be tolerated in research settings, but not
in routine care. Another obstacle to clinical integration is the lack of standardized interaction
interfaces across different AR/VR hardware manufacturers. While laptops universally rely on
keyboards and mice, AR/VR devices use a wide array of input methods. Some manufacturers
rely on hand controllers with varying designs and button layouts; others use hand tracking
with different gesture sets. These inconsistencies hinder seamless adoption and training,
further slowing down the integration of AR/VR into clinical workflows.



3.2     Interactive rendering techniques for mixed reality simulation,
        planning and guidance of surgical operations
Simon Drouin (ETS – Montreal, CA)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Simon Drouin
 Joint work of Andrey Titov, Simon Drouin, Alejandro Olivares Hernandez, Tina Nantenaina, Naomi Catwell
Main reference Andrey Titov, Marta Kersten-Oertel, Simon Drouin: “Contextual Ambient Occlusion: A volumetric
               rendering technique that supports real-time clipping”, Comput. Graph., Vol. 119, p. 103884, 2024.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CAG.2024.01.011


This presentation highlighted recent advances by my group on the interactive rendering of
medical images for simulation, planning and guidance of surgical operations, with a specific
focus on mixed reality displays. We have shown how advanced volumetric rendering techniques



                                                                                                                   25062
26   25062 – Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR)


     can help visualize 4D echography images, how segmented volumes can be interactively volume-
     rendered in virtual reality to improve depiction of the anatomy for surgical planning and how
     these interactive rendering techniques can be leveraged to simulate surgical procedures for
     the training of residents. Following the presentation, a demo of our VR interactive volume
     rendering system was setup for other seminar participants to try.



     3.3    XR Interaction in the Operation Room
     Tanja Döring (Universität Bremen, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Tanja Döring


     As a researcher in Human-Computer Interaction, the focus of my work is on innovative
     and multimodal interaction techniques in different application domains. The domain of
     the operating room (OR), with its phases of training, preoperative, interoperative, and
     postoperative activities, offers a multitude of possibilities to be supported by interactive
     technology to make the procedures more efficient and successful, to improve patient safety
     and well-being as well as the work conditions of surgeons and OR staff. Nowadays, many
     digital systems already support the work in the OR, such as by providing image data during
     surgery. However, the interaction with these systems is often cumbersome, as it takes place
     as a secondary task next to the primary operation task in sterile conditions and with usually
     busy hands. Thus, solutions for the interactions with the increasing number of systems
     are needed that fit this specific and safety-critical environment, align well with the main
     task of the operation, and do not increase workload. A rise of systems that use extended
     reality (XR) and artificial intelligence (AI) to provide more extensive assistance to surgeons
     and medical staff will also set new requirements for the interaction with technology during
     training, preoperative planning, during surgery in the operating room, and postoperative
     care. A well-balanced design of embodied, multimodal implicit and explicit XR interactions
     that also consider a trustful and sensible human-AI collaboration is needed. During the
     Dagstuhl Seminar “Extended Reality for the Operating Room” we fruitfully discussed this
     highly interdisciplinary, applied, and dynamic field of research from many angles, compiling
     visions for smooth, intelligent, and effective XR systems of the future. I am interested in
     working on a design space for XR interaction in the OR, putting together the dimensions that
     need to be taken into account when designing for this domain, which include the different
     phases, tasks and goals, the user roles as well as (explicit and implicit) input and output
     facilities. Especially the integration of implicit interaction, such as through the tracking
     of eye gaze and biosensing for input, or the inclusion of additional modalities for output,
     such as haptic feedback, are promising paths to facilitate and enrich XR interactions in
     the OR. Nowadays, many parallel systems and screens exist that are not integrated. The
     usability of used XR systems, such as HMDs, still needs to be improved, and interactions lack
     standards, so they may be challenging to learn and remember. Thus, there is a great demand
     for standardization and integration and the design of personalized and context-aware, more
     intelligent interactive assistance systems.
P. Haddawy, A. Hennemuth, R. Kikinis, G. Zachmann, M. Lorenz and A. Reinschlüssel                      27


3.4    Gabor Fichtinger: directions for future grants
Gabor Fichtinger (Queen’s University – Kingston, CA)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Gabor Fichtinger


During the Dagstuhl Seminar, I focused on developing research project ideas and exploring
directions for future grant proposals. I also contributed to drafting a joint white paper
that brought together perspectives from different participants to outline shared research
priorities. In addition, I met several researchers whose work intersects with mine, leading
to new academic connections that may support future collaboration. The seminar provided
time and space for thoughtful exchange, helping identify common interests and potential
pathways for joint work in global health.



3.5    Imaging data and preoperative planning as main components for XR
       in the operating room
Tabea Flügge (Charité – Berlin, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Tabea Flügge


Extended Reality in the operating room may enhance surgical precision, efficiency, and patient
outcomes. Key aspects are the accurate registration and display of multimodal imaging
data and the transfer of the preoperative planning to the surgical site. XR may provide
real-time 3D overlays of patient anatomy, helping surgeons navigate complex procedures
with greater accuracy. The holographic visualization of critical structures, like blood vessels,
tumors, or nerves, may reduce surgical risks. Transferring preoperative planning to the
surgical site allows for real-time navigation of procedures. The surgeon receives intraoperative
guidance by superimposing 3D images of the planned surgical result on the region of interest.
In reconstructive oral and maxillofacial surgery cases, complex preoperative planning is
performed, and surgical guides and patient-individual implants are manufactured. Therefore,
adherence to the surgical plan is crucial for avoiding intra- and postoperative complications.
Incorporating automated segmentation and analysis of large amounts of patient data further
helps predict surgical risks and machine learning models may suggest surgical approaches to
improve the precision of a surgical procedure. A second key aspect besides the availability of
information is its individual display, e.g., on head-mounted devices, to avoid distraction and
work continuously without breaking focus. User profiles for all staff members in the OR may
improve the distribution of information in the OR and avoid redundant information.




                                                                                                   25062
28   25062 – Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR)


     3.6    LARACROFT: A Collaborative AR Platform for Enhancing
            Laparoscopic Training in the Operating Theater
     Joaquim A. Jorge (University of Lisbon, PT)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Joaquim A. Jorge
      Joint work of Joaquim A. Jorge, António Salgueiro, Mona Zavichi, Anderson Maciel, Catarina Moreira, Francisca
                    Leite, Cátia Costa


     The LARACROFT platform introduces an augmented reality (AR) framework tailored for
     remote collaboration in laparoscopic surgery. Designed to operate within the spatial and
     cognitive constraints of the operating theater, the system supports real-time interaction
     between local and remote surgeons via a shared AR workspace. It integrates hand tracking,
     video passthrough, and gaze-directed, foot-triggered input mechanisms to enable effective
     control without compromising sterility or workflow. In a pilot study, medical students and
     mentors engaged in standardized surgical tasks, revealing key insights into the impact of AR-
     supported telecollaboration on motor coordination and communication. Observed limitations,
     including latency and display resolution, highlighted current technological thresholds in
     surgical AR. However, participants reported enhanced engagement and situational awareness,
     pointing toward the platform’s potential for scalable deployment in surgical education and
     support.



     3.7    Workflow Considerations for XR in the OR
     Luv Kohli (InnerOptic Technology – Hillsborough, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Luv Kohli


     XR has the potential to be used in a variety of ways for the OR, such as medical device navig-
     ation, visualization of internal structures, identification of cancerous tissue, pre-procedure or
     intra-procedure planning, information and image display, telemedicine and communication,
     and many more. Rather than focus here on a specific use case, I offer some thoughts and
     questions about how we might enable XR’s eventual adoption and use in the OR.
         There are cases where XR use by patients shows a lot of promise and success (for
     example, pain distraction, neurological rehabilitation, PTSD). XR technology has advanced
     considerably in recent years but to my knowledge, it does not yet have widespread adoption
     in the OR, at least not for physician users. Why?
         When researching, developing, and commercializing new technologies for the OR, we
     face the challenge of how to integrate those technologies into physician workflows. If a new
     technology takes too much time to set up for each patient, it becomes an opportunity cost
     with less time available to treat additional patients. If using the technology is too complex,
     it ends up not being used. For example, some physicians have told me that even though
     they have access to some sophisticated medical device navigation systems, setup takes long
     enough that it is not worth the time or complexity.
         Also, for an organization to invest in a technology commercialization effort, there must
     be reasonable evidence that the technology (compared to standard of care or other less
     disruptive technologies) will improve patient outcomes, enable physicians to do things they
     otherwise could not do, improve hospital throughput, generate profit for the hospital, or
     provide some other business benefit.
P. Haddawy, A. Hennemuth, R. Kikinis, G. Zachmann, M. Lorenz and A. Reinschlüssel                   29


    As researchers and technologists focused on improving patient care with XR, how might
we develop XR to enable its use without workflow disruption? For example, what can be
done to make setup quick and efficient? How can technology be made robust to failure or
emergency situations (e.g., if an emergency arises, can the physician immediately remove a
headset and revert to standard of care?)? How can ergonomics be improved, especially for
long procedures?
    These considerations often end up being procedure-specific because different procedures
have different workflow requirements. For complex procedures, a lot of time and mental effort
can be spent on communication between physicians and OR staff, so that physicians can
see what they need to see. One could imagine developing procedure-specific conversational
AI models for a physician to more easily interact via voice, without requiring very precise
wording, or without requiring challenging hand gestures or controllers. Procedure-specific
inference models may also be able to understand procedure workflow and show “just-in-time”
information to the physician, reducing communication overhead.
    There are likely many other workflow-related improvements that can be made, and it
would be interesting to explore how our research can support physicians and staff in the OR
without negatively impacting their workflow.



3.8    Perspective on the Future Use of XR for OR
Mario Lorenz (TU Chemnitz, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Mario Lorenz


XR, in a strict sense, only encompasses the mediation of virtual, computer-generated content
for all human senses i.e., visual overlays, haptic or acoustic amplifications. However, XR
alone is just one of several technologies (AI, image processing, 3D-printing, diagnostics)
driving the progress in medicine and surgery and a focus solely on XR without including
those other domains will rather hinder than facilitate XRs uptake in the OR. In general, it
is important not to ask ourselves “What can XR do for the surgeon?”, but rather “What
problems does the surgeons currently have? Where are the limitations of how they can help
the patient?” Using this approach, we will discover where XR really brings a benefit and is
not just pushed from a technology enthusiastic perspective. We will further discover how
XR fits best in to the supporting ecosystem of advanced technologies (AI, image processing,
3D-printing, diagnostics). By facilitating synergies, and win-win-situations, we will foster
the transfer into the OR. The following use case shall demonstrate my perspective:
1. Patient with Face/Head-Trauma. When the patient arrives in OR the surgeon could
    get an overlay of the MRI on the patient using AR. This is not a very new use case,
    but everything one could achieve solely with XR. By broadening the scope of involved
    technologies, a much more advanced scenario is imaginable. By 3D-scanning the patients
    head in the OR an AI could calculate how the bone fragments have moved since the
    MRI was taken and can visualize this updated 3D-model to the surgeon via an AR
    headset. Another AI, could deduce how the bone fragments have to be put together
    stepwise, which implants are necessary for this, how standard implants have to be bend
    and what custom implants need to be 3D-printed. Once this is determined 3 paralyzed
    processes are imitated (1) the printing of the custom implants; (2) A nurse or a resident
    surgeon is adapting the shape of the standard implant using a template of the target




                                                                                                25062
30   25062 – Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR)


        shape visualized through and AR display. An AI checks in the background the forming
        process and provides and audio-visual feedback when the correct shape is reached; (3) The
        surgeon gets support through the AR glasses by visualising the positions of the bone
        fragments and the instructions of how they have to be put together using the implants.
        During the entire surgery the visual guidance is updated based on the tracked deformation
        of the patient’s soft tissue. Another option for this use case for severe trauma or in case
        of tumour resection is, that the AI calculating the reconstructions steps also uses pictures
        form the patient before the incident.
     2. Tracking for AR guidance, VR training and automated surgery. In the future OR,
        every step of the surgery is tracked. This data can be used to generate training scenarios
        in VR simulation but also to teach an AI to perform surgery autonomously. Further,
        it allows to gather the various existing individual surgical techniques and may allow to
        find the objectively best procedures. In AR supported surgical guidance applications this
        knowledge is used for generating the AR instructions.
     3. XR for Telesurgery. In the future telesurgery will not be performed by the surgeon
        looking at mono- or stereoscopic images of a live feed. Instead, a detailed and complete
        3D representation of the patenting will be simulated visually, haptically, auditory and
        olfactory. This allows the surgeons to perform the surgery on a virtual patient whilst
        their movements are tracked and translated to according movements of the surgery robot.
     4. Miscellaneous Use Cases. (1) AI based detection of a sudden vessel rupture, with
        AR visualization of the rupture spot. (2) AI based in-situ detection of tumours with AR
        visualisation and guidance. (3) Integrating of health monitor data and other patient data
        into a single cockpit that is visualized in AR for the surgeon during surgery.



     3.9     Experimenting with augmented reality in the operating room:
             lessons learned
     Javier Pascau (Carlos III University of Madrid, ES)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Javier Pascau
      Joint work of Javier Pascau, Mónica García-Sevilla, David García-Mato, Rafael Moreta-Martínez, Alicia
                    Pose-Díez-de-la-Lastra
     Main reference Alicia Pose-Díez-de-la-Lastra, Tamas Ungi, David Morton, Gabor Fichtinger, Javier Pascau:
                    “Real-time integration between Microsoft HoloLens 2 and 3D Slicer with demonstration in pedicle
                    screw placement planning”, Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg., Vol. 18(11), pp. 2023–2032, 2023.
               URL https://doi.org/10.1007/S11548-023-02977-0


     In this talk, I presented our experience at Universidad Carlos III de Madrid introducing
     Augmented Reality (AR) in the Operating Room (OR). Our initial open-source solution com-
     bined a 3D-printed reference, a surgical guide, and an application running on a smartphone,
     offering a versatile approach for visualizing anatomical models augmented over 3D-printed
     phantoms or directly onto patients during surgery. With this straightforward method, we
     successfully displayed essential surgical planning information in training sessions for sacral
     neurostimulation and during craniosynostosis and microtia surgeries. Smartphones and
     tablets offer numerous advantages, such as affordability, ease of introduction into sterile
     environments via transparent bags, and the possibility of sharing the AR visualization among
     multiple users. However, when porting our AR solutions to Head-Mounted Displays (HMDs)
     like Microsoft Hololens2, the interaction with holograms and the immersive experience greatly
     improved. Despite current HMD limitations, this approach offers significant benefits for the
P. Haddawy, A. Hennemuth, R. Kikinis, G. Zachmann, M. Lorenz and A. Reinschlüssel                                   31


OR, including natural hand-gesture interactions and enhanced 3D perception. Our recent
work integrating Hololens2 with the 3DSlicer platform has opened new possibilities, combin-
ing the advantages of AR visualization with the computational and algorithmic capabilities
available in 3DSlicer. These findings were demonstrated after the talk, utilizing a 3D-printed
craniosynostosis patient model to visualize AR content both on a tablet and via Hololens2.



3.10      Personal perspective of seminar outcome
Dirk Reiners (University of Central Florida – Orlando, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Dirk Reiners


The main outcome for me for this seminar is a much better understanding of the needs of
the medical professionals in the OR, in terms of things they can and cannot do, and their
requirements of supporting technology like XR. Discussions with doctors and XR researchers
led to new ideas for visual representations of relevant data in an integrated context that can
be used inside the OR for different kinds of procedures.



3.11      Multimodal Features and User Representation Considerations
Anke V. Reinschluessel (Universität Konstanz, DE)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Anke V. Reinschluessel
Main reference Anke Verena Reinschlüssel: “Empowering surgeons – a multimodal interaction approach to improve
               computer-assisted surgical planning and interventions”, 2022.
          URL https://doi.org/10.26092/ELIB/1620


Several aspects are important to consider in order to advance the use of extended (XR) or
mixed reality (MR) in the operating room (OR). When thinking about MR, we mostly focus
on the visual aspects, but MR can also augment or integrate other senses, such as audio
or haptic, which can also support a procedure. There have been approaches to use audio
or tactile information to guide interventions (e.g., [3] or [5]). Furthermore, also for surgery
planning, haptic props have been shown as a promising approach to interacting with image
data (e.g., [1, 2] or [4]). Multimodal feedback might also be particularly interesting in a
situation where a specialist is joining remotely and is virtually present in the room. Subtle
on-site occurrences, like a sound from a device or someone coming into the OR asking a
question, might not be picked up and transmitted by the collaboration system by default but
distract the team on-site. This could lead to confusion as the reason for the team’s attention
shift is unclear to the remote specialist. Therefore, it is important to consider what and
how it is transmitted in these remote collaboration settings. To create a better sense of
co-presence, a system should also not simply represent the position the remote person placed
themselves but maybe also add multimodal feedback for the on-site personnel, e.g., heat
patches imitating the body heat someone standing there would radiate. Likewise, it might be
worthwhile to explore which kind of user representations support remote collaboration best,
as humans pick up subtle cues without conscious processing that influence the relationships.
For example, our breathing and heart rate are perceived and can synchronise, leading to
a feeling of closeness and allowing for an understanding of the other person’s state in real
settings, which are details that current avatar representations omit. Additionally, as avatar




                                                                                                                25062
32   25062 – Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR)


     representations can also be a source of distraction, investigating which aspects of the user
     representation are beneficial for use in a high-stress environment and which add stress. The
     aspects of this talk were intensely discussed in the context of remote collaboration for surgical
     contexts, but might also play a role in robotics-assisted surgery or remote robotic surgery.
     It is worthwhile to investigate how the humans operating them can be present in the OR,
     and, potentially, the results can also be transferred to robotics representations to increase
     awareness and collaboration with it.
     References
     1    Reinschluessel, A., Fischer, R., Schumann, C., Uslar, V., Muender, T., Katzky, U., Kißner,
          H., Kraft, V., Lampe, M., Lück, T. & Others Introducing virtual & 3D-printed models for
          improved collaboration in surgery. Proceedings Of The 18. Annual Meeting Of The German
          Society Of Computer-and Robot-Assisted Surgery, Oliver Burgert (Ed.). 18 pp. 253-258
          (2019)
     2    Reinschluessel, A., Muender, T., Salzmann, D., Döring, T., Malaka, R. & Weyhe, D. Virtual
          Reality for Surgical Planning – Evaluation Based on Two Liver Tumor Resections. Frontiers
          In Surgery. 9 (2022)
     3    Black, D., Lilge, S., Fellmann, C., Reinschluessel, A., Kreuer, L., Nabavi, A., Hahn, H.,
          Kikinis, R. & Burgner-Kahrs, J. Auditory Display for Telerobotic Transnasal Surgery Using
          a Continuum Robot. J. Medical Robotics Res.. 4, 1950004:1-1950004:14 (2019)
     4    Muender, T., Reinschluessel, A., Salzmann, D., Lück, T., Schenk, A., Weyhe, D., Döring, T.
          & Malaka, R. Evaluating Soft Organ-Shaped Tangibles for Medical Virtual Reality. CHI ’22,
          New Orleans, LA, USA, 29 April 2022 – 5 May 2022, Extended Abstracts. pp. 237:1-237:8
          (2022)
     5    Reinschluessel, A., Cebulla, S., Herrlich, M., Döring, T. & Malaka, R. Vibro-Band: Sup-
          porting Needle Placement for Physicians with Vibrations. Extended Abstracts Of CHI 2018,
          Montreal, QC, Canada, April 21-26, 2018. (2018)



     3.12      Enhancing Liver Surgery and Hepatic Interventions with AI and
               XR Technologies
     Andrea Schenk (Fraunhofer MEVIS – Bremen, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Andrea Schenk


     Artificial intelligence technologies, particularly deep learning, have accelerated and partially
     automated the analysis of preoperative imaging data such as CT and MRI. This has enabled
     more widespread creation and use of 3D models for treatment planning, risk analysis and
     decision support. In particular, liver cancer treatments with multiple therapy options,
     including open and minimally invasive surgery, have benefited from this development. The
     addition of information from laboratory values, histology and liver function tests, together
     with numerical simulations and AI-based prediction of treatment outcomes, has led to
     simpler, safer and improved therapies. XR tools, particularly augmented reality (AR),
     provide surgeons with real-time visualizations of complex liver anatomy, enabling greater
     accuracy during procedures. This enhanced visualization helps to accurately identify critical
     structures such as blood vessels, bile ducts and distances to tumors, ultimately reducing
     the risk of complications. The use of XR in surgical training also improves the skills of
     medical professionals by allowing them to practice techniques in an immersive, risk-free
     environment. The combination of AI and XR technologies helps ensure that patients receive
P. Haddawy, A. Hennemuth, R. Kikinis, G. Zachmann, M. Lorenz and A. Reinschlüssel                       33


safer and more effective care in the field of liver surgery, with the potential to significantly
improve patient outcomes. In the talk, I presented our own research in this area, including
the segmentation of anatomical liver structures and pathologies from CT and MRI data
using AI, the calculation of image-based liver function, and therapy simulations for tumor
resection and ablation as well as for liver transplantation. In three projects, we extended XR
technologies for the transfer of 3D models and planning results into the operating room and
developed an extremely fast visualization technology called AVIS, which allows noise-free
real-time volume rendering in AR with interactive modification of the transfer function and
application of cut planes. An overview of current research topics concluded the presentation.



3.13      Towards task specific (physical) XR solutions
Falko Schmid (Heinrich-Heine-Universitätsklinikum Düsseldorf, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Falko Schmid


XR is emerging as a valuable tool in the operating room (OR), with the potential to support
a range of critical processes and workflows, including immersive communication, visualization
of medical imagery, navigation, and ambient communication through technologies such
as light and projection. These applications can greatly enhance the effectiveness and
efficiency of medical procedures, but to unlock their full potential, several key factors must
be addressed. A thorough understanding of the technology itself is essential. Devices like
headsets must be carefully evaluated for factors such as battery life, resolution, camera
position, field of view, brightness, and sensory capabilities, as these elements significantly
impact the quality and feasibility of potential solutions. Additionally, interaction capabilities
like gestures, voice control, eye tracking, contextual sensor fusion, and the integration of
wearables must be explored to ensure they align with the specific needs of the medical
environment. Equally important is a deep understanding of the task at hand. It is crucial
to determine whether additional visual information would be beneficial and to evaluate
alternative ways to present information, such as through sound, ambient changes, vibration,
or external visual cues. It’s not just about identifying the type of information required
but also understanding how and when it should be delivered to maximize its value. The
implementation of natural, intuitive, and robust interactions is key, especially in high-pressure
environments like surgery, where ease of use and minimizing distractions are critical. Finally,
a comprehensive understanding of clinical processes is necessary to integrate MR effectively
into existing workflows. Solutions must be designed to enhance the capabilities of medical
professionals without adding complexity or burden. Given the fragility of MR technology,
developing stable, robust, and turnkey solutions that are reliable is a significant challenge
that must be addressed to fully realize MR’s potential in the OR. I believe that rethinking
what XR means in concrete implementations is necessary. For example, while relying on
multi-purpose headsets like HL offers the potential for fast, low-effort showcasing, these
devices are often over-engineered, but typically leading to fragile solutions. Too often, our
thinking is driven by the technological possibilities of these devices, rather than analyzing
the needs of surgeons and the underlying processes. I believe specific solutions, especially in
terms of hardware, can be much more beneficial by addressing the real needs of surgeons.
For instance, using their native tool – the surgical magnification loupe – as an interface for
augmented reality, rather than introducing an entirely new device, could provide a more
effective solution.



                                                                                                    25062
34   25062 – Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR)


     3.14      XR and AI as collaborative tools for shared decision-making
     Siriwan Suebnukarn (Thammasat University – Pathum Thani, TH)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Siriwan Suebnukarn


     XR and AI as collaborative tools for shared decision-making XR enhanced by AI has
     tremendous potential in shared decision-making (SDM) both preoperative and intraoperative
     surgical contexts by providing data-driven insights, automating routine tasks, and offering
     predictive analytics to support clinicians in making informed decisions. Using XR, surgeons
     can interact with anatomical models in a virtual environment, simulating different surgical
     approaches, testing possible complications, and adjusting the plan in a shared decision-making
     context. AI can also suggest the most efficient path based on patient-specific factors. AI can
     process large datasets from similar cases to predict potential risks (e.g., bleeding, infection,
     recovery time) for a given patient. During shared decision-making, these risk assessments
     can be integrated into XR, allowing the surgical team to visualize how different decisions
     (such as incision placement, resection margins) might impact patient outcomes in real-time.
     In cases where multiple specialists must collaborate on a complex procedure, XR can help
     them rehearse the surgery together by simulating potential complications or variations, and
     specialists can practice responding to these challenges in an immersive XR environment
     before surgery. Preoperative SDM often involves consultations with patients and families.
     AI-driven XR systems can present the patient’s condition and potential surgical options in
     an easily understandable format, improving communication and helping the patient become
     an active participant in the decision-making process. The intraoperative phase is highly
     dynamic, requiring real-time decision-making based on changing conditions. During surgery,
     AI can process real-time imaging data (such as live CT, MRI, or ultrasound) and use XR to
     overlay crucial information onto the surgical field. This allows the surgical team to make
     shared decisions without losing focus on the procedure. AI can highlight critical structures or
     suggest optimal surgical paths, reducing the risk of errors. AI can provide real-time decision
     support by analyzing the evolving intraoperative environment and suggesting changes to the
     surgical plan. For example, if unexpected bleeding occurs or tissue appears different from
     preoperative images, AI can process these changes and recommend adjustments, which are
     then visualized in XR. Surgeons and other specialists can review these suggestions and decide
     collaboratively on the next steps. By merging the analytical power of AI with the immersive
     capabilities of XR, teams can enhance collaboration, precision, and patient outcomes in both
     preoperative planning and intraoperative execution.



     3.15      Virtual and Augmented Reality in a Surgical Setting – Research at
               the University Clinic for Visceral Surgery, Pius-Hospital Oldenburg
     Verena Uslar (Universität Oldenburg, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Verena Uslar


     To compensate for the growing personnel shortage in medicine, the possibilities of digit-
     alization must be fully exploited. However, significant problems still exist in transferring
     new digital tools into clinical practice. Often, medical staff are skeptical about introdu-
     cing new tools into daily clinical routine and/or the tools do not meet the actual needs.
P. Haddawy, A. Hennemuth, R. Kikinis, G. Zachmann, M. Lorenz and A. Reinschlüssel                    35


Therefore, the University Hospital for Visceral Surgery at Pius-Hospital, with its research
focus, is dedicated to the user-centered development of digital tools in collaboration with
developers and companies from the medical technology industry. This ensures that the
tools are developed in a needs-based manner from the outset and increases the likelihood of
the tools developed in research projects being transferred to a marketable medical product.
At the Dagstuhl Seminar XR4OR, I was pleased to have the opportunity to present three
best-practice projects and their results. In the VIVATOP project, we researched VR and
AR applications for preoperative planning, intraoperative support, and training and further
education with our project partners. For example, a VR planning tool was developed that
uses a haptically correct liver model instead of conventional controllers for interaction (see
Fig. 1). Additionally, an AR application was researched that allows users to view segmented,
patient-specific 3D liver models and can also be used intraoperatively as a navigation aid
for tumor resection. The follow-up project AHrEZ is currently working on the automatic
segmentation of the liver model based on patients’ CT or MRI scans and the automatic
placement of the model in the surgical site during the operation.




   Figure 1 Surgical planning tool (VR) using patient-specific 3D liver models.

   For the evaluation of these tools, the University Hospital for Visceral Surgery uses
not only the usual subjective measures known from user-centered development, such as
questionnaires or interviews, but also new methods like mobile EEG or skin conductance
(EDA). Furthermore, the University Hospital operates two Living Labs, where the developed
tools can be iteratively tested (see Fig. 2). This allows us to provide our development
partners with a comprehensive overview of factors such as feasibility and usability of the
developed tools, as well as workload and stress when using the tools, in research projects.



                                                                                                 25062
36   25062 – Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR)


     This leads to demonstrators, such as the newly developed lighting concept for the operating
     room in the SmartOT project (see Fig. 3), being researched in a sustainable manner, so that
     the implementation as a medical product actually occurs after the project.




        Figure 2 Research at the University Hospital for Visceral Surgery at Pius-Hospital Oldenburg.




         Figure 3 Photo of the demonstrator for a new operating room lighting system. The prototype
     will be installed in one of the new operating rooms at Pius-Hospital this year.

         The Dagstuhl Seminar was a confirmation for me that this type of research is urgently
     needed. Additionally, it had a lasting impact on future research projects through the creation
     of new contacts.
P. Haddawy, A. Hennemuth, R. Kikinis, G. Zachmann, M. Lorenz and A. Reinschlüssel                                     37


3.16      Awake Craniotomy
Gregory F. Welch (University of Central Florida – Orlando, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Gregory F. Welch


The following is an idea I wrote up to share, but then discovered that it is already being
done, at least to some extent. Still, I like the idea, and think more could be done in this area.
    Awake neurosurgery , also known as awake craniotomy , is a specialized surgical procedure
performed while the patient is conscious. This technique is often used when operating on
brain regions responsible for critical functions like language, motor control, and memory, to
monitor and preserve the patient’s cognitive and functional abilities in real-time.
    Although I am not a medical professional, I have seen this in person. My mother suffers
from Essential Tremor (ET) – a neurological disorder that causes involuntary, rhythmic
shaking, typically affecting the hands but sometimes impacting other parts of the body,
such as the head, voice, arms, or legs. I was present in the operating room when she had a
Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) system implanted for the first time, and again when she had
revision surgery – surgical repositioning of the leads / contacts in her brain.
    My thinking is that an awake neurosurgery patient could wear a VR system running an
application that automatically, with the guidance of the surgeon, prompts the patient to
think and speak about things, perhaps even to carry out cognitive and motor activities. The
goal would be to exercise different regions of the brain during the surgery, to increase the
chance of detecting any neurological issues caused by the surgery.
    For example, much like VR is used for physical therapy, the system could present the
patient with nearby virtual targets to look at or even “touch”. This could be going on
concurrently while the surgeon is operating, normally cycling through some critical activities
(cognitive functions), and / or carrying out activities that exercise parts of the brain called
out by the surgeon. While the surgeon could call out the specific activities, if they instead
call out the goal for the cognitive activity, the system could undertake a broad series of
activities that will stimulate or exercise the relevant brain activity.



3.17      Haptics for the OR
Rene Weller (Universität Bremen, DE)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Rene Weller
 Joint work of Rene Weller, Gabriel Zachmann, Maximilian Kaluschke, Siriwan Suebnukarn, Peter Haddawy
Main reference Maximilian Kaluschke, René Weller, Myat Su Yin, Benedikt W. Hosp, Farin Kulapichitr, Siriwan
               Suebnukarn, Peter Haddawy, Gabriel Zachmann: “Reflecting on Excellence: VR Simulation for
               Learning Indirect Vision in Complex Bi-Manual Tasks”, in Proc. of the IEEE Conference Virtual
               Reality and 3D User Interfaces, VR 2024, Orlando, FL, USA, March 16-21, 2024, pp. 712–721, IEEE,
               2024.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1109/VR58804.2024.00091


Haptic feedback plays a crucial role in realistic surgical simulation and has the potential to
enhance actual surgical procedures. We will detail the development of a VR simulator for
total hip arthroplasty (THA) and dental surgeries, including the haptic devices, rendering
methods, and evaluation of its realism and usability. Furthermore, we discuss how haptic
interfaces and devices can be applied in the operating room, focusing on how providing
tactile feedback to surgeons can improve precision, safety, and control, ultimately leading to
better surgical outcomes.



                                                                                                                  25062
38   25062 – Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR)


     3.18      Remotely guided robotic surgery through extended reality
     Sudanthi Wijewickrema (University of Melbourne, AU)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Sudanthi Wijewickrema


     In locations where expert surgeons are not available, it will be beneficial if remote surgery is
     possible. This will require the following.
         Obtain a model of the region of interest: Pre-operative scans of the patient (regions of
     interest for the surgery) need to be obtained first. These scans should then be segmented to
     identify anatomical structures and/or pathologies. Artificial intelligence methods such as
     deep learning can be used for this. From these segmentations, a 3D model of the region of
     interest can be created.
         Generate a surgical plan: Using the pre-operative 3D model, a surgical plan and optimal
     path for the surgery should be generated. The path should be displayed on the 3D model in
     a step-by-step manner to enable real-time guidance.
         Register the patient with the pre-operative model: Fiducials can be used as orientation
     landmarks to register the patient with the 3D model and surgical plan. Registration should
     be done prior to the start of the surgery and in real-time to ensure the 3D model is aligned
     with the patient.
         Perform remote robotic surgery: The surgeon in the remote location can operate on the
     3D model projected via a XR headset and haptics that simulate the robotic surgical system.
     The operation will be reflected on the actual patient mimicking the actions of the remote
     surgeon.



      4      Open problems
     4.1     Dagstuhl Seminar 2025 – XR in the OR: “Pain Points”
     Dirk Weyhe (Universität Oldenburg, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Dirk Weyhe
     Main reference Weyhe D. (2025): Neue digitale Assistenzsysteme: Potenziale in der Viszeralmedizin. Die Chirurgie.
                    96, 1-2. doi: 10.1007/s00104-024-02220-9
               URL 10.1007/s00104-024-02220-9


     Introduction. The future of medicine in the Western world is shaped by demographic
     change and increasingly advanced, individualized, and interdisciplinary therapy options. In
     contrast, there is a growing shortage of personnel. The Wi-FOR Institute, commissioned by
     Price Waterhouse Coopers (PWC) Germany, analyzed that in 2022, there was a shortage
     of 290,000 unfilled positions (6.8%) in the healthcare sector, which is expected to grow to
     1.8 million (35.4%) by the year 2035. The Robert Bosch Foundation published a study in
     2021 titled “Health Centers for Germany: How a Restart in Primary Care Can Succeed.”
     Their projections indicate that by 2035, rural areas, such as Northwest Germany, will face
     dramatic undersupply with a primary care coverage rate of less than 75%. The German
     Medical Association describes in the report on “Resilience in Healthcare” from 2023 by the
     Expert Council that the increasing demand for medical expertise will be met with a future
     shortage of doctors.
P. Haddawy, A. Hennemuth, R. Kikinis, G. Zachmann, M. Lorenz and A. Reinschlüssel                          39




    Figure 4 3D printing of a deformable liver with vascular tree projection (yellow – metastases of
colorectal carcinoma).


Method. The potentials of digital assistance systems such as AR and VR are presented
using the example of the BMBF-funded collaborative project VIVATOP (Weyhe, 2025).
In this project, preoperative liver surgeries were planned in VR based on patient-specific
segmented DICOM data (CT scans), supported intraoperatively by AR, and the case series
was transferred into a database for postoperative debriefing and training purposes. Initial
combinations of 3D-printed livers and registered AR projections for training purposes are
presented (Fig. 4).
    As “pain points” for potential routine application, “Fluid XR in daily use”, “automatic
placement” (registration), fully automatic segmentation (3D), “haptic feedback” in planning
& training systems, and very important digital concepts to compensate for the lack of
healthcare workers have been defined.

Summary
The potential of digital assistance systems in visceral surgery is enormous; however, a number
of technical solutions are still needed to fully realize these potentials in routine practice with
high added value. In this context, telemedicine plays a crucial role and has made significant
advancements in recent years.
References
1    Dirk Weyhe. Neue digitale Assistenzsysteme: Potenziale in der Viszeralmedizin. Die Chirur-
     gie. 96, 1-2. doi: 10.1007/s00104-024-02220-9




                                                                                                       25062
40   25062 – Extended Reality for the Operating Room (XR4OR)


             Participants
       Philippe C. Cattin                  Luv Kohli                         Falko Schmid
     Universität Basel – Allschwil, CH   InnerOptic Technology –           Heinrich-Heine-
       Tanja Döring                      Hillsborough, US                  Universitätsklinikum
     Universität Bremen, DE                                                Düsseldorf, DE
                                          Mario Lorenz
       Simon Drouin                      TU Chemnitz, DE                     Siriwan Suebnukarn
     ETS – Montreal, CA                                                    Thammasat University –
                                          Rainer Malaka                    Pathum Thani, TH
       Gabor Fichtinger
     Queen’s University –                Universität Bremen, DE              Verena Uslar
     Kingston, CA                                                          Universität Oldenburg, DE
                                           Javier Pascau
       Tabea Flügge                      Carlos III University of            Gregory F. Welch
     Charité – Berlin, DE                Madrid, ES                        University of Central Florida –
       Peter Haddawy                                                       Orlando, US
                                           Dirk Reiners
     Mahidol University – Salaya, TH                                         Rene Weller
                                         University of Central Florida –
       Anja Hennemuth                                                      Universität Bremen, DE
                                         Orlando, US
     Charité – Berlin, DE                                                    Dirk Weyhe
       Joaquim A. Jorge                   Anke Reinschlüssel               Universität Oldenburg, DE
     University of Lisbon, PT            Universität Konstanz, DE            Sudanthi Wijewickrema
       Ron Kikinis                         Andrea Schenk                   University of Melbourne, AU
     Harvard Medical School –            Fraunhofer MEVIS –                  Gabriel Zachmann
     Boston, US                          Bremen, DE                        Universität Bremen, DE
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25071

Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market
Design
Martin Bichler∗1 , Péter Biró∗2 , Tom Demeulemeester†3 , and
Bettina Klaus∗4
1       TU München – Garching, DE. bichler@in.tum.de
2       HUN-REN KRTK – Budapest, HU & Corvinus University of Budapest, HU.
        biro.peter@krtk.mta.hu
3       University of Lausanne, CH. tom.demeulemeester@unil.ch
4       University of Lausanne, CH. bettina.klaus@unil.ch

        Abstract
Dagstuhl Seminar 25071 gathered an interdisciplinary group of researchers from economics,
computer science, and operations research to address current challenges in auction and matching
market design. These centralized allocation mechanisms – used in school admissions, kidney
exchanges, refugee resettlement, power markets, and spectrum auctions – must increasingly
accommodate complex real-world requirements, including multi-objective optimization, dynamic
participation, and strategic behavior under uncertainty.
Seminar February 9–14, 2025 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/25071
2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Algorithmic game theory and
   mechanism design
Keywords and phrases algorithms, auctions, game theory, market design, matching markets
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.2.41



    1    Executive Summary
Martin Bichler (TU München – Garching, DE)
Péter Biró (HUN-REN KRTK – Budapest, HU & Corvinus University of Budapest, HU)
Bettina Klaus (University of Lausanne, CH)
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, and Bettina Klaus


The Dagstuhl Seminar emphasized the intersection of markets with and without monetary
transfers, aiming to identify conceptual and methodological tools that can be transferred
across auction and matching domains. It provided a platform to exchange insights across
disciplines, discuss open problems, and foster new collaborations.



Structure and Activities
The week-long seminar began with participant introductions and featured a carefully balanced
mix of:
   Survey talks, which provided foundational overviews and highlighted key developments
   in the field.

∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector

            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15, Issue 2, pp. 41–62
Editors: Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, Tom Demeulemeester, and Bettina Klaus
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
42   25071 – Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design


        Research presentations, focusing on current projects, algorithmic innovations, and real-
        world applications.
        Rump sessions to stimulate open discussion on challenges and open problems.
        Working group sessions for in-depth exploration of emerging research directions.
        A closing discussion including updates of working groups’ results, as well as a social
        excursion to foster informal interactions.



     Highlights of Survey Talks
     The seminar featured six in-depth survey talks, scheduled across the week, which framed the
     discussions and established key interdisciplinary touchpoints:
         Haris Aziz opened with a survey on fair allocation and matching, reviewing fundamental
         fairness concepts and recent advances in two-sided matching models.
         Thanh Nguyen gave a survey on relaxations in market design, highlighting how continuous
         relaxations and rounding can be used to tackle complex constraints in matching, exchange,
         and allocation markets.
         Axel Ockenfels presented a survey on behavioral market design, emphasizing the role of
         bounded rationality and empirical behavior in designing effective institutions, particularly
         in the face of global challenges.
         Bettina Klaus delivered a commemorative and forward-looking talk titled “Happy
         50(+1)th birthday TTC!”, tracing the evolution of the Top Trading Cycles mechan-
         ism and its extensions to more complex and realistic preference domains.
         Margarida Carvalho concluded the seminar’s survey series with a talk on mathematical
         optimization for matchings, exploring mixed-integer programming formulations and their
         role in addressing many-to-one matching problems under constraints.

        These survey talks spanned theoretical, algorithmic, and behavioral dimensions of market
     design and emphasized the importance of cross-disciplinary approaches to current market
     design problems.



     Key Themes and Contributions
     Connecting Auction and Matching Domains
     Participants explored how auction-based concepts such as artificial pricing, budget constraints,
     and learning dynamics could be translated into matching settings like course allocation or
     kidney exchanges. Pseudo-market mechanisms and matching with contracts emerged as
     promising hybrid models for allocation in settings with soft monetary constraints or policy-
     based contracts.

     Addressing Real-World Complexity
     Multiple talks and working groups addressed the need to design mechanisms that account for
     real-world constraints – ranging from congestion aversion in school choice, to multi-criteria
     optimization in kidney exchange, to crowd-based last-mile delivery. Algorithmic techniques
     included mixed-integer programming, approximation algorithms, and simulations tailored to
     specific institutional settings.
Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, Tom Demeulemeester, and Bettina Klaus                                    43


Strategic Behavior and Bounded Rationality
Several presentations focused on modeling and mitigating strategic manipulation in allocation
mechanisms. Discussions included satisficing equilibria, perverse incentives created by
institutional rankings, and incentive-compatible mechanisms that balance fairness and
efficiency. These considerations are essential for ensuring adoption and trust in designed
systems.

Emerging Methodologies
Participants presented innovative tools from behavioral economics, agent-based modeling, and
game-theoretic learning, alongside traditional mechanism design and algorithmic techniques.
Working groups explored algorithmic approaches to topics like financial network compression,
weak preference handling in TTC, and equilibrium computation in Bayesian settings.



Conclusion
Dagstuhl Seminar 25071 succeeded in fostering rich interdisciplinary exchange around the
growing complexity of modern allocation problems. By emphasizing the connections between
auctions and matching markets, and grounding theory in practical application domains, the
seminar helped lay the groundwork for future collaboration and innovation in computational
market design.
    The diversity of topics and expertise reflected both the breadth of the field and the need
for integrated approaches to market design challenges in an increasingly complex world.
    The organisers thank all the Dagstuhl staff members for their professional support and
the participants for enriching the seminar.




                                                                                                 25071
44   25071 – Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design


      2       Table of Contents
     Executive Summary
       Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, and Bettina Klaus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             41

     Overview of Talks
          A Survey on Fair Allocation and Matching
          Haris Aziz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47
          Learning in Games
          Martin Bichler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     47
          Multi-criteria optimisation in the Spanish kidney exchange programme
          Péter Biró . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47
          Sharing with Frictions: Limited Transfers and Costly Inspections
          Federico Bobbio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
          Mathematical Optimization for Matchings
          Margarida Carvalho . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
          Bidding for subsidies with one’s patience
          Gian Caspari . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
          Fairness in Assignments with Congestion-Averse Agents: Concepts, Algorithms,
          and Complexity
          Jiehua Chen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
          Welfare Lower Bounds in House Allocation Problems with Existing Tenants: A
          Characterization
          Yang Chen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
          Complexity and Manipulation of International Kidney Exchange Programs with
          Country-Specific Parameters
          Rachael Colley . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
          Trading homogeneous goods at multiple delivery points
          Dávid Csercsik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
          Open Questions from Kidney Exchange and Stable matches
          Gergely Csáji . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
          Pricing Valid Cuts for Price-Match Equilibria
          Robert Day and Ben Lubin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         51
          Fair integer programming under dichotomous and cardinal preferences
          Tom Demeulemeester . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       51
          Complexities in the Roommates Problem
          Frederik Glitzner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    51
          (Our) Open practical and theoretical problems in matching
          Claus-Jochen Haake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
          Stable matchings and distributive lattices
          Zsuzsanna Jankó . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
          Housing Market with Identical Objects and Top Trading Cycles Mechanisms
          Mehmet Karakaya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, Tom Demeulemeester, and Bettina Klaus                                         45


  Happy 50 (+1) th birthday TTC! A Survey
  Bettina Klaus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
  Correlation of rankings in matching markets
  Patrick Loiseau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
  Perverse incentives created by rankings
  Thayer Morrill . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
  Relaxations in Market Design
  Thanh Nguyen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     54
  Behavioral Market Design
  Axel Ockenfels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     54
  Online Bipartite Matching with Replacements
  Katarzyna Paluch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     54
  Satisficing equilibrium
  Bary Pradelski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
  Jumping to Conclusions
  Sven Rady . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
  Strategic Queues with Priority Classes
  Marco Scarsini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
  The Strong Core of Housing Markets with Partial Order Preferences
  Ildikó Schlotter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
  Service Assignment at the United States Naval Academy
  Naomi Utgoff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
  Lastmile delivery with crowdsourcing
  Ana Viana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    57
  Computing Balanced Solutions for Large International Kidney Exchange Schemes
  When Cycle Length Is Unbounded
  Xin Ye . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57

Working groups
  On the Existence of Strict Bayes-Nash Equilibrium in Bayesian All-Pay Auctions
  Martin Bichler, Janik Bürgermeister, Julius Durmann, Bary Pradelski, Sven Rady,
  and Marco Scarsini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
  Portfolio compression in financial networks
  Péter Biró . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
  Potential applications of mechanism design approaches for Last Mile Delivery
  Problems
  Dávid Csercsik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
  TTC rules for weak preferences
  Bettina Klaus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
  Gaming the DA in Amsterdam
  Thilo Klein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
  Minimum spanning subgraph for a group of agents
  Dušan Knop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     61




                                                                                                      25071
46   25071 – Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design


        GenAI for Bid Language and Bid Entry Design
        Ben Lubin, Robert Day, and Thanh Nguyen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        61

     Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, Tom Demeulemeester, and Bettina Klaus                                         47


 3     Overview of Talks
3.1    A Survey on Fair Allocation and Matching
Haris Aziz (UNSW – Sydney, AU)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Haris Aziz


In this survey talk, I discuss some recent results and trends in the literature on fair allocation.
I also discuss the connections with two sided matching.



3.2    Learning in Games
Martin Bichler (TU München – Garching, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Martin Bichler


We analyze the convergence of gradient-based learners to (Bayesian) Nash equilibrium in
market games. While equilibrium can be verified ex-post, we discussed ex-ante conditions for
convergence in games.



3.3    Multi-criteria optimisation in the Spanish kidney exchange
       programme
Péter Biró (HUN-REN KRTK – Budapest, HU & Corvinus University of Budapest, HU)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Péter Biró


We study the relevance of the order of the objective criteria in the hierarchic optimisation in
the Spanish kidney exchange programme. We conduct computer simulations on three real
kidney exchange instances from Spain in 2019 and also on simulated datasets by using the
ENCKEP kidney exchange simulator. We consider six optimisation criteria that are relevant
in the Spanish policy: maximisation of (1) the number of transplants, (2) a composite
quality-priority score, (3) the number of cycles, (4) the number of two-cycles and three-cycles
with embedded two-cycles, (5) the number of back-arcs in the cycles, and (6) the minimisation
of the number of ABO-incompatible transplants. In our simulations we compute all the
alternative solutions that can be obtained by a hierarchical optimisation strategy using these
criteria, and we analyse the trade-offs with regard to these objectives.




                                                                                                      25071
48   25071 – Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design


     3.4     Sharing with Frictions: Limited Transfers and Costly Inspections
     Federico Bobbio (Northwestern University – Evanston, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Federico Bobbio
      Joint work of Federico Bobbio, Randall Berry, Michael Honig, Thanh Nguyen, Vijay Subramanian, Rakesh Vohra


     We study an optimal mechanism design problem for resource sharing between an incumbent
     noncommercial user and a commercial entrant. Motivated by applications such as wireless
     spectrum allocation and access to national resources, where noncommercial and commercial
     users compete for limited availability, the mechanism is subject to two key constraints. First,
     direct transfers cannot take place to compensate the incumbent for externalities caused by
     the activity of the commercial user. Instead, the incumbent reports a disutility for sharing
     to a regulator; the second constraint is that this disutility can only be verified via a costly
     inspection. The regulator optimizes total welfare by announcing a probability of shared
     resource assignment along with a probability of inspection. We show that in the optimal
     mechanism, both allocation and inspection decisions are binary: The regulator either fully
     allows or prohibits sharing, and inspections occur only for certain reported values when
     sharing is denied. We further reformulate the problem as a knapsack model to characterize
     threshold extremal points.



     3.5     Mathematical Optimization for Matchings
     Margarida Carvalho (University of Montreal, CA)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Margarida Carvalho


     In this talk, we will begin by reviewing key aspects of effectively solving mixed-integer
     programming (MIP) formulations in practice. We will then explore optimization problems
     in many-to-one matchings, gradually progressing from computationally tractable cases to
     NP-hard ones. Along the way, we will examine MIP models, emphasizing the interplay
     between modeling techniques and solution strategies. Finally, we will conclude with open
     questions on the role of mathematical optimization in matching markets.



     3.6     Bidding for subsidies with one’s patience
     Gian Caspari (Zentrum für Europäische Wirtschaftsforschung – Mannheim, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Gian Caspari
     Main reference Gian Caspari: “Bidding for Subsidies with One’s Patience”. Available at SSRN
               URL https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.5133595


     We study the problem of distributing subsidies in a market that includes both marginal
     individuals in need of assistance and infra-marginal individuals who would purchase the
     subsidized product without additional incentives. We propose the use of a wait time auction,
     where individuals bid the amount of time they are willing to wait in exchange for a specified
     subsidy amount. This design enables more direct targeting of marginal individuals, thereby
     enhancing the overall effectiveness of the subsidy program. Furthermore, screening is costless
     in equilibrium as no wait times are imposed, and practical robustness against deviations
     from equilibrium behavior can be ensured by implementing a maximum allowable bid.
Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, Tom Demeulemeester, and Bettina Klaus                                             49


3.7    Fairness in Assignments with Congestion-Averse Agents: Concepts,
       Algorithms, and Complexity
Jiehua Chen (TU Wien, AT)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Jiehua Chen


The congested assignment problem is concerned with assigning agents to posts where agents
care about both the posts and their congestion levels. Here, agents are averse to congestion,
consistently preferring lower over higher congestion for the same resource. Such scenarios
are prevalent across many domains, including traffic management and school choice, where
fair resource allocation is crucial. Congested assignment can be considered as a restricted
variant of the Group Activity Selection problem, introduced by Darmann et al. Additionally,
it is related to many-to-one matching in matching under preferences.
     In this talk, I will explore one ex-ante fairness concept, top-fairness, and two ex-post
fairness concepts, envy-freeness and competitiveness. The top-fairness and competitiveness
concepts were recently introduced by Bogomolnaia and Moulin. While a top-fair or envy-free
assignment always exists and can be found easily, competitive assignments do not always
exist. The talk will cover the following key points:
1. An efficient method to determine the existence of competitive or maximally competitive
     assignments for a given congestion profile.
2. Two optimization variants of congested assignments and their computational complexity:
     a) Finding a top-fair assignment that is envy-free b) Finding a top-fair assignment that
     is maximally competitive. Both variants are NP-hard, unfortunately.
3. Parameterized algorithms for these NP-hard problems.



3.8    Welfare Lower Bounds in House Allocation Problems with Existing
       Tenants: A Characterization
Yang Chen (University of Lausanne, CH)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Yang Chen
 Joint work of Yang Chen, Di Feng
Main reference Chen, Yang and Di Feng: “Welfare Lower Bounds in House Allocation Problems with Existing
               Tenants: A Characterization”. Available at SSRN, 2025.
          URL https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.5111246


We study Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez’s (1999) house allocation problems with existing
tenants. In particular, we focus on three welfare lower bounds conditions for agents, with
respect to tenants’ endowments, solidarity for newcomers, and fairness for all agents. Based
on these three welfare lower bounds conditions, together with three other well studied
properties, namely pair efficiency, strategy-proofness and weak neutrality, we characterize a
class of mechanisms proposed by Sönmez and Ünver (2005): the You Request My House-I
Get Your Turn mechanism with Newcomer Priorities (YTP), which is a hybrid between
the top trading cycles mechanism and a serial dictatorship mechanism of newcomers. Our
result constitutes the first characterization, in the absence of invariance properties, e.g.,
non-bossiness and consistency.




                                                                                                          25071
50   25071 – Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design


     3.9     Complexity and Manipulation of International Kidney Exchange
             Programs with Country-Specific Parameters
     Rachael Colley (University of Glasgow, GB)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Rachael Colley
      Joint work of Rachael Colley, David Manlove, Daniël Paulusma, Michelle Zhang


     Kidney Exchange Programs (KEPs) facilitate the exchange of kidneys, and larger pools of
     recipient-donor pairs tend to yield proportionally more transplants, leading to the proposal
     of international KEPs (IKEPs). However, practical limitations must be considered in IKEPs
     to ensure that countries remain willing to participate. Thus, we study IKEPs with country-
     specific parameters, restricting the selected transplants to be feasible for the countries to
     conduct, e.g., imposing an upper limit on the number of consecutive exchanges within a
     country’s borders. We provide a complexity dichotomy of finding allocations for different
     country-specific parameters and study the potential for countries to misreport their parameters
     to increase their allocation. As manipulation can harm the total number of transplants, we
     propose an individually rational (IR) and incentive compatible (IC) mechanism. We first give
     a theoretical approximation ratio for our mechanism in terms of the number of transplants
     and then use simulations to show that the cost of IC and IR in practice is between 18% and
     34% of the maximum number of transplants.



     3.10      Trading homogeneous goods at multiple delivery points
     Dávid Csercsik (HUN-REN KRTK – Budapest, HU)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Dávid Csercsik


     The EU Energy Platform was established in April 2022. As part of the EU Energy Platform
     the EU also set up a demand aggregation and joint purchasing mechanism (DA/JPM),
     called AggregateEU. The AggregateEU is a non-binding mechanism that aims to match the
     supply and demand of natural gas in the context of multiple delivery points (mostly LNG
     terminals). The non-binding nature of the platform raises several potential problems (like
     the phenomenon of overbidding and its implications). Still, the synthesis of a non-binding
     alternative is also non-trivial. We aim to create an auction framework in which participants,
     either buyers or sellers of a homogeneous good are characterized by limited access and
     different access costs to each delivery point, while also considering the principle of fairness,
     i.e. equal access to cheap sources for buyer participants.



     3.11      Open Questions from Kidney Exchange and Stable matches
     Gergely Csáji (Eötvös Lorand University – Budapest, HU)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Gergely Csáji


     In this talk I will give an overview of some recent projects, focusing on the remaining
     open questions. The topics include NTU games for kidney exchange, core of many-to-many
     matching markets, student and resident allocation and a new notion called k-stability.
Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, Tom Demeulemeester, and Bettina Klaus                                                     51


3.12      Pricing Valid Cuts for Price-Match Equilibria
Robert Day (University of Connecticut, US) and Ben Lubin (Boston University, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Robert Day and Ben Lubin


We use valid inequalities (cuts) of the binary integer program for winner determination in
a combinatorial auction (CA) as “artificial items” that can be interpreted intuitively and
priced to generate Artificial Walrasian Equilibria. While the lack of an integer programming
gap is sufficient to guarantee a Walrasian equilibrium, we show that it does not guarantee
a “price-match equilibrium” (PME), a refinement that we introduce, in which prices are
justified by an iso-revenue outcome for any hypothetical removal of a single bidder. We
prove the existence of PME for any CA and characterize their economic properties and
computation. We implement minimally artificial PME rules and compare them with other
prominent CA payment rules in the literature.



3.13      Fair integer programming under dichotomous and cardinal
          preferences
Tom Demeulemeester (University of Lausanne, CH)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Tom Demeulemeester
 Joint work of Tom Demeulemeester, Dries R. Goossens, Ben Hermans, Roel Leus
Main reference Tom Demeulemeester, Dries R. Goossens, Ben Hermans, Roel Leus: “Fair integer programming
               under dichotomous and cardinal preferences”, Eur. J. Oper. Res., Vol. 320(3), pp. 465–478, 2025.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EJOR.2024.08.023


One cannot make truly fair decisions using integer linear programs unless one controls the
selection probabilities of the (possibly many) optimal solutions. For this purpose, we propose
a unified framework when binary decision variables represent agents with dichotomous
preferences, who only care about whether they are selected in the final solution. We
develop several general-purpose algorithms to fairly select optimal solutions, for example, by
maximizing the Nash product or the minimum selection probability, or by using a random
ordering of the agents as a selection criterion (Random Serial Dictatorship). We also discuss
in detail how to extend the proposed methods when agents have cardinal preferences. Lastly,
we evaluate the proposed methods on the specific application of kidney exchange. We find
that while the methods maximizing the Nash product or the minimum selection probability
outperform the other methods on the evaluated welfare criteria, methods such as Random
Serial Dictatorship perform reasonably well in computation times that are similar to those of
finding a single optimal solution.



3.14      Complexities in the Roommates Problem
Frederik Glitzner (University of Glasgow, GB)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Frederik Glitzner


In the Stable Roommates problem, the aim is, given a set of agents and their non-bipartite
ordinal preferences over each other are given, to compute a matching of the agents such
that no two agents prefer each other to their assigned partners (or are unmatched). In this


                                                                                                                  25071
52   25071 – Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design


     talk, we will review concepts related to this problem, outline new theoretical and empirical
     perspectives on how to deal with instances that do not admit such matchings, and pose a
     range of algorithmic, structural, and complexity-theoretic questions.



     3.15      (Our) Open practical and theoretical problems in matching
     Claus-Jochen Haake (Universität Paderborn, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Claus-Jochen Haake


     We discuss two open problems in matching. First, in terms of a farsightedness, is a maximal
     matching indeed maximal? Second, under which conditions can we guarantee the existence
     of stable matchings, when preferences are generated through the satisfaction of objective
     criteria? Here we draw a connection to bargaining theory.



     3.16      Stable matchings and distributive lattices
     Zsuzsanna Jankó (Corvinus University of Budapest, HU & HUN-REN KRTK – Budapest, HU)
            License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Zsuzsanna Jankó
      Joint work of Tamás Fleiner, Zsuzsanna Jankó, Babak Miraftab, Konstantinos Stavropoulos


     It is a classic result that the set of one-to-one stable matchings form a distributive lattice.
     We generalize this to many-to-many matchings with substitutable, IRC and increasing choice
     functions, and show that the lattice of the solutions is distributive. We know one-to-one stable
     matchings have rotations, we try to look at how to find something similar in many-to-many
     matchings.



     3.17      Housing Market with Identical Objects and Top Trading Cycles
               Mechanisms
     Mehmet Karakaya (Izmir Katip Çelebi University, TR)
            License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Mehmet Karakaya
      Joint work of Mehmet Karakaya, Bettina Klaus, Jan Christoph Schlegel


     We consider the housing market model with identical objects where each agent is indifferent
     among identical objects. The Top Trading Cycles (TTC) mechanism with uniform tie-
     breaking satisfies individual rationality, Pareto optimality, and strategy-proofness. We
     introduce a new consistency notion for housing market with identical objects model. We
     show that when there are two types of objects TTC mechanism with uniform tie-breaking is
     consistent. However, when there are at least three types of objects TTC mechanism with
     uniform tie-breaking violates consistency. Our conjecture is that there is no rule satisfying
     individual rationality, Pareto optimality, strategy-proofness, and consistency for housing
     market with identical objects.
Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, Tom Demeulemeester, and Bettina Klaus                                                  53


3.18      Happy 50 (+1) th birthday TTC! A Survey
Bettina Klaus (University of Lausanne, CH)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Bettina Klaus


I present a survey talk commemorating more that 50 years of Gale’s famous top trading
cycles (TTC) algorithm. The classical housing market model and the TTC algorithm were
introduced by Shapley and Scarf (1974) in their seminal paper “Cores and Indivisibilities,”
Journal of Mathematical Economics 1. The TTC agorithm / rule satisfies many desirable
properties relating to weak / strong core stability, efficiency, and incentives, and, remarkably,
is characterized by various combinations of these properties. I review some of the most
important papers in the field and include some recent results on variations of the Shapley Scarf
housing market model (multiple object (re)allocation, limited externalities, weak preference
domains).



3.19      Correlation of rankings in matching markets
Patrick Loiseau (Inria – Palaiseau, FR)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Patrick Loiseau
 Joint work of Rémi Castera, Patrick Loiseau, Bary Pradelski
Main reference Rémi Castera, Patrick Loiseau, Bary Pradelski: “Correlation of Rankings in Matching Markets”,
               2025.
          URL https://hal.science/hal-03672270


We study the role of correlation in matching, where multiple decision-makers simultaneously
face selection problems from the same pool of candidates. We propose a model in which
decision-makers have varying information on candidates from different sociodemographic
groups when evaluating and ranking them, thus leading to varying correlations among
candidates’ priority scores. Such differential correlation arises, for example, when the cost of
information acquisition, decision-maker preferences, or the prevalence of selection criteria
vary across sociodemographic groups. We show that a lower correlation for one of the groups
worsens the outcome for all groups, thus leading to efficiency loss. Moreover, students from
a given group are worse of as their own correlation level increases. This implies that it is
advantageous to belong to a low-correlation group. Finally, we extend the extent tie-breaking
literature to multiple priority classes and intermediate levels of correlation. Overall, our
results point to a previously overlooked systemic source of group inequalities in school,
university, and job admissions.



3.20      Perverse incentives created by rankings
Thayer Morrill (North Carolina State University – Raleigh, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Thayer Morrill


In many applications, participants care about an exogenous ranking that potentially distorts
the preferences they submit in a centralized match. For example, a ranking influenced by a
schools yield percentage might lead to a school rejecting students who the school expects




                                                                                                               25071
54   25071 – Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design


     to reject them. In the doctor-hospital match, the rank-to-fill metric (what spot on your
     preference list where you matched to) leads some hospitals to pressure students to rank it
     first. Can we design rankings which capture the relative quality of the agents being match
     but which do not distort the agent’s preference reports?



     3.21      Relaxations in Market Design
     Thanh Nguyen (Purdue University – West Lafayette, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Thanh Nguyen


     This talk presents a survey of a new approach to market design for complex environments.
     The approach first relaxes the discreteness of market design problems into a continuous
     market equilibrium solution and then rounds it to a nearby solution. I illustrate this method
     in four different settings: stable matching with complementarities, competitive equilibrium
     in allocations beyond substitutes and with budget constraints, combinatorial assignment and
     exchange without monetary transfer, and social choice.



     3.22      Behavioral Market Design
     Axel Ockenfels (Universität Köln, DE & MPI – Bonn, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Axel Ockenfels


     Addressing pressing economic and social challenges – such as pandemics and other health
     crises, climate change, and energy scarcity – requires changes in behavior. In this talk, I will
     use case studies, primarily from my own research, to illustrate how human behavior and
     bounded rationality influences the design of institutions aimed at aligning incentives and
     actions with overarching goals. I will argue that economic design research and behavioral
     science are often complementary, rather than substitutes, in promoting effective behavioral
     change.



     3.23      Online Bipartite Matching with Replacements
     Katarzyna Paluch (University of Wroclaw, PL)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Katarzyna Paluch


     In the online bipartite matching problem with replacements, all the vertices on one side of
     the bipartition (servers) are given, and the vertices on the other side (clients) arrive one
     by one with all their incident edges. The goal is to maintain a maximum matching while
     minimizing the number of changes (replacements) to the matching.
Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, Tom Demeulemeester, and Bettina Klaus                                                      55


3.24      Satisficing equilibrium
Bary Pradelski (CNRS – Oxford, GB)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Bary Pradelski
 Joint work of Bary S. R. Pradelski, Bassel Tarbush
Main reference Bary S. R. Pradelski, Bassel Tarbush: “Satisficing Equilibrium”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2409.00832, 2024.
          URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2409.00832


We propose a solution concept in which each agent i does not necessarily optimize but selects
one of their top ki actions. Our concept accounts for heterogeneous agents’ bounded rationality.
We show that there exist satisficing equilibria in which all but one agent best-respond and
the remaining agent plays at least a second-best action in asymptotically almost all games.
Additionally, we define a class of approximate potential games in which satisficing equilibria
are guaranteed to exist. Turning to foundations, we characterize satisficing equilibrium
via decision theoretic axioms and we show that a simple dynamic converges to satisficing
equilibria in almost all large games. Finally, we apply the satisficing lens to two classic games
from the literature.



3.25      Jumping to Conclusions
Sven Rady (Universität Bonn, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Sven Rady


This talk presents a continuous-time game of strategic experimentation with two-armed
bandits in which payoffs on the risky arm are generated by a compound Poisson process.
The distribution of payoff increments depends on an unkown state of the world, whereas the
arrival rate of such increments does not. As a consequence, players learn exclusively from the
size of the lump-sum payoffs they obtain. Under perfect monitoring, the piecewise constancy
of beliefs allows for an analysis of stationary Markov equilibria with essentially discrete-time
techniques. In turn, these Markov equilibria constitute perfect Bayesian equilibria when
players observe all payoffs, but not each other’s actions. Strongly symmetric equilibria cannot
improve on the symmetric Markovian one. Whether asymmetric equilibria can achieve higher
payoffs than Markovian equilibria is the focus of ongoing work.



3.26      Strategic Queues with Priority Classes
Marco Scarsini (LUISS University – Rome, IT)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Marco Scarsini
 Joint work of Maurizio D’Andrea, Marco Scarsini
Main reference Maurizio D’Andrea, Marco Scarsini: “Strategic Queues with Priority Classes”, CoRR,
               Vol. abs/2502.05906, 2025.
          URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2502.05906


We consider a strategic M/M/1 queueing model under a first-come first-served regime, where
customers are split into two classes and class A has priority over class B. Customers can
decide whether to join the queue or balk, and, in case they have joined the queue, whether
and when to renege. We study the equilibrium strategies and compare the equilibrium
outcome and the social optimum in the two cases where the social optimum is or is not
constrained by priority.

                                                                                                                   25071
56   25071 – Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design


     3.27      The Strong Core of Housing Markets with Partial Order
               Preferences
     Ildikó Schlotter (HUN-REN KRTK – Budapest, HU)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Ildikó Schlotter
      Joint work of Ildikó Schlotter, Lydia Mirabel Mendoza Cadena
     Main reference Ildikó Schlotter, Lydia Mirabel Mendoza Cadena: “The Strong Core of Housing Markets with Partial
                    Order Preferences”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2501.15834, 2025.
               URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2501.15834


     We study the strong core of housing markets when agents’ preferences over houses are
     expressed as partial orders. We provide a structural characterization of the strong core, and
     propose an efficient and weakly group-strategyproof algorithm that finds an allocation in the
     strong core or decides that it is empty, even in the presence of forced and forbidden arcs.
     Additionally, we show that certain results known for the strong core in the case when agents’
     preferences are weak orders can be extended to the setting with partial order preferences;
     among others, we show that the strong core in such housing markets satisfies the property of
     respecting improvements.



     3.28      Service Assignment at the United States Naval Academy
     Naomi Utgoff (United States Naval Academy – Annapolis, US)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Naomi Utgoff
      Joint work of Ashwin Kambhampati, Chad Redmer, Naomi Utgoff


     This paper studies service assignment at the United States Naval Academy (USNA). Service
     assignment is the process which assigns each member of USNA’s senior class to one of several
     communities, each representing a career path within the Navy. This matching problem is
     unique to the literature in that it features hard minimums, community individual rationality
     constraints, and the requirement that every midshipman be assigned to a community. A
     stable assignment is generally impossible under these requirements: we characterize a natural
     relaxation that we call minimal unfairness. We then introduce the individual-rationality
     adjusted deferred acceptance algorithm (IRDA) and show that it always selects a minimally
     unfair assignment which respects the Navy’s requirements. This mechanism relies on the
     construction of caps based on the primitives, namely the minimums, maximums, and
     individual rationality constraints. These caps thus determine when a community must reject
     a midshipman, as well as which midshipman should be rejected. Unlike standard deferred
     acceptance in which the rejecting community simply rejects its least favorite proposal(s)
     above its ceiling, IRDA identifies a rejectable set of midshipmen, and forces the rejection of
     a midshipman in that set. We also discuss two alternative mechanisms, generalized serial
     dictatorship (GSD) and eligibility type capped deferred acceptance (ECDA), and contrast
     their properties with IRDA.
Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, Tom Demeulemeester, and Bettina Klaus                                                 57


3.29      Lastmile delivery with crowdsourcing
Ana Viana (INESC TEC – Porto, PT)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Ana Viana


Last-mile delivery refers to the final leg in the distribution process, typically involving the
transportation of goods from a depot or store to the customer’s house. Traditionally, this role
was fulfilled by professional delivery fleets. However, the exponential growth of e-commerce
globally has introduced significant logistical challenges, requesting for innovative delivery
models. One such model is based on the concept of crowdsourcing, where individuals –
commonly referred to as occasional drivers (ODs) – who have no professional affiliation with
the retailers, sign up to deliver goods to customers for a compensation. That is the case of
e.g. Amazon Flex.
    Several research challenges can be considered. To name a few:
1. How should parcels be assigned for delivery – should they be handled by the professional
    fleet or an OD? And among ODs, which driver is the best candidate for a specific delivery?
2. Beyond economic efficiency, how can we ensure ODs remain engaged and satisfied with
    the program
3. What is the optimal payment structure for an OD to ensure fairness while maintaining
    cost efficiency for the retailer?

   The purpose of this talk is to provide a brief introduction to the problem and discuss
with the audience potential areas of research aligned with the main topics of the seminar.



3.30      Computing Balanced Solutions for Large International Kidney
          Exchange Schemes When Cycle Length Is Unbounded
Xin Ye (Durham University, GB)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Xin Ye
 Joint work of Márton Benedek, Péter Biró, Gergely Csáji, Matthew Johnson, Daniël Paulusma, Xin Ye
Main reference Márton Benedek, Péter Biró, Gergely Csáji, Matthew Johnson, Daniël Paulusma, Xin Ye:
               “Computing Balanced Solutions for Large International Kidney Exchange Schemes when Cycle
               Length is Unbounded”, in Proc. of the 23rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
               Multiagent Systems, AAMAS 2024, Auckland, New Zealand, May 6-10, 2024, pp. 2153–2155,
               International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems / ACM, 2024.
          URL https://doi.org/10.5555/3635637.3663091


In kidney exchange programmes (KEP) patients may swap their incompatible donors leading
to cycles of kidney transplants. Recently, countries try to merge their national patient-donor
pools leading to international KEPs (IKEPs). As shown in the literature, long-term stability
of an IKEP can be achieved through a credit-based system. In each round, every country is
prescribed a “fair” initial allocation of kidney transplants. The initial allocation, which we
obtain by using solution concepts from cooperative game theory, is adjusted by incorporating
credits from the previous round, yielding the target allocation. The goal is to find, in each
round, an optimal solution that closely approximates this target allocation. There is a
known polynomial-time algorithm for finding an optimal solution that lexicographically
minimizes the country deviations from the target allocation if only 2-cycles (matchings)
are permitted. In practice, kidney swaps along longer cycles may be performed. However,
the problem of computing optimal solutions for maximum cycle length ℓ is N P -hard for




                                                                                                              25071
58   25071 – Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design


     every ℓ ≥ 3. By contrast, the problem is polynomial time solvable once we allow unbounded
     cycle length. However, in contrast to the case where ℓ = 2, we show that for ℓ = ∞,
     lexicographical minimization is only polynomial-time solvable under additional conditions
     (assuming P ̸= N P ). Nevertheless, the fact that the optimal solutions themselves can be
     computed in polynomial time if ℓ = ∞ still enables us to perform a large scale experimental
     study for showing how stability and total social welfare are affected when we set ℓ = ∞
     instead of ℓ = 2.



      4     Working groups
     4.1    On the Existence of Strict Bayes-Nash Equilibrium in Bayesian
            All-Pay Auctions
     Martin Bichler (TU München – Garching, DE), Janik Bürgermeister (TU München, DE),
     Julius Durmann (TU München, DE), Bary Pradelski (CNRS – Oxford, GB), Sven Rady
     (Universität Bonn, DE), and Marco Scarsini (LUISS University – Rome, IT)
           License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Martin Bichler, Janik Bürgermeister, Julius Durmann, Bary Pradelski, Sven Rady, and Marco
                     Scarsini


     We are interested in the question of why gradient-based no-regret learning converges to the
     Bayes-Nash equilibrium in Bayesian market games such as auctions, contests, and oligopoly
     pricing. For this, we first focus on the all-pay auction. The complete-information all-pay
     auction only has a mixed Nash equilibrium. In contrast, with continuous types and actions,
     there is a unique pure Bayes-Nash equilibrium (PBNE). After discretizing the type and
     action space of this continuous game, we usually observe convergence to a PBNE. However,
     existence and convergence depend on the discretization of the type and action space. We
     aim to explain the reasons why the complete-information all-pay auction has no PBNE, but
     the discretized version of the game does. These questions should shed light on the more
     general reasons why we see convergence to a PBNE in a wide variety of Bayesian games.



     4.2    Portfolio compression in financial networks
     Péter Biró (HUN-REN KRTK – Budapest, HU & Corvinus University of Budapest, HU)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Péter Biró


     In a financial network the banks (or companies) have initial assets and liabilities towards each
     other. Financial clearing means that all the banks have to pay their obligations immediately.
     If a bank has more dept than its assets and credits then it will go bankrupt, and can only
     pay part of its liabilities to its creditors using a pre-defined payment rule, potentially causing
     a cascading effect of bankruptcy in the network involving banks that looked healthy initially.
     The so-called systemic risk in a network can be even higher if certain bankruptcy costs occur
     when a bank defaults, generating amplified losses in the economy.
         Portfolio compression is an act in financial markets where the financial obligations are
     cleared in a cycle after the mutual agreement of the agents involved. The coordination of
     the portfolio compression can be done by private agencies, e.g., TriOptima for banks, or by
Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, Tom Demeulemeester, and Bettina Klaus                                     59


governmental agencies, as in Romania for companies. When the agents give their approval in
advance to a central coordinator for portfolio compression, then the coordinator can choose
a portfolio compression over one or multiple cycles. The goal of the coordinator can be to
reduce as much dept as possible, or to reduce the systemic risk. In our working group, we
discussed the possibility of using a mixed integer linear programming approach with bi-level
optimisation to finding a portfolio compression for a given financial network and payment
rules to maximise these objectives.



4.3    Potential applications of mechanism design approaches for Last
       Mile Delivery Problems
Dávid Csercsik (HUN-REN KRTK – Budapest, HU)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Dávid Csercsik


In supply chain management, the expression last mile describes the logistical challenges
corresponding to the final phase of transportation, in which items are delivered to their
terminal destinations. Last-mile delivery (LMD) is the most expensive and most polluting
part of the supply chain. Considering the totality of simultaneous LMDs, efficiency is not
ideal. Multiple vehicles take part in the process, partially loaded. It is however not trivial,
how the coordination of LMD operations may be increased, without monopolizing the sector.
    The concept of cooperation in the delivery process is not novel. Literature sources
emphasize the importance of central planning (or collaborative planning), which reduce the
the overall cost and so the sum of distance and increase the efficiency at the same time.
However, in these works the collaboration platform is operated by delivery companies and
focuses mainly on profit sharing mechanism, or in other word the players in the game are the
the delivery companies and the single delivery tasks are not considered as active members of
the market.
    As a particular approach, auctions may be efficiently used to increase the coordination in
transportation management, more specifically in the efficient procurement of transportation
services. The first optimization-based auction for a transportation service allocation, which
allowed package (or combined) bids dates to 1992. The items to be auctioned were service
rights for lanes, i.e., single transportation paths between cities, and the service rights have
been allocated for years.



4.4    TTC rules for weak preferences
Bettina Klaus (University of Lausanne, CH)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Bettina Klaus


For Shapley-Scarf housing markets with weak preferences the TTC rule with fixed tie-breaking
is not Pareto efficient. Ehlers (2014): “Top trading with fixed tie-breaking in markets
with indivisible goods,” Journal of Economic Theory, shows that Gale’s top trading cycles
algorithm with fixed tie-breaking is characterized by weak efficiency, individual rationality,
strategyproofness, non-bossiness, and consistency.




                                                                                                  25071
60   25071 – Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design


         For Shapley-Scarf housing markets with strict preferences, the TTC rule is the only
     rule satisfying Pareto efficiency, individual rationality, and strategy-proofness. A natural
     question then is: Are there generalizations of TTC that are satisfying the Ma properties?
     The answer is yes, as illustrated by the following references: Jaramillo and Manjunath (2012);
     Alcalde-Unzu and Molis (2013); Aziz and de Keijzer (2012); Plaxton (2013); Saban and
     Sethuraman (2013); Xiong, Wang, and He (2022). Since there are several extensions of TTC
     to the weak preference domain, can we refine the class by imposing more properties?
         Our working group (Bettina, Haris, Mehmet, Naomi, Tamas, Thayer, Yang) first studied
     the Xiong, Wang, and He (2022) algorithm. We conjecture that it satisfies strong core
     stability (proof to be worked out) and plan to analyze the other properties for it (and for
     the other mechanisms). We also brainstormed on the general structure behind all proposed
     algorithms and their link to the underlying properties. We’ll continue with these ideas and
     hopefully will obtain some neat results.



     4.5    Gaming the DA in Amsterdam
     Thilo Klein (Zentrum für Europäische Wirtschaftsforschung – Mannheim, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Thilo Klein


     School authorities increasingly turn to lotteries as a means of addressing school segregation.
     In Europe, a growing number of cities have adopted lottery-based admissions, replacing
     traditional priority-based systems.
         Our working group (Federico, Margarida, Gian, Jiehua, Gergely, Tom, Frederik, Claus-
     Jochen, Zsuzsanna, Thilo, Katarzyna, Nadja) examined the case of Amsterdam, which
     introduced the Deferred Acceptance (DA) mechanism with multiple tie-breaking and no
     priorities in 2015. We analysed the city’s responses to the challenges that emerged from
     this approach and identify three key areas for improvement: (1) Efficiency: In response
     to legal disputes from parents seeking to swap school places, Amsterdam transitioned to
     a single tie-breaking system. (2) Inequality: To address concerns about unequal access,
     the city introduced a guarantee of placement at a top-k school from students’ ranked
     preferences. (3) Reciprocity: Amsterdam added a priority rule for students ranking a school
     first, effectively introducing an Immediate Acceptance (IA) step before the DA process.
     While these modifications, implemented in 2016 and 2018, aimed to improve outcomes, they
     rendered the mechanism obviously manipulable.
         We analysed an adaptive mechanism combining a maximum b-matching with the rank
     minimizing (RM) mechanism. This combination balances efficiency, equality, and reciprocity
     while muting strategic incentives. We will continue this analysis and discuss it with researchers
     and policy makers in Amsterdam.
Martin Bichler, Péter Biró, Tom Demeulemeester, and Bettina Klaus                                    61


4.6    Minimum spanning subgraph for a group of agents
Dušan Knop (Czech Technical University – Prague, CZ)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Dušan Knop


Consider an undirected graph G = (V, E) and a set of agents N .Each agent i ∈ N has a
valuation function over the graph’s edges wi : E → R. Our problem is to find a spanning
subgraph H = (V, F ) of G such that |F | is minimal and for each agent i ∈ N , the graph H
contains a minimal spanning tree of G with respect to wi .
    We started with the case where |N | = 2, and provided two polynomial-time algorithms
for the problem. The first algorithm relies on the known fact that the edge sets of minimum
spanning trees for some valuation function wi form a matroid, and uses a weighted matroid-
intersection algorithm to compute in polynomial time a largest edge set that is contained in
a wi -minimum spanning tree for both i = 1, 2. Such an edge set can then be extended to a
solution of minimum size in a straightforward manner. The second algorithm is combinatorial
and relies only on elementary techniques and a few structural observations without building
on matroid theory.



4.7    GenAI for Bid Language and Bid Entry Design
Ben Lubin (Boston University, US), Robert Day (University of Connecticut, US), and Thanh
Nguyen (Purdue University – West Lafayette, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Ben Lubin, Robert Day, and Thanh Nguyen


The initial steps and focus areas of a project aimed at integrating generative AI into auction
bidding systems. After exploring multiple potential use cases, the team chose to prioritize
building a bidding interface for a combinatorial auction, deferring broader mechanism design-
related applications to future work. The team explored applications such as TV advertising
slot auctions and school choice mechanisms, and reviewed existing bidding language models
including combinatorial assignments with budget constraints. The plan is to begin with
simple sealed bid scenarios using value queries, avoiding more complex iterative approaches
initially.
    Preliminary testing with various versions of Claude and GPT models revealed limitations
and strengths. While the models show potential in templating and general language under-
standing, they struggle with advanced quantitative reasoning. GPT-4’s reasoning model
was marginally better but still insufficient for more nuanced tasks. The team observed
a bias toward online advertising tasks – likely due to the models’ training data – further
highlighting the need for customization to suit a specific bidding application (actually to
include advertising, as the model biases towards contemporary mechanisms like adsense).
    To address these challenges, the team recognized a need for customization, likely both
in the LLM and in the code around it. More specifically, this likely includes integrating
domain-specific information via Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), building a custom
value calculator (potentially with LLM support), and creating agentic systems that combine
LLMs with tool-use capabilities. Fine-tuning the LLM is a potential step, though we are
hoping to avoid having to do this.
    The initial work at the conference was promising, but also made clear that there is quite
a bit of follow on work necessary to get a usable system. We also briefly discussed how such
a system might be evaluated as a path to a publishable paper.


                                                                                                 25071
62   25071 – Dealing with Complexities in Auction and Matching Market Design


             Participants
       Haris Aziz                     Tom Demeulemeester              Thayer Morrill
     UNSW – Sydney, AU               University of Lausanne, CH     North Carolina State University –
       Martin Bichler                 Julius Durmann                Raleigh, US
     TU München – Garching, DE       TU München, DE                   Thanh Nguyen
       Péter Biró                                                   Purdue University –
                                       Tamás Fleiner
     HUN-REN KRTK – Budapest,                                       West Lafayette, US
                                     Budapest University of
     HU & Corvinus University of     Technology & Economics, HU       Axel Ockenfels
     Budapest, HU                                                   Universität Köln, DE & MPI –
                                      Frederik Glitzner             Bonn, DE
       Federico Bobbio               University of Glasgow, GB
     Northwestern University –                                        Katarzyna Paluch
     Evanston, US                     Claus-Jochen Haake            University of Wroclaw, PL
                                     Universität Paderborn, DE
       Janik Bürgermeister                                            Bary Pradelski
     TU München, DE                    Zsuzsanna Jankó              CNRS – Oxford, GB
                                     Corvinus University –
       Margarida Carvalho                                             Sven Rady
                                     Budapest, HU
     University of Montreal, CA                                     Universität Bonn, DE
                                       Mehmet Karakaya                Baharak Rastegari
       Gian Caspari
                                     Izmir Katip Çelebi             University of Southampton, GB
     Zentrum für Europäische
                                     University, TR
     Wirtschaftsforschung –                                           Marco Scarsini
     Mannheim, DE                     Bettina Klaus                 LUISS University – Rome, IT
      Jiehua Chen                    University of Lausanne, CH
                                                                      Ildikó Schlotter
     TU Wien, AT                       Thilo Klein                  HUN-REN KRTK –
      Yang Chen                      Zentrum für Europäische        Budapest, HU
     University of Lausanne, CH      Wirtschaftsforschung –           Nadja Stroh-Maraun
                                     Mannheim, DE                   Universität Paderborn, DE
       Rachael Colley
     University of Glasgow, GB         Xenia Klimentova               Naomi Utgoff
                                     INESC TEC – Porto, PT          United States Naval Academy –
       Gergely Csáji
     Eötvös Lorand University –        Dušan Knop                   Annapolis, US
     Budapest, HU                    Czech Technical University –     Carmine Ventre
                                     Prague, CZ                     King’s College London, GB
       Dávid Csercsik
     HUN-REN KRTK –                    Patrick Loiseau                Ana Viana
     Budapest, HU                    Inria – Palaiseau, FR          INESC TEC – Porto, PT
       Robert Day                      Ben Lubin                      Xin Ye
     University of Connecticut, US   Boston University, US          Durham University, GB
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25072

What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification
and Visualization
Wolfgang Aigner∗1 , Sara Lenzi∗2 , Niklas Rönnberg∗3 ,
Kajetan Enge†4 , and Alexander Rind†5
1       St. Pölten University of Applied Sciences, AT. wolfgang.aigner@fhstp.ac.at
2       University of Deusto – Bilbao, ES; Ikerbasque Basque Foundation for Science –
        Bilbao, ES. sara.lenzi@deusto.es
3       Linköping University, SE. niklas.ronnberg@liu.se
4       Universität für Musik & darstellende Kunst – Graz, AT. kajetan@enge.at
5       FH – St. Pölten, AT. Alexander.Rind@fhstp.ac.at

        Abstract
This report summarizes the outcomes of a Dagstuhl Seminar that brought together international
experts from the data visualization and data sonification communities. The seminar aimed to bridge
these two fields by exploring their complementary potential in enhancing human-data interactions.
Over five days, participants engaged in discussions, inspiration sessions, and presentations focused
on nine key topics, including design theory, application examples, perception, interaction, and
evaluation of integrated visualization and sonification. The seminar facilitated a collaborative
environment in which both communities shared knowledge, identified common challenges, and
began defining a novel field that combines visual and auditory data representation. The event
marked a significant step towards establishing a common ground between these disciplines, with
the goal of improving data analysis and presentation in an increasingly data-driven world.
Seminar February 9–14, 2025 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/25072
2012 ACM Subject Classification Human-centered computing → Visualization; Human-centered
   computing → Auditory feedback; Human-centered computing → Sound-based input / output;
   Applied computing → Sound and music computing
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.2.63



    1    Executive Summary
Wolfgang Aigner (St. Pölten University of Applied Sciences, AT)
Sara Lenzi (University of Deusto – Bilbao, ES & Ikerbasque Basque Foundation for Science –
Bilbao, ES)
Niklas Rönnberg (Linköping University, SE)


        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, and Niklas Rönnberg


In our daily lives, we as humans perceive our surroundings in an inherently multimodal
way. However, the vast majority of data analysis idioms are exclusively visual, not using
the apparent potential of combined designs. While the visualization field studies visual
data analysis solutions, the sonification field investigates comparable solutions that convey
data over non-speech audio. There are several similarities between the methods and design


∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector

           Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
           under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15, Issue 2,
pp. 63–88
Editors: Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
64   25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization


     theories of both approaches, such as the use of perceptual variables to encode data attributes,
     the use of marks and substrates to convey items, and the role of interaction in manipulating
     the data representations.
         Over the last decades, both fields have established research communities, theoretical
     frameworks, and toolkit support. Although extensive research has been conducted on both
     auditory and visual representation of data, relatively little is known about their systematic
     and complementary combination for data exploration, analysis, and presentation. There
     are potential powerful synergies in combining both modalities to address the individual
     limitations of each other. Nevertheless, existing research on combinations has often focused
     only on one of the modalities.
         This Dagstuhl Seminar aimed, first and foremost, at creating a space for discussion where
     the international communities of data visualization and data sonification came together
     to map and define a novel field for the improvement of human – data relationships. Over
     five days, 24 experts from both fields participated in group activities, inspirational sessions,
     keynote presentations, and informal gatherings. The seminar was the result of work conducted
     in the previous years by the organizers, including research projects, as well as a series of
     meetups and workshops and meetups of the AVAC – Audio Visual Analytics Community
     (https://audio-visual-analytics.github.io) at different venues:
         STAR and Panel @ EuroVis 2024 (Odense, Denmark): May 29-30, 2024
         Panel Discussion @ ICAD 2023 (Norrköping, Sweden): June 29, 2023
         Application Spotlight @ IEEE VIS (Oklahoma City, USA/hybrid): October 20, 2022
         3rd Workshop on Audio-Visual Analytics @ Int. Conf. Advanced Visual Interfaces:
         June 7, 2022
         Workshop @ IEEE VIS (virtual): October 25, 2021
         Workshop @ Audio Mostly (virtual): September 3, 2021

         Moreover, a State of the Art Report on data visualization and data sonification [1] was
     published as collaborative achievement of members of both communities. Based on these
     activities, the organizers identified a number of potential topics of discussion and shared them
     with the participants prior to the seminar. After an iterative, collective process of selection,
     we identified nine topics to be discussed in groups during the 5-day Dagstuhl Seminar:
         Design theory for joint visualization and sonification
         Design framework for joint visualization and sonification
         Application examples & success stories
         Tools and libraries
         Perception and cognition
         Redundancy and complementarity
         Interaction
         Accessibility
         Evaluation of joint visualization and sonification

         During the seminar, after two inspirational keynote presentations that introduced the
     main achievements, techniques, tools, and challenges of both fields, participants were assigned
     to two topics of their choice, which they engaged in deeply in small discussion groups over
     the course of the week. Figure 1 shows the full schedule of the seminar.
         The two inspirational sessions were designed as a light, engaging introduction for non-
     experts to visualization and sonification, and to provide a refreshing moment from the intense
     group discussions. In the evenings, participants gathered to showcase demos and current
     projects, exchange opinions on the respective fields, and overall enjoy each other’s company.
     The excursion to Völklinger Hütte was an intriguing break that helped participants connect
     more deeply with the region that will provide long-lasting memories for the participants.
Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind                          65


    The work started during the seminar is far from being complete. However, we felt that
great progress was made to bring the two perspectives closer together. The need to define
a common idiom was a first challenge that became easier as the week progressed. Both
communities made efforts to understand each other, which also involved self-reflection on
one’s field and open eyes and ears to the other’s. Groups focused on mapping the borders of
each field and began defining the key terms as a necessary preliminary step to build a new
joint perspective. The sections of this document will report on each group’s progress.
    In a historical time when we as humans are dealing with the often overwhelming presence
of data in our lives, and when researchers in the field carry the responsibility to facilitate
sense-making of such data, this Dagstuhl Seminar has been widely recognised by participants
as a milestone in establishing a common ground between the data visualization and data
sonification community.
References
1    Kajetan Enge, Elias Elmquist, Valentina Caiola, Niklas Rönnberg, Alexander Rind, Michael
     Iber, Sara Lenzi, Fangfei Lan, Robert Höldrich, and Wolfgang Aigner. Open Your Ears and
     Take a Look: A State-of-the-Art Report on the Integration of Sonification and Visualization.
     Computer Graphics Forum (EuroVis ’24), 43(3):e15114, 2024.




                                                                                                    25072
25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Organizers: discuss topics for the following days
                                                                                                                          noisses xefl / ciM nepO / yrtaP                                        noisses xefl / ciM nepO / yrtaP        noisses xefl / ciM nepO / yrtaP
                                                                                                                                     renniD                               renniD                            renniD                                     renniD                            )ecivres​-fles( renniD   00:91 - 00:81
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  noitceles cipoT
                                                                                                                               )snoisses lellarap ni(
                                                                                                                                spuorG noissucsiD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      )snoisses lellarap ni(
                                                                                                                                                                                                       spuorG noissucsiD                                                                        lavirrA           00:81 - 00:61
                                                                                                                                                                       )renniD .lcni(
                                                                                                                                                                         noisrucxE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   topics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Presenting and collecting discussion
                                                                                                                                 kaerB eeffoC                     gnikiH / noisrucxE                    kaerB eeffoC                             kaerB eeffoC                                                     00:61 - 03:51
                                                                                                                                                                                                       )snoisses lellarap ni(
                                                                                                                               )snoisses lellarap ni(                                                   spuorG noissucsiD                )noissucsid / noitatsrevnoc(
                                                                                                                                spuorG noissucsiD                                                                                        rehto hcae wonk ot gnitteG
                                                                                               erurtapeD                                                                                            egnE natejaK ,izneL araS
                                                                                                                                                                                                           )klawdnuos(                                                                                            03:51 - 00:31
                                                                                                                               srteboR .C nahtanoJ                                                      noisseS noitaripsnI
                                                                                                                               ytivitca noitazilausiv(                                               )sriats no( otohp puorG             noitamrofni lanoitazinagrO
                                                                                                                                noisseS noitaripsnI
                                                                                                 hcnuL                                hcnuL                               hcnuL                             hcnuL                                      hcnuL                                                      00:31 - 51:21
                                                                                                  rtopeR                                                              rtopeR lhutsgaD                                                                noissucsiD
                                                                                    lhutsgaD rof stxeT yrammuS :hsiniF                                           rof stxeT yrammuS :rtatS
                                                                                                                               )snoisses lellarap ni(                                                 )snoisses lellarap ni(                )eeL nihsgnoB :rekaepS(                                               51:21 - 00:11
                                                                                               )srezinagrO(                     spuorG noissucsiD                   )snoisses lellarap ni(             spuorG noissucsiD                     noitazilausiV klaT ortnI
                                                                                                 seitivitcA                                                          spuorG noissucsiD
                                                                                    pU wolloF fo noissucsiD & gnisolC                                                                                                                     )ssarraB nehpetS :rekaepS(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             noitacfiinoS klaT ortnI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 1 Schedule of the seminar.
                                                                                             kaerB eeffoC                        kaerB eeffoC                        kaerB eeffoC                       kaerB eeffoC                             kaerB eeffoC                                                     00:11 - 03:01
                                                                                                                               )snoisses lellarap ni(                                                 )snoisses lellarap ni(
                                                                                           )snoisses lellarap ni(               spuorG noissucsiD                  )snoisses lellarap ni(              spuorG noissucsiD                       )sedils 2 nim 2(
                                                                                            spuorG noissucsiD                                                       spuorG noissucsiD                                                stnapicirtap fo noitcudortni rtohS
                                                                                                                         2 spuorg noissucsid otni gnittilpS                                     1 spuorg noissucsid otni gnittilpS                                                                                03:01 - 00:9
                                                                                               )munelp ni(                         )munelp ni(                          )munelp ni(                       )srezinagrO(                )grebnnöR .N ,izneL .S ,rengiA .W(
                                                                                     noissucsid + spuorg morf rtopeR     noissucsid + spuorg morf rtopeR      noissucsid + spuorg morf rtopeR        scipoT fo noitatneserP               weivrevO dna emocleW
                                                                                       tuo​-kcehC / tsafkaerB                      tsafkaerB                           tsafkaerB                          tsafkaerB                                 tsafkaerB                                                     54:8 - 03:70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :emiT
                                                                                                 yadirF                            yadsruhT                           yadsendeW                            yadseuT                                    yadnoM                                   yadnuS                5202
66
Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind                                67


 2       Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, and Niklas Rönnberg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                1

Overview of Talks
     Sonification Background
     Stephen Barrass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     6
     Introduction to Information Visualization
     Bongshin Lee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      6
     Getting to know each other
     Katharina Groß-Vogt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       6

Inspiration Sessions
     The Soundwalk
     Kajetan Enge and Sara Lenzi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          7
     Presentation and Activity on Alternative Designs
     Jonathan C. Roberts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        7

Working Groups
     Application Examples & Success Stories
     Wolfgang Aigner, Stephen Barrass, Johanna Schmidt, and Kelly Snook . . . . . . .                8
     Perception & Cognition
     Elias Elmquist, Katharina Groß-Vogt, Michael Krone, and Sita Vriend . . . . . . .               11
     Definition of a Research and Development Agenda for Integrated Audio-Visual
     Data Representation Tools and Libraries
     Valentina Caiola, Thomas Hermann, Øystein Moseng, and Alexander Rind . . . . 12
     Towards a Design Framework
     Kajetan Enge, Dietmar Offenhuber, Christina Gillmann, Bruce Walker, and Sara
     Lenzi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
     Interaction
     Mohammad Ghoniem, Bongshin Lee, Sandra Pauletto, Jonathan C. Roberts, Niklas
     Rönnberg, and Jonathan Zong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     Accessibility
     Bongshin Lee, Øystein Moseng, Jonathan C. Roberts, Bruce Walker, and Jonathan
     Zong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17
     Redundancy and Complementarity
     Wolfgang Aigner, Sandra Pauletto, Elias Elmquist, Kelly Snook, Katharina Groß-
     Vogt, and Christina Gillmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17
     Towards a Design Theory
     Kajetan Enge, Mohammad Ghoniem, Thomas Hermann, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rön-
     nberg, and Johanna Schmidt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     Evaluation
     Stephen Barrass, Valentina Caiola, Michael Krone, Alexander Rind, and Sita Vriend 19

Open Mic Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            24


                                                                                                          25072
68   25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization


     Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind                        69


 3     Overview of Talks
On the first day of our seminar, we offered two talks and a self-introduction session, starting
to build a bridge between the communities.



3.1    Sonification Background
Stephen Barrass (Sonification.com – Ainslie, AU)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Stephen Barrass


This talk provided a background on sonification as a basis for sharing concepts and terminology
with persons from the visualization community. At the beginning, some simple examples
and a short historical timeline were presented. Next, canonical sonification techniques
were introduced with examples. This was followed by an overview of more contemporary
developments in techniques. Then, a final section introduced Sonic Information Design as an
intentional approach using the TaDa Task-oriented Data Sensitive method for choosing a
sonification technique.



3.2    Introduction to Information Visualization
Bongshin Lee (Yonsei University – Seoul, KR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Bongshin Lee


Information visualization is a powerful tool for understanding complex data by transforming
it into visual representations that leverage human perception and cognition. In this talk, key
concepts of information visualization were introduced for those new to the field, explaining
why we visualize data and how it helps reveal patterns, trends, and insights. The role
of interaction in enabling users to explore and manipulate data was discussed, making
visualization a dynamic and engaging process. Additionally, the main purposes of information
visualization, from exploratory data analysis to effective communication were covered. Finally,
key challenges and opportunities in the field were highlighted.



3.3    Getting to know each other
Katharina Groß-Vogt (Universität für Musik & darstellende Kunst – Graz, AT)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Katharina Groß-Vogt


First, fully embodied representation of the participants’ backgrounds were enacted to sort
along the alphabet (first names); along the time being in the research field; in 2D sorted on
a world map; in 3D, stating your emotional feeling along valence, arousal, and dominance
(lying on floor – standing). Then we conducted a speed dating on questions such as what is
a good or bad example of sonification and visualization.




                                                                                                  25072
70   25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization


      4     Inspiration Sessions
     This Dagstuhl Seminar offered two Inspiration Sessions, one with a focus on audio and one
     focusing on visuals:



     4.1    The Soundwalk
     Kajetan Enge (Universität für Musik & darstellende Kunst – Graz, AT & St. Pölten University
     of Applied Sciences, AT)
     Sara Lenzi (University of Deusto – Bilbao, ES & Ikerbasque Basque Foundation for Science –
     Bilbao, ES)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Kajetan Enge and Sara Lenzi


     The “Soundwalk” is a practice born in the 1970s together with the emergence of soundscape
     studies [1, 2]. Soundscape is a term that refers to the totality of the sounds we hear in our
     acoustic environment, be it the sounds that we ourselves produce (breathing, walking) or
     sounds provoked by our interaction with the environment or by other agents in the close or
     distant world (e.g., cars, birds, airplanes. . . ). Soundwalks are a tool that increases awareness
     of how we can explore and make sense of the world by actively listening to it. There are many
     ways to conduct a soundwalk. During this seminar, we selected and proposed to participants
     seven “Listening spots,” both indoor and outdoor the Castle. Each Listening spot presented
     a suggestion for how to listen to the soundscape: “Imagine: Everything you hear is meant
     as a concert just for you,” “Can you hear something that cannot be seen?”, “How far can
     you hear?” ... Participants were encouraged to explore each listening spot on their own, in
     silence – some participants even found their own personal listening spots!
     References
     1    R. Murray Schafer. The Soundscape. The Tuning of the World. Knopfs, 1977.
     2    Hildegard Westerkamp. Soundwalking. Sound Heritage, III(4), 1974.



     4.2    Presentation and Activity on Alternative Designs
     Jonathan C. Roberts (Bangor University, UK)


           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Jonathan C. Roberts


     This session discussed design ideas to create many alternative designs. Starting with some
     background information on designs – looking briefly at an example by Jacques Bertin in
     his Semiology book – the session turned to getting participants in a group to consider
     alternative design ideas. The activity met the VisDice framework developed by Roberts and
     Owen [1], which used six inspirational images. In the activity, the image is chosen, and using
     lateral thinking, the people sketched a quick solution to visualize or sonify a dataset. The
     participants were split into four groups, each using the same test data. After sketching their
     own 2 cm x 2 cm quick sketch, they explained their idea to their peers. The next dice was
     rolled, giving a new dice image (inspirational image). The new idea must be different to the
Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind                        71


first. In this way the ideas change and are diverse from the initial idea. It helps to create
new ideas. The process and ideology of generating alternatives were discussed, and the larger
methodology of Five Design-Sheets [2] was also briefly presented.
References
1    Aron Owen and Jonathan C. Roberts. Inspire and create: Unveiling the potential of visdice
     in visualization design. In Nan Cao, Barbora Kozlikova, Jiazhi Xia, and Wesley Willett,
     editors, IEEE VIS 2023 Posters: Visualization & Visual Analytics. IEEE Computer Society
     Press, 2023.
2    Jonathan C. Roberts, Chris Headleand, and Panagiotis D. Ritsos. Sketching designs using
     the Five Design-Sheet methodology. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
     Graphics, 22(1):419–428, 2015.



 5       Working Groups
We structured our seminar in nine working groups.



5.1      Application Examples & Success Stories
Wolfgang Aigner (St. Pölten University of Applied Sciences, AT)
Stephen Barrass (Sonification.com – Ainslie, AU)
Johanna Schmidt (TU Wien, AT)
Kelly Snook (Kepler Concordia – Yamaguchi, JP)
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Wolfgang Aigner, Stephen Barrass, Johanna Schmidt, and Kelly Snook


The purpose of the Application Examples & Success Stories working group was to collect
application examples and success stories for the combination of sonification and visualization.

5.1.1      Summary
The working group started the discussion with collecting examples of joint sonification and
visualization, both in research and everyday situations. Especially when communicating the
effectiveness of audio-visual feedback to people not familiar with sonification, the parking
sensor in cars, metal detectors, and tools for localizing blockage in long pipes could be used
as familiar examples. The working group continued the discussion by browsing the STAR
report [1] and personal collections for audio-visual examples. From there, we identified key
elements where sonification contributed to a data visualization. Afterward we looked into
how visualization adds to sonification. A table was created that summarizes advantages for
designers when using an integrated audio-visual approach. A list of application domains
where audio-visual techniques are already used was created. The working group concluded
the discussion by collecting examples of real-world situations where both audio and visual
channels are required. Further developments could include the identification of real-world
examples where both modalities are essential.




                                                                                                  25072
72   25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization


     5.1.2    Application Areas
     When looking at different audio-visual examples, we identified the following application areas
     where sonification and visualization are already used in combination:
       Astronomy
        Earth Science, Climate Change
        Physics
        Medicine and Health
        Molecular Science
        Biology, Zoology
        Social Sciences
        Economics
        Urban Studies
        Data Journalism

     5.1.3    Results
     We identified use cases and tasks where each modality (sonification and visualization) can
     profit from integration. Table 1 summarizes task and use cases where adding visual content
     to a sonification brings advantages to the analytics. Table 2 summarizes task and use cases
     where adding audio to a data visualization brings advantages to the analytics.

         Table 1 The first column defines the task or use case that can be improved by adding visualization
     to a sonification. The second column describes the advantage for the potential users of the application.

      Explore details                  Audio can be used to set a context (e.g., bells give a comparison
                                       between different datasets/concepts). Visualization can then be
                                       used to explain the difference.
      Exploration / Interac-           Visualization to steer the audio exploration of a dataset. Selecting
      tion                             details in visualization can help to focus on particular channels
                                       in the audio signal.
      Orientation / Guidance           Point users to specific parts in the audio data which is interest-
                                       ing/important to listen to.
Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind                              73


    Table 2 The first column defines the task or use case that can be improved by adding audio to a
visualization. The second column describes the advantage for the potential users of the application.

 Sudden changes                 We can hear sudden data changes better than we can see them.
                                Rapid changes that are not shown very long (e.g., scrolling
                                through a dataset) are hearable, but hardly visible and might be
                                missed.
 Small changes / Accentu-       Very small changes might not be visible (e.g., very little difference
 ation                          between bars), but these small changes would be hearable.
 Repeating patterns             It is hard to see repeating patterns and compare them over time.
                                This would work better when using audio.
 Evaluation / Trust build-      By not only watching a visualization, but also listening to a
 ing                            visualization, you can be sure that you did not miss anything
                                and that you considered all small data changes. Audio may
                                reveal uncertainty in a plot.
 Different data scales          Listening to data from different data scales (e.g., tiny changes vs.
                                large data scales) is possible, but visualizing data with different
                                data scales is really hard.
 More channels                  With audio, it is possible to listen to more data channels than
                                when watching the data (views get cluttered easily).
 More foci                      Possible to focus on a visualization (e.g., 3D representation) and
                                hear a second parameter. Instead of switching between different
                                views, audio can represent an additional channel (e.g., users
                                select a data channel for audio and concentrate on another view).
 More details                   Different sound channels (e.g., for different data channels) can
                                be heard and identified independently (if a dataset is constant or
                                changing a lot). It is probably not possible to identify correlation.
 Additional analysis chan-      Adding audio can be compared to adding color to a visualiza-
 nel                            tion – it is then possible to represent, grasp and analyze more
                                information at once.
 Engagement                     Sound/music can increase engagement, motivate people to watch
                                a visualization, and help them understand the data. Users emerge
                                while watching the visualization.
 Increasing Trust               Sound helps to increase trust in automatic decisions of a machine
                                (e.g., self-driving car, to indicate that it will turn or stop).
 Feedback / Confirmation        When interacting with data, audio signals can be used for con-
                                firming the interaction (e.g., selection). Audio can be used to
                                indicate the effect of an interaction (e.g., how many data points
                                will be selected/removed by an interaction).
 Transitions                    Audio signals can prepare users for changes and transitions.


References
1    Kajetan Enge, Elias Elmquist, Valentina Caiola, Niklas Rönnberg, Alexander Rind, Michael
     Iber, Sara Lenzi, Fangfei Lan, Robert Höldrich, and Wolfgang Aigner. Open Your Ears and
     Take a Look: A State-of-the-Art Report on the Integration of Sonification and Visualization.
     Computer Graphics Forum (EuroVis ’24), 43(3):e15114, 2024.




                                                                                                        25072
74   25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization


     5.2    Perception & Cognition
     Elias Elmquist (Linköping University, SE)
     Katharina Groß-Vogt (Universität für Musik & darstellende Kunst – Graz, AT)
     Michael Krone (Hochschule für Technik – Stuttgart, DE)
     Sita Vriend (Universität Stuttgart, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Elias Elmquist, Katharina Groß-Vogt, Michael Krone, and Sita Vriend


     We argue for using multi-modal displays as they meet best the nature of human perception,
     following an ecological approach of how our senses were shaped and how they interplay to
     heuristically build up a representation of our surroundings.
         The properties of audio-visual perception vs. cognition, i.e., the lower vs. higher level
     processes of Gestalt psychology, have to be clear to allow for creating truly multi-modal
     displays. Therefore, we intend to recommend a set of testable guidelines, still on a hypothetic
     level, that motivate mapping choices in audio-visual displays:
         If you follow these guidelines for creating an audio-visual representation, the cognitive load
     might still increase compared to the load of the purely visual or purely auditory representation,
     but the least increase possible. It might even decrease! And – in any case – the user will also
     gain more insights.

     Guideline hypotheses
        Utilize principles of grouping in gestalt psychology and of cross-modal per-
        ception for both auditory and visual elements in the audio-visual data repres-
        entation. For instance, pitch can enhance brightness perception. Many more examples
        need to be collected here.
        The A+V representation needs to be redundant in at least one data dimension,
        for instance either via a spatial/temporal synchronization or linked via inter-
        action. This argument is supported by the real-world synchronization of audio-visual
        events. Furthermore we draw on Munzner’s [1] argument on visualizations: it makes
        no sense to have exactly the same visualization of the same data; but also not to show
        a different visualization of two different data sets. The benefit is showing either two
        visualizations of the same data or representing different data by the same visualization.
           Any dynamic sonification should involve a dynamic visualization (e.g., showing the
           position in the timeline).
           An overview visualization should be linked to an overview sonification!
           A visualization can be combined with interactive sonification (details on demand!)
        If there is a fully technically redundant A+V representation, question if there
        is any added value.
           Technical redundancy: all data variables map to visual variables and to auditory
           variables.
           “Communicative redundancy” [2]: one modality allows for different insights (e.g.,
           emotions in sound, engagement). We need more research here.
        Sound has to be synchronous or a little bit delayed (and never earlier than
        visuals). We find evidence for this claim in the Temporal Ventriloquism effect [3], though
        we need to add more details here from psychophysics research.
Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind                          75


   We should always use spatial sounds. The evidence for this is the spatial ventrilo-
   quism effect, and the fact that all visualization is spatial. We should make use of spatial
   sound rendering in order to better align A+V displays.
   Be clear in creating either consonance OR dissonance on the level of indexic-
   ality between A and V representation. Indexicality [4] is the level between iconic
   and symbolic representation.
   A good A-V mapping involves to separately (!) make sure the polarity of the
   audio representation and visual representation correctly represent the change
   in data value (semantics).
      Mapping should consider audio-visual correspondence AND the a-data and the v-data
      mapping separately.
      Scaling of A-V mappings and mappable differences AV-data
      Dimension of A and V should be considered

   We discussed a number of further possible guidelines, but these need more research, either
through literature review or our own experiments:
   List experimental findings on experiences of how we interpret AV representations uniformly.
   Furthermore, we can learn AV representations – find more evidence from multi-modal
   learning experiments.
   Identify saliency principles to guide attention in AV representations, and find which
   auditory properties relate to visual ones in their being salient.

References
1    Tamara Munzner. Visualization Analysis and Design. AK Peters, Boca Raton, FL, USA,
     2014.
2    Kajetan Enge, Elias Elmquist, Valentina Caiola, Niklas Rönnberg, Alexander Rind, Michael
     Iber, Sara Lenzi, Fangfei Lan, Robert Höldrich, and Wolfgang Aigner. Open Your Ears and
     Take a Look: A State-of-the-Art Report on the Integration of Sonification and Visualization.
     Computer Graphics Forum (EuroVis ’24), 43(3):e15114, 2024.
3    Daniel A. Slutsky and Gregg H. Recanzone. Temporal and spatial dependency of the
     ventriloquism effect. NeuroReport, 12(1):7, January 2001.
4    Dominic Oswald. Non-speech audio-semiotics: A review and revision of auditory icon and
     earcon theory. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Auditory Display
     (ICAD), Atlanta, GA, USA, June 2012. 18–21 June 2012.



5.3    Definition of a Research and Development Agenda for Integrated
       Audio-Visual Data Representation Tools and Libraries
Valentina Caiola (City University of Hong Kong, HK)
Thomas Hermann (Universität Bielefeld, DE)
Øystein Moseng (Highsoft AS – Vik I Sogn, NO)
Alexander Rind (St. Pölten University of Applied Sciences, AT)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Valentina Caiola, Thomas Hermann, Øystein Moseng, and Alexander Rind


We defined an audio-visual analytics idiom (AVAID), which is a systematic and reprodu-
cible audio-visual data representation. We followed a two-fold approach with a bottom-up
phenomenological collection of current tools and libraries and a top-down scenario-based
investigation with seven diverse personae. Outputs of the investigation:



                                                                                                    25072
76   25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization


     a. Collection of categorization criteria for existing (visualization, sonification, and AV-
        integrated) tools, components and libraries
     b. Identification of Interface Abstraction Levels – distributed on a continuum, where the
        two poles are (a) tools which are configured via a graphical user interface and (b)
        libraries/packages to be used for coding tools or components.
     c. List of Requirements: List of needs and problems to be addressed by AVAIDs tools
     d. Definition of minimal criteria for inclusion in AVAID tool set: Rendering from Data
        through a systematic representation Method (e.g., mapping, model) – DMR
     e. Collection of Use Case Scenarios – along the interface abstraction levels continuum
     f. Prototyping trade-offs

     5.3.1   Defining the scope of tools and libraries
     We defined DMR tools and libraries as complete systems that enable Rendering from Data
     through a systematic representation Method (e.g., mapping, model). We can differentiate
     between tools and libraries that facilitate this complete process, and components that support
     parts of this process. A full AVAID could for instance be setup as such:
        Data: a component to read/filter data (e.g., numpy for loading csv files),
        Mapping/Model: a component for mapping data (e.g., a python function to create a
        Csound score file),
        Rendering (Auditory Representation): CSound is a sound rendering component usable
        for sonifications that focuses exclusively on sound rendering (R).
        Rendering (Visual Representation): for instance the data could be plotted using scalable
        vector graphics (SVG) in the web browser.

     5.3.2   Mapping the landscape of AVAID tools and libraries
     We identified the following dimensions as useful for differentiating between AVAID tools and
     libraries:
         Platform (e.g., web, native, specialized)
         Environment (e.g., jupyter notebooks, IDEs)
         Self-contained DMR tools vs component tools vs. libraries
         Interface abstraction level (e.g., GUI, text, code)
         Popularity
         Licensing (open/closed)
         Learning curve vs. perceived value (“Return on time invested”)
         Capabilities / versatility
         Data type support (e.g., map, graph, tabular)
         Data input/output, import/export
         Output capabilities
         Static vs dynamic output (interactivity)
         Visual rendering types (pixel graphics, vector graphics)
         Rendered audio types (sampled audio vs. score / higher level representation)
         Synchronization (e.g., between auditory and visual rendering)
         Collaborative editing or production features
         Extensibility
Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind                          77


    We believe the AVAID tooling space will need to cover a spectrum of different interface
abstraction levels and levels of capabilities. This is analogous to the existing tooling space in
visualization. Observing the current tools and libraries state of the art, we identified the
need for audio-visual tools to develop AVAIDs, and came up with a narrow research question:
RQ1: “What are the needs/problems that should be solved by AVAID tools across different
interface abstraction levels?”
    functionality (services) matter more than rendering systems
    suitable rendering abstractions (to avoid engine specific lock-in)
    shareability/extensibility to promote community (presets, templates, extensions)
    enable (best) integration of the visualization and sonification modalities (synchronization,
    Multiple Coordinated Views (MCV) between modalities,...)
    Input/Output – Import/Export – Formats
    Users lacking knowledge of visualization and sonification – good output anyway – capture
    intent and context
    real-time rendering for enhanced interactivity
    continuum of flexibility versatility in data handling, method, and rendering
    data types (map, graph, tabular) and data size (performance)
    production speed (prototyping)
    collaborative production

5.3.3   Prototyping
We discussed how prototyping relates to AVAIDs and libraries and identified three dimensions
that form a triangle of trade-offs:
   precision (or fidelity) (e.g., mock or subsampled data, imprecise representation method,
   or sketchy rendering)
   aesthetics
   speed (time needed to create prototype & products)

   We acknowledge the speed quality trade-off in prototyping, speed referring to inverse
time needed to create the prototype/system. Along the quality direction we usually face
another trade-off, the one between precision and aesthetics, where the former refers to how
accurately information is conveyed to the users and the latter refers to how pleasant and
aesthetically the media is judged. Altogether, a ternary “prototyping space” emerges in
which different AVAIDs can be positioned. AVAIDs may serve as an enabler of this process
through their capabilities.




                                                                                                    25072
78   25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization


     5.4    Towards a Design Framework
     Kajetan Enge (Universität für Musik & darstellende Kunst – Graz, AT & St. Pölten Univer-
     sity of Applied Sciences, AT)
     Dietmar Offenhuber (Northeastern University – Boston, US)
     Christina Gillmann (Fraunhofer FIT – St. Augustin, DE)
     Bruce Walker (Georgia Institute of Technology – Atlanta, US)
     Sara Lenzi (University of Deusto – Bilbao, ES & Ikerbasque Basque Foundation for Science –
     Bilbao, ES)


           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Kajetan Enge, Dietmar Offenhuber, Christina Gillmann, Bruce Walker, and Sara Lenzi


     Creating audio-visual artifacts requires design. And design is hard, especially in an interdis-
     ciplinary setting. Nevertheless, Design as a discipline can provide the principles, processes,
     and tools that our field needs to produce impactful outcomes. Our main message is to be
     intentional, systematic, and interdisciplinary. This field will need to define its design patterns,
     best practices, and implementation strategies that achieve the design goals.
         The design process as we see it starts with clearly specified Design Goals. These include
     hypotheses, purposes, intended insights, communicative intention, and potential outcomes.
     Understanding the ecosystem in which the AVA exists is crucial. The ecosystem is shaped
     by constraints, previous designs, and also future possibilities. The AVA Design Space is vast,
     requiring many decisions along multiple dimensions. Design Patterns can provide a process
     to navigate through the design space. Design Patterns can reflect the values, approaches,
     and best practices of our community. Finally, implementation can leverage all that is known
     about perception, cognition, aesthetics, communication, emotion, technology, etc., reflecting
     the depth of interdisciplinarity in the field.



     5.5    Interaction
     Mohammad Ghoniem (Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, LU)
     Bongshin Lee (Yonsei University – Seoul, KR)
     Sandra Pauletto (KTH Royal Institute of Technology – Stockholm, SE)
     Jonathan C. Roberts (Bangor University, UK)
     Niklas Rönnberg (Linköping University, SE)
     Jonathan Zong (MIT – Cambridge, US)


           License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Mohammad Ghoniem, Bongshin Lee, Sandra Pauletto, Jonathan C. Roberts, Niklas Rönnberg,
                     and Jonathan Zong


     When designing an interactive audio-visual system, we begin with data as the foundation.
     Our goal is to present information in a way that facilitates people to understand, learn, or
     engage in an enjoyable experience. The data itself shapes the auditory and visual experience,
     serving as the foundation of interaction.
         Interaction enables individuals or groups to engage with the system, adapt their experience,
     and control the data exploration, and raises key questions: How is this system setup? What
     principles are there when setting up the system? How can we control the system and what
     actions do we enact upon the system? What devices are there to control the system? How
     do we display the output, and where is it displayed?
Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind                          79




                                           e s   Model       Up
                                      tifi                        da
                                   No                               tes

                     Audio visual
                      Rendering                                   Controller
                        (View)
                             Pe
                                  rce
                                      ive                         es
                                         s                    Us
                                                 User


    Figure 2 Model view controller for audio-visual renderings.


     The model-view-controller (MVC) pattern, widely used in human-computer interaction [1,
2], offers a valuable framework for structuring these experiences (see Figure 2). In this
 context, we suggest using the term “rendering” instead of “view” because “view” carries
 a strong visual association. In contrast, both sound and visuals can be rendered, making
“rendering” a more inclusive term for this discussion.
     The user wants to understand the information, hear the data, and experience the visual
 feedback. There is an intent, an aim for their task. The data underpins the system. It can
 come from a sensor of the world (the distance from the car bumper to the tree) or from a
 questionnaire or survey (how happy are people in the world). Before it is rendered in visual
 or auditory form, it may need to go through cleaning, preparation and transformation steps
 to be ready for the audio/visual mapping. The result of this process is a data model. It is
 this data model that will be turned into sound and visualised. The user then interacts via a
controller to express their intents, or goals, by controlling aspects or parts of the model that
 are rendered. The controller can be a device, an object of various shapes and materials, or
 more traditionally a slider on a user interface, button on a keyboard, or even their body in
 the world. The data-model now needs to be rendered – viewed and heard in some form. The
“rendering” is a visual or auditory presentation of the data model, based on an output device,
 for example, speakers or screens in the room, or speakers or screens embedded in the objects
 that are interacted with, on headphones or in an immersed head-mounted display, mixed
 along with the visuals on a screen, handheld devices such as smartphone, tablet or small
 display such as a watch.
     These ideas can be expanded and discussed further. Each of the individual parts, the
 model, rendering, controller and role of the user can be explored further. One important
 focus is that many instances of each part of the architecture are relevant. They are necessarily
 coordinated to provide a full and rich user experience. Multiple users can be in the system,
 interacting together, and controlling the audio-visual experience. Many renderings support
 multiple views or alternative presentations of the data. Various types of controllers enable
 different commands – some offering more intuitive interfaces, others designed for precise
 control, and some focused on enhancing user enjoyment. In addition, different controls,
 mappings, and experiences cater to specific needs, ensuring accessibility. For example,
 auditory feedback allows visually impaired users to engage with the system. People can
 also learn better when they can explore multiple and alternative ways of experiencing or
 interacting with the data.




                                                                                                    25072
80   25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization


     References
     1    John Hunt. The Model-View-Controller Architecture. In Smalltalk and Object Orientation,
          pages 266–278. Springer, London, 1997.
     2    John Zukowski. The Model-View-Controller Architecture. In John Zukowski’s Definitive
          Guide to Swing for Java 2, pages 71–77. Apress, Berkeley, CA, 1999.



     5.6    Accessibility
     Bongshin Lee (Yonsei University – Seoul, KR)
     Øystein Moseng (Highsoft AS – Vik I Sogn, NO)
     Jonathan C. Roberts (Bangor University, UK)
     Bruce Walker (Georgia Institute of Technology – Atlanta, US)
     Jonathan Zong (MIT – Cambridge, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Bongshin Lee, Øystein Moseng, Jonathan C. Roberts, Bruce Walker, and Jonathan Zong


     The accessibility working group explored the role of multimodal audio-visual interfaces in
     improving accessibility, focusing on sonification and visualization. Discussions centered on
     the relationship between accessibility, inclusion, and usability, emphasizing the need for
     supporting diverse literacy levels and cognitive abilities. A key theme was redundancy
     across multiple modalities – how different representations can enable insights even if full
     redundancy across modalities is unattainable. We examined the balance between alternative
     and redundant representations, considering how auditory and visual modalities can enhance
     understanding without assuming that increased information bandwidth improves accessibility.
     The group also discussed strategies for achieving meaningful redundancy, including compar-
     isons between perceptual mappings. We considered how interactive techniques can bridge
     gaps and link modalities – such as visually inspecting data while controlling sonification in
     time. The working group continues to discuss future research directions, highlighting the
     need for practical examples, interactive approaches, and frameworks that support accessible
     multimodal data representation.



     5.7    Redundancy and Complementarity
     Wolfgang Aigner (St. Pölten University of Applied Sciences, AT)
     Sandra Pauletto (KTH Royal Institute of Technology – Stockholm, SE)
     Elias Elmquist (Linköping University, SE)
     Kelly Snook (Kepler Concordia – Yamaguchi, JP)
     Katharina Groß-Vogt (Universität für Musik & darstellende Kunst – Graz, AT)
     Christina Gillmann (Fraunhofer FIT – St. Augustin, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Wolfgang Aigner, Sandra Pauletto, Elias Elmquist, Kelly Snook, Katharina Groß-Vogt, and
                     Christina Gillmann


     We developed the beginning of a redundancy-complementarity model for AV representations.
     Through discussions, which started with individual examples and understandings of redund-
     ancy/complementarity, we realised that redundancy/complementarity can be defined in the
     data, representation, and task domains. A fully redundant representation involves both
Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind                            81


representations (A and V) visualising/sonifying the same dataset and the user being able
to do the same task with the audio-only, or visual-only or audio-visual representations. A
semi-redundant representation might utilize two (or more) overlapping datasets, some
visualised and others sonified. In this case, the sonification affords a task and the visualisation
might afford a different task. A fully complementary representation involves separately
sonifying and visualising two (or more) different datasets. These representations afford
different tasks, but the fact that they are happening at the same time might make emerge an
unexpected meaning that could be then used in some way, for example to create an art work.
Furthermore, the group summarised possible benefits of these representations. Note that the
following list of benefits is not exhaustive. A fully redundant representation might afford
inclusiveness, the possibility of switching modality, safety and trust. The semi-redundant
representation can afford engagement, reduction of cognitive load, representation of multiple
dimensions (e.g., uncluttering), multi-tasking, richer understandings and trust. The fully
complementary representation might afford the serendipitous emergence of a new/unexpected
meaning, which could be beneficial in some contexts (for example an artistic context).



5.8    Towards a Design Theory
Kajetan Enge (Universität für Musik & darstellende Kunst – Graz, AT & St. Pölten Univer-
sity of Applied Sciences, AT)
Mohammad Ghoniem (Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, LU)
Thomas Hermann (Universität Bielefeld, DE)
Sara Lenzi (University of Deusto – Bilbao, ES & Ikerbasque Basque Foundation for Science –
Bilbao, ES)
Niklas Rönnberg (Linköping University, SE)
Johanna Schmidt (TU Wien, AT)


      License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Kajetan Enge, Mohammad Ghoniem, Thomas Hermann, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, and
                Johanna Schmidt


The working group based its discussion on the Design Framework suggested by the earlier
discussion group. We think of principles of Audio-Visual Idioms as encapsulating the Design
Framework into a Design Theory. Four concerns that were identified are:
1. Intention – Intentionality: We suggest that in the context of audio-visual design,
    Intention refers to the deliberate integration of sonification and visualization by the
    designer in order to support sensemaking, presentation, and storytelling about the data.
2. Integration – different levels of integration (low → high):
    a. Hardware integration of output/presentation devices (e.g., speakers, headphones,
       screens).
    b. Technical integration: implementation of (combining) two modalities.
    c. Audio-visual integration consists in the coordination of visual and auditory renderings as
       they depend on the same underlying data (MVC Model View Controller Architecture [1,
       2]).
    d. Sensory integration: integration of two (or more) perceptual stimuli. This is what
       comes from the real world, e.g., we hear and see a dog at the same time. This has to
       do with what our perception is exposed to. Sensorial perception is a requisite.




                                                                                                      25072
82   25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization


         e. Cognitive/mental integration: it happens when a person understands the stimuli as
            coming from the same source. This association might be only imagined, a concept in
            our mind (vs sensory integration).
     3. Sensemaking: We expect our audience to take an analytical perspective of our artifact
        (i.e., audio-visual artifact) in order to make sense of the phenomenon of interest.
     4. Artifact: In our context, an artifact implies an audio-visual representation of a dataset.
        An audio-visual idiom (grammar) without data values is not an artifact.

         Work on Design Theory will consist in identifying principles (such as unified constructs
     or a unified multiple coordinated AV-renderings framework) ensuring a deeper integration of
     the two modalities.
     References
     1    John Hunt. The Model-View-Controller Architecture. In Smalltalk and Object Orientation,
          pages 266–278. Springer, London, 1997.
     2    John Zukowski. The Model-View-Controller Architecture. In John Zukowski’s Definitive
          Guide to Swing for Java 2, pages 71–77. Apress, Berkeley, CA, 1999.



     5.9      Evaluation
     Stephen Barrass (sonification.com – Ainslie, AU)
     Valentina Caiola (City University of Hong Kong, HK)
     Michael Krone (Hochschule für Technik – Stuttgart, DE)
     Alexander Rind (St. Pölten University of Applied Sciences, AT)
     Sita Vriend (Universität Stuttgart, DE)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Stephen Barrass, Valentina Caiola, Michael Krone, Alexander Rind, and Sita Vriend


     The purpose of this working group was to discuss evaluation of audio-visual (AV) idioms.
     First, we discussed the necessity for evaluation of AV idioms. Then, we identified evaluation
     methods from visualization, sonification, and human-computer interaction (HCI) and how
     they can be arranged into a decision map as guidance for researchers and practitioners. We
     discussed the special considerations for evaluating audio-visual idioms: auditory impairments,
     sound literacy (e.g., musician/non-musician), technical test conditions (e.g., headphones/
     speakers, room setup). Furthermore, the way how audio-visual idioms are not fully redundant
     makes it necessary to evaluate such idioms in an integrated way rather than visual separately
     from sound.

     5.9.1      Why Evaluate AV Idioms?
     We first discussed whether evaluation of AV idioms is always necessary. Some projects that
     involve AV idioms may not need to be evaluated. For example, the exploration of the design
     space and novel techniques may inherently be valuable and not need to be evaluated. The
     fields of sonification and visualization exhibit different trends in evaluating their research.
     While only few sonification papers include an evaluation [4], different forms of evaluations
     are widespread in visualization, which is (partly) due to publication venues often requiring
     an evaluation in order to publish. Of research on audio-visual data representations about two
     third include an evaluation [6]. Evaluation has the potential to reveal how an AV idiom is
     useful. Hence, we urge researchers to consider evaluation as part of their process, not merely
     as a formality.
Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind                             83


5.9.2    Evaluation Frameworks and Methods
There is currently no framework or method for the evaluation of AV idioms specifically.
Instead, we identified evaluation methods from visualization, sonification, and HCI. These
methods can be used and adapted to suit the evaluation of AV idioms.
    First, we like to point out evaluation methods from HCI. Evaluation methods from HCI
are typically user-centered, meaning that the user is central to the design process. HCI
distinguishes between formative and summative evaluation methods. Formative evaluation
methods on the one hand are considered from the beginning and takes an iterative approach
to the design of an artifact [27]. Visualization research has adopted formative HCI methods
in visualization design studies [19, 25]. Summative evaluation methods on the other hand,
are conducted at the end of a development cycle and tests how well a design performs. The
design is often compared against benchmarks. Research in sonification and visualization often
evaluates performance measures such as reaction time and error rate [15], but learnability [2],
working memory load [22] and psychophysics [8, 23] has also been investigated.
    From HCI and related fields, we identified the following evaluation techniques that would
be useful for researcher to explore for the evaluation of AV idioms: (1) Empirical evaluation,
(2) heuristic evaluation, (3) third-wave HCI methodologies, and (4) alternative methodologies.
1. Empirical evaluation techniques rely on experimental procedures to answer research
    questions. Experimental procedures can collect and analyze qualitative data such as
    in grounded theory [16], or quantitative data as long as the experiment is replicable.
    Validation of a data representation by comparing it to a second representation typically
    are empirical as well. Empirical evaluation techniques are widely used and accepted in
    visualization [17] and have been applied to sonification as well. Measures used in empirical
    evaluation vary widely and depend on the aspect a researcher would like to investigate.
    Some examples include standardized questionnaires such as the NASA-TLX on perceived
    workload [14], visualization specific questionnaires [10], questionnaires assessing usability
    of AV idioms [24], the visualization literacy questionnaire [18], among others. Visualization
    research has a rich tradition of mainly empirical evaluation techniques that could be
    adapted to evaluate AV idioms. For an introduction we could like to point the reader
    to An Introduction and Guide to Evaluation of Visualization Techniques Through User
    Studies [11] and Patterns for visualization evaluation [5].
2. Heuristic evaluation can identify usability issues in an artifact throughout the design
    cycles [20]. A heuristics evaluation involves a group of experts that examine and judge an
    artifact, often according to a list of principles. In HCI, many heuristic principles exist [21].
    However, specific visualization heuristics have been developed [9]. We think that findings
    from psychoaccoustics and visual perception research could inform the design of AV
    idioms and could act as heuristics. There is an opportunity for future research to identify
    and formulate heuristics for AV idioms specifically.
3. Third-wave HCI methodologies go beyond the user-technology relationship and
    recognizes that interaction is a form of meaning creation. Methodologies thus focus
    on experiences and meaning-making in a broader context, beyond the artifact and its
    user [3, 13]. One such methodology is phenomenology: “a philosophical movement that
    seeks to analyze the relations between human beings and their world rather than as a
    method for describing reality” [26].
4. Lastly, we would like to point out alternative evaluation methods. We think such
    methods could be valuable to evaluate AV idioms too. For example: critical self-reflection,
    which is used in humanities [1, 7].




                                                                                                       25072
84   25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization


     5.9.3   Special Considerations of the Evaluation of AV Idioms
     Considering evaluation methods from adjacent fields is a good start. Such methods can be
     adapted to evaluate AV idioms. However, evaluations should be tailored to specific research
     goals. Hence, we identified special consideration for the evaluations of AV idioms. We came
     up with the following decision checklist to guide the evaluation of AV idioms:
     1. State the intent of the AV idiom and possible hypotheses and assumptions: A design is
        usually created with intent. This intent should be testable. Additionally, the researcher
        should state their assumptions and expectations. These can be formulated as testable
        hypotheses.
     2. Define specificities: Define who the intended user of the AV idioms is, what task(s)
        they will perform with it and in what context they will use it.
     3. Summative vs. Formative: A researcher should decide how they intend to evaluate
        their AV idiom before they start design. Do they intend to involve the user throughout
        development? Then formative evaluation methods will apply. Or will the researcher
        compare the AV idiom once it is created? Then summative methods are better suited.
     4. Define “good”: Researchers might want to evaluate if their AV idiom is better than an
        alternative representation. In such a case it is important to define what it means for the
        AV idiom to be good. What good means depends on the intent and specificities of the
        designed AV idiom. For example, should the designed AV idiom lead to fewer errors or
        should the designed AV idiom be more memorable.
     5. Choose methodology and method: The researcher should choose a suitable method
        based on the previous points. In both visualization and sonification, empirical methodology
        is often chosen. Empirical methods are especially suitable for summative approaches.
        This methodology include both quantitative and qualitative methods that can be used
        to validate a design. However, we also want to point to alternative methodologies from
        other fields. For example critical self-reflection which is commonly used in humanities,
        phenomenology which is widely accepted in design, and third-wave HCI methodologies.
     6. Choose measures: What to measure should be chosen based previous points, especially
        on the methods chosen and what “good” means to the researcher. For example, a
        researcher wants to know if their AV idiom conveys the same information to sighted,
        deaf and blind users. In such a case, the researcher might chose a qualitative method to
        measure the users’ comprehension of the AV idiom.

         We recommend that researchers plan how to evaluate their AV idiom before they begin
     development. An AV idiom is often designed with a specific intent. This intent needs to be
     stated, as well assumptions and hypotheses. How to evaluate is guided by these intentions,
     assumptions and/or hypotheses. For example, an AV idiom is designed with the intent to
     help children learn about space. The evaluation should then test the learnability of the AV
     idiom with children.
         Furthermore, design often requires specificity. AV idiom are often developed with a
     specific user in mind who will use the design in a specific context to perform determined
     tasks. These specificities need to not only be considered when designing the AV idiom but
     also when planning the evaluation. In the case of a summative evaluation, especially when
     looking to validate an AV idiom, a baseline must be chosen when evaluating an AV idiom. We
     concluded that AV idioms should be tested as an integrated system when exploring the design
     space of AV idioms. Hence, as a general rule of thumb, AV idioms should only be compared
     to alternative AV idioms. This is because Gibsodian perception [12], considers human
     perception as an active integrated system, rather than as passive and separate channels of
Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind                          85


sensation. This theory of ecological perception has enormous implications for the evaluation
of multisensory interfaces! The whole is more than the sum of the parts. Evaluating channels
separately will not provide a true description of the whole system. Furthermore the senses
provide different kinds of information and a simply redundant interface is the least likely to
provide perceptual benefits and advantages. Hence, it is not useful to compare visualization
to AV idioms. However, we identified exceptions. For example, a researcher might compare
an AV idiom to a visualization if they want to explore if the combination with sonification
adds something useful to the visualization. Or if an AV idiom intends to be accessible for
blind, sighted, and deaf individuals.
    There are, of course, further factors that will influence the results of an evaluation. On
the one hand, the background and personal factors of the user will play a role (e.g., musical
training or auditory impairments). On the other hand, the technical setup will play a
role (e.g., room/lab settings and the output device). Therefore, such factors need to be
documented correctly and thoroughly considered when drawing conclusions based on the
evaluation results.
    However, we see the need for evaluation methods specifically developed for AV idioms.
Further research should identify, adapt and extend evaluation methods from HCI, visualization
and sonification useful for the evaluation of AV idioms. For example, how do we adapt
evaluation methods to evaluate fully redundant AV idioms, fully complementary AV idioms,
or mixed redundant AV idioms?
References
 1 J Dewey. How we think: a restatement of the relation of reflective thinking to the educative
     process. D.C. Heath & Co Publishers, 1933.
 2 Tilman Dingler, Jeffrey Lindsay, and Bruce N Walker. Learnabiltiy of sound cues for
     environmental features: Auditory icons, earcons, spearcons, and speech. In Proceedings of
     the 14th international conference on auditory display. International Community for Auditory
     Display, 2008.
 3 Emanuel Felipe Duarte and M. Cecilia C. Baranauskas. Revisiting the three HCI waves: a
     preliminary discussion on philosophy of science and research paradigms. In Proceedings of
     the 15th Brazilian Symposium on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 38:1–38:4,
     New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
 4 Gaël Dubus and Roberto Bresin. A systematic review of mapping strategies for the
     sonification of physical quantities. PloS one, 8(12):e82491, 2013.
 5 Niklas Elmqvist and Ji Soo Yi. Patterns for visualization evaluation. In Proceedings of the
     2012 BELIV workshop: Beyond time and errors – novel evaluation methods for visualization,
     Beliv ’12, pages 12:1–12:8, New York, NY, USA, 2012. Association for Computing Machinery.
 6 Kajetan Enge, Elias Elmquist, Valentina Caiola, Niklas Rönnberg, Alexander Rind, Michael
     Iber, Sara Lenzi, Fangfei Lan, Robert Höldrich, and Wolfgang Aigner. Open Your Ears and
     Take a Look: A State-of-the-Art Report on the Integration of Sonification and Visualization.
     Computer Graphics Forum (EuroVis ’24), 43(3):e15114, 2024.
 7 Janet Eyler, Dwight E Giles, and Angela Schmeide. A practitioner’s guide to reflection in
     service-learning: Student voices & reflections. Vanderbilt University, 1996.
 8 Jamie Ferguson and Stephen A. Brewster. Evaluation of psychoacoustic sound parameters
     for sonification. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on multimodal
     interaction, Icmi ’17, pages 120–127, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing
     Machinery.
 9 Camilla Forsell. Evaluation in Information Visualization: Heuristic Evaluation. In 2012
     16th International Conference on Information Visualisation, pages 136–142, 2012. tex.ids=
     forsell_2012_evaluation ISSN: 2375-0138.




                                                                                                    25072
86   25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization


     10   Camilla Forsell and Matthew Cooper. Questionnaires for evaluation in information visu-
          alization. In Proceedings of the 2012 BELIV workshop: Beyond time and errors – novel
          evaluation methods for visualization, Beliv ’12, pages 16:1–16:3, New York, NY, USA, 2012.
          ACM.
     11   Camilla Forsell and Matthew Cooper. An Introduction and Guide to Evaluation of Visual-
          ization Techniques Through User Studies. In Weidong Huang, editor, Handbook of Human
          Centric Visualization, pages 285–313. Springer, New York, NY, 2014.
     12   James Jerome Gibson. The senses considered as perceptual systems. Bloomsbury Academic,
          1966.
     13   Steve Harrison, Deborah Tatar, and Phoebe Sengers. The three paradigms of HCI. In Alt.
          Chi. Session at the SIGCHI Conference on human factors in computing systems San Jose,
          California, USA, pages 1–18, 2007.
     14   Sandra G. Hart. NASA-Task Load Index (NASA-TLX); 20 Years Later. Proceedings of the
          Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 50(9):904–908, October 2006.
     15   Jessica Hullman, Xiaoli Qiao, Michael Correll, Alex Kale, and Matthew Kay. In pursuit of
          error: a survey of uncertainty visualization evaluation. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
          and Computer Graphics, 25(1):903–913, 2019.
     16   Petra Isenberg, Torre Zuk, Christopher Collins, and Sheelagh Carpendale. Grounded
          evaluation of information visualizations. In Proceedings of the 2008 workshop on beyond
          time and errors: Novel EvaLuation methods for information visualization, Beliv ’08, pages
          6:1–6:8, New York, NY, USA, 2008. Association for Computing Machinery.
     17   Heidi Lam, Enrico Bertini, Petra Isenberg, Catherine Plaisant, and Sheelagh Carpendale.
          Empirical studies in information visualization: Seven scenarios. IEEE Transactions on
          Visualization and Computer Graphics, 18(9):1520–1536, 2012.
     18   Sukwon Lee, Sung-Hee Kim, and Bum Chul Kwon. VLAT: Development of a visualization
          literacy assessment test. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
          23(1):551–560, 2017.
     19   Miriah Meyer and Jason Dykes. Criteria for Rigor in Visualization Design Study. IEEE
          Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 26(1):87–97, January 2020. tex.ids=
          Meyer2020designstudy conferenceName: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
          Graphics.
     20   Jakob Nielsen. How to conduct a heuristic evaluation. Nielsen Norman Group, 1(1):8, 1995.
     21   Jakob Nielsen and Rolf Molich. Heuristic evaluation of user interfaces. In Proceedings of
          the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, pages 249–256, New York,
          NY, USA, 1990. ACM.
     22   Lace M.K. Padilla, Spencer C. Castro, P. Samuel Quinan, Ian T. Ruginski, and Sarah H.
          Creem-Regehr. Toward objective evaluation of working memory in visualizations: a case
          study using pupillometry and a dual-task paradigm. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
          and Computer Graphics, 26(1):332–342, 2020.
     23   Ghulam Jilani Quadri. Toward constructing frameworks for task- and design-optimized
          visualizations. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 44(5):104–113, 2024.
     24   Niklas Rönnberg and Camilla Forsell. Questionnaires assessing usability of audio-visual
          representations. In AVI 2022 Workshop on Audio-Visual Analytics (WAVA22), Frascati,
          Rome, Italy, May 2022. Zenodo.
     25   Michael Sedlmair, Miriah Meyer, and Tamara Munzner. Design study methodology: Reflec-
          tions from the trenches and the stacks. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
          Graphics, 18(12):2431–2440, 2012.
     26   Peter-Paul Verbeek. Moralizing technology: Understanding and designing the morality of
          things. University of Chicago press, 2011.
Wolfgang Aigner, Sara Lenzi, Niklas Rönnberg, Kajetan Enge, and Alexander Rind                         87


27      John Zimmerman, Jodi Forlizzi, and Shelley Evenson. Research through design as a method
        for interaction design research in HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
        Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’07, pages 493–502, New York, NY, USA, April 2007.
        Association for Computing Machinery.




    6    Open Mic Sessions
In our seminar, we held Open Mic Sessions on Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday evenings
in the castle’s wine cellar. Mainly, the following topics and projects were presented and
discussed:
    Jonathan Zong presented his work on Umwelt [2].
    Kajetan Enge presented theoretical constructs bridging the theory-gap between the
    sonification and visualization fields [1].
    Kelly Snook presented her MiMu Gloves1 , a pair of gloves for versatile music composing
    and performing trough gestural movements.

References
1     Kajetan Enge, Alexander Rind, Michael Iber, Robert Höldrich, and Wolfgang Aigner.
     Towards a unified terminology for sonification and visualization. Personal and Ubiquitous
     Computing, 27(5):1949–1963, oct 2023.
2     Jonathan Zong, Isabella Pedraza Pineros, Mengzhu (Katie) Chen, Daniel Hajas, and Arvind
      Satyanarayan. Umwelt: Accessible Structured Editing of Multi-Modal Data Representations.
      In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI
     ’24, pages 1–20, New York, NY, USA, may 2024. Association for Computing Machinery.




1
    https://mimugloves.com/




                                                                                                   25072
88   25072 – What You Hear is What You See? Integrating Sonification and Visualization


            Participants
       Wolfgang Aigner                    Thomas Hermann                     Jonathan C. Roberts
     FH – St. Pölten, AT               Universität Bielefeld, DE           Bangor University, GB
       Stephen Barrass                    Michael Krone
     Sonification – Ainslie, AU        Hochschule für Technik –              Niklas Rönnberg
       Valentina Caiola                Stuttgart, DE                       Linköping University, SE
     City University –                    Bongshin Lee
     Hong Kong, HK                     Yonsei University – Seoul, KR        Johanna Schmidt
                                                                           TU Wien, AT
       Elias Elmquist                     Sara Lenzi
     Linköping University, SE          University of Deusto – Bilbao, ES
                                       & Ikerbasque Basque Foundation        Kelly Snook
       Kajetan Enge                                                        Kepler Concordia –
     Universität für Musik &           for Science – Bilbao, ES
                                                                           Yamaguchi, JP
     darstellende Kunst – Graz, AT        Øystein Moseng
       Mohammad Ghoniem                Highsoft AS – Vik I Sogn, NO
                                                                            Sita Vriend
     Luxembourg Institute of Science      Dietmar Offenhuber               Universität Stuttgart, DE
     & Technology, LU                  Northeastern University –
       Christina Gillmann              Boston, US                            Bruce N. Walker
     Fraunhofer FIT –                     Sandra Pauletto                  Georgia Institute of Technology –
     Sankt Augustin, DE                KTH Royal Institute of              Atlanta, US
       Katharina Groß-Vogt             Technology – Stockholm, SE
     Universität für Musik &              Alexander Rind                    Jonathan Zong
     darstellende Kunst – Graz, AT     FH – St. Pölten, AT                 MIT – Cambridge, US
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25081

Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic
Guillermo Badia∗1 , Manfred Droste∗2 , Phokion G. Kolaitis∗3 ,
Carles Noguera∗4 , Sophie Brinke†5 , Lovro Mrkonjić†6 , and
Gaia Petreni†7
1      University of Queensland – Brisbane, AU. g.badia@uq.edu.au
2      Universität Leipzig, DE. droste@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
3      University of California – Santa Cruz, US & IBM Almaden Research Center –
       San Jose, US. kolaitis@ucsc.edu
4      University of Siena, IT. carles.noguera@unisi.it
5      RWTH Aachen, DE. brinke@logic.rwth-aachen.de
6      RWTH Aachen, DE. mrkonjiclovro@gmail.com
7      University of Siena, IT. gai.petreni@student.unisi.it

        Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 25081 “Semirings in
Databases, Automata, and Logic”, which was held from February 16 to 21, 2025. The seminar
focused on semirings, a class of algebraic structures with many applications in computer science,
particularly in databases and automata. Semirings are used in databases to annotate tuples in
the input and output relations of queries (in particular, in the case of bag semantics, using the
semiring of natural numbers) allowing to model several relevant aspects of databases. In automata
theory, semirings allow to define weighted automata, which have applications in natural language
processing, speech recognition, and image compression. Moreover, semirings are strongly related
to the algebraic semantics of many-valued logics. The seminar brought together researchers from
the communities mentioned above, and it developed a research agenda for studying semirings,
guided by a collection of diverse applications. This led to several new collaborations between
members from different communities, including joint work for publications.
Seminar February 16–21, 2025 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/25081
2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Database theory; Theory of
   computation → Formal languages and automata theory; Theory of computation → Logic;
   Mathematics of computing → Discrete mathematics
Keywords and phrases databases, finite model theory, multi-valued logic, provenance, semirings,
   weighted automata, weighted logic
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.2.89




∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector
            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15, Issue 2, pp. 89–109
Editors: Guillermo Badia, Manfred Droste, Phokion G. Kolaitis, Carles Noguera, Sophie Brinke, Lovro Mrkonjić,
and Gaia Petreni
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
90   25081 – Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic


      1     Executive Summary
     Guillermo Badia (University of Queensland – Brisbane, AU)
     Manfred Droste (Universität Leipzig, DE)
     Phokion G. Kolaitis (University of California – Santa Cruz, US & IBM Almaden Research
     Center – San Jose, US)
     Carles Noguera (University of Siena, IT)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Guillermo Badia, Manfred Droste, Phokion G. Kolaitis, and Carles Noguera


     Semirings are fundamental algebraic structures that in recent times have found a number of
     applications to computer science, especially in the areas of databases and automata. On the
     side of databases, commercial query languages, such as SQL, use bag semantics, instead of
     set semantics, to evaluate relational database queries, which means that the semiring of the
     natural numbers is used to annotate tuples in the input and output relations. More generally,
     the annotations can be values in some fixed semiring; this gives a common generalization
     of both set semantics and bag semantics of database queries, and also makes it possible to
     model other situations in which one is interested, e.g., in the probability or the reliability of
     an answer. Furthermore, semirings of polynomials have been successfully used to carry out
     a rigorous study of provenance in databases. On the side of automata, semirings are used
     to define weighted automata, which are nondeterministic finite automata augmented with
     values from a semiring as weights on the transitions. These weights may model, e.g., the
     cost involved when executing a transition, the amount of resources or time needed for this,
     or the probability or reliability of its successful execution. Weighted automata have found
     numerous applications to natural language processing, speech recognition, and algorithms
     for digital image compression.
         These applications have inspired numerous investigations in the logic-in-computer-science
     community. For instance, motivated by the work on semirings in databases, the evaluation of
     arbitrary first-order formulas in semirings has been recently explored in the literature, where,
     among other things, the relation between elementary equivalence (i.e., indistinguishability in
     first-order logic) and isomorphism on finite structures has been examined. In the same vein,
     various notions of locality in the semiring framework have been studied and zero-one laws and
     convergence laws have been obtained, whereas Ehrenfeucht–Fraïssé games have been used to
     characterize equivalence up to bounded quantifier rank under semiring semantics. As regards
     semirings and automata, Kleene’s classical theorem on the characterization of languages
     recognized by automata with languages denoted by regular expressions was extended by
     Schützenberger to the behaviors of weighted automata and rational power series. By a
     fundamental theorem of Büchi, Elgot, and Trakhtenbrot, finite automata have the same
     expressive power on words as monadic second-order logic; therefore, various problems about
     this logic on words are decidable. In recent years, a suitable weighted logic was developed and
     shown to have the same expressive power on words, trees, and graphs as weighted automata.
     Consequently, this weighted logic has similar decidability properties on these structures as
     the unweighted monadic second-order logic. In turn, both of these approaches could be
     seen as part of the framework of many-valued logics, where algebraic structures expanding
     semirings with suitable operations have been studied for a long time.
         This seminar brought together researchers from three communities that share an interest
     in semirings, namely databases, automata and multi-valued logic. The goal was to develop a
     research agenda, featuring tutorials, contributed talks, and discussions on open problems
     and future directions. Overall, the seminar was a success.
Guillermo Badia et al.                                                                             91


Organization of the Seminar. The seminar was held between February 16–21, 2025 from
Monday to Friday. There were five invited tutorials with long 75-minute talks, two from the
database community, two from the automata community, and one from the multi-valued
logic community, that helped define a common language and a common set of problems, and
16 contributed 25-minute talks from experts in all these fields. The tutorials were given by
    Val Tannen on the semiring framework of data(base) provenance;
    Erik Paul on weighted automata and weighted logics;
    Erich Grädel on the model theory of semiring semantics;
    Sara Ugolini on the algebraic semantics of many-valued logics; and
    Peter Kostolányi on models of computation over semirings.

    In addition, there was a session where five open problems (some of them rather major)
were presented. Our collectors, Sophie Brinke, Lovro Mrkonjić, and Gaia Petreni, recorded
all open problems, and later collected them for inclusion in this report. Finally, there was
a closing session to formulate future research directions. The schedule was developed in
a way that allowed sufficient time for informal discussions and exchange of ideas between
participants.
Outcomes of the Seminar. There are several major outcomes:
  The presence of participants with very diverse backgrounds enabled us to exchange
  interesting ideas. For example, logicians and algebraists were strongly inspired by the
  problems in the database community, and database theoreticians learned relevant facts
  about semirings from the automata and algebra people. New collaborations emerged dur-
  ing the seminar, and there are some new papers with authors from different communities
  currently in the writing.
  We have assembled a list of open problems from all involved areas, which we included
  here. We hope that this list will help define the community interested in semirings, and
  will also inspire young researchers to contribute to this currently very timely area.
  A follow-up seminar is already being planned with a modified team of organizers (including
  two of the present ones, Guillermo Badia and Carles Noguera, together with Val Tannen
  and Thomas Eiter), adding the new community of AI.

Acknowledgements. We are grateful to the Scientific Directorate and to the staff of the
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz Center for Informatics for their support of this seminar. We also
wish to express our sincere thanks to Sophie Brinke, Lovro Mrkonjić and Gaia Petreni for
collecting the abstracts of the talks and compiling the list of open problems.




                                                                                               25081
92   25081 – Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic


      2       Table of Contents
     Executive Summary
       Guillermo Badia, Manfred Droste, Phokion G. Kolaitis, and Carles Noguera . . . . 90

     Overview of Talks
          The Semiring Framework for Data(base) Provenance
          Val Tannen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    94
          Weighted Automata and Weighted Logics
          Erik Paul . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   94
          The Impact of State Mergingon Predictive Accuracy in Probabilistic Tree Automata:
          Dietze’s Conjecture Revisited
          Johanna Björklund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
          Term Rewriting, Equality Saturation, the Chase, and Tree Automata
          Dan Suciu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
          The Transportation Problem for Positive Commutative Monoids
          Albert Atserias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
          The Model Theory of Semiring Semantics
          Erich Grädel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
          The algebraic semantics of many-valued logics
          Sara Ugolini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
          Compactness in Semiring Semantics
          Sophie Brinke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   97
          Codd’s Theorem for Databases over Semirings
          Guillermo Badia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     97
          Semirings with Infinitary Operations
          Lovro Mrkonjić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
          Models of Computation over Semirings
          Peter Kostolányi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
          Hoops in semiring semantics
          Tomasz Kowalski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
          Valued Constraint Satisfaction Problem and Resilience in Database Theory
          Žaneta Semanišinová . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
          Polynomial-time Convergence of Datalogo over p-stable Semirings
          Hung Ngo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
          Not all semirings are strong
          Jacques Sakarovitch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
          Semiring Circuits for Sum-Product Queries
          Paris Koutris . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
          Rewriting Consistent Answers on Annotated Data and Semiring Circuits
          Jonni Virtema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
          When do homomorphism counts help in query algorithms?
          Balder ten Cate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
Guillermo Badia et al.                                                                                    93


   How to Bake an Uncertainty Pie: Take Even Parts of Abstract Interpretation,
   K-relations, and Zonotopes and Mix Thoroughly
   Boris Glavic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
   Complete Additively Idempotent Semirings and their Applications in Weighted
   Automata Theory, Social Network Analysis and Modal Logics
   Miroslav Ćirić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
   On the Boolean Closure of Deterministic Tree Automata
   Wolfgang Thomas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104

Open problems
   Circuit Size for Reachability
   Paris Koutris . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
   Convergence rate of Datalogo over p-stable semirings
   Hung Ngo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
   Subreducts of monus semirings
   Paolo Aglianò . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
   Weighted First-Order Definable Languages
   Manfred Droste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
   Conjunctive Query Containment under Bag Semantics
   Phokion G. Kolaitis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109




                                                                                                      25081
94   25081 – Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic


      3      Overview of Talks
     3.1     The Semiring Framework for Data(base) Provenance
     Val Tannen (University of Pennsylvania – Philadelphia, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Val Tannen
      Joint work of Yael Amsterdamer, Daniel Deutch, Nate Foster, Erich Grädel, Todd J. Green, Zachary G. Ives,
                    Grigoris Karvounarakis, Tova Milo, Matthias Naaf, Sudeepa Roy, Val Tannen
     Main reference Todd J. Green, Gregory Karvounarakis, Val Tannen: “Provenance semirings”, in Proc. of the
                    Twenty-Sixth ACM SIGACT-SIGMOD-SIGART Symposium on Principles of Database Systems,
                    June 11-13, 2007, Beijing, China, pp. 31–40, ACM, 2007.
               URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1265530.1265535


     Data from different sources mixes up in data sharing systems. We end up with complex
     relationships between participants’ data. In well-disciplined systems, these relationships
     are specified by logical constraints that define database transformations. When participants
     receive data from the sharing system, they would like to apply some trust judgements to
     it. Their confidence may be based on external opinions about the other participants. To
     combine these opinions, they need to know how a data item they receive depends on the
     sources – other participants in the system. Knowing this means knowing the provenance of
     the data item.
         This tutorial provides an overview of the semiring framework for databases and logics,
     which forms the foundation of the semiring provenance approach.



     3.2     Weighted Automata and Weighted Logics
     Erik Paul (Universität Leipzig, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Erik Paul


     Weighted automata are a generalization of finite automata and allow the description of
     quantitative properties of languages. Finite automata themselves are known to be expressively
     equivalent to MSO logic due to the fundamental Büchi–Elgot–Trakhtenbrot Theorem. For a
     long time, a corresponding logical characterization of weighted languages recognizable by
     weighted automata had been missing.
         In this tutorial, we provide an introduction to weighted automata and in particular to
     weighted logics, a generalization of classical MSO logic expressively equivalent to weighted
     automata. After giving some insights into the ideas behind weighted logics in their current
     form, we consider generalizations to data structures and automaton models beyond weighted
     automata over words as well as generalizations to weight structures beyond semirings. Finally,
     we present further evidence of the robustness of weighted logics by examining a generalization
     of the classical Feferman–Vaught Theorem to weighted logics over arbitrary finite structures
     and by showing how fragments of weighted logics capture languages recognizable by weighted
     automata restricted to a certain degree of ambiguity.
Guillermo Badia et al.                                                                                             95


3.3     The Impact of State Mergingon Predictive Accuracy in Probabilistic
        Tree Automata: Dietze’s Conjecture Revisited
Johanna Björklund (University of Umeå, SE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Johanna Björklund
Main reference Johanna Björklund: “The impact of state merging on predictive accuracy in probabilistic tree
               automata: Dietze’s conjecture revisited”, J. Comput. Syst. Sci., Vol. 146, p. 103563, 2024.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCSS.2024.103563


Dietze’s conjecture concerns the problem of equipping a tree automaton M with weights
to make it probabilistic, in such a way that the resulting automaton N predicts a given
corpus C as accurately as possible. The conjecture states that the accuracy cannot increase
if the states in M are merged with respect to an equivalence relation ∼ so that the result
is a smaller automaton M ∼ . Put differently, merging states can never improve predictions.
This is under the assumption that both M and M ∼ are bottom-up deterministic and accept
every tree in C. We prove that the conjecture holds, using a construction that turns any
probabilistic version N ∼ of M ∼ into a probabilistic version N of M , such that N assigns at
least as great a weight to each tree in C as N ∼ does.



3.4     Term Rewriting, Equality Saturation, the Chase, and Tree Automata
Dan Suciu (University of Washington – Seattle, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Dan Suciu
 Joint work of Dan Suciu, Yisu Remy Wang, Yihong Zhang
Main reference Dan Suciu, Yisu Remy Wang, Yihong Zhang: “Semantic foundations of equality saturation”, CoRR,
               Vol. abs/2501.02413, 2025.
          URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2501.02413


Equality saturation is an approach to the word problem that is currently popular in the
compilers community. In this talk we describe the equality saturation framework, and relate
it to two well-known concepts: the chase of TGDs and EGDs, and to tree automata. We also
describe open problems, some of which require extensions of the chase, or of tree automata,
to semirings.



3.5     The Transportation Problem for Positive Commutative Monoids
Albert Atserias (UPC Barcelona Tech, ES)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Albert Atserias
 Joint work of Albert Atserias, Phokion G. Kolaitis


In the transportation problem as studied in the theory of resource allocation in economic
theory, a finite set of suppliers seek to distribute their production among a finite set of
consumers to completely fill their demands. As an optimization problem, the goal is to
achieve so at the minimum total transportation cost. Varying the interpretation of what
supply, demand, and cost is, the transportation problem can be used to model a variety
of tasks from different areas, from the original resource allocation problem in economics,
to the problem of image reconstruction in tomography, the relational consistency problem




                                                                                                               25081
96   25081 – Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic


     in database theory, and the joint measurability problem of observables in quantum theory.
     Motivated by some of these applications, where the interpretations of supply and demand
     need not obey the arithmetic of the real numbers, we study the transportation problem in
     the abstract setting of positive semirings and, even more generally, in the setting of positive
     commutative monoids.



     3.6     The Model Theory of Semiring Semantics
     Erich Grädel (RWTH Aachen, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Erich Grädel
     Main reference Erich Grädel, Val Tannen: “Provenance Analysis and Semiring Semantics for First-Order Logic”,
                    CoRR, Vol. abs/2412.07986, 2024.
               URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2412.07986


     Semiring semantics relies on the idea to evaluate logical statements not just by true or false,
     but by values in some commutative semiring. This approach has originally been motivated
     by the provenance analysis of database queries, but has meanwhile been extended to a
     systematic alternative semantics for many logical systems, in particular for first-order logic
     and fixed-point logics. Semiring semantics can provide very detailed information about a
     query or a logical statement, for instance concerning the combinations of atomic facts that
     imply its truth, or practical information about evaluation costs, confidence scores, access
     levels, or the number of successful evaluation strategies.
         The development of semiring semantics raises the question to what extent classical
     techniques and results of logic extend to semiring semantics, and how this depends on the
     algebraic properties of the underlying semiring. This tutorial provides a survey on recent
     results in this research programme, covering aspects such as axiomatisability of finite semiring
     interpretations, 0-1 laws, locality, and Ehrenfeucht–Fraïssé games.



     3.7     The algebraic semantics of many-valued logics
     Sara Ugolini (IIIA–CSIC – Bellaterra, ES)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Sara Ugolini


     Many-valued logics are systems of nonclassical logics which go beyond the true/false dichotomy
     of classical logic. By considering more than two truth values, they provide a formal framework
     for reasoning with partial truth and truth degrees.
         In this tutorial we give an overview of many valued logics from the perspective of their
     algebraic semantics. In particular, we focus on those logics whose models can be presented by
     means of residuated structures and their reducts; these indeed cover most of the well-known
     many-valued logics considered in the literature, e.g., Łukasiewicz logic, Gödel–Dummett
     logic, all logics arising from (left-)continuous t-norms, 3-valued Kleene logic.
         In particular, we discuss how algebraic methods can be fruitfully used to study logical
     properties.
Guillermo Badia et al.                                                                                        97


References
1    N. Galatos, P. Jipsen, T. Kowalski, and H. Ono. Residuated Lattices: An Algebraic Glimpse
     at Substructural Logics, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 151,
     Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2007.
2    P. Hájek. Metamathematics of Fuzzy Logics, Kluwer Academic Publisher, Dordrecht, The
     Netherlands, 1998.
3    G. Metcalfe, F. Paoli, and C. Tsinakis. Residuated Structures in Algebra and Logic, vol. 277.
     American Mathematical Society, 2023.



3.8     Compactness in Semiring Semantics
Sophie Brinke (RWTH Aachen, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Sophie Brinke
 Joint work of Sophie Brinke, Anuj Dawar, Erich Grädel, Lovro Mrkonjić, Matthias Naaf


Semiring semantics for first-order logic evaluates formulae not just to true or false but to
values from a commutative semiring. Depending on the underlying semiring, this allows us
to track descriptions of the atomic facts that are responsible for the truth of a statement
or practical information about the evaluation such as costs or confidence. Also classical
semantics appears as a special case when the Boolean semiring is used, which raises the
question to what extent model-theoretic results can be generalized beyond the Boolean
semiring and how this relates to the algebraic properties of the underlying semiring. In this
talk, we investigate the availability of compactness, which states that a set of sentences is
satisfiable if every finite subset is. By defining satisfiability as the existence of non-zero
valuations, this implication can be generalized to every absorptive semiring. For the, in
Boolean semantics equivalent, formulation via entailment, the situation is different: Based
on an order on the semiring, the entailment relation naturally extends to semiring semantics,
but this yields a stronger variant of compactness, which fails for the tropical semiring, the
Łukasiewicz semiring, and the semirings of generalized absorptive polynomials. However, it
still holds for finite semirings and (possibly infinite) lattice semirings.



3.9     Codd’s Theorem for Databases over Semirings
Guillermo Badia (University of Queensland – Brisbane, AU)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Guillermo Badia
 Joint work of Guillermo Badia, Phokion G. Kolaitis, Carles Noguera
Main reference Guillermo Badia, Phokion G. Kolaitis, Carles Noguera: “Codd’s Theorem for Databases over
               Semirings”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2501.16543, 2025.
          URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2501.16543


Codd’s Theorem, a fundamental result of database theory, asserts that relational algebra and
relational calculus have the same expressive power on relational databases. We explore Codd’s
Theorem for databases over semirings and establish two different versions of this result for
such databases: the first version involves the five basic operations of relational algebra, while
in the second version the division operation is added to the five basic operations of relational
algebra. In both versions, the difference operation of relations is given semantics using
semirings with monus, while on the side of relational calculus a limited form of negation is



                                                                                                          25081
98   25081 – Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic


     used. The reason for considering these two different versions of Codd’s theorem is that, unlike
     the case of ordinary relational databases, the division operation need not be expressible in
     terms of the five basic operations of relational algebra for databases over an arbitrary positive
     semiring; in fact, we show that this inexpressibility result holds even for bag databases.



     3.10      Semirings with Infinitary Operations
     Lovro Mrkonjić (RWTH Aachen, DE)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Lovro Mrkonjić
      Joint work of Sophie Brinke, Erich Grädel, Lovro Mrkonjić, Matthias Naaf
     Main reference Sophie Brinke, Erich Grädel, Lovro Mrkonjic, Matthias Naaf: “Semiring Provenance in the Infinite”,
                    in Proc. of the The Provenance of Elegance in Computation - Essays Dedicated to Val Tannen,
                    Tannen’s Festschrift, May 24-25, 2024, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, OASIcs,
                    Vol. 119, pp. 3:1–3:26, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
               URL https://doi.org/10.4230/OASICS.TANNEN.3


     Some applications of semirings require infinitary semirings with addition and multiplication
     operators over infinite collections of values. For example, in semiring semantics for first-order
     logic, existential and universal quantifiers over infinite domains are interpreted using infinitary
     addition and multiplication, respectively. In order to guarantee well-defined and informative
     semiring semantics in the infinitary setting, infinitary operations must satisfy core algebraic
     properties, such as distributivity and invariance under partition and re-ordering of the
     operands, which are analogous to associativity and commutativity from the finite setting.
         We present an overview of infinitary semirings and precise definitions of their core algebraic
     properties, and we discuss further properties such as compactness. It turns out that some
     semirings do not admit infinitary operations, some semirings must be extended in order
     to allow infinitary operations, and other semirings, such as semirings induced by complete
     lattices, naturally admit infinitary operations. Finally, we outline the impact of infinitary
     operations on free polynomial semirings, which are used for provenance analysis in logic,
     databases and game theory. Our analysis shows that, with suitable definitions for infinitary
     semirings, large parts of the theory of semiring provenance can be successfully generalized to
     infinite domains.



     3.11      Models of Computation over Semirings
     Peter Kostolányi (Comenius University – Bratislava, SK)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Peter Kostolányi
     Main reference Peter Kostolányi: “Weighted automata and logics meet computational complexity”, Inf. Comput.,
                    Vol. 301, p. 105213, 2024.
               URL https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IC.2024.105213


     The tutorial highlights a recent reinterpretation of certain parts of computational complexity
     theory from the viewpoint of a weighted automata theorist. It explains how the framework of
     weighted Turing machines over semirings can be used to capture various sorts of quantitative
     complexity classes – such as those of counting and optimisation problems – in a consistent
     manner as instances of weighted complexity classes over different semirings. Several basic
     results about the classical complexity classes of decision problems turn out to generalise to
     this weighted setting, while new appealing connections to weighted logics arise. The tutorial
     gives a brief overview of the most substantial observations of this kind.
Guillermo Badia et al.                                                                                    99


3.12      Hoops in semiring semantics
Tomasz Kowalski (Jagiellonian University – Kraków, PL)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Tomasz Kowalski


Many semirings used in semiring semantics are naturally ordered and admit an additional
subtraction-like operation, often called monus. It turns out that multiplication-free reducts
of such semirings are very well known in universal algebra and algebraic logic under the
name of dual hoops. A dual hoop is an algebra A = (A; +, −, 0) such that (A; +, 0) is a
commutative monoid, and moreover the following identities hold:
    x − x = 0,
    (x − y) + y = (y − x) + x,
    x − (y + z) = (x − y) − z.

    This implies that x ≤ y ⇐⇒ x − y = 0 defines an order, − is a co-residual of + in this
order, and moreover the order is natural. In algebraic logic, these algebras are more often
presented in the order-dual form, with ·, → and 1, so from now on I will always speak of
hoops, relying on the reader to identify the correct order.
    Hoops were first considered by Bosbach in [1, 2], then studied by Büchi and Owens in [3],
and then investigated thoroughly by Blok and Ferreirim in [4]. Hoops have a number of
pleasant algebraic properties, and a number of them follow from something more general
than the hoop structure, namely, from the fact that they are subtractive. The property
of subtractivity was isolated and thoroughly studied by Aglianò and Ursini in a series of
articles starting from [5] (with a prequel by Ursini). The hoop structure adds natural (in the
technical sense) residuated order to subtractivity, yelding algebras resembling ordered rings.
    Furthermore, expanding a hoop to a semiring preserves the pleasant algebraic properties
alluded to above. The theory of such expansions was studied, somewhat more generally, by
Blok and Pigozzi in [6].
    My talk will be a sightseeing tour, introducing such expanded hoops and presenting a
few examples: in particular showing that some commonly used semirings such as N[X] have
an implicit dual hoop structure.
References
1    B. Bosbach. Komplementäre Halbgruppen. Axiomatik und Arithmetik, Fundamenta Mathe-
     maticae 64, 257–287, 1969.
2    B. Bosbach. Komplementaere Halbgruppen. Kongruenzen und Quotienten, Fundamenta
     Mathematicae 69, 1–14, 1970.
3    J. R. Büchi and T. M. Owens. Complemented monoids and hoops, unpublished manuscript.
4    W. J. Blok and I. M. A. Ferreirim. Hoops and their implicational reducts, Algebra Universalis
     43, 233–257, 2000.
5    P. Aglianò and A. Ursini. On subtractive varieties II: General properties, Algebra Universalis
     36, issue 2, 222–259, 1996.
6    W. J. Blok and D. Pigozzi. On the structure of varieties with equationally definable principal
     congruences III, Algebra Universalis 32, 545–608, 1994.




                                                                                                      25081
100   25081 – Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic


      3.13      Valued Constraint Satisfaction Problem and Resilience in Database
                Theory
      Žaneta Semanišinová (TU Dresden, DE)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Žaneta Semanišinová
       Joint work of Manuel Bodirsky, Carsten Lutz, Žaneta Semanišinová
      Main reference Manuel Bodirsky, Zaneta Semanisinová, Carsten Lutz: “The Complexity of Resilience Problems via
                     Valued Constraint Satisfaction Problems”, in Proc. of the 39th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on
                     Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2024, Tallinn, Estonia, July 8-11, 2024, pp. 14:1–14:14, ACM, 2024.
                URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3661814.3662071


      A recent research topic in database theory is the computational complexity of resilience of
      queries. For a fixed conjunctive query, the problem is to compute the number of facts that need
      to be removed from a given database so that it does not satisfy the query. Mathematically,
      this problem can be viewed as removing tuples from relations of a relational structure so
      that it does not satisfy a fixed primitive positive sentence. In this talk, I will explain how
      resilience problems can be viewed as valued constraint satisfaction problems (VCSPs) of
      structures that are finite or at least finite-like (in the sense that they have an oligomorphic
      automorphism group). A VCSP is parameterized by a valued structure, which consists of
      a domain and cost functions, each defined on some finite power of the domain with values
      in the semiring of rational numbers extended with positive infinity. Building on the known
      results about VCSPs on finite domains, we explore how the setting can be generalized to
      infinite domains and give some general powerful hardness and tractability conditions for the
      resilience problem.



      3.14      Polynomial-time Convergence of Datalogo over p-stable Semirings
      Hung Ngo (relationalAI – Berkeley, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Hung Ngo
       Joint work of Sungjin Im, Ben Moseley, Hung Ngo, Kirk Pruhs
      Main reference Sungjin Im, Benjamin Moseley, Hung Q. Ngo, Kirk Pruhs: “Polynomial Time Convergence of the
                     Iterative Evaluation of Datalogo Programs”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2312.14063, 2023.
                URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2312.14063


      Datalogo is an extension of Datalog that allows for aggregation and recursion over an arbitrary
      commutative semiring. Unlike Datalog, the natural iterative evaluation of some Datalogo
      programs over some semirings may not converge. It is known that the commutative semirings
      for which the iterative evaluation of Datalogo programs is guaranteed to converge are exactly
      those semirings that are stable.
          Previously, the best known upper bound on the number of iterations until convergence
      over p-stable semirings is exponential in data complexity. In this talk, we present a recent
      finding that the native iterative algorithm for Datalogo converges in polynomial time.
Guillermo Badia et al.                                                                                         101


3.15      Not all semirings are strong
Jacques Sakarovitch (IRIF, CNRS – Université Paris Cité, FR & LTCI, Télécom Paris,
IPP, FR)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Jacques Sakarovitch
Main reference Jacques Sakarovitch: “Elements of Automata Theory”. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139195218


Working with weighted automata naturally leads to the problem of the definition of the
(Kleene) star operation on the semiring of (formal power) series. And proving that rational
series are realised by weighted finite automata (one direction of the Kleene Theorem) may
require to establish the identity: (s0 + sp )∗ = (s0 )∗ (sp (s0 )∗ )∗ where s0 and sp are respectively
the “constant term” and the “proper part” of a series s.
    In my book “Elements of Automata Theory”, I gave a proof of the above identity under
the hypothesis that the weight semiring has the property that the product of two summable
families is a summable family. I called such semirings “strong” and even though all semirings
that I knew are strong, I stated the conjecture that there should exist some semirings which
are not strong.
    I have presented the problem but for want of time, I have not been able to describe the
example of a semiring which is not strong that my colleague David Madore gave me and
that will be the subject of a forthcoming publication. At least, I was able to announce the
existence of such a semiring which justifies the title.



3.16      Semiring Circuits for Sum-Product Queries
Paris Koutris (University of Wisconsin-Madison, US)
       License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Paris Koutris
 Joint work of Austen Fan, Paris Koutris, Hangdong Zhao
Main reference Austen Z. Fan, Paraschos Koutris, Hangdong Zhao: “Tight Bounds of Circuits for Sum-Product
               Queries”, Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 2(2), p. 87, 2024.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3651588


In this talk, we ask the following question: given a Boolean Conjunctive Query, what is the
smallest circuit that computes the provenance polynomial of the query over a given semiring?
We answer this question by giving upper and lower bounds. We show a circuit construction
that matches this bound when the semiring is idempotent. The techniques we use combine
several central notions in database theory: provenance polynomials, tree decompositions,
and disjunctive Datalog programs. We extend our results to lower and upper bounds for
formulas. Finally, we briefly present open problems related to circuit constructions.




                                                                                                            25081
102   25081 – Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic


      3.17      Rewriting Consistent Answers on Annotated Data and Semiring
                Circuits
      Jonni Virtema (University of Sheffield, GB)
             License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Jonni Virtema
       Joint work of Phokion G. Kolaitis, Nina Pardal, Jonni Virtema
      Main reference Phokion G. Kolaitis, Nina Pardal, Jonni Virtema: “Rewriting Consistent Answers on Annotated
                     Data”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2412.11661, 2024.
                URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2412.11661


      We study consistent answers of queries over databases annotated with values from a naturally
      ordered positive semiring. In this setting, the consistent answers of a query are defined as
      the minimum of the semiring values that the query takes over all repairs of an inconsistent
      database. The main focus is on self-join free conjunctive queries and key constraints, which is
      the most extensively studied case of consistent query answering over standard databases. We
      introduce a variant of first-order logic with a limited form of negation, define suitable semiring
      semantics, and establish that the consistent query answers of a self-join free conjunctive
      query under key constraints are rewritable in this logic if and only if the attack graph of the
      query contains no cycles. This result generalizes an analogous result of Koutris and Wijsen
      for ordinary databases, but also yields new results for a multitude of semirings, including the
      bag semiring, the tropical semiring, and the fuzzy semiring. Moreover, we relate our logic to
      particular arithmetic circuit complexity classes defined over semirings.



      3.18      When do homomorphism counts help in query algorithms?
      Balder ten Cate (University of Amsterdam, NL)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Balder ten Cate
       Joint work of Balder ten Cate, Victor Dalmau, Phokion G. Kolaitis, Wei-Lin Wu
      Main reference Balder ten Cate, Victor Dalmau, Phokion G. Kolaitis, Wei-Lin Wu: “When Do Homomorphism
                     Counts Help in Query Algorithms?”, in Proc. of the 27th International Conference on Database
                     Theory, ICDT 2024, March 25-28, 2024, Paestum, Italy, LIPIcs, Vol. 290, pp. 8:1–8:20, Schloss
                     Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
                URL https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPICS.ICDT.2024.8


      A query algorithm based on homomorphism counts is a procedure for determining whether a
      given instance satisfies a property by counting homomorphisms between the given instance
      and finitely many predetermined instances. In a left query algorithm, we count homo-
      morphisms from the predetermined instances to the given instance, while in a right query
      algorithm we count homomorphisms from the given instance to the predetermined instances.
      Homomorphisms are usually counted over the semiring N of non-negative integers; it is also
      meaningful, however, to count homomorphisms over different semirings, including the Boolean
      semiring B, where the homomorphism count indicates whether or not a homomorphism
      exists. I will present some results from joint work with Victor Dalmau, Phokion G. Kolaitis
      and Wei-Lin Wu (ICDT 2024), where we compare the relative expressive power of query
      algorithms over N and over B. One of the main results asserts that if a property is closed
      under homomorphic equivalence, then that property admits a left query algorithm over B if
      and only if it admits a left query algorithm over N.
Guillermo Badia et al.                                                                                                103


3.19      How to Bake an Uncertainty Pie: Take Even Parts of Abstract
          Interpretation, K-relations, and Zonotopes and Mix Thoroughly
Boris Glavic (University of Illinois – Chicago, US)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Boris Glavic
 Joint work of Su Feng, Boris Glavic, Oliver Kennedy, Babak Salimi
Main reference Jiongli Zhu, Su Feng, Boris Glavic, Babak Salimi: “Learning from Uncertain Data: From Possible
               Worlds to Possible Models”, in Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38:
               Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC,
               Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024, 2024.
          URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c17fab1bcef325d0d30989c9bf506c0b-Abstract-
               Conference.html


Uncertainty arises naturally due to data quality issues such as missing values, constraint
violations, and outliers. As the ground truth clean version of a dirty database is typically
not recoverable, there is a need to reason about all possible outcomes of computations over
all possible clean versions of the database and to determine which outcomes will be certainly
returned by the computation irrespective of uncertainty about the ground truth clean dataset.
These problems have been studied in reachability analysis in control theory and in the context
of certain answers and consistent query answering in databases. As both problems are known
to be computationally hard for many interesting classes of computation, there is a need for
conservative approximations: under-approximate what is certainly known to be true and
over-approximate what is possibly true. In this talk, I will introduce techniques for computing
such approximations for relational queries, yielding a query semantics for uncertain data for
full relational algebra queries with aggregation and sorting-based operations that has PTIME
data complexity and an approach for training and inference with linear models where both
the training data and test data may be dirty. On the side of over-approximating all possible
outcomes both approaches are shown to be instances of abstract interpretation, a technique
from programming languages for over-approximating a set of inputs as an element from a
so-called abstract domain and for computations in the abstract domain that preserve this
over-approximation. In the cases of relational queries, K-relations over a naturally-ordered
semiring K can be used as the abstract domain and standard K-relational query semantics is
sufficient to preserve the over-approximation. To deal with aggregation and value uncertainty,
the domain of these K-relations are intervals. In case of machine learning, the abstract
domain of zonotopes, a restricted type of convex polytopes expressed as affine transformations
of the unit hypercube, is used to encode uncertainty. This domain has the advantage of being
able to encode correlations between values, but necessitates new methods for computing
closed form solutions to models that will be briefly introduced in this talk.
References
1    Su Feng, Boris Glavic, Oliver Kennedy: Efficient Approximation of Certain and Possible
     Answers for Ranking and Window Queries over Uncertain Data, Proceedings of the VLDB
     Endowment 16(6), 1346–1358, 2023.
2    Su Feng, Boris Glavic, Aaron Huber, Oliver Kennedy: Efficient Uncertainty Tracking
     for Complex Queries with Attribute-Level Bounds, Proceedings of the 46th International
     Conference on Management of Data, 528–540, 2021.
3    Su Feng, Aaron Huber, Boris Glavic, Oliver Kennedy: Uncertainty Annotated Databases
     - a Lightweight Approach for Approximating Certain Answers, Proceedings of the 44th
     International Conference on Management of Data, 1313–1330, 2019.




                                                                                                                   25081
104   25081 – Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic


      3.20      Complete Additively Idempotent Semirings and their Applications
                in Weighted Automata Theory, Social Network Analysis and Modal
                Logics
      Miroslav Ćirić (University of Niš – Serbia, RS)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Miroslav Ćirić
       Joint work of Miroslav Ćirić, Jelena Ignjatović, vana Micić, Stefan Stanimirović, Aleksandar Stamenković, Nada
                     Damljanović, Zorana Jančić, Ivan Stanković, Jelena Matejić


      An additively-idempotent semiring is a semiring whose addition is an idempotent operation.
      In such a semiring, one can define a partial ordering, called the natural partial ordering,
      which is compatible both with addition and multiplication, and has the zero as the smallest
      element. Relative to the natural partial ordering, an additively-idempotent semiring is
      positively ordered, and besides, it forms an upper semilattice in which the binary supremum
      operation coincides with addition. In the case when that upper semilattice is complete, in
      the sense that every subset, whether finite or infinite, has a supremum, then it is convenient
      to treat infinite suprema as infinite sums, seeing that they satisfy all properties from the
      definition of infinite addition. If, in addition, infinite distributive laws hold, then we say
      that the considered semiring is a complete additively-idempotent semiring. The class of such
      semirings is quite broad and includes many important types of semirings, such as complete
      max-plus semirings, complete min-plus (tropical) semirings, as well as various semirings that
      are semiring reducts of algebras widely used in fuzzy set theory.
          The key property of complete additively-idempotent semirings is the existence of residua-
      tion, that is, the existence of a pair of binary operations adjoined to multiplication, which
      enable certain types of inequations and equations to be solved in such a semiring. In addition,
      residuation is transferred to matrices and vectors over such a semiring, which gives the
      possibility to solve various inequalities and equations involving matrices and vectors. The
      purpose of this talk is to show how residuation can be applied in solving some very important
      problems in weighted automata theory (containment and equivalence, simulations and bisim-
      ulations, state reduction), in social network analysis (positional analysis, blockmodeling) and
      modal logics.



      3.21      On the Boolean Closure of Deterministic Tree Automata
      Wolfgang Thomas (RWTH Aachen, DE)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Wolfgang Thomas
       Joint work of Christof Löding, Wolfgang Thomas
      Main reference Christof Löding, Wolfgang Thomas: “On the Boolean Closure of Deterministic Top-Down Tree
                     Automata”, Int. J. Found. Comput. Sci., Vol. 35(1&2), pp. 11–22, 2024.
                URL https://doi.org/10.1142/S0129054123480015


      The tree languages recognizable by deterministic top-down tree automata form a proper
      subclass D of the class of regular tree languages, and this proper containment also applies to
      its (strictly larger) Boolean closure BC(D). We present two results around the decades-long
      open problem whether for regular tree languages one can decide membership in BC(D). First,
      a characterization of BC(D) by a natural extension of deterministic top-down tree automata
      is presented, giving a convenient method to show that certain regular tree languages are
      outside BC(D). Secondly, it is shown that, for fixed k, it is decidable whether a regular tree
      language is a Boolean combination of k tree languages of D.
Guillermo Badia et al.                                                                                         105


 4     Open problems
4.1     Circuit Size for Reachability
Paris Koutris (University of Wisconsin-Madison, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Paris Koutris


Let Kn be the complete graph over n vertices. Consider the provenance polynomial that
sums over all simple paths from node 1 to node n in Kn , and for every path takes the product
of the weights xij of every edge {i, j} in the path. We interpret sum and product over an
absorptive semiring (absorptive means that 1 + x = 1 for every element x).
    The question is: What is the size of the smallest circuit that represents this polynomial?
We know that we can construct such a circuit of size O(n3 ) for any absorptive semiring [1].
But we do not know whether this is optimal, or whether we can show a matching lower
bound. The lower bound is open even for the case of the tropical semiring. The best lower
bound is the trivial Ω(n2 ) bound that says that we need to see all input edges.
References
1    Stasys Jukna. Lower Bounds for Tropical Circuits and Dynamic Programs, Theory Comput.
     Syst. 57(1): 160–194, 2015. DOI: 10.1007/s00224-014-9574-4



4.2     Convergence rate of Datalogo over p-stable semirings
Hung Ngo (relationalAI – Berkeley, US)
      License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Hung Ngo
Main reference Sungjin Im, Benjamin Moseley, Hung Q. Ngo, Kirk Pruhs: “Polynomial Time Convergence of the
               Iterative Evaluation of Datalogo Programs”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2312.14063, 2023.
          URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2312.14063


In the paper “Polynomial Time Convergence of the Iterative Evaluation of Datalogo Programs”
to be presented at PODS 2025, we proved that a Datalogo program converges after a
polynomial number of steps. The convergence time is roughly O(pn4 ), where n is the output
size. The best known lower bound is Ω((p + 1)n).
    The open problem is to close this gap. We think that an upper bound of O((p + 1)n) is
possible.



4.3     Subreducts of monus semirings
Paolo Aglianò (University of Siena, IT)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Paolo Aglianò


Many semirings have a natural structure of “semiring with monus”, i.e. they possess a
term operation which acts as a dual implication and it forms a residuated pair with + w.r.t.
the natural ordering. However always asking such term to be present can cause unwanted
problems with the current understanding of the theory. Of course it is possible to formulate
the definitions in such a way that a semiring with monus is an algebra (in the universal
algebraic sense). This suggests that a way out could be solving the following problem.



                                                                                                            25081
106   25081 – Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic


      ▶ Problem. Characterize those semirings that are subreducts of semirings with monus.
      Alternatively, characterize those semirings that are embeddable in a semiring with monus.

         This could be useful because
      1. from the general theory we know that this class is at least a quasivariety, so it has strong
         structural properties;
      2. the embedding allows one to use the monus operation “as if it were present”, but without
         having it interfere with the (quasi)equational properties of the class.



      4.4    Weighted First-Order Definable Languages
      Manfred Droste (Universität Leipzig, DE)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Manfred Droste
       Joint work of Manfred Droste, Paul Gastin


      ▶ Theorem. For L ⊆ Σ∗ , the following statements are equivalent.
      1. L is star-free.
      2. L is aperiodic.
      3. L is FO-definable.
      4. L is LTL-definable.

         The equivalences of statements 1 and 2, 2 and 3 respectively 3 and 4 are fundamental
      theorems of Schützenberger [1], McNaughton and Papert [2] resp. Kamp [3]. A proof of these
      and more equivalences can be found in the survey by Diekert and Gastin [4]. This raises
      the question whether analogous results hold for weighted languages s : Σ∗ → S, where S is a
      semiring.
      1′ It is still unclear how statement 1 shall be translated to the weighted setting. A star-free
         language in the classical sense is a language that can be constructed from finite languages
         using Boolean operators, including complementation, and concatenation, but no Kleene
         star. In the semiring setting, the problem arises what to do with the complement.
      2′ For statement 2, an adequate translation is already known: s is called aperiodic if s = JAK
         for some aperiodic, polynomially ambiguous NFA A. Polynomially ambiguous means
         that A shall only admit polynomially many paths for any input.
      3′ Statement (3) can be translated to: s is definable in weighted FO.
      4′ It is still open to define a suitable weighted version of LTL.

          First results on formulations of statements 1′ and 2′ and their equivalence are contained
      in [5]. An equivalence of statements 2′ and 3′ was given more recently in [6].
          There are natural formulations of a weighted LTL for which the implication 4′ implies 3′
      is straightforward. The difficulty is to obtain an equivalence. An ideal result would be a
      formulation of a weighted LTL which, possibly through the implication of 4′ implies 2′ , would
      lead to procedures for quantitative model checking, similar to the seminal developments for
      the unweighted case.
          In summary, it is still open to find adequate formulations for statements 1′ and 4′ and to
      prove or disprove their equivalence to the remaining statements.
Guillermo Badia et al.                                                                                107


References
1    M.-P. Schützenberger. On Finite Monoids Having Only Trivial Subgroups, Information and
     Control 8(2): 190–194, 1965. DOI: 10.1016/s0019-9958(65)90108-7
2    R. McNaughton and S. Papert. Counter-free Automata, Research Monograph, vol. 65, MIT
     Press, 1971.
3    J. A. W. Kamp. Tense Logic and the Theory of Linear Order, PhD Thesis, University of
     California, Los Angeles (UCLA), 1968.
4    V. Diekert and P. Gastin. First-order definable languages, Logic and Automata: History
     and Perspectives (J. Flum, E. Grädel, Th. Wilke, eds.), Amsterdam University Press, 2008,
     pp. 261–306. ISBN: 978-90-5356-576-6.
5    M. Droste and P. Gastin. On aperiodic and star-free formal power series in partially
     commuting variables, Formal Power Series and Algebraic Combinatorics (D. Krob, A. A.
     Mikhalev, A. V. Mikhalev, eds.), 12th Int. Conf., Moscow, Springer, 2000, pp. 158–169.
6    M. Droste and P. Gastin. Aperiodic weighted automata and weighted first-order logic,
     Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS 2019), LIPIcs, vol. 138, Schloss
     Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019, pp. 76:1–76:15.



4.5    Conjunctive Query Containment under Bag Semantics
Phokion G. Kolaitis (University of California – Santa Cruz, US & IBM Almaden Research
Center – San Jose, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Phokion G. Kolaitis


The conjunctive query containment problem asks: given two conjunctive queries q and q ′ of
the same arities, is it true that on every relational database D, it holds that q(D) ⊆ q ′ (D)?
    In 1977, Chandra and Merlin showed that, for standard relational databases, this problem
is NP-complete [1]. In 1993, Chaudhuri and Vardi raised the question of whether or not
the conjunctive query containment problem is decidable for bag databases, i.e., when the
databases considered are databases over the semiring (N, +, ×, 0, 1) of the natural numbers [2].
In spite of concerted efforts by several different groups of researchers, the conjunctive query
containment problem for bag databases remains open to date. It is known, however, that it
the containment problem for bag databases becomes undecidable if slightly larger classes of
queries are considered, such as unions of conjunctive queries [3] or conjunctive queries that
include negated equalities as atoms [4].
    It should be noted that the conjunctive query containment problem is also meaningful
for databases over naturally ordered semirings. Results concerning the decidability and
complexity of this problem over such semirings have been obtained by T. J. Green in 2011 [5]
and by Kostylev, Reutter, and Salamon in 2014 [6].
References
1    A. K. Chandra and P. M. Merlin. Optimal implementation of conjunctive queries in relational
     data bases, STOC 1977: 77–90. DOI: 10.1145/800105.803397
2    S. Chaudhuri and M. Y. Vardi. Optimization of Real Conjunctive Queries, PODS 1993:
     59–70. DOI: 10.1145/153850.153856
3    Y. E. Ioannidis and R. Ramakrishnan. Containment of Conjunctive Queries: Beyond Rela-
     tions as Sets, ACM Trans. Database Syst. 20(3): 288–324, 1995. DOI: 10.1145/211414.211419
4    T. S. Jayram, P. G. Kolaitis, E. Vee. The Containment Problem for Real Conjunctive
     Queries with Inequalities, PODS 2006: 80–89. DOI: 10.1145/1142351.1142363




                                                                                                   25081
108   25081 – Semirings in Databases, Automata, and Logic


      5   T. J. Green. Containment of Conjunctive Queries on Annotated Relations, Theory Comput.
          Syst. 49(2): 429–459, 2011. DOI: 10.1007/s00224-011-9327-6
      6   E. V. Kostylev, J. L. Reutter, A. Z. Salamon. Classification of Annotation Semirings over
          Containment of Conjunctive Queries, ACM Trans. Database Syst. 39(1): 1:1–1:39, 2014.
          DOI: 10.1145/2556524
Guillermo Badia et al.                                                                                 109


        Participants
 Samson Abramsky                    Boris Glavic                     Carles Noguera
University College London, GB    University of Illinois –         University of Siena, IT
 Paolo Aglianò                   Chicago, US                         Nina Pardal
University of Siena, IT             Erich Grädel                  University of Huddersfield, GB
                                 RWTH Aachen, DE                     Erik Paul
  Antoine Amarilli
Inria Lille – Nord Europe, FR       Marcel Jackson                Universität Leipzig, DE
                                 La Trobe University –               Vitaly Perevoshchikov
 Albert Atserias                 Bundoora, AU
UPC Barcelona Tech, ES                                            Herrischried, DE
                                    Phokion G. Kolaitis
  Guillermo Badia                                                    Gaia Petreni
                                 University of California –
University of Queensland –                                        University of Siena, IT
                                 Santa Cruz, US & IBM Almaden
Brisbane, AU                     Research Center – San Jose, US      Jacques Sakarovitch
 Johanna Björklund                  Peter Kostolányi              IRIF, CNRS – Université Paris
University of Umeå, SE           Comenius University –            Cité, FR & LTCI, Télécom Paris,
                                 Bratislava, SK                   IPP, FR
 Camille Bourgaux
CNRS & ENS – Paris, FR              Egor Kostylev                    Žaneta Semanišinová
                                 University of Oslo, NO           TU Dresden, DE
 Sophie Brinke
RWTH Aachen, DE                     Paris Koutris                    Dan Suciu
                                 University of Wisconsin-         University of Washington –
 Silvia Butti                                                     Seattle, US
University of Oxford, GB         Madison, US
                                    Tomasz Kowalski                  Val Tannen
 Miroslav Ćirić                                                   University of Pennsylvania –
                                 Jagiellonian University –
University of Niš – Serbia, RS                                    Philadelphia, US
                                 Kraków, PL
 Víctor Dalmau                      Dietrich Kuske                   Balder ten Cate
UPF – Barcelona, ES              TU Ilmenau, DE                   University of Amsterdam, NL
 Frank Drewes                       Filip Mazowiecki                 Wolfgang Thomas
University of Umeå, SE           University of Warsaw, PL         RWTH Aachen, DE
 Manfred Droste                     Lovro Mrkonjić                   Sara Ugolini
Universität Leipzig, DE          RWTH Aachen, DE                  IIIA–CSIC – Bellaterra, ES
 Thomas Eiter                       Hung Ngo                         Jonni Virtema
TU Wien, AT                      relationalAI – Berkeley, US      University of Sheffield, GB




                                                                                                    25081
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25082

Visualizing Data on Non-Flat, Non-Rectangular Displays
Anastasia Bezerianos∗1 , Raimund Dachselt∗2 , Wesley J. Willett∗3 ,
and Ricardo Langner†4
1       Université Paris-Saclay, INRIA, CNRS, FR.
        anastasia.bezerianos@universite-paris-saclay.fr
2       Technische Universität Dresden, DE. raimund.dachselt@tu-dresden.de
3       University of Calgary, CA. wj@wjwillett.net
4       Technische Universität Dresden, DE. ricardo.langner@tu-dresden.de

        Abstract
Experiences with data, visualization, and computing more broadly are mediated via flat, rect-
angular displays. However, an exciting range of new display technologies, including flexible,
spherical, physical, and even robotic and drone-based displays, have recently emerged and are
increasingly commercially available. These novel types of displays offer new ways to represent,
explore, communicate, and share data, yet there is very little understanding of how to best utilize
these novel form factors for data visualizations. This Dagstuhl Seminar aimed to escape from the
display flatland that characterizes research in visualization, and to create a roadmap for future
research on interactive non-flat displays. Bringing together researchers from data visualization,
human-computer interaction, ubiquitous computing, tangible interaction, mobile and wearable
technologies, and design, we surveyed the landscape of emerging technologies, ideated future
opportunities for visualization on non-flat displays, and outlined a common research agenda for
this emerging area.
Seminar February 16–21, 2025 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/25082
2012 ACM Subject Classification Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction
   (HCI); Human-centered computing → Visualization; Hardware → Emerging technologies
Keywords and phrases data visualization, design and evaluation, human-computer interaction,
   non-flat non-rectangular displays, visualizations beyond the desktop
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.2.110



    1    Executive Summary
Anastasia Bezerianos (Université Paris-Saclay, INRIA, CNRS, FR)
Raimund Dachselt (Technische Universität Dresden, DE)
Wesley J. Willett (University of Calgary, CA)
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, and Wesley J. Willett


The physical screens that we consider when creating visualizations for representing data,
making decisions with this data, and learning about our environment – mobile phones
and tablets, desktops, or even large wall or table displays – are predominantly flat and
rectangular. Nevertheless, technology companies are actively pursuing a wide range of new
display technologies, including curved displays, bendable displays, spherical displays, light
field displays, cube displays, physical pin-based displays, foldable phones, and even robotic


∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector



            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Visualizing Data on Non-Flat, Non-Rectangular Displays, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15, Issue 2, pp. 110–125
Editors: Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, Wesley J. Willett, and Ricardo Langner
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, Wesley J. Willett, and Ricardo Langner                        111


and drone displays. Yet to date, visualization researchers and practitioners have not deeply
considered the true potential for these new form factors, nor their challenges when it comes
to communicating data.
    This Dagstuhl Seminar brought together a diverse set of visualization and human-computer
interaction researchers to outline an agenda for visualization on interactive non-flat displays
and prepare the visualization research community for a future in which data displays become
richer, more interactive, and more deeply embedded in environments. To that end, the
seminar paired state-of-the-art talks and show-and-tell activities designed to build familiarity
with a wider range of novel display technologies with ideation and design futuring sessions
focused on envisioning their visualization potential.
    Initial presentations included overviews of a range of new enabling technologies, including
light field displays, shape-changing surfaces, and robotic displays, along with late-breaking
work in situated visualization and data physicalization. Show-and-tell sessions also featured a
diversity of physical and digital display types, with participants demonstrating novel research
prototypes and commercial displays that push the limits of current display technologies. To
push our vision of possible non-flat visualizations further, seminar participants then engaged
in a series of design futuring activities, using both traditional sketching and generative
AI tools to envision and elaborate possible future displays, visualizations, and scenarios.
Building upon these generative activities, participants then worked together to identify and
connect key research opportunities and challenges for visualization on non-flat displays, laying
the groundwork for a research agenda for the field and also identifying a variety of targeted
follow-up projects.




                                                                                                   25082
112   25082 – Visualizing Data on Non-Flat, Non-Rectangular Displays


       2       Table of Contents
      Executive Summary
        Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, and Wesley J. Willett . . . . . . . . . . 110

      Structure of the Seminar
           Week at a Glance
           Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, and Wesley J. Willett . . . . . . . . . . 114

      Overview of Talks
           An Overview of Light Field Displays
           Emmanuel Pietriga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
           Situated Visualization & Physicalization
           Nathalie Bressa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
           Visualization Futures
           Wesley J. Willett . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
           Democratizing the Design and Development of Emerging Technologies
           Aluna Everitt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
           AR × Human-Robot Interaction
           Ryo Suzuki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118

      State-of-the-Art Groups
           Interaction & HCI
           Caroline Appert, Raimund Dachselt, Ricardo Langner, and Can Liu . . . . . . . . . 118
           Perception, Design, and Vis
           Lyn Bartram, Anastasia Bezerianos, Tanja Blascheck, Pierre Dragicevic, Petra
           Isenberg, and Bongshin Lee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
           Data Physicalization & Shape-Changing Displays
           Lora Oehlberg, Nathalie Bressa, Aluna Everitt, Yvonne Jansen, Konstantin Klamka,
           Charles Perin, Kim Sauvé, and Miriam Sturdee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
           AR/MR/XR Visualization
           Tobias Isenberg, Emmanuel Pietriga, Ryo Suzuki, Wesley J. Willett, and Julie
           Williamson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120

      Grand Challenges Working Groups
           What is the scope of visualization on non-flat non-rectangular displays (NFNRD)?
           Julie Williamson, Nathalie Bressa, Pierre Dragicevic, Yvonne Jansen, Konstantin
           Klamka, Lora Oehlberg, Emmanuel Pietriga, Kim Sauvé, Miriam Sturdee, Ryo
           Suzuki, and Wesley J. Willett . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
           Display and input technologies
           Caroline Appert, Pierre Dragicevic, Tobias Isenberg, Ricardo Langner, Can Liu,
           and Ryo Suzuki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
           Applications: What is the benefit of visualizing data on NFNRD?
           Tanja Blascheck, Caroline Appert, Aluna Everitt, Petra Isenberg, Tobias Isenberg,
           and Can Liu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, Wesley J. Willett, and Ricardo Langner                          113


   Relationship between data and displays
   Anastasia Bezerianos, Lyn Bartram, Raimund Dachselt, Konstantin Klamka, Ri-
   cardo Langner, Charles Perin, and Julie Williamson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
   Design approaches for NFNRD visualizations
   Kim Sauvé, Nathalie Bressa, Raimund Dachselt, Lora Oehlberg, Charles Perin, and
   Miriam Sturdee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
   Evaluating visualizations on NFNRD
   Lyn Bartram, Anastasia Bezerianos, Tanja Blascheck, Petra Isenberg, and Em-
   manuel Pietriga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124

Outlook and Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125




                                                                                                     25082
114   25082 – Visualizing Data on Non-Flat, Non-Rectangular Displays


          3    Structure of the Seminar
      3.1      Week at a Glance
      Anastasia Bezerianos (Université Paris-Saclay, INRIA, CNRS, FR)
      Raimund Dachselt (Technische Universität Dresden, DE)
      Wesley J. Willett (University of Calgary, CA)

      Monday
      The seminar was opened by the organizers with an introduction to the topic of data
      visualization on non-flat non-rectangular displays (NFNRD), by presenting objectives and
      potential outcomes, and by providing organizational information. This was followed by a
      fast-paced self-introduction of all participants, where each person was giving a lightning talk
      about their background, relation to the seminar’s topic, and expectations from the seminar.
          An important activity to connect people and to foster collaboration was the research
      speed-dating conducted before and after lunch in two rounds. One half of the seminar
      participants was seated, while the half rotated in five minute time-slots to quickly brainstorm
      and discuss potential joint research. This activity helped bring together people in a fast-paced
      and focused fashion while also seeding follow-up paper activities.
          Altogether, we scheduled five invited overview talks at the first three days to introduce a
      particular related topic area from the perspective of one expert participant. In the afternoon,
      Emmanuel Pietriga started with the first talk on the topic “An overview of (Wearable) Light
      Field Displays” (see Sec. 4.1).
          The final scheduled activity of the day was a group activity elicitating the state-of-the-art
      of visualization beyond flat, rectangular display from four different topic lenses:
          Interaction and HCI (see Sec. 5.1)
          Perception, Design, and Visualization (see Sec. 5.2)
          Data Physicalization & Shape-Changing Displays (see Sec. 5.3)
          AR/MR/XR Visualization (see Sec. 5.4)

      Tuesday
      The second day of the seminar was started with the second overview talk given by Nathalie
      Bressa on the topic “Situated Visualization & Physicalization” (see Sec. 4.2). Afterwards, all
      state-of-the-art groups from the previous day reported back on their findings and informed
      all other seminar participants about the key research contributions, advances, publications,
      research venues, and community activities in the respective area.
          An important activity central to the seminar’s core objective of creating innovative designs
      and envisioning novel visualization approaches was the show-and-tell session conducted in two
      rounds before lunch. Many participants brought their own demos, early research prototypes,
      videos, material probes, and sketches to let others experience and discuss inspiring research
      ideas (see Fig. 1).
          After lunch, Wesley Willett gave the third overview talk on “Visualization Futures” (see
      Sec. 4.3). This was intended as a starting point for the following afternoon group activities,
      two design futuring sessions. Here, participants split into six smaller groups and used the
      card-based sketching game “Vis Futures”1 , where players think critically (and playfully)


      1
          https://dataexperience.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/visfutures/
Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, Wesley J. Willett, and Ricardo Langner                         115




    Figure 1 The Tuesday show-and-tell session allowing participates to showcase, experience, and
discuss latest research prototypes, materials, and ideas.


about the future of data and visualization. Using sketches, AI-generated images, videos, and
small physical prototypes, a series of innovative design ideas was developed and presented
in a plenary to all seminar participants. Groups explored diverse concepts ranging from
visualization on deformable shape-changing displays to vegetable bio-displays, textile and
garment displays, foldable displays, and water displays.

Wednesday
The first part of the morning was spent on two more overview talks concluding the series.
First, Aluna Everitt talked about “Democratizing the Design and Development of Emerging
Technologies” (see Sec. 4.4), followed by a surveying talk on the topic of “AR x Human-
Robot Interaction” given by Ryo Suzuki (see Sec. 4.5). Of course, we also followed the great
tradition of a group picture on the castle’s staircase (see p. 125).
    To generate breakout groups for discussing the grand challenges of visualization for
NFNRD, all attendees spent the remaining time before lunch brainstormed critical topics,
challenges, and technologies. We then used affinity diagramming and clustering to consolidate
these ideas (see Fig. 2, middle, for some of the resulting post-it groups).
    After assigning people to six breakout groups based on the emergent themes from the
clustering exercise, we enjoyed lunch followed by a social activity with many research-related
and personal discussions, a bus trip to the city of Trier. There, we participated in a guided
tour of the historic city and had a Roman-inspired dinner at the restaurant “Zum Domstein”,
which enabled new bonds to be forged between the participants.

Thursday
This day saw intense and deep scientific discussions across several breakout group work
sessions. Spread over the whole day and with reporting-back sessions in between (see, for
example, Fig. 2), the discussion centered around the following topics:
   What is the scope of visualization on NFNRD? (11 participants, see Sec. 6.1)
    Display and input technologies (6 participants, see Sec. 6.2)
    Applications: What is the benefit of visualizing data on NFNRD? (6 part., see Sec. 6.3)
    Relationship between data and displays (7 participants, see Sec. 6.4)
    Designing visualizations for NFNRD (6 participants, see Sec. 6.5)
    Evaluating visualizations on NFNRD (5 participants, see Sec. 6.6)



                                                                                                    25082
116   25082 – Visualizing Data on Non-Flat, Non-Rectangular Displays




         Figure 2 People from the scoping breakout group reporting back to all participants.


          Some groups discussed the same topics across several sessions, but with shifting group
      members. The summaries provided in Sec. 6 provide an aggregated overview of the major
      findings that, taken together, lay the foundations for a research agenda with challenges and
      opportunities.

      Friday
      The entire morning was spent wrapping up the seminar. First, six concrete research projects
      and publication ideas that emerged during the past days were openly discussed among
      participants, along with potential publication venues, such as IEEE VIS, ACM CHI, IEEE
      TVCG, and others. Second, a bigger joint publication on the challenges of data visualization
      on non-flat, non-rectangular displays was discussed and sketched in its structure. We agreed
      on further steps and publication venues. Especially with this second effort, we aim to outline
      a comprehensive research agenda for data visualization on these emerging display types. This
      shall enable other researchers and practitioners in the fields of visualization, HCI and visual
      design to develop future data visualization solutions for these new form factors – thereby
      going beyond display flatland.
Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, Wesley J. Willett, and Ricardo Langner                           117


 4     Overview of Talks
4.1    An Overview of Light Field Displays
Emmanuel Pietriga (INRIA Saclay – Orsay, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Emmanuel Pietriga


I presented an overview of light field displays by first introducing light field photography. Light
field displays enable virtual content to be rendered at different focal depths simultaneously
and are particularly interesting for Augmented Reality. They enable blending virtual content
with the physical world, as the light from virtual elements behaves similar to the light from
the physical environment. It also has the potential to solve the vergence accommodation
conflict. Virtual content is not limited to a single focal plane and can also be rendered much
closer to the user’s eyes. Light field displays are still in their infancy, and I talked about the
visual perception studies we are running to better understand their potential benefits.



4.2    Situated Visualization & Physicalization
Nathalie Bressa (Télécom Paris, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Nathalie Bressa


Situated visualization is an area within information visualization that focuses on placing
data visualizations in physical places to display contextually relevant information that can
be related to people, places, or objects. Physicalizations, on the other hand, are physical
artifacts that encode data through their geometry or material properties. In this talk, I
provided an overview of these two concepts and highlighted their connections and overlap.
By discussing a diverse set of examples of situated visualizations and physicalizations, I
aimed to inspire new ideas for visualization on non-flat, non-rectangular displays.



4.3    Visualization Futures
Wesley J. Willett (University of Calgary, CA)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Wesley J. Willett


Together, let’s consider visualization futures — imagining possible and probable future
technologies, probing their implications, and using them as inspiration for visualization
research. This talk highlights the potential for design futuring to (1) draw ideas from existing
science fiction and speculative media, (2) craft new future visions that explore, provoke, and
critique, and (3) articulate new trajectories, frameworks, and theories for data visualization as
a field. Using the Vis Futures card deck, plus a range of generative and manual design tools,
we’ll also ideate and elaborate new visualizations for a variety of novel display platforms.




                                                                                                      25082
118   25082 – Visualizing Data on Non-Flat, Non-Rectangular Displays


      4.4    Democratizing the Design and Development of Emerging
             Technologies
      Aluna Everitt (University of Canterbury – Christchurch, NZ)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Aluna Everitt


      My research focuses on democratizing the development of emerging technologies. More
      specifically, by establishing accessible approaches for designing and building emerging tech-
      nologies such as robotics, wearables, and shape-changing interfaces. To advance the field, my
      research focuses not only on understanding these technologies (e.g., their design), but also
      how to build them (e.g., engineer them), and how to innovate with them (e.g., application).
      In this talk, I will go over some of the projects I have worked on around this topic across the
      fields of HCI, Design, and Engineering.



      4.5    AR × Human-Robot Interaction
      Ryo Suzuki (University of Colorado – Boulder, US & Tohoku University – Sendai, JP)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Ryo Suzuki


      In this talk, I gave an overview of research examples and a taxonomy of augmented reality
      and robotics based on my CHI 2022 paper. Augmented and mixed reality (AR/MR) have
      emerged as a new way to enhance human-robot interaction (HRI) and robotic interfaces (e.g.,
      actuated and shape-changing interfaces). Recently, an increasing number of studies in HCI,
      HRI, and robotics have demonstrated how AR enables better interactions between people
      and robots. However, often research remains focused on individual explorations and key
      design strategies, and research questions are rarely analyzed systematically. In this paper,
      we synthesize and categorize this research field in the following dimensions: 1) approaches to
      augmenting reality; 2) characteristics of robots; 3) purposes and benefits; 4) classification
      of presented information; 5) design components and strategies for visual augmentation;
      6) interaction techniques and modalities; 7) application domains; and 8) evaluation strategies.
      We formulate key challenges and opportunities to guide and inform future research in AR
      and robotics.



       5     State-of-the-Art Groups
      5.1    Interaction & HCI
      Caroline Appert (University Paris-Saclay – Orsay, FR), Raimund Dachselt (Technische
      Universität Dresden, DE), Ricardo Langner (Technische Universität Dresden, DE), and Can
      Liu (City University – Hong Kong, HK)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Caroline Appert, Raimund Dachselt, Ricardo Langner, and Can Liu


      This working group conducted a quick survey of the current state of the art for interacting
      with visualizations. Looking from an HCI perspective on what has been researched in the
      past, we first identified several interaction modalities, including, but not limited to, mouse
Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, Wesley J. Willett, and Ricardo Langner                                    119


and keyboard, touch and multitouch, pen, tangibles, eye gaze, mid-air gestures (hand), spatial
interaction and device gestures, embodied interaction, speech, twisting, bending, deformation,
proxemic interaction, and any multimodal combination thereof. Many of these modalities
have already been applied in visualization research, especially in the past 15 years, with an
increasing number of papers devoted to natural interaction or Post-WIMP interaction for
visualization, sometimes characterized as visualization beyond the desktop. We provided
several examples from the literature for each category, identified gaps, and discussed the
potential. Touch input on arbitrarily shaped surfaces is still not easy, pen interaction has
rarely been applied to curved surfaces, speech and multimodal interaction including speech
would be a good candidate for interacting with unusual displays, and twisting, bending,
deformation, etc. are still very underexplored in vis research. This situation will likely change
with non-flat, non-rectangular displays being increasingly used for data visualization.



5.2    Perception, Design, and Vis
Lyn Bartram (Simon Fraser University – Surrey, CA), Anastasia Bezerianos (Université
Paris-Saclay, INRIA, CNRS, FR), Tanja Blascheck (Universität Stuttgart, DE), Pierre
Dragicevic (INRIA – Bordeaux, FR), Petra Isenberg (INRIA Saclay – Orsay, FR), and
Bongshin Lee (Yonsei University – Seoul, KR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Lyn Bartram, Anastasia Bezerianos, Tanja Blascheck, Pierre Dragicevic, Petra Isenberg, and
                Bongshin Lee


This group presented trends in visualization on “atypical” display forms, and atypical use
(atypical for visualization research and design) to inform participants from outside the
visualization community about relevant work related to the seminar. We noted existing
visual perception work on very large displays (walls) and very small ones (smartwatches) that
can be applied to study novel form factors for visualization. However, we also highlighted
atypical “use”,including aspects that go beyond classic visualization tasks, designs, and
evaluation methodologies, such as affective responses not only due to the visual encoding but
also due to the display form and context of visualization use; aspects related to glanceability
(mostly from work on smartwatches), etc. We additionally summarized situations in which
visualizations have appeared on atypical “forms.” Some are extensions of classic displays,
like combining mobile phones and tablets or combining them with digital tables to create
new forms and configurations for data visualization, adding flexible displays as bands on
smartwatches and extending the visualization surfaces, etc. Others are forms rarely used
for visualization, such as drone displays that can fly, spherical displays (from big room
installations to small hand-size spheres), flexible or pin-array displays used to visualize data,
ambient displays embedded in the environment, and more generally situated visualizations.




                                                                                                               25082
120   25082 – Visualizing Data on Non-Flat, Non-Rectangular Displays


      5.3    Data Physicalization & Shape-Changing Displays
      Lora Oehlberg (University of Calgary, CA), Nathalie Bressa (Télécom Paris, FR), Aluna
      Everitt (University of Canterbury – Christchurch, NZ), Yvonne Jansen (CNRS – Talence,
      FR), Konstantin Klamka (Barkhausen Institut – Dresden, DE), Charles Perin (University of
      Victoria, CA), Kim Sauvé (University of the West of England – Bristol, GB), and Miriam
      Sturdee (University of St Andrews, GB)
            License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Lora Oehlberg, Nathalie Bressa, Aluna Everitt, Yvonne Jansen, Konstantin Klamka, Charles
                      Perin, Kim Sauvé, and Miriam Sturdee


      We presented a summary of relevant resources on data physicalizations and shape-changing
      displays. Data physicalizations (DP) are physical representations of data; shape-changing
      displays (SCD) are dynamic physical displays that can represent varying types of data or
      information. We summarized research venues that approach these topics from the perspectives
      of visualization, human-computer interaction, and enabling technologies (systems engineering).
      We also highlight communities beyond academia that apply or practice data physicalization or
      shape-changing displays within their domain. We then discussed relevant research publications
      that address key research questions, including: what the design space of DP and SCD looks
      like; how to design and build DP and SCD; what are the “platforms” that designers use to
      define data physically; how we encode data physically; how people interact with physical
      properties; what is the role of the audience of a DP or SCD. Finally, we discussed example
      systems and enabling technologies that make data physicalizations and shape-changing
      displays possible, including digital fabrication approaches and meta-materials.



      5.4    AR/MR/XR Visualization
      Tobias Isenberg (INRIA Saclay – Orsay, FR), Emmanuel Pietriga (INRIA Saclay – Orsay,
      FR), Ryo Suzuki (University of Colorado – Boulder, US & Tohoku University – Sendai, JP),
      Wesley J. Willett (University of Calgary, CA), and Julie Williamson (University of Glasgow,
      GB)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Tobias Isenberg, Emmanuel Pietriga, Ryo Suzuki, Wesley J. Willett, and Julie Williamson


      This group presented a summary of related work on mixed/augmented/extended reality (XR)
      visualization approaches and enabling technologies. We first summarized the visualization,
      immersive technology, and computer graphics venues around which this research is centered.
      Next we outlined a slate of recent innovations in XR hardware that have substantially
      reduced barriers to creating rich, complex and usable XR visualization systems, including:
      (1) untethered headsets, (2) table tracking in real-world settings, (3) high-resolution video
      passthrough, (4) fine-grained hand tracking, and (5) live environment mapping. We then
      highlighted a variety of recent design spaces and example systems that represent the state-of-
      the-art in XR visualization.
Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, Wesley J. Willett, and Ricardo Langner                                      121


 6     Grand Challenges Working Groups
Identifying grand-challenges in emerging research topics, such as visualization on non-flat
displays, is crucial to help identify and articulate the most pressing questions and guide
future research efforts. To inspire discussions and reflection, we first conducted a series of
design futuring exercises, using an established ideation methodology (Vis Future Cards).
These produced a suite of novel designs for visualizations built for shape-changing, evolving,
wearable, and natural material displays; as well as discussions around opportunities such
displays provide for data communication, sharing, and engaging with data. Inspired by
these reflections and the prior work, the seminar participants then conducted a series of
brainstorming sessions about challenges, opportunities and open research questions. We then
thematically analyzed the resulting ideas and grouped them in categories that represent the
major challenges in the domain. Breakout working groups explored these topics and started
creating an analysis that we plan to publish as a grand challenges / research agenda report.
In the following sections, we provide abstracts for these working groups.
    These include: determining the scope of research on the domain; exploring display
technologies and interaction techniques that may fit the display form forms; identifying what
visualizations and tasks such displays will be best used for (application contexts); considering
the tight relationship between data and display and how they can each influence the other;
adapting existing visualization design and prototyping methodologies for displays that are
non-flat and whose form may need to fit the environment; and finally evaluation challenges
and opportunities to determine how we read but also how we engage with visualizations on
them given that these displays do not only encode data but also need to fit their environment.



6.1    What is the scope of visualization on non-flat non-rectangular
       displays (NFNRD)?
Julie Williamson (University of Glasgow, GB), Nathalie Bressa (Télécom Paris, FR), Pierre
Dragicevic (INRIA – Bordeaux, FR), Yvonne Jansen (CNRS – Talence, FR), Konstantin
Klamka (Barkhausen Institut – Dresden, DE), Lora Oehlberg (University of Calgary, CA),
Emmanuel Pietriga (INRIA Saclay – Orsay, FR), Kim Sauvé (University of the West
of England – Bristol, GB), Miriam Sturdee (University of St Andrews, GB), Ryo Suzuki
(University of Colorado – Boulder, US & Tohoku University – Sendai, JP), and Wesley J.
Willett (University of Calgary, CA)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Julie Williamson, Nathalie Bressa, Pierre Dragicevic, Yvonne Jansen, Konstantin Klamka, Lora
                Oehlberg, Emmanuel Pietriga, Kim Sauvé, Miriam Sturdee, Ryo Suzuki, and Wesley J. Willett


Recent years have seen an increase of visualization research that goes beyond desktop displays,
this include visualization on mobile devices, physicalization, and immersive visualization
using augmented reality technology. We focused on articulating the difference of the work
targeted in this seminar from that prior work. Our focus targets dynamic and interactive
visualizations, on physical displays that are not flat but rather have forms that integrate
/ fit their environment. These characteristics suggest that such displays allow embedding
data in context (for example, in locations where the data is relevant) and can support more
expressive, immediate, and powerful interactions. And they allow experiencing data in person
rather than via a window into another place, as is the case of flat displays. Other work groups
elaborated on the benefits of such displays as well as open challenges and opportunities. After




                                                                                                                 25082
122   25082 – Visualizing Data on Non-Flat, Non-Rectangular Displays


      defining the nature of these displays and visualizations built for them, we then considered the
      challenges they pose. These include how to promote displays and visualization use cases that
      minimize material and other resources (specialized material which may limit their life-cycle,
      energy use, sustainability, development cost), as well as ethical considerations (for example,
      ensuring equity, access, privacy, etc.).



      6.2    Display and input technologies
      Caroline Appert (University Paris-Saclay – Orsay, FR), Pierre Dragicevic (INRIA – Bordeaux,
      FR), Tobias Isenberg (INRIA Saclay – Orsay, FR), Ricardo Langner (Technische Universität
      Dresden, DE), Can Liu (City University – Hong Kong, HK), and Ryo Suzuki (University of
      Colorado – Boulder, US & Tohoku University – Sendai, JP)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Caroline Appert, Pierre Dragicevic, Tobias Isenberg, Ricardo Langner, Can Liu, and Ryo Suzuki


      We identified possible broad categories of displays that fit our scope of non-flat non-rectangular
      displays. These include real 3D displays (such as volumetric systems or 3D LED arrays),
      non-deformable [non-flat or non-rectangular] displays, deformable displays (including actu-
      ated, bendable, and foldable variants), modular (compound) displays made up of several
      components that can be rearranged, wearable or fabric displays, as well as everyday objects
      as displays. In addition to these form factors, we consider challenges related to materials,
      resolution, durability and energy consumption. The interactions appropriate for these dis-
      plays are very much an open research topic. We have identified several input technologies
      that either exist or can be envisioned for such displays, such as on-surface input (via touch
      or tools) or off-surface input (mid-air gestures, speech, or proxemics). A first open research
      question is categorizing these possible inputs and studying good matches between input
      and type of display. Nevertheless, the details of how input is going to be translated to
      “interactions” (the words or commands that target and manipulate visualizations) depends
      on the type of visualizations and data presented on them.



      6.3    Applications: What is the benefit of visualizing data on NFNRD?
      Tanja Blascheck (Universität Stuttgart, DE), Caroline Appert (University Paris-Saclay –
      Orsay, FR), Aluna Everitt (University of Canterbury – Christchurch, NZ), Petra Isenberg
      (INRIA Saclay – Orsay, FR), Tobias Isenberg (INRIA Saclay – Orsay, FR), and Can Liu
      (City University – Hong Kong, HK)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Tanja Blascheck, Caroline Appert, Aluna Everitt, Petra Isenberg, Tobias Isenberg, and Can Liu


      As NFNRDs can vary greatly in form and size, identifying when data visualization on
      NFNRDs makes sense (and what benefits it might provide) requires taking a step back
      and considering the possible contexts of use. We considered several dimensions that define
      this context of use: application types (public / private, stationary /mobile), audience (data
      specialists / general public, single person / collaborative use), tasks (ambient / focus), etc.
      Clearly not all display types (identified in the previous working group) fit all contexts of
      use. We considered possible matches and identified a grand challenge focued on the interplay
      between application (purpose and context of the visualization), data, and displays.
Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, Wesley J. Willett, and Ricardo Langner                                  123


6.4    Relationship between data and displays
Anastasia Bezerianos (Université Paris-Saclay, INRIA, CNRS, FR), Lyn Bartram (Simon
Fraser University – Surrey, CA), Raimund Dachselt (Technische Universität Dresden, DE),
Konstantin Klamka (Barkhausen Institut – Dresden, DE), Ricardo Langner (Technische
Universität Dresden, DE), Charles Perin (University of Victoria, CA), and Julie Williamson
(University of Glasgow, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Anastasia Bezerianos, Lyn Bartram, Raimund Dachselt, Konstantin Klamka, Ricardo Langner,
                Charles Perin, and Julie Williamson


Having access to displays that can be of diverse forms and sizes raises several research
questions around how to display data on them. These start from visualization mapping and
resolution questions – what we call “how the data follows the display”. For example, how can
visualizations designed for a flat rectangular screen be rendered on other types of displays,
such as a sphere or a cylinder? More generally, can we render any visualization on any
display form and, if not, what are the limits we encounter (resolution, occlusion, etc)? Other
questions relate to how the nature of the data can influence the display, or “how the display
follows the data”. These observations highlight how designers might allow data to shape the
form of actuated or shape-changing displays. We articulated the connection between data
and displays and collected a set of opportunities and research challenges on this topic.



6.5    Design approaches for NFNRD visualizations
Kim Sauvé (University of the West of England – Bristol, GB), Nathalie Bressa (Télécom Paris,
FR), Raimund Dachselt (Technische Universität Dresden, DE), Lora Oehlberg (University of
Calgary, CA), Charles Perin (University of Victoria, CA), and Miriam Sturdee (University
of St Andrews, GB)
      License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Kim Sauvé, Nathalie Bressa, Raimund Dachselt, Lora Oehlberg, Charles Perin, and Miriam
                Sturdee


But how do we go about designing visualizations for such displays? Traditional sketching
and paper prototyping methods are not enough, as they do not capture the subtleties of
displaying information on forms that may distort visuals (see also subsection 6.6) or may
be hard to envision on a two dimensional medium such as paper. We collected factors that
make NFNRD hard to design for and considered different existing design methods, such
as physical prototyping, and how these could be adapted for creating initial designs. We
additionally reflected on the use of these displays, as their purpose is to be more integrated
than flat displays, exploring how they could be perceived in their intended context of use is
important. And thus how our design methods could ensure the context of use is taken into
account even at the early stages.




                                                                                                             25082
124   25082 – Visualizing Data on Non-Flat, Non-Rectangular Displays


      6.6    Evaluating visualizations on NFNRD
      Lyn Bartram (Simon Fraser University – Surrey, CA), Anastasia Bezerianos (Université
      Paris-Saclay, INRIA, CNRS, FR), Tanja Blascheck (Universität Stuttgart, DE), Petra
      Isenberg (INRIA Saclay – Orsay, FR), and Emmanuel Pietriga (INRIA Saclay – Orsay, FR)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Lyn Bartram, Anastasia Bezerianos, Tanja Blascheck, Petra Isenberg, and Emmanuel Pietriga


      Given the diverse and unpredictable form factors and sizes of NFNRD, it is important to
      evaluate how visualizations are read on them. The topic of evaluation is challenging as there
      are several factors that need to be considered – including the form of the display and the
      context of use. The form needs to be considered from a readability / perception perspective,
      in other words we need to validate if information can be correctly read and understood, as
      aspects like curvature, angle, etc. may affect visualization reading. Traditional user-study
      methods will likely be enough in these instances. But we additionally need to consider
      evaluating the context of use and of display placement. It is possible that data engagement
      will be higher with displays of unusual form factors or form factors that have forms fitting
      the environment. Investigating and evaluating engagement and affective responses requires
      different study methods, such as longitudinal observation studies or controlled studies that
      capture measures beyond time and error. Our group listed a set of relevant study methods,
      measures, and logistics



       7     Outlook and Conclusion
      Throughout the week, our group grappled with the vast scale, potential, and implications
      for visualization as new display technologies allow us to escape the narrow confines and
      constraints of 2D screens. The diversity and heterogeneity of future display technologies
      that might support data visualization is vast and complex – to the extent that they simple
      generalizations. Yet within this rich space, our seminar succeeded in identifying not only a
      range of clear challenges and opportunities for the visualization research community, but also
      a set of promising near-term research projects (which smaller teams of attendees intend to
      pursue going forward). We look forward to a set of inspired new publications and research
      grants which trace their genesis to this seminar, and extend a gracious thank you to Dagstuhl
      for providing the support and organization that allowed us to convene it.
Anastasia Bezerianos, Raimund Dachselt, Wesley J. Willett, and Ricardo Langner                           125


        Participants
  Caroline Appert                   Aluna Everitt                   Lora Oehlberg
University Paris-Saclay –         University of Canterbury –      University of Calgary, CA
Orsay, FR                         Christchurch, NZ                  Charles Perin
  Lyn Bartram                       Petra Isenberg                University of Victoria, CA
Simon Fraser University –         INRIA Saclay – Orsay, FR          Emmanuel Pietriga
Surrey, CA                          Tobias Isenberg               INRIA Saclay – Orsay, FR
                                  INRIA Saclay – Orsay, FR          Kim Sauvé
 Anastasia Bezerianos
                                    Yvonne Jansen                 University of the West of
Université Paris-Saclay, INRIA,
                                  CNRS – Talence, FR              England – Bristol, GB
CNRS, FR
                                    Konstantin Klamka               Miriam Sturdee
 Tanja Blascheck                  Barkhausen Institut –           University of St Andrews, GB
Universität Stuttgart, DE         Dresden, DE                       Ryo Suzuki
  Nathalie Bressa                   Ricardo Langner               University of Colorado – Boulder,
Télécom Paris, FR                 TU Dresden, DE                  US & Tohoku University –
                                    Bongshin Lee                  Sendai, JP
 Raimund Dachselt                 Yonsei University – Seoul, KR     Wesley J. Willett
TU Dresden, DE                                                    University of Calgary, CA
                                    Can Liu
  Pierre Dragicevic               City University –                 Julie Williamson
INRIA – Bordeaux, FR              Hong Kong, HK                   University of Glasgow, GB




                                                                                                      25082
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25091

Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design
Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo∗1 , Chadlia Jerad∗2 , Edward A. Lee∗3 ,
Claire Pagetti∗4 , and Shaokai Jerry Lin†5
1      TU Dresden, DE. jeronimo.castrillon@tu-dresden.de
2      University of Manouba, TN. chadlia.jerad@ensi-uma.tn
3      University of California – Berkeley, US. eal@berkeley.edu
4      ONERA – Toulouse, FR. claire.pagetti@onera.fr
5      University of California – Berkeley, US. shaokai@berkeley.edu

        Abstract
Reactive systems – software systems that continuously interact with their physical or digital
environment – are central to safety-critical domains such as autonomous vehicles, industrial
automation, and medical devices. These systems face inherent design tensions: the need to be
predictable yet adaptable, timely yet accurate, consistent yet available, and secure yet accessible.
Addressing one requirement often undermines another, revealing tradeoffs that are not merely
engineering challenges but fundamental limits. This seminar aimed to confront these tradeoffs
directly, drawing on insights from real-time systems, distributed computing, formal methods,
machine learning, and security. By exploring case studies, formal frameworks, and practical tools,
we made progress in the understanding of how to make design decisions when no single solution
satisfies all competing goals. Interactive sessions and demos gave participants a tangible sense of
the costs and compromises involved. With all this, we achieved the seminar’s goal, namely, to
cultivate a shared understanding of how to navigate the complex design space of reactive systems
and chart paths toward more robust and principled solutions.
Seminar February 23–28, 2025 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/25091
2012 ACM Subject Classification Computer systems organization → Embedded and cyber-
   physical systems; Computer systems organization → Dependable and fault-tolerant systems
   and networks; Computer systems organization → Real-time systems; Computing methodologies
   → Distributed computing methodologies; Computing methodologies → Concurrent computing
   methodologies; Mathematics of computing → Mathematical analysis; Security and privacy →
   Software and application security
Keywords and phrases reactive systems, cyber-physical systems, design tradeoffs, real-time
   systems, distributed computing, predictability, adaptability, timeliness, accuracy, consistency,
   availability, security, accessibility, machine learning, formal methods, system design, embedded
   systems, safety-critical systems, tool support, programming models, runtime verification
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.2.126




∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector
             Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
             under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15, Issue 2, pp. 126–157
Editors: Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo, Chadlia Jerad, Edward A. Lee, Claire Pagetti, and Shaokai Jerry Lin
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                     127


 1     Executive Summary
Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo (TU Dresden, DE)
Chadlia Jerad (University of Manouba, TN)
Edward A. Lee (University of California – Berkeley, US)
Claire Pagetti (ONERA – Toulouse, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo, Chadlia Jerad, Edward A. Lee, and Claire Pagetti


Reactive systems are software systems that engage in a continual dialogue with their envir-
onment. They constitute the software parts of cyber-physical systems where timely reactions
are often critical to safety. Applications include autonomous vehicles, electric power systems,
industrial automation, healthcare electronics, and robotics. Because the software engages
in a continual dialog with its environment, it often has conflicting requirements. It needs
to be predictable, but robust to unpredictable events; it needs to react in a timely manner,
but this often requires reacting with inconsistent information; it needs to be adaptable, but
demonstrably safe; and it needs to be secure, but accessible and available. Many conferences
and workshops focus on one of the goals, such as achieving real-time behavior, without
explicitly acknowledging the costs and without providing sound strategies for dealing with
failures that prevent reaching the goals. The focus of this seminar was on the tradeoffs that
are intrinsic in the design of such systems. When you make a system predictable, available,
secure, or even demonstrably safe, what have you lost?
    This seminar pulled in experts from manifold disciplines, both academic and industrial,
to identify and discuss the fundamental limits in reactive systems design that make tradeoffs
inevitable. In preparation for the seminar, the co-organizers reached out to leading experts
among the participants and invited them to deliver four talks to frame the discussions for
each of the first four days. Following this initial outreach, all participants were contacted and
invited to contribute through short talks, position statements, and demonstrations of any
relevant tools. The seminar format was kept flexible and open to allow space for ideas and
key discussion points to emerge organically. In this context, the working groups described in
Section 4 arose from the core ideas and challenges identified during the morning sessions.
These groups held their discussions during the first half of the afternoon sessions of the first
two days. The seminar was organized as described blow.

Day 1: Consistency vs. availability
Consistency is agreement on shared information across a distributed system. Availability
is the ability to act on that shared information in a timely way. It has been shown that
as latency increases when sharing such information, either consistency or availability or
both must be sacrificed. This topic focused on how to manage this tradeoff. It included
presentations proposing different ways to formalize the tradeoff, as well as examples of how
it arises in software design. Two breakout groups formed on the first day, focusing on the
topics “Distributed Music Challenge” and “Can AI Be Used in Critical Systems?”

Day 2: Timeliness vs. accuracy
Because reactive systems interact continuously with their environment, they need to sense
and interpret that environment. Today, many such systems need to include sophisticated
vision subsystems, audio information processing, motion sensing, etc. The computation
required to interpret sensor data often implies unacceptable delays or impossible energy



                                                                                                    25091
128   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


      requirements. It is not acceptable for an automated vehicle to identify a pedestrian after it
      has hit the pedestrian. This topic focused on how to manage this tradeoff. Three breakout
      groups formed on the second day, focusing on the topics “Benchmarks for RT systems”,
      “Tradeoff of timeliness and accuracy”, and “Orchestration/coordination languages vs reactive
      languages.”

      Day 3: Predictability vs. adaptability
      Reactive systems often perform critical tasks. We need for them to behave predictably
      during normal operation, but also adapt to behave reasonably in abnormal situations. Recent
      innovations in machine learning promise significant improvements for the latter requirement,
      but it is unclear how to reconcile the use of ML with the former requirement. This topic
      focused on how to manage this tradeoff.

      Day 4: Security vs. accessibility
      When systems are secure, nothing bad happens even when malicious players are present.
      Achieving the goal that “nothing bad happens,” however, is trivially easy by ensuring that
      nothing at all happens. Security measures often get in the way of other goals. This topic
      will focus on how to manage this tradeoff. For example, techniques that offer tiered access to
      capabilities, taint analysis, or mixtures of encrypted and unencrypted communication might
      be explored. During the afternoon session, reports from the group discussions were shared,
      along with brief previews of the software demonstrations (teasers) scheduled for Day 5.

      Day 5: Tools and Demos
      This topic focused on tools that support analysis and design and make explicit the management
      of tradeoffs. The key goal of the groups was to feel the pain intrinsic to the tradeoffs that
      are the theme of the seminar. A total of five software tools tutorials were presented (see
      Section 5). Hands-on exercises were organized into two sessions, each consisting of parallel
      tracks. This structure was designed to give participants the opportunity to experiment with
      two of the five available tools, rather than one. The tools presented were: “Lingua Franca”,
      “Timed SCCharts”, “QRML”, “Rebecca”, and “HipHop”.
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                         129


 2       Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo, Chadlia Jerad, Edward A. Lee, and Claire Pagetti . . .                 2

Overview of Talks
     Safety and AI Standards for Automobile: An overview
     Andres Barrilado . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     7
     Modeling reconfigurable CPS using UML
     Grzegorz Bazydło . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     7
     Reactive systems: Optimizations and opportunities in domain-specific computing
     Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       7
     Formalizing Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design
     Samarjit Chakraborty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8
     Security Efficiency Tradeoffs for Intelligent Systems
     Anupam Chattopadhyay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        11
     Assurance of Neural Network-based Safety-Critical Avionics with Formal Methods
     Arthur Clavière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
     A component model and modelling language for tradeoffs and multi objective
     optimization
     Marc Geilen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     Exploring the memory / execution time tradeoff in dataflow graphs
     Alain Girault . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     Latency and Consistency Tradeoffs in Shared-Memory Systems
     Andrés Goens Jokisch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     Can we make COTS CPS Ultra-Reliable?
     Arpan Gujarati . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     Necessary Conditions for Model Engineering to Ensure System Correctness
     Jérôme Hugues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14
     Introduction to Avionic Certification
     Victor Jegu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
     A Motivating Example: Distributed Music
     Erling Rennemo Jellum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     Time-Tarot: Toward a Quantitative Approach to Time-Predictability
     Chadlia Jerad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     Declarative Lifecycle Management in Digital Twins
     Einar Broch Johnsen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     Security vs. Accessibility Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems
     Hokeun Kim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     Consistency vs. Availability in Reactive Systems Design
     Edward A. Lee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
     CAL Theorem in Reactive Systems
     Shaokai Jerry Lin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17




                                                                                                        25091
130   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


        Benchmarking Worst-Case Performance of Real-Time Systems
        Martin Schoeberl, Erling Jellum, Shaokai Jerry Lin, Chadlia Jerad, Emad Jacob
        Maroun, Marten Lohstroh, and Edward A. Lee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
        Certification of ML-based systems
        Claire Pagetti and Arthur Clavière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
        Synergies between Timing Predictability and Microarchitectural Security
        Jan Reineke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
        Observations on Formalizing Reactive Systems
        Marcus Rossel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
        Timing Tradeoffs in Timed Automata with Dynamic Ticks
        Alexander Schulz-Rosengarten and Reinhard von Hanxleden . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
        Fail-operational Systems in Autonomous Driving Applications
        Katharina Sedow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
        The Functional, the Imperative, and the Sudoku
        Manuel Serrano . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
        Consistency versus Availability in Redundant Controllers – Formal Verification,
        Test Design, Time Analysis
        Marjan Sirjani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
        Tradeoffs in Accuracy and Timeliness in Transportation Cyber-Physical Systems
        Jonathan Sprinkle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
        Timeliness vs. Accuracy
        Lothar Thiele . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
        Fundamental Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems for Smart Agriculture and Pollutants
        Detection in Resource-Constrained Environments
        Eric Tutu Tchao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
        Utility-Based System Design: Making Sense of Tradeoffs
        Eugene Yip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

      Working groups
        Can AI be used in critical Systems?
        Jérôme Hugues, Andres Barrilado, Frédéric Boniol, Thomas Carle, Jerónimo
        Castrillón-Mazo, Samarjit Chakraborty, Arthur Clavière, Victor Jegu, Claire Pagetti,
        Marcus Rossel, Selma Saidi, Jonathan Sprinkle, Hasna Bouraoui, and Eugene Yip                23
        Distributed music challenge
        Grzegorz Bazydło, Anupam Chattopadhyay, Andrés Goens Jokisch, Chadlia Jerad,
        Erling Jellum, Einar Broch Johnsen, Hokeun Kim, Edward A. Lee, Shaokai Jerry
        Lin, Jan Reineke, Manuel Serrano, Martin Schoeberl, Lothar Thiele, and Reinhard
        von Hanxleden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24
        Orchestration/coordination languages vs reactive languages
        Jérôme Hugues, Edward A. Lee, Shaokai Jerry Lin, and Manuel Serrano . . . . . .              24
        Tradeoffs in accuracy and timeliness
        Andres Barrilado, Hasna Bouraoui, Anupam Chattopadhyay, Jerónimo Castrillón-
        Mazo, Arpan Gujarati, Hokeun Kim, Lothar Thiele, Alexander Schulz-Rosengarten,
        Katharina Sedow, and Jonathan Sprinkle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                       131


   Benchmarks for real-time systems
   Thomas Carle, Samarjit Chakraborty, Arthur Clavière, Victor Jegu, Chadlia Jerad,
   Claire Pagetti, Jan Reineke, and Martin Schoeberl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

Software teasers
   Timed Rebeca
   Marjan Sirjani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   Lingua Franca
   Erling Rennemo Jellum and Edward A. Lee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   SCCharts
   Alexander Schulz-Rosengarten . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   QRML
   Marc Geilen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
   HipHop
   Manuel Serrano . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    31

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32




                                                                                                      25091
132   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


       3     Overview of Talks
      3.1    Safety and AI Standards for Automobile: An overview
      Andres Barrilado (NXP Semiconductors – Toulouse, FR)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Andres Barrilado
       Joint work of Andres Barrilado, Iban Guinebert


      Presentation in which a short summary of recently published safety standards for AI in the
      automotive domain is shared. Some selected extracts are discussed with regards to tradeoffs
      linked to predictability and adaptability. Additionally, we provide an introduction to the
      tradeoffs now being observed specifically by semiconductor manufacturers when having to
      produce functionally safe inference accelerators.



      3.2    Modeling reconfigurable CPS using UML
      Grzegorz Bazydło (University of Zielona Gora, PL)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Grzegorz Bazydło


      The presentation introduces an approach to designing reconfigurable cyber-physical systems
      (CPS) using state machine diagrams from the Unified Modeling Language (UML). The UML
      specification is transformed using model-driven development (MDD) techniques into an
      efficient hardware description language (HDL) program, utilizing a concurrent finite state
      machine (CFSM) as an intermediate model. The resulting HDL specification can be analyzed,
      validated, synthesized, and ultimately implemented in field-programmable gate array (FPGA)
      devices.
          Dynamic partial reconfiguration – a feature of modern FPGAs – enables the replacement
      of parts of the CPS algorithm without powering down the device. However, to leverage
      this feature, the model must be safe, which, in the proposed approach, means incorporating
      special idle states where control is transferred during the reconfiguration process. The CFSM
      model significantly facilitates this task.
          The proposed design method provides an efficient graphical modeling approach for the
      control part of a reconfigurable CPS, along with an automated translation of the behavior
      model into a synthesizable Verilog description. This Verilog code can be directly implemented
      in FPGA devices and dynamically reconfigured as needed. A practical example from the
      field of demand-side management illustrates the successive stages of the proposed method.



      3.3    Reactive systems: Optimizations and opportunities in
             domain-specific computing
      Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo (TU Dresden, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo


      This talk discusses optimizations for dataflow and reactive programs. This includes optimiz-
      ations to the runtime system of Lingua Franca [5], initial work on decoupling timelines to
      expose more parallelism [6], a system to explore energy-performance tradeoffs [7, 2], and a
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                     133


methodology to explore tradeoffs between performance and accuracy for ML workloads [3, 4].
The talk closes with an outlook on how domain-specific programming abstractions and
domain-specific computer architectures [1] may offer more control over system-level tradeoffs,
including performance, energy consumption, accuracy and reliability.
References
1    Asif Ali Khan, Hamid Farzaneh, Karl F. A. Friebel, Lorenzo Chelini, and Jeronimo Castrillon.
     Cinm (cinnamon): A compilation infrastructure for heterogeneous compute in-memory and
     compute near-memory paradigms. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference
     on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS’25),
     ASPLOS ’25. Association for Computing Machinery, March 2025.
2    Robert Khasanov and Jeronimo Castrillon. Energy-efficient runtime resource management
     for adaptable multi-application mapping. In Proceedings of the 2020 Design, Automation
     and Test in Europe Conference (DATE), DATE ’20, pages 909–914. IEEE, March 2020.
3    Guilherme Korol, Michael Guilherme Jordan, Mateus Beck Rutzig, Jeronimo Castrillon,
     and Antonio Carlos Schneider Beck. Design space exploration for CNN offloading to FPGAs
     at the edge. In 2023 IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), pages
     1–6, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, June 2023. IEEE, IEEE Computer Society.
4    Guilherme Korol, Michael Guilherme Jordan, Mateus Beck Rutzig, Jeronimo Castrillon, and
     Antonio Carlos Schneider Beck. Pruning and early-exit co-optimization for CNN acceleration
     on FPGAs. In Proceedings of the 2023 Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference
     (DATE), DATE’23, pages 1–6. IEEE, April 2023.
5    Christian Menard, Marten Lohstroh, Soroush Bateni, Mathhew Chorlian, Arthur Deng,
     Peter Donovan, Clément Fournier, Shaokai Lin, Felix Suchert, Tassilo Tanneberger, Hokeun
     Kim, Jeronimo Castrillon, and Edward A. Lee. High-performance deterministic concurrency
     using Lingua Franca. ACM Transactions on Architecture and Code Optimization (TACO),
     20(4):1–29, August 2023.
6    Julian Robledo, Christian Menard, Erling Jellum, Edward A. Lee, and Jeronimo Castrillon.
     Timing enclaves for performance in Lingua Franca. In 2024 Forum for Specification and
     Design Languages (FDL), pages 1–9, September 2024.
7    Till Smejkal, Robert Khasanov, Jeronimo Castrillon, and Hermann Härtig. E-Mapper:
     Energy-efficient resource allocation for traditional operating systems on heterogeneous
     processors, 2024.



3.4    Formalizing Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design
Samarjit Chakraborty (The University of North Carolina (UNC) at Chapel Hill, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Samarjit Chakraborty


Today, most complex reactive systems, and especially autonomous systems, are composed
of multiple subsystems such as controllers, schedulers, machine learning (ML) components,
and security systems. These subsystems are designed independently and are aimed to work
to perfection. But in reality they do not work perfectly and the imperfection is assumed to
be small enough that it may be ignored. We argue that design approaches should make the
imperfections in these components first class citizens, formalize specifying imperfections, and
allow tradeoffs in the design play a more prominent role.
    Towards this, we first define a flexible notion of system-level safety to admit imperfect
behaviors. We then compute which component behaviors would ensure such a notion system
safety. This allows more component behaviors compared to those that would be admitted



                                                                                                    25091
134   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


      if the component was to be designed to perfection. These additional behaviors allow more
      efficient component implementations. Further, they allow exploration of tradeoffs where the
      deficiency of one component may be compensated by another component, while satisfying
      the notion of system-level safety and the flexibility it allows. To arrive at a general notion of
      imperfection, we consider the dynamics of closed-loop control systems. First, we determine
      the trajectory followed by such systems in their state space, when all the system components
      behave perfectly, e.g., when all the elements of the system state may be estimated exactly,
      all machine learning components in the system always return accurate inferences, and the
      deadlines of all software/control tasks are always met. For any given initial condition, such a
      system trajectory represents the ideal behavior of the system, which might not be practically
      realizable. To allow imperfect system behaviors, we consider a safety pipe around this ideal
      trajectory. Any system trajectory that lies within this safety pipe is considered to be an
      acceptable or safe behavior of the system [4].
           It is, however, non-trivial to estimate component behaviors from such specifications of
      safety pipes that capture system-level behaviors. In this talk we illustrated how this may be
      done for the specific case of imperfect timing behaviors. In particular, we asked: Given a
      safety pipe specifying allowed system behaviors, what are feasible timing behaviors that a
      control task may experience? Our procedure to answer this question involves the following
      two steps: (1) Guess a regular language L of timing behaviors that a control task may
      experience [1]. Such a language is a set of strings over the alphabet Σ = {0, 1}. Here, 0
      represents the case where the control task in question misses its deadline at the specified
      sampling period, i.e., the control input is not available at the time of actuation and an old
      control input is used. On the other hand, 1 denotes the case that the control task successfully
      completes its execution before the predetermined time of actuation. Hence, a string 101010 . . .
      denotes that the case where every alternate execution of the control task misses its deadline.
      Equivalently, it also denotes the case where the control task is purposefully not scheduled in
      every alternate sampling period to save computation bandwidth.
           In the next step: (2) We use approximate reachability analysis over a bounded time
      horizon to check whether all the trajectories of the given closed loop system stay within
      the specified safety pipe, when the control task is subjected to any timing behavior that
      belongs to the language L. Here, we use approximate reachability to contain the state-space
      explosion that would otherwise happen. If the language L of timing behaviors result in safe
      closed-loop behaviors (i.e., all the closed-loop trajectories are within the safety pipe) then
      we add L to the set of safe languages, viz., Lsaf e = Lsaf e ∪ L, where Lsaf e was initially
      empty. By iteratively following this procedure, we create a set of timing behaviors Lsaf e
      that results in safe closed-loop system behaviors. Now, since the union of regular languages
      is regular, Lsaf e may be represented as a finite state automata. We can use this procedure
      to synthesize safe schedules for a set of control tasks. For this, we rely on automata-theoretic
      techniques [5, 9] to combine the Lsaf e s of all the controllers to synthesize schedules where
      the tasks of each controller is not always scheduled for execution (i.e., occasionally misses its
      deadline), but the safety of all the closed-loop systems is guaranteed [10]. Such schedules
      account for the dynamics of the closed-loop system [2, 3, 6] and cannot be reproduced by
      standard scheduling policies like fixed priority or earliest deadline first (EDF) [7]. This
      approach of using a flexible notion of system safety to allow multiple (imperfect) component
      behaviors allows the exploration of different tradeoffs between the performance of different
      system components. For example, the work in [11] uses the size of the reachable set as a
      measure of safety and shows how the size of a neural network – and therefore its inference
      quality – for state estimation in a closed-loop control system may be traded off with the
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                    135


magnitude of the control input. This is used to partition a deep neural network (DNN)
between edge and cloud resources. A similar approach was also used [8] to purposefully
choose DNNs with less than optimal size and inference accuracy, to fit multiple DNNs on
the same shared graphics processing unit (GPU), while ensuring that the dynamics of the
closed-loop systems using these DNN inferences remain safe.
    While a safety pipe around an ideal system trajectory, or the size of the reachable set, are
two different notions of system safety, there are many other possibilities. For example, not
all trajectories within a safety pipe might be permissible. Most work on formal methods till
date have focused on specifying perfect or ideal system behaviors (e.g., all deadlines are met).
Specifying what kind of imperfect behaviors might be acceptable requires domain knowledge,
and those with such knowledge are usually not sufficiently conversant with formal methods
to be able to write formal specifications. Hence, new avenues for involving domain experts
– who are not specialists in formal methods – to write formal specifications, perhaps using
tools from machine learning will be needed.
References
 1 Bineet Ghosh, Clara Hobbs, Shengjie Xu, F. Donelson Smith, James H. Anderson, P. S.
     Thiagarajan, Benjamin Berg, Parasara Sridhar Duggirala, and Samarjit Chakraborty.
     Statistical verification of autonomous system controllers under timing uncertainties. Real
     Time Syst., 60(1):108–149, 2024.
 2 Dip Goswami, Reinhard Schneider, and Samarjit Chakraborty. Co-design of cyber-physical
     systems via controllers with flexible delay constraints. In 16th Asia South Pacific Design
     Automation Conference (ASP-DAC), 2011.
 3 Dip Goswami, Reinhard Schneider, and Samarjit Chakraborty. Re-engineering cyber-physical
     control applications for hybrid communication protocols. In Design, Automation and Test
     in Europe (DATE), 2011.
 4 Clara Hobbs, Bineet Ghosh, Shengjie Xu, Parasara Sridhar Duggirala, and Samarjit
     Chakraborty. Safety analysis of embedded controllers under implementation platform
     timing uncertainties. IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst., 41(11):4016–
     4027, 2022.
 5 Clara Hobbs, Shengjie Xu, Bineet Ghosh, Enrico Fraccaroli, Parasara Sridhar Duggirala,
     and Samarjit Chakraborty. Quantitative safety-driven co-synthesis of cyber-physical system
     implementations. In 15th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems
     (ICCPS), pages 99–110. IEEE, 2024.
 6 Martin Lukasiewycz, Reinhard Schneider, Dip Goswami, and Samarjit Chakraborty. Modular
     scheduling of distributed heterogeneous time-triggered automotive systems. In 17th Asia
     and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC), 2012.
 7 Florian Sagstetter, Sidharta Andalam, Peter Waszecki, Martin Lukasiewycz, Hauke Stähle,
     Samarjit Chakraborty, and Alois C. Knoll. Schedule integration framework for time-triggered
     automotive architectures. In The 51st Annual Design Automation Conference (DAC), 2014.
 8 Shengjie Xu et al. GPU partitioning & neural architecture sizing for safety-driven sensing
     in autonomous systems. In IEEE International Conference on Assured Autonomy (ICAA),
     2024.
 9 Shengjie Xu, Bineet Ghosh, Clara Hobbs, P. S. Thiagarajan, and Samarjit Chakraborty.
     Safety-aware flexible schedule synthesis for cyber-physical systems using weakly-hard con-
     straints. In Atsushi Takahashi, editor, 28th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation
     Conference (ASP-DAC), 2023.
10 Anand Yeolekar, Ravindra Metta, Clara Hobbs, and Samarjit Chakraborty. Checking
     scheduling-induced violations of control safety properties. In 20th International Symposium
     on Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis (ATVA), volume 13505 of Lecture
     Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2022.



                                                                                                   25091
136   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


      11    Tingan Zhu, Prateek Ganguli, Arkaprava Gupta, Shengjie Xu, Luigi Capogrosso, Enrico
            Fraccaroli, Marco Cristani, Franco Fummi, and Samarjit Chakraborty. Controllers for edge-
            cloud cyber-physical systems. In 17th IEEE International Conference on COMmunication
            Systems and NETworks (COMSNETS), 2025.



      3.5    Security Efficiency Tradeoffs for Intelligent Systems
      Anupam Chattopadhyay (Nanyang TU – Singapore, SG)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Anupam Chattopadhyay
       Joint work of Anupam Chattopadhyay, Prasanna Ravi, Sourav Sen Gupta, Mustafa Khairallah, Zakaria Najm,
                     Shivam Bhasin, Arpan Jati, Naina Gupta, Anh Tu Ngo


      Security and privacy are growing concerns across all forms of digital systems, including
      Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS). Embedding intelligence in such systems are done to enhance
      performance and autonomy. Such an inclusion compromises security, which is often fixed as
      an afterthought. The talk highlights several instances across the stack of digital systems, from
      machine learning, general purpose processors to hardened cryptographic implementations,
      which showcase that security and efficiency present contrasting choices for a system designer.
      This situation is exacerbated for autonomy, where Artificial Intelligence (AI) is invoked. Lack
      of explanation in many AI systems directly falls into the hands of a malicious actor, who can
      compromise the system in many subtle ways.



      3.6    Assurance of Neural Network-based Safety-Critical Avionics with
             Formal Methods
      Arthur Clavière (Collins Aerospace – Blagnac, FR)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Arthur Clavière
       Joint work of Arthur Clavière, Dmitrii Kirov, Darren Cofer


      We present a process for the Verification of neural networks using formal methods, developed
      to support the needs of Collins engineers working on neural networks for aircraft. The process
      focuses on low-complexity neural networks (having hundreds or thousands of learnable
      parameters) with simple input domains (less than 10 input features). It is especially
      applicable when the neural network is used to approximate a given target function (such as
      a complex optimization or large look-up table) at a lower computational cost. It compares
      the behavior of the neural network to the target function by exhaustively verifying the
      entire input space. Such an exhaustive verification, made possible by using formal methods,
      analyzes how the neural network would respond not only on the training or test dataset but
      also to any unseen data in its input range. We anticipate that this approach will be useful
      for high-criticality neural network-based components (DAL-C and above). It can be used as
      a means of compliance with certification objectives e.g., stability analysis and generalization
      capability assessment as defined by the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA).
      The process is illustrated through a Collins use case, namely the Recommended Cruise Level
      (RCL) function, which can be used to provide pilots with a suggested altitude to reduce the
      operational cost of the flight. The process is used to verify a neural network implementation
      of the RCL, that significantly reduces the computational cost and memory footprint of a
      traditional implementation.
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                     137


3.7    A component model and modelling language for tradeoffs and multi
       objective optimization
Marc Geilen (TU Eindhoven, NL)
      License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Marc Geilen
 Joint work of Marc Geilen, Twan Basten


Tradeoffs represent choices between multiple objectives that are determined by choices
between different configurations. This presentation introduces a mathematical framework, a
component model and a domain-specific language. The mathematical framework captures the
essential operations and requirements to support compositional computation of Pareto optimal
configurations of a system from descriptions of the (optimal) configurations of components.
It defines a number of relations on configurations, the sets of possible configurations of
components or systems to characterize which ones are considered better, worse, or equivalent.
The framework provides insight in requirements on the models and operations to work
effectively, preserve optimality, etcetera. We further introduce a component model for
Quality and Resource Management that builds on Pareto Algebra. It aims to describe
application and platform components in a virtualized platform setting. Components are
described in terms of input and out qualities, their required and provided budgets, their
optimization objectives and the parameters used to configure the component. The resulting
system semantics is a set of (Pareto optimal) configurations of the overall system. This set
can be implicitly captured as a set of equations in terms of the combined system parameters.
We have defined a Domain-Specific Language, called QRML, to specify such component
models generated different types of visualization and generate the set of constraints to be
checked for satisfiability, or for optimization, by a constraint solver, such as the Z3 SMT
solver. The tools are available through the web page https://www.qrml.org.



3.8    Exploring the memory / execution time tradeoff in dataflow graphs
Alain Girault (INRIA – Grenoble, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Alain Girault
 Joint work of Alain Girault, Pascal Fradet, Alexandre Honorat


Many computing systems are constrained by a fixed amount of available shared memory.
Modeling applications with task graphs makes it possible to analyze and optimize their
memory usage. The NP-complete problem studied here is finding a parallel schedule of a
given task graph that minimizes its memory peak.
    Our first contribution is an algorithm that finds optimal sequential schedules for a dataflow
task graph. This algorithm is based on graph transformation rules. On a large class of graphs,
it is able to compress the graph into a single node which contains a sequential schedule
optimal w.r.t. the memory peak. The approach also applies to SDF graphs after converting
them into task graphs. However, since that conversion may produce very large graphs, we
also propose a new suboptimal method, similar to Partial Expansion Graphs, to reduce
the problem size. We evaluate our approach on classic benchmarks, on which we always
outperform the state-of-the-art.
    From this optimal sequential schedule, our second contribution is a dynamic parallel
schedule, which consists of a ready list scheduling that we adapt to take into account memory
requirements. Our approach always produces a parallel schedule that meets the constraints


                                                                                                    25091
138   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


      and enjoys very good speedups. It can also be applied to less harsh memory constraints,
      leading to more substantial speedups. We compare with alternative approaches on multiple
      applications expressed as task graphs (scientific workflows, signal processing filters). When
      memory constraints are close to their minimum, our approach always succeeds in finding a
      parallel schedule meeting the given constraints, whereas the other approaches mostly fail.
      When memory constraints are significantly higher, our results are comparable to others for
      speedup. Furthermore, our approach is faster and can deal with very large task graphs (up
      to 50,000 nodes) using a naive Python implementation.



      3.9     Latency and Consistency Tradeoffs in Shared-Memory Systems
      Andrés Goens Jokisch (University of Amsterdam, NL)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Andrés Goens Jokisch


      Shared-memory systems are a reality of today’s hardware, and current trends are to increase
      their scale and complexity, with heterogeneous shared-memory architectures and hierarchical
      systems with protocols like CXL. These systems, however, have complex behaviors that
      trade consistency with latency, through out-of-order execution and weak guarantees in the
      protocols, resulting in weak memory consistency models, i.e. models weaker than sequential
      consistency. In this talk, I present some of the architectural guarantees, and open questions
      in this context, which give us primitives to express and control tradeoffs in consistency and
      latency. I argue we should build higher-level abstractions on top of these primitives to reason
      about these tradeoffs at a higher level of abstraction in the design process, e.g. programming
      languages or runtime systems.



      3.10      Can we make COTS CPS Ultra-Reliable?
      Arpan Gujarati (University of British Columbia – Vancouver, CA)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Arpan Gujarati


      In the avionics domain, “ultra-reliability” refers to the practice of ensuring quantifiably
      negligible residual failure rates in the presence of transient and permanent hardware faults.
      In this talk, I discuss the need for new mechanisms that can help us make contemporary and
      next-generation CPS, which use inexpensive, relatively unreliable off-the-shelf components,
      more reliable and, if possible, ultra-reliable (as airplanes). I will frame the discussion around
      the problem of Byzantine fault tolerance (BFT). Specifically, I will briefly present our RTSS
      2022 work, where we proposed a novel BFT timed key-value store, called Achal, designed
      specifically for Ethernet-based distributed real-time control applications. I will then describe
      our current work on understanding two key limitations of Achal-like systems. First, can
      they be seamlessly ported to real, complex CPS applications? Second, can precision time
      synchronization be considered a reliable primitive? Finally, I wrap up with my key takeaway,
      that we must focus on systems / middleware / tools that make it easier to engineer reliable
      systems, as opposed to designing new fault-tolerance protocols from scratch.
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                   139


3.11      Necessary Conditions for Model Engineering to Ensure System
          Correctness
Jérôme Hugues (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Jérôme Hugues


Engineering Reactive Systems primarily involves evaluating the accuracy of computations,
as well as the system’s quality attributes (such as safety, security), or its functions or data
(such as availability, consistency). This list is not exhaustive, and neither is this mapping.
These properties can be assessed by testing the final system. A more timely and cost-
effective approach is to rely on models and verification and validation (V&V) techniques
such as simulation or model checking. Evaluating these quality attributes necessitates the
construction of an additional system: a model and a demonstration that the model is
sufficiently accurate to both represent the system and support a verification objective.
    In this presentation, I propose some considerations in the scope of Dagstuhl Seminar 25091.
Firstly, when considering a model as a system, it is crucial to define its requirements. The
term “capturing a system behavior” is too ambiguous. A model should support an engineering
goal, such as evaluating a system attribute. Therefore, the selection of a modeling language,
the creation of the model, and the property to be evaluated cannot be separated. It is
essential to ensure that the evaluation of an attribute or a tradeoff analysis among multiple
attributes can be initially expressed in a model and then analyzed by some techniques.
This can only be achieved if the modeling language is sound, the model captures a domain
taxonomy, and, of course, it is correct.



3.12      Introduction to Avionic Certification
Victor Jegu (Airbus S.A.S. – Toulouse, FR)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Victor Jegu


Before aircrafts are approved to carry passengers, the industry has to provide evidence to the
aviation authorities of the safety and conformity of their products. This approval is called
“certification”. And is achieved by conducting a very thoroughly documented process of
addressing every foreseeable failure with safety impact. This process is particularly stringent
with failures of catastrophic or hazardous consequences. This talk briefly describes this
process for avionic equipment (computers). For functions with minor safety impact, COTS
or COTS-like “Design Assurance Level” (DAL) could be considered. At such a level, low
energy (edge) AI technology could already be considered. But for higher Assurance Level,
achieving this objective may require a thorough understanding of the technology, exhaustive
(including formal) design checking, use of diverse strategies for error detection, and resource
redundancy. The purpose of this talk is to give academics with intent to assist industry
by providing tools, methods, languages and IP in general, an understanding of the level
and nature of information (documentation and support) the industry needs to adopt their
proposals.




                                                                                                  25091
140   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


      3.13      A Motivating Example: Distributed Music
      Erling Rennemo Jellum (University of California – Berkeley, US)
             License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Erling Rennemo Jellum
       Joint work of Edward A. Lee, Erling Jellum


      This talk will introduce the Distributed Rhythm Generator, a distributed real-time program
      written in Lingua Franca. Distributed real-time systems are intriguingly challenging systems,
      as they must balance two opposing requirements. First, they must often only actuate based on
      a consistent view of the shared variables of the overall system, and second, they must actuate
      in a timely manner. Without time-predictable networks, reconciling these requirements
      might not be possible and a tradeoff must be made. We will show how the reactor-oriented
      programming paradigm introduced by Lingua Franca, enables an elegant specification of
      such consistency-available tradeoffs.



      3.14      Time-Tarot: Toward a Quantitative Approach to
                Time-Predictability
      Chadlia Jerad (University of Manouba, TN)
             License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Chadlia Jerad
       Joint work of Chadlia Jerad, Martin Schoeberl, Emad Jacob Maroun, Edward A. Lee, Shaokai Lin, Erling Jellum


      The current trends in hardware design aim at improving the average performance. Together
      with the increase in software complexity, this trajectory runs contrary to time-predictability,
      especially when designing safety-critical and real-time systems, as timing requirements need
      to be guaranteed a priori. Literature is rich with valuable attempts to define and measure
      time-predictability. Still, a quantitative approach that covers all the different features at
      the different abstraction levels is missing. This talk suggests the design of a concept map
      for time-predictability levels. It is based on results from different research papers and is
      meant to be extensible to accommodate future inventions. It is also derived from expert
      knowledge in the different fields. The concept map, when combined with multi-criteria
      decision techniques, can formalize the choice among two or more designs. The techniques to
      be used are the Brown-Gibson Model and the Analytic Hierarchy Process. The former has
      the advantage of combining objective and subjective factors that immediately derive from
      the concept map. Because weighted scoring is required in this method, we use the Analytic
      Hierarchy Process to weigh the features among each other. A challenge though is about the
      support of multi-processor systems with different architectures. In addition, the use of the
      worst-case performance can be decided to be used either as a validation tool or to perform
      fusion of the results.
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                    141


3.15      Declarative Lifecycle Management in Digital Twins
Einar Broch Johnsen (University of Oslo, NO)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Einar Broch Johnsen
 Joint work of Einar Broch Johnsen, Eduard Kamburjan, Nelly Bencomo, Silvia Lizeth Tapia Tarifa


Together, a digital twin and its physical counterpart can be seen as a self-adaptive system:
the digital twin monitors the physical system, updates its own internal model of the physical
system, and adjusts the physical system by means of controllers in order to maintain given
requirements. As the physical system shifts between different stages in its lifecycle, these
requirements, as well as the associated analyzers and controllers, may need to change. The
exact triggers for such shifts in a physical system are often hard to predict, as they may be
difficult to describe or even unknown; however, they can generally be observed once they
have occurred, in terms of changes in the system behavior. This talk presents an automated
method for self-adaptation in digital twins to address shifts between lifecycle stages in a
physical system, based on recent work [1]. Our method is based on declarative descriptions
of lifecycle stages for different physical assets and their associated digital twin components.
Declarative lifecycle management provides a high-level, flexible method for self-adaptation of
the digital twin to reflect disruptive shifts between stages in a physical system.
References
1    Eduard Kamburjan, Nelly Bencomo, Silvia Lizeth Tapia Tarifa, and Einar Broch Johnsen.
     Declarative lifecycle management in digital twins. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 27th
     International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems, MODELS
     Companion ’24, page 353–363, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing
     Machinery.



3.16      Security vs. Accessibility Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems
Hokeun Kim (Arizona State University – Tempe, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Hokeun Kim


In this framing discussion, I explore the fundamental tradeoffs between security and accessib-
ility in designing reactive and cyber-physical systems (CPS). This discussion examines how
secure access mechanisms – such as authentication, encryption, detection, and mitigation –
must balance with the need for accessibility. Through real-world examples and case studies,
I highlight the challenges of designing secure reactive systems and CPS while managing the
tradeoffs between security and accessibility, considering threat models, costs, and security re-
quirements of the target systems. Various design decisions, including connectivity, encryption
strategies, and the choice between prevention and detection of cyber threats, are analyzed in
the context of modern threat models. This framing discussion also presents a methodology
for enforcing security without sacrificing essential accessibility, ensuring the domain-specific
reactive systems and CPS are secure and protected yet accessible.




                                                                                                   25091
142   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


      3.17      Consistency vs. Availability in Reactive Systems Design
      Edward A. Lee (University of California – Berkeley, US)
             License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Edward A. Lee
       Joint work of Edward A. Lee, Ravi Akella, Soroush Bateni, Shaokai Lin, Marten Lohstroh, Christian Menard


      Distributed software systems often require consistent shared information. For example, con-
      nected vehicles require agreement on access to an intersection before entering the intersection.
      It is far from trivial, however, how to achieve consistency, or even how to define it rigorously
      enough to know when it has been achieved. In this talk, I will show how strong and weak
      forms of consistency can be defined, how software infrastructure can provide reasonable
      guarantees and efficient implementations, and what are the fundamental costs of achieving
      consistency that no software system can avoid. Specifically, I will outline the CAL theorem,
      which quantifies consistency, availability, and latency, and gives an algebraic relation that
      shows that as latency increases, either availability or consistency or both must decrease. I
      will describe a coordination language called Lingua Franca that enables programmers to
      explicitly work with the tradeoffs between these three quantities.



      3.18      CAL Theorem in Reactive Systems
      Shaokai Jerry Lin (University of California – Berkeley, US)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Shaokai Jerry Lin
       Joint work of Shaokai Jerry Lin, Edward A. Lee


      In 2000, Eric Brewer (UC Berkeley) famously stated the CAP theorem during the PODC
      keynote. However, the tradeoffs mentioned in the theorem was not formally specified. Lee et
      al. [1] later proposed the CAL theorem, which establishes a mathematical relationship among
      the three properties: Consistency, Availability, and Latency (extending Partitioning in the
      CAP theorem). In this talk, we present a work-in-progress formalism based on the CAL
      theorem, which aims to 1) be easily applicable to programming frameworks, and 2) capture
      the behavior of a reactive system over time. We demonstrate the formalism on a simple stock
      exchange application written in the Lingua Franca (LF) coordination language. We derive
      timing constraints from the semantics of the LF language and the application, formulating a
      system of equations calculating earliest firing times of reactions from previous firing times
      and asynchronous inputs. We represent the system of equations into a linear difference
      equation using the max-plus algebra and show that the eigenvalue of a coefficient matrix
      represents the threshold of the system’s responsiveness.
      References
      1    Edward A. Lee, Ravi Akella, Soroush Bateni, Shaokai Lin, Marten Lohstroh, and Christian
           Menard. Consistency vs. availability in distributed cyber-physical systems. ACM Trans.
           Embed. Comput. Syst., 22(5s), September 2023.
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                                   143


3.19      Benchmarking Worst-Case Performance of Real-Time Systems
Martin Schoeberl (Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK), Erling Jellum (University
of California – Berkeley, US), Shaokai Lin (University of California – Berkeley, US), Chadlia
Jerad (Univrsity of manouba, TN), Emad Jacob Maroun (Technical University of Denmark –
Lyngby, DK), Marten Lohstroh (University of California – Berkeley, US), and Edward A.
Lee (University of California – Berkeley, US)
       License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Martin Schoeberl, Erling Jellum, Shaokai Jerry Lin, Chadlia Jerad, Emad Jacob Maroun, Marten
                 Lohstroh, and Edward A. Lee


Real-time systems rely on tasks with well-defined worst-case execution times (WCET) to
ensure predictable behavior. To facilitate accurate WCET estimation, some researchers
advocate for processor architectures that simplify timing analysis, known as precision-timed
or time-predictable architectures. However, the precise definition and quantification of time
predictability remain open questions. This talk examines the concept of time predictability
and the challenges in measuring it. Instead of focusing solely on architectural properties,
we argue that worst-case performance should be evaluated as a combined property of the
processor, compiler, and WCET analysis tool. To enable systematic evaluation, we propose
to standardize on a benchmark suite for assessing time-predictable processors, compilers, and
WCET analysis tools. We define worst-case performance as the geometric mean of WCET
bounds across this benchmark set.



3.20      Certification of ML-based systems
Claire Pagetti (ONERA – Toulouse, FR) and Arthur Clavière (Collins Aerospace –
Blagnac, FR)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Claire Pagetti and Arthur Clavière


The purpose of the talks was to present some of the results reached for introducing ML
(Machine Learning) algorithms in Airborne systems. First a brief introduction on certification
and on current drafted standards for ML was done. Indeed, EASA is writing roadmaps
and preliminary guidance. SAE/EUROCAE working group is in parallel writing a future
ED/ARP document. The presentation then has dug to two use cases. The first was the
simplest: how to replace a set of LUT (look-up tables) – here for the avoidance collision system
ACAS Xu – with neural networks while preserving the intended function. For that, formal
verification was successfully applied. These kinds of surrogate models to compress existing
code is a way forward. The seconds case is exploratory: vision-based perception algorithm to
detect runway during an aircraft landing. Again formal verification was successfully applied
to check robustness against some foreseeable perturbations. These preliminary results open
the path for certification.




                                                                                                                  25091
144   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


      3.21      Synergies between Timing Predictability and Microarchitectural
                Security
      Jan Reineke (Universität des Saarlandes – Saarbrücken, DE)
             License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Jan Reineke
       Joint work of Marco Guarnieri, Gideon Mohr, Zilong Wang, Klaus v. Gleissenthall, Jan Reineke


      Timing attacks exploit variations in execution time to leak sensitive information. Hardware-
      software leakage contracts are a new security abstraction that augments the instruction-set-
      architecture (ISA) to capture microarchitectural leakage at software level. In recent work we
      have shown how to verify that open-source RISC-V processors satisfy particular contracts and
      how to synthesize precise leakage contracts for a given processor. In this talk, I motivate and
      introduce leakage contracts and I discuss two equivalent notions of contract satisfaction that
      suggest synergies between research on timing predictability and microarchitectural security.



      3.22      Observations on Formalizing Reactive Systems
      Marcus Rossel (Barkhausen Institut – Dresden, DE)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Marcus Rossel


      Reactive systems have a rich history of rigorous modeling and verification techniques. As
      modern verification efforts become more ambitious, they require the composition of a growing
      number of techniques. This composition necessitates interfacing between different formalisms
      and tools, which can lead to error-prone discontinuities in the verification pipeline. While
      there exist systems for coherently verifying reactive systems, they are limited in expressivity.
      Interactive theorem provers (ITPs) provide a means of verification with virtually unbounded
      expressiveness, but do not natively capture the semantics of notions like concurrency and
      mutability. We discuss the problems encountered when attempting gap-free verification of
      reactive systems in ITPs.



      3.23      Timing Tradeoffs in Timed Automata with Dynamic Ticks
      Alexander Schulz-Rosengarten (Universität Kiel, DE) and Reinhard von Hanxleden (Uni-
      versität Kiel, DE)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Alexander Schulz-Rosengarten and Reinhard von Hanxleden


      Synchronous languages build on an abstraction from physical execution time by dividing
      the execution into logical ticks. However, they say little about when to execute the ticks
      and traditionally lack built-in support for physical time. This makes it rather cumbersome
      to express things like time-outs or periodic executions. We present Timed SCCharts that
      use a timed automata formalism and combine it with the concept of dynamic ticks. This
      enables specifying time-dependent behavior while addressing tradeoffs in timing in the face
      of imperfections of execution with physical time.
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                   145


    One application area we plan to explore is the railway domain, as part of the REAKT
initiative. This initiative aims to revitalize rural rail lines, using the line Bad Malente –
Lütjenburg as real world laboratory. As an aside, in Germany alone, about 5000 km of rural
train lines have been put out of service since the 1990s. This corresponds to about 30% of
the total network, and it directly affects more than 3 million citizens.



3.24      Fail-operational Systems in Autonomous Driving Applications
Katharina Sedow (Saneon GmbH – Ismaning, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Katharina Sedow


As the automotive research and development field approaches automated driving levels
SAE L4 and L5, the introduction of the requirement for the driving function to continue
operation when an abnormal system behavior occurs becomes crucial. Highly automated and
autonomous systems cannot use a human driver as the fallback decision-maker and actuator,
and, in order to be safe, they must possess the ability to function until the vehicle reaches a
safe state. This talk briefly introduces the concept behind fail-operational systems. First, we
introduce the advances of such systems when compared to the fail-safe implementations. We
further provide an example of a fail-operational architecture. In the last part of the talk,
we discuss the challenges the automotive industry faces when developing fail-operational
driving functionality. They include the assurance of independent redundancy, tradeoffs in
performance and safety, as well as the development costs. Finally, we address the approaches
intended to handle those issues, such as redundant system design, the introduction of
monitoring safety components, and the handling of the high safety integrity levels.



3.25      The Functional, the Imperative, and the Sudoku
Manuel Serrano (INRIA – Sophia Antipolis, FR)
       License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Manuel Serrano
 Joint work of Manuel Serrano, Robert Bruce Findler


Conventional wisdom suggests that the benefits of functional programming no longer apply in
the presence of even a small amount of imperative code, as if the addition of imperative code
effectively subtracts. And yet, as we show in this talk, combining functional programming
with the special imperative language Esterel provides a multiplicative improvement to the
benefits of functional programming.
    To illustrate these benefits, the bulk of this talk consists of an in-depth exploration
of HipHop code (a mashup of JavaScript and Esterel) that implements a Sudoku solver,
showing how it is possible to write code that is as easy to understand as if it were written in
a pure functional programming style, even though it uses multiple threads, mutable state,
thread preemption, and even thread abortion. Even better, concurrent composition and task
canceling provide significant program structuring benefits that allow a clean decomposition
and task separation in the solver.




                                                                                                  25091
146   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


      3.26      Consistency versus Availability in Redundant Controllers – Formal
                Verification, Test Design, Time Analysis
      Marjan Sirjani (Mälardalen University – Västerås, SE)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Marjan Sirjani


      A potential problem that may arise in the domain of distributed control systems is the
      existence of more than one primary controller in redundancy plans which may lead to
      inconsistency. We worked on an algorithm called NRP FD (Network Reference Point
      Failure Detection), proposed by industry, to solve this issue by prioritizing consistency over
      availability. I explain how by using modeling and formal verification, we discovered an issue
      in NRP FD where we may have two primary controllers at the same time. We then provide
      a solution to mitigate the identified issue, thereby enhancing the robustness and reliability of
      such systems. In the same context, I will also show how we used model checking for making
      informed decisions in designing test cases for fault-tolerant systems. I will add a discussion
      on how this approach may be generalized in different contexts.



      3.27      Tradeoffs in Accuracy and Timeliness in Transportation
                Cyber-Physical Systems
      Jonathan Sprinkle (Vanderbilt University – Nashville, US)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Jonathan Sprinkle
       Joint work of Jonathan Sprinkle, George Gunter, Daniel B. Work, the CIRCLES Consortium


      This talk explores the timing and accuracy tradeoffs from application problems in transport-
      ation cyber-physical systems. The talk demonstrates previous proof of dampening traffic
      waves in closed road scenarios, and evidence that existing adaptive cruise controllers amplify
      (rather than reduce) traffic waves. To address these issues, the work discusses the use of
      hierarchical high-latency and low-latency controllers, which were shown to be successful.
      These approaches utilize shared information of the road network that may be gathered over
      recent minutes, for the purposes of reducing stop and go traffic waves. Given the dynamics of
      freeway traffic, where speeds of up to 35 m/s regularly encounter stop and go waves traveling
      at -4 m/s (i.e., against the flow), the lookahead of the on-vehicle sensors is insufficient to
      dampen these waves, and external information is needed. Using only local sensors it is
      possible to avoid collisions, but it is not trivial to also dampen the traffic waves. Thus it is
      important to understand how to share data on downstream state information, with timing
      information to help understand how to interpret those data. The talk transitions to discussion
      on how to design and utilize safety envelope controllers for future experiments, in which AI
      or other untrusted controllers are fielded in open road scenarios. While these controllers can
      be theoretically shown to be safe, the theory requires information from vehicle sensors (such
      as derivatives of velocity or acceleration) which are difficult to obtain, and for which filtering
      delays the availability of the data – requiring an additional following gap for safety that may
      reduce the effectiveness of the approach. The conclusion calls for continued exploration in
      determining the accuracy of these distributed systems, which are loosely coordinated, when
      it is impossible to recreate the situations in which they were fielded. Further, it calls for
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                    147


understanding how one can safely field AI-based controllers to gather field training data,
when there may be significant limitations in understanding how safe the safety envelopes are
for general use.
    This work is supported by the US National Science Foundation, and the US Department
of Energy.



3.28      Timeliness vs. Accuracy
Lothar Thiele (ETH Zürich, CH)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Lothar Thiele


This talk surveys the research landscape surrounding the fundamental tradeoff between
timeliness and accuracy in complex systems. It explores formal and informal approaches
to managing this tradeoff from multiple perspectives, including neuroscience and psycho-
logy, scheduling theory, algorithm design, system architecture, and multi-agent systems.
Connecting research from the late 1980s to cutting-edge developments, the talk examines
how current abstractions, particularly those related to accuracy (e.g., algorithmic precision)
and timeliness (e.g., system timing requirements), hold up in the face of increasing system
complexity. A core question explored is whether these abstractions remain adequate, or
if we need fundamentally new approaches beyond reliance on testing and benchmarking
in real-world environments, to effectively address the timeliness-accuracy tradeoff across
algorithms, runtime systems (including hardware), and requirements. Finally, the talk
identifies key open research questions in this area.



3.29      Fundamental Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems for Smart Agriculture
          and Pollutants Detection in Resource-Constrained Environments
Eric Tutu Tchao (Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, GH)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Eric Tutu Tchao


In resource-constrained environments like rural Ghana, designing reactive systems for critical
applications, such as smart agriculture and detecting pollutants from illegal mining activities,
demands confronting unavoidable tradeoffs. These systems must balance competing priorities
shaped by limited energy, connectivity, and financial resources. This has forced researchers to
examine how fundamental engineering limits force compromises between accuracy, timeliness,
security, and scalability. Researchers cannot eliminate compromises but formalize them,
embedding transparency into system architecture. By doing so, they create solutions that are
survivable, equitable, and aligned with the pragmatic realities of communities like Ghana’s
– where “good enough” is not a concession but a necessity. My presentation at Dagstuhl
Seminar 25091 illustrates a broader truth that in resource-constrained environments, tradeoffs
are not design failures but fundamental constraints.




                                                                                                   25091
148   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


      3.30      Utility-Based System Design: Making Sense of Tradeoffs
      Eugene Yip (GLIWA – Weilheim, DE)
             License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Eugene Yip
       Joint work of Eugene Yip, Gerald Lüttgen


      Selecting software components to reuse as a means to reduce development time and costs
      can be challenging, especially when multiple components provide the same functionality but
      offer different non-functional properties, e.g., numerical accuracy, memory footprint, power
      rating, timeliness, robustness, security, or financial cost. In this talk, we seek to model the
      benefit that a system gains from a component’s non-functional properties using so-called
      “Property-Utility Functions” (PUFs) as a means to formally analyse tradeoffs in component
      selection. We will discuss how a PUF can model the incremental benefit (utility) that a
      system would receive for each additional unit of resource that a component consumes. We
      will explore open challenges in how the utility of a datum or event is transformed by the
      PUFs of the components they flow through, how to tradeoff one component for another based
      on their qualities, how to compose and decompose PUFs for bottom-up and top-down system
      design, and how to diagnose violations in expected utilities.



       4      Working groups
      4.1     Can AI be used in critical Systems?
      Jérôme Hugues (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US), Andres Barrilado (NXP
      Semiconductors – Toulouse, FR), Frédéric Boniol (ONERA – Toulouse, FR), Thomas
      Carle (Toulouse University, FR), Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo (TU Dresden, DE), Samarjit
      Chakraborty (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, US), Arthur Clavière (Collins
      Aerospace – Blagnac, FR), Victor Jegu (Airbus S.A.S. – Toulouse, FR), Claire Pagetti
      (ONERA – Toulouse, FR), Marcus Rossel (Barkhausen Institut – Dresden, DE), Selma Saidi
      (TU Braunschweig, DE), Jonathan Sprinkle (Vanderbilt University – Nashville, US), Hasna
      Bouraoui (TU Dresden, DE) and Eugene Yip (GLIWA – Weilheim, DE)
             License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Jérôme Hugues, Andres Barrilado, Frédéric Boniol, Thomas Carle, Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo,
                       Samarjit Chakraborty, Arthur Clavière, Victor Jegu, Claire Pagetti, Marcus Rossel, Selma Saidi,
                       Jonathan Sprinkle, Hasna Bouraoui, and Eugene Yip


      The working group concluded that deploying AI in safety-critical systems hinges on balancing
      two tightly linked factors – accuracy and timeliness – because longer training or inference
      windows can enhance correctness but may violate real-time constraints. Across the four
      domains discussed (avionics, automotive, medical devices such as pacemakers, and rail),
      regulators are cautiously expanding standards: avionics currently only certifies off-line–trained
      ML components, automotive guidelines are rapidly evolving, medical devices show promising
      results under tight safeguards, and rail is changing slowly. Participants agreed AI is most
      defensible when it supplements rather than replaces human judgment or expensive hardware
      (e.g., monocular camera + AI distance estimation versus LiDAR) and when robust mitigation
      layers – observers, simplex architectures, safety “nets,” or treating AI like an imperfect
      sensor – contain the impact of inevitable errors. Defining what constitutes a “good” AI
      therefore means specifying clear functional and safety requirements, acknowledging residual
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                                   149


failure probabilities, and ensuring retraining or adaptation does not void certification credits.
Finally, the group underscored that verification strategies must scale with AI complexity:
small-state reinforcement learning can leverage formal methods, whereas high-dimensional
perception models require new notions of coverage, traceability, and explainability, reinforcing
that full autonomy remains out of reach today while incremental, supervised uses continue
to gain traction.



4.2    Distributed music challenge
Grzegorz Bazydło (University of Zielona Gora, PL), Anupam Chattopadhyay (Nanyang TU
– Singapore, SG), Andrés Goens Jokisch (University of Amsterdam, NL), Chadlia Jerad
(University of Manouba, TN), Erling Rennemo Jellum (University of California – Berkeley,
US), Einar Broch Johnsen (University of Oslo, NO), Hokeun Kim (Arizona State University
– Tempe, US), Edward A. Lee (University of California – Berkeley, US), Shaokai Jerry
Lin (University of California – Berkeley, US), Jan Reineke (Universität des Saarlandes
– Saarbrücken, DE), Manuel Serrano (INRIA – Sophia Antipolis, FR), Martin Schoeberl
(Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK), Lothar Thiele (ETH Zürich, CH) and
Reinhard von Hanxleden (Universität Kiel, DE)
      License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Grzegorz Bazydło, Anupam Chattopadhyay, Andrés Goens Jokisch, Chadlia Jerad, Erling Jellum,
                Einar Broch Johnsen, Hokeun Kim, Edward A. Lee, Shaokai Jerry Lin, Jan Reineke, Manuel Serrano,
                Martin Schoeberl, Lothar Thiele, and Reinhard von Hanxleden


In the breakout group session titled “Distributed Music Challenge,” we explored the practical
aspects of the Distributed Rhythm Generator introduced in the preceding talk. This hands-on
activity involved running a distributed real-time program written in Lingua Franca across
two laptops, simulating the behavior of a networked rhythm generator. The session provided
a concrete illustration of the tradeoffs between consistency and availability in distributed
real-time systems. Participants experimented with three distinct conditions: normal network
operation, a scenario with network overload, and one with disrupted clock synchronization.
Through these scenarios, the group observed how the Lingua Franca runtime handled timing
and consistency under different constraints, deepening the discussion on how reactor-oriented
programming can be used to model and manage such tradeoffs elegantly in distributed
systems.



4.3    Orchestration/coordination languages vs reactive languages
Jérôme Hugues (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US), Edward A. Lee (University
of California – Berkeley, US), Shaokai Jerry Lin (University of California – Berkeley, US),
and Manuel Serrano (INRIA – Sophia Antipolis, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Jérôme Hugues, Edward A. Lee, Shaokai Jerry Lin, and Manuel Serrano


The breakout group discussed the relationship between coordination languages, synchronous
reactive languages, and choreographic languages. First, we started by reviewing examples
of each language category, namely Reo, Choral, Rebeca, Esterel, and Lingua Franca. The
group recognized that all these languages do some form of coordination. Some also have




                                                                                                                  25091
150   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


      the capability to support the full implementation either within their own language such as
      Esterel, or through the integration with other programming languages like Lingua Franca.
      In other cases, the functional code is considered opaque, and the language only defines the
      interface of these containers.
          The group noted that these languages define how the synchronization of the execution
      of some containers happen. More specifically, their semantics define when (time), why
      (causality), and which action is executed. These containers are stateful, and they react to
      multiple, possibly simultaneous, inputs. Hence, it is critical to address when these events
      are sent, how they are processed, and how to change the container’s state to guarantee
      determinism. These questions become more complicated when considering an implementation
      on resource-constrained embedded targets, as opposed to larger machines.
          Finally, the group noted that this reasoning can be extended to not just mathematical
      formalisms such as communicating sequential processes (CSP) or Kahn process networks
      (KPN), but also synchronization/communication APIs such as POSIX or MPI. They also
      define some notion of stateful containers. However, in the case of API-based solutions, the
      actual boundary of the container and its interface is not a first-class citizen: asserting the
      correctness or determinism of a concurrent system, e.g., built on top of POSIX APIs, is more
      complex than a similar system expressed in a dedicated coordination language.



      4.4    Tradeoffs in accuracy and timeliness
      Andres Barrilado (NXP Semiconductors – Toulouse, FR), Hasna Bouraoui (TU Dresden,
      DE), Anupam Chattopadhyay (Nanyang TU – Singapore, SG), Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo
      (TU Dresden, DE), Arpan Gujarati (University of British Columbia – Vancouver, CA),
      Hokeun Kim (Arizona State University – Tempe, US), Lothar Thiele (ETH Zürich, CH),
      Alexander Schulz-Rosengarten (Universität Kiel, DE), Katharina Sedow (Saneon GmbH –
      Ismaning, DE) and Jonathan Sprinkle (Vanderbilt University – Nashville, US)
            License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Andres Barrilado, Hasna Bouraoui, Anupam Chattopadhyay, Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo, Arpan
                      Gujarati, Hokeun Kim, Lothar Thiele, Alexander Schulz-Rosengarten, Katharina Sedow, and
                      Jonathan Sprinkle


      This breakout session addressed the challenges, methodologies, and future directions involved
      in managing tradeoffs between accuracy and timeliness in computational systems. The central
      theme built on Lothar Thiele’s earlier seminar presentation and drew parallels with Thinking,
      Fast and Slow [1], asking how systems could dynamically respond with appropriately timed
      decisions and varying confidence levels. The key questions and themes were:
         What methodologies can be used to manage accuracy vs. timeliness tradeoffs?
         What are the real costs of missing a timeline in industry today?
          How do real-time systems currently handle uncertainty or degraded performance?
         What is the role of resource scaling (e.g., parallelism) in trading accuracy for time?

          During the discussion, Andrès Goens emphasized the benefits of early-exit strategies
      and iterative answer refinement for real-time constrained systems, raising concerns about
      how uncertainty compounds in extended predictions – illustrated with a motor motion
      example where the sine wave frequency is unknown. He suggested connecting these ideas
      to computationally aware model predictive control (MPC), citing Jonathan’s earlier work,
      and posed the question: “Getting something quick converges eventually, but what issues
      expand with extended predictions?”. Anupam Chattopadhyay contributed by stressing the
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                    151


importance of leveraging parallel resources to improve accuracy under time constraints,
especially in embarrassingly parallel applications. He framed timeliness and accuracy as just
two among many competing objectives, and discussed the challenge of managing out-of-order
answers in anytime systems, noting that “getting more accuracy with unbounded time might
not be worth it.”
    The discussion on use case and domain examples highlighted challenges in automotive and
rail systems, particularly regarding decision timelines, fallback mechanisms, and uncertainty
handling. In autonomous vehicles across L2 to L5 levels, issues such as classification errors –
like braking for an image of a person rather than a real one – underscored the difficulty of
making safe decisions when initial data is ambiguous. Real-world cases included Waymo’s
geofenced operations in Phoenix and the contrast between fast emergency fallback systems
and more complex uncertainty mitigation strategies in advanced vehicles. In rail systems,
the focus shifted to multi-modal data fusion from LiDAR and cameras, emphasizing the
challenge of resolving inconsistencies, especially when distinguishing between humans and
other objects on the tracks. The layered processing approach – comprising rapid object
detection, slower identification, and subsequent motion tracking – was presented as a method
to incrementally refine understanding while balancing timeliness and accuracy.
    Human-centered analogies highlighted how people naturally adjust processing time based
on perceived threat and proximity, serving as an implicit model for soft real-time systems.
For example, humans allocate more cognitive resources to assessment when a potential
hazard appears distant, whereas immediate threats like the need to brake demand rapid
reaction. Additionally, the way distractions – such as animals – can temporarily obscure
more critical upcoming stimuli like vehicles illustrates how prioritization and attention shifts
occur dynamically, a concept relevant to designing systems that must manage changing
real-time demands.
    Key technical considerations included debates on online training and distribution drift,
particularly whether it is preferable to adapt models dynamically at runtime or to preserve
memory of rare edge cases that could be critical. Shadow mode simulation emerged as a
strategy for evaluating new algorithms alongside active systems, especially within virtual or
“metaverse” environments, offering a non-intrusive way to test improvements. Additionally,
sensor cascades were discussed, where secondary sensors are activated based on outputs
from primary sensors to refine decision accuracy, enabling more responsive and adaptive
perception pipelines.
    To visually support and extend the conceptual discussions, several figures (Figure 1,
Figure 2, Figure 3) were sketched throughout the session. These illustrations capture the
tradeoffs between accuracy, time, and computational effort in real-time and soft real-time
systems. They also highlight architectures that mirror human-inspired decision strategies
and progressive refinement models.
    A key focus of the discussion was on the complex challenges of designing systems that
must operate across multiple timelines while adapting to shifting, context-sensitive deadlines.
Participants explored how systems can meaningfully react to outdated but potentially
valuable information, and the risks associated with making premature decisions based on
incomplete data. A recurring theme was the importance of metadata – such as timestamps
and confidence scores – to inform decision-making under uncertainty. Additionally, the need
to establish acceptance criteria for degraded or “poisoned” data, and the integration of
error-correcting mechanisms in fault-tolerant designs, was emphasized. These challenges
raised several open questions about the future of dynamic system design.




                                                                                                   25091
152   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design




         Figure 1 Anytime Algorithm Convergence: Anytime algorithms will converge on a specific
      accuracy, which improves over time. Understanding any mid-execution accuracy (decision points)
      can help approximate what the final accuracy may be. Additional resources for parallel activity
      may further improve the convergence time. Axes: Y-axis: accuracy, X-axis: time, Z-axis: resources
      required to obtain the particular decision points).




          Figure 2 Frame-based Decision Enhancement: Taking into account regular processing of frame
      rates: enabling parallel access with in-process updates (not early exit) could open the pathway to
      taking 2 data values from two frames, and using the combined information to make a more informed
      decision (Axes: Y-axis: accuracy, X-axis: time).
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                          153




    Figure 3 A “Thinking Fast, Thinking slow” explicit example: Component 1 can arrive with
something above the accuracy threshold, but will not maximize accuracy quickly. The result from its
quick response can trigger the next component, which should (with initial criteria) arrive at a better
solution, faster than starting without that information. Axes: Y-axis: accuracy, X-axis: time).


   Key System Design Challenges:
   Managing multiple, context-sensitive timelines and deadlines
   Handling outdated but potentially valuable data
   Mitigating the cost of incorrect early decisions
   Timestamping decisions and including confidence metadata
   Defining acceptance criteria for incomplete or degraded input
   Building fault-tolerant systems that can still reason under uncertainty

   Open Questions:
   How can contextual deadlines be defined in reactive systems?
   What are effective methods to systematically integrate fault models and fallback strategies?
   Beyond automotive and rail, which domains are best suited for designs emphasizing
   dynamic tradeoffs in accuracy and timeliness?

   As a closing summary, the group emphasized that:
   Timeliness vs. Accuracy must be treated not as static tradeoffs but as part of a system’s
   runtime behavior.
   Current systems rarely pay a high cost for delayed decisions, but future high-stakes
   autonomous platforms (e.g., L5 vehicles, medical robotics) will.
   There is opportunity in revisiting layered decision systems, sensor fusion under uncertainty,
   and the reuse of older data in dynamic ways.
   Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo’s Debriefing Thought: “When the trigger changes your deadline,
   you are in a new kind of reactive system.”

References
1    Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. macmillan, 2011.




                                                                                                         25091
154   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


      4.5    Benchmarks for real-time systems
      Thomas Carle (Toulouse University, FR), Samarjit Chakraborty (The University of North
      Carolina (UNC) at Chapel Hill, US), Arthur Clavière (Collins Aerospace – Blagnac, FR), Vic-
      tor Jegu (Airbus S.A.S. – Toulouse, FR), Chadlia Jerad (University of Manouba, TN), Claire
      Pagetti (ONERA – Toulouse, FR), Jan Reineke (Universität des Saarlandes – Saarbrücken,
      DE) and Martin Schoeberl (Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK)
            License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Thomas Carle, Samarjit Chakraborty, Arthur Clavière, Victor Jegu, Chadlia Jerad, Claire
                      Pagetti, Jan Reineke, and Martin Schoeberl


      The work group on “Benchmarks for Real-Time Systems” discussed the shortcomings of
      existing benchmark suites like TACLeBench and explored possible directions for developing
      more representative and useful benchmarks. TACLeBench was criticized for being largely
      composed of small, non-real-time benchmarks, lacking multi-threaded code, and using only
      fixed inputs. Furthermore, it does not offer standardized licensing, nor does it provide
      clear guidance on the context in which benchmarks should be executed or evaluated. These
      limitations make it ill-suited for evaluating modern real-time systems, which are increasingly
      complex and heterogeneous.
          Participants noted that existing real-time benchmarks are used for a range of evaluation
      purposes – such as analyzing the worst-caes performance and/or predictability of microar-
      chitectures, assessing WCET (Worst-Case Execution Time) analysis tools, and evaluating
      scheduling algorithms. Depending on the benchmarks’ purpose they could consist of indi-
      vidual tasks, full applications, or even complete systems where specific software and hardware
      combinations are considered together.
          A key theme in the discussion was the importance of designing benchmarks that reflect
      actual real-time workloads and applications. Real-time systems span diverse domains
      and benchmarks should reflect this diversity. Instead of relying exclusively on small code
      fragments, participants suggested a potential shift towards specification-based benchmarks:
      defining the intended behavior rather than a fixed implementation, with the goal of deriving
      implementations that exhibit predictable worst-case performance.
          Domains that are particularly representative of modern real-time systems include vision
      and perception (e.g., camera or LIDAR input), sensor fusion, control algorithms such as
      model-predictive control, and mixed workloads running on heterogeneous architectures (e.g.,
      involving both CPUs and GPUs). These domains may feature execution time variation
      depending on the nature of the input data, a characteristic that existing benchmark suites
      largely fail to capture.
          Several participants pointed to tools like Simulink and Lustre as valuable sources for
      generating realistic benchmarks. Simulink, in particular, includes many example controllers
      that are already central to real-world safety-critical systems. These models can be used to
      generate C code, with support for different code generation configurations, including full
      closed-loop systems that simulate both controllers and plants. Similarly, code generated
      from Lustre, or real-world code bases like Autoware, could serve as useful starting points for
      building a more diverse and representative benchmark suite.
          Another important aspect raised was the need to define reference contexts for benchmarks.
      This includes specifying the hardware architecture and microarchitecture, selecting reasonable
      parameter values, and ideally providing baseline results obtained using known analysis tools.
      Benchmarks should also include annotations – such as loop bounds – to ensure they are
      compatible with WCET analysis tools like AbsInt.
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                    155


 5     Software teasers
In this session, various seminar participants demonstrate programming languages and tools
they are developing.



5.1    Timed Rebeca
Marjan Sirjani (Mälardalen University – Västerås, SE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Marjan Sirjani


Timed Rebeca is an actor-based modeling language equipped with a model-checking tool. It
is designed to be both accessible and usable for software engineers and grounded in formal
semantics, ensuring formal verification support. A cyber-physical system is represented as a
set of communicating actors, and safety and liveness properties can be verified using the model-
checking tool, Afra. Rebeca homepage can be accessed here: https://rebeca-lang.org/.



5.2    Lingua Franca
Erling Rennemo Jellum (University of California – Berkeley, US), Edward A. Lee (University
of California – Berkeley, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Erling Rennemo Jellum and Edward A. Lee


Lingua Franca is a reactor-oriented coordination language for implementing cyber-physical
systems. Due to its declarative syntax, automatic diagramming is possible. By separating
the concerns of coordination and timing from the computation, it is a promising target for
code generated by large language models. Lingua Franca homepage can be accessed here:
https://www.lf-lang.org/.



5.3    SCCharts
Alexander Schulz-Rosengarten (Universität Kiel, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Alexander Schulz-Rosengarten


SCCharts is a reactive synchronous programming language with sequentially constructive
semantics. It supports dynamic ticks, which are driven by a minimal interface to the
environment. As such, it may be integrated with other runtimes, such as Lingua Franca,
to provide its ticks. SCCharts rely on several model-to-model transformations to turn an
SCChart model into code. SCCharts has sophisticated diagram generation, the same that
is used in Lingua Franca. Each compilation step can also be inspected graphically, making
the compiler transparent and easing development. Links to SCCharts can be accesses here:
https://github.com/kieler/semantics/wiki/Quick-Overview.




                                                                                                   25091
156   25091 – Tradeoffs in Reactive Systems Design


      5.4    QRML
      Marc Geilen (TU Eindhoven, NL)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Marc Geilen


      QRML is a domain-specific language for formulating multi-objective optimization problems
      for cyber-physical systems. The problems can be exported to several formats and solved
      by tools like Z3. QRML also runs in the browser. QRML tool can be accessed here:
      https://qrml.org/qrml.



      5.5    HipHop
      Manuel Serrano (INRIA – Sophia Antipolis, FR)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Manuel Serrano


      HipHop is a synchronous-reactive language embedded in Javascript. It connects the asyn-
      chronous world of Javascript with the synchronous world of Esterel. The HipHop program
      describes a deterministic and concurrent response to external inputs, and the embedding
      Javascript decides when to trigger the HipHop program. HipHop can be downloaded from
      GitHub (https://github.com/manuel-serrano/hiphop).
J. Castrillón-Mazo, C. Jerad, E. A. Lee, C. Pagetti, and S. J. Lin                                     157


        Participants
  Andres Barrilado                   Jérôme Hugues                   Selma Saidi
NXP Semiconductors –               Carnegie Mellon University –   TU Braunschweig, DE
Toulouse, FR                       Pittsburgh, US                    Klaus Schneider
  Grzegorz Bazydlo                   Victor Jegu                  RPTU
University of Zielona Gora, PL     Airbus S.A.S. – Toulouse, FR   Kaiserslautern-Landau, DE
  Frédéric Boniol                    Erling Rennemo Jellum           Martin Schoeberl
ONERA – Toulouse, FR               University of California –     Technical University of Denmark
  Hasna Bouraoui                   Berkeley, US                   – Lyngby, DK
TU Dresden, DE                      Chadlia Jerad                    Alexander Schulz-Rosengarten
  Thomas Carle                     University of Manouba, TN      Universität Kiel, DE
Toulouse University, FR             Einar Broch Johnsen              Katharina Sedow
  Jerónimo Castrillón-Mazo         University of Oslo, NO         Saneon GmbH – Ismaning, DE
TU Dresden, DE                       Hokeun Kim                      Manuel Serrano
  Samarjit Chakraborty             Arizona State University –     INRIA – Sophia Antipolis, FR
University of North Carolina at    Tempe, US                         Marjan Sirjani
Chapel Hill, US                      Edward A. Lee                Mälardalen University –
  Anupam Chattopadhyay             University of California –     Västerås, SE
Nanyang TU – Singapore, SG         Berkeley, US                      Jonathan Sprinkle
  Arthur Clavière                    Shaokai Jerry Lin            Vanderbilt University –
Collins Aerospace – Blagnac, FR    University of California –     Nashville, US
  Marc Geilen                      Berkeley, US                      Eric Tutu Tchao
TU Eindhoven, NL                    Claire Pagetti                Kwame Nkrumah University of
  Alain Girault                    ONERA – Toulouse, FR           Science and Technology, GH
INRIA – Grenoble, FR                 Jan Reineke                     Lothar Thiele
  Andrés Goens Jokisch             Universität des Saarlandes –   ETH Zürich, CH
University of Amsterdam, NL        Saarbrücken, DE                   Reinhard von Hanxleden
  Arpan Gujarati                     Marcus Rossel                Universität Kiel, DE
University of British Columbia –   Barkhausen Institut –             Eugene Yip
Vancouver, CA                      Dresden, DE                    GLIWA – Weilheim, DE




                                                                                                    25091
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25092

Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and
Applications
Josu Ceberio Uribe∗1 , Benjamin Doerr∗2 , John McCall∗3 ,
Carsten Witt∗4 , and Marcus Schmidbauer†5
1       University of the Basque Country – Donostia, ES. josu.ceberio@ehu.eus
2       Ecole Polytechnique – Palaiseau, FR. doerr@lix.polytechnique.fr
3       The Robert Gordon University – Aberdeen, GB. j.mccall@rgu.ac.uk
4       Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK. cawi@dtu.dk
5       Universität Passau, DE. marcus.schmidbauer@uni-passau.de

        Abstract
The Dagstuhl Seminar 25092 “Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Practice” took
place on February 23–28, 2025. It brought together 25 international experts in estimation-of-
distribution algorithms (EDAs) and related research areas. Their research focus ranged from
theoretical aspects like mathematical runtime analyses to efficient solutions of real-world problems
in industrial contexts. This report documents the program and the main outcomes of this fruitful
seminar.
Seminar February 23–28, 2025 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/25092
2012 ACM Subject Classification Computing methodologies → Search methodologies; Theory
   of computation → Design and analysis of algorithms
Keywords and phrases estimation-of-distribution algorithms, heuristic search and optimization,
   machine learning, probabilistic model building
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.2.158



    1    Executive Summary
John McCall (The Robert Gordon University – Aberdeen, GB)
Josu Ceberio Uribe (University of the Basque Country – Donostia, ES)
Benjamin Doerr (Ecole Polytechnique – Palaiseau, FR)
Carsten Witt (Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK)
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © John McCall, Josu Ceberio Uribe, Benjamin Doerr, and Carsten Witt


The Dagstuhl Seminar “Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Practice” from
February 23 to 28, 2025, brought together 25 international experts in the field of estimation-
of-distribution algorithms (EDAs). EDAs iteratively evolve a distribution on the search
space (called probabilistic model of the search space) in such a way that better solutions
accumulate probability mass. Consequently, after running an EDA for sufficient time, one
can obtain near-optimal solutions simply by sampling from this probabilistic model. The
expertise of the seminar participants covered a broad variety of aspects ranging, in particular,
from theoretical topics such as mathematical runtime analyses to an applied topics such as
the solution of industrial optimization problems through EDAs.


∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector



            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15, Issue 2, pp. 158–183
Editors: Josu Ceberio Uribe, Benjamin Doerr, John McCall, Carsten Witt, and Marcus Schmidbauer
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                    159


    The main aim of the seminar was to narrow the gap between theory and practice in
EDAs by bringing together researchers from both sides and stimulating interaction. We
facilitated this interaction through two long introductory talks on theory of EDAs and on
typical applications of EDAs, through some regular conference-style talks discussing recent
substantial results, short flash talks presenting new ideas and open problems, and breakout
sessions for focused discussions. At all times, we left ample time for discussions, and flexibly
adjusted the schedule to not cut short interesting discussions.
    We believe that the seminar has succeeded its main aims of narrowing the gap between
theory and practice in EDAs. This is visible from the high number of talks and the intensive
discussions both in plenary and breakout sessions. Moreover, all participants attended
essentially all sessions and all stayed for the full five days of the seminar. Given the large
number of truly leading experts from academia and industry usually having overloaded
schedules, this shows the success of the seminar, and the Dagstuhl Seminar center in general.
    The seminar has identified several promising research directions, which can be explored
in the reminder of this report. One that deserves particular mention is the relation of
model-based genetic algorithms, that use additional mechanisms to understand the search
space structure, and multi-variate EDAs, that try to understand the search space via the
core working principles of EDAs. Here clearly a more intensive exchange of ideas is very
promising, and will surely result from this seminar.
    Overall, we feel that this was a very successful seminar, and, also in the name of the
participants, we thank Dagstuhl for enabling us to conduct this seminar at Schloss Dagstuhl,
which was the ideal place for this type of seminar.




                                                                                                   25092
160   25092 – Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications


       2       Table of Contents
      Executive Summary
        John McCall, Josu Ceberio Uribe, Benjamin Doerr, and Carsten Witt . . . . . . . 158

      Overview of Talks
           Multi-Armed Bandits and Algorithm Configuration and their connections to EDAs
           (Self-presentation)
           Jasmin Brandt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
           Inversion vectors: an alternative representation for permutations
           Josu Ceberio Uribe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
           Searching Permutations for Constructing Uniformly Distributed Point Sets
           Carola Doerr . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
           An Introduction to Search Trajectory Mining
           Martin Fyvie . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
           It’s Always the Step-Size
           Nikolaus Hansen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
           Can EDAs be useful for Data augmentation and Imputation?
           Jose Ignacio Hidalgo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
           Is Deep Optimization an EDA?
           Joshua D. Knowles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
           Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms for Multi-Valued Decision Variables
           Martin S. Krejca . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
           Introduction to Theoretical Analyses of EDAs
           Timo Kötzing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
           Faster Optimization Through Genetic Drift
           Johannes Lengler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
           Introduction to EDAs
           John McCall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
           Estimation of Distribution Algorithms using generative Machine Learning models
           Franz Rothlauf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
           From Fitness Landscapes to Problem Factorizations: A Machine Learning Perspect-
           ive
           Roberto Santana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
           The use of the Doubly Stochastic Matrix models for the Quadratic Assignment
           Problem
           Valentino Santucci . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
           Linkage-Learning Evolutionary Algorithms: Recent Theoretical Advances
           Marcus Schmidbauer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
           Estimation of Distribution Algorithms and the Ising Model
           Jonathan L. Shapiro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                      161


   Vine Copula-Based Estimation of Distribution Algorithms for Multivariate Con-
   tinuous Optimization
   Marta Rosa Soto Ortiz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
   Optimal Mixing in Model-based Evolutionary Algorithms
   Dirk Thierens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
   Estimated Distributions and Warm Starts
   Vanessa Volz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
   Runtime Analysis of the Multi-valued cGA
   Carsten Witt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171

Working groups
   Breakout Session: Learning Distributions with Deep Learning
   Josu Ceberio Uribe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
   Breakout Session: Exploration versus Exploitation
   Duc-Cuong Dang and Jonathan L. Shapiro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
   Breakout Session: Univariate versus Multivariate 2
   Duc-Cuong Dang and Jonathan L. Shapiro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
   Breakout Session: Genetic Drift 1
   Martin S. Krejca . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
   Breakout Session: Univariate versus Multivariate 1
   Timo Kötzing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
   Breakout Session: Genetic Drift 2
   Johannes Lengler and Carsten Witt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
   Breakout Session: Explainability of EDAs
   John McCall and Josu Ceberio Uribe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
   Breakout Session: Linkage Learning
   John McCall and Duc-Cuong Dang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180

Panel discussions
   Discussion Forum: Early Insights on Design and Analysis of EDAs
   Duc-Cuong Dang, Timo Kötzing, Marcus Schmidbauer, and Andrew M. Sutton . . 181

Open problems
   Sampling of Rare Fitness Values
   Duc-Cuong Dang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183




                                                                                                     25092
162   25092 – Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications


       3      Overview of Talks
      3.1     Multi-Armed Bandits and Algorithm Configuration and their
              connections to EDAs (Self-presentation)
      Jasmin Brandt (Universität Paderborn, DE)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Jasmin Brandt
      Main reference Jasmin Brandt, Viktor Bengs, Björn Haddenhorst, Eyke Hüllermeier: “Finding Optimal Arms in
                     Non-stochastic Combinatorial Bandits with Semi-bandit Feedback and Finite Budget”, in Proc. of
                     the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural
                     Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 -
                     December 9, 2022, 2022.
                URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/820e95997d050178323230e316897c38-Abstract-
                     Conference.html
      Main reference Jasmin Brandt, Elias Schede, Björn Haddenhorst, Viktor Bengs, Eyke Hüllermeier, Kevin Tierney:
                     “AC-Band: A Combinatorial Bandit-Based Approach to Algorithm Configuration”, in Proc. of the
                     Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2023, Thirty-Fifth Conference on
                     Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2023, Thirteenth Symposium on Educational
                     Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2023, Washington, DC, USA, February 7-14, 2023,
                     pp. 12355–12363, AAAI Press, 2023.
                URL https://doi.org/10.1609/AAAI.V37I10.26456


      In this talk, a brief introduction to the Multi-Armed Bandit and Algorithm Configuration
      problem was given. I presented my recent work on combinatorial bandits and the challenges
      during the extension of the theoretical analysis to Algorithm Configuration. In addition, the
      connection of the problems to EDAs was shortly outlined.



      3.2     Inversion vectors: an alternative representation for permutations
      Josu Ceberio Uribe (University of the Basque Country – Donostia, ES)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Josu Ceberio Uribe
       Joint work of Josu Ceberio Uribe, Aimar Barrena, Ekhine Irurozki, Jose A. Lozano, Mikel Malagón


      Many optimization algorithms use permutations to represent solutions, but despite their
      apparent simplicity, permutations present significant challenges for optimization methods,
      particularly for Global Random Search algorithms. The mutual-exclusivity constraint
      complicates the learning and sampling of probability distributions over the permutation
      space, often requiring costly numerical computations. An alternative approach involves
      using bijective functions on Sn to transform permutation-coded solutions into integer-vector
      representations known as inversion vectors.
          Although inversion vectors have been recognized for centuries, a comprehensive and
      unified framework for them is lacking. In this paper, we provide formal definitions and a
      unified notation for all types of inversion vector codifications. We then establish bijective
      transformations between these codifications, enabling the characterization of their relation-
      ships and properties. Finally, we apply this theoretical framework to explain the behavior of
      UMDA algorithms when different inversion vectors are used in various permutation problems.
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                                 163


3.3     Searching Permutations for Constructing Uniformly Distributed
        Point Sets
Carola Doerr (Sorbonne University – Paris, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Carola Doerr
 Joint work of François Clément, Carola Doerr, Kathrin Klamroth, Luís Paquete
Main reference François Clément, Carola Doerr, Kathrin Klamroth, Luís Paquete: “Transforming the Challenge of
               Constructing Low-Discrepancy Point Sets into a Permutation Selection Problem”, CoRR,
               Vol. abs/2407.11533, 2024.
          URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2407.11533


Uniformly distributed point sets of low discrepancy are heavily used in experimental design
and across a very wide range of applications such as numerical integration, computer
graphics, and finance. Recent methods based on Graph Neural Networks [1] and solver-based
optimization [2] identified point sets having much lower discrepancy than previously known
constructions. We show that further substantial improvements are possible by separating
the construction of low-discrepancy point sets into (i) the relative position of the points, and
(ii) the optimal placement respecting these relationships. Using tailored permutations, we
construct point sets that are of 20% smaller discrepancy on average than those proposed
by Rusch et al. In terms of inverse discrepancy, our sets reduce the number of points in
dimension 2 needed to obtain a discrepancy of 0.005 from more than 500 points to less than
350. For applications where the sets are used to query time-consuming models, this is a
significant reduction.
References
1    T.K. Rusch, N. Kirk, M.M. Bronstein, C. Lemieux, D. Rus, Message-Passing Monte
     Carlo: Generating low-discrepancy point sets via graph neural networks. Proc. Natl. Acad.
     Sci. U.S.A. 121, e2409913121 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2409913121 Free
     version available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15059
2    F. Clément, C. Doerr, K. Klamroth, L. Paquete, Constructing Optimal L∞ Star Discrepancy
     Sets. To appear in Proc. of the AMS. Preprint available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.
     17463



3.4     An Introduction to Search Trajectory Mining
Martin Fyvie (The Robert Gordon University – Aberdeen, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Martin Fyvie


Population-based metaheuristics are commonly used to solve complex optimization problems,
but their stochastic nature often obscures decision-making processes. As these algorithms
are increasingly deployed in critical domains requiring end-user interaction, the need for
explainability has grown. This presentation introduces trajectory mining as a post-runtime
analytical framework for enhancing the transparency of optimization methods including
Estimation of Distribution Algorithms, Genetic Algorithms, Particle Swarm Optimization,
and Differential Evolution.
    Our approach is based on the use of Principal Components Analysis to project algorithm
search trajectories onto lower-dimensional sub-spaces, capturing population evolution from
initialization to convergence. Novel metrics such as Mean Variable Contribution identify




                                                                                                                25092
164   25092 – Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications


      decision variables with highest impact on search behaviour and solution quality. These ana-
      lyses, complemented by statistical testing, extract explanatory features that reveal algorithm
      behaviour across diverse problem landscapes, allowing search behaviour comparisons.
          We show from experiments on benchmark problems and real-world applications how
      trajectory mining can be used to identify influential variables and reveal key learning steps
      that help to explain fitness outcomes. These insights can inform the design of new algorithm
      variants while improving end-user understanding of solution quality and algorithm behaviour,
      particularly in domains requiring human-algorithm collaboration.



      3.5     It’s Always the Step-Size
      Nikolaus Hansen (INRIA Saclay – Palaiseau, FR)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Nikolaus Hansen


      By the semantics of the parameter K in cGA, we identify analogous places “of K” in the
      CMA-ES. However, in the CMA-ES, we cannot use the same value for K in all of these
      places. In particular, in the (m, C) parametrization of the distribution, the C update must
      have a much larger K value (a smaller learning rate) than the m update, usually n2 /µ vs 1.
      Otherwise, CMA-ES fails to work. In the CMA-ES, genetic drift is usually only observable
      when the objective is noisy and we discuss how failures can be observed. Anecdotal evidence
      also suggests that a failure of ES or CMA-ES is often due to a failure of the step-size
      adaptation, in particular also when the objective is noisy where we observe the smallest
      eigenvalue of C to drift to zero exponentially fast.



      3.6     Can EDAs be useful for Data augmentation and Imputation?
      Jose Ignacio Hidalgo (Complutense University of Madrid, ES)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Jose Ignacio Hidalgo
       Joint work of Jose Ignacio Hidalgo, Oscar Garnica, J. Mauel Velasco, Jessica Megane
      Main reference José Ignacio Hidalgo, Marta Botella, J. Manuel Velasco, Oscar Garnica, Carlos Cervigón, Remedios
                     Martínez, Aranzazu Aramendi, Esther Maqueda, Juan Lanchares: “Glucose forecasting combining
                     Markov chain based enrichment of data, random grammatical evolution and Bagging”, Appl. Soft
                     Comput., Vol. 88, p. 105923, 2020.
                URL https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ASOC.2019.105923


      In this talk, we present the work of our group on blood glucose prediction for individuals with
      diabetes, where we utilize Estimation of Distribution Algorithms in two distinct parts of the
      modeling process. First, we applied a UMDA to learn the weights of an ensemble model for
      glucose prediction. Second, we also use a UMDA to improve the data augmentation process.
          I divided the talk in three parts. In the first part I quickly revised how I used a comatc
      GA, a basic EDA, for solving the main contribution of my PhD Thesis: Partitioning of digital
      ciruits for Multi-FPGA implementation. I also mentioned in this part the previous work on
      EDAs in collaboration qith UPM, Roberto Santana, Pedro Larrañaga, Concha Bielza an
      Alfredo Cuesta, where we proposed the use of Archimedean Copulas as the model of a Joint
      Distribution Fuuhction in an EDA.
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                                 165


    The second part of the talk was devoted to explain our work on Blood Glucose prediction
for peole with diabetes. We have beeb applying Grammatical Evolution approaches for the
last 12 years. In those works we use EDAs, in particular an UMDA. First, we applied a
UMDA to learn the weights of an ensemble model for glucose prediction. Second, we also
use a UMDA to improve the data augmentation process.
    Finally, we propose a new problem for EDAs to solve in the context of the EARCO project.
EARCO stands for European Alpha-1 Research Collaboration. It is a pan-European network
committed to promoting clinical research and education in alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency
(AATD).



3.7     Is Deep Optimization an EDA?
Joshua D. Knowles (SLB Cambridge Research, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Joshua D. Knowles
Main reference Jamie Caldwell, Joshua D. Knowles, Christoph Thies, Filip Kubacki, Richard A. Watson: “Deep
               Optimisation: Transitioning the Scale of Evolutionary Search by Inducing and Searching in Deep
               Representations”, SN Comput. Sci., Vol. 3(3), p. 253, 2022.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1007/S42979-022-01109-W


Deep Optimization is an algorithm that uses deep association networks to learn epistatic
structure in a problem while optimizing it, and that works recursively applying parts of itself
to itself. It was introduced in 2018 by Jamie Caldwell et al, [1] and it comes out of and
develops ideas from Richard A. Watson’s 25 years of research on models of symbiogenetic
evolution. It appears to perform remarkably well on some problems (including learning
constraints with no explicit constraint handling mechanism), however that’s presently a
tentative statement because it’s not in common use. The basic form of the algorithm is
an EDA but it also departs from other EDAs in some ways that I’ll explain. I have new
results to show based on work I did with MSc students last year; these improve the algorithm
significantly on hard multiple knapsack problem instances. Questions: Is Deep Optimization
correctly classified as an EDA? Is it better than other EDAs? Why/why not? How should
we measure its performance (since it has more and different overhead than other EDAs)?
Is there a lighter-weight version of it that would be better for theoretical analysis? What
theoretical tools would be needed to analyse Deep Optimization properly?
References
1    Caldwell, J.R., Watson, R.A., Thies, C. and Knowles, J.D., 2018. Deep optimisation:
     Solving combinatorial optimisation problems using deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1811.00784.
2    Caldwell, J., Knowles, J., Thies, C., Kubacki, F. and Watson, R., 2022. Deep optimisa-
     tion: Transitioning the scale of evolutionary search by inducing and searching in deep
     representations. SN Computer Science, 3(3), p.253.




                                                                                                                25092
166   25092 – Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications


      3.8     Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms for Multi-Valued Decision
              Variables
      Martin S. Krejca (Ecole Polytechnique – Palaiseau, FR)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Martin S. Krejca
       Joint work of Firas Ben Jedidia, Benjamin Doerr, Martin S. Krejca
      Main reference Firas Ben Jedidia, Benjamin Doerr, Martin S. Krejca: “Estimation-of-distribution algorithms for
                     multi-valued decision variables”, Theor. Comput. Sci., Vol. 1003, p. 114622, 2024.
                URL https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TCS.2024.114622


      The majority of research on estimation-of-distribution algorithms (EDAs) concentrates on
      pseudo-Boolean optimization and permutation problems, leaving the domain of EDAs for
      problems in which the decision variables can take more than two values, but which are not
      permutation problems, mostly unexplored. To render this domain more accessible, we propose
      a natural way to extend the known univariate EDAs to this setting. Different from a naive
      reduction to the binary case, our approach avoids additional constraints. Since understanding
      genetic drift is crucial for an optimal parameter choice, we extend the known quantitative
      analysis of genetic drift to EDAs for multi-valued, categorical variables. Roughly speaking,
      when the variables take r different values, the time for genetic drift to become significant is r
      times shorter than in the binary case. Consequently, the update strength of the probabilistic
      model has to be chosen r times lower now. To investigate how desired model updates take
      place in this framework, we undertake a mathematical runtime analysis on the r-valued
      LeadingOnes problem. We prove that with the right parameters, the multi-valued UMDA
      solves this problem efficiently in O(r ln(r)2 n2 ln(n)) function evaluations. Overall, our work
      shows that our good understanding of binary EDAs naturally extends to the multi-valued
      setting, and it gives advice on how to set the main parameters of multi-values EDAs.



      3.9     Introduction to Theoretical Analyses of EDAs
      Timo Kötzing (Hasso-Plattner-Institut, Universität Potsdam, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Timo Kötzing


      The Theory of EDAs, conducted as a run time analysis of specific EDAs applied to test
      functions, has a history of close to 20 years. In this talk, I review some of the core results
      provided by the theory of EDAs. I give insights into main paradigms and the models used
      by theoreticians.
         Discussing results, I present different settings pertaining to (a) hill climbing; (b) noise,
      rugged landscapes and local optima; (c) behavior in the absence of a signal.
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                                    167


3.10      Faster Optimization Through Genetic Drift
Johannes Lengler (ETH Zürich, CH)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Johannes Lengler
 Joint work of Cella Florescu, Marc Kaufmann, Johannes Lengler, Ulysse Schaller, Dirk Sudholt, Carsten Witt
Main reference Cella Florescu, Marc Kaufmann, Johannes Lengler, Ulysse Schaller: “Faster Optimization Through
               Genetic Drift”, in Proc. of the Parallel Problem Solving from Nature – PPSN XVIII – 18th
               International Conference, PPSN 2024, Hagenberg, Austria, September 14-18, 2024, Proceedings, Part
               III, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 15150, pp. 70–85, Springer, 2024.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-70071-2_5


I gave some new perspective on genetic drift. While genetic drift is often seen as something
to be avoided, as it produces mistakes, I discuss a simple problem, dynamic BinVal, for which
it is faster to accept those mistake and use aggressive updates that correct them quickly.
This talk is part of a general discussion at Dagstuhl on when one should avoid or accept
genetic drift.
References
1    Johannes Lengler, Dirk Sudholt, and Carsten Witt. “The complex parameter landscape of
     the compact genetic algorithm.” Algorithmica 83 (2021): 1096-1137.



3.11      Introduction to EDAs
John McCall (The Robert Gordon University – Aberdeen, GB)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © John McCall


In this talk I provide an introduction to Estimation of Distribution Algorithms (EDA). I
begin with the general concept of an EDA: that one models the distribution of fitness over a
search space and by sampling this distribution one hopes to generate high fitness solutions
with a high probability.
    The talk covers a range of key EDA techniques including: linkage learning; model
parameterisation, model sampling; and adaptation to different representation spaces. I also
present some EDA applications on test functions, theoretical benchmarks and to real world
applications in biocontrol and marine scheduling.
    In summary, EDAs are a mature and successful optimisation metaheuristic based on
mathematically-principled statistical modelling that have been applied across all major
problem representations and in the real world.



3.12      Estimation of Distribution Algorithms using generative Machine
          Learning models
Franz Rothlauf (Universität Mainz, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Franz Rothlauf


The talk discussed the development of EDAs using generative ML models over the last 15
years.




                                                                                                                   25092
168   25092 – Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications


      3.13      From Fitness Landscapes to Problem Factorizations: A Machine
                Learning Perspective
      Roberto Santana (University of the Basque Country – Donostia, ES)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Roberto Santana
       Joint work of Roberto Santana, Arnaud Liefooghe, Bilel Derbel
      Main reference Roberto Santana, Arnaud Liefooghe, Bilel Derbel: “Boomerang-shaped neural embeddings for NK
                     landscapes”, in Proc. of the GECCO ’22: Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference,
                     Boston, Massachusetts, USA, July 9 – 13, 2022, pp. 858–866, ACM, 2022.
                URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3512290.3528856


      This talk discusses the use of machine learning models – particularly neural networks – to
      automate various components of evolutionary search by leveraging information from the
      problem’s fitness landscape. A general framework is presented in which the search model
      comprises three elements: (1) data from the fitness landscape; (2) a neural network; and
      (3) a machine learning task. As a specific instance of this framework, the talk presents the
      problem of learning neural embeddings for NK landscapes [1]. In this scenario, the goal is to
      learn an embedding-based representation of an NK landscape instance, where each binary
      solution of the NK problem is mapped to a continuous vector. To construct this embedding,
      each NK model solution is treated as a word in a vocabulary. Sentences are sequences of NK
      solutions related by predefined semantics (e.g., walks in the fitness landscape), and a corpus
      is a large collection of such sentences.
          The talk also proposes alternative scenarios in which fitness landscape data correspond to
      local optima networks (LONs) [2], represented as annotated graphs. Graph neural networks
      are employed to process these LONs, and the machine learning task involves algorithm
      parameter generation by producing a factorization of the optimization problem – one that
      could be exploited by a factorized distribution algorithm (FDA). The work aligns with
      approaches that integrate ML techniques with classical exploratory landscape analysis for
      automated algorithm selection [3], as well as with applications of graph neural networks in
      solving combinatorial optimization problems [4].
          Finally, the talk addresses the question of theory choice [5] for Estimation of Distribution
      Algorithms, advocating for the use of factorizations as a fundamental component of EDA
      theory. This is justified by their potential to provide simplicity, broad applicability, fruitful-
      ness, and accuracy – particularly due to their compatibility with widely accepted theories in
      the ML field.
      References
      1    R. Santana, A. Liefooghe, and B. Derbel, “Boomerang-shaped neural embeddings for nk
           landscapes,” in Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, 2022,
           pp. 858–866.
      2    G. Ochoa, M. Tomassini, S. Vérel, and C. Darabos, “A study of nk landscapes’ basins
           and local optima networks,” in Proceedings of the 10th annual conference on Genetic and
           evolutionary computation, 2008, pp. 555–562.
      3    M. Seiler, U. Škvorc, C. Doerr, and H. Trautmann, “Synergies of deep and classical explor-
           atory landscape features for automated algorithm selection,” in International Conference
           on Learning and Intelligent Optimization. Springer, 2024, pp. 361–376.
      4    I. Echeverria, M. Murua, and R. Santana, “Multi-assignment scheduler: A new behavioral
           cloning method for the job-shop scheduling problem,” in International Conference on
           Learning and Intelligent Optimization. Springer, 2024, pp. 138–152.
      5    T. S. Kuhn, The Essential Tension. University of Chicago Press, 1977, ch. Objetivity,
           value judgment and theory choice, pp. 320–339.
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                               169


3.14      The use of the Doubly Stochastic Matrix models for the Quadratic
          Assignment Problem
Valentino Santucci (University for Foreigners of Perugia, IT)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Valentino Santucci
 Joint work of Valentino Santucci, Josu Ceberio
Main reference Valentino Santucci, Josu Ceberio: “On the Use of the Doubly Stochastic Matrix Models for the
               Quadratic Assignment Problem”, Evolutionary Computation, pp. 1–33, 2025.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1162/evco_a_00369


Permutation problems have captured the attention of the combinatorial optimization com-
munity for decades due to the challenge they pose. Although their solutions are naturally
encoded as permutations, in each problem, the information to be used to optimize them can
vary substantially. Therefore, we discussed two types of permutation problems: ordering
problems and assignment problems. The Quadratic Assignment Problem (QAP) is perhaps
the most prominent example of permutation problems of assignment type. In the talk we
discussed how it is possible to use Doubly Stochastic Matrices (DSMs) to address QAP in the
context of Estimation of Distribution Algorithms. To that end, we discussed efficient learning
and sampling schemes that enable an effective iterative update of the probability model.
We analyzed the effectiveness of the discussed model both on QAP and on the the Linear
Ordering Problem (LOP), a well-known example of permutation problem of ordering type.
The talk concluded with a description of the potential uses of DSMs for other optimization
paradigms, such as genetic algorithms or model-based gradient search.



3.15      Linkage-Learning Evolutionary Algorithms: Recent Theoretical
          Advances
Marcus Schmidbauer (Universität Passau, DE)
       License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Marcus Schmidbauer
 Joint work of Markus Schmidbauer, Dirk Sudholt


Linkage Learning (LL) aims at detecting dependencies between problem variables. We gave a
short introduction into LL and, in particular, contrasted different linkage-learning techniques.
Statistical Linkage Learning (SLL) uses frequencies of gene value combinations, whereas
Empirical Linkage Learning (ELL) is based on investigating how perturbation influences the
fitness of a solution. We proved the correctness of ELL on the Hierarchical If-and-only-if
(H-IFF) problem. Further, we stated bounds on the expected runtime of the ELL-based
Parameter-less Population Pyramid (P3) on H-IFF.



3.16      Estimation of Distribution Algorithms and the Ising Model
Jonathan L. Shapiro (University of Manchester, GB)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Jonathan L. Shapiro


This talk discussed Estimation of Distribution Algorithms and the Ising Model.




                                                                                                              25092
170   25092 – Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications


      3.17      Vine Copula-Based Estimation of Distribution Algorithms for
                Multivariate Continuous Optimization
      Marta Rosa Soto Ortiz (CaixaBank Tech – Madrid, ES)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Marta Rosa Soto Ortiz


      Estimation of Distribution Algorithms (EDAs) are a class of generative models within
      evolutionary computation that build probabilistic models from selected solutions in order to
      generate new candidate solutions. In the continuous multivariate setting, traditional EDAs
      often assume Gaussian distributions and linear dependencies between variables. However,
      these assumptions are restrictive and rarely hold in complex, real-world scenarios.
          To address these limitations, we adopt vine copula models, which offer a flexible framework
      by decoupling the modeling of marginal distributions from the dependency structure. Vine
      copulas capture dependencies between variables – regardless of their individual distributions –
      by learning them directly from the data, allowing for a broad range of pairwise relationships,
      including asymmetric, nonlinear, and non-monotonic interactions.
          Moreover, vine copulas decompose the joint dependency structure into a product of
      conditional bivariate copulas, organized hierarchically in a sequence of trees known as R-
      vines. This architecture allows different copula families to be assigned to different variable
      pairs within the same decomposition, making it highly adaptable to the complex dependency
      patterns found in real-world data.
          We illustrate the effectiveness of this approach through real-world examples, where vine
      copulas successfully capture diverse dependency patterns – such as tail dependence and
      complex variable dependencies – that Gaussian-based models fail to represent. In addition,
      we introduce copulaedas, an R package available on CRAN, which implements a complete
      vine copula-based EDA framework, including model learning and sampling procedures.
          Our findings show that vine copulas significantly enhance the modeling capabilities of
      EDAs, enabling more expressive and adaptive search distributions for continuous optimization
      problems.



      3.18      Optimal Mixing in Model-based Evolutionary Algorithms
      Dirk Thierens (Utrecht University, NL)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Dirk Thierens


      This talk discussed Optimal Mixing in Model-based Evolutionary Algorithms.



      3.19      Estimated Distributions and Warm Starts
      Vanessa Volz (CWI – Amsterdam, NL)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Vanessa Volz


      Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms (EDA) learn the underlying structure of a given
      black-box problem. But can the obtained model be reused for optimising similar problems?
      Below, I summarise a discussion on the topic.
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                         171


    In the field of evolutionary computation (EC), problems are commonly assumed to be
a black box. However, in most real-world settings, solving a problem with sophisticated
methods is only considered profitable if it is recurring, i.e. if different instances of the
same problem are encountered repeatedly. For example, logistics companies need to solve
comparable routing problems every day. Medical professionals need to create effective
treatment plans for similar conditions. Hyperparameters of algorithms need to be adjusted
for each new task. While the underlying problem structures remain unknown, black-box
optimisation approaches could be iteratively tailored to the regularly encountered problem
over time (across instances). Essentially: Learning to optimise.
    Some work on warm-starting EDAs exists, for example for CMA-ES ([1] for Hyperpara-
meter Optimisation and [2] for contextual optimisation). A structural transfer framework
using EDAs has also been proposed in [3].
    For some problems, such as ensemble selection of machine learning models for different
data folds, the optima may be assumed to be in similar locations. In these cases, when
running an EDA, warm-starting from the previously estimated distribution (with higher
exploration settings) might be sufficient for improving algorithm performance. In other cases,
additional domain knowledge would be required to determine how the obtained information
can be transferred. However, in most settings, what kind of similarity exists between instances
would need to be established first. How this can be done remains an open question.
References
1    M. Nomura, S. Watanabe, Y. Akimoto, Y. Ozaki, and M. Onishi, Warm Starting CMA-ES
     for Hyperparameter Optimization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 10, Art. no. 10, May 2021, doi: 10.1609/aaai.v35i10.17109.
2    Y. Sekino, K. Uchida, and S. Shirakawa, Warm Starting of CMA-ES for Contextual
     Optimization Problems. In Parallel Problem Solving from Nature – PPSN XVIII, Cham:
     Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024, pp. 205–220. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-70068-2_13.
3    R. Santana, A. Mendiburu, and J. A. Lozano, Structural transfer using EDAs: An application
     to multi-marker tagging SNP selection. In 2012 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation,
     Jun. 2012, doi: 10.1109/CEC.2012.6252963.



3.20      Runtime Analysis of the Multi-valued cGA
Carsten Witt (Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Carsten Witt
 Joint work of Sumit Adak, Carsten Witt
Main reference Sumit Adak, Carsten Witt: “Improved Runtime Analysis of a Multi-Valued Compact Genetic
               Algorithm on Two Generalized OneMax Problems”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2503.21439, 2025.
          URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2503.21439


In this talk, we discuss recent advances in the runtime analysis of the multi-valued cGA,
defined in the framework by Ben Jedidia et al. [5]. We consider an r-valued LeadingOnes
function and prove a runtime bound of O(n2 r2 (log3 n+log2 r)) that holds with high probability.
For an r-valued OneMax function counting the number of positions of value r − 1, we prove
a bound of O(nr(log n + log2 r)), which improves the previously best bound by Hamano et
al. [4] by a logarithmic factor and is tight for r = 2. Finally, we discuss a second generalization
of OneMax to the r-valued domain, which sums up the integer values of all positions and
hence has a maximum value of n(r − 1). For this function, the multi-valued cGA is proved
to find the optimum in time O(nr3 (log2 n + log r)) with high probability. Our proofs are




                                                                                                        25092
172   25092 – Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications


      based on analyses of stochastic drift of the frequencies for value r − 1 and bounds on their
      genetic drift. Finally, we discuss why the bound for the second OneMax-function is probably
      not tight.
      References
       1 S. Adak and C. Witt, Runtime Analysis of a Multi-valued Compact Genetic Algorithm on
           Generalized OneMax, in Proc. of PPSN 2024, Springer, pp. 53-69.
       2 S. Adak and C. Witt, A Runtime Analysis of the Multi-Valued Compact Genetic Algorithm
           on Generalized LeadingOnes, in Proc. of EvoCOP 2025, Springer, to appear.
       3 S. Adak and C. Witt, Improved Runtime Analysis of a Multi-Valued Compact Genetic
           Algorithm on Two Generalized OneMax Problems, in Proc. of GECCO 2025, ACM Press,
           to appear
       4 R. Hamano, K. Uchida, S. Shirakawa, D. Morinaga, and Y. Akimoto, “Tail Bounds on
           the Runtime of Categorical Compact Genetic Algorithm, Evolutionary Computation, 2025,
           https://doi.org/10.1162/evco_a_00361, in press
       5 F. Ben Jedidia, B. Doerr, and M. S. Krejca, Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms for
           Multi-Valued Decision Variables, Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 1003, p. 114622, 2024.



       4      Working groups
      4.1     Breakout Session: Learning Distributions with Deep Learning
      Josu Ceberio Uribe (University of the Basque Country – Donostia, ES)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Josu Ceberio Uribe


      The breakout session explored applications of deep learning for learning distributions, with
      a focus on alternatives to traditional Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) approaches.
      Starting point of the session was the following:
          Traditional MLE methods often require intensive computation,
          Model capacity must appropriately capture variable interactions,
          Deep learning offers computational efficiency while maintaining modeling power.

         There was no common position, but rather, each participant presented a different vision
      of what the title of the session might mean. As a result, participants suggested various
      approaches:
      1. Generating variation rather than modeling entire populations,
      2. Moving beyond optimization to distribution estimation,
      3. Finding optimal search directions,
      4. Leveraging deep learning models (both custom-trained and existing LLMs) to guide
         search point selection,
      5. Developing higher-level learning models adaptable to various problems,
      6. Using fitness approximation for ranking or selection,
      7. Integrating selection directly into learning processes using fitness information.

           Finally, the conversation expanded to more general ideas:
           Learning movement patterns or genetic operators (crossover, mutation),
           Developing black-box iterative models that learn movement, selection, and solution
           representation,
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                     173


   Projection techniques into embedding spaces to reduce interactions while preserving
   information,
   Relationships with Bayesian Optimization,
   Solution quality prediction and generation (potential GAN applications).



4.2    Breakout Session: Exploration versus Exploitation
Duc-Cuong Dang (Universität Passau, DE), Jonathan L. Shapiro (University of
Manchester, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Duc-Cuong Dang and Jonathan L. Shapiro


Participants. Jonathan L. Shapiro, Franz Rothlauf, Carsten Witt, Vanessa Volz, Jasmin
Brandt, Timo Kötzing, Martin S. Krejca, Aishwarya Radhakrishnan, Andrew M. Sutton,
Marcus Schmidbauer, Duc-Cuong Dang

    To get everyone on the same page, Jonathan Shapiro highlighted the importance of
exploitation and exploration as in the case of Reinforcement Learning (RL): at any time one
always have to decide between using the current information to exploit immediate rewards,
versus exploring the alternatives that may lead to better rewards later.
    The first question we discussed is whether it is a good strategy to explore first and exploit
later. This is the case with traditional Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs), the algorithms often
converge in the end. Some participants noted that this is not the case for EDAs like BoA.
Marcus Schmidbauer added that in the case of GOMEA, a multivariate model-building
algorithm, it is a combination of extreme exploitation with extreme exploration. Timo
Kötzing added a comment that there is a fundamental difference between RL and EA: in
EAs, the rewards are not immediate. The notion of neighbourhood is also important: EAs
seem to prefer having nearby good solutions over having random good solutions that are
hard to recombine. Jasmin Brandt commented that we may need a proper definition of
exploitation and exploration. According to Franz Rothlauf, exploitation means finding good
solutions nearby the ones already explored, while doing anything else is exploration.
    We then discussed different parameters that can influence the search towards either
exploitation or exploration. In the case of EAs, it appears that that the mutation rate is often
settled to one on average per mutation. However, one should be careful about which EAs are
considered. In the case non-elitist EAs, the balance between mutation and selection does not
necessarily lead to mutation rate of 1/n but it depends on which selection is used or how it is
set. For example, in tournament selection of size k the balance is found exactly at mutation
rate ln(k)/n. For EDAs, the following parameters can influence the search: the inverse of
the population size 1/K in cGA; for UMDA, this is the ratio µ/λ when the (µ,λ)-truncation
selection is used to decide which solutions to keep in order to model the next distribution;
the learning rate ρ in PBIL and related algorithms like Ant Colony Optimisation. From the
theory side, how to control these parameters optimally for simple problems remains an open
question as the existing lower bound techniques and results are scarce.
    A common set of parameters that is important for all the above-mentioned algorithms
to avoid the possibility of premature convergence is the borders that limit the frequencies
of bits to be strictly below 1 and strictly above 0. In practical applications, the use of
these borders is essential as one may absolutely wants to avoid degenerated distributions, an
example is the application Franz Rothlauf has in his talk. Related to this, Jonathan Shapiro



                                                                                                    25092
174   25092 – Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications


      asked, in practices how to avoid identify that the learned model is general enough and not
      over-fitted. This is a hard question, and often the case this comes back to a good engineering
      practice, or a familiarity with the problems and algorithms. Martin S. Krejca put forwards
      the following question: Is there any way to adjust the borders, somehow reflecting the amount
      of confidence on doing the right thing at any given time? Jasmin Brandt added that in
      the case of multi-arm bandit problems, the confidence interval is a well-defined concept. A
      related question we discussed is how to detect that the entropy of the model is too low early
      on, or are the techniques developed for stagnate detection in EAs useful for EDAs?
          In summary, we all agree that the balancing exploitation and exploration is relevant to
      all areas of Evolutionary Computation, including EDAs. We know how to deal with them for
      practical problems, however formulating them as statements with rigorous proofs remains
      challenging. The good news is that even in a lack of recommendations, there is a technique
      from theory that allow selecting the values for parameters efficiently based on power-law
      distributions.



      4.3    Breakout Session: Univariate versus Multivariate 2
      Duc-Cuong Dang (Universität Passau, DE), Jonathan L. Shapiro (University of
      Manchester, GB)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Duc-Cuong Dang and Jonathan L. Shapiro


      Participants. Jonathan L. Shapiro, John McCall, Joshua D. Knowles, Carola Doerr, Vanessa
      Volz, Nikolaus Hansen, Josu Ceberio Uribe, Valentino Santucci, Alistair Benford, Andrew M.
      Sutton, Martin S. Krejca, Roberto Santana, Duc-Cuong Dang

          The breakout session began with a discussion of the trade-off between having an accurate
      model, at the expense of intensive computation, as in the case of building graphical models
      in EDAs, versus having less accurate models that are faster to learn, but at the risk of
      misleading or slowing down the search for optimal solutions.
          We agree that in practical runs of EDAs, there may not be a clear separation between the
      phase of learning an accurate model and that of using that model to find optimal solutions
      as the model is often learned along the way. More importantly, as pointed out by Nikolaus
      Hansen, for solving an optimisation problem, finding an accurate model can be misleading:
      we only want to find the best solutions. In fact, we want models that can help the search in
      finding better solutions, or in finding improvements to the existing solutions, more efficiently.
      In other words, a good model should help guide the search towards the optimal solutions,
      and need not be an accurate description of those solutions.
          We then discussed whether there are practical problems where there are clear interactions
      between variables, but the univariate model is still useful, as this is often argued by theory
      research (most existing theory papers only focus on univariate models). John McCall gave
      an example of such settings for a scheduling problem in chemotherapy. In this application,
      thousands of interactions between variables are detected between the variables, but univari-
      ate algorithms like PBIL/DEUM still outperform hBOA. The current hypothesis for the
      inefficiency of hBOA, which is stuck with medium quality solutions, is that this is due to
      the dominance of different terms in the objectives. It could be very interesting if there is a
      mathematical description that can capture this property.
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                      175


    As the discussion progressed, we asked the question whether the computational budget or
parameter settings, like the sample size, can have some influence on the success of univariate
models. This is because the univariate model is cheaper to learn, compared to models with
interactions. From the practical side, practitioners have noticed that on some problems,
the population or the sample size needs to be set above a certain threshold for the search
to be successful. We then discussed the settings in which the computational budget is less
of an issue, whether multivariate models are always the better choice. Nikolaus Hansen
mentioned a counter-example of the sector-sphere function where univariate performs best.
In addition, trying to adapt the step sizes on this function may worsen the progress of
optimisation. Similar effects can be observed for the case of LongPath and SurfSamp in
discrete optimisation, and this is related to the general issue of balancing exploitation and
exploration.
    We then discussed whether multivariate models might limit the diversity of solutions.
In other words, in multivariate EDAs, how does the entropy of the model evolve as the
search progresses? Nikolaus Hansen said that it tends to increase as we learn more about
the models. He added that a good indicator of a good model is that the entropy of sampled
solutions within a fitness level should be high. Carola Doerr drew the parallel with black-box
complexity: if we know more about the problem at hand, we want to have higher entropy.
For example, if we know that we are solving a OneMax-type problem, the best algorithm
is to sample O(n/ log n) solutions uniformly at random, and then infer a consistent target
string based on the acquired fitness of these random solutions.
    The following questions were also discussed during the breakout session.
1. Is it always a good practice to first try univariate models first and then try the multivariate
    ones? There is no consensus among the participants on this question.
2. What is the current state of theory research on multivariate models? As far as we know,
    the only theory research on multivariate models is about linkage-learning, e.g. the papers
    by Dirk Sudholt and co-authors.
3. Should we model improvement moves (or directions) instead of that of solutions? After
    our discussion, we incline towards modelling the improvement moves.
4. Is there any benefit for building a model from scratch instead of incremental learning,
    and vice-versa? This is open.
5. Are the weights of detected interactions important to learn, and how to use them? This
    is open.
6. Is there a way to learn the model implicitly, or somehow avoid the burden of building an
    explicitly accurate model? This is open, but there are related ideas about projecting the
    search into other spaces where there may be less deception.



4.4    Breakout Session: Genetic Drift 1
Martin S. Krejca (Ecole Polytechnique – Palaiseau, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Martin S. Krejca


Participants. Alistair Benford, Jasmin Brandt, Josu Ceberio Uribe, Duc-Cuong Dang,
Benjamin Doerr, Carola Doerr, Martin Fyvie, Nikolaus Hansen, Joshua Knowles, Timo
Kötzing, Martin S. Krejca




                                                                                                     25092
176   25092 – Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications


          This breakout session discussed the phenomenon of genetic drift in estimation-of-
      distribution algorithms (EDAs). The discussion meandered a bit while it took place. The
      following summary rearranges it logically, grouping it in terms of different points that were
      discussed.
          We started the session by Benjamin’s explanations of the mathematical results for genetic
      drift in univariate EDAs on binary problems, which mostly concerns the cGA and the PBIL.
      In this setting, genetic drift refers to the random movement of frequencies in the probabilistic
      model without any true signal from the objective function. In the case of constant objective
      functions, we have strong concentration bounds that tell us how long it takes until a frequency
      randomly moves by at least ε. It was also mentioned that the resulting bounds can be used
      for a smart restart scheme, which recommends to restart an EDA whenever it is likely that a
      frequency could have moved too far due to genetic drift. When restarting, the step size of an
      update should be halved (which usually means that the population size should be doubled).
          This explanation raised the question how realistic this analysis is, since real objective
      functions are not constant. It was clarified that genetic drift is usually superimposed by the
      true signal of an objective function, but that it is hard to analyze it in its generality, which
      is why the mathematical analysis assumes a constant objective function, which represents
      the full effect of pure genetic drift.
          A natural question that followed was whether this phenomenon also shows up in practice
      and whether it is relevant. It was agreed upon that genetic drift does show up in practice,
      but it was less clear whether it is relevant. The consensus was ultimately that is is indeed
      relevant but that practitioners may not care about it due to other, more pressing issues,
      such as budgetary constraints or the wishes of the customer. A typical approach is to simply
      rely on best practices, which traditionally aim at reducing the impact of genetic drift (albeit
      without mathematical guarantees).
          Afterward, the discussion moved to other types of search spaces. It was mentioned that
      genetic drift is also present for multi-valued discrete search spaces, where it is even easier to
      have a greater (detrimental) effect, due to generally smaller starting values of the frequencies.
      Afterward, the question came up to what extent genetic drift is visible in continuous search
      spaces. The conclusion was that it also shows up there and also poses a problem.
          With genetic drift being a general problem, other questions were whether it is possible to
      detect genetic drift somehow and how it behaves in the presence of noise. Regarding the
      detection, it was mentioned that the sig-cGA operates on only updating a frequency when a
      statistical significance in the objective function is detected. This approach allows to directly
      measure (with a certain confidence) that genetic drift did not occur. This approach should
      not be largely affected by noise. Otherwise, more traditional EDAs are known to cope well
      with noise, but only if the step size is chosen sufficiently small (suggesting again a smart
      restart scheme in the general case).
          These points were followed up by questions how genetic drift relates to similar phenomena
      in other settings, such as multi-armed bandits and reinforcement learning. For multi-armed
      bandits, it was not so clear how this directly translates to the setting of EDAs, since there
      is no real exploitation in the binary domain, as the two possible choices for a variable are
      either 0 or 1. However, assigning a confidence to each frequency is something that aligns well
      with multi-armed bandits and seems like a good strategy. As for reinforcement learning, the
      question was whether the approach of adding uniform samples periodically with a certain
      probability could prove promising to counteract genetic drift. The argument was brought
      forth that uniform samples are not a good choice. However, in continuous problems, it is not
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                      177


uncommon to add noise on purpose to the samples and to then assess whether the selection
is affected by this choice. If it is, then the learning rate is increased. Something similar could
potentially prove useful for EDAs as well.
    In the same vein as the connection to reinforcement learning, the question came up
whether it is smart to introduce an artificial bias into the update that explicitly counteracts
genetic drift. This has been done before in theoretical studies to great effect, but the paper
on the sig-cGA shows that this can also easily backfire. A static approach is not useful, as
the bias can be stronger than the signal of the objective function, which renders optimization
unsuccessful. However, a dynamically adjusting approach could maybe work.
    In conclusion, genetic drift is a real and important problem that is hard to detect. Being
able to detect it could tremendously improve the situation. The sig-cGA as well as the
concept of adding noise on purpose and adjusting the step size based on whether this affects
selection can be promising ways to reduce the impact of genetic drift. However, these details
need to be worked out in greater detail analytically.



4.5    Breakout Session: Univariate versus Multivariate 1
Timo Kötzing (Hasso-Plattner-Institut, Universität Potsdam, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Timo Kötzing


In this breakout session we discussed univariate versus multivariate EDAs.
    We started by discussing insights dating back to 80s / 90s. In particular, we discussed a
concatenated (summed) Trapk function, and the difference to LeadingOnes-concatenated
Trapk . Univariate EDAs or uniform crossover can optimize this function if the gap in function
value between local optima is large enough. It might also work if parameter scale with k
sufficiently, due to averaging over many traps. If the gap in fitness is small, the function is
“fully deceptive”, univariate EDAs get stuck, same with crossover. As an aside: univariate
EDAs might be “more stuck” than EAs. Mutlivariate EDA can learn blocks; can swap all
blocks. This is highly related to the work of Mühlenbein, Ochoa and others.
    We then discussed how to learn the linkage. How can one do it efficientily? The direct
algorithm scales quadratic in the number of variables, which can be too much. Many problems
with low computation time use UMDA instead. Some modern algorithms can do better (eg
GOMEA).



4.6    Breakout Session: Genetic Drift 2
Johannes Lengler (ETH Zürich, CH) and Carsten Witt (Technical University of Denmark –
Lyngby, DK)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Johannes Lengler and Carsten Witt


This 2nd breakout session on genetic drift considered its definition, theoretical implications,
and practical considerations in various types of EDAs. The participants discussed how genetic
drift affects algorithm performance, its distinction to stochastic drift, and potential strategies
for mitigating its impact.
    The following key points were debated in the session.



                                                                                                     25092
178   25092 – Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications


      Definition and Characteristics of Genetic Drift
      Genetic drift was described as the loss of alleles in a population due to stochastic effects. In
      an infinite population model, genetic drift cannot lead to a loss of alleles. To avoid too strong
      genetic drift, the population size of an EDA usually has to scale linearly in problem size
      on benchmark problems like BV (Binary Value) and LO (LeadingOnes). This was already
      observed in early literature.

      Distinguishing Genetic Drift from Stochastic Drift
      Empirical evidence suggests sharp thresholds in population size that determine genetic drift
      behavior. The role of minimum population size in modeling multivariate problems was
      debated. The impact of genetic drift on neutral versus non-neutral bits was questioned.

      Genetic Drift in Specific Problem Settings
      For constrained problems (e.g., knapsack), the effect of different selection operators on drift
      as discussed. Ising models (related to so-called checkerboard problems) were proposed as
      potential test cases. Whether genetic drift occurs on fitness plateaus was questioned. The
      Dynamic BinVal problem was suggested as another theoretical test bed.

      Counteracting Genetic Drift
      In theoretical studies, borders on marginal frequencies are used to avoid fixation at extreme
      values. Multi-factor EDAs use Bayesian priors to prevent premature fixation. Tournament
      selection in UMDA and its potential impact on genetic drift was explored. Hybrid approaches
      combining EDAs with local search were proposed to mitigate drift. Finally, theoretical studies
      have identified scenarios (dynamic BinVal) where genetic drift can speed up optimization.

      Algorithmic and Theoretical Considerations
      Studying PBIL instead of UMDA was suggested as potentially more insightful. Again, the
      role of population size in determining genetic drift was highlighted. The phenomenon of
      domino convergence was discussed in relation to problem landscapes like BinVal and OneMax.

      Broader Implications and Open Questions
      The applicability of genetic drift to machine learning was debated. Whether overparameterized
      neural networks exhibit genetic drift was questioned. Symmetry breaking in EDAs and
      theoretical analysis of PBIL for feature selection were suggested as future research directions.



      4.7    Breakout Session: Explainability of EDAs
      John McCall (The Robert Gordon University – Aberdeen, GB) and Josu Ceberio Uribe
      (University of the Basque Country – Donostia, ES)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © John McCall and Josu Ceberio Uribe


      In this session, we approached the “explainability” of EDAs from the point of view of expert
      practitioners. That is to say, what can be derived empirically from the EDA process that
      can potentially be useful in gaining an understanding of an EDA? The key starting point
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                      179


for the discussion was the observation that runs of an EDA using a Probabilistic Graphical
Model (PGM) will generate sequences of PGMs. These can be considered as trajectories of
the EDA through model space. What might be learned from these trajectories?
    The trajectories are a function of EDA parameters (population size, selection pressure)
and problem characteristics (the distribution of fitness over solutions). Generally, insights
can be gained from varying algorithm or problem characteristics and deriving statistical
relations.
    Problems can also be decomposed using certain functional bases on solution spaces (Walsh,
continuous Fourier, discrete Fourier). There is rich potential for exploiting this when the
PGM explicitly distributes fitness over these basis components, also known as “problem
structure.”
    In black-box scenarios, where the problem structure is unknown and so there is no
decomposition available, does it make sense to capture first-order structure, then second-
order, and so on to higher orders? Structure detection algorithms are widely used in EDAs
and so there is a potential value in mining PGM trajectories for problem structure. We
wonder if there is an algorithm that tries to guess the most interesting representation to
optimize a problem.
    How can a decomposition of the above help when designing an algorithm? Can structural
features of problem classes suggest EDAs specialized to learn how fitness is distributed
across those structures? Might the behavior of such EDAs on such problems be amenable to
theoretical analysis?
    EDA experts in the group observed that by examining PGM trajectories you can sometimes
manually identify solutions that are better than those sampled from the model by the EDA,
even after parameter optimization. Can we learn more efficiently from those trajectories?
    In the context of real-world problems, often similar problems need to be frequently
solved. We discussed how to gain knowledge about the problem family by running EDAs on
the problem and extracting recurrent model structures. Related to this, transfer learning
works on EDAs, and incremental-BOA were discussed. There were cases where models
learnt in certain iterations were re-used in later iterations (i+1, i+2, i+3,. . . ). We discussed
aggregating trajectories of EDA executions, and then using SVD-type techniques to remove
noise, and hence gain insights about recurrent structures. We discussed whether ensembles
of algorithms (the same algorithm with different parameters run on the same problem) might
help in problem understanding. This was related to Island models. In some real-world
problems such as scheduling, such analysis can be used to identify resources that need to be
carefully allocated early in the solution process, while others may be fixed later and can be
flexibly allocated. This also gives a lot of information about the process. We discussed the
general concept of “backbones” of important variables that, once optimally set, reduce the
complexity of optimizing the remaining variables.
    We discussed the relation between EDA theory and EDA explainability, with a special
focus on the phase transition between divergence and convergence of algorithms and the
relation to population size. A key theme arising many times in the seminar was the focus
of EDA theory on genetic drift whereas researchers of large-scale and applied EDAs never
consider but see premature convergence as a major problem. The process of adjusting
population size appears to be analogous to the role of K in theory. Is there potential for
combining theoretical and empirical analysis to understand this phase transition?
    In the context of UMDA (or PBIL), we considered statistical analysis of univariate
probabilities as a source of information about the problem. Does the explainability approach
discussed in this group offer a bridge between the two EDA communities to build a framework




                                                                                                     25092
180   25092 – Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications


      that is useful to both theory and practice? Such a framework would consider a set of problems
      with known and controllable structures and explore generalized concepts of K theoretically
      and empirically.



      4.8    Breakout Session: Linkage Learning
      John McCall (The Robert Gordon University – Aberdeen, GB) and Duc-Cuong Dang (Uni-
      versität Passau, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © John McCall and Duc-Cuong Dang


      Participants. John McCall, Marcus Schmidbauer, Benjamin Doerr, Timo Kötzing, Martin
      Fyvie, Aishwarya Radhakrishnan, Andrew M. Sutton, Nikolaus Hansen, Carsten Witt,
      Duc-Cuong Dang.

           The group considered the question “How much precision is needed in linkage learning?”
      More fully, for an EDA that learns linkage, either in the form of a PGM (Probabilistic
      Graphical Model) or more broadly as families of subsets of variables, to optimise a problem,
      is it necessary to incorporate in the EDA model all linkage that is detected.
           The discussion focussed around a published paper comparing algorithm performance on
      a real world chemotherapy problem. The chemotherapy problem is based on binary strings
      encoding dosages of multiple drugs over a time period. The problem contains thousands
      of variable linkages based on tumour-size, dosage constraints and toxic side-effects on the
      patient. The paper compares a leading multivariate-PGM EDA, hBOA, against a GA and
      three univariate EDAs (UMDA, PBIL and a univariate version of DEUM).
           The counter-intuitive result is that the univariate algorithms, led by UMDA, all converge
      to the (best-known) optimum much faster than hBOA, with far fewer fitness evaluations
      and massively less clock time. This is despite the fact that the univariate EDAs learn no
      interactions. The GA is outperformed on this problem by all of the EDAs.
           There was discussion on the linkage detection method used – if there is no thresholding
      then spurious linkages can be detected that have no significance for the problem. hBOA uses
      internal linkage parameters that do use thresholding, and note that the inventor of hBOA
      (Martin Pelikan) collaborated on the paper. Moreover, a separate detection algorithm (LDA)
      was used to verify the linkages. The paper concludes that, in this example, multivariate
      linkage is inessential.
           A contrasting example in the case of Concatenated Traps was discussed. Here it can
      be shown theoretically that P3 (Parameter-less Population Pyramid), a model-building EA
      related to EDAs, requires multivariate linkage-learning to solve the problem in polynomial
      time. If only univariate learning is allowed (i.e. no linkage) P3 is shown to require exponential
      time to solve Concatenated Traps. Therefore in this example, multivariate modelling is
      essential.
           Some more general insight into when linkages are essential or inessential can potentially
      be gained through Walsh function decomposition of binary functions. More research is needed
      into how robust Walsh coefficients are in terms of detecting essential linkage, particularly
      under function scaling.
           The original question on precision remains open.
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                  181


 5     Panel discussions
5.1    Discussion Forum: Early Insights on Design and Analysis of EDAs
Duc-Cuong Dang (Universität Passau, DE), Timo Kötzing (Hasso-Plattner-Institut, Uni-
versität Potsdam, DE), Marcus Schmidbauer (Universität Passau, DE), and Andrew M.
Sutton (University of Minnesota – Duluth, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Duc-Cuong Dang, Timo Kötzing, Marcus Schmidbauer, and Andrew M. Sutton


The first part of this session was devoted to early theoretical approaches to the analysis of
Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms (EDAs). The second one gave a short introduction to
the Cross-Entropy Method (CEM).

First Part: Early Theory on EDAs
Mühlenbein et. al. [1] consider additively decomposed functions, and point out that simple
genetic algorithms fail when they are deceptive. The authors present conditions for such
functions on which the Boltzmann distribution factors into a product over marginal distri-
butions, making them tractable for univariate EDAs. They also demonstrate that when
these conditions do not hold, the factorization is approximate. Further, the authors consider
a purely selection-based EDA using the Boltzmann distribution, called Boltzmann EDA
(BEDA). The authors prove that, for a given ϵ, BEDA on OneMax finds the optimum in
Nϵ (specified in the paper) generations with probability at least 1 − ϵ.
Mühlenbein et. al. [2] consider EDAs with infinite populations to solve continuous max-
imisation problems. They define that an EDA converges globally if the average fitness of
the population converges to the globally optimal fitness value as time goes to infinity. The
authors prove that certain purely selection-based EDAs converge globally. Further, they prove
that this is also the case for the Factorized Distribution Algorithm (FDA) with proportional
selection.

Second Part: Introduction to CEM
The idea of CEM [3] when applied to an optimisation problem is to view it as a problem of
estimating the probability of sampling solutions above some quality threshold; typically this
is a rare event and the technique of importance sampling provides an efficient solution. This
is equivalent to minimising the Kullback-Leibler metrics between a family of distributions
defined by some model and the ideal sampling distribution (hence the name cross-entropy) and
analytically solving this minimisation problem produces a specific algorithm for the model,
like in the case of the univariate model we obtain the Univariate Marginal Distribution
Algorithm (UMDA) and then Population-based Incremental Learning (PBIL) via some
smoothing process.
References
1    Heinz Mühlenbein, Thilo Mahnig, and Alberto O. Rodriguez. 1999. Schemata, Distributions
     and Graphical Models in Evolutionary Optimization. Journal of Heuristics (1999), 215–247.
     https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1009689913453
2    Qingfu Zhang, and Heinz Mühlenbein. 2004. On the convergence of a class of estimation of
     distribution algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation (2004), 127-136.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/TEVC.2003.820663




                                                                                                 25092
182   25092 – Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms: Theory and Applications


      3     Pieter-Tjerk de Boer, Dirk P. Kroese, Shie Mannor, and Reuven Y. Rubinstein. 2005.
            A Tutorial on the Cross-Entropy Method. Annals of Operations Research (2005), 19-67.
            https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-005-5724-z



       6     Open problems
      6.1    Sampling of Rare Fitness Values
      Duc-Cuong Dang (Universität Passau, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Duc-Cuong Dang


      We discuss the algorithmic design problem of efficiently discovering all fitness values, thus
      introducing the notion of (expected) cover time instead of optimisation time. This design
      perspective is useful in some situations where the number of possible fitness values is relatively
      small and they are well connected.
          A prominent algorithm that follows this idea is the so-called Fitness Frequency Assign-
      ment [2] which completely ignores the actual fitness values but focuses on the frequencies at
      which these values are encountered by the parent and offspring populations. We formulate
      this algorithm in its general form as the (µ+λ)-FFA algorithm using unary unbiased variation
      operators and show some of its invariants and a conditional upper bound on the cover time.
      It remains an open question how to prove unconditional bounds for some functions such as
      OneMax or Jump, since experiments with fixed λ = 1 suggest that they lie between Ω(n2 )
      and O(n2 log n) depending on µ. Finally, we introduce the notion of the fitness accessibility
      graph, and show that learning this graph on the fly can improve the cover time in some
      settings.
          As a general question to the research community on EDAs, we want to know what
      information and statistics are useful to learn or model, then to exploit in order to minimise
      the cover time. Benjamin and Timo suggest a multi-objectivization approach: run GSEMO
      on (f (x), −f (x)) and this gives a cover time of O(n2 log n) for OneMax and Jump. In
      a related work, Aisha and Timo have a paper [1] where they analyse Novelty Search on
      OneMinMax and show a non-trivial upper bound O(n2 ) for the expected optimisation time.
      References
      1    D. Antipov, T. Kötzing, A. Radhakrishnan. Greedy Versus Curious Parent Selection for
           Multi-objective Evolutionary Algorithms. PPSN (3) 2024: 86-101.
      2    T. Weise, Z. Wu, X. Li, Y. Chen, and J. Lässig. Frequency Fitness Assignment: Optimization
          Without Bias for Good Solutions Can Be Efficient. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 27(4): 980-992
           (2023).
J. Ceberio Uribe, B. Doerr, J. McCall, C. Witt, and M. Schmidbauer                                        183


        Participants
 Alistair Benford                    Jose Ignacio Hidalgo              Roberto Santana
University of Birmingham, GB       Complutense University of        University of the Basque Country
                                   Madrid, ES                       – Donostia, ES
 Jasmin Brandt
Universität Paderborn, DE            Joshua D. Knowles                 Valentino Santucci
                                   SLB Cambridge Research, GB       University for Foreigners of
   Josu Ceberio Uribe                                               Perugia, IT
University of the Basque Country     Timo Kötzing
                                   Hasso-Plattner-Institut,            Marcus Schmidbauer
– Donostia, ES                                                      Universität Passau, DE
                                   Universität Potsdam, DE
 Duc-Cuong Dang                                                        Jonathan L. Shapiro
Universität Passau, DE               Martin S. Krejca               University of Manchester, GB
                                   Ecole Polytechnique –
  Benjamin Doerr                   Palaiseau, FR                       Marta Rosa Soto Ortiz
Ecole Polytechnique –                                               CaixaBank Tech – Madrid, ES
                                    Johannes Lengler
Palaiseau, FR                      ETH Zürich, CH                      Andrew M. Sutton
                                                                    University of Minnesota –
  Carola Doerr                       John McCall                    Duluth, US
Sorbonne University – Paris, FR    The Robert Gordon University –      Dirk Thierens
  Martin Fyvie                     Aberdeen, GB                     Utrecht University, NL
The Robert Gordon University –       Aishwarya Radhakrishnan           Vanessa Volz
Aberdeen, GB                       Hasso-Plattner-Institut,         CWI – Amsterdam, NL
                                   Universität Potsdam, DE
  Nikolaus Hansen                                                      Carsten Witt
INRIA Saclay –                      Franz Rothlauf                  Technical University of Denmark
Palaiseau, FR                      Universität Mainz, DE            – Lyngby, DK




                                                                                                       25092
