                                                On the undecidability of quantum channel capacities
                                                          Archishna Bhattacharyya* 1 , Arthur Mehta†1 , and Yuming Zhao‡2
                                                                    1 University of Ottawa, Department of Mathematics and Statistics
                                                              2 QMATH, Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Copenhagen
arXiv:2601.22471v3 [quant-ph] 30 Mar 2026




                                                                                          March 31, 2026



                                                                                               Abstract
                                                          An important distinction in our understanding of capacities of classical versus quantum
                                                      channels is marked by the following question: is there an algorithm which can compute (or
                                                      even efficiently compute) the capacity? While there is overwhelming evidence suggesting that
                                                      quantum channel capacities may be uncomputable, a formal proof of any such statement is
                                                      elusive. We initiate the study of the hardness of computing quantum channel capacities. We
                                                      show that, for a general quantum channel, it is QMA-hard to compute its quantum capacity, and
                                                      that the entanglement-assisted zero-error capacity under some restrictions is uncomputable;
                                                      indicative of the fact that quantum channel capacities may generally be undecidable.




                                            Contents
                                            1       Introduction                                                                                       2

                                            2       Preliminaries                                                                                     11

                                            3       Computing the quantum capacity is QMA-hard                                                        18

                                            4       A special case of the entanglement-assisted zero-error classical capacity of quantum
                                                    channels is uncomputable                                                             23
                                                * abhat086@uottawa.ca
                                                †
                                                    amehta2@uottawa.ca
                                                ‡
                                                    yuming@math.ku.dk




                                                                                                   1
1        Introduction
Quantum channels represent dynamical processes occurring in Nature from an information-theoretic
viewpoint. Quantifying the rate of transmission through a channel is equivalent to ascertaining the
amount of resources consumed or created in a dynamical process and underpins much of infor-
mation theory founded from the groundbreaking work of Shannon [Sha48]. The maximum rate
of transmission is called the capacity of the channel. Informally, the capacity is the ratio of the
number of bits over the number of channel uses, where a bit measures the amount of entropy or
information. While for classical channels there exists only the classical capacity, for quantum
channels the landscape becomes richer, as one may send classical or quantum bits with or without
the assistance of resources such as entanglement, symmetric side channels, and others. Moreover,
the data sent may or may not be private, i.e., shielded from an adversary and only accessible to the
receiver. Depending on these properties, the capacities may be classical, private, or quantum with
or without assistance.
    On the basis of whether information transmission through a channel is perfect or imperfect
one can further restrict the fidelity of the state at the channel input with that at the output to be
unity. Such a model depicts perfect transmission characterising zero-error capacities. Interest-
ingly enough, it was again Shannon’s work [Sha56] founding the notion of zero-error capacities by
associating to a channel its so-called confusability graph, encoding many of its properties. In the
quantum case, Duan-Severini-Winter [DSW13] introduced not only the notion of zero-error quan-
tum capacities, but presented them via a noncommutative generalisation of a graph, associating to
every channel Φ its (quantum) confusability graph or operator system Sϕ .
    In terms of our understanding of classical versus quantum channel capacities an important
distinction is marked by the following question:
Question 1. Is there an algorithm which can compute (or even efficiently compute) the capacity?
    Classically, the work of Shannon [Sha48] shows that the capacity of a classical channel is given
by optimising a certain entropic quantity — the mutual information, I(X; Y ) := H(X) + H(Y ) −
H(XY )1 , over a single use of the channel. It immediately follows from the fact that I(X; Y ) is
additive that there is an efficiently computable single-letter formula for the capacity of a classical
channel.
    In contrast, Question 1 is poorly understood in the quantum setting. While such formulae
are known for some restricted families of quantum channels [CRS08], no such characterisation is
known in general. The best known coding theorem [Llo97, Sho02, Dev05] expresses the quantum
capacity in regularized form as
                                                          1 (1) ⊗n
                                            Q(Φ) = lim      Q (Φ ),
                                                      n→∞ n


where Q(1) (Φ) = maxρ Ic (Φ, ρ) is the one-shot quantum capacity, defined via the coherent infor-
mation Ic (Φ, ρ) (see Definition 2.1).
    Superadditivity [Has09] and superactivation [SY08] already indicate that such a regularization
is unavoidable. Stronger still, Cubitt et al. [CEM+ 15] showed that for every n ∈ N, there exists
a quantum channel Φ such that n1 Q(1) (Φ⊗n ) < Q(Φ). Taken together, these phenomena strongly
    1
        Here, H(X) is the Shannon entropy and X, Y are classical random variables.


                                                           2
suggest that the quantum capacity may be uncomputable [PECG+ 25]. However, they do not di-
rectly address its computability. In particular, even a positive answer to the following question
would not, on its own, resolve Question 1.
Question 2. Does there exist a quantum channel Φ such that for every n ∈ N,
                                     1 (1) ⊗n
                                       Q (Φ ) < Q(Φ) ?
                                     n
    While the existence of such an exotic channel would be remarkable, it falls short of resolving
Question 1. For example, it would not rule out the existence of a yet-undiscovered entropic quan-
tity that provides a more direct method for computing Q(Φ). The intuitive connection between
Question 1 and Question 2 is nonetheless well founded, but the implication may actually run in the
opposite direction. As we discuss in Section 1.3, if the problem of determining whether Q(Φ) ≥ 21
or Q(Φ) < 21 is suitably hard, in a computational sense, then Question 2 must admit a positive
answer.
    The connection between Question 1 and Question 2 draws strong parallels with undecidability
phenomena in the study of non-local games [FKM+ 25]. In that setting, progress toward unde-
cidability was preceded by a sequence of intermediate hardness results. While we do not resolve
Question 1, we establish the first such intermediate hardness results toward this goal.

1.1     Main results
In this work we initiate a formal investigation of the computational hardness and computability of
quantum channel capacities and give two hardness results in the spirit of answering Question 1.

1.1.1   QMA hardness
Our first main result is that estimating quantum capacities of quantum channels is QMA-hard.

Theorem 1.1 (Informal version of Corollary 3.13). Given a quantum channel Φ, it is QMA-hard
to decide if the quantum capacity, Q(Φ), is ≥ 43 or ≤ 14 , promised one of them holds.

    In fact, we establish a reduction from any QMA-complete language to the problem of estimat-
ing the quantum capacity of degradable quantum channels, which then implies that it is QMA hard
to estimate the quantum capacity of an arbitrary quantum channel. Since for degradable channels,
the quantum capacity equals the one-shot quantum capacity [CRS08], our reduction also yields
QMA-hardness of the one-shot quantum capacity for degradable channels. This is somewhat sur-
prising: degradable channels are among the best understood classes of quantum channels, and
the one-shot quantum capacity already has a simple single-letter formula, yet estimating one-shot
quantum capacity of degradable channels remains hard even for quantum computers.
    While Theorem 1.1 does not rule out the possibility of a single-letter formula for the quantum
capacity in full generality, it does show that such a formula, even when available, need not be
efficiently computable (unless P=QMA).




                                                3
1.1.2    Undecidability
In the spirit of Question 1, our second main contribution establishes an undecidability result for
a quantum channel capacity. Specifically, we consider a restricted variant of the entanglement-
assisted one-shot zero-error classical capacity of a classical-to-quantum (abbrev. c-q) channel,
           (1)
denoted C0,PME (Φ). We show that the threshold problem for this capacity is undecidable.
Theorem 1.2 (Informal version of Corollary 4.2). Given a c-q channel Φ and an integer t, it is
                              (1)
RE-hard to determine whether C0,PME (Φ) ≥ log(t).
                                                                                           (1)
    Operationally, the entanglement-assisted one-shot zero-error classical capacity C0,E (Φ) of a
quantum channel Φ is the maximum number of classical messages that can be transmitted per-
fectly through a single use of Φ, assuming the sender and receiver share entanglement in advance.
                             (1)
The restricted capacity, C0,PME (Φ), is defined similarly for c-q channels, except that the shared
entangled state is required to be maximally entangled, and decoding operations are projective mea-
surement channels (see Definition 2.3).
                                                                            (1)
    At a conceptual level, the restrictions appearing in the definition of C0,PME (Φ) reflect the struc-
ture of perfect strategies of nonlocal games used in our reduction, which we explain in the technical
overview below. Thus, Theorem 1.2 shows that undecidability already arises for a restricted notion
of zero-error capacity for quantum channels.

1.2     Technical contributions and proof ideas
Next, we present an overview of the techniques used and highlight the intuitive idea behind our
proofs.

1.2.1    Reduction from QMA problems to quantum capacity of channels
Encoding channels as circuits. To define our promise problem related to Theorem 1.1 we fol-
low the approach of [CM23] and consider a quantum channel to be encoded as the description of
a quantum circuit C which implements the channel ΦC . These circuits are considered to be com-
prised of unitary gates from some standard universal gate set, as well as non-unitary operations of
partial trace and state preparation. Our problem is then as follows:
        Given the description of a circuit C, decide if the corresponding channel ΦC satisfies
        Q(ΦC ) ≥ 34 or Q(ΦC ) ≤ 41 , given one of these two cases holds.
To prove the QMA-hardness for the above decision problem, we appeal directly to the definition of
the complexity class QMA. The starting point is to consider an equivalent characterisation in which
a verifier, given an input x from a QMA language, produces a classical description of the quantum
circuit V (x) (see Fig. 1). This quantum circuit implements a quantum channel ΦV (x) from a proof
register to a single-qubit decision register R. The probability, Pr(verifier accepts x with ρ), that
the verifier accepts x with a proof state ρ is then given by
                              ⟨1|ΦV (x) (ρ)|1⟩ = Tr Ux† (|1⟩⟨1| ⊗ I)Ux ρ ,
                                                                        
                                                                                                 (1)
where Ux is the Stinespring isometry for ΦV (x) . Suppose this QMA language has completeness c
and soundness s. If x ∈ Y , then there exists a proof state ρ such that Pr(verifier accepts x with ρ) ≥
c; if x ∈ N , then Pr(verifier accepts x with ρ) ≤ s for all proof states ρ.

                                                   4
Intuitive approach of QMA-hardness. An intuitive approach for the reduction would be to
choose two channels whose quantum capacities are well understood and exemplify the extremes:
a channel ΦY with full capacity, and a channel ΦN with zero capacity. We then consider the
following construction. Fix a QMA language (Y, N ), and map each instance x to a channel Φx
defined as follows. Φx first applies the Stinespring dilation Ux of the verification channel ΦV (x)
to the first register R, say of the input state ρ, and then measures R in the computational basis.
Conditioned on the first bit of decision register R, it applies ΦY to R′ , the second register of ρ if
R is in the state |1⟩⟨1|, and applies ΦN to R′ if R is in the state |0⟩⟨0|. At a heuristic level, this
construction suggests the desired reduction: if x ∈ Y , then Φx behaves similarly to ΦY and has
large quantum capacity, while if x ∈ N , then Φx behaves similarly to ΦN and has small quantum
capacity.
    While this approach seems promising, the quantum capacity Q(Φ) is notoriously difficult to
analyse, even for channels constructed from seemingly simple components. To address this, we
introduce a variant of the well-known direct sum of quantum channels, which we call the symmetric
direct sum, and show that, together with an appropriate choice of ΦY and ΦN , the spirit of this
approach can be made rigorous.

Symmetric direct sums of channels The standard direct sum of channels Φ0 : B(H0 ) → B(K0 )
and Φ1 : B(H1 ) → B(K1 ) is given by
                                                             
                                   X0 0       Φ0 (X0 )     0
                       Φ0 ⊕ Φ1            =                       .
                                   0 X1          0      Φ1 (X1 )

It is known that this defines a valid quantum channel Φ0 ⊕ Φ1 : B(H0 ⊕ H1 ) → B(K0 ⊕ K1 )
[Wat18]. More general direct sum constructions have been studied in the context of channel ca-
pacities, including partially coherent direct sums [CG21] and generalised direct sums [WZ25].
     Such constructions are not suitable for our purposes. First, the inputs to our promise problems
are encoded as classical descriptions of quantum circuits. Although the direct sums above are nat-
ural at the level of linear-algebraic expressions, they do not interact cleanly with the circuit model.
In particular, given circuits C0 and C1 implementing channels Φ0 and Φ1 , it is not straightforward
to construct a circuit implementing the direct sum Φ0 ⊕ Φ1 . One concrete obstruction is that the
Hilbert spaces H0 ⊕ H1 and K0 ⊕ K1 need not have dimension a power of two, making their direct
realisation within the circuit formalism unwieldy. The second, and more substantial, issue with
the constructions above is that for our purposes we must combine two channels Φ0 and Φ1 with
a common input space R in such a way that the resulting channel still acts on R, rather than on
the direct sum R ⊕ R. To address this, in Definition 3.1, we introduce a new construction that
generalises the direct sum of channels as well as the probabilistic direct sums of [CM23].
     Concisely, given channels Φ0 , Φ1 : B(H) → B(K) and an isometry U : H′ → (C2 )⊗n we
define the symmetric direct sum as
                                                                               
                                              F0 (σ) ⊗ Φ0 (ρ)          0
                       Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 (σ ⊗ ρ) =                                         ,
                                                     0          F1 (σ) ⊗ Φ1 (ρ)

where Fi (σ) = (⟨i| ⊗ I)M(U σU † )(|i⟩ ⊗ I), i = 0, 1, and M(τ ) = x∈{0,1}n |x⟩⟨x|τ |x⟩⟨x| is
                                                                   P
the channel corresponding to measurement in the computational basis. Extending linearly from


                                                  5
elementary tensors to arbitrary states, it can be confirmed that Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 is a well-defined quantum
channel from B(H′ ⊗ H) → B((C2 )⊗n ⊗ K).
    As outlined in Remark 3.11, given circuits implementing the channels Φ0 and Φ1 , together
with a circuit implementing the unitary U , one can construct, in polynomial time, a circuit for the
channel Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 as illustrated in Fig. 2. The strength of the symmetric direct sum comes from
two key properties that allow us to analyse Q(Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 ) through the one-shot quantum capacity
for suitable choices of Φ0 and Φ1 . First, the complement of the symmetric direct sum is equal
to the symmetric direct sum of the individual complementary channels — a property that also
holds for standard direct sum constructions. Second, due to the symmetry between the output and
environment, it preserves degradability. The latter notably is a novel property of the symmetric
direct sum not observed in previous constructions.
 Property 1. (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 )c = Φc0 ⊕U Φc1 .
 Property 2. If Φ0 , Φ1 are degradable channels, then Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 is degradable, and consequently
 Q(Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 ) = Q(1) (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 ).
   See Lemmas 3.2 and 3.3 for the precise statements and proofs of these properties. These
observations are crucial for our approach in determining Q(Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 ) when Φ0 and Φ1 are chosen
from the correct family of channels.

Role of degradable and anti-degradable channels In our proof of Theorem 1.1 via the sym-
metric direct sum construction, we select channels with a certain property such that the quantum
capacity of the symmetric direct sum, Q(Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 ) can be expressed in terms of Q(Φ0 ) and Q(Φ1 ).
Namely, we choose a channel that, depending on certain channel parameters, is degradable as well
as anti-degradable (see Section 2.1 for a definition of (anti-)degradability and properties of such
channels). We then take the two extreme cases which lead to a channel with maximum capacity
like the identity channel, and zero capacity like an anti-degradable channel.
    Intuitively, the property of degradability gives us that the coherent information, an entropic
quantity that characterises the one-shot quantum capacity, is additive. Hence, the quantum ca-
pacity becomes exactly equal to the coherent information, and no longer requires a regularisation.
The property of anti-degradability gives us that the quantum capacity is zero, as it allows the en-
vironment of the channel to simulate the state of the receiver (see Section 2.1). Specifically for
our proof, we choose, Aη , the qubit amplitude damping channel, and take A0 = id the identity
channel, and A1/2 an anti-degradable channel with no capacity as described in Remark 3.6.
    Properties 1 and 2 allow us to compute the quantum capacity of any symmetric direct sum of
A1/2 and A0 . For any isometry U , we show that
                           Q(A1/2 ⊕U A0 ) = max Tr U † (|1⟩⟨1| ⊗ I)U ρ .
                                                                        
                                                                                                 (2)
                                               ρ

Given any QMA language (Y, N ), we map each instance x 7→ Φx := A1/2 ⊕Ux A0 , where Ux is
the Stinespring isometry of the verification channel ΦV (x) . Comparing Equations (1) and (2), we
see that
                          Q(Φx ) = max Pr(verifier accepts x with ρ).                          (3)
                                       ρ
The mapping from x to the description of the circuit that implements Φx is efficient, as illustrated
in Figure 2. This establishes a Karp reduction from any QMA-complete problem to the problem
of estimating the quantum capacity of quantum channels.

                                                   6
1.2.2     Undecidability via graph parameters
Classical capacity and independence number Let G = (V, E) be an undirected graph. The
independence number α(G) is the maximum size of a set of pairwise non-adjacent vertices. Given
a classical channel Φ with confusability graph G, it is well known that the one-shot zero-error
capacity satisfies
                                       (1)
                                    C0 (Φ) = log(α(G)).                                     (4)
Moreover, for any graph G, one can efficiently construct a classical channel ΦG such that G is the
confusability graph of ΦG . Thus, computing the one-shot zero-error capacity of a classical channel
is at least as hard as computing the independence number of a graph. Since computing α(G) is
                                           (1)
NP-complete, it follows that computing C0 (Φ) is NP-hard.
    Our undecidability result, Theorem 1.2, follows from a similar complexity-theoretic paradigm.
Namely, we establish a reduction from quantum independence number, which is known to be
uncomputable, to the restrict variant of the entanglement-assisted one-shot zero-error capacity of
a quantum channel.

Quantum independence number An operational characterisation of the independence number
α(G) is given by the independent set game IS(G, t), introduced in [MRV16]. In this game, two
non-communicating players aim to convince a verifier that G has an independent set of size at
least t. The game IS(G, t) has a perfect classical strategy if and only if α(G) ≥ t. Allowing
the players to share (finite-dimensional) entanglement leads to the quantum independence number
αq (G), defined as the largest t for which IS(G, t) admits a perfect quantum strategy. The recent
result MIP∗ = RE [JNV+ 21] implies that it is RE-hard to determine if a given independent set
game has a perfect quantum strategy. As a result, given any graph G and a positive integer t, it is
RE-hard to determine whether αq (G) ≥ t.
    In Section 4, we establish the following quantisation of Equation (4).

Theorem 1.3 (Resated from Theorem 4.1). There is a computable mapping from graphs G to c-q
channels ΦG such that
                                (1)
                               C0,PME (ΦG ) = log(αq (G)).                             (5)

   Theorem 1.3 yields a reduction from the problem of computing the quantum independence
                                                  (1)
number of graphs to the problem of computing C0,PME of c-q channels. As a consequence, given
                                                               (1)
any c-q channel Φ and a positive integer t, determine whether C0,PME (Φ) ≥ log(t) is RE-hard.

Classical-to-quantum channels A c-q channel Φ is specified by a finite alphabet V and a family
of output densities {ρv }v∈V . Its confusability graph2 G is the graph with vertices V , in which
distinct vertives v, w ∈ V are adjacent whenever Tr(ρv ρw ) ̸= 0. Conversely, given any graph G,
we can construct a c-q channel ΦG whose confusability graph is exactly G. This is precisely the
mapping from graphs to channels used in Theorem 1.3.
    The key point is that, for the channels ΦG , transmitting t bits in our restricted entanglement-
assisted setting is equivalent to winning the independent set game IS(G, t) perfectly. More pre-
cisely, we establish a one-to-one correspondence between (|ψ⟩, Ei , 1 ≤ i ≤ t), the state and encod-
  2
      In fact, this “classical" graph also matches the noncommutative graph associated with the quantum channel Φ.


                                                          7
                               (1)
ing channels that achieve C0,PME (ΦG ), and (|ψ⟩, {Pvi }v∈V , 1 ≤ i ≤ t), the state and measurements
that win with certainty for IS(G, t). This correspondence yields Theorem 1.3.
    The independent set game IS(G, t) belongs to a broader class of synchronous games, whose
perfect strategies are well-understood and admit a particular form: the shared state is maximally
entangled, and the measurements are projection-valued. These features are precisely what restrict
                                             (1)                    (1)
our results to only pertain to the capacity C0,PME as opposed to C0,E .

1.3    Parallel developments and conjectures in undecidability
A recurring theme in recent quantum information theory is that quantities with clear operational
meaning can nonetheless exhibit extreme computational hardness. The most developed exam-
ples are values of nonlocal games: their complexity theory has progressed from initial hardness
results [IV12, NW19] to full undecidability [Slo19, Slo20, JNV+ 21, MNY22, NZ23, DFN+ 25,
CM25, TV25, FKM+ 25, Lin25, MSSV25, CMPS25]. Quantum channel capacities are another
natural family of operational quantities, but their complexity landscape remains sparsely under-
stood. In this light, our results may therefore be seen as early steps toward a complexity-theoretic
understanding of quantum channel capacities paralleling the development that took place for non-
local games.
    In the study of nonlocal games, the quantum value ωq (G) is defined as the supremal winning
probability over all finite-dimensional quantum strategies, while the commuting operator value
ωco (G) is the supremal winning probability over all strategies in the commuting operator model.
Both values admit convergent hierarchies with computable values at each level. For ωq (G), one
                                                                            (n)
may restrict to strategies of local dimension n, obtaining optimal values ωFD (G) satisfying
                         (1)          (2)                    (n)
                       ωFD (G) ≤ ωFD (G) ≤ · · · ,     lim ωFD (G) = ωq (G).
                                                      n→∞

For ωco (G), the NPA hierarchy [NPA08] provides a sequence of semidefinite relaxations with op-
               (n)
timal values ωNPA (G) satisfying
                       (1)           (2)                     (n)
                     ωNPA (G) ≥ ωNPA (G) ≥ · · · ,     lim ωNPA (G) = ωco (G).
                                                      n→∞

Since both hierarchies converge (from below to ωq , and from above to ωco ), a natural question is
whether the game values are always attained at some finite level.
                                                                               (n)
Question 3. Does there exist a nonlocal game G such that for every n ∈ N, ωFD (G) < ωq (G) (resp.
 (n)
ωNPA (G) > ωco (G))?
    Earlier results gave strong evidence in this direction. Slofstra [Slo11], and Harrow, Natarajan,
                                                                                             (n)
and Wu [HNW17] proved that for every level n there exists a nonlocal game G such that ωFD (G) <
                                                  (n)
ωq (G), and (respectively) a game G such that ωNPA (G) > ωco (G). Although these results do not
answer Question 3, they suggest that attaining these values may require unbounded levels.
    The eventual resolution of Question 3 is indeed closely related to undecidability. Slofstra [Slo19]
answered Question 3 affirmatively for ωq by constructing a linear system game G such that ωq (G) =
        (n)
1 but ωFD (G) < 1 for all n ∈ N. Using similar techniques, he also showed that, given a nonlocal
                                                                         (n)
game G, it is undecidable to determine if there exists n such that ωFD (G) = 1. More recently,
[FKM+ 25] answered Question 3 affirmatively for ωco . They prove that the decision problem

                                                  8
      Given a nonlocal game G, is ωco (G) > 1/2 or ≤ 1/2.

is RE-hard. If the NPA hierarchy always attains the commuting operator value at some finite level,
this problem would lie in coRE, contradicting RE-hardness.
    By the superadditivity of the one-shot quantum capacity Q(1) , the regularised formula for quan-
tum capacity also gives rise to a natural convergent hierarchy.

                      Q(1)        (2)
                       reg (Φ) ≤ Qreg (Φ) ≤ · · · ,   lim Q(n)
                                                           reg (Φ) = Q(Φ),
                                                      n→∞

         (n)          (1)   ⊗2n
where Qreg (Φ) := Q (Φ   2n
                              )
                                . Our Question 2, which asks if there exists a quantum channel Φ
                              (n)
such that for every n ∈ N, Qreg (Φ) < Q(Φ), is in direct analogy with Question 3.
    As in the nonlocal-game setting, there are already partial results pointing in answering Ques-
tion 2. Cubitt, Elkouss, Matthews, Ozols, Pérez-García, and Strelchuk in [CEM+ 15] showed that
                                                               (n)
for every n ∈ N, there exists a quantum channel Φ such that Qreg (Φ) < Q(Φ). For a full resolution
of Question 2, one needs to alternate the quantifiers showing there exists a channel Φ such that for
             (n)
all n ∈ N, Qreg (Φ) < Q(Φ).
                                                                                        (n)
    Unlike in the setting of non-local games however, at each level the function Qreg (Φ) may
                                   (n)
not be computable: computing Qreg (Φ) involves maximizing a continuous function on a compact
set, which in general can be accomplished in the second level of the arithmetical hierarchy Π02 .
Nonetheless, determining the computational hardness of the decision problem
                                                                   1          1
               Given a quantum channel Φ, determine if Q(Φ) ≥        or Q(Φ) < .            (Qcap)
                                                                   2          2
can still potentially resolve Question 2. In fact, assuming a negative answer to Question 2, then
(QCap) would be in Σ03 . A positive answer to Question 2 would then follow from the following
conjecture:

Conjecture 1.4. (QCap) is Π03 -hard.

    To the best of our knowledge, the smallest upper bound on (QCap) is the 4th level of the
arithmetical hierarchy Π04 .
                       (n)
    We do note that Qreg (Φ) can be approximated to within arbitrary precision, so the gapped
version
                 Given a quantum channel Φ, is Q(Φ) ≥ 3/4 or ≤ 1/4.                (GapQcap)
is in RE. We conjecture that

Conjecture 1.5. (GapQcap) is RE-complete.

1.4   Discussion and outlook
In this work, we initiate a formal study into the computational hardness of channel capacities for
quantum channels. A natural long-term objective here is to understand whether the quantum capac-
ity is uncomputable for general channels. This objective is anticipated to be extremely challenging,
and in the discussion below we highlight both the insights gained toward this goal and the respects
in which the present results fall short.

                                                 9
Encoding of the input channels First, our result in Theorem 1.1 considers a formulation in
which the input is a quantum circuit C implementing a channel ΦC . In this setting, we rule out
the existence of an efficient algorithm that, given C, approximates the quantum capacity Q(ΦC )
even within a constant error. On the other hand, in several areas of quantum information theory,
quantum channels are often studied via explicit mathematical descriptions or formulas, rather than
through circuit representations. Furthermore, succinct input representations of the kind used here
are well known to increase the apparent computational complexity of a problem. However, if the
quantum capacity is indeed uncomputable, then such differences in how channels are specified
                                                                         (1)
become largely immaterial. In particular, we show that the capacity C0,PME of a c-q channel is
uncomputable. So in Theorem 1.2 we need not specify if a channel is encoded as a quantum
circuit, or via some other computable encoding using mathematical formulas, such as descriptions
of Kraus operators.

Entanglement-assisted zero-error capacities and graph parameters Since Shannon’s intro-
duction of zero-error communication through confusability graphs, graph parameters have played a
central role in the study of one-shot zero-error capacities. In the entanglement-assisted setting, this
connection was developed further in the work of Cubitt, Leung, Matthews, and Winter [CLMW10],
who showed that shared entanglement can increase the one-shot zero-error capacity of a classical
channel, and in the work of Beigi [Bei10], who related the entanglement-assisted zero-error capac-
ity to the Lovász ϑ-function.
     Particularly relevant to us is the latter work of Mančinska and Roberson on quantum graph
homomorphisms [MR16]. They introduced the quantum independence number, and showed that
                                                                                     (1)
it is closely related to the entanglement-assisted one-shot zero-error capacity C0,E for classical
channels. More precisely, if a classical channel N has confusability graph G, then their Theorem
                  (1)
5.1 shows that C0,E (N ) is at least log(αq (G)), with equality whenever the capacity can be achieved
using projective measurements on a maximally entangled state. Our Theorem 1.3 can be viewed
as taking this idea one step further by considering quantum channels. In both [MR16] and our
setting, the relevant protocols come from perfect quantum strategies for the independent set game,
and therefore naturally involve maximally entangled states and projective measurements. [MR16]
already asked whether (for classical channels) such restrictions can always be removed. For general
quantum channels, however, later work of Stahlke [Sta16] shows that one can not expect this in
full generality: there exists quantum channel Φ such that only using a non-maximally entangled
                      (1)
state can achieve C0,E (Φ). While the undecidability of the entanglement-assisted capacity remains
open, the discussion here naturally motivates considering maximal entanglement and projective
                                               (1)
measurements leading to the special case, C0,PME .

Insights to Shannon capacity The Shannon capacity [Sha56] as we know is a central concept
bridging zero-error information theory and graph theory, the computability of which has remained
notoriously difficult (see [LS25] for a review). The beautiful work of Lovász shows that the Lovász
ϑ-function can be computed in polynomial time in n (size of the adjacency matrix), and is an
upper bound on the Shannon capacity, whose computation requires the computation of an infinite
series of the independence number, which is a known NP-hard problem [Lov79]. Moreover, even
fundamental questions surrounding the Shannon capacity remain answered, the best-known being
the determination of the Shannon capacity of odd cycle graphs of length greater than 5 [Lov79,

                                                  10
dBBZ24, PS19, Boh04]. Such evidence for extreme uncomputability of even the Shannon capacity
unravels the elusive nature of the entanglement-assisted case in full generality.

Comparison with prior works Our QMA-hardness result of the quantum capacity begs a com-
parison with one of the results of Beigi and Shor [BS07], which shows that computing the classical
(Holevo) capacity of a quantum channel is NP-complete. Notably, to the best of out knowledge,
it is the only other significant complexity-theoretic lower bound known for quantum channel ca-
pacities. This general lack of formal hardness results highlights how fundamental questions about
complexity of quantum channel capacities, including Question 1, have so far remained largely
unexplored.

1.5    Outline
Section 1 is the introduction. We present the main results Theorem 3.12 and Corollary 3.13 on the
QMA-hardness of computing Q(Φ) in Section 3 for a quantum channel Φ, and Theorem 4.1 and
                                                  (1)
Corollary 4.2 on the RE-hardness of computing C0,PME (Φ) in Section 4. We review relevant back-
ground to follow the proofs of these results in Section 2, namely quantum channel capacities and
circuits, aspects of computational complexity, and the quantum independence number of graphs.

Acknowledgements We thank Eric Culf, Omar Fawzi, Laura Mančinska, and William Slofs-
tra for helpful discussions on the complexity of quantum channel capacities, circuit and direct
sum constructions of quantum channels, and undecidability of nonlocal games admitting a perfect
quantum strategy. AB thanks Anne Broadbent for invaluable support. We acknowledge the support
of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC)(ALLRP-578455-
2022), the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number FA9550-20-1-0375 and
of the Canada Research Chairs Program (CRC-2023-00173). AM acknowledges the support of
NSERC DG 2024-06049. YZ is supported by VILLUM FONDEN via QMATH Centre of Excel-
lence grant number 10059 and Villum Young Investigator grant number 37532.


2     Preliminaries
Notation For n ∈ N, write [n] = {1, 2, . . . , n}. For a function f : N → [0, 1], write f : N →
                                                         k                    k
(0, 1)exp to mean that there exist N, k > 0 such that 2−n < f (n) < 1 − 2−n for all n ≥ N . We
write log for the base-2 logarithm. We denote registers by uppercase Latin letters A, B, C, . . .; and
we denote Hilbert spaces by uppercase script letters H, K, L, . . .. We always assume registers are
finite sets and Hilbert spaces are finite-dimensional. We denote an independent copy of a register
A by A′ . Given a register A, the Hilbert space spanned by A is HA = span{|a⟩ | a ∈ A} ∼            =
  |A|
C . We indicate that an operator or vector is on register A with a subscript A, omitting when
clear from context. Given two registers A and B, we write AB for their cartesian product, and
treat the isomorphism HAB ∼     = HA ⊗ HB implicitly. Given finite-dimensional Hilbert spaces
H and K, we write B(H, K) for the set of all linear operators H → K, B(H) = B(H, H),
U(H) ⊆ B(H) for the subset of unitary operators, and D(H) ⊆ B(H) for the subset of density
operators where D(H) := {ρ ∈ B(H), ρ ≥ 0, Tr ρ = 1}. Write U(d) = U(Cd ). An operator


                                                 11
                                                         √
A ∈ B(H) is positive, denoted by A ≥ 0, if A = A† A, where (·)† represents the Hermitian
conjugate. We denote by idR the identity map on B(HR ). We write Tr for the trace on B(H). On
B(HAB ), we write the partial trace TrB = id ⊗ Tr. For ρAB ∈ B(HAB ), write ρA = TrB (ρAB ).
We denote the L1 -norm by ∥·∥1 and the trace norm by 21 ∥·∥1 . We denote the operator norm by
∥·∥. The identity P   operator is denoted by I. We denote the canonical maximally-entangled state
   +
|ϕ ⟩AA =′      √ 1
                        a∈A |a⟩ ⊗ |a⟩ ∈ HAA′ . We write the maximally-mixed state on a register
                  |A|
                1
                    P
A as ωA = |A|         a∈A |a⟩⟨a| ∈ D(HA ). A positive-operator-valued
                                                    P
                                                                        measurement (POVM) is a
finite set of positive operators {Pi }i∈I such that i Pi = 1, and a projection-valued measurement
(PVM) is a POVM where all the elements are projectors. A quantum channel is a completely
positive trace-preserving (CPTP) map Φ : B(H) → B(K). We denote the Choi-Jamiołkowski
isomorphism J : B(B(HA ), B(HB )) → B(HAB ), J(Φ) = (id ⊗Φ)( |ϕ+ ⟩⟨ϕ+ |AA′ ). Note that if
is Φ is a quantum channel, J(Φ) ∈ D(HAB ), called the Choi state. The Kraus representation of
                                                d−1
                                                    Φ(ρ) = Ai ρA†i where Ai ∈ B(H) are the Kraus
                                                P
a quantum channel Φ : B(H) → B(H) is
                                                   i=0
                      d−1
                            A†i Ai = I, and d = dim(H). For Φ : B(HA ) → B(HB ), by Stinespring’s
                      P
operators such that
                      i=0
dilation theorem, there exists an isometry V : A → BE known as the Stinespring isometry such
that Φ(ρ) = TrE (V ρV † ). The complementary channel Φc : B(HA ) → B(HE ) is given by
Φc (ρ) = TrB (V ρV † ). Note that the Kraus representation is not unique. However, for a channel
Φ we can always find its minimal Stinespring representation and corresponding minimal Kraus
representation. Every Stinespring representation is equivalent to a minimal one via an isometry on
the environment denoted by register E. The diamond norm of a linear map Φ : B(HA ) → B(HB )
is defined as ∥Φ∥⋄ := sup ∥Φ(MRA )∥1 , with supremum over all M ∈ B(HRA ) with dR = dA
                            ∥M ∥1 ≤1
and ∥M ∥1 ≤ 1.

2.1     Quantum channel capacities and circuits
In this section, we introduce various capacities associated with quantum channels. In the pro-
cess, we introduce the relevant entropic quantities and their properties, and the notion of circuit
construction of quantum channels.
    We focus on the quantum capacity and the entanglement-assisted zero-error capacity in this
work. We recall that the von Neumann entropy of a quantum state ρ is defined as S(ρ) :=
− Tr(ρ log ρ). The coherent information [BNS98], or equivalently, the one-shot quantum capacity
is an entropic quantity denoted by Q(1) (Φ). It characterises the amount of quantum information
that can be transmitted over a quantum channel Φ (in a single use).
Definition 2.1 (Quantum capacity). The quantum capacity of a channel Φ is given by
                                                        Q(1) (Φ⊗n )
                                           Q(Φ) := lim                                          (6)
                                                    n→∞      n
where
                                           Q(1) (Φ) := max Ic (Φ, ρ),
                                                          ρ
                                       c
and Ic (Φ, ρ) = S [(Φ(ρ)] − S [Φ (ρ)] is the entropy exchanged between the channel Φ and its
environment.

                                                         12
    A channel N is said to be degradable if there exists another channel D, known as the degrading
map, such that D◦N = N c . Similarly, a channel M is said to be anti-degradable if there exists an
anti-degrading map L such that L ◦ Mc = M. Intuitively, a degradable channel allows its receiver
(Bob) to simulate the state of the environment (Eve) for any input supplied by the sender (Alice).
Similarly, an anti-degradable channel allows the environment to simulate the receiver’s state for
any input. For degradable channels, the quantum capacity is additive and hence Q(N ) = Q(1) (N ).
For anti-degradable channels, the quantum capacity Q(M) = 0. Let id2 be the identity channel on
B(C2 ). Since this channel sends the entire input to the receiver, the environment does not receive
any information. It is easy to see that the action of the complementary channel idc2 (ρ) = Tr(ρ),
and hence Ic (id2 , ρ) = S(ρ). This implies that the coherent information Q(1) (id2 ) = max S(ρ) =
                                                                                          ρ
log 2 = 1.
    The notion of entanglement assistance means that prior to communication through a noisy
channel, the sender and receiver are allowed to share an entangled state. Sharing of prior entangle-
ment has been shown to increase the capacity in certain cases, as well as to have no effect in others,
see [Wat18] for a summary. Indeed, determining the information transmission capacities of quan-
tum channels is still a fundamentally unresolved question. The entanglement-assisted one-shot
                                              (1)
zero-error classical capacity, denoted by C0,E (Φ), is the number of bits perfectly transmitted in
a single use of the channel Φ in the presence of preshared entanglement (not necessarily maximal)
between the sender and receiver.

Definition 2.2 (Entanglement-assisted one-shot zero-error classical capacity). The entanglement-
assisted one-shot zero-error classical capacity of a CPTP map Φ : B(HA ) → B(HB ) is defined
as
                                       (1)
                                     C0,E (Φ) := sup log|M |,                                     (7)
                                                  |ψ⟩,M

where the supremum is over all pure bipartite (entangled) states |ψ⟩ ∈ D(HA0 ⊗ HB0 ) and collec-
                                                   |M |
tions M of CPTP maps {Em : B(HA0 ) → B(HA )}m=1 such that

                    ∀ m ̸= m′ : (Φ ◦ Em ⊗ idB0 )(|ψ⟩) ⊥ (Φ ◦ Em′ ⊗ idB0 )(|ψ⟩).

    If we restrict the P
                       shared state between the sender and receiver to only be a maximally entangled
        +
state ϕAA′ = √     1
                         a∈A |a⟩ ⊗ |a⟩ ∈ HAA′ , then we can define the corresponding maximal-
                  |A|
entanglement-assisted one-shot zero-error classical capacity. Along with another condition for
projective measurements, we obtain the following capacity notion relevant for our work.

Definition 2.3 (PME-assisted one-shot zero-error classical capacity). The PME-assisted one-shot
zero-error classical capacity of a classical-to-quantum channel Φ : B(CΣ ) → B(HB ) with the
input alphabet Σ is defined as
                                      (1)
                                    C0,PME (Φ) := sup log|M |,                              (8)
                                                   ϕ+ ,M

where the supremum is over all pairs (ϕ+ , M ) satisfying

    • ϕ+ ∈ D(HA0 ⊗ HA0 ) is a maximally entangled state, and


                                                 13
                                                                          Σ         |M |
                                         Pchannels {E
      • M consists of quantum-to-classical           m : B(HA0 ) → B(C )}m=1 } with the out-
        put alphabet Σ such that Em (ρ) = a∈Σ Tr(Pam ρ) |a⟩⟨a| for some PVMs {Pam : a ∈ Σ}, 1 ≤
        m ≤ |M |,
and
                    ∀ m ̸= m′ : (Φ ◦ Em ⊗ idA0 )(ϕ+ ) ⊥ (Φ ◦ Em′ ⊗ idA0 )(ϕ+ ).
Remark 2.4. The action of a quantum channel may also be represented as a quantum circuit. The
circuit model of quantum computation describes unitary quantum operations (channels) wherein a
universal gate set S such as the Clifford+T gate set {CN OT, H, T } can approximate any unitary
to arbitrary precision by composing finitely many tensors of the elementary gates. To completely
describe any quantum channel, two non-unitary operations are also required: the partial trace
          C
Tr : B( 2 ) →     C  on one qubit, and single-qubit state preparation in the computational basis,
                                  C
given by the mapping C → B( 2 ), λ 7→ λ |0⟩⟨0| . Due to the Stinespring dilation theorem, the
composite gate set S ∪ {Tr, |0⟩⟨0|} can approximate any quantum channel to arbitrary precision.
The Stinespring dilation also enables constructing the circuit of a quantum channel as a sequence
of steps: single-qubit preparation, followed by the action of unitary gates, and finally a partial trace.
In this work, we will assume that our quantum circuits for channels are always in this canonical
form. See [CM23] for more on the circuit construction of channels.

2.2     Complexity theory
In this work, we study decision problems related to the computability of various channel capacities.
Notably, we show that computing the quantum capacity of a quantum channel is QMA-hard. and
computing the entanglement-assisted zero-error classical capacity of a classical-quantum channel
restricted to maximal entanglement is RE-hard. We formally introduce the exact meaning of such
a statement about hardness of computing in this section.
                                                                    Z
    A Turing machine is a tuple M = (k, Σ, S, δ) where k ∈ ≥0 is called the number of work
tapes, Σ is a finite set called the set of symbols containing a blank symbol □, S is a finite set called
the set of states containing the initial state start and the halt state halt, and δ : S × Σk+2 →
S × Σk+2 × {−1, 0, 1}k+2 is a function called the transition function. A Turing machine is an
abstraction of a computation. A function f is computable if there is a Turing machine M such
that f (x) = M (x) for all x. A language is a subset L ⊆ {0, 1}∗ where Σ∗ denotes the set of words
in Σ. A Turing machine decides a language L if M (x) = 1 when x ∈ L and M (x) = 0 when
x∈ / L. A promise problem P is a pair of disjoint subsets Y (P ), N (P ) ⊆ {0, 1}∗ . The elements
of Y (P )∪N (P ) are called the instances of P , and the elements of Y (P ) are the yes instances and
the elements of N (P ) are the no instances. We write x ∈ P to mean x ∈ Y (P ) ∪ N (P ). Every
language L corresponds to the promise problem (L, Lc ), so we exclusively work with promise
problems in the following. A Turing machine M decides P if M (x) = 1 for all x ∈ Y (P ) and
M (x) = 0 for all x ∈ N (P ). A complexity class is a collection of promise problems. A problem
P is hard for a complexity class C or C-hard, if every problem in C reduces to P. The problem P
is said to be C-complete if it is C-hard and P ∈ C.
    The complexity class QMA is the quantum analogue of NP and, informally, consists of those
promise problems that admit an efficiently verifiable quantum witness. A promise problem (Y, N )
is called QMA-hard if, for every promise problem (Y ′ , N ′ ) in QMA, there exists a polynomial-
time computable function f : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}∗ such that f (Y ′ ) ⊆ Y and f (N ′ ) ⊆ N . A promise

                                                   14
problem is called QMA-complete if it is both QMA-hard and in QMA. The canonical example of
a QMA-complete is the local Hamiltonian problem [KSV02].
   We define the class QMA as follows.
Definition 2.5 (QMA). Let c, s :       N → (0, 1). A promise problem Y, N ⊆ {0, 1}∗ is in QMAc,s
if there exist polynomials p, r, l :   N → N and a Turing machine V with one input tape and one
output tape such that
    • For all x ∈ {0, 1}∗ , V halts on input x in r(|x|) steps and outputs the description of a
      quantum circuit V (x) (see Fig. 1) for a unitary Ux : (C2 )⊗(p(|x|)+l(|x|)) → (C2 )⊗(p(|x|)+l(|x|)) ,




                       {
                                                                                    Φ(ρ)

                   ρ
                                                                                    Decision
                                         .                               .         register R
                                         .                               .
                                         .                               .
                 Proof                   .                               .
                register                 .                               .




                                 {
                                         .                               .
                                         .                               .
                                         .                               .
                                         .                               .
                               | 0⟩      .                               .




                                                    ΦV(x)

                       Figure 1: Verification circuit V (x) that implements ΦV (x) .

      where the proof state is in (C2 )⊗p(|x|) and the ancillary register is initialized as |0⟩⊗l(|x|) ∈
      (C2 )⊗l(|x|) , such that the following hold:
    • For all x ∈ Y , there exists a density ρ ∈ D (C2 )⊗p(|x|) such that
                                                                 
                                                                      
                              Tr Ux ρ ⊗ |0⟩⟨0|⊗l(|x|) Ux† ( |1⟩⟨1| ⊗ I) ≥ c(|x|).
                                                     


    • For all x ∈ N and ρ ∈ D (C2 )⊗p(|x|)
                                           
                                                                     
                                             ⊗l(|x|)  †
                         Tr Ux ρ ⊗ |0⟩⟨0|             Ux ( |1⟩⟨1| ⊗ I) ≤ s(|x|).

  For any c, s :      N → (0, 1)exp, with c(n) − s(n) = O(1/poly(n)), we have that QMAc,s =
QMA 3 , 1 [MW05].
      4 4


Remark 2.6. Given unitary Ux , as in Definition 2.5, we let Wx : (C2 )⊗p(|x|) → (C2 )⊗(p(|x|)+l(|x|))
denote the isometry sending |ψ⟩ 7→ Ux (|ψ⟩ ⊗ |0⟩⊗l(|x|) ). Note then that
                                                                                             
Tr Ux ρ⊗ |0⟩⟨0|⊗l(|x|) U † ( |1⟩⟨1|⊗I) = Tr Wx ρWx† ( |1⟩⟨1|⊗I) = Tr Wx† ( |1⟩⟨1|⊗I)Wx ρ .
                       


                                                    15
   R is the class of all problems that can be decided with a Turing machine; P ∈ R is called
decidable, and P ∈/ R is called undecidable. We define the class RE as follows.

Definition 2.7 (RE). RE is the class of all problems P such that there exists a Turing machine M
where if x ∈ Y (P ), M halts on input x.

    MIP is the class of languages that can be decided by a multi-prover interactive proof system.
MIP(2, 1) corresponds to a proof system with two provers and a single round of interaction and
is equivalent to families of nonlocal games F = {Gx }x where the all-powerful provers attempt to
convince the verifier that the word x ∈ {0, 1}∗ belongs to a language L. In a two-player nonlocal
game G, Alice and Bob (two players) play against a verifier. During the game, the verifier samples
a question pair (q, q ′ ) from a finite set Q × Q according to a probability distribution π, sends q to
Alice, q ′ to Bob, and they respectively respond with answers a, a′ ∈ A, another finite set denoting
the answers. Alice and Bob win this round of the game if V (q, q ′ ; a, a) = 1 and lose otherwise.
Here, V : Q × Q′ × A × A′ → {0, 1} is a function called the predicate. Importantly, while the
setup of the game G = (Q, A, π, V ) is known to everyone, Alice and Bob cannot communicate
during the game and thus have no knowledge of each other’s question and answer. The goal is to
come up with a strategy which maximises their chance of winning.
    The power of MIP(2, 1) is captured by the gapped promise problem for the family of games F :
for fixed constants 0 < s < c ≤ 1, given a game Gx ∈ F decide whether the value of Gx is at least
c, or less than s, given the promise that one of the two must hold. This constitutes what is known
as the (c, s)-gap problem for F with completeness and soundness parameters c and s respectively.
Since the provers in MIP cannot communicate, it is natural to ask what happens if they are allowed
to share entanglement which gives rise to the complexity class MIP∗ with entangled provers. MIP∗
is captured by the gapped promise problem defined above where the value of a game is replaced
by its quantum value [CHTW04].
    The complexity of MIP∗ , the quantum counterpart of MIP turned out to be much harder to
determine and increasingly larger until it was shown to be equal to RE, the class of recursively
enumerable languages (see Section 2.2) in [JNV+ 21]. More precisely, for any 0 < s < 1 the
so-called synchronous3 games have been constructed for which the (1, s)-gap∗ problem decides
the Halting problem. This result indicates that, in general, approximating the quantum value of
synchronous games within any additive constant is undecidable. Immediately prior to this, [Slo19]
showed an important result that whether or not a synchronous game has a perfect quantum strategy
is undecidable.

2.3     Quantum independence number
In this section, we introduce the classical and quantum independence numbers of a graph, and
briefly discuss the computational complexity of computing the latter.
    Let G = (V, E) be a graph, where V is a finite set of vertices and E ⊆ V × V is the set
of edges. Throughout this paper, we assume all graphs are undirected and simple, meaning that
(v, v) ̸= E for all v ∈ V , and (v, w) ∈ E implies (w, v) ∈ E. A subset S ⊆ V is an independent
   3
     In a synchronous game, if the players receive the same question, they must produce the same answer in any perfect
strategy games.



                                                         16
set if no two distinct vertices in S are adjacent, i.e., (v, w) ∈
                                                                / E for all v, w ∈ S. The (classical)
independence number of G is

                        α(G) := max{|S| : S ⊆ V is an independent set}.

     Given a graph G = (V, E) and a positive integer t, the t-independent set game IS(G, t) of G is
a two-player (commonly called Alice and Bob) nonlocal game in which Alice and Bob attempt to
convince a referee that G contains an independent set of t vertices. In IS(G, t), the referee samples
i, j ∈ [t] uniformly and sends i to Alice and j to Bob. Alice and Bob then respond with vertices
v, w ∈ V , respectively. The players win if and only if:
    • if i = j, then v = w;

    • if i ̸= j, then (v, w) ∈
                             / E.
Alice and Bob may agree on a strategy beforehand, but are not allowed to communicate during the
game. A strategy is said to be perfect if it wins this game with certainty.
    A deterministic classical strategy consists of two functions fA , fB : [t] → V . On questions i
and j, Alice outputs fA (i) and Bob outputs fB (j). It is not hard to see that IS(G, t) has a perfect
deterministic classical strategy if and only if α(G) ≥ t. This gives an alternative formulation of
α(G): it is the maximal t such that IS(G, t) has a perfect classical strategy.
    A quantum strategy allows Alice and Bob to share entanglement, often leading to a higher
winning probability than classically possible. Such a strategy S consists of a quantum state |ψ⟩ ∈
HA ⊗ HB , where HA and HB are finite-dimensional Hilbert spaces, and POVMs {Pvi : v ∈ V } ⊆
B(HA ) and {Qjw : w ∈ V } ⊆ B(HB ) for all i, j ∈ [t]. When the players use this strategy, the
probability of answering v, w on questions i, j is

                                    pS (v, w|i, j) = ⟨ψ|Pvi ⊗ Qjw |ψ⟩.

The quantum independence number of G is

                    αq (G) = max{t : IS(G, t) has a perfect quantum strategy}.

Quantum independent set games belong to a broader class called symmetric synchronous games.
In a synchronous game, if the players receive the same question, they must produce the same
answer in any perfect strategy. A synchronous game is symmetric if exchanging the roles of Alice
and Bob does not change the winning rules. Perfect strategies for synchronous games are well-
understood [HMPS17]. In particular, we know that IS(G, t) has a perfect quantum strategy if and
only if there exist finite-dimensional PVMs {Pvi : v ∈ V }, i ∈ [t] such that Pvi Pwj = 0 whenever
answering v and w for questions i and j loses the game. This gives an alternative formulation for
the quantum independence number:

        αq (G) = max{t : there exist finite-dimensional PVMs {Pvi : v ∈ V }, i ∈ [t]
                           such that for i ̸= j, Pvi Pwj = 0 whenever v = w or (v, w) ∈ E}.

The MIP∗ = RE result [JNV+ 21] implies that the decision problem
      Given a synchronous game G, does it have a perfect quantum strategy?

                                                   17
is RE-complete. We remark that this problem was first shown to be undecidable by Slofstra in
[Slo19]. The MIP∗ = RE result strengthens it to RE-complete. See also [PS25] for a detailed
discussion.
    Given any synchronous game G with question set Q and answer set A, we can construct a graph
G = (V, E) with V = Q × A, and ((q, a), (q ′ , a′ )) ∈ E if and only if answering a, a′ on q, q ′ loses
the game G. Let t = |Q|. Then the independent set game IS(G, t) has a perfect quantum strategy
if and only if G has a perfect quantum strategy. Since this mapping from synchronous games G to
independent set games IS(G, t) is clearly computable, as an immediate consequence:

Theorem 2.8. The decision problem

      Given a graph G and a positive integer t, is αq (G) ≥ t?

is RE-hard.


3     Computing the quantum capacity is QMA-hard
In this section we show that computing the quantum capacity of a quantum channel is QMA-hard
(Corollary 3.13). To do so, we introduce the following construction, a symmetric direct sum of
quantum channels.
                                                                                                     n
Definition 3.1 (Symmetric direct sum). Let U : HA → HA′ be an isometry, where HA′ = C2
with the standard orthonormal basis {|z⟩ : z ∈ {0, 1}n }. Let Φ0 : B(HB ) → B(HB ′ ) and
Φ1 : B(HB ) → B(HB ′ ) be CPTP maps. Define the symmetric direct sum of Φ0 and Φ1 as the
channel Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 : B(HA ⊗ HB ) → B(HA′ ⊗ HB ′ ) given by
                              X
            Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 (ρ) :=        ( |z⟩⟨z| U ⊗ IB ′ )(idA ⊗ Φz1 )(ρ)(U † |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ IB ′ ). (9)
                                      z∈{0,1}n


Here, z1 is the first bit of z.

   The following lemma shows that the complement of the symmetric direct sum of Φ0 and Φ1 is
equal to the symmetric direct sum of the complementary channels Φc0 and Φc1 .

Lemma 3.2. (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 )c = Φc0 ⊕U Φc1 , where all symbols are as in Definition 3.1.

Proof. Let V0 : HB → HBP′ E and V1 : HB → HB ′ E be the Stinespring isometries of Φ0 and Φ1 .

Then, we claim that V = |zz⟩A′ A′E ⟨z|U ⊗ Vz1 is the Stinespring isometry of Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 where
                                  z




                                                  18
A′E is a copy of register A′ in the environment of Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 (ρ).
                                                         !                          !
                                        X                      X                  †
                         †                                        † ′    ′ ′
            TrA′E E (V ρV ) = TrA′E E      |zz⟩⟨z|U ⊗ Vz1 ρ      U |z ⟩⟨z z | ⊗ Vz′
                                                                                                            1
                                                 z                             z′
                                XX
                                               TrA′E E |zz⟩⟨z|U ⊗ Vz1 ρ U † |z ′ ⟩⟨z ′ z ′ | ⊗ Vz†′
                                                                                                   
                            =
                                                                                                    1
                                z        z′
                                XX
                                               TrE |z⟩⟨z|U ⊗ Vz1 ρ U † |z ′ ⟩⟨z ′ | ⊗ Vz†′ ⟨z ′ |z⟩
                                                                                         
                            =
                                                                                             1
                                z        z′
                                X
                                     TrE |z⟩⟨z|U ⊗ Vz1 ρ U † |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ Vz†1
                                                                          
                            =
                                z
                                X
                            =        ( |z⟩⟨z| U ⊗ IB ′ )(idA ⊗ Φz1 )(ρ)(U † |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ IB ′ )
                                z
                            = Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 (ρ).

   We have that Φc0 (ρ) = TrB ′ (V0 ρV0† ) and Φc1 (ρ) = TrB ′ (V1 ρV1† ). Therefore,

               Φc0 ⊕U Φc1 (ρ) = TrB ′ (V0 ρV0† ) ⊕U TrB ′ (V1 ρV1† )
                                X
                              =    ( |z⟩⟨z| U ⊗ IE )(idA ⊗ Φcz1 )(ρ)(U † |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ IE ).
                                     z

   We now consider the complement of the symmetric direct sum.
                                                     !                                    !
                                    X                      X                            †
        (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 )c (ρ) = TrA′ B ′   |zz⟩⟨z|U ⊗ Vz1 ρ         U † |z ′ ⟩⟨z ′ z ′ | ⊗ Vz′
                                                                                                            1
                                                  z                             z′
                                XX                                                                     
                            =                  TrA′ B ′ (|zz⟩⟨z|U ⊗ Vz1 ) ρ U † |z ′ ⟩⟨z ′ z ′ | ⊗ Vz†′
                                                                                                        1
                                 z        z′
                                X
                            =         TrB ′ ( |z⟩⟨z| U ⊗ Vz1 )ρ(U † |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ Vz1 )
                               z
                            = Φc0 ⊕U Φc1 (ρ).

This completes the proof.                                                                                       ■
   In the next lemma we show that the channel Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 is degradable if Φ0 and Φ1 are degradable.

Lemma 3.3. Let Φ0 , Φ1 be degradable channels and let Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 be as constructed in Defini-
tion 3.1. Then, Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 is a degradable channel.

Proof. Let D0 and D1 be degrading maps for Φ0 and Φ1 such that D0 ◦ Φ0 = Φc0 and D1 ◦ Φ1 = Φc1 .
Define the channel D : B(HA′ ⊗ HB ′ ) → B(HA′E ⊗ HE ) as
                                X
                    D(ρ) =                ( |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ IE )(idA′ ⊗ Dz1 )(ρ)( |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ IE ).
                             z∈{0,1}n


We claim that D is a degrading map for Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 .

                                                           19
     Now we will show that D ◦ (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 ) = (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 )c .

 D ◦ (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 )(ρ)
                                                                
       X
=D        ( |z⟩⟨z| U ⊗ IB ′ )(idA ⊗ Φz1 )(ρ)(U † |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ IB ′ )
          z∈{0,1}n
       X
                    ( |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ IE )(idA′ ⊗ Dz1 ) ( |z ′ ⟩⟨z ′ | U ⊗ IB ′ )(idA ⊗ Φz1′ )(ρ)(U † |z ′ ⟩⟨z ′ | ⊗ IB ′ ) ( |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ IE )
                                                                                                                    
=
    z,z ′ ∈{0,1}n
      X
=              ( |z⟩⟨z| U ⊗ IE )(idA ⊗ Dz1 ◦ Φz1 )(ρ)(U † |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ IE )
    z∈{0,1}n
      X
=              ( |z⟩⟨z| U ⊗ IE )(idA ⊗ Φcz1 )(ρ)(U † |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ IE )
    z∈{0,1}n

=(Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 )c (ρ),

where the last equality follows from Lemma 3.2. This completes the proof.                                                ■
   An immediate corollary results from the above lemma just by the property that if a channel is
degradable, then its quantum capacity is equal to its one-shot quantum capacity [CRS08].

Corollary 3.4. Let Φ0 , Φ1 be degradable channels and let Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 be as constructed in Defini-
tion 3.1. Then, Q(Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 ) = Q(1) (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 ).

    We now introduce the specific channels we choose as Φ0 and Φ1 to establish our QMA-hardness
result, Theorem 3.12.
                                                                            (1)
Definition 3.5. Let Φ be a quantum channel. We define Q− (Φ) := min Ic (Φ, ρ).
                                                                                          ρ

Remark 3.6. Consider the two extreme cases of the qubit amplitude            channel. This
                                                                      damping             chan-
                                                                                             √ 
                                                                   1 √ 0                   0    η
nel denoted by Aη , is specified by two Kraus operators A0 =                  and A1 =
                                                                   0  1−η                  0 0
                           †          †
such that Aη (ρ) = A0 ρA0 + A1 ρA1 . Here, η is interpreted as the probability of transmission.
This channel physically represents the loss of an excitation (say, aphoton)
                                                                            from a quantum sys-
                                                                         1
tem to  a
      1 noisy environment.   This  channel  is degradable  for η  ∈ 0, 2
                                                                            and anti-degradable for
η ∈ 2 , 1 . Notably, it is both degradable and anti-degradable at η = 1/2. At η = 0, A0 = id2
and hence Q(A0 ) = Q(1) (A0 ) = log 2 = 1. Since the quantum capacity is zero for any anti-
degradable channel we have that Q(A1/2 ) = Q(1) (A1/2 ) = 0. Further, since Ic (A1/2 , ρ) = 0 for
        (1)
all ρ, Q− (A1/2 ) = 0, as defined in Definition 3.5, as well. We choose Φ1 = A0 and Φ0 = A1/2 .

     We now state the following known result for the von-Neumann entropy of subnormalised states.
It is important for establishing a result about the coherent information of the symmetric direct sum
of channels, Theorem 3.9, hence we include a proof.

Lemma 3.7. For every q ≥ 0 and ω ∈ D(H), S(qω) = qS(ω) − q log q.




                                                               20
Proof. Since Tr(ω) = 1, we obtain that
                                                          
                                 S(qω) = − Tr qω log(qω)
                                       = − Tr(qω log ω) − Tr(qω log q)
                                       = −q Tr(ω log ω) − q log q Tr(ω)
                                       = qS(ω) − q log q.
This completes the proof.                                                                                       ■
    The next lemma gives us the von-Neumann entropy of classical-quantum states, another known
result important for establishing Theorem 3.9.
                                   P
Lemma 3.8 ([YHD08]). Let ρ =          |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ ρz be a classical-quantum state. Then
                                        z
                                                                X
                                              S(ρ) =                     S(ρz ).                              (10)
                                                                    z

   The following theorem gives the coherent information of the symmetric direct sum of quantum
channels.
Theorem 3.9. Let Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 (ρ) be as in Definition 3.1. Let Q(1) (Φ1 ) ≥ Q(1) (Φ0 ). Let p =
max Tr (U † ( |1⟩⟨1| ⊗ I)U )σ where the maximisation is over quantum states σ. Then, writing
 σ
 (1)
Q− (Φ0 ) as in Definition 3.5, we have that
                                                                                                        (1)
     pQ(1) (Φ1 ) + (1 − p)Q(1) (Φ0 ) ≥ Q(1) (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 ) ≥ pQ(1) (Φ1 ) + (1 − p)Q− (Φ0 ).                      (11)
Proof. Define pz = Tr(⟨z|U ⊗ IB )ρ(U † |z⟩ ⊗ IB ) and ρz = p1z (⟨z|U ⊗ IB )ρ(U † |z⟩ ⊗ IB ). Then,
                 P
(Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 )(ρ) = pz |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ Φz1 (ρz ). Now
                   z
                                                                                                !
                                                               X
                        S(Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 (ρ)) = S                             pz |z⟩⟨z| ⊗ Φz1 (ρz )
                                                                z
                                                   X                               
                                               =               S pz Φz1 (ρz )
                                                       z
                                                   X                                               
                                               =                pz S(Φz1 (ρz )) − pz log pz ,                 (12)
                                                       z

where the second equality is by Lemma 3.8 and the last equality is by Lemma 3.7. Then,
                       S((Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 )c (ρ)) = S((Φc0 ⊕U Φc1 )(ρ))
                                             X                               
                                           =      pz S(Φcz1 (ρz )) − pz log pz ,
                                                           z

where the first equality is by Lemma 3.2 and the last equality is by Eq. (12). Now,
      Ic (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 , ρ) = S(Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 (ρ)) − S(Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 )c (ρ)
                          X                               X
                                                              pz S(Φcz1 (ρz )) − pz log pz
                                                                                           
                        =     pz S(Φz1 (ρz )) − pz log pz −
                             z                                                         z
                             X
                         =        pz Ic (Φz1 , ρz ).
                             z


                                                                21
                  ✦✵
                       {               ..
                                        .
                                                          ❳         ❳
                                                                             Tr




  ✂



   {        ✦✵
                    ❯           ..
                                 . ♥




                                 ✦✵
                                                ❱✶            ❱✁
                                                                            Tr
                                                                                 ..
                                                                                  .


                                                                                            }
                                                                                            ✭✧✄ ★☎ ✧✆✮✭✝✮




        Figure 2: The symmetric direct sum of channels succinctly presented by a circuit.


Then,
                                                      X
                           Q(1) (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 ) = max             pz Ic (Φz1 , ρz )
                                                ρ
                                                          z
                                                      X
                                            ≤ max             pz Q(1) (Φz1 )
                                                ρ
                                                          z

                                            = pQ (Φ1 ) + (1 − p)Q(1) (Φ0 ).
                                                    (1)



The last equality follows from the assumption that Q(1) (Φ1 ) ≥ Q(0) (Φ0 ). For the lower bound, let
σ be a state such that p = Tr (U † ( |1⟩⟨1| ⊗ I)U )σ and ρ be a state such that Ic (Φ1 , ρ) = Q(1) (Φ1 ).
Then,

                           Q(1) (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 ) ≥ Ic (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 , σ ⊗ ρ)
                                              X
                                            =      pz Ic (Φz1 , ρ)
                                                z
                                            = pIc (Φ1 , ρ) + (1 − p)Ic (Φ0 , ρ)
                                                                                      (1)
                                            ≥ pQ(1) (Φ1 ) + (1 − p)Q− (Φ0 ).

                                                                                                        ■
   The following corollary immediately holds.

Corollary 3.10. Let Φ0 = A1/2 and Φ1 = A0 as in Remark 3.6. Let p be as in Theorem 3.9. Then,
Q(1) (Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 ) = p.

    In the remark below, we show that there exists a circuit implementing the symmetric direct sum
of channels as illustrated in Fig. 2.

Remark 3.11. Let C0 , C1 be circuits representing the channel actions of Φ0 and Φ1 . From the
Stinespring representation of Φ0 (ρ) = (id ⊗ Tr)(V0 (ρ ⊗ |0⟩⟨0|)V0† ), Φ1 (ρ) = (id ⊗ Tr)(V1 (ρ ⊗

                                                     22
|0⟩⟨0|)V1† ) we can, without loss of generality, let C1 and C0 be represented by the action of the
unitary V1 and V0 respectively, where |0⟩⟨0| denotes an auxiliary input system. Let C be the circuit
corresponding to the unitary U . We now construct the circuit for the channel Φ0 ⊕U Φ1 using the
diagram in Fig. 2.
   The following theorem establishes a reduction from every promise problem in QMA to the
problem of deciding the quantum capacity of symmetric direct sum channels.
Theorem 3.12. For every promise problem L ∈ QMA 3 , 1 , there is an efficient mapping from
                                                         4 4
instances x to circuit descriptions implementing channels Φx such that if x ∈ Y then Q(Φx ) ≥ 34 ,
and if x ∈ N then Q(Φx ) ≤ 14 .
Proof. Let L = (Y, N ) ∈ QMA 3 , 1 as in Definition 2.5, and let V (x) be the corresponding verifi-
                                 4 4
                                                                              n      n        n +n
cation circuit for each instance x. The circuit V (x) acts by a unitary Ux : C2 1 ⊗ C2 2 → C2 1 2
                          n                              n
on the proof state in C2 1 with an ancilla |0⟩⊗n2 ∈ C2 2 , and then measures the first qubit in the
computational basis. Here n1 = p(|x|) and n2 = l(|x|) as defined in Definition 2.5. Define the
                   n        n +n
isometry Wx : C2 1 → C2 1 2 by sending |ψ⟩ 7→ Ux (|ψ⟩ ⊗ |0⟩⊗n2 ), as discussed in Remark 2.6.
Then the probability of accepting ρ is given by Tr(Wx† ( |1⟩⟨1| ⊗ I)Wx ρ).
    Let Φx = Φ0 ⊕Wx Φ1 be the symmetric direct sum where Φ0 = A1/2 and Φ1 = A0 are the
extremes of the qubit amplitude damping channel Aη as in Remark 3.6. By Remark 3.11, the
circuit description for Φx can be computed in polynomial time from the classical description of the
circuit V (x). Then by Corollary 3.10, we have Q(Φx ) = maxρ Tr(Wx† ( |1⟩⟨1| ⊗ I)Wx ρ).
    If x ∈ Y then there exists a quantum state ρ such that Tr(Wx† ( |1⟩⟨1| ⊗ I)Wx ρ) ≥ 43 . Thus the
quantum capacity
                                                                           3
                   Q(Φx ) = Q(1) (Φ0 ⊕Wx Φ1 ) ≥ Tr(Wx† ( |1⟩⟨1| ⊗ I)Wx ρ) ≥ .
                                                                           4
If x ∈ N then for every quantum state ρ, Tr(Wx† ( |1⟩⟨1| ⊗ I)Wx ρ) ≤ 41 . Then, as above, the
quantum capacity
                                                            1
                             Q(Φx ) = Q(1) (Φ0 ⊕Wx Φ1 ) ≤ .
                                                            4
                                                                                           ■
    This results in the immediate corollary stated as follows.
Corollary 3.13. Given a quantum channel ΦC : B(H) → B(K), presented succinctly by a quan-
tum circuit C which implements ΦC , it is QMA-hard to decide if Q(ΦC ) ≥ 43 or Q(ΦC ) ≤ 14 .


4    A special case of the entanglement-assisted zero-error classi-
     cal capacity of quantum channels is uncomputable
                                                                            (1)
In this section, we establish the following relations between the capacity C0,PME of quantum chan-
nels and the quantum independence number of graphs.
Theorem 4.1. There is a computable mapping from (simple and undirected) graphs G to classical-
                                  (1)
to-quantum channels ΦG such that C0,PME (ΦG ) = log (αq (G)).

                                                 23
   As an immediate consequence of Theorem 2.8 that determining whether αq (G) ≥ t is RE-hard,
                                                 (1)
we have the following undecidability result for C0,PME .

Corollary 4.2. The decision problem
                                                                              (1)
        Given a positive integer t and a classical-to-quantum channel Φ, is C0,PME (Φ) ≥ log t?

is RE-hard.

      Now we prove Theorem 4.1.
Proof of Theorem 4.1. We first describe the mapping from graphs G to c-q channels ΦG . Given
                                                                                      V ×V
          (and undirected) graph G = (V, E), consider the matrix A = (Avw ) ∈ C
any (simple                                                                                 defined
            1 if v = w or (v, w) ∈ E
by Avw =                                . Let α := |min λ(A)| be the absolute value of the minimal
            0 otherwise
eigenvalue of A. Then αI + A is a positive semidefinite matrix with diagonal elements 1 + α. We
then apply Cholesky decomposition to find vectors {|ψv ⟩ : v ∈ V } ∈ CV such that
                                           
                                           1
                                                    if (v, w) ∈ E
                              ⟨ψv |ψw ⟩ = 1 + α if v = w
                                           
                                             0       otherwise.
                                           

Let
                                                       1
                                        |ψ̃v ⟩ := √       |ψv ⟩                                   (13)
                                                      1+α
for all v ∈ V . Then {|ψ̃v ⟩ : v ∈ V } are unit vectors in CV such that
                                           (
                                              1
                                             1+α
                                                  if (v, w) ∈ E
                             ⟨ψ̃v |ψ̃w ⟩ =
                                            0     if v ̸= w and (v, w) ∈
                                                                       / E.

Define the c-q channel ΦG : B(CV ) → B(CV ) by sending

                                          |v⟩⟨v| 7→ |ψ̃v ⟩⟨ψ̃v |

for all v ∈ V , where {|v⟩ : v ∈ V } is the standard orthonormal basis for CV .
                          (1)
    We first prove that C0,PME (ΦG ) ≥ log (αq (G)). Let t := αq (G). Then there are PVMs {Pvi :
v ∈ V } ⊆ B(H), i ∈ [t] for some finite-dimensional space H such that for i ̸= j, Pvi Pwj = 0
whenever v = w or (v, w) ∈ E. Let |τ ⟩ ∈ H ⊗ H be a maximally entangled state. For every
i ∈ [t], let Ei : B(H) → B(CV ) be the q-c channel sending
                                             X
                                       ρ→        Tr(Pvi ρ)|v⟩⟨v|,
                                            v∈V

and let
                               ρi = (ΦG ⊗ idH ) ◦ (Ei ⊗ idH ) (|τ ⟩⟨τ |).


                                                   24
Then for any i ̸= j,
                                            1     X
                         Tr(ρi ρj ) =                  | ⟨ψ̃v |ψ̃w ⟩|2 Tr(Pvi Pwj ).
                                         dim(H)2 v,w∈V

When v = w or (v, w) ∈ E, T r(Pvi Pwj ) = 0; when v ̸= w and (v, w) ∈              / E, ⟨ψ̃v |ψ̃w ⟩ = 0.
It follows that Tr(ρi ρj ) = 0 for all i ̸= j. Hence ρ1 , . . . , ρt are perfectly distinguishable. This
          (1)
implies C0,PME (ΦG ) ≥ log t.
                        (1)                                                   (1)
    Now we prove C0,PME (ΦG ) ≤ log (αq (G)). Let t ∈ N such that C0,PME (ΦG ) = log t. Then
there exists a finite-dimensional space HR , a finite-dimensional space HA and a maximally entan-
gled state |ψ⟩ ∈ HA ⊗ HR , and q-c channels E1 , . . . , Et : B(HA ) → B(CV ) such that ρ1 , . . . , ρt
are perfectly distinguishable, where

                              ρi = (ΦG ⊗ idH ) ◦ (Ei ⊗ idH ) (|ψ⟩⟨ψ|),

and Ei (ρ) = v∈V Tr(Pvi ρ)|v⟩⟨v| for all ρ ∈ B(HA ), where {Pvi : v ∈ V } is a PVM for all i ∈ [t].
            P
   For every i ̸= j,

                             0 = Tr(ρi ρj )
                                  X
                                       Tr Pvi Pwj | ⟨ψ̃v |ψ̃w ⟩|2
                                                 
                               =
                                   v,w∈V
                                   X                  X
                                         Tr Pvi Pvj +   Tr Pvi Pwj .
                                                                 
                               =
                                   v∈V                       v̸=w
                                                           (v,w)∈E

Here, the first equality uses that ρi and ρj are perfectly distinguishable, and the last equality uses
that ⟨ψ̃v |ψ̃w ⟩ = 0 if v ̸= w and (v, w) ∈
                                          / E. It follows that for all i ̸= j,

                                                 Pvi Pwj = 0                                       (14)

if v = w or (v, w) ∈ E. This implies αq (G) ≥ t.
                       (1)
    We conclude that C0,PME (ΦG ) = log (αq (G)).                                                    ■


References
[Bei10]       S. Beigi. Entanglement-assisted zero-error capacity is upper-bounded by the lovász
              ϑ function. Phys. Rev. A, 82: 010303, 2010.
              DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.82.010303.

[BNS98]       H. Barnum, M. A. Nielsen, and B. Schumacher. Information transmission through a
              noisy quantum channel. Phys. Rev. A, 57: 4153–4175, 1998.
              DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.57.4153.

[Boh04]       T. Bohman. A limit theorem for the Shannon capacities of odd cycles. II. Proceedings
              of the American Mathematical Society, 133: 537–543, 2004.
              DOI: 10.1090/S0002-9939-04-07470-2.

                                                      25
[BS07]      S. Beigi and P. W. Shor. On the complexity of computing zero-error and Holevo
            capacity of quantum channels. arXiv preprint arXiv:0709.2090, 2007.
            DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.0709.2090.
[CEM+ 15] T. Cubitt, D. Elkouss, W. Matthews, M. Ozols, D. Pérez-García, and S. Strelchuk.
          Unbounded number of channel uses may be required to detect quantum capacity.
          Nature communications, 6(1): 6739, 2015.
          DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7739.
[CG21]      S. Chessa and V. Giovannetti. Partially coherent direct sum channels. Quantum, 5:
            504, 2021.
            DOI: 10.22331/q-2021-07-15-504.
[CHTW04] R. Cleve, P. Hoyer, B. Toner, and J. Watrous. Consequences and limits of nonlocal
         strategies. In Proceedings. 19th IEEE Annual Conference on Computational Com-
         plexity, 2004., pages 236–249, 2004.
         DOI: 10.1109/CCC.2004.1313847.
[CLMW10] T. S. Cubitt, D. Leung, W. Matthews, and A. Winter. Improving zero-error classical
         communication with entanglement. Phys. Rev. Lett., 104: 230503, 2010.
         DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.230503.
[CM23]      E. Culf and A. Mehta. New approaches to complexity via quantum graphs. arXiv
            preprint arXiv:2309.12887, 2023.
            DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2309.12887.
[CM25]      E. Culf and K. Mastel. RE-completeness of entangled constraint satisfaction prob-
            lems. In 2025 IEEE 66th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
            (FOCS), pages 2194–2230, 2025.
            DOI: 10.1109/FOCS63196.2025.00116.
[CMPS25] E. Culf, K. Mastel, C. Paddock, and T. Spirig. The quantum smooth label cover
         problem is undecidable. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.03477, 2025.
[CRS08]     T. S. Cubitt, M. B. Ruskai, and G. Smith. The structure of degradable quantum
            channels. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 49(10), 2008.
            DOI: 10.1063/1.2953685.
[dBBZ24]    D. de Boer, P. Buys, and J. Zuiddam. The asymptotic spectrum distance, graph limits,
            and the shannon capacity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16763, 2024.
            DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2404.16763.
[Dev05]     I. Devetak. The private classical capacity and quantum capacity of a quantum chan-
            nel. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 51(1): 44–55, 2005.
            DOI: 10.1109/TIT.2004.839515.
[DFN+ 25]   Y. Dong, H. Fu, A. Natarajan, M. Qin, H. Xu, and P. Yao. The computational advan-
            tage of MIP∗ vanishes in the presence of noise. J. ACM, 72(6), 2025.
            DOI: 10.1145/3760771.

                                              26
[DSW13]     R. Duan, S. Severini, and A. Winter. Zero-error communication via quantum chan-
            nels, noncommutative graphs, and a quantum lovász number. IEEE Transactions on
            Information Theory, 59(2): 1164–1174, 2013.
            DOI: 10.1109/TIT.2012.2221677.

[FKM+ 25] M. Fanizza, L. Kroell, A. Mehta, C. Paddock, D. Rochette, W. Slofstra, and Y. Zhao.
          The NPA hierarchy does not always attain the commuting operator value. arXiv
          preprint arXiv:2510.04943, 2025.
          DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2510.04943.

[Has09]     M. B. Hastings. Superadditivity of communication capacity using entangled inputs.
            Nature Physics, 5(4): 255–257, 2009.
            DOI: 10.1038/nphys1224.

[HMPS17] W. Helton, K. P. Meyer, V. I. Paulsen, and M. Satriano. Algebras, synchronous games
         and chromatic numbers of graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.00960, 2017.
         DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1703.00960.

[HNW17]     A. W. Harrow, A. Natarajan, and X. Wu. An improved semidefinite programming hi-
            erarchy for testing entanglement. Communications in Mathematical Physics, 352(3):
            881–904, 2017.
            DOI: 10.1007/s00220-017-2859-0.

[IV12]      T. Ito and T. Vidick. A multi-prover interactive proof for nexp sound against entan-
            gled provers. In 2012 IEEE 53rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
            Science, pages 243–252. IEEE, 2012.
            DOI: 10.1109/FOCS.2012.11.

[JNV+ 21]   Z. Ji, A. Natarajan, T. Vidick, J. Wright, and H. Yuen. MIP* = RE. Communications
            of the ACM, 64(11): 131–138, 2021.
            DOI: 10.1145/3485628.

[KSV02]     A. Y. Kitaev, A. Shen, and M. N. Vyalyi. Classical and Quantum Computation.
            American Mathematical Society, 2002.
            DOI: 10.1090/gsm/047.

[Lin25]     J. Lin. MIPco = coRE. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.07162, 2025.
            DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2510.07162.

[Llo97]     S. Lloyd. Capacity of the noisy quantum channel. Phys. Rev. A, 55: 1613–1622,
            1997.
            DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.55.1613.

[Lov79]     L. Lovasz. On the Shannon capacity of a graph. IEEE Transactions on Information
            Theory, 25(1): 1–7, 1979.
            DOI: 10.1109/TIT.1979.1055985.




                                              27
[LS25]      N. Lavi and I. Sason. Advances in the Shannon capacity of graphs. arXiv preprint
            arXiv:2509.24600, 2025.
            DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2509.24600.

[MNY22]     H. Mousavi, S. S. Nezhadi, and H. Yuen. Nonlocal games, compression theorems,
            and the arithmetical hierarchy. pages 1–11, 2022.
            DOI: 10.1145/3519935.3519949.

[MR16]      L. Mančinska and D. E. Roberson. Quantum homomorphisms. Journal of Combina-
            torial Theory. Series B, 118: 228–267, 2016.
            DOI: 10.1016/j.jctb.2015.12.009.

[MRV16]     L. Mančinska, D. E. Roberson, and A. Varvisotis. On deciding the existence of perfect
            entangled strategies for nonlocal games. Chicago Journal of Theoretical Computer
            Science, 2016(5), 2016.
            DOI: 10.4086/cjtcs.2016.005.

[MSSV25] L. Mančinska, P. Spaas, T. Spirig, and M. Vernooij. Gap-preserving reductions and
         re-completeness of independent set games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05253, 2025.
         DOI: doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.05253.

[MW05]      C. Marriott and J. Watrous. Quantum Arthur–Merlin games. Computational Com-
            plexity, 14(2): 122–152, 2005.
            DOI: 10.1007/s00037-005-0194-x.

[NPA08]     M. Navascués, S. Pironio, and A. Acín. A convergent hierarchy of semidefinite pro-
            grams characterizing the set of quantum correlations. New Journal of Physics, 10(7):
            073013, 2008.
            DOI: 10.1088/1367-2630/10/7/073013.

[NW19]      A. Natarajan and J. Wright. NEEXP is contained in MIP. In 2019 IEEE 60th an-
            nual symposium on foundations of computer science (FOCS), pages 510–518. IEEE,
            2019.
            DOI: 10.1109/FOCS.2019.00039.

[NZ23]      A. Natarajan and T. Zhang. Quantum free games. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual
            ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2023, page 1603–1616, New York,
            NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.
            DOI: 10.1145/3564246.3585208.

[PECG+ 25] Á. Perales-Eceiza, T. Cubitt, M. Gu, D. Pérez-García, and M. M. Wolf. Undecidabil-
           ity in physics: a review. Physics Reports, 1138: 1–29, 2025.
           DOI: 10.1016/j.physrep.2025.06.004.

[PS19]      S. C. Polak and A. Schrijver. New lower bound on the Shannon capacity of C7 from
            circular graphs. Information Processing Letters, 143: 37–40, 2019.
            DOI: 10.1016/j.ipl.2018.11.006.


                                              28
[PS25]    C. Paddock and W. Slofstra. Satisfiability problems and algebras of boolean con-
          straint system games. Illinois Journal of Mathematics, 69(1): 81–107, 2025.
          DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.07901.
[Sha48]   C. E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical
          Journal, 27(3): 379–423, 1948.
          DOI: 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb01338.x.
[Sha56]   C. Shannon. The zero error capacity of a noisy channel. IRE Transactions on Infor-
          mation Theory, 2(3): 8–19, 1956.
          DOI: 10.1109/TIT.1956.1056798.
[Sho02]   P. Shor. The quantum channel capacity and coherent information. lecture notes, MSRI
          Workshop on Quantum Computation, 2002.
[Slo11]   W. Slofstra. Lower bounds on the entanglement needed to play XOR non-local
          games. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 52(10): 102202, 2011.
          DOI: 10.1063/1.3652924.
[Slo19]   W. Slofstra. The set of quantum correlations is not closed. Forum of Mathematics,
          Pi, 7: e1:1–e1:41, 2019.
          DOI: 10.1017/fmp.2018.3.
[Slo20]   W. Slofstra. Tsirelson’s problem and an embedding theorem for groups arising from
          non-local games. Journal of the American Mathematical Society, 33(1): 1–56, 2020.
          DOI: 10.1090/jams/929.
[Sta16]   D. Stahlke. Quantum zero-error source-channel coding and non-commutative graph
          theory. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 62(1): 554–577, 2016.
          DOI: 10.1109/TIT.2015.2496377.
[SY08]    G. Smith and J. Yard. Quantum communication with zero-capacity channels. Science,
          321(5897): 1812–1815, 2008.
          DOI: 10.1126/science.1162242.
[TV25]    A. Taller and T. Vidick. Approximating the quantum value of an LCS game is RE-
          hard. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.22444, 2025.
          DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2507.22444.
[Wat18]   J. Watrous. The theory of quantum information. Cambridge university press, 2018.
          DOI: 10.1017/9781316848142.
[WZ25]    Z. Wu and S.-Q. Zhou. Extreme capacities in generalized direct sum channels. arXiv
          preprint arXiv:2510.10711, 2025.
          DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2510.10711.
[YHD08]   J. Yard, P. Hayden, and I. Devetak. Capacity theorems for quantum multiple-access
          channels: classical-quantum and quantum-quantum capacity regions. IEEE Transac-
          tions on Information Theory, 54(7): 3091–3113, 2008.
          DOI: 10.1109/TIT.2008.924665.

                                           29
