                                         Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive
                                         Circuit Lower Bounds
                                         Marco Carmosino # 
                                         MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, MA, USA
                                         Ngu Dang # 
                                         Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
                                         Tim Jackman # 
                                         Boston University, Boston, MA, USA

                                               Abstract
                                         Gate elimination is the only method known that can prove complexity lower bounds for explicit
                                         functions against unrestricted Boolean circuits. After decades of effort, the best results are still
arXiv:2602.17942v1 [cs.CC] 20 Feb 2026




                                         linear: Li and Yang proved lower bounds of 3.1n − o(1) in the basis B2 consisting of all binary
                                         Boolean functions (STOC 2022), and Iwama and Morizumi proved lower bounds of 5n − o(1) in the
                                         DeMorgan basis consisting only of AND, OR, and NOT functions (MFCS 2002). These arguments
                                         deploy intricate and lengthy case analyses that substitute carefully-chosen inputs into circuits and
                                         track which gates become redundant – thus, “gate elimination”. Unlike other methods in complexity
                                         theory, there is only limited characterization of the obstacles to improving circuit lower bounds
                                         proved via gate elimination.
                                             Towards better understanding of gate elimination, this work contributes: (1) formalizing circuit
                                         simplifications as a convergent term graph rewriting system and (2) giving a simple and constructive
                                         proof of a classical lower bound using this system.
                                             First, we show that circuit simplification is a convergent term graph rewriting system over
                                         the DeMorgan and {∧, ∨, ⊕} bases. We define local rewriting rules from Boolean identities such
                                         that every simplification sequence yields an identical final result (up to circuit isomorphism or
                                         bisimulation). Convergence enables rigorous reasoning about structural properties of simplified
                                         circuits without dependence on the order of simplification. Then, we show that there is no similar
                                         convergent formalization of circuit simplification over the U2 and B2 bases.
                                             Then, we use our simplification system to give a constructive circuit lower bound, generalizing
                                         Schnorr’s classical result that the XOR function requires 3(n − 1) gates to compute in the DeMorgan
                                         basis. A constructive lower bound f ̸∈ C gives an algorithm (called a “refuter”) that efficiently
                                         finds counter-examples for every C-circuit trying to compute the function f . Chen, Jin, Santhanam,
                                         and Williams showed that constructivity plays a central role in many longstanding open problems
                                         about complexity theory (FOCS 2021), so it is natural to ask for constructive circuit lower bounds
                                         from gate elimination arguments. This demonstrates how using convergent simplification can lead
                                         to shorter and more modular proofs of circuit lower bounds. Furthermore, until this work, no
                                         constructive lower bound had been proved via gate elimination.

                                         2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Rewrite systems; Theory of computation
                                         → Circuit complexity

                                         Keywords and phrases Term Graph Rewriting, Circuit Complexity, Constructivity

                                         Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.CVIT.2016.23

                                         Supplementary Material




                                                     © Marco Carmosino, Ngu Dang, and Tim Jackman;
                                                     licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
                                         42nd Conference on Very Important Topics (CVIT 2016).
                                         Editors: John Q. Open and Joan R. Access; Article No. 23; pp. 23:1–23:24
                                                            Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                                                            Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
23:2   Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds


        1     Introduction

       Circuits model the computation of Boolean functions on fixed input lengths by acyclic wires
       between atomic processing units – logical “gates.” To measure the circuit complexity of a
       function f , we fix a set of gates B – called a basis – and count the number of binary gates
       required to compute f . Some of the well-known bases include the DeMorgan basis (binary
       AND, binary OR, and unary NOT gates), the U2 basis (all binary Boolean functions except
       parity and equivalence), and the B2 basis (all binary Boolean functions).
           Shannon proved in 1949 – using a simple counting argument – that most n-input Boolean
       functions require near-maximal circuit complexity (2n /n gates) to compute [39]. This is
       almost the trivial “memorization” complexity obtained for any n-input Boolean function
       by writing a DNF using O(n2n ) gates. Unfortunately, counting arguments only establish
       that such hard functions exist. Identifying specific Boolean functions with high circuit
       complexity is a major open problem, inextricably connected to the ongoing search for efficient
       pseudorandom bit generators via celebrated hardness-randomness tradeoffs: strong enough
       circuit complexity lower bounds imply P = BPP [28, 17, 19]. The past seven decades have
       seen impressive super-polynomial complexity lower bounds proved for circuits restricted to
       constant depth [11, 41, 51]. However, complexity lower bounds for unrestricted circuits are
       required for efficient universal derandomization, and remain a substantial challenge.
           Gate elimination is the most successful technique known for proving complexity lower
       bounds on specific Boolean functions against unrestricted circuits over the DeMorgan, U2 ,
       [34, 38, 52, 23, 18] and B2 bases [38, 46, 9, 10, 26]. The idea is straightforward: input
       variables are substituted (by constants or by other functions) and then the resulting circuit is
       simplified. During simplification, complexity measures like the number of gates and assertions
       about circuit structure are tracked and lifted to lower bounds using induction. For example,
       if restriction yields a desirable subfunction (e.g., the same function on fewer variables) while
       removing c gates, then we can inductively argue that the original circuit had at least c · n
       gates. The simplest gate elimination arguments follow this schematic exactly, substituting
       constants and removing gates according to basic Boolean identities. Schnorr’s tight 3(n − 1)
       bound for XORn (and ¬XORn ) [38] exemplifies this nicely: substituting for an input with a
       constant allows removal of at least three gates and results in a circuit computing XORn−1
       (or ¬XORn−1 ). Induction shows that any XORn circuit must have at least 3(n − 1) gates.
           However, progress has been slow and the best known lower bounds remain linear: about
       5n for the DeMorgan and U2 bases [23, 18] and 3.1n for the B2 basis [26]. Why? Ongoing
       attempts to improve these results and understand both the capabilities and limitations of
       gate elimination are an important research direction. In a exciting recent development,
       breakthrough ETH-hardness results used gate elimination to characterize and exploit the
       structure of the linear-size circuits [16]. Combined with new results showing that constructive
       separations (efficient algorithms generating inputs where an incorrect algorithm errs, defined
       below) are necessary for widely-conjectured complexity lower bounds [7], this raises natural
       questions. Are proofs by gate elimination constructive? If so, is that an obstacle or an asset?
           The questions above motivate this work. Despite the fundamental role of gate elimination,
       our understanding of this methodology remains informal and all known arguments are ad-hoc.
       We present two contributions:
       1. Formalization of the circuit-simplification process used in all gate elimination arguments
          as a convergent term graph rewriting system.
       2. A constructive separation of XORn from circuits of size < 3(n − 1), derived by re-writing
          Schnorr’s gate elimination proof using our convergent circuit simplification system.
M. Carmosino, N. Dang, and T. Jackman                                                               23:3


1.1    Our Results & Research Directions
Convergent Systems for Gate Elimination. In Section 3, we develop a formal foundation
for gate elimination as a convergent term graph rewriting system using ideas from
term rewriting [2] and graph-based computation models [32]. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 define
simplification systems for Boolean formulas over the DeMorgan and {∧, ¬, ⊕} bases where
rules are derived from carefully-chosen Boolean identities. Then, the Knuth-Bendix algorithm
[20, 15] is applied to produce convergent formula simplification system. In Section 3.3, these
formula rewriting systems are lifted into circuit rewriting systems via Plump’s term graph
rewriting framework [32]. The resulting systems are convergent, that is, any valid sequence
of simplifications terminates in a unique normal form, regardless of order.

▶ Theorem (Informal Statement of Theorem 13). Circuit simplification is convergent in the
DeMorgan ({∧, ∨, ¬}) and {∧, ⊕, ¬} bases.

    This convergence property is useful for making gate-elimination arguments both clean
and automatable: because every simplification sequence terminates in the same normal form,
the structural properties of the simplified circuit are invariant under the choice of rewrites,
letting us reason about circuits “up to normal form” rather than requiring justification
for each possible simplification path. This is especially important for computer-aided
proofs – non-terminating rewrite systems may not even halt, whereas convergent rewriting
guarantees completion and makes brute-force exploration unnecessary. We hope that casting
gate elimination in a convergent term-graph rewriting framework contributes to ongoing
formalization of complexity theory (see Section 1.2 on Related Work).

▶ Research Direction 1. Formalize known gate elimination arguments in standard proof
assistants with the purpose of developing new computer-assisted gate elimination arguments
and ultimately improved circuit lower bounds.

   To further this goal, we reproved Schnorr’s lower bound for XORn [38] using the system
(Appendix C) and in a structured format, aiming to ease formalization (Appendix C.1).
Verifying convergence of our system and Schnorr’s argument using a proof assistant like
Lean4 is a natural next step.

Non-confluent Gate Elimination. We explore varying our systems in Section 4 to surprising
effect. Classical circuit complexity arguments conflate the DeMorgan basis and U2 as
interchangeable. This treatment is not baseless: with respect to size and depth bounds, the
two bases are identical for all non-degenerate functions except f (x) = ¬x. This equivalence
also holds between {¬, ∧, ⊕} and B2 ; arguments like [30] begin by categorizing B2 gates as
“AND”-like and “XOR”-like, informally changing the basis to {¬, ∧, ⊕}. We make these
folklore connections between the bases explicit in Appendix B. However, we find that when
formalizing gate elimination as a rewriting system, this equivalence between the bases
immediately breaks down.

▶ Observation (Informal Statement of Observation 16). U2 and B2 do not admit confluent
circuit simplification systems.

   This failure arises from the presence of superfluous negation gates which need to be
subsumed upwards and/or downwards during simplification, causing divergent simplification
paths and ultimately non-isomorphic circuits (see Figure 2 in Section 4).
   Even different bases are often treated similarly since translations often only sees constant
changes to size and depth. As researchers are interested in proving non-linear lower bounds,



                                                                                                  CVIT 2016
23:4   Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds


       this cost is seemingly inconsequential. This results highlights how impactful a basis choice
       can be; arguments in the DeMorgan basis or {∧, ⊕, ¬} can be easier than their U2 or B2
       counterparts. This is especially true if implemented in a proof assistant – formalizing in
       these bases may cut down the search space depending on the specific argument.
           By casting gate elimination as a rewriting system, we gain a better understanding of
       its underlying properties. Besides decades of limited progress and known limitations (see
       Related Works), provable barriers to using gate elimination to prove superlinear circuit
       bounds remain unknown.

       ▶ Research Direction 2. Further investigate gate elimination as a rewriting system. How
       does varying bases and rules affect its power? Does there exist a barrier for the technique
       against proving circuit lower bounds?

       Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds. The statement “Boolean function f does not have
       size s(n) circuits” has quantifier structure ∀∃ when translated into logic:

          ∀n ∈ N ∀C such that size(C) < s(n) ∃x ∈ {0, 1}n C(x) ̸= f (x).

       Concretely, every circuit that fails to compute f must err on a particular input x. Thus,
       every circuit complexity lower bound for a specific function f induces a natural total search
       problem: given as input a circuit C that is too small (and therefore must fail to compute
       f ) print a bitstring x such that C and f disagree. Exciting recent work discovered that
       constructive separations play a surprisingly central role in complexity theory, by showing that
       most conjectured uniform separations (including P ̸= NP, ZPP ̸= EXP, and BPP ̸= NEXP)
       can be automatically transformed into constructive separations [7].
           On the other hand, they also showed that if certain well-known lower bounds (including
       “deciding palindromes requires super-quadratic time on one-Tape Turing Machines”, [27])
       can be made constructive, then major complexity breakthroughs (like P ̸= NP) would follow
       [7]. Essentially, the intuition that “simple” proofs of complexity lower bounds should be
       “easy” to make constructive is wildly inaccurate. We show that, at least in the case of gate
       elimination, simple proofs can be converted into constructive separations.

       ▶ Theorem (Informal Statement of Theorem 19). Let C be any DeMorgan circuit on n inputs
       with fewer than 3(n − 1) binary gates. There is an efficient and deterministic algorithm that,
       given input C, prints an n-bit string x such that C(x) ̸= XORn (x).

           This immediately raises further questions: what about other circuit lower bounds proved
       using gate elimination? Though some employ sophosticated combinatorial objects, they still
       use a simple inductive simplification structure. What about other notions of “constructivity”?
       The efficient error generation algorithms discussed above are not logical notions becuase the
       proof itself is not treated as a mathematical object. Subsequent work showed that many
       features of constructive separations in the algorithmic sense still hold when we consider proofs
       in weak fragments of Peano Arithmetic closely associated with computational complexity
       classes, like Cook’s PV (which is connected to deterministic polynomial time) [14]. There
       is a recent turn towards understanding the proof-theoretic strength required to establish
       known theorems and resolve open problems of complexity theory, and it is entirely unknown
       where gate elimination fits into this landscape [29, 8]. The foregoing discussion motivates

       ▶ Research Direction 3. Analyze gate elimination using both “algorithmic” and logical proof
       theory. Which gate elimination proofs can be transformed into constructive separations? Can
       weak logical theories (like PV) prove circuit lower bound via gate elimination?
M. Carmosino, N. Dang, and T. Jackman                                                                  23:5


1.2    Related Work
Proving & Exploiting Structural Characterization of Circuits. Beyond the problem of
proving tight circuit bounds for a particular Boolean function lies a natural design question
which asks “what is the structure of its optimal circuit?” Though this question empirically
appears difficult to answer in general [50], it has been investigated for a handful of functions
and bases over the last few decades. The primary method here is also gate elimination: one
proves that any deviation from the desired structure would allow one to eliminate “too many”
gates, contradicting optimality. Some of the earliest work on this question include [37] and
[3] which investigated when optimal circuits for 2-output Boolean functions compute each
output independently of the other. Subsequent work characterized optimal circuits computing
XOR in the DeMorgan basis under the convention that NOT-gates contribute to circuit size
[21], and later extended these ideas to other bases [22]. More recently, Rahul Ilango [16]
                                                             Wn
characterizes the optimal structure of circuits computing i=1 (xi ∧ yi ), and leverages this to
obtain a breakthrough hardness reduction: the partial function minimum circuit size problem
(MCSP∗ ) is hard assuming the exponential time hypothesis (ETH).
    Structural characterizations also have practical implications, but their recent applications
highlight a broader theoretical payoff. In particular, Carmosino, Dang, and Jackman [6]
explicitly target and characterize optimal circuits of functions which enjoy linear sized circuits
such as the exclusive-or function XOR where they show that the result of [21] also holds
when NOT-gates do not contribute to circuit size under the same basis. They further show
that the structure of optimal circuits for simple extensions (function extensions with minimal
additional circuit complexity) enables a fixed-parameter tractable algorithm to identify them.
Together, these developments motivate studying gate elimination even if the technique seems
unable to prove superlinear bounds: understanding its intrinsic strengths and limitations as
a method for proving and exploiting structural theorems may be valuable independently of
its role as a lower-bound tool.
    These new applications of gate elimination motivate its study even if the technique seems
unable to prove superlinear bounds. Thus, we believe that further study is required to
understand the strengths and weaknesses inherent to gate elimination as a technique itself,
rather than as a tool for proving lower bounds.

Formalizing Circuit Complexity with Proof Assistants. Besides its theoretical importance,
circuit complexity has clear practical relevance; circuit minimization, synthesis, and verifica-
tion are central tasks in hardware design. These applications have motivated the creation of
a rich suite of software for the design of Boolean circuits [5, 43, 35, 47]. Recent open-source
tools like Cirbo [1] employ SAT-based techniques and optimal circuit databases to enable
efficient optimization, analysis and experimentation [13]. While these tools are useful for
upper bounds, they do not provide methods for lower bounds beyond exhaustive search.
    The use of theorem provers in studying circuit complexity has mostly been limited to
verification. [40] provides a HOL4 library which verifies common functional elements and can
structurally analyze complex circuits which are composed of these widgets. Rocq has also
been used for the verification of classical circuits and quantum circuits [4, 33]. One of the few
formally verified lower bounds – Clique cannot be computed by polynomial size monotone
circuits – was formalized in Isabelle/HOL [48]. However, to the best of our knowledge, this
work is the first to model circuits as term graphs. This representation is not impracticable for
proof assistants – [49] recently formally verified term graph optimizations in Isabelle/HOL.
By formally studying gate elimination, we hope to build up the set of tools for verifiable
circuit lower bounds and bridge the gap with the extensive upper bound tooling.



                                                                                                     CVIT 2016
23:6   Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds


       Barriers Against Gate Elimination. The relativization, natural proofs, and algebrization
       barriers to improving complexity separations are not known to apply to gate elimination [36].
       Investigating its limitations, [12] constructed functions whose circuits are “resistant” to gate
       elimination: any single substitution reduces their complexity by merely a constant. As gate
       elimination arguments rely on a small constant number of substitutions, current techniques
       cannot prove superlinear circuit lower bounds for these functions. This analysis is limited in
       two ways: (i) this requires the class to contain their constructions, which is not always given,
       and (ii), this limit does not say much about using gate elimination for applications besides
       circuit lower bounds.


        2     Representing Boolean Circuits as Term Graphs

       We study general circuits over two bases. The first is the DeMorgan basis BD = {∧, ∨, ¬, 0, 1}
       of Boolean functions: binary ∧ and ∨, unary ¬, and zero-ary (constants) 1 and 0. The
       second basis is {∧, ⊕, ¬, 0, 1}, where ∨ has been replaced by the binary exclusive-or function
       ⊕. Circuits take zero-ary variables in X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } for some fixed n as inputs, and
       have exactly one distinguished output gate. Usually, circuits are described as directed acyclic
       graphs (DAGs) with nodes labeled by function symbols or variables and edges representing
       “wires” between the gates. For every such circuit C, acyclicity of the underlying graph ensures
       that C computes a well-defined n-ary Boolean function by evaluating each gate in topological
       order according to the function it is labeled with (starting with a substitution of concrete
       bits into the variables) until the output gate has a value.
           The complexity of a Boolean circuit can be measured in a number of ways including
       size and depth. In this work, circuit size is defined as the number of binary gates (i.e.,
       ¬ gates are “free”). Under this measure, the circuit complexity of non-degenerate Boolean
       functions – the size of the smallest circuits computing them – are the same in the DeMorgan
       basis and U2 , the basis consisting of the set of all binary Boolean operators besides ⊕ and its
       complement ⊙. The same relationship holds between {∧, ⊕, ¬, 0, 1} and B2 = U2 ∪ {⊕, ⊙}.
       We make this relationship explicit in Appendix B.
           To apply results from term graph rewriting, however, we must describe circuits as
       hypergraphs, tuples C = ⟨VC , EC , labC , attC ⟩ where VC and EC are finite sets of vertices
       (or nodes) and hyperedges respectively, labC : EC → B ∪ X is an edge-label function
       recording the type of each edge, and attC : EC → VC≤3 is an attachment function which
       assigns a non-empty string of vertices attC (e) = v0 , . . . , vℓ to each hyperedge e such that
       | attC (e)| = 1 + arity(labC (e)). We call v0 the result node of e and v1 , . . . , vℓ the argument
       nodes, and denote them res(e) and arg(e) respectively.
           The hypergraph C is a term graph if (1) there is a node rootG from which each node is
       reachable, (2) G is acyclic – there is no path where some node occurs twice, and (3) each
       node is the result node of a unique edge. In this setting, hyperedges represent logic gates
       and vertices represent “wires” between gates — essentially dual to the standard encoding of
       circuits as DAGs.


        3     Gate Elimination as a Convergent Term Graph Rewriting System

       An abstract rewriting system is just a set of objects A together with a binary relation → on
       A called the rewrite relation. In this section, we will develop a system S where A consists of
       Boolean circuits over the DeMorgan basis and C → C ′ holds when C simplifies to C ′ via a
       single step of gate elimination. To this end, first recall standard notions concerning abstract
M. Carmosino, N. Dang, and T. Jackman                                                                     23:7


                                                                                           ∗
rewriting systems (see Definition 2.1.3 of [2]). For elements a, a′ ∈ A, write a → a′ to mean
that there is a finite path of rewrite steps from a to a′ .

▶ Definition 1. The rewrite relation → is called
terminating iff there is no infinite path a0 → a1 → . . . ,
                                                  ∗         ∗
confluent iff for every triple a, b, b′ ∈ A, if a → b and a → b′ , then there exists c ∈ A such
                ∗        ′ ∗
   that both b → c and b → c , and
convergent iff it is both confluent and terminating.

   An object a ∈ A is in normal form if there is no b such that a → b. Objects in normal
form often enjoy nice structural properties, because they are “simplest” according to the
rewrite relation. For example, circuits C in normal form according to our system S will have:

     No double negations.
     No constants unless C computes a constant function — e.g., (xi ∨ ¬xi ) normalizes to 1.
     No identity gates — sub-circuits (γ ∧ γ) and (γ ∨ γ) do not occur.

    Each rewrite rule of S will (by construction) decrease or preserve the number of gates.
Consequently, it will be straightforward to show that (1) system S is terminating and (2)
given a circuit C with bits b = b1 , . . . , bn substituted for all input variables, rewriting C
using S until termination just evaluates C on input b. These basic properties connect paths
through S to efficient circuit manipulation and evaluation. The work in showing that S is
“well behaved” goes into proving confluence. We proceed along the following lines.

1. Identify a list of Boolean identities, EB , which are sufficient for gate elimination arguments.
2. Use the Knuth-Bendix algorithm on EB to produce a convergent formula simplification
   system RB .
3. Lift RB to a convergent circuit simplification system S via Plump’s account of term
   graph rewriting.

   This detailed treatment is for the DeMorgan basis ({∧, ∨, ¬}); the convergent system for
{∧, ⊕, ¬} follows similarly albeit with a different set of Boolean identities.

3.1      Boolean Identities
The identities collected in EB (Definition 2) describe each step of circuit simplification in
proofs by gate elimination. Clearly, EB is valid for Boolean algebra: for all g ∈ {0, 1},
each identity is true when ≈ is interpreted as equality on the Boolean domain. Therefore,
consequences derived from EB via “sound inference rules” are true. We do not treat that
equational logic 1 formally, because we transform EB into a convergent term rewriting system
in the next subsection.

▶ Definition 2 (Useful Boolean Identities). We denote by EB the following set of identities:

     1∧1≈1          1∨1≈1          ¬1 ≈ 0      g∧1≈g         g∧0≈0          g ∧ ¬g ≈ 0     g∧g ≈g
     1∧0≈0          1∨0≈1          ¬0 ≈ 1      1∧g ≈g        0∧g ≈0         ¬g ∧ g ≈ 0     g∨g ≈g
     0∧1≈0          0∨1≈1        ¬¬g ≈ g       g∨0≈g         g∨1≈1          g ∨ ¬g ≈ 1
     0∧0≈0          0∨0≈0                      0∨g ≈g        1∨g ≈1         ¬g ∨ g ≈ 1
       (tt and)      (tt or)      (tt not)     (passing)      (fixing)       (tautology)   (simplify)

1
    See Chapter 3 of [2] or the exposition of Birkhoff’s Theorem in [31].




                                                                                                        CVIT 2016
23:8   Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds


           Some Boolean identities are omitted from EB , such as commutativity of ∧ and ∨. This is
       for two reasons: (1) including them would induce a rewriting system that is not convergent
       and (2) commutativity identities do not “simplify” Boolean expressions – the right hand
       sides do not have fewer Boolean operators than the left. While EB does not fully characterize
       Boolean algebra, it is sufficient to capture the steps of gate elimination. The identities EB
       are available in machine-readable form as supplementary material:
       https://feasible-math.org/2026-FSCD-80-supplementary.zip


       3.2    Convergent Term Rewriting for Boolean Formulas
       Now we mechanically transform EB into an abstract term rewriting system on Boolean
       formulas and prove convergence. Term rewriting is a classical special case of abstract
       rewriting systems, motivated by algebra, logic, and programming language theory. Terms are
       treelike expressions built up from function symbols, constants, and variables. We will take
       an intermediate step through treelike expressions to get to DAG-like expressions: circuits.
       Terms in general and DeMorgan formulas in particular are defined below, along with some
       auxiliary notions required to specify appropriate rewrite relations.

       ▶ Definition 3 (DeMorgan Formulas as Terms). Let Σ be a finite tuple of function and constant
       symbols with arities d⃗ ∈ N|Σ| , and let Z denote an infinite set of variables. T (Σ, Z) denotes
       the set of all terms over Σ and Z, defined inductively:
           Every variable z ∈ Z is a term.
           Every application of a function symbol fi ∈ Σ to di terms t1 , . . . , tdi of the form
           f (t1 , . . . , tdi ) is a term.
       Let B = ⟨∧, ∨, ¬, 0, 1⟩ with arities ⟨2, 2, 1, 0, 0⟩ be the DeMorgan signature. We denote by
       F = T (B, X) where X = {g, x1 , x2 , . . . } the set of DeMorgan formulas.

           A substitution σ is a mapping between terms that may replace any finite number of
       variables with another term, but must leave constants and function applications fixed. So,
       can write substitutions as σ = {xi 7→ t}. A term rewrite rule is a pair of terms ⟨ℓ, r⟩ written
       as ℓ → r, such that (1) ℓ is not a variable and (2) the set of variables in r is a subset of the
       variables in ℓ. A term rewriting system (TRS) over T (Σ, Z) is a set R of term rewrite rules
       where all pairs of terms are from T (Σ, Z). Finally, we have:

       ▶ Definition 4 (Term Rewriting, Definition 4.1 of [32]). The rewrite relation →R on T (Σ, Z)
       induced by a term rewriting system R is defined as follows:
       t →R u if there is a rule ℓ → r in R and a substitution σ such that
        1. The left-hand side of the rule “matches” t — σ(ℓ) is a subterm of t
        2. The right-hand side “generates” u — u is obtained from t by replacing an occurence of
           σ(ℓ) by σ(r)

          We can now give the precise type of EB : it is a set of pairs of terms from F . We aim to
       transform EB into a convergent term rewriting system RB . Rather than manually casting our
       equations as term rewrite rules (e.g. g ∧ 1 ≈ g =⇒ g ∧ 1 → g) and then proving convergence
       from scratch, we use a well-known procedure designed to automate this: the Knuth-Bendix
       completion algorithm [20, 15].

       ▶ Theorem 5 (Knuth-Bendix, [45]). Given as input a set of identities E over T (Σ, Z), if
       Knuth-Bendix terminates, it outputs a convergent term rewriting system R over T (Σ, Z)
       with the same consequences as E.
M. Carmosino, N. Dang, and T. Jackman                                                              23:9


    At a high level, Knuth-Bendix completion works by ensuring that overlapping pairs of
rules do not create ambiguities. Furthermore, the algorithm may add new rules and/or
simplify rules to create a convergent   system. Manually running the algorithm in our case
would require checking 25
                            
                          2   pairs of equations — although not every possible pair overlaps.
While this is technically doable by hand, we instead use the open-source Knuth-Bendix
Completion Visualizer software (KBCV, [45]) to run the algorithm on input EB , yielding

▶ Definition 6 (Term Rewriting System RB ).

          0 → ¬1           g ∧ ¬1 → ¬1             g∧1→g               g ∧ ¬g → ¬1
      ¬¬g → g              ¬1 ∧ g → ¬1             1∧g →g              ¬g ∧ g → ¬1
      g∧g →g                g∨1→1                 g ∨ ¬1 → g           g ∨ ¬g → 1
      g∨g →g                1∨g →1                ¬1 ∨ g → g           ¬g ∨ g → 1
   (normalizing)              (fixing)             (passing)            (tautology)

▶ Lemma 7. RB is a convergent term rewriting system for the DeMorgan formulas, F .

Proof. The Knuth-Bendix algorithm run on input EB terminated and printed the system
RB listed in Definition 6 above. Therefore, RB is convergent and has the same consequences
as EB . A machine-verifiable proof has been included in the supplementary material in
certification problem format (CPF) which can be verified using tools like CeTA [44]. KBCV
outputs its proofs in CPF 2 while CeTA requires CPF 3. We have converted the output to CPF
3 using the tool at http://cl-informatik.uibk.ac.at/software/ceta/cpf3.tgz.              ◀

   The rules of RB are grouped based on their structure and impact on a formula. Observe
that RB is a smaller set than EB , as Knuth-Bendix has made a few simplifications including
removal of truth-table identities. The unique added rule, 0 → ¬1, stands out. This is the only
rewrite rule in the system RB that increases the number of Boolean operators in a formula.
This is compatible with gate elimination because: (1) the formulas become simpler in the
sense that after rewriting 0 to ¬1 only a single type of constant occurs, and (2) substituting
a variable for 0 can be accomplished by a single additional step of rewriting to ¬1. The term
rewriting rules RB are available in machine-readable form as part of supplementary material.
   All that remains is lifting this rewriting system for formulas to one for circuits.


3.3    Convergent Term Graph Rewriting for Boolean Circuits
Recalling Plump’s definitions, we can lift our term rewriting system to a term graph rewriting
system by generalizing the notions of pattern matching and generation as follows [32].

▶ Definition 8 (Hypergraph Morphism). For hypergraphs G and H, a hypergraph morphism
f : G → H is a pair of functions fE : EG → EH and fV : VG → VH that preserve
labels, so fE maps each edge γ of G to an edge of H with matching label:
    ∀γ ∈ EG labG (γ) = labH (fE (γ)) and
attachments, so for every edge γ of G, fV is an order-preserving map from the vertices
    attached to γ to the vertices attached to fE (γ) in H — recalling that att(γ) is a string:
    ∀γ ∈ EG ∀i ∈ | attG (γ)| fV (attG (γ))[i] = attH (fE (γ))[i].

   Term graphs can be transformed into terms in the natural way: by “unrolling” term
graphs so that each edge is read only once.



                                                                                                 CVIT 2016
23:10   Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds


        ▶ Definition 9 (Term representation of a term graph (3.2 in [32])). A node v in a term graph
        G represents the term termG (v) = labG (e)(termG (v1 ), . . . , termG (vℓ )), where e is the unique
        edge with res(e) = v and where arg(v) = v1 , . . . vℓ . Denote termG (rootG ) by term(G).

            Similarly, terms t can be transformed into term graphs by encoding each application of
        a function symbol in t by a hyper-edge; the resulting hypergraph is essentially the parse
        tree of t. To formulate pattern matching, Plump extended this simple idea to erase specific
        variables: for a term t, define ⋄t as the parse tree of t encoded by a hypergraph, with all
        repeated variables collapsed into “open” vertices — that is, the edge xi is deleted for each xi ,
        but the unique result vertex remains and is referenced by every edge that was attached to xi
        in the parse tree. A term graph L is an instance of a term l if there is a graph morphism
        ⋄l → L that sends the root of ⋄l to the root of L. Given a node v in a term graph G and a
        term rewrite rule r → ℓ, the pair ⟨v, ℓ → r⟩ is a redux if the subgraph of G reachable from v
        (denoted G[v]) is an instance of ℓ. Finally, we recall a single step of Plump’s graph rewriting:
        essentially, a subgraph matching the left hand side of a rule is sliced out and replaced with
        the right-hand side.

        ▶ Definition 10 (Term Graph Rewriting (Definition 1.4.5 of [32])). Let G be a term graph
        containing a redux ⟨v, l → r⟩. There is a proper rewrite step from G to H where H is
        constructed by
         1. G1 ← G − {e} where e is the unique edge that satisfies res(e) = v
         2. G2 ← the disjoint union of G1 with ⋄r where
               v is identified with root(⋄r)
               Every edge labeled with a variable in ⋄r is identified according to the morphism that
               matched ℓ to G.
         3. Garbage collection: H is obtained from G2 by deleting all nodes and edges not reachable
            from the root.

          We will consider rewriting up to two different notions of equivalence for hypergraphs.
        One is hypergraph isomorphism, the other is

        ▶ Definition 11 (Bisimilarity). Two term graphs G and H are bisimilar, denoted G ∼ H, if
        term(G) = term(H).

            Crucially for our applications, two bisimilar circuits compute the same function. Thus,
        though weaker than isomorphism, bisimilarity is still valuable in the circuit complexity setting:
        it implies functional equivalence. Plump showed that under both notions of equivalence,
        convergent term rewriting can be used to manufacture convergent term graph rewriting.

        ▶ Theorem 12 (Corollary 1.7.4 and Theorem 1.7.12 of [32]). If R is a convergent term
        rewriting system, then
         1. the term graph rewriting system consisting of proper rewrite steps induced by R plus the
            collapse rule is convergent up to hypergraph isomorphism, and
         2. the term graph rewriting system consisting only of proper rewrite steps (plain rewriting)
            induced by R is convergent up to bisimilairty classes of hypergraphs.

            Collapse is an additional term graph rewriting rule that allows us to merge two rooted
        subhypergraphs if there exists a root-preserving hypergraph morphism between them. For
        circuits, this operation would correspond to finding redundant subcircuits and combining
        them into one. This is natural simplification step; indeed, if our goal was to optimize circuits
        then any system missing this rule would be insufficient. In gate elimination proofs the
M. Carmosino, N. Dang, and T. Jackman                                                                23:11


collapse rule is largely irrelevant – arguments start with sub-optimal circuits and simplify
them until a contradiction is obtained to prove circuit complexity lower bounds.
    However, it is still desirable to work with collapse because it provides a strong guarantee:
circuit simplifications act identically on isomorphism classes of circuits. When aiming for
structural characterizations which should hold up to isomorphism, this is the natural choice.
Unfortunately, it is not clear if the collapse rule can be implemented efficiently. Therefore,
we use the plain rewriting system (without collapse rule) when constructive arguments are
required (e.g., Theorem 19).
    Applying this lifting theorem to our term rewriting system RB for simplification of
DeMorgan formulas yields systems for gate elimination.

▶ Theorem 13. RB induces two term graph rewriting systems for DeMorgan circuits:
1. system S includes the collapse rule and is convergent up to circuit isomorphism, and
2. system S ′ does not include the collapse rule and is convergent up to circuit bisimulation.


3.4    Explicit Circuit Simplification Systems
In this section we “compile” the systems S and S ′ to give a concrete description of DeMorgan
circuit simplification, complementing the entirely abstract statement of Theorem 13.
    There are three parts to S: (1) notions of redundancy and pattern matching for sub-
circuits (Definitions 14 and 15), (2) a set of circuit rewrite rules given as pairs of patterns
(Figures 3 – 6 in Appendix A), and (3) the procedure for pattern-substitution in a circuit
(Algorithm 1). System S is then the binary relation on circuits induced by setting C → C ′
when either (a) C matches the left-hand side l of a rule ⟨l 7→ r⟩ and C ′ is the result of
substituting pattern r for l in C, or (b) C has a redundant sub-circuit that “collapses” in C ′ .
System S ′ is identical except for omission of the collapse rule.

▶ Definition 14 (Collapsing Redundant Sub-Circuits). Circuit C collapses to circuit D if there
is a non-injective hypergraph morphism C 7→ D mapping rootC to rootD , denoted C ≻ D.

▶ Definition 15 (Pattern & Redux in Circuits). A pattern is just a circuit L where vertices
γ without a unique gate g such that attL (g)[0] = γ may occur; we call these open vertices.
Circuit D is then an instance of pattern L if there is a morphism p : L → D sending rootL
to rootD . Then, given a vertex α in circuit C and a rule L 7→ R, the pair ⟨α, L 7→ R⟩ is a
redex if the sub-circuit of C rooted at α (denoted C[α]) is an instance of L.

    Most rewrite rules of S use the open vertex labeled γ to match “the rest of the sub-circuit
D.” That is, a morphism p will send γ to each node of D not explicitly mentioned to “match”
the pattern. Each family of rules then plays a different role in gate elimination.
Normalizing enforces that each circuit does not contain “duplicate” gates — such as double
    negation or trivial identity.
Fixing applies when a gate computes a constant function because of one input.
Passing applies when a gate computes the identity function because of one input.
Tautology removes redundant (costly) gates which trivially compute constants.

    Distinct rules are required for fixing, passing, and tautology to handle left and right
inputs because inclusion of “AND is commutative” and “OR is commutative” as rewrite
rules makes confluence impossible [42]. Finally, we describe an abstract proper rewrite step
(Definition 10) as a concrete operation that transforms circuits (Algorithm 1).



                                                                                                    CVIT 2016
23:12   Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds




                                                  ∨                                                        ∨
                  ∧   7→        γ
                                                           7→
                                                                               ∧
                                                                                                                   7→
                                              γ
                                                                                   γ
                                                                                        7→     γ               ¬
                                                       1         1                                                        1
                  γ                                                       1
                                                                                                           γ




          (a) AND De-duplication (b) OR Fixing (left)                 (c) AND Passing (right) (d) OR Tautology (left)

           Figure 1 Selection of proper circuit rewriting steps, see Figures 3 – 6 in Appendix A for the
        complete system.



             Algorithm 1 Step of Circuit Simplification System S, defining C → C ′
        Require: C is a circuit containing the redex ⟨α, R 7→ L⟩, with p : R → C[α] the witnessing
                 morphism
         C1 ← C − {g} where g = res−1 (α)            ▷ Remove the unique gate with output wire α
         C2 ← C1 + R                              ▷ Disjoint union: rhs of the matched rule with C
         C3 ← Identify vertex α with rootR of C2 ▷ Connect R to the appropriate element(s) of C
         if γ ∈ R then                                                ▷ Does R reuse a subcircuit?
             C4 ← Identify vertex p(γ) with γ of C3 ▷ Yes; wire the matching element of R into C
         else
             C4 ← C3                              ▷ R does not reuse any subcircuits — do nothing
         C ′ ← Garbage collection: remove all vertices and edges unreachable from rootC4




         4      Simplification of U2 and B2 Circuits is Not Confluent

        In this section we demonstrate that any similar formulation of gate elimination in U2 is not
        confluent. As U2 ⊂ B2 , the same argument shows gate elimination in B2 is not confluent.
        To do this we produce a circuit and substitution which, after applying a different series
        of rewrites, results in two distinct circuits (i.e. non-isomorphic). We recall the 14 binary
        operators that make up U2 in Table 1.

             Table 1 The U2 basis: all the binary Boolean operations except ⊕ and its negation ⊙

                 p    q    ∗1       ∗2   ∗3       ∗4       ∗5   ∗6   ∗7   ∗8       ∗9    ∗10       ∗11   ∗12   ∗13      ∗14
                 T    T    T        F    T        F        T    F    T    F        T      F         T     F     T        F
                 T    F    T        F    T        F        F    T    T    F        F      T         F     T     T        F
                 F    T    T        F    F        T        T    F    F    T        T      F         F     T     T        F
                 F    F    T        F    F        T        F    T    T    F        T      F         F     T     F        T


            Gates ∗4 and ∗6 compute the negation of their first and second inputs respectively. If
        these are not the sole gate in the circuit, then they are superfluous. We can remove them by
        relabeling either their input gates or every gate that is read by them. We demonstrate the
        two ways to “push” these superfluous negations in Figure 2.
M. Carmosino, N. Dang, and T. Jackman                                                                    23:13


               ∗10



               ∗4                             ∗14                             ∗10



               ∗8                              ∗8                             ∗7

  (a) ∗4 can be removed two ways (b) Pushing up: ∗10 → ∗14         (c) Pushing down: ∗8 → ∗7

     Figure 2 Two simplifications for ∗4 , disproving convergence of gate elimination over U2 and B2


    If both of these rewrite rules are present in our system then, as the example shows, is not
confluent. Unfortunately, we must include rewrite rules that both push negations up and
down: if we do not (and choose to always push negations in one direction), then superfluous
∗4 and ∗6 gates can survive at the extremes of the circuit. Furthermore, this issue cannot be
sidestepped even if we limit ourselves to optimal circuits. This is because “passing” rules in
this rewriting system must generate intermediate negation gates.
    For example, p ∗8 q is equivalent to ¬p ∧ q; if we wanted to substitute q ← 1 we would
like the equivalent of a “passing” rule to be applied. However, the output wires of ∗8 should
pass to ¬p, which is not an actual gate in the circuit. Thus, rather than removing ∗8 , this
substitution will have to relabel ∗8 to ∗4 . Then ∗4 can be eliminated by “pushing” it either
up or down leading to two non-isomorphic circuits. Again, we cannot always “push down” as
p could be an input and not a binary gate. From these examples, we see that

▶ Observation 16. Gate elimination is not confluent in the U2 or B2 bases, even when
restricted to optimal circuits.

 5      Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds via Convergent Gate Elimination
Proofs by gate elimination often show a circuit C has property P with the following argument.

1. Assume, for the sake of contradiction, that C does not have property P.
2. Select a variable xi and constant α for substitution using ¬P and the structure of C.
3. Simplify C under the substitution {xi 7→ α}, to obtain a constant-free circuit C ′ .
4. Argue that a critical property P′ of C ′ implies a contradiction.

   To demonstrate that this system is sufficiently powerful to capture gate elimination
arguments, we revisit Schnorr’s lower-bound for the parity function XOR using the system S.
To begin, we must first recall the parity functions XORn :
                                                                                     Pn
▶ Definition 17. For an n bit input ⃗x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ {0, 1}n , XORn (⃗x) = ( i=1 xi ) mod 2.

We define (¬)f to mean “f or ¬f .” For a (partial) assignment α, we define f ↾α to be the
function restricted under α. We now recall two useful facts about (¬)XORn .

▶ Fact 1. XORn is self-reducible, i.e., for any i ∈ [n], for any assignment b ∈ {0, 1},

     XORn ↾xi ←b ≡ (¬)XORn−1 .

▶ Fact 2. XORn is maximally sensitive, i.e., for all i ∈ [n], for all assignments α,

     XORn (α) ̸= XORn (α⊕i ) where α⊕i denotes α but with its ith bit flipped.



                                                                                                        CVIT 2016
23:14   Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds


            Schnorr’s proof is the quintessential gate elimination proof. We provide the full details of
        re-proving it using our system in Appendix C and merely provide a sketch here.

        ▶ Theorem 18 (Schnorr, [38]). XORn requires 3(n − 1) gates in the DeMorgan basis.

        Proof Sketch. Let C be an optimal circuit for XORn with n ≥ 2, our goal is to find a
        substitution of an input hyperedge which results in at least 3 costly gate hyperedges (those
        labeled with ∧ or ∨) to be removed during rewriting steps. We first fix a topological order
        and let h be its first costly gate. Then, h has two arguments whose terms are (¬)xi and
        (¬)xj . If h were the only costly gate reading (¬)xi , we can substitute xj to eliminate h via a
        fixing rule, leaving xi disconnected. However, the resulting circuit, which by self-reducibility
        (Fact 1) computes (¬)XORn−1 , no longer depends on xi . This contradicts non-degeneracy of
        XORn−1 (Fact 2).
            Therefore, another costly gate f ̸= h reads (¬)xi . Furthermore, (¬)f cannot be the
        output since we can fix it by substituting xi , again contradicting Fact 1. Let f ′ be any
        binary gate reading f . Then, we choose the substitution for xi that fixes f . This ultimately
        removes at least 3 costly gates h, f, f ′ after simplification and the resulting circuit computes
        XORn−1 by Fact 1. Finally, we apply induction to obtain the desired lower bound.               ◀

            Schnorr’s proof is simple, but when viewed through the lens of formal methods, it is hard
        not to see it as an algorithm for breaking down XOR circuits; this is especially true of our
        structured proof in Appendix C.1. Gate elimination yields its lower bounds by arguing that
        if a circuit does not have some minimal structure, then it doesn’t compute its underlying
        function. Since a function is defined by its behavior on its inputs, it seems reasonable to
        expect that we can derive which inputs the circuit would fail on. We show that this intuition
        is true at least for Schnorr’s proof by giving the first constructive separation for a circuit
        lower bound proved by gate elimination.

        ▶ Theorem 19. Let C be a DeMorgan circuit on n inputs with size s < 3(n − 1) that claims
        to compute XORn . We can construct an input x ∈ {0, 1}n such that C(x) ̸= XORn (x) in
        polynomial time with respect to n.

        Proof. Let C be a DeMorgan circuit on n inputs with size s < 3(n − 1) and let f be the
        function it computes. If n = 2, then we can brute-force evaluate all four possible inputs to
        find a counterexample in constant time. For larger n, we can run Algorithm 2. At a high
        level, the algorithm will follow Schnorr’s proof; each iteration, it tries to find a substitution
        that removes at least three gates. If it cannot, then the circuit’s function will violate Fact 2,
        and we can easily extract a counterexample. If successful, it instead produces a circuit that
        is too small to compute XOR on one fewer variable which it can recurse on. This continues
        until, eventually, the remaining circuit purports to compute (¬)XOR2 with fewer than three
        gates, and again we can simply brute-force over its four completions.
             Algorithm 2 keeps track of (i) a partial restriction α and (ii) a list V of the variables
        still unrestricted by the circuit. During each iteration, it considers Ci , a normalized circuit
        computing f ↾α . In lines 4-5, the algorithm can identify an obvious contradiction to Fact 2.
        If Ci is degenerate with respect to some variable(s) in V then f ↾α does not depend on some
        xj for some j ∈ V . Let α̂ be any completion of α, then C(α̂) = f (α̂) = f (α̂⊕j ) = C(α̂⊕j ); C
        is incorrect on one of these two inputs since XORn (α̂) ̸= XORn (α̂⊕j ).
             Otherwise, in line 7, the algorithm selects the topologically minimal binary gate of Ci
        which must read (¬)xp and (¬)xq where i =    ̸ j since Ci is normalized. As in Schnorr, (¬)xp
        must be read by another binary gate f besides h. If this is not the case on line 9 then we
        are in a similar case to the previous DEGEN case: after adding the correct substitution of xq
M. Carmosino, N. Dang, and T. Jackman                                                                   23:15


to α and normalizing, f ↾α will no longer depend on xp , and C must err on any completion
α̂ or α̂⊕p . Furthermore, (¬)f must not be the output or else we can fix the circuit to be
constant on line 15-17. If it were, we could then take any completion α̂ and it or α̂⊕q will be
a counterexample, since f no longer depends on xq .
     If the algorithm does not return prematurely, then as in Schnorr, there exists some f ′ that
reads (¬)f . Algorithm 2 selects a substitution for xp so that simplification removes h, f and
f ′ reducing the size of the circuit by at least three per loop iteration. Hence, the resulting
Ci+1 is too small to compute XOR|V | . In the worst case, the algorithm goes through n − 2
iterations and the resulting Cn−2 will, by Fact 1 purportedly compute (¬)XOR2 . However,
its size will be at most s − 3(n − 2) < 3(n − 1) − 3(n − 2) = 3. Therefore, we can simply
brute-force over all four completions of α and C must err on at least one of them.
     It is easy to see this process runs in polynomial time (with respect to n). There are at
most linear loop iterations, and each condition can be checked in polynomial time. Since we
are using system S ′ without collapse, substitution and simplification in each iteration can be
done in polynomial time. To extract a counterexample, we only need to compute the circuit
on a constant number of inputs and each evaluation can be done in polynomial time.             ◀

   Algorithm 2 Efficient search for a bad restriction α witnessing that C does not compute XOR.
Require: C is a circuit on n input variables with s gates with n > 3 and s < 3(n − 1)
 1: i ← 0 ; C0 ← Normalize C ; α ← ∅ ; V ← [n]
 2: ▷ number of rounds ; working circuit ; working restriction ; active variables                  ◁
 3: while |V| > 2 do
 4:    if a variable xj for some j ∈ V is not read in Ci then
 5:        return "DEGEN in xj under α"
 6:    Assert: Ci is in normal form and does not trivially fail to compute XOR|V |
 7:    h ← topologically minimal {∧, ∨}-gate in Ci
 8:    Assert: h has inputs (¬)xp , (¬)xq for p, q ∈ V and p ̸= q
 9:    ▷ the assertion holds because Ci is in normal form                                          ◁
10:    if the fanout of (¬)xp is 1 then
11:        add fixer(h, xq ) 7→ xq to α
12:        ▷ fixer(h, xq ) is the substitution for xq that removes h via a fixing rule             ◁
13:        return "DEGEN in xp under α"
14:    else
15:        f ← the distinct gate reading xp besides h, so f ̸= h
16:    if (¬)f is the output gate of Ci then
17:        add fixer(f, xp ) 7→ xp to α
18:        return "CONST under α"
19:    else
20:        f ′ ← topologically minimal costly successor of f in Ci
21:    add fixer(f, xp ) 7→ xp to α
22:    Ci+1 ← Substitute xp ← fixer(f, xp ) in Ci and simplify           ▷ Eliminates h, f, and f ′
                                          ′
23:    ▷ By convergence of system S this step is deterministic — greedy selection of
         simplifications is the same up to bisimulation of Ci+1 which is all we require            ◁
24:    V ← V \ {p}
25:    i ← (i + 1)
26:    Assert: Ci+1 is a normalized circuit which is too small to compute (¬)XOR|V |
27: return "FAILS under α"                ▷ “fail search”, brute-force is feasible to find the error




                                                                                                       CVIT 2016
23:16   Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds


             References
         1   Daniil Averkov, Tatiana Belova, Gregory Emdin, Mikhail Goncharov, Viktoriia Krivogornitsyna,
             Alexander S. Kulikov, Fedor Kurmazov, Daniil Levtsov, Georgie Levtsov, Vsevolod Vaskin,
             and Aleksey Vorobiev. Cirbo: A new tool for boolean circuit analysis and synthesis. In Toby
             Walsh, Julie Shah, and Zico Kolter, editors, AAAI-25, Sponsored by the Association for the
             Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, February 25 - March 4, 2025, Philadelphia, PA, USA,
             pages 11105–11112. AAAI Press, 2025. URL: https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v39i11.33207,
             doi:10.1609/AAAI.V39I11.33207.
         2   Franz Baader and Tobias Nipkow. Term rewriting and all that. Cambridge University Press,
             1998.
         3   Norbert Blum and Martin Seysen. Characterization of all optimal networks for a si-
             multaneous computation of AND and NOR. Acta Informatica, 21:171–181, 1984. doi:
             10.1007/BF00289238.
         4   Thomas Braibant. Coquet: A coq library for verifying hardware. In Jean-Pierre Jouannaud
             and Zhong Shao, editors, Certified Programs and Proofs - First International Conference, CPP
             2011, Kenting, Taiwan, December 7-9, 2011. Proceedings, volume 7086 of Lecture Notes in
             Computer Science, pages 330–345. Springer, 2011. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-25379-9\_24.
         5   Robert K. Brayton and Alan Mishchenko. ABC: an academic industrial-strength verification
             tool. In Tayssir Touili, Byron Cook, and Paul B. Jackson, editors, Computer Aided Verification,
             22nd International Conference, CAV 2010, Edinburgh, UK, July 15-19, 2010. Proceedings,
             volume 6174 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 24–40. Springer, 2010. doi:
             10.1007/978-3-642-14295-6\_5.
         6   Marco Carmosino, Ngu Dang, and Tim Jackman. Simple circuit extensions for xor in ptime.
             arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16903. To Appear in STACS 2026, 2025.
         7   Lijie Chen, Ce Jin, Rahul Santhanam, and Ryan Williams. Constructive separations and their
             consequences. TheoretiCS, 3, 2024. URL: https://doi.org/10.46298/theoretics.24.3,
             doi:10.46298/THEORETICS.24.3.
         8   Lijie Chen, Jiatu Li, and Igor C. Oliveira. Reverse mathematics of complexity lower bounds. In
             65th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2024, Chicago, IL,
             USA, October 27-30, 2024, pages 505–527. IEEE, 2024. doi:10.1109/FOCS61266.2024.00040.
         9   Evgeny Demenkov and Alexander S. Kulikov. An elementary proof of a 3n - o(n) lower bound
             on the circuit complexity of affine dispersers. In Filip Murlak and Piotr Sankowski, editors,
             Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science 2011 - 36th International Symposium, MFCS
             2011, Warsaw, Poland, August 22-26, 2011. Proceedings, volume 6907 of Lecture Notes in
             Computer Science, pages 256–265. Springer, 2011. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-22993-0\_25.
        10   Magnus Gausdal Find, Alexander Golovnev, Edward A. Hirsch, and Alexander S. Kulikov. A
             better-than-3n lower bound for the circuit complexity of an explicit function. In 2016 IEEE
             57th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 89–98, 2016.
             doi:10.1109/FOCS.2016.19.
        11   Merrick L. Furst, James B. Saxe, and Michael Sipser. Parity, circuits, and the polynomial-time
             hierarchy. Math. Syst. Theory, 17(1):13–27, 1984. doi:10.1007/BF01744431.
        12   Alexander Golovnev, Edward A. Hirsch, Alexander Knop, and Alexander S. Kulikov. On
             the limits of gate elimination. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 96:107–119, 2018. doi:10.1016/j.jcss.
             2018.04.005.
        13   Mikhail Goncharov, Alexander S. Kulikov, and Georgie Levtsov. Smaller circuits for bit
             addition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.13966. To Appear in STACS 2026, 2025.
        14   Stefan Grosser and Marco Carmosino. Student-teacher constructive separations and
             (un)provability in bounded arithmetic: Witnessing the gap. In Michal Koucký and Nikhil
             Bansal, editors, Proceedings of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Com-
             puting, STOC 2025, Prague, Czechia, June 23-27, 2025, pages 1341–1347. ACM, 2025.
             doi:10.1145/3717823.3718216.
M. Carmosino, N. Dang, and T. Jackman                                                                 23:17


15   Gérard Huet. A complete proof of correctness of the knuth-bendix completion algorithm. Jour-
     nal of Computer and System Sciences, 23(1):11–21, 1981. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
     com/science/article/pii/0022000081900027, doi:10.1016/0022-0000(81)90002-7.
16   Rahul Ilango. Constant depth formula and partial function versions of mcsp are hard. SIAM
     Journal on Computing, 0(0):FOCS20–317–FOCS20–367, 2020. arXiv:https://doi.org/10.
     1137/20M1383562, doi:10.1137/20M1383562.
17   Russell Impagliazzo and Avi Wigderson. P = BPP if E requires exponential circuits: De-
     randomizing the XOR lemma. In Frank Thomson Leighton and Peter W. Shor, editors,
     Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, El
     Paso, Texas, USA, May 4-6, 1997, pages 220–229. ACM, 1997. doi:10.1145/258533.258590.
18   Kazuo Iwama and Hiroki Morizumi. An explicit lower bound of 5n - o(n) for boolean circuits.
     In Krzysztof Diks and Wojciech Rytter, editors, Mathematical Foundations of Computer
     Science 2002, 27th International Symposium, MFCS 2002, Warsaw, Poland, August 26-30,
     2002, Proceedings, volume 2420 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 353–364. Springer,
     2002. doi:10.1007/3-540-45687-2\_29.
19   Valentine Kabanets and Russell Impagliazzo. Derandomizing polynomial identity tests means
     proving circuit lower bounds. Comput. Complex., 13(1-2):1–46, 2004. URL: https://doi.
     org/10.1007/s00037-004-0182-6, doi:10.1007/S00037-004-0182-6.
20   DONALD E. KNUTH and PETER B. BENDIX. Simple word problems in universal al-
     gebras††the work reported in this paper was supported in part by the u.s. office of naval
     research. In JOHN LEECH, editor, Computational Problems in Abstract Algebra, pages
     263–297. Pergamon, 1970. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
     B978008012975450028X, doi:10.1016/B978-0-08-012975-4.50028-X.
21   Yu A Kombarov. The minimal circuits for linear boolean functions. Moscow University
     Mathematics Bulletin, 66(6):260–263, 2011.
22   Yu A Kombarov. Complexity and structure of circuits for parity functions. Journal of
     Mathematical Sciences, 233:95–99, 2018.
23   Oded Lachish and Ran Raz. Explicit lower bound of 4.5n - o(n) for boolena circuits. In
     Proceedings of the Thirty-Third Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC
     ’01, page 399–408, New York, NY, USA, 2001. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:
     10.1145/380752.380832.
24   Leslie Lamport. How to write a proof. The American mathematical monthly, 102(7):600–608,
     1995.
25   Leslie Lamport. How to write a 21 st century proof. Journal of fixed point theory and
     applications, 11:43–63, 2012.
26   Jiatu Li and Tianqi Yang. 3.1n - o(n) circuit lower bounds for explicit functions. In Stefano
     Leonardi and Anupam Gupta, editors, STOC ’22: 54th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium
     on Theory of Computing, Rome, Italy, June 20 - 24, 2022, pages 1180–1193. ACM, 2022.
     doi:10.1145/3519935.3519976.
27   Wolfgang Maass. Quadratic lower bounds for deterministic and nondeterministic one-tape
     turing machines (extended abstract). In Richard A. DeMillo, editor, Proceedings of the 16th
     Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, April 30 - May 2, 1984, Washington, DC,
     USA, pages 401–408. ACM, 1984. doi:10.1145/800057.808706.
28   Noam Nisan and Avi Wigderson. Hardness vs randomness. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 49(2):149–167,
     1994. doi:10.1016/S0022-0000(05)80043-1.
29   Igor C. Oliveira. SIGACT news complexity theory column 124 meta-mathematics of computa-
     tional complexity theory. SIGACT News, 56(1):41–68, 2025. doi:10.1145/3726856.3726862.
30   Wolfgang J. Paul. A 2.5 n-lower bound on the combinational complexity of boolean functions.
     In Proceedings of the Seventh Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC
     ’75, page 27–36, New York, NY, USA, 1975. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:
     10.1145/800116.803750.




                                                                                                     CVIT 2016
23:18   Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds


        31   David A. Plaisted. Equational reasoning and term rewriting systems, page 274–364. Oxford
             University Press, Inc., USA, 1993.
        32   Detlef Plump. Term graph rewriting. Handbook Of Graph Grammars And Computing By
             Graph Transformation: Volume 2: Applications, Languages and Tools, pages 3–61, 1999.
        33   Robert Rand, Jennifer Paykin, and Steve Zdancewic. QWIRE practice: Formal verification of
             quantum circuits in coq. In Bob Coecke and Aleks Kissinger, editors, Proceedings 14th Inter-
             national Conference on Quantum Physics and Logic, QPL 2017, Nijmegen, The Netherlands,
             3-7 July 2017, volume 266 of EPTCS, pages 119–132, 2017. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.266.8.
        34   NP Red’kin. Proof of minimality of circuits consisting of functional elements. Systems Theory
             Research: Problemy Kibernetiki, pages 85–103, 1973.
        35   Franz-Xaver Reichl, Friedrich Slivovsky, and Stefan Szeider. Circuit minimization with qbf-
             based exact synthesis. In Brian Williams, Yiling Chen, and Jennifer Neville, editors, Thirty-
             Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2023, Thirty-Fifth Conference
             on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2023, Thirteenth Symposium on
             Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2023, Washington, DC, USA, February
             7-14, 2023, pages 4087–4094. AAAI Press, 2023. URL: https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.
             v37i4.25524, doi:10.1609/AAAI.V37I4.25524.
        36   Hanlin Ren and Rahul Santhanam. A relativization perspective on meta-complexity. In Petra
             Berenbrink and Benjamin Monmege, editors, 39th International Symposium on Theoretical
             Aspects of Computer Science, STACS 2022, Marseille, France (Virtual Conference), March
             15-18, 2022, volume 219 of LIPIcs, pages 54:1–54:13. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
             Informatik, 2022. URL: https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2022.54, doi:10.4230/
             LIPICS.STACS.2022.54.
        37   Jürgen Sattler. Netzwerke zur simultanen berechnung boolescher funktionen. In Peter Deussen,
             editor, Theoretical Computer Science, 5th GI-Conference, Karlsruhe, Germany, March 23-25,
             1981, Proceedings, volume 104 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 32–40. Springer,
             1981. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/BFb0017293, doi:10.1007/BFB0017293.
        38   Claus-Peter Schnorr. Zwei lineare untere schranken für die komplexität boolescher funktionen.
             Computing, 13(2):155–171, 1974. doi:10.1007/BF02246615.
        39   Claude. E. Shannon. The synthesis of two-terminal switching circuits. The Bell System
             Technical Journal, 28(1):59–98, 1949. doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1949.tb03624.x.
        40   Sumayya Shiraz and Osman Hasan. A library for combinational circuit verification using the
             HOL theorem prover. IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst., 37(2):512–516,
             2018. doi:10.1109/TCAD.2017.2705049.
        41   Roman Smolensky. Algebraic methods in the theory of lower bounds for boolean circuit
             complexity. In Alfred V. Aho, editor, Proceedings of the 19th Annual ACM Symposium on
             Theory of Computing, 1987, New York, New York, USA, pages 77–82. ACM, 1987. doi:
             10.1145/28395.28404.
        42   Rolf Socher-Ambrosius. Boolean algebra admits no convergent term rewriting system. In
             Ronald V. Book, editor, Rewriting Techniques and Applications, 4th International Conference,
             RTA-91, Como, Italy, April 10-12, 1991, Proceedings, volume 488 of Lecture Notes in Computer
             Science, pages 264–274. Springer, 1991. doi:10.1007/3-540-53904-2\_102.
        43   Mathias Soeken, Heinz Riener, Winston Haaswijk, and Giovanni De Micheli. The EPFL logic
             synthesis libraries. CoRR, abs/1805.05121, 2018. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.05121,
             arXiv:1805.05121.
        44   Christian Sternagel and René Thiemann. Formalizing knuth-bendix orders and knuth-bendix
             completion. In Femke van Raamsdonk, editor, 24th International Conference on Rewriting Tech-
             niques and Applications, RTA 2013, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, June 24-26, 2013, volume 21
             of LIPIcs, pages 287–302. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2013. URL:
             https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.RTA.2013.287, doi:10.4230/LIPICS.RTA.2013.287.
        45   Thomas Sternagel and Harald Zankl. KBCV - knuth-bendix completion visualizer. In Bernhard
             Gramlich, Dale Miller, and Uli Sattler, editors, Automated Reasoning - 6th International
M. Carmosino, N. Dang, and T. Jackman                                                                23:19


     Joint Conference, IJCAR 2012, Manchester, UK, June 26-29, 2012. Proceedings, volume
     7364 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 530–536. Springer, 2012. doi:10.1007/
     978-3-642-31365-3\_41.
46   Larry J. Stockmeyer. On the combinational complexity of certain symmetric boolean functions.
     Math. Syst. Theory, 10:323–336, 1977. doi:10.1007/BF01683282.
47   Ruofei Tang, Xuliang Zhu, Xinyi Zhang, Lei Chen, Xing Li, Mingxuan Yuan, and Jianliang
     Xu. EDGE: dbms-empowered boolean decomposition for GIG synthesis. In 62nd ACM/IEEE
     Design Automation Conference, DAC 2025, San Francisco, CA, USA, June 22-25, 2025, pages
     1–7. IEEE, 2025. doi:10.1109/DAC63849.2025.11133306.
48   René Thiemann. Clique is not solvable by monotone circuits of polynomial size. Archive of
     Formal Proofs, May 2022. https://isa-afp.org/entries/Clique_and_Monotone_Circuits.
     html, Formal proof development.
49   Brae J. Webb, Ian J. Hayes, and Mark Utting. Verifying term graph optimizations using
     Isabelle/HOL. In Robbert Krebbers, Dmitriy Traytel, Brigitte Pientka, and Steve Zdancewic,
     editors, Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Programs
     and Proofs, CPP 2023, Boston, MA, USA, January 16-17, 2023, pages 320–333. ACM, 2023.
     doi:10.1145/3573105.3575673.
50   Ingo Wegener. The Complexity of Boolean Functions. Wiley-Teubner, 1987.
51   Ryan Williams. Nonuniform ACC circuit lower bounds. J. ACM, 61(1):2:1–2:32, 2014.
     doi:10.1145/2559903.
52   Uri Zwick. A 4n lower bound on the combinational complexity of certain symmetric boolean
     functions over the basis of unate dyadic boolean functions. SIAM Journal on Computing,
     20(3):499–505, 1991.




                                                                                                    CVIT 2016
23:20   Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds


        A            Gate Elimination Rules




                                 7→       ¬
                                                                    ¬
                                                                                                                     7→    γ                              7→    γ
                         0
                                                                                7→    γ
                                                                                                         ∧                                ∨

                                                                    ¬                                    γ                                γ
                                          1
                                                                γ




          (a) Zero Elim                           (b) 2xNegation Elim                         (c) AND-De-dup                       (d) OR-De-dup

            Figure 3 Normalizing Rules




                     ∧                                      ∧
                                                                                                         ∨
                                                                                                                                              ∨
             γ
                             ¬       7→       ¬
                                                    γ
                                                                        ¬        7→       ¬      γ
                                                                                                                      7→                                   7→
                                                                                                                                                      γ
                                                                                                                 1             1
                                                                                                                                      1                             1

                             1                1                         1                 1



          (a) AND-Left                            (b) AND-Right                               (c) OR-Left                          (d) OR-Right

            Figure 4 Fixing Rules




                                                                                                         ∨                                    ∨

                         ∧                                      ∧                                γ                                                    γ
                                                                                                                                                           7→       γ

                 γ
                                     7→       γ                             γ
                                                                                 7→       γ
                                                                                                                 ¬    7→       γ
                                                                                                                                      ¬

                                 1                      1

                                                                                                                 1                    1



          (a) AND-Left                            (b) AND-Right                               (c) OR-Left                          (d) OR-Right

            Figure 5 Passing Rules




                     ∧                                              ∧                                ∨                                            ∨
                                     7→       ¬
                                                                                7→    ¬                              7→                                   7→
                             ¬                              ¬                                                ¬                            ¬
                                                                                                                           1                                    1
                     γ                        1                     γ                 1              γ                                            γ




          (a) AND-Left                            (b) AND-Right                               (c) OR-Left                          (d) OR-Right

            Figure 6 Tautology Rules
M. Carmosino, N. Dang, and T. Jackman                                                                 23:21


 B       Circuit Size When NOT Gates are Free: Comparing Different Bases
Recall that U2 is the basis consisting of all two-input Boolean functions except binary
exclusive-or ⊕ and equivalence ⊙ while the DeMorgan basis is {∧, ∨, ¬}. We show explicitly
that these bases are equivalent in terms of size and depth when ¬ gates are not counted
towards these complexity measures. The proof that B2 and {∧, ⊕, ¬} are equivalent when
the latter’s ¬ gates are free is identical.

▶ Lemma 20 (Folklore). Let f be any non-degenerate Boolean function besides f (x) = ¬x.
Then the size and depth complexity of f in the U2 (B2 ) basis and the DeMorgan ({∧, ⊕, ¬})
basis where ¬ gates are free is equal.

Proof. Let CCU (f ) denote the circuit size complexity of f in the U2 basis. Let CCD (f )
denote the circuit size complexity of f in the DeMorgan basis where ¬ gates are free.
   We begin by arguing CCD (f ) ≤ CCU (f ) by translating any optimal U2 circuit into a
DeMorgan circuit of equal size. We recall the 14 binary Boolean operators that form the U2
in Table 2.

         p   q   ∗1 ∗2 ∗3 ∗4 ∗5 ∗6 ∗7 ∗8 ∗9 ∗10 ∗11 ∗12 ∗13 ∗14
         T T T        F     T     F    T     F    T    F    T    F     T     F    T    F
         T F      T   F     T     F     F    T    T    F    F    T     F     T    T    F
         F T T        F     F     T    T     F    F    T    T    F     F     T    T    F
         F F      T   F     F     T     F    T    T    F    T    F     F     T    F    T
     Table 2 The U2 basis consists of all the binary Boolean operations except XOR2 and ¬XOR2



   We claim that no optimal circuit for f uses ∗i gates for i ∈ [6]. For ∗1 and ∗2 , replacing
these gates with the constants 0 and 1 would reduce the size of the circuit. Similarly, ∗3 and
∗5 gates are non-optimal since they just compute the first and second inputs respectively. If
a ∗3 gate appears in a circuit, we can instead feed it’s first input into it’s outputs for the
same effect. The gates ∗4 and ∗6 simply negate their first and second inputs respectively.
Similarly, if a ∗4 or ∗6 appear internally we can pass the first and second inputs up to the
gates’ outputs but we must change the labels of these gates. We record the transformations
in Table 3 below:

                                 ∗7    ∗8   ∗9   ∗10 ∗11 ∗12 ∗13 ∗14
                     ¬p     q    ∗12 ∗11 ∗13 ∗14        ∗8    ∗7    ∗9    ∗10
                      p    ¬q ∗13 ∗14 ∗12 ∗11 ∗10             ∗9    ∗7     ∗8
     Table 3 Gate substitutions when removing superfluous internal ∗4 or ∗6 gates



    For example, if a ∗4 gate is the first input of ∗7 , then we can remove the ∗4 gate, feed its’
first input into the first input of the ∗7 gate and then relabel the ∗7 gate to be a ∗12 gate. If
a ∗4 or ∗6 gate is the output of the circuit, then it must be negating one of the remaining 8
Boolean functions since f (x) ̸= ¬x. We can apply the transformations listed in Table 4.

                         ¬(∗7 ) ¬(∗8 ) ¬(∗9 ) ¬(∗10 ) ¬(∗11 ) ¬(∗12 ) ¬(∗13 )         ¬(∗14 )
      Is Equivalent To    ∗8        ∗7     ∗10      ∗9       ∗12       ∗11     ∗14     ∗13
     Table 4 Gate substitutions for removing superfluous negations at the output




                                                                                                     CVIT 2016
23:22   Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds


           Lastly, the remaining 8 binary Boolean functions in the basis can all be represented in
        the DeMorgan basis with only one binary gate:

                                  ∗7      ∗8      ∗9      ∗10     ∗11       ∗12      ∗13      ∗14
             Is Equivalent To p ∨ ¬q ¬p ∧ q ¬p ∨ q p ∧ ¬q p ∧ q ¬p ∨ ¬q p ∨ q               ¬p ∧ ¬q
             Table 5 Translations Between U2 and DeMorgan formulas for ∗7 through ∗14



           To show CCU (f ) ≤ CCD (f ) we show how to take any optimal DeMorgan circuit and
        transform it into an equivalent size U2 circuit. To do so, if any ¬ gate has fanout m where
        m > 1, we split the ¬ gate up into m copies, each with fanout exactly one. We also remove
        any double negations. Neither of these transformations change the size of the circuit.
           Then, in increasing topological order, we replace each ∧ and ∨ gate with one of the
        U2 gates depending on whether their left or right inputs is negated. There are 8 possible
        configurations, and the correspondence can be seen in Table 5. Lastly, if the entire circuit is
        negated (i.e. the final output gate is ¬), then we absorb it into the U2 gate below using the
        transformations listed in Table 4.
           Since CCU (f ) ≤ CCD (f ) and CCD (f ) ≤ CCU (f ) we get CCU (f ) = CCD (f ). Notice
        that none of these transformations change the depth of the circuits as well, and thus the
        bases are equivalent with respect to depth complexity as well.                               ◀


         C       Circuit Simplification in Action: Proving Schnorr’s Lower Bound
        In this section, we provide the full proof of Theorem 18, Schnorr’s lower bound for XORn ,
        using our system S to demonstrate that this system is powerful enough to capture traditional
        gate elimination arguments. As a reminder, the theorem states that any DeMorgan circuit
        C computing XORn requires at least 3(n − 1) costly gates [38].
            As a quick reminder, proofs by gate elimination often use the following argument to show
        that a circuit C has property P.

        1. Assume that C does not have property P.
        2. Select a variable xi and constant α for substitution {xi 7→ α} using ¬P and the structure
           of C.
        3. Simplify C under the substitution {xi 7→ α}, to obtain a constant-free circuit C ′ .
        4. Argue that a critical property P′ of C ′ implies a contradiction, therefore C must have
           property P.

            System S formalizes the simplification procedure used in step three above. Usually, this
        is not necessary: the critical property is something like P′ = “simplification eliminated four
        gates” and it is clear that every sequence of simplification steps reaches a circuit C ′ with
        property P′ . However, to algorithmically process the results of gate elimination we must
        assert more complicated post-simplification properties like P′ = “input xj has fanout one,”
        where xj was the sibling of xi in C. These more delicate properties are not so easily seen to
        hold after every terminated simplification. Furthermore, we often wish to carefully sequence
        and analyze only the first few steps of gate elimination, and then apply “all remaining
        simplifications” without considering them in detail. It is critical that P′ emerge no matter
        how the steps of elimination are sequenced.
            The convergent simplification procedure S for circuits has the following property: every
        valid run of S on C with α substituted for any input xi terminates with the same circuit
M. Carmosino, N. Dang, and T. Jackman                                                                 23:23


C ′ , up to bisimulation. Therefore, to carry out the gate elimination argument template
above, one need only exhibit a particular run of S and argue that the resulting C ′ has critical
property P′ .
     In Appendix C.1, we provide an alternative proof of Theorem 18 using the structured proof
format of Lamport [24, 25]. Due to the case analysis and repeated proofs by contradiction
present, this alternative format may be easier to verify. Furthermore, we believe that this
presentation style makes the intricate case analysis present both in our proof of Schnorr more
explicit and readable. Furthermore, this style of proof is more amenable to verification using
a computer.

Proof of Theorem 18. Let C be an optimal circuit for XORn with n ≥ 2. In the original
proof, the goal was to find some setting of an input node such that gate elimination would
remove at least 3 costly (∧ and ∨) gate. Besides notational differences, our goal remains the
same. We will find a substitution of an input hyperedge which causes at least 3 costly gate
hyperedges (those labeled ∧ or ∨) to be removed during rewriting. Following Schnorr we
build up the circuit locally around an input by repeated proofs by contradiction; we perform
substitutions and rewrites to contradict C’s optimality or the downward self-reducibility of
XORn thereby forcing C to have the desired structure.
    In order to smooth the transition from viewing circuits as graphs to viewing them as
term graphs, we will simply refer to input hyperedges as inputs and gate hyperedges as gates.
We describe the substitution and rewriting steps at a high level.
    We wish to first sort the gates in “topological order". In the traditional view of circuits as
DAGs (where gates are nodes) this notion is straightforward. However, since our gates are
edges, we must do so indirectly. We can sort the vertices of C topologically and, since each
node is the result node of a unique edge, we then order the gates according to their result
nodes. From this point on when we refer to sorting inputs or gates topologically, formally we
are doing this process.
    Fix a topological order and let h be the first costly gate in C. Under the traditional view
of circuits, we would conclude h has xi (or ¬xi ) and xj (or ¬xj ) as inputs for some i, j ∈ [n].
Formally, this means h has two argument nodes whose terms are xi (or ¬xi ) and xj (or
¬xj ). Before we continue, however, we streamline our verbiage. We notate the possibility of
¬ gates by defining the shorthand (¬)f to mean “f (or ¬f )." If f ′ has an argument node
whose term is (¬)f we say that f feeds into f ′ and that f ′ is a successor of f . Lastly if the
label of a gate f is ∧ or ∨ we say f is costly. Combining these allows us to instead say h is
the costly successor of two inputs xi and xj for some i, j ∈ [n] — maintaining the formalism
of our system while being more inline with the original proof.
    We assert i ≠ j. Otherwise h ≡ (¬)xi ⋄ (¬)xi for some ⋄ ∈ {∧, ∨}. If this occurred, we
could apply a normalizing or tautology rule; rewriting C would then delete h. Since h is a
costly gate this would decrease the the size of C, contradicting C’s optimality.
    We now wish to say that xi has fanout at least 2 where we define fanout to the number
of costly successors a gate or input has. Again, assume the contrary: h is xi ’s only costly
successor. We can then substitute xj = α where α is set so that during rewriting, we can
apply a fixing rule to h. This would mean that C|xj =α does not depend on xi violating Fact
2 (All Subfunctions of (¬)XOR are Non-Degenerate).
    Let f be another costly successor of xi . We can conclude that (¬)f is not the output
of the circuit (i.e. the root node). If it were, then we could substitute xi = β and fix (¬)f
during rewriting. This would fix the output of the circuit so that C|xi = β is constant
contradicting Fact 1 ((¬)XOR is fully DSR).



                                                                                                     CVIT 2016
23:24   Convergent Gate Elimination and Constructive Circuit Lower Bounds


             Let f ′ be a costly successor of f and observe h =    ̸ f ′ since f < f ′ in our topological
        ordering and h was the first costly gate in the ordering. We now observe that if we set
        xi = β so that f is fixed, then during rewriting we eliminate h (using a fixing or passing
        rule), f (using a fixing rule), and f ′ (using a fixing or passing rule). This is because once f
        is fixed, then the fixing (¬)1 now feeds into f ′ . In this case we say that (¬)1 inherited f ′ as
        a successor after this rewrite applies, and thus another rewriting rule will apply deleting f ′ .
             Thus XORn requires at least 3 more costly gates than XORn−1 . Since XOR1 requires zero
        costly gates, we have using induction that XORn requires at least 3(n − 1).                     ◀

        C.1     Structured Proof of Schnorr
        Below, we prove Theorem 18 with a structured proof as proposed by Lamport [24, 25]. We
        believe that this presentation style makes the intricate case analysis present in this proof
        more explicit and readable. Furthermore, this style of proof is more amenable to verification
        using a computer.

         Structured Proof of Theorem 18. Let C be an optimal circuit for XORn where n ≥ 2.
         1. Let h be the first AND,OR gate of C in topological order, so h has (¬)xi , (¬)xj as inputs
            for i, j ∈ N.
         2. i ̸= j
            a. Suppose not, so i = j
            b. Then h ≡ (¬)xi ⋄ (¬)xi where ⋄ ∈ {∧, ∨}
            c. Thus, one of the normalizing or tautology rules from Gate Elim TGRS matches h
            d. Rewrite C finding h deleted
            e. Contradiction to optimality of C
         3. The fanout of xi must be at least 2.
            a. Suppose not, so fanout of xi is 1.
            b. Substitute xj = α in C to fix h
            c. Rewrite C, finding that fanout of xi is now 0
            d. Thus, C |xj =α does not depend on xi
            e. Contradiction to Fact 2.
         4. Let f be the other gate taking xi as input so f ̸= h
         5. (¬)f is not the output gate of C.
            a. Suppose it is, so (¬)f is the output gate of C.
            b. Substitute xi = α in C to fix f
            c. Rewrite C, finding that output of C is constant
            d. Thus, C |xi =α is a constant function
            e. Contradiction to Fact 1.
         6. Let f ′ be a costly successor of f in C, such must exist.
         7. Eliminate three distinct gates with a substitution.
            a. Substitute xi = α in C to fix f
            b. Rewrite C, finding at least f, h, f ′ deleted
            c. argument: Observe that xi “touches” gate h to eliminate, and it fixes f which “touches”
                gate f ′
            d. there exists a 1-bit restriction eliminating ≥ 3 gates
         8. Conclude XORn requires at least 3 more costly gates than XORn−1 .
         9. Observe XOR1 requires 0 costly gates.
        10. Use induction to show XORn requires at least 3(n − 1).
                                                                                                    ◀
