                 Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity, Revision 1 of Report No. 8 (2026)




      A Note on Natural-Proofs for Super-Linear Lower
               Bounds for Linear Functions
                                                   Ran Raz *


                                                    Abstract
           Proving super-linear lower bounds on the size of circuits computing explicit linear
      functions A : Fn → Fn is a fundamental long-standing open problem in circuit
      complexity. We focus on the case where F is a finite field. The circuit can be either a
      Boolean circuit or an arithmetic circuit with scalar products and sum gates over F.
           We extend the notion of natural proofs [RR97] to the context of proving circuit
                                                           2
      lower bounds for linear functions. Let Ln = Fn denote the set of all linear functions
      A : Fn → Fn , represented by their corresponding n × n matrices over F. We say
      that a lower bound proof for the circuit complexity of a linear function A : Fn → Fn is
      natural, if either implicitly or explicitly, the proof defines for every n a subset Cn ⊂ Ln ,
      such that, there exists a polynomial-time recognizable subset Cn′ ⊆ Cn , such that,
      |Cn′ | ≥ poly(n)
                  1
                       · |Ln | and the lower bound applies for every function A ∈ Cn′ . This
      definition is analogous to the original definition of natural proofs by Razborov and
      Rudich [RR97], modified to the study of linear functions A : Fn → Fn , represented by
      their corresponding n × n matrices, rather than general Boolean functions, represented
      by their truth tables.
           We observe that recent works on trapdoored matrices, by Vaikuntanathan and
      Zamir [VZ26] and Braverman and Newman [BN25], imply that, assuming (strong but
      plausible) cryptographic assumptions, natural proofs cannot establish circuit lower
      bounds higher than n · polylog(n) for linear functions A : Fn → Fn . Moreover, recent
      constructions of trapdoored matrices by Benhamouda et al. [BCHIKMRR25] imply
      that, assuming (somewhat less standard but still plausible) cryptographic assumptions,
      natural proofs cannot establish super-linear circuit lower bounds for linear functions
      A : Fn → Fn .

    We study the problem of proving super-linear lower bounds on the size of circuits
computing explicit linear functions A : Fn → Fn . We focus on the case where F is a
finite field. The circuit can be either a Boolean circuit (that uses the Boolean gates ∧, ∨, ¬),
or an arithmetic circuit (that uses scalar products and sum gates1 over F). Since a linear
function A : Fn → Fn can be represented as an n × n matrix over F, a simple counting
argument implies that the circuit complexity of most linear functions A : Fn → Fn is at
   * Department of Computer Science, Princeton University.    Research supported by a Simons Investigator
Award. Email: ran.raz.mail@gmail.com
    1
      It is well known that non-scalar product gates do not decrease the arithmetic circuit complexity of a
linear function.


                                                          1
                                                                                                        ISSN 1433-8092
least Ω(n2 / log n). However, for explicit linear functions, no lower bound better than Ω(n)
is known. In this note, we investigate whether there are natural-proofs barriers for proving
super-linear lower bounds for such functions.
    A landmark work by Razborov and Rudich introduced the notion of Natural Proofs in
                                                                           n
the context of proving circuit lower bounds [RR97]. Let Fn = {0, 1}2 denote the set of all
Boolean functions f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}, represented by their truth tables. A lower bound
proof for the circuit complexity of a function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} is called natural, if either
implicitly or explicitly, the proof defines for every n a subset Cn ⊂ Fn , such that, there exists
a subset Cn′ ⊆ Cn , satisfying the following three properties:
  1. Usefulness: The lower bound applies for every function f ∈ Cn′ .

  2. Constructivity: There is a polynomial time algorithm that given the truth table of a
     function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}, determines whether f ∈ Cn′ .

  3. Largeness: |Cn′ | ≥ 2−O(n) · |Fn |.
These conditions formalize the idea that a natural proof identifies a large, efficiently
recognizable class of functions for which the lower bound holds. Razborov and Rudich
proved that, assuming standard cryptographic assumptions, natural proofs cannot establish
super-polynomial circuit lower bounds, or other strong circuit lower bounds [RR97]. This
result is often viewed as a barrier for proving strong circuit lower bounds. Boneh et al.
showed that, under strong assumptions, natural proofs cannot establish even super-linear
circuit lower bounds [BIPSW18].
    While the view of natural proofs as a barrier for proving strong circuit lower bounds is
highly controversial (see for example [For24]), natural proofs have been extensively studied
in numerous works from a wide range of perspectives, and were found to be relevant to many
other issues in computational complexity theory (see for example [Razb95, Cho11, MV15,
Wil16, CIKK16, GKSS17, FSV18, KPI25, KLMS25]).
    We extend the notion of natural proofs to the context of proving circuit lower bounds
                                      2
for linear functions. Let Ln = Fn denote the set of all linear functions A : Fn → Fn ,
represented by their corresponding n × n matrices over F. We say that a lower bound proof
for the circuit complexity of a linear function A : Fn → Fn is natural, if either implicitly or
explicitly, the proof defines for every n a subset Cn ⊂ Ln , such that, there exists a subset
Cn′ ⊆ Cn , satisfying the following three properties:
  1. Usefulness: The lower bound applies for every function A ∈ Cn′ .

  2. Constructivity: There is a polynomial time algorithm that given the n × n matrix over
     F corresponding to a linear functions A : Fn → Fn , determines whether A ∈ Cn′ .

  3. Largeness: |Cn′ | ≥ poly(n)
                            1
                                 · |Ln |.
These conditions are analogous to the corresponding usefulness, constructivity and largeness
conditions in the original definition of natural proofs. Note that while the description of
a Boolean function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} by its truth table is of exponential length, the
description of a linear function A : Fn → Fn by its corresponding n×n matrix is of quadratic
length. It is hence reasonable to scale-up the fraction 2−O(n) in the largeness condition in the

                                                2
                                            1
original definition of natural proofs to poly(n) in our new definition, as they are both inverse
polynomial in the length of description of the corresponding function.
    Striking recent works by Vaikuntanathan and Zamir [VZ26] and Braverman and
Newman [BN25] introduced the concept of trapdoored matrices. A distribution of n × n
trapdoored matrices is a distribution Dn over Ln , satisfying the following two properties:
(See Definition 2.1, Definition 2.2 and Definition 2.3 in [VZ26])2

   1. Efficiency: Every function A : Fn → Fn in the support of Dn has a circuit of size
      almost linear in n.

   2. Indistinguishability: Dn is indistinguishable from the uniform distribution over Ln
      by a polynomial time algorithm. Specifically, for any polynomial time algorithm T ,
      the probability that T outputs 1 on a matrix A drawn from the distribution Dn is
      almost equal to the probability that T outputs 1 on a matrix A drawn from the
      uniform distribution over Ln , where almost equal means that the difference between
      them vanishes faster than any inverse polynomial in n.

       Our main result is the following observation:

Corollary 1. Assume that there exists a family of distributions {Dn : n ∈ N}, such that,
for every n, Dn is a distribution over Ln , and:

   1. Efficiency: Every function A : Fn → Fn in the support of Dn has an arithmetic circuit
      of size at most s(n).

   2. Indistinguishability: The distribution Dn is indistinguishable from the uniform
      distribution over Ln by a polynomial time algorithm.

Then, natural proofs cannot establish lower bounds higher than s(n) on the arithmetic circuit
complexity of linear functions A : Fn → Fn .

Proof. Similarly to [RR97], assume for a contradiction that there exists a natural proof that
establishes a lower bound higher than s(n) on the arithmetic circuit complexity of linear
functions A : Fn → Fn . Let Cn′ ⊆ Ln be the corresponding subset that satisfies the three
required properties: Usefulness, Constructivity and Largeness. Denote by Dn′ the support
of Dn .
    By the Efficiency property of Dn and the Usefulness property of Cn′ , the subsets Cn′ and
Dn′ are disjoint. By the Constructivity property of Cn′ , there is a polynomial time algorithm
T that determines whether a matrix A is in Cn′ . Thus, T is a polynomial time algorithm
that outputs 1 on inputs in Cn′ and 0 on inputs in Dn′ . By the Largeness property of Cn′ ,
we have that T outputs 1 with non-negligible probability over Ln (that is, T outputs 1 with
probability larger than some inverse polynomial in n), while it outputs 0 on inputs in Dn′ ,
and thus violates the Indistinguishability property of Dn .
   2
    We ignore here the requirement of efficient sampleability in [VZ26], as this requirement is immaterial for
our work.




                                                      3
    Note that a lower bound higher than c·s(n) on the Boolean circuit complexity of a function
A : Fn → Fn implies a lower bound higher than s(n) on the arithmetic circuit complexity
of the same function (when F is a finite field and c is a sufficiently large constant). Hence,
Corollary 1 also implies that natural proofs cannot establish lower bounds higher than c·s(n)
on the Boolean circuit complexity of linear functions A : Fn → Fn .
    Explicit constructions of distributions of trapdoored matrices (under cryptographic
assumptions) were given in [VZ26, BN25, BCHIKMRR25]. Vaikuntanathan and Zamir
proved the following theorem: (Theorem 3.1 in [VZ26]. A similar construction was given by
Braverman and Newman [BN25])

Theorem 2. [VZ26, BN25] There exists a family of distributions {Dn : n ∈ N}, such that,
for every n, Dn is a distribution over Ln , and:

   1. Efficiency: Every function A : Fn → Fn in the support of Dn has an arithmetic circuit
      of size O(n · polylog(n)).

   2. Indistinguishability: Assuming the sub-exponential hardness of learning parity with
      noise, generalized to the field F (for exact statement and parameters, see Section 3
      in [VZ26]), the distribution Dn is indistinguishable from the uniform distribution over
      Ln by a polynomial time algorithm.3

Corollary 3. Assuming the sub-exponential hardness of learning parity with noise,
generalized to the field F (for exact statement and parameters, see Section 3 in [VZ26]),
natural proofs cannot establish lower bounds higher than n · polylog(n) on the arithmetic
circuit complexity of linear functions A : Fn → Fn (for some polylog(n)).

Proof. The proof follows immediately from Corollary 1 and Theorem 2.
    Benhamouda et al. [BCHIKMRR25] (Section 5.2) propose candidates for distributions of
trapdoored matrices computable by linear-size circuits. Specifically, they construct families
of distributions {Dn : n ∈ N}, such that, for every n, Dn is a distribution over Ln , and:

   1. Efficiency: Every function A : Fn → Fn in the support of Dn has a linear-size arithmetic
      circuit.

   2. Indistinguishability: Assuming certain cryptographic assumptions (for exact statement
      see Section 5.2 in [BCHIKMRR25]), the distribution Dn is indistinguishable from the
      uniform distribution over Ln by a polynomial time algorithm.

Corollary 4. Assuming the cryptographic assumptions of [BCHIKMRR25] (Section 5.2),
natural proofs cannot establish super-linear lower bounds on the arithmetic circuit complexity
of linear functions A : Fn → Fn .

    As before, since lower bounds on Boolean circuit complexity imply lower bounds on
arithmetic circuit complexity, Corollary 3 and Corollary 4 apply to Boolean circuits as well.
   3
     Under the polynomial hardness of learning parity with noise, generalized to the field F, the obtained
efficiency is O(n1+ϵ ), for an arbitrary small ϵ > 0, rather than O(n · polylog(n)).



                                                    4
Acknowledgement
I am grateful to Yuval Ishai for very helpful conversations about [BCHIKMRR25].


References
[BCHIKMRR25] Fabrice Benhamouda, Caicai Chen, Shai Halevi, Yuval Ishai, Hugo
   Krawczyk, Tamer Mour, Tal Rabin, Alon Rosen: Encrypted Matrix-Vector Products
   from Secret Dual Codes. CCS 2025: 394-408 1, 4, 5

[BIPSW18] Dan Boneh, Yuval Ishai, Alain Passelègue, Amit Sahai, David J. Wu: Exploring
   Crypto Dark Matter: New Simple PRF Candidates and Their Applications. TCC 2018:
   699-729 2

[BN25] Mark Braverman, Stephen Newman: Practical Secure Delegated Linear Algebra with
   Trapdoored Matrices. TCC 2025 1, 3, 4

[Cho11] Timothy Y. Chow: Almost-Natural Proofs. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 77(4): 728-737
   (2011) 2

[CIKK16] Marco L. Carmosino, Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets, Antonina
   Kolokolova: Learning Algorithms from Natural Proofs. CCC 2016: 10:1-10:24 2

[For24] Lance Fortnow: Natural Proofs is Not the Barrier You Think It Is. Computational
    Complexity Blog. https://blog.computationalcomplexity.org/2024/09/natural-proofs-is-
    not-barrier-you-think.html 2

[FSV18] Michael A. Forbes, Amir Shpilka, Ben Lee Volk: Succinct Hitting Sets and Barriers
   to Proving Lower Bounds for Algebraic Circuits. Theory Comput. 14(1): 1-45 (2018) 2

[GKSS17] Joshua A. Grochow, Mrinal Kumar, Michael E. Saks, Shubhangi Saraf:
   Towards an Algebraic Natural Proofs Barrier via Polynomial Identity Testing. Electron.
   Colloquium Comput. Complex. TR17 (2017) 2

[KLMS25] Michal Koucky, Bruno Loff, Tulasimohan Molli, Mike Saks: The Natural-Proofs
   Barrier Against Data Structure Lower Bounds. Manuscript (2025) 2

[KPI25] Oliver Korten, Toniann Pitassi, Russell Impagliazzo: Stronger Cell Probe Lower
   Bounds via Local PRGs. FOCS 2025 2

[MV15] Eric Miles, Emanuele Viola: Substitution-Permutation Networks, Pseudorandom
  Functions, and Natural Proofs. J. ACM 62(6): 46:1-46:29 (2015) 2

[Razb95] Alexander A. Razborov: Unprovability of Lower Bounds on Circuit Size in Certain
   Fragments of Bounded Arithmetic. Izvestiya: Mathematics 59(1), 205-227 (1995) 2

[RR97] Alexander A. Razborov, Steven Rudich: Natural Proofs. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 55(1):
   24-35 (1997) 1, 2, 3


                                           5
[VZ26] Vinod Vaikuntanathan, Or Zamir:       Improving Algorithmic Efficiency Using
   Cryptography. SODA 2026 1, 3, 4

[Wil16] Ryan Williams: Natural Proofs versus Derandomization. SIAM J. Comput. 45(2):
   497-529 (2016) 2




                                                             ECCC                          ISSN 1433-8092
                                         6
                                                             https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il
