                                                          DOT-DEPTH THREE, RETURN OF THE J-CLASS

                                                                         THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN


                                                Abstract. We look at concatenation hierarchies of classes of regular languages. Each such
                                                hierarchy is determined by a single class, its basis: level n is built by applying the Boolean
                                                polynomial closure operator (BPol), n times to the basis. A prominent and difficult open
                                                question in automata theory is to decide membership of a regular language in a given level. For
                                                instance, for the historical dot-depth hierarchy, the decidability of membership is only known
arXiv:2401.16195v1 [cs.FL] 29 Jan 2024




                                                at levels one and two.
                                                   We give a generic algebraic characterization of the operator BPol. This characterization
                                                implies that for any concatenation hierarchy, if n is at least two, membership at level n reduces
                                                to a more complex problem, called covering, for the previous level, n´1. Combined with earlier
                                                results on covering, this implies that membership is decidable for dot-depth three and for level
                                                two in most of the prominent hierarchies in the literature. For instance, we obtain that the
                                                levels two in both the modulo hierarchy and the group hierarchy have decidable membership.




                                                                                     1. Introduction
                                         Context. This article addresses one of the most fundamental questions in automata the-
                                         ory, which emerged in the 1970s: the dot-depth problem. It originates from an algorithm by
                                         Schützenberger [45] that determines whether a regular language is star-free. Star-free languages
                                         are specific regular languages obtained from singletons using three regularity-preserving opera-
                                         tions: union, concatenation, and complement (on the other hand, star-free expressions disallow
                                         Kleene star). Schützenberger’s result initiated a line of research aiming to understand subclasses
                                         of regular languages defined by high-level formalisms (e.g., a restricted set of regular expres-
                                         sions). Moreover, it highlighted a natural parameter of star-free languages, which measures
                                         their complexity: the number of alternations between complement and concatenation required
                                         to express them.
                                            Schützenberger’s work led Brzozowski and Cohen [10] to define a hierarchy of classes of
                                         languages known as the dot-depth. Roughly speaking, languages at level n in this hierarchy are
                                         those that can be defined by a star-free expression with at most n ´ 1 alternations between
                                         complement and concatenation. Brzozowski and Knast showed that the dot-depth is infinite
                                         (i.e., it does not collapse) [11]. The significance of the dot-depth hierarchy is further evidenced
                                         by its logical formulation, discovered by Thomas [59]: level n in the dot-depth corresponds to
                                         the class BΣn of all languages that can be defined in first-order logic under an appropriate
                                         signature, with at most n blocks of quantifiers of the form D˚ or @˚ .
                                            The dot-depth actually inspired a general family of hierarchies called the concatenation hi-
                                         erarchies. The simplest way to define them is through operators. An operator Op takes as
                                         input a class C of regular languages and produces as output a larger class OppCq. In order to
                                         build a concatenation hierarchy, we require two of them. First, the polynomial closure PolpCq
                                         of a class C consists of all finite unions of concatenation products L1 a1 L1 ¨ ¨ ¨ an Ln where the
                                         languages Li belong to C and the ai ’s are letters. Second, the Boolean closure BoolpCq of a class
                                         C is its closure under all Boolean operations. Finally, “BPol” is the composition of these two
                                         operators: BPolpCq “ BoolpPolpCqq for each class C. All concatenation hierarchies follow the
                                         same construction pattern: it starts from a base class, level zero; then, level n ` 1 is built from
                                                                                               1
2                               THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

level n by applying the “BPol” operator once. Thus, each hierarchy is entirely determined by its
level zero. For the dot-depth hierarchy, level zero consists of four languages: the empty one, the
singleton consisting of the empty word, and their complements. Other prominent hierarchies
include the Straubing-Thérien hierarchy [49, 56] whose basis consists of only the empty and
universal languages, the group hierarchy [23] whose basis consists of the languages recognized
by a permutation automaton [58] or the modulo hierarchy [12] whose basis consist of the “mod-
ulo languages”, which are those for which membership of a word is determined by its length
modulo some integer.
   The logical characterization by quantifier alternation hierarchies is also a generic feature
of concatenation hierarchies. Each such hierarchy corresponds to the alternation hierarchy
in first-order logic equipped with a signature determined by its basis [39]. For instance, the
Straubing-Thérien hierarchy [25] is associated with the signature consisting only of the linear
order “ă” on positions and the unary alphabetical predicates apxq, bpxq,. . . In order to capture
the dot-depth, one needs to add the successor predicate “`1” [59]. The modulo hierarchy [12]
is also a natural example. Its signature consists of the linear order, the alphabetical predicates
and the modular predicates, which test position’s values modulo an integer.
   In summary, the levels of concatenation hierarchies have a dual characterization: by operators
on the one hand, by logic on the other. This underscores that the minimum level containing
a language is a robust parameter. Intuitively, it measures the complexity required to express
a language. This intuition is formalized by the fact that the non-elementary lower bound
for checking satisfiability in first-order logic comes from quantifier alternation [48]. This has
motivated researchers to tackle the original Schützenberger membership problem for individual
level of concatenation hierarchies: do we have an algorithm to test whether an input language
belongs to such a level? If so, we say that the level is decidable.
State of the art. Historically, this question has drawn the attention of numerous researchers,
see [29] for a survey. Initially, it was mostly addressed for specific levels in the dot-depth
or Straubing-Thérien hierarchies. Nevertheless, due to its inherent complexity, advances have
been gradual. Simon [46, 47] proposed an algorithm for level one in the Straubing-Thérien
hierarchy. This is an influential result and there are many alternate proofs [26, 54, 1, 18, 19].
Knast [20] also tackled level one, but for the dot-depth hierarchy (see also [57, 2, 21] for alternate
proofs). Straubing then designed a key reduction [50] that shows that a level n is decidable in
the Straubing-Thérien hierarchy if and only if the same holds for the dot-depth. Additionally,
level one has been proven to be decidable in the group hierarchy. This breakthrough was
achieved [16, 17] in a purely algebraic context, leveraging a challenging result by Ash [7] (see
[27] for a survey). Finally, there are also several results concerning the lower levels of the modulo
hierarchy [12, 22]
   Following these first results, the decidability of dot-depth two became a prominent open
problem in automata theory. Many partial results, conjectures and over-approximations were
proposed [8, 9, 60, 13, 51, 52, 61, 55, 62, 33, 34, 3, 4] until decidability was finally proved
in [36, 40]. The algorithms presented in [36] and [40] differ slightly, but they both rely on a
more general problem than membership, called separation, which is decidable for a subclass of
dot-depth two. Intuitively, solving C-separation for a class C, brings information that can be
exploited for studying classes built on top of C (typically through operators). A striking example
of this claim is the generic reduction [39] from PolpCq-membership to C-separation (when C has
mild properties). It is based on a generic characterization of PolpCq on the syntactic monoid
of the input language (a canonical algebraic recognizer that can be computed from the input).
The class C defines a binary relation on the syntactic monoid whose computation boils down to
                                        DOT-DEPTH THREE                                           3

C-separation. The characterization states that the input language belongs to PolpCq if and only
if every pair of this relation satisfies a generic equation depending only on Pol (and not on C).

Contributions. We investigate the BPol operator, as opposed to focusing on BPolpCq for
a specific class C. This is desirable in order to obtain generic results and to pinpoint which
hypotheses on the input class C are necessary for deciding BPolpCq-membership (thus abstracting
away the irrelevant peculiarities of C). This approach is not new, see for instance [34]. Our
aim is to obtain a transfer result from C-separation to BPolpCq-membership, similar to the one
existing for Pol. Unfortunately, BPol is much harder to deal with than Pol. Indeed, in practice,
the classes which are closed under language concatenation (such as PolpCq) are simpler to handle
than those which are not (such as BPolpCq in general).
   Our first contribution is a generic algebraic characterization of BPol (for input classes satis-
fying mild properties). Its presentation is similar to the aforementioned characterization of Pol.
It uses two equations that the syntactic monoid of a language satisfies if and only if the language
in is BPolpCq. Each one parameterized by a relation defined from C. The first of these relations
is the one used in the characterization of PolpCq: its computation boils down to C-separation.
Unfortunately, the second relation is based on a new ad hoc problem for C whose decidability
status is not clear in general. Consequently, our first characterization does not immediately
yield a BPolpCq-membership procedure for most classes C. Nonetheless, we do get an inter-
esting simple corollary: a new effective characterization of level two in the Straubing-Thérien
hierarchy. While such a characterization was known [40], this new one is much simpler. In
particular, this yields a new proof for the decidability of dot-depth two by the aforementioned
reduction of Straubing [50].
   Our second contribution is a specialized characterization of BPol for the particular inputs
C which are themselves of the form BPolpDq, for some other class D. In other words, C is
a non-zero level in an arbitrary concatenation hierarchy and BPolpCq is a level above two in
the same hierarchy. In this case, we are able to reformulate the second equation of our first
generic characterization. We end-up with a new equation parameterized by a relation based on
the C-covering problem (a generalization of separation to more than just two input languages).
Therefore, the main corollary of this second characterization is that BPolpBPolpDqq-membership
reduces to BPolpDq-covering. As the latter problem has already been extensively studied for
many classes BPolpDq, we obtain as a corollary new positive decidability results of membership
for several levels.
Applications. When G consists only of group languages and has decidable separation, it is
shown in [41, 35] that level one in the hierarchies of bases G and G` has decidable covering.
Here, G` consists of all languages of the form Lztεu and L Y tεu, with L P G. Combined with
our results, this implies that for such classes G, level two in the hierarchies of bases G and G`
has decidable membership. Most of the bases that are considered in the literature are of this
kind. In particular, since their bases have decidable separation [7, 44], we obtain that level two
in both the modulo hierarchy and the group hierarchy has decidable membership.
   Our other main applications concern the Straubing-Thérien hierarchy and the dot-depth. It
was shown in [42] that level two has decidable covering in both hierarchies. Combined with our
results, this implies that level three in both the Straubing-Thérien hierarchy and the dot-depth
has decidable membership.
Organization of the paper. In Section 2, we introduce preliminary definitions. We define
concatenation hierarchies in Section 3. Section 4 is devoted to relations that we use in our
characterizations. The two characterizations are presented in Section 5 and Section 6.
4                               THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

                                        2. Preliminaries
2.1. Words, classes and regular languages. We fix an arbitrary finite alphabet A for the
whole paper. As usual, A˚ denotes the set of all words over A, including the empty word ε.
We let A` “ A˚ ztεu. For u, v P A˚ , we write uv the word obtained by concatenating u and v.
A language is a subset of A˚ . Abusing terminology, we often write u for the singleton tuu. We
lift concatenation to languages: for K, L Ď A˚ , we let KL “ tuv | u P K and v P Lu.
    A class of languages C is a set of languages. We say that C is a lattice when it is closed under
union and intersection, H P C and A˚ P C. Also, a Boolean algebra is a lattice closed under
complement. Finally, if for all L P C and w P A˚ , the languages w´1 L “ tu P A˚ | wu P Lu and
Lw´1 “ tu P A˚ | uw P Lu both belong to C, we say that C is closed under quotients.
    A positive prevariety (resp. prevariety) is a lattice (resp. Boolean algebra) closed under quo-
tients, containing only regular languages. These are the languages that can be equivalently
defined by finite automata or finite monoids. We use the latter definition.
Monoids. A monoid is a set M endowed with an associative multiplication ps, tq ÞÑ st which
has an identity 1M , i.e., such that 1M ¨ s “ s ¨ 1M “ s for every s P M . A group is a monoid G
such that for all g P G, there exists g ´1 such that gg ´1 “ g´1 g “ 1G .
   An idempotent of a monoid M is an element e P M such that ee “ e. We write EpM q Ď M
for the set of all idempotents in M . It is folklore that for each finite semigroup M , there is a
natural number ωpM q (denoted by ω when M is understood) such that for every s P M , the
element sω is an idempotent.
   An ordered monoid is a pair pM, ďq where M is a monoid and ď is a partial order on M ,
compatible with multiplication: for all s, s1 , t, t1 P M , if s ď t and s1 ď t1 , then ss1 ď tt1 . A
subset F Ď M is an upper set (for ď) if it is upward closed for ď: for all s, t P M , if s P F
and s ď t, then t P F . By convention, we view every unordered monoid M as the ordered
one pM, “q whose ordering is equality. In this case, all subsets of M are upper sets. Thus, a
definition for ordered monoids makes sense for unordered ones.
   Finally, we use the Green relations [15] defined on monoids. We briefly recall them. Given a
monoid M and s, t P M ,
                      s ďJ t   when there exist x, y P M such that s “ xty,
                      s ďL t   when there exists x P M such that s “ xt,
                      s ďR t   when there exists y P M such that s “ ty,
                      s ďH t   when s ďL t and s ďR t.
These relations are preorders (i.e., reflexive and transitive). We write ăJ , ăL , ăR and ăH for
their strict variants (e.g., s ăJ t when s ďJ t but t ­ďJ s). We write J, L, R and H for the
associated equivalences (e.g., s J t when s ďJ t and t ďJ s). The following lemmas are standard
(see e.g., [30]).
Lemma 1. Let M be a finite monoid and s, t P M such that t ďJ s. If s ďR t, then s R t.
Moreover, if s ďL t then s L t.

Lemma 2. Let M be a finite monoid, e P EpM q and s P M be such that e H s. Then, sω “ e.
Regular languages. Note that A˚ is a monoid: its multiplication is word concatenation, and
its identity is ε. We consider morphisms α : A˚ Ñ pM, ďq where pM, ďq is an arbitrary ordered
monoid. That is, α : A˚ Ñ M is a map such that αpεq “ 1M and αpuvq “ αpuqαpvq for all
u, v P A˚ . We say that L Ď A˚ is recognized by the morphism α when there is an upper set
F Ď M for ď such that L “ α´1 pF q.
                                        DOT-DEPTH THREE                                           5

Remark 3. Recall that we view any unordered monoid M as the ordered one pM, “q. Thus,
a language L Ď A˚ is recognized by a morphism α : A˚ Ñ M if there exists an arbitrary set
F Ď M (all subsets are upper sets for ““”) such that L “ α´1 pF q.
   It is standard that the regular languages are those which can be recognized by a morphism
into a finite monoid.
Remark 4. The only infinite monoid that we consider is A˚ . We shall implicitly assume that
every other monoid M, N, . . . is finite.
2.2. Membership, separation and covering. We define three decision problems. Each of
them depends on an arbitrary fixed class C and take regular languages as input. We use them
as mathematical tools for investigating C.
   The first problem is C-membership. It takes a regular language L as input and asks whether
L belongs to C.
   The second problem is C-separation. It takes as input two regular languages L1 and L2 and
asks if L1 is C-separable from L2 : does there exist K P C such that L1 Ď K and L2 X K “ H?
Remark 5. Separation generalizes membership. Indeed, for any regular language L, we have
L P C if and only if L is C-separable from A˚ zL (which is also regular).
   The third problem is C-covering. It takes as input a regular language L1 and a finite set
L2 of regular languages, and asks whether the pair pL1 , L2 q is C-coverable:Ť does there exist a
C-cover K of L1 (i.e., K is a finite set of languages in C such that L Ď KPK K) such that
for all K P K, there exists L P L2 satisfying K X L “ H?
Remark 6. When C is a lattice, this generalizes separation: L1 is C-separable from L2 if and
only if pL1 , tL2 uq is C-coverable.
   Finally, the definition of C-covering is simplified when C is a Boolean algebra. Given a finite
set of languages L, we say that L is C-coverable to mean that pA˚ , Lq is C-coverable. The
following simple lemma is proved in [37].
Lemma 7. Let C be a Boolean algebra, L1 Ď A˚ be a language and L2 be a finite set of
languages. Then, pL1 , L2 q is C-coverable if and only if tL1 u Y L2 is C-coverable.
2.3. C-morphisms. We turn to a key mathematical tool (see [38, 43] for the proofs). Given a
positive prevariety C, a morphism η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq into a finite ordered monoid is a C-morphism
if it is surjective and all languages recognized by η belong to C. If C is a prevariety (i.e., C is
also closed under complement), it suffices to consider unordered monoids (by convention, we
view them as ordered by equality).
Lemma 8. Let C be a prevariety and let η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq be a morphism. The two following
conditions are equivalent:
   (1) η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq is a C-morphism.
   (2) η : A˚ Ñ pN, “q is a C-morphism.

Remark 9. Another formulation of Lemma 8 is that when C is a prevariety, whether a mor-
phism η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq is a C-morphism does not depend on the ordering ď. Thus, we shall
implicitly use Lemma 8 and drop the ordering when dealing with prevarieties.
  We use C-morphisms as mathematical tools. In particular, we need the following result.
Proposition 10. Let C be a positive prevariety and let L1 , . . . , Lk P C. There exists a C-
morphism η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq recognizing L1 , . . . , Lk .
6                                THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

   We also use C-morphisms to tackle membership. It is known that every regular language
L is recognized by a canonical morphism αL : A˚ Ñ pML , ďL q, called its syntactic morphism,
which can be computed from any representation of L (see e.g., [30]). It is standard that for
every positive prevariety C, we have L P C if and only if αL is a C-morphism. Altogether, this
yields the following proposition.
Proposition 11. Let C be a positive prevariety. There is an effective reduction from C-
membership to the problem of deciding whether a morphism α : A˚ Ñ pM, ďq is a C-morphism.

                                 3. Concatenation hierarchies
  Concatenation hierarchies are built uniformly from a single input class using two operators,
which we first present.

3.1. Polynomial closure and Boolean closure. The polynomial closure of a class C is the
class PolpCq consisting of all finite unions of marked products L0 a1 L1 ¨ ¨ ¨ an Ln where n P N
a1 , . . . , an P A and L0 , . . . , Ln P C. It is not clear from the definition whether the class PolpCq
has robust properties, even when C does. It was shown by Arfi [5, 6] that if C is a prevariety,
then PolpCq is a positive prevariety. This result was later strengthened by Pin [28]: if C is a
positive prevariety, then so is PolpCq (see also [39]).
Theorem 12. Let C be a positive prevariety. Then, PolpCq is a positive prevariety closed under
language concatenation.
   In general, the classes PolpCq are not closed under complement. Hence, it is natural to
combine polynomial closure with another operator. Given a class D, the Boolean closure of
D, written BoolpDq, is the least Boolean algebra containing D. For each input class C, we
write BPolpCq for BoolpPolpCqq. Since quotients commute with Boolean operations, we have the
following corollary of Theorem 12.
Corollary 13. If C is a positive prevariety, BPolpCq is a prevariety.
  Observe that by definition, a language in BoolpCq is built from finitely many languages in C.
This yields the following lemma for BoolpCq-morphisms.
Lemma 14. Let C be a positive prevariety and α : A˚ Ñ M be a BoolpCq-morphism. There
exists a morphism β : Q Ñ M and a C-morphism γ : A˚ Ñ pQ, ďq such that α “ β ˝ γ.
Proof. By hypothesis on α, there exists a finite set L of languages in C such that every language
recognized by α is a Boolean combination of languages in L. Since C is a positive prevariety,
Proposition 10 yields a C-morphism γ : A˚ Ñ pQ, ďq recognizing every language L P L. It
remains to construct β : Q Ñ M . For every q P Q, we fix wq P γ ´1 pqq and define βpqq “ αpwq q.
We prove that β is a morphism. This boils down to proving that γpuq “ γpvq ñ αpuq “ αpvq
for all u, v P A˚ . Indeed, since γpw1Q q “ 1Q “ γpεq, we would get αpw1Q q “ αpεq, and
therefore βp1Q q “ 1M . Similarly, for q, r P Q, since γpwqr q “ qr “ γpwq wr q, we would get
αpwqr q “ αpwq wr q, which yields βpqrq “ βpqqβprq.
   Let now u, v P A˚ such that γpuq “ γpvq, and let us prove that αpuq “ αpvq. Since γ
recognizes every language L P L, we have u P L ô v P L for all L P L. Hence, for every Boolean
combination H of languages of L, we have u P H ô v P H. Since every language recognized by
α is such a Boolean combination, we obtain αpuq “ αpvq.
   It remains to prove that α “ β ˝ γ. Let w P A˚ and q “ γpwq. We have γpwq “ γpwq q.
Therefore, αpwq “ αpwq q “ βpqq “ βpγpwqq, as desired.                                         
                                                 DOT-DEPTH THREE                                                         7

   The classes BPolpCq, which are central to this paper, are difficult to handle. This is because
they are not closed under concatenation in general. This makes it hard to specify languages
in BPolpCq. Nonetheless, we shall use the following weak concatenation principle based on
BPolpCq-covers, proved in [42, Lemma 3.4].
Lemma 15. Let C be a prevariety and L0 , . . . , Ln P PolpCq. For i ď n, let Ki be a BPolpCq-
cover of Li . Then, there exists a BPolpCq-cover H of L0 ¨ ¨ ¨ Ln such that for every H P H,
there exists Ki P Ki for all i ď n, such that H Ď K0 ¨ ¨ ¨ Kn .
   We shall also need the following variant of Lemma 15, which considers marked concatenation.
It is presented in [42, Lemma 3.6].
Lemma 16. Let C be a prevariety, L0 , . . . , Ln P PolpCq and let a1 , . . . , an P A. For i ď n, let
Ki be a BPolpCq-cover of Li . Then, there is a BPolpCq-cover H of L0 a1 L1 ¨ ¨ ¨ an Ln such that
for every H P H, there exists Ki P Ki for all i ď n, such that H Ď K0 a1 K1 ¨ ¨ ¨ an Kn .
   Lemmas 15 and 16 only apply to very specific languages to be covered: such a language must
be a concatenation of languages in PolpCq that are themselves already covered. To build these
specific languages, we shall use another result which we present now.
   We start with definitions. Let η : A˚ Ñ N be a morphism (such as a C-morphism) and
n P N. An η-pattern of length n is a tuple ps “ pw1 , e1 , . . . , wn , en , wn`1 q of pA` ˆ EpN qqn ˆ A˚
satisfying the three following conditions:
    (1) If n ě 1, then w1 , . . . , wn`1 P A` are all nonempty,
    (2) ei J ηpw1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wn`1 q for 1 ď i ď n,
    (3) ηpwi qei “ ηpwi q and ei ηpwi`1 q “ ηpwi`1 q for 1 ď i ď n.
If α : A˚ Ñ M is another morphism, we say that ps is α-guarded if for all 1 ď i ď n, there exists
gi P EpM q such that η ´1 pei q X α´1 pgi q ‰ H, αpwi qgi “ αpwi q and gi αpwi`1 q “ αpwi`1 q. Note
that ps is η-guarded if η is surjective. Note also that when n “ 0, Conditions (1) to (3) hold
trivially. Therefore, pwq is an η-pattern for every w P A˚ .
   We now introduce a notation. Let ps “ pw1 , e1 , . . . , wn , en , wn`1 q be an η-pattern. We write
πpspq “ w1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wn`1 P A˚ . Also, we let Òη ps Ď A˚ be the following language:
                                   Òη ps “ w1 η ´1 pe1 q ¨ ¨ ¨ wn η ´1 pen q wn`1 .
When ps is of length n “ 0, we let Òη ps “ tw1 u.
  We turn to the statement. Given a morphism η : A˚ Ñ N and a J-class J Ď N , it can be
used to build a cover of a language included in η ´1 pJq. Yet, we need a strong hypothesis on J.
We say that a J-class J Ď N is η-alphabetic to indicate that for every a P A, if J ďJ ηpaq, then
ηpaq P J.
Proposition 17. Let η : A˚ Ñ N and α : A˚ Ñ M be two morphisms, J Ď N be an η-
alphabetic J-class and H Ď η ´1 pJq. Then, there exists a finite set P of α-guarded η-patterns
            pq P H for all ps P P and tÒη ps | ps P P u is a cover of H.
such that πps
Remark 18. The proof of Proposition 17 is not immediate. The core idea is to define an
ordering on a suitable set of η-patterns and to show that this ordering is well. The proof is
inspired by the “minimal bad sequence” argument of Nash-Williams [24]. The set P is then
chosen as a set of minimal patterns for this ordering.
  Before proving Proposition 17, we introduce some terminology on η-patterns. Let η : A˚ Ñ N
be a morphism and ps be an η-pattern. For n P N, we define the n-splits of ps. Intuitively, they
are tuples ps
            p1 , e1 , . . . , psn , en , psn`1 q where e1 , . . . , en P EpN q and ps1 , . . . , psn are η-patterns, which
are such that “flattening” ps           p1 , e1 , . . . , psn , en , psn`1 q yields ps. Let us formally define n-splits, by
8                                            THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

induction on n. If n “ 0, ps          pq is the only 0-split of ps. If n “ 1, we say that ps       p1 , e1 , ps2 q is a 1-split
of ps if ps1 “ pu1 , f1 , . . . , uk , fk , uk`1 q, ps2 “ pv1 , g1 , . . . , vℓ , gℓ , vℓ`1 q and,
                               ps “ pu1 , f1 , . . . , uk , fk , uk`1 , e1 , v1 , g1 , . . . , vℓ , gℓ , vℓ`1 q.
Finally, when n ě 2, we say that ps                    p1 , e1 , . . . , psn , en , psn`1 q is an n-split of ps when there exists an
η-pattern qs such that ps            q , en , psn`1 q is a 1-split of ps and ps        p1 , e1 , . . . , psn´1 , en´1 , psn q is an pn´1q-split
of qs.
    Finally, a split of ps is an n-split of ps for some n P N. Abusing terminology, we often write
ps “ ps  p1 , e1 , . . . , psn , en , psn`1 q to indicate that ps            p1 , e1 , . . . , psn , en , psn`1 q is a split of ps. We may
now recall the statement of Proposition 17.
    When ps is an η-pattern, we abuse notation and write ηps                                     pq instead of ηpπps       pqq. Clearly, when
psp1 , e1 , . . . , psn , en , psn`1 q is a split of ps, we have ηps            pq “ ηps     p1 q ¨ ¨ ¨ ηps pn qηps
                                                                                                                  pn`1 q.
Proof. We work with a slightly different property than the one of the statement. Observe
that given an η-pattern ps, it may happen that πps             pq R Òη ps. We associate with ps an al-
ternate language Ò˚ ps containing πps           pq. It will be easier to manipulate in the proof. Let
ps “ pw1 , e1 , . . . , wn , en , wn`1 q be an η-pattern. We write Ò˚ ps Ď A˚ for the following language:
                               Ò˚ ps “ w1 pη ´1 pe1 q Y tεuq ¨ ¨ ¨ wn pη ´1 pen q Y tεuqwn`1 .
This definition ensures that πps  pq P Ò˚ ps for every η-pattern ps. We connect this notion to the
original languages Òη ps in the following fact.
Fact 19. Let ps be an α-guarded η-pattern. There exists finitely     Ť     many α-guarded η-patterns
                              pi q “ πps
ps1 , . . . , psk such that πps        pq for every i ď k and Ò˚ ps “ 0ďiďk Òη psi .
Proof. We write ps “ pw1 , e1 , . . . , wn , en , wn`1 q. If n “ 0, then Ò˚ ps “ Òη ps “ tw1 u. Hence, it
suffices to chose k “ 1 and ps1 “ ps. Assume now that n ě 1. Let I Ď t1, . . . , nu. We associate
an η-pattern psI that we build from ps. Let I “ ti1 , . . . , ih u with i1 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă ih . Moreover, let
i0 “ 0 and ih`1 “ n ` 1. For every j such that 1 ď j ď h ` 1, we let vj “ wij´1 `1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wij .
Finally, we define psI “ pv1 , ei1 , . . . , vh , eih , vh`1 q. It is easy to check that πps
                                                                                           pI q is an α-guarded
η-pattern suchŤthat πps  pI q “ πps    pq. Moreover, since concatenation distributes over union, we
obtain Ò˚ ps “ IĎt1,...,nu Òη psI .                                                                           
   We construct a finite set P of α-guarded η-patterns ps such that πps           pq P H and tÒ˚ ps | ps P P u
is a cover of H. It will then be straightforward to use Fact 19 to construct the set described in
Proposition 17, which will complete the proof.
   Let us focus on the construction of P . First, we identify a special infinite set Q of η-patterns.
We shall then define the desired set P as a subset of Q. Let k “ 1 ` |M ˆ N |2 . Then, Q is the
set of all α-guarded η-patterns pw1 , e1 , . . . , wn , en , wn`1 q such that |wi | ď 2k for every i ď n ` 1.
We complete the definition with a key lemma. It implies that the η-patterns in Q suffice to
cover a language contained in η ´1 pJq, such as H.
Lemma 20. Let w P η ´1 pJq. There is ps P Q such that w “ πps
                                                            pq.
Proof. We prove will a stronger result. We define R as the set of all η-patterns of the form
ps “ pw1 , e1 , . . . , wn , en , wn`1 q P Q that additionally satisfy |wn`1 | ď k. Clearly, R Ď Q. We
prove that for every w P η ´1 pJq, there exists ps P R such that w “ πps      pq. In the proof, we consider
the monoid M ˆN equipped with the componentwise multiplication. We write γ : A˚ Ñ M ˆN
for the morphism defined by γpuq “ pαpuq, ηpuqq for all u P A˚ .
   We proceed by induction on the length of w. If |w| ď k, it suffices to choose ps “ pwq P R.
Assume now that |w| ą k. We get a1 , . . . , ak P A and w1 P A` such that w “ w1 a1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ak .
Since k ą |M ˆ N |2 , the pigeonhole principle yields i, j such that 1 ď i ă j ď k, we have
                                                 DOT-DEPTH THREE                                                       9

γpa1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ai q “ γpa1 ¨ ¨ ¨ aj q and γpai`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ak q “ γpaj`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ak q. We now define x “ a1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ai and
y “ ai`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ak . By definition |x| ď k and |y| ď k. Moreover, we have w “ w1 xy. Consider
pg, eq “ pγpai`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ aj qqω P EpM ˆ N q. By definition of i and j, we have γpxqpg, eq “ γpxq
and pg, eqγpyq “ γpyq. Clearly, w1 P η ´1 pJq since w1 is a nonempty prefix of w P η ´1 pJq
and we know that J is η-alphabetic. Since |w1 | ă |w|, induction yields an α-guarded η-pattern
ps1 “ pw1 , e1 , . . . , wn , en , wn`1 q P R such that w1 “ πps
                                                               p1 q. Let ps “ pw1 , e1 , . . . , wn , en , wn`1 x, e, yq.
Now, the tuple ps is an α-guarded η-pattern. Indeed, Condition (1) holds by definition. Condi-
tion (2) holds because w P η ´1 pJq and J is η-alphabetic. Condition (3) and the fact that ps is
α-guarded hold by definition of the idempotent pg, eq P EpM ˆ N q. Moreover, since w “ w1 xy
and w1 “ πps       p1 q, it is immediate that w “ πps       pq. Finally, |wi | ď 2k for every i ď n and
|wn`1 | ď k since ps1 P R. Since |x| ď k, we deduce that |wn`1 x| ď 2k. Finally, we have |y| ď k
by construction. Hence, ps P R, by definition of R.                                                                    
     We now define an ordering on Q. Its definition is based on splits, introduced above. For
ps, qs P Q, we write ps ĺ qs when there exist ℓ P N, ps1 , . . . , psℓ`1 P Q, qs1 , . . . , qsℓ P Q and
f1 , . . . , fℓ P EpN q satisfying the three following conditions:
      (1) for 1 ď i ď ℓ, we have ηps               qi q “ fi ,
      (2) ps “ ps  p1 , f1 , . . . , psℓ , fℓ , psℓ`1 q,
      (3) qs “ ps  p1 , f1 , qs1 , f1 , . . . , psℓ , fℓ , qsℓ , fℓ , psℓ`1 q.
When ℓ “ 0, the definition simply states that ps “ ps1 “ qs. It can be verified that ĺ is a partial
order.
Fact 21. Let ps, qs P Q such that ps ĺ qs. Then, Ò˚ qs Ď Ò˚ ps.
Proof. Let ℓ P N, ps1 , . . . , psℓ`1 P Q, qs1 , . . . , qsℓ P Q and f1 , . . . , fℓ be idempotents of N , as in the
definition of ps ĺ qs. Now consider w P Ò˚ qs. By definition, this yields ui P Ò˚ psi for i ď ℓ ` 1,
vi P Ò˚ qsi for i ď ℓ and xi , yi P η ´1 pfi q Y tεu for i ď ℓ such that,
                                         w “ u1 x1 v1 y1 ¨ ¨ ¨ uℓ xℓ vℓ yℓ uℓ`1 .
Since vi P Ò˚ qsi for all i ď ℓ, we have ηpvi q “ ηps            qi q “ fi by hypothesis. It follows that
                                                     ´1
ηpxi vi yi q “ fi . Therefore, we have xi vi yi P η pfi q. This implies that w P Ò˚ ps, since we also
have ui P Ò˚ psi for all i ď ℓ ` 1 and ps “ psp1 , f1 , . . . , psℓ , fℓ , psℓ`1 q.                    
  The proof of Proposition 17 is based on the following lemma. It states that the ordering ĺ
on Q is well.
Lemma 22. Let ps    pi qiPN be an infinite sequence of η-patterns in Q. There exist i, j P N such
that i ă j and psi ĺ psj .
   Before we prove Lemma 22, let us apply it to build our cover of the language H and complete
the main argument. Let QH Ď Q be the set of all η-patterns ps P Q such that πps          pq P H. We
say that an η-pattern ps P QH is minimal if there exists no other η-pattern qs P QH such that
qs ĺ ps. Let then F Ď QH be the set of all minimal η-patterns ps P QH . By definition, qs ł ps
for every ps, qs P F such that ps ‰ qs. Hence, Lemma 22 implies that F is a finite set. We define
K “ tÒ˚ ps | ps P F u. Since F Ď QH , it is immediate by definition that πps pq P H for every ps P F .
Therefore, it remains to prove that K is a cover of H. We fix a word w P H and exhibit K P K
such that w P K. Since H Ď η ´1 pJq by hypothesis, Lemma 20 yields qs P Q such that πps       q q “ w.
Moreover, since w P H, we have qs P QH . Since ĺ is a well-order, it has no strictly decreasing
sequence. Therefore, there exists a minimal η-pattern ps P QH such that ps ĺ qs. By definition,
ps P F and Ò˚ ps P K. Since πps   q q “ w, we have w P Ò˚ qs. Finally, since ps ĺ qs, Fact 21 implies
that w P Ò˚ ps as well, which concludes the argument.
10                                        THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

  It remains to prove Lemma 22 to finish the proof of Proposition 17. We do so by adapting
the standard argument of Nash-Williams [24]. We say that a sequence ps              pi qiPN of η-patterns is
bad if psi P Q for every i and psi ł psj for every i ă j. We have to prove that there exists no
bad sequence. Proceeding by contradiction, assume that there exists a bad sequence. We first
use this hypothesis to construct a specific one: we build by induction a specific sequence ps         pi qiPN
such that for every i P N, ps0 , . . . , psi can be continued into a bad sequence.
  Choose ps0 P Q such that ps0 can be continued into a bad sequence. Such an η-pattern must
exist by the assumption that there exists a bad sequence. Assume now that ps0 , . . . , psi have been
chosen so that ps0 , . . . , psi can be continued into a bad sequence. We define psi`1 P Q as an η-
pattern of minimal length such that ps0 , . . . , psi , psi`1 can be continued into a bad sequence. This
defines pspi qiPN . Observe that it is necessarily bad. Indeed, otherwise, we would have i ă j such
that psi ĺ psj , contradicting the hypothesis that ps0 , . . . , psi can be continued into a bad sequence.
In particular, observe that ps      pi qiPN contains η-patterns with arbitrarily large length (since, by
definition of Q, there are only finitely many η-patterns of length n in Q for each n P N).
  Let ℓ “ |EpN q ˆ EpM q| ˆ |N | ` 1. By the pigeonhole principle, there exist infinitely many
indices 1 ď i1 ă i2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ such that psik “ ps    q , f, rsik q, where,
       ‚ qs P Q is an η-pattern of length ℓ,
       ‚ f P EpN q is an idempotent,
       ‚ rsik is an η-pattern in Q for each k ě 1.
Let qs “ pw1 , e1 , . . . , wℓ , eℓ , wℓ`1 q. Since qs belongs to Q, it is α-guarded. Hence, we obtain
idempotents g1 , . . . , gℓ P EpM q such that for all 1 ď i ď ℓ, we have η ´1 pei q X α´1 pgi q ‰ H,
αpwi qgi “ αpwi q and gi αpwi`1 q “ αpwi`1 q. Now, since ℓ “ |EpN q ˆ EpM q| ˆ |N | ` 1, the
pigeonhole principle yields |N | ` 1 indices h1 , . . . , h|N |`1 ď ℓ such that eh1 “ ¨ ¨ ¨ “ eh|N|`1
and gh1 “ ¨ ¨ ¨ “ gh|N|`1 . We now use the pigeonhole principle again to get i, j such that
1 ď i ă j ď |N | ` 1 and ηpw1 ¨ ¨ ¨ whi q “ ηpw1 ¨ ¨ ¨ whj q. We define,

                              qs1 “ pw1 , e1 , . . . , whi , ehi , whj `1 , ehj `1 , . . . , eℓ , wℓ`1 q.

Since ηpw1 ¨ ¨ ¨ whi q “ ηpw1 ¨ ¨ ¨ whj q, ehi “ ehj and ghi “ ghj , we get that qs1 is an α-guarded
η-pattern in Q. Moreover ηps                             q q “ ηps      q 1 q. Furthermore, it is clear that the length of qs1 is
strictly smaller than that of qs since i ă j. Finally, observe that qs1 ĺ qs. Indeed, consider
e “ ehi “ ehj P EpN q. We show that ηpwhi `1 ¨ ¨ ¨ whj q “ e. This implies that qs1 ĺ qs by defi-
nition of ĺ. Let s “ ηpw1 ¨ ¨ ¨ whi q and t “ ηpwhi `1 ¨ ¨ ¨ whj q. By definition of i and j, we have
st “ s. The definition of η-patterns also yields s J e, se “ s and et “ t. The fact that se “ s
also implies that s ďL e and we get s L e from Lemma 1. This yields x P N such that xs “ e.
We get t “ et “ xst “ xs “ e, which completes the proof that qs1 ĺ qs.
     For each k ě 1, let ps1ik “ ps                          q 1 , f, rsik q. One can check that ps1ik is indeed an η-pattern
in Q, because this is the case for psik “ ps                                  q , f, rsik q. We now prove that the infinite sequence
ps0 , . . . , psi1 ´1 , ps1i1 , ps1i2 , ps1i3 , . . . is bad. In particular, this means that ps0 , . . . , psi1 ´1 , ps1i1 can be con-
tinued into a bad sequence. This is a contradiction: by definition of qs1 from qs, we know that
the length of ps1i1 is strictly smaller than the one of psi1 . This is not possible since psi1 P Q is
defined as an η-pattern of minimal length such that ps0 , . . . , psi1 ´1 , psi1 can be continued into a
bad sequence.
     It remains to prove that ps0 , . . . , psi1 ´1 , ps1i1 , ps1i2 , ps1i3 , . . . is bad. Since ps          pi qiPN is bad, we know
that for i ă j ď i1 ´ 1, we have psi ł psj . We now prove that psi ł ps1ik for i ď i1 ´ 1 and
k ě 1. By contradiction, assume that psi ĺ ps1ik . Since qs1 ĺ qs, we have ps1ik ĺ psik . Hence, we get
psi ĺ psik , contradicting the hypothesis that ps                               pi qiPN is bad. Finally, we show that given h, k such
                                                      DOT-DEPTH THREE                                                                11

that 1 ď h ă k, we have ps1ih ł ps1ik . By contradiction assume that ps1ih ĺ ps1ik . By definition, this
            q 1 , f, rsih q ĺ ps
means that ps                  q 1 , f, rsik q. Hence, the definition of ĺ implies that there are two cases.
‚ First, it may happen that rsih ĺ rsik . Since psih “ ps             q , f, rsih q and psik “ ps     q , f, rsih q, it follows that
  psih ĺ psik . Again, this contradicts the hypothesis that ps                  pi qiPN is bad.
‚ Otherwise, there are u       s, vs P Q such that qs1 ĺ ps      q 1 , f, usq, rsih ĺ vs and rsik “ ps            u, f, vsq. Observe
  that ηps    uq “ f . Indeed, we have f J ηps              1
                                                           q q, ηps    1
                                                                     q qf “ ηps        1
                                                                                      q q and f ηps      uq “ ηps       uq by defini-
  tion of η-patterns. The fact that ηps            q 1 qf “ ηps  q 1 q implies ηps       q 1 q ďL f and Lemma 1 yields
  ηps q 1 q L f . We get s P N such that sηps      q 1 q “ f . Finally, since we have qs1 ĺ ps                 q 1 , f, u
                                                                                                                        sq, we obtain
  ηps   1
      q q “ ηps   1
                 q qηps uq. Altogether, we get ηps     uq “ f ηps   uq “ sηps       1
                                                                                   q qηpsuq “ sηps        1
                                                                                                       q q “ f.
      Since f “ ηps     uq and rsih ĺ sv , the definition of ĺ implies that ps             q , f, rsih q ĺ ps  q , f, u s, f, vsq. Since
  rsik “ ps  u, f, vsq, this exactly says that ps q , f, rsih q ĺ ps  q , f, rsik q. That is, we have psih ĺ psik . Again,
  this contradicts the hypothesis that ps         pi qiPN is bad.
This completes the proof.                                                                                                            

3.2. Concatenation hierarchies. Let C be a prevariety. For all n P N, we define two classes
Poln pCq and BPoln pCq. We let Pol0 pCq “ BPol0 pCq “ C. Then, for every n ě 1, we define
inductively Poln pCq “ PolpBPoln´1 pCqq and BPoln pCq “ BPolpBPoln´1 pCqq “ BoolpPoln pCqq.
We say that the class BPoln pCq is level n in the concatenation hierarchy of basis C. Note that
we have BPoln pCq Ď Poln`1 pCq Ď BPoln`1 pCq for n P N.
Remark 23. We are mainly interested in “full” levels BPoln pCq. However, the classes Poln pCq
are important tools in the paper.

Historically, the first concatenation hierarchy is the dot-depth (Brzozowski, Cohen [10]) of
basis DD “ tH, tεu, A` , A˚ u. Thomas [59] proved that the dot-depth corresponds exactly to
the quantifier alternation hierarchy of first-order logic with the linear order and the successor
(FOpă, `1q). More precisely, Poln pDDq “ Σn pă, `1q and BPoln pDDq “ BΣn pă, `1q for all
n P N. This logical characterization extends to arbitrary concatenation hierarchies [39]: for
every prevariety C, there exists a set IC of first-order predicates such that Poln pCq “ Σn pIC q and
BPoln pCq “ BΣn pIC q for all n P N.
Group based hierarchies. Prevarieties consisting of group languages are prominent bases.
Group languages are those that can be recognized by a morphism into a finite group. A group
prevariety is a prevariety G that contains only group languages. We use bases that are group
prevarieties as well as slight extensions thereof. For each class G, we let G` be the class consisting
of all languages tεu Y L and A` X L for L P G. One may verify that if G is a prevariety, then
so is G` . Also, G` contains the languages tεu and A` .
   Let us present three standard group prevarieties. The trivial prevariety ST “ tH, A˚ u yields
a hierarchy introduced by Straubing [49] and Thérien [56]. It characterizes the alternation
hierarchy of first-order logic equipped with only the linear order (FOpăq). Also, ST` “ DD:
the hierarchy of basis ST` is the dot-depth. Another example is the prevariety MOD of modulo
languages (membership of a word in the language depends only on its length modulo some fixed
integer). The hierarchies of bases MOD and MOD` characterize the alternation hierarchies of
FOpă, M ODq and FOpă, `1, M ODq, where “MOD ” is the set of modular predicates, see e.g.,
[12]. Finally, let us mention the group hierarchy of Margolis and Pin [23]. Its basis is the class
GR of all group languages.
   There are many papers investigating membership, separation and covering for particular
hierarchies of this kind (see e.g., [47, 20, 16, 33, 12, 14, 40, 63]). Yet, proving that they are
decidable for all levels remains a longstanding open question in automata theory. In the paper,
12                             THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

we shall use the following generic theorem of [41, 35], which applies to level one in an arbitrary
group based hierarchy.
Theorem 24. Let G be a group prevariety with decidable separation. Then, BPolpGq and
BPolpG` q have decidable covering.
  This result can be pushed further for the Straubing-Thérien hierarchy and the dot-depth.
The following is proved in [42].
Theorem 25. BPol2 pSTq and BPol2 pDDq have decidable covering.
   We prove a generic characterization of BPol. It implies that if a non-zero full level has
decidable covering, then the next full level has decidable membership. By Theorem 24, it
follows that if G is a group prevariety with decidable separation, then BPol2 pGq and BPol2 pG` q
have decidable membership. Also, Theorem 25 implies that BPol3 pSTq and BPol3 pDDq have
decidable membership.

                               4. C-pairs, C-sets and C-swaps
  We present tools used in our characterization. With a class C and a morphism α : A˚ Ñ M ,
we associate three notions: the C-pairs in M 2 , the C-sets in 2M and the C-swaps in M 6 .
4.1. The C-pairs associated to a morphism. Let C be a class and α : A˚ Ñ M be a
morphism. We say that ps, tq P M 2 is a C-pair for α when α´1 psq is not C-separable from
α´1 ptq. When α is understood, we simply say that ps, tq is a C-pair. Since the set of C-pairs is
a subset of M 2 , it is finite. Also, having a C-separation algorithm in hand suffices to compute
all C-pairs associated with an input morphism.
Lemma 26. Let C a class with decidable separation. Given a morphism α : A˚ Ñ M , one can
compute all C-pairs for α.
   The C-pairs for α define a binary relation on M , which is reflexive when α is surjective (this
is always the case in the paper). Also, it is symmetric if C is closed under complement. On the
other hand, the C-pairs relation is not transitive in general.
   We turn to a simple but crucial lemma. When C is a positive prevariety, it characterizes the
C-pairs in terms of C-morphisms. Let η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq and α : A˚ Ñ M be two morphisms.
We say that ps, tq P M 2 is an η-pair for α when there exist u, v P A˚ such that ηpuq ď ηpvq,
s “ αpuq and t “ αpvq. The statement is as follows.
Lemma 27. Let C be a positive prevariety and let α : A˚ Ñ M be a morphism. For every
C-morphism η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq, each C-pair for α is also an η-pair. Moreover, there exists a
C-morphism η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq such that the C-pairs for α are exactly the η-pairs.
Proof. For the first assertion, let η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq be a C-morphism and let ps, tq P M 2 be a
C-pair for α. Let F Ď N be the set of all elements r P N such that ηpuq ď r for some u P α´1 psq.
By definition, F is an upper set for the ordering ď on N . Hence, we have η ´1 pF q P CpAq since
η is a C-morphism. Moreover, it is immediate from the definition of F that α´1 psq Ď η ´1 pF q.
Since ps, tq is a C-pair (which means that α´1 psq cannot be separated from α´1 ptq by a language
of C), it follows that η ´1 pF q X α´1 ptq ‰ H. This yields v P A˚ such that ηpvq P F and αpvq “ t.
Finally, the definition of F yields u P A˚ such that ηpuq ď ηpvq and αpuq “ s, concluding the
proof of the first assertion.
   We turn to the second assertion. Let P Ď M 2 be the set of all pairs ps, tq P M 2 that are
not C-pairs. For each ps, tq P P , there exists Ks,t P CpAq which separates α´1 psq from α´1 ptq.
Proposition 10 yields a C-morphism η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq such that every language Ks,t for ps, tq P P
                                        DOT-DEPTH THREE                                           13

is recognized by η. It remains to prove that for every u, v P A˚ , if ηpuq ď ηpvq, then pαpuq, αpvqq
is a C-pair. We prove the contrapositive. Assuming that pαpuq, αpvqq is a not a C-pair, we
show that ηpuq ę ηpvq. By hypothesis, pαpuq, αpvqq R P which means that Kαpuq,αpvq P CpAq is
defined and separates α´1 pαpuqq from α´1 pαpvqq. Thus, u P Kαpuq,αpvq and v R Kαpuq,αpvq . Since
Kαpuq,αpvq is recognized by η, this implies ηpuq ę ηpvq, concluding the proof.                    

  We also have the following key corollary of Lemma 27: the C-pair relation is compatible with
multiplication.
Corollary 28. Let C be a positive prevariety, let α : A˚ Ñ M be a morphism and let
ps1 , t1 q, ps2 , t2 q P M 2 be two C-pairs. Then ps1 s2 , t1 t2 q is also a C-pair.
   The C-pairs are used to characterize several operators. We shall use them to handle BPol.
In the proof, we shall also need the characterization of Pol proved in [39, Theorem 54].
Theorem 29. Consider a positive prevariety C and a surjective morphism α : A˚ Ñ pM, ďq.
Then, α is a PolpCq-morphism if and only if the following property holds:
(1)                      sω`1 ď sω tsω for all C-pairs ps, tq P M 2 for α.
 Theorem 29 implies that PolpCq has decidable membership when C has decidable separation.
We also state a useful corollary.
Corollary 30. Let C be a positive prevariety and α : A˚ Ñ M a morphism. For every e P EpM q
and s P M , if pe, sq is a C-pair for α, then pe, eseq is a PolpCq-pair for α.
Proof. It follows from Lemma 27 that there exists a PolpCq-morphism γ : A˚ Ñ pQ, ďq such
that the PolpCq-pairs for α are exactly the γ-pairs for α. Furthermore, we obtain by Lemma 27
a C-morphism η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq such that the C-pairs for γ are exactly the η-pairs for γ.
   Since pe, sq is a C-pair for α and since η is a C-morphism, we may apply Lemma 27 again to
obtain u, v P A˚ such that ηpuq ď ηpvq, αpuq “ e and αpvq “ s. Let q “ γpuq and r “ γpvq.
By definition, pq, rq P Q2 is an η-pair for γ, which means that it is a C-pair by definition of
η. Since γ is a PolpCq-morphism, Theorem 29 yields q ω`1 ď q ω rq ω , i.e., γpuk`1 q ď γpuk vuk q
for k “ ωpQq. By definition of γ, it follows that pαpuk`1 q, αpuk vuk qq is a PolpCq-pair. Since
e P EpM q, this exactly says that pe, eseq is a PolpCq-pair for α, as desired.                

4.2. The C-sets associated to a morphism. Roughly speaking, C-sets are the generalization
of C-pairs adapted to covering. We only use C-sets when C is a Boolean algebra. In this case, by
Lemma 7, we may consider the variant in which the language that needs to be covered is A˚ .
   Consider a class C and a morphism α : A˚ Ñ M . We say that a subset T Ď M is a C-set
for α if and only if the set tα´1 ptq | t P T u is not C-coverable. As for C-pairs, the set of all
C-sets for α is finite: it is a subset of 2M . Furthermore, having a C-covering algorithm in hand
is clearly enough to compute all C-sets for an input morphism α.
Lemma 31. Let C be a class with decidable covering. Given a morphism α : A˚ Ñ M , one can
compute all C-sets for α.
  Let us present a few properties. First, we have the following fact which is immediate from
the definition of covering.
Fact 32. Let C be a class, α : A˚ Ñ M be a morphism and T Ď M be a C-set for α. Every
S Ď T is also a C-set for α.
14                              THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

  When C is a prevariety, we can characterize the C-sets associated to a morphism with a single
C-morphism. Consider two morphisms η : A˚ Ñ N and α : A˚ Ñ M . We say that T Ď M is
an η-set for α to indicate that there exists F Ď A˚ such that ηpwq “ ηpw1 q for every w, w1 P F
and T “ αpF q.
Lemma 33. Let C be a prevariety and α : A˚ Ñ M be a morphism. For every C-morphism
η : A˚ Ñ N , each C-set for α is also an η-set. There exists a C-morphism η : A˚ Ñ N such
that the C-sets for α are exactly the η-sets.
Proof. For the first assertion, we fix a C-set T Ď M and a C-morphism η : A˚ Ñ N . We
prove that T is an η-set. We define K “ tη ´1 psq | r P N u. Since η is a C-morphism, K is a
C-cover of A˚ . Hence, since T is a C-set (which means that tα´1 ptq | t P T u is not C-coverable),
there exists K P K such that K X α´1 ptq ‰ H for every t P T . Thus, for each t P T , we get
wt P K X α´1 ptq. Let F “ twt | t P T u. By definition T “ αpF q. Finally, by definition of K, we
have K “ η ´1 prq for some r P N . Hence, ηpwq “ r for every w P F , which completes the proof
of the first assertion.
   We turn to the second assertion. We first introduce some terminology: given two sets of
languages K and L, we say that K is separating for L when for every K P K, there exists L P L
such that K X L “ H. Note that by definition, L is C-coverable if and only if there exists a
C-cover of A˚ that is separating for L.
   Let now P Ď 2M be the set of all subsets T of M that are not C-sets. By definition, for every
T P P , there exists a C-cover KT of A˚ that is separating for tα´1 ptq | t P T u. Proposition 10
yields a C-morphism η : A˚ Ñ N recognizing all languages K P KT , for T P P . It remains
to prove that if T Ď M is an η-set for α, then it is a C-set for α (the converse implication is
immediate from the first assertion). By contradiction, assume that T is not a C-set, i.e., that
T P P . By definition of covering, it follows that T ‰ H. Also, since T P P , there exists a
C-cover KT of A˚ that is separating for tα´1 ptq | t P T u. Moreover, since T is an η-set, we get
F Ď A˚ such that ηpwq “ ηpw1 q for every w, w1 P F and T “ αpF q. Since T ‰ H, we have
F ‰ H as well. Since KT is a cover of A˚ , we get K P KT such that K X F ‰ H. Thus,
since K is recognized by η and ηpwq “ ηpw1 q for every w, w1 P F , it follows that F Ď K. Since
T “ αpF q, we obtain K X α´1 ptq ‰ H for every t P T . It follows that KT is not separating for
tα´1 ptq | t P T u, contradicting our hypothesis.                                                
4.3. The C-swaps associated to a morphism. This last relation is ad hoc. It is not based
on a “Boolean problem” such as separation or covering. We directly use C-morphisms.
   Given two morphisms α : A˚ Ñ M and η : A˚ Ñ N , we define tuples pq, r, s, t, e, f q P M 6
called the η-swaps for α. When using these objects later, the elements e, f P M will be idem-
potents (hence the notation). However, this is not required for the definition. We say that
pq, r, s, t, e, f q P M 6 is an η-swap for α when there exist words uq P α´1 pqq, ur P α´1 prq,
us P α´1 psq, ut P α´1 ptq, ue P α´1 peq and uf P α´1 pf q satisfying the two following conditions:
     (1) The elements ηpue q and ηpuf q are idempotents of N .
     (2) We have ηpur ue us q “ ηpuf q and ηpuq uf ut q “ ηpue q.
Consider a prevariety C. We define the C-swaps for α as the tuples pq, r, s, t, e, f q P M 6 that are
η-swaps for every C-morphism η : A˚ Ñ N . We conclude this section with a technical result.
Lemma 34. Let C be a prevariety and let α : A˚ Ñ M be a morphism. There xs a C-morphism
η : A˚ Ñ N such that the C-swaps for α are exactly the η-swaps and the C-pairs for α are
exactly the η-pairs.
Proof. Let P Ď M 6 be the set of all tuples that are not a C-swap and ts
                                                                       p1 , . . . , psk u “ P . By
definition, we know that for each i ď k, there exists a C-morphism ηi : A˚ Ñ Ni such that
                                        DOT-DEPTH THREE                                          15

psi P M 6 is not an ηi -swap. Moreover, Lemma 27 yields a C-morphism γ : A˚ Ñ Q such that
the C-pairs are exactly the γ-pairs. Consider the monoid N1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ Nk ˆ Q equipped with the
componentwise multiplication. Let now β : A˚ Ñ N1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ Nk ˆ Q be the morphism defined
by βpwq “ pη1 pwq, . . . , ηk pwq, γpwqq for w P A˚ . Finally, let η : A˚ Ñ N be the surjective
restriction of β. One may now verify that η satisfies the desired properties.                

                                5. General characterization
  In this section, we characterize the BPolpCq-morphisms.
Theorem 35. Let C be a prevariety and let α : A˚ Ñ M be a surjective morphism. Then, α is
a BPolpCq-morphism if and only if the two following equations hold:
                             pesetqω`1 “ pesetqω etpesetqω for every t P M
(2)
                                 and every C-pair pe, sq P EpM q ˆ M .
                       peqf reqω pesf teqω “ peqf reqω qf tpesf teqω for every
(3)
                       C-swap pq, r, s, t, e, f q P M 6 such that e, f P EpM q.
   Theorem 35 does not have immediate general consequences for BPolpCq-membership. It
implies that the problem is decidable when both C-pairs and C-swaps can be computed. On
the one hand, the calculation of C-pairs boils down to C-separation. On the other hand, we do
not know whether the computation of C-swaps reduces to a natural problem. This is why we
cannot deduce a general corollary from Theorem 35. Yet, we prove in Section 6 that if C is
itself of the form BPolpDq for a prevariety D, then (3) is equivalent to an equation depending
on C-sets only (which can be computed when C-covering is decidable, by Lemma 31).
Remark 36. Equation (2) was previously used in [43]: alone, it characterizes the larger class
Pol2 pCqXco-Pol2 pCq consisting of all languages L such that L P Pol2 pCq and A˚ zL P Pol2 pCq. The
inclusion BPolpCq Ď Pol2 pCqX co-Pol2 pCq implies that all BPolpCq-morphisms indeed satisfy (2).
We shall give a direct proof in the paper.
5.1. A first application: the class BPolpATq. We may already get an effective character-
ization for a key class: level two in the Straubing-Thérien hierarchy (BPol2 pSTq). Obtaining
such a characterization remained an important open problem for many years until it was finally
solved in [36]. Theorem 35 yields a new simpler characterization of BPol2 pSTq. Let AT be the
class of alphabet testable languages: the Boolean combinations of languages A˚ aA˚ where a P A
is a letter. Pin and Straubing [31] proved that BPol2 pSTq “ BPolpATq (see also [39] for a more
recent proof). Hence, we apply Theorem 35 in the special case when C “ AT.
   For w P A˚ , let alphpwq Ď A be the set of all letters occurring in w (i.e., the least B Ď A
such that w P B ˚ ). It is folklore and simple to verify that a morphism η : A˚ Ñ N is an
AT-morphism if and only if alphpuq “ alphpvq ñ ηpuq “ ηpvq for all u, v P A˚ . With this result
in hand, one can check that for C = AT, Equation (3) is equivalent to Equation (5) below, which
uses AT-sets instead of AT-swaps. More precisely, Theorem 35 yields the following corollary.
Corollary 37. Let α : A˚ Ñ M be a surjective morphism. Then, α is a BPolpATq-morphism
if and only if the following equations hold:
                             pesetqω`1 “ pesetqω etpesetqω for every t P M
(4)
                                and every AT-pair pe, sq P EpM q ˆ M .
                       peqf reqω pesf teqω “ peqf reqω qf tpesf teqω for every
(5)
                       AT-set tq, r, s, t, e, f u Ď M such that e, f P EpM q.
16                               THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

   Thus, BPolpATq-membership boils down to AT-covering, which suffices to compute AT-pairs
and AT-sets. Deciding AT-covering is simple: a finite set of languages L is not AT-coverable if
and only if there is a sub-alphabet B Ď A such that each L P L contains a word w satisfying
alphpwq “ B. Hence, the class BPol2 pSTq “ BPolpATq is decidable. This reproves the result
of [36].
Remark 38. Interestingly, the properties in Corollary 37 appeared in previous papers (though
precisely establishing the link involves quite a bit of technical work). Equation (5) is equivalent
to a property that Pin and Weil [33, 32] conjectured to be a characterization of BPol2 pSTq.
Equation (4) is equivalent to an upper bound of BPol2 pSTq proved by Almeida and Klı́ma [4]
(the link is made with Lemma 39 below which reformulates (4)). Actually, it was conjectured
in [4] that the two put together characterize BPol2 pSTq (a conjecture proved by Corollary 37).
We now turn to the proof of Theorem 35.

5.2. Proof of Theorem 35: “only if ” direction. Assume that α is a BPolpCq-morphism.
We show that it satisfies (2) and (3). That it satisfies (2) follows from [38, Theorem 6.7], which
states that (2) characterizes the class Pol2 pCq X co-Pol2 pCq consisting of all languages L such
that both L and A˚ zL belong to Pol2 pCq. Now by definition, BPolpCq Ď Pol2 pCq X co-Pol2 pCq.
Let us provide a direct proof.
   Since C is a prevariety, PolpCq is a positive prevariety by Theorem 12. Therefore, we may ap-
ply Lemma 14. It yields a PolpCq-morphism γ : A˚ Ñ pQ, ďq as well as a morphism β : Q Ñ M
such that α “ β ˝ γ. Moreover, Lemma 27 yields a C-morphism η : A˚ Ñ N such that the
η-pairs for γ are exactly the C-pairs for γ. We let n “ ωpM q ˆ ωpN q ˆ ωpQq.
Equation (2). We fix a C-pair pe, sq P EpM q ˆ M for α and t P M . We have to show that
pesetqω`1 “ pesetqω etpesetqω . Since η is a C-morphism, Lemma 27 yields u, v P A˚ such that
ηpuq “ ηpvq, αpuq “ e and αpvq “ s. Let x “ un and y “ un´1 v. We have γpxq P EpQq,
αpxq “ e and αpyq “ es. Let f “ γpxq P EpQq and q “ γpyq. Note that βpf q “ e and βpqq “ es.
We also let r P Q such that βprq “ t P M . Since ηpxq “ ηpyq, we know that pf, qq is a C-pair for
γ by definition of η. Since γ is a PolpCq-morphism, this yields f ď f qf by Theorem 29. Thus,
                                   pf qf rqω f rpf qf rqω ď pf qf rqω`1
Conversely, since pf, qq is a C-pair, we may apply Corollary 28. It implies that pf r, f qf rq is a
C-pair for γ as well. Thus, Theorem 29 yields the following inequality:
                                  pf qf rqω`1 ď pf qf rqω f rpf qf rqω .
Altogether, we get pf qf rqω`1 “ pf qf rqω f rpf qf rqω . We now apply β to get (2), as desired.
Equation (3). We fix a C-swap pq, r, s, t, e, f q P M 6 with e, f P EpM q. We have to prove that
peqf reqω pesf teqω “ peqf reqω qf tpesf teqω .
   Since η is a C-morphism, the definition of a C-swap yields ux P α´1 pxq for x P tq, r, s, t, e, f u
with ηpue q, ηpuf q P EpN q, ηpur ue us q “ ηpuf q and ηpuq uf ut q “ ηpue q. Let ye “ une and
yf “ unf . By definition, we have γpye q, γpyf q P EpQq, αpye q “ e and αpyf q “ f . Finally,
since ηpue q, ηpuf q P EpN q, we also know that ηpye q “ ηpue q and ηpyf q “ ηpuf q. In particular,
we obtain that ηpur ye us q “ ηpyf q and ηpuq yf ut q “ ηpye q. We let,
                             x “ pye uq yf ur ye qn pye us yf ut ye qn ,
                             y “ pye uq yf ur ye qn uq yf ut pye us yf ut ye qn .
It is enough to prove that γpxq “ γpyq. Indeed, since α “ β ˝ γ, this will yield αpxq “ αpyq,
which is exactly (3). Let ê “ γpye q, fˆ “ γpyf q, q̂ “ γpuq q, r̂ “ γpur q, ŝ “ γpus q and t̂ “ γput q.
                                             DOT-DEPTH THREE                                                17


Since ηpye q “ ηpuq yf ut q, the definition of η implies that pê, q̂ fˆt̂q is a C-pair for γ. Hence, since
γ is a PolpCq-morphism, Theorem 29 yields ê ď êq̂ fˆt̂ê. We may now multiply by pêq̂ fˆr̂êqn on
the left and pêŝfˆt̂êqn on the right to obtain,
                                pêq̂ fˆr̂êqn pêŝfˆt̂êqn ď pêq̂ fˆr̂êqn q̂ fˆt̂pêŝfˆt̂êqn .
Hence, γpxq ď γpyq. Moreover, the definitions yield,
                        ηpyf q “ ηpur ye pye uq yf ur ye qn´1 pye us yf ut ye qn´1 ye us q.
Thus, pfˆ, r̂êpêq̂ fˆr̂êqn´1 pêŝfˆt̂êqn´1 êŝq is a C-pair for γ. Since γ is a PolpCq-morphism and
fˆ P EpQq, Theorem 29 then yields the inequality fˆ ď fˆr̂êpêq̂ fˆr̂êqn´1 pêŝfˆt̂êqn´1 êŝfˆ. We may
now multiply it by pêq̂ fˆr̂êqn êq̂ on the left and t̂êpêŝfˆt̂êqn on the right. Since n is a multiple of
ωpQq, this yields,
                                      pêq̂ fˆr̂êqn q̂fˆt̂pêŝfˆt̂êqn ď pêq̂ fˆr̂êqn pêŝfˆt̂êqn .
Hence, γpyq ď γpxq. We have proved γpxq “ γpyq, as desired.
5.3. Proof of Theorem 35: “if ” direction, preliminaries. We now concentrate on the
more difficult “if” implication. Assume that α satisfies (2) and (3). We prove that it is a
BPolpCq-morphism. We first reformulate (2) using PolpCq-pairs instead of C-pairs. This follows
from [43, Theorems 6.4 and 6.7]. Here, we give a direct proof.
Lemma 39. Let C be a prevariety and let α : A˚ Ñ M be a surjective morphism. Then, α
satisfies (2) if and only if it satisfies the following:
(6)                          sω`1 “ sω tsω for all PolpCq-pairs pt, sq P M 2 .
Proof. We start with the “if” direction. Assume that α satisfies (6). We show that (2) holds as
well. Let pe, sq P M 2 be a C-pair and t P M . We have to show that,
                                     pesetqω`1 “ pesetqω`1 etpesetqω .
Corollary 30 implies that pe, eseq is a PolpCq-pair. It then follows from Corollary 28 that pet, esetq
is a PolpCq-pair. The desired equality is now immediate from (6).
   We turn to the “only if” direction of Lemma 39, which requires more work. Assume that
α satisfies (2). We prove that (6) holds. First, we overapproximate the PolpCq-pairs using
a preorder. We let ĺ be the least preorder on M such that for every e P EpM q and every
s, x, y P M such that pe, sq is a C-pair, we have xey ĺ xesey. We have the following lemma.
Lemma 40. For all PolpCq-pairs pq, rq P M 2 , we have q ĺ r.
Proof. One can verify that ĺ is a precongruence on M , i.e., if q ĺ r and q 1 ĺ r 1 , then qq 1 ĺ rr 1 .
Let „ be the equivalence on M generated by ĺ: we have q „ r if and only if q ĺ r and
r ĺ q. Since ĺ is a precongruence, „ is a congruence. Therefore, the quotient N “ M {„
is a monoid and the ordering induced by ĺ on N makes pN, ďq an ordered monoid. We let
δ : M Ñ N be the morphism associating its equivalence class to every element in M . Finally,
we let η “ δ ˝ α : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq. We use Theorem 29 to prove that η is a PolpCq-morphism. For a
PolpCq-pair pq, rq P M 2 for α, it will follow that from Lemma 27 that there exist u, v P A˚ such
that ηpuq ď ηpvq, αpuq “ q and αpvq “ r. By definition of η, this yields δpqq ď δprq. Hence,
q ĺ r as desired.
   It remains to prove that η is a PolpCq-morphism. In view of Theorem 29, we have to show that
for all C-pairs pp, tq P N 2 for η, we have pω`1 “ pω tpω . Since pp, tq is a C-pair, one may verify
that there exists a C-pair pq, rq P M 2 for α such that δpqq “ p and δprq “ t. Let k “ ωpM q. It
follows from Corollary 28 that pq k , q k´1 rq is a C-pair for α. Since q k P EpM q, it follows that
18                               THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

q k ĺ q 2k´1 rq k by definition. We can now multiply by q on the left which yields q ω`1 ĺ q ω rq ω .
We apply δ on both sides to get pω`1 “ pω tpω as desired.                                         
   We are now ready to conclude the proof of Lemma 39. We have to prove that α satisfies (6).
Let pt, sq P M 2 be a PolpCq-pair for α. We prove that sω`1 “ sω tsω . Lemma 40 yields t ĺ s.
By definition of ĺ, this yields s0 , . . . , sn P M such that s0 “ s, sn “ t and for 0 ă i ď n, we
have si´1 “ xeqey and si “ xey for some e P EpM q and q, x, y P M such that pe, qq is a C-pair.
We use induction on i to prove that sω`1 “ sω si sω for every i ď n. The case i “ n will then
yield the desired result.
   When i “ 0, the result is trivial since s0 “ s. Assume now that i ě 1. By definition, we
have si´1 “ xeqey and si “ xey for some e P EpM q and q, x, y P M such that pe, qq is a C-pair.
Moreover, sω`1 “ sω si´1 sω by induction. Thus, sω`1 “ sω xeqeysω . It follows that,
                                sω`2 “ psω`1 qω`2 ,
                                     “ psω xeqeysω qω`2 ,
                                     “ sω xpeqeysω xqω`1 eqeysω .
Since pe, qq is a C-pair, it follows from (2) that,
                           peqeysω xqω`1 “ peqeysω xqω eysω xpeqeysω xqω .
Altogether, we obtain,
                         sω`2 “ sω xpeqeysω xqω eysω xpeqeysω xqω eqeysω ,
                              “ psω xeqeysω qω xeypsω xeqeysω qω`1 ,
                              “ psω si´1 sω qω si psω si´1 sω qω`1 .
Since sω`1 “ sω si´1 sω , we get sω`2 “ sω si sω`1 . It now suffices to multiply by sω´1 on the
right to get sω`1 “ sω si sω , which completes the proof.                                    
   We now introduce some terminology. Lemma 34 yields a C-morphism η : A˚ Ñ N such
that the η-swaps are exactly the C-swaps and the η-pairs are exactly the C-pairs. We let
Q “ tpηpwq, αpwqq | w P A˚ u Ď N ˆM , which is a monoid for the componentwise multiplication.
For q “ pt, sq P Q, we let rqsN “ t P N and rqsM “ s P M . Let τ : A˚ Ñ Q be the morphism
such that τ pwq “ pηpwq, αpwqq for all w P A˚ . Clearly, all languages recognized by α are also
recognized by τ . Thus, it suffices to show that τ is a BPolpCq-morphism. We first present a few
simple properties of τ . Using the fact that α satisfies (3), one deduces the following lemma.
Lemma 41. Let q, r, s, t P Q and e, f P EpQq be elements such that rqf tsN “ resN and
rressN “ rf sN . Then, we have,
                             peqf reqω pesf teqω “ peqf reqω qf tpesf teqω .
Proof. Since rqf tsN “ resN and e P EpQq (which implies that resN P EpN q), it is immediate
that,
                       rpeqf reqω pesf teqω sN “ rpeqf reqω qf tpesf teqω sN .
Moreover, since the C-swaps for α are exactly the η-swaps, the hypothesis that rqf tsN “ resN
and rressN “ rf sN implies that prqsM , rrsM , rssM , rtsM , resM , rf sM q is a C-swap for α. Hence,
we obtain from (3) that,
                         rpeqf reqω pesf teqω sM “ rpeqf reqω qf tpesf teqω sM .
Hence, we get peqf reqω pesf teqω “ peqf reqω qf tpesf teqω , as desired.                            
   We now reformulate (2) (or rather (6), which is equivalent by Lemma 39). We say that a pair
pq, rq P Q2 is a good pair if and only if prqsM , rrsM q P M 2 is a PolpCq-pair for α and rqsN “ rrsN .
One can verify the following lemma from (6).
                                                DOT-DEPTH THREE                                                       19

Lemma 42. If pq, rq P Q2 is a good pair then r ω`1 “ r ω qr ω .
Proof. By hypothesis and definition of good pairs, rqsN “ rrsN and prqsM , rrsM q is a PolpCq-
pair for α. The first equality yields rr ω`1 sN “ rr ω qr ω sN . Also, since α satisfies (2), it also
satisfies (6) by Lemma 39. Therefore, rr ω`1 sM “ rr ω qr ω sM since prqsM , rrsM q is a PolpCq-pair.
Altogether, we get r ω`1 “ r ω qr ω as desired.                                                    
  By Corollary 28, good pairs are stable under multiplication: if pq, rq, pq,1 r 1 q P Q2 are good
pairs, then so is pqq 1 , rr 1 q. We use this fact implicitly. Also, we have the following lemma.
Lemma 43. Let q P Q. There exists K P PolpCq such that pq, rq is a good pair for all r P τ pKq
and τ ´1 pqq Ď K Ď η ´1 prqsN q.
Proof. Let T Ď M be the set consisting of all t P M such that prqsM , tq is not a PolpCq-pair for
α. By definition, for each t P T , there                                          ´1
 ´1                       ´1
                                      Ş exists a language Kt P PolpCq separating α prqsM q from
α ptq. We define K “ η prtsN q X tPT Kt . We have K P PolpCq since η is a C-morphism and
PolpCq is closed under intersection by Theorem 12. One may now verify that K satisfies the
desired properties.                                                                            
   Finally, the next lemma follows from Corollary 30.
Lemma 44. Let e P EpQq and r P Q. If resN “ rrsN , then pe, ereq is a good pair.
Proof. Clearly, resN “ reresN . Moreover, by definition of η, the hypothesis that resN “ rrsN
implies that presM , rrsM q is a C-pair for α. Thus, Corollary 30 yields that presM , reresM q is a
PolpCq-pair for α. Altogether, we obtain that pe, ereq is a good pair.                           

5.4. Proof: main argument. We may now start the proof. Given q1 , q2 P Q and K a finite
set of languages, we say that K is pq1 , q2 q-safe to indicate that for all K P K and u, u1 P K, we
have q1 τ puqq2 “ q1 τ pu1 qq2 . We say that K is safe to indicate that it is p1Q , 1Q q-safe.
Proposition 45. For every J-class J Ď N , there exists a safe BPolpCq-cover of η ´1 pJq.
   We first explain how to conclude the proof using Proposition 45. For each J-class J Ď N ,
Proposition 45 yields a safe BPolpCq-cover KJ of η ´1 pJq. The union K of all KJ is a safe
BPolpCq-cover of A˚ . By definition of safeness, each K P K satisfies K Ď τ ´1 pqq for some
q P Q. Since K is a cover of A˚ , it follows that for each subset F Ď Q, τ ´1 pF q is the union of all
languages K P K such that K Ď τ ´1 pF q. By closure under union, this yields τ ´1 pF q P BPolpCq.
Hence, τ is a BPolpCq-morphism, which completes the main proof.
   We now focus on the proof of Proposition 45. Let J be a J-class of N . We define the index
of J as the number of J-classes J 1 of N such that J ăJ J 1 . We use induction on the index of J
to build a safe BPolpCq-cover of η ´1 pJq. The construction involves a sub-induction on a second
parameter. We define an ordering on QˆJ ˆQ as follows: given pq1 , d, q2 q, pr1 , d1 , r2 q P QˆJ ˆQ
                                      q
and q P Q, we let pq1 , d, q2 q Ý     Ñ pr1 , d1 , r2 q when there exist s1 , s2 , s11 , s12 P Q and e P EpQq such
that,
     (1) rs1 es2 sN “ d and resN “ rs11 sN d1 rs12 sN .
     (2) q “ s1 es2 , r1 “ q1 s1 es11 and r2 “ s12 es2 q2 .
For pq1 , d, q2 q, pr1 , d1 , r2 q P Q ˆ J ˆ Q, we let pq1 , d, q2 q ď pr1 , d1 , r2 q if pq1 , d, q2 q “ pr1 , d1 , r2 q
                   q
or pq1 , d, q2 q ÝÑ pr1 , d1 , r2 q for some q P Q. Finally, we let pq1 , d, q2 q ă pr1 , d1 , r2 q when
pq1 , d, q2 q ď pr1 , d1 , r2 q and pr1 , d1 , r2 q ‰ pq1 , d, q2 q.
Fact 46. The relation ď on Q ˆ J ˆ Q is a preorder.
20                                     THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

Proof. By definition, ď is reflexive. Let us now prove that it is transitive. Let pq1 , d, q2 q,
pr1 , d1 , r2 q, pr11 , d2 , r21 q be such that pq1 , d, q2 q ď pr1 , d1 , r2 q and pr1 , d1 , r2 q ď pr11 , d2 , r21 q. We
prove that pq1 , d, q2 q ď pr11 , d2 , r21 q. We have q, r, s1 , s1 , s11 , s12 , t1 , t2 , t11 , t11 P Q and e, f P Q such
that,
     (1) rs1 es2 sN “ d , resN “ rs11 sN drs12 sN ,
            rt1 f t2 sN “ d1 , rf sN “ rt11 sN d2 rt12 sN .
     (2) q “ s1 es2 , r1 “ q1 s1 es11 , r2 “ s12 es2 q2 ,
            r “ t1 f t2 , r11 “ r1 t1 f t11 , r21 “ t12 f t2 r2 .
Let s21 “ s11 r11 t1 f t11 and s22 “ r21 f t2 s12 . We have rs1 es2 sN “ d and,
                        resN “     rs11 sN d1 rs12 sN
                             “     rs11 t1 f t2 s12 sN                    as rt1 f t2 sN “ d1 ,
                             “     rs11 t1 f f f t2s12 sN                 as f P EpM q,
                             “     rs11 t1 f t11 sN d2 rt12 f t2 s12 sN   as rf sN “ rt11 sN d2 rt12 sN ,
                             “     rs21 sN d2 rs22 sN .
Furthermore, we have the equalities q “ s1 es2 , r11 “ r1 t1 f t11 “ q1 s1 es11 t1 f t11 “ q1 s1 es21 and
                                                                                              q
                                                                                              Ñ pr11 , d2 , r21 q. Thus,
r21 “ t12 f t2 r2 “ t12 f t2 r2 s12 es2 q2 “ s22 es2 q2 . Altogether, we obtain pq1 , d, q2 q Ý
we get pq1 , d, q2 q ď pr11 , d2 , r21 q.                                                                             
   We now start the construction. We define the rank of a triple pq1 , d, q2 q P Q ˆ J ˆ Q as the
number of triples pr1 , d1 , r2 q P Q ˆ J ˆ Q such that pq1 , d, q2 q ď pr1 , d1 , r2 q. We use induction
on the rank of pq1 , d, q2 q P Q ˆ J ˆ Q to construct a pq1 , q2 q-safe BPolpCq-cover of η ´1 pdq. It
will follow from the case q1 “    Ťq2 “ 1Q that there exists a safe BPolpCq-cover         of Kd of η ´1 pdq
for every d P J. Thus, K “ dPJ Kd is the desired safe BPolpCq-cover of η ´1 pJq described in
Propostition 45.
   We fix pq1 , d, q2 q P Q ˆ J ˆ Q. We build our pq1 , q2 q-safe BPolpCq-cover of η ´1 pdq in two steps.
                                                            q
We say that q P Q stabilizes pq1 , d, q2 q if pq1 , d, q2 q Ý
                                                            Ñ pq1 , d, q2 q. We define:
                       Ss “ tq P Q | rqsN “ d and q does not stabilize pq1 , d, q2 qu.
                                                                                          s Ď η ´1 pdq
In the first step, we use induction to build a pq1 , q2 q-safe BPolpCq-cover KSs of τ ´1 pSq
(the base case of the sub-induction is when Ss “ H: it suffices to choose KSs “ H). The key
argument to construct this pq1 , q2 q-safe BPolpCq-cover is Proposition 17, which yields a PolpCq
cover. In the second (and simpler) step, we complete KSs with a single language of BPolpCq to
take into accounts the elements of η ´1 pdq stabilizing pq1 , d, q2 q, thus obtaining the desired safe
BPolpCq-cover Kd of η ´1 pdq.
   The first step differs depending on whether J Ď N is a maximal J-class (i.e., 1N P J) or not.
Here, we treat the most involved case: we assume that J is not maximal. Thus, 1N R J.
Remark 47. If tεu P C, we may assume without loss of generality that the C-morphism
η : A˚ Ñ N recognizes tεu. In this case, the maximal J-class of N is t1N u and η ´1 p1N q “ tεu.
This trivializes the case where J is maximal: ttεuu is a safe BPolpCq-cover of η ´1 p1N q. This
is a key point as we are mainly interested in input classes C which are themselves of the form
C “ BPolpDq. In this case, tεu P C.
5.5. First case: J maximal. Building KSs . We prove Proposition 45 in the special case
where J Ď N is the maximal J-class of N . We first build a PolpCq-cover H of τ ´1 pSq       s with
Proposition 17. Then, we look at each language H P H and build a BPolpCq-cover of H
independently. The reunion of these covers will be the desired BPolpCq-cover KSs of τ ´1 pSq. s
   This case is simpler than the next one, when J is not maximal. Indeed, the maximal J-
class of N is necessarily η-alphabetic. Let w P A˚ and a1 , . . . , an P A be the letters such that
                                              DOT-DEPTH THREE                                                   21

w “ a1 ¨ ¨ ¨ an . We let,
                            Ò w “ η ´1 p1N q a1 η ´1 p1N q ¨ ¨ ¨ an η ´1 p1N q Ď A˚ .
In particular, we let Ò ε “ η ´1 p1N q. The following lemma is a corollary of Proposition 17.
Lemma 48. There is a finite set F Ď τ ´1 pSq    s such that tÒ w | w P F u is a cover of τ ´1 pSq.
                                                                                               s
Proof. Since J is maximal, it is η-alphabetic. Therefore, since τ ´1 pSq          s Ď η ´1 pdq and d P J,
it follows from Proposition 17 that there is a finite set P of η-patterns such πpp̄q P τ ´1 pSq        s
                                                                        ´1 s
for every p̄ P P and the set tÒη p̄ | p̄ P P u is a cover of τ pSq. Consider a p̄ P P and let
                                                              s we have ηpπpp̄qq “ d P J which means that
p̄ “ pw1 , g1 , . . . , wn , gn , wn`1 q. Since πpp̄q P τ ´1 pSq,
g1 , . . . , gn P J by definition of η-patterns. Moreover, since J is the maximal J-class of N , the
neutral element 1N is the only idempotent in J. Hence, g1 “ ¨ ¨ ¨ “ gn “ 1N . Since ε P η ´1 p1N q,
                                                                                                  s We
this yields Òη p̄ Ď Ò πpp̄q. Consequently, we have tÒ πpp̄q | p̄ P P u is also a cover of τ ´1 pSq.
may now choose F “ tπpp̄q | p̄ P P u which completes the proof.                                         
    We fix the set F Ď τ ´1 pSq         s described in Lemma 48 for the remainder of the proof. For
each w P F , we construct a pq1 , q2 q-safe         Ť BPolpCq-cover Kw of Ò w. In view of Lemma 48,
it will then be immediate that KSs “ wPF Kw is the desired pq1 , q2 q-safe BPolpCq-cover of
        s We fix w P F . Let a1 , . . . , an P A be the letters such that w “ a1 ¨ ¨ ¨ an . We have
τ ´1 pSq.
Ò w “ η ´1 p1N qa1 η ´1 p1N q ¨ ¨ ¨ an η ´1 p1N q. We first cover the language η ´1 p1N q using induction
on the rank of pq1 , d, q2 q in the following lemma.
Lemma 49. There exists a tight BPolpCq-cover V of η ´1 p1N q that is pr1 , r2 q-safe for all
r1 , r2 P Q such that pq1 , d, q2 q ă pr1 , 1N , r2 q.
Proof. Let X Ď Q2 be the set of all pairs pr1 , r2 q P M 2 such pq1 , d, q2 q ă pr1 , 1N , r2 q. For all
pr1 , r2 q P X, the rank of pr1 , 1N , r2 q is strictly smaller than the one of pq1 , d, q2 q. Hence, we may
use induction on the rank of pq1 , d, q2 q to get a pr1 , r2 q-safe BPolpCq-cover Vr1 ,r2 of η ´1 p1N q.
Let ℓ “ |X| and tpr1,1 , r2,1 q, . . . , pr1,ℓ , r2,ℓ qu “ X. We define,
                     V “ tV1 X ¨ ¨ ¨ X Vℓ X η ´1 p1N q | Vj P Vr1,j ,r2,j for all j ď ℓu.
Since η is a C-morphism and BPolpCq is closed under intersection, it is immediate that V is
tight BPolpCq-cover of η ´1 p1N q. One may verify that it satisfies the desired property. 
   Lemma 16 yields a BPolpCq-cover Kw of Ò w such that for every language K P Kw , we have
K Ď V0 a1 V1 ¨ ¨ ¨ an Vn where Vi P Vi for all i. It remains to prove that Kw is pq1 , q2 q-safe. Let
K P Kw . Given u, u1 P K, we prove that q1 τ puqq2 “ q1 τ pu1 qq2 .
   By definition, we have K Ď V0 a1 V1 ¨ ¨ ¨ an Vn with Vi P Vi for all i. Since u, u1 P K, we obtain
two words vi , vi1 P Vi for all i, such that u “ v0 a1 v1 ¨ ¨ ¨ an vn and u1 “ v01 a1 v11 ¨ ¨ ¨ an vn1 . For every
i such that 0 ď i ď n, we define,
                             xi “ v0 a1 ¨ ¨ ¨ vi´1 ai and yi “ ai`1 vi`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ an vn .
In particular, x0 “ yn “ ε. Observe that u “ xn vn yn , u1 “ x1 v11 y1 and xi vi1 yi “ xi´1 vi´1 yi´1
for all i. We prove that q1 τ pxi vi yi qq2 “ q1 τ pxi vi1 yi qq2 for all i. Transitivity will then yield
q1 τ pxn vn yn qq2 “ q1 τ px1 v11 y1 qq2 . This exactly expresses the equality q1 τ puqq2 “ q1 τ pu1 qq2 , as
desired. We now fix i and prove that q1 τ pxi vi yi qq2 “ q1 τ pxi vi1 yi qq2 . We write s1 “ τ pxi q and
s2 “ τ pvi q. The proof is based on the following lemma.
Lemma 50. We have pq1 , d, q2 q ă pq1 s1 , 1N , s2 q2 q.
   By definition of Vi in Lemma 49, it follows from Lemma 50 that Vi is a pq1 s1 , s2 q2 q-safe
BPolpCq-cover of η ´1 p1N q. Thus, as Vi P Vi and vi , vi1 P Vi , we get q1 s1 τ pvi qs2 q2 “ q1 s1 τ pvi1 qs2 q2 ,
i.e. q1 τ pxi vi yi qq2 “ q1 τ pxi vi1 yi qq2 as desired.
22                                    THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

Proof of Lemma 50. We first show the (non-strict) inequality pq1 , d, q2 q ď pq1 s1 , 1N , s2 q2 q. We
may use s11 “ s12 “ e “ 1Q in the definition of ď. Thus, it suffices to show that rs1 s2 sN “ d.
Recall that the sets Vj are tight covers of η ´1 p1N q. Thus, ηpvj q “ ηpvj1 q “ 1N for all j. It
follows that ηpxi yi q “ ηpa1 ¨ ¨ ¨ an q “ ηpwq. Thus, since w P F Ď τ ´1 pSq,             s the definition of Ss
yields ηpxi yi q “ d. Altogether, we get rs1 s2 sN “ d.
    It remains to prove that the inequality is strict. By contradiction, assume that this is not the
case, i.e., that pq1 s1 , 1N , s2 r2 q ď pq1 , d, q2 q. Let q “ τ pwq. We prove that q stabilizes pq1 , d, q2 q.
This is a contradiction since w P F which means that q “ τ pwq P S.                    s By hypothesis, we get
p1 , p2 , p11 , p12 and f P EpQq such that,
     (1) rp1 f p2 sN “ 1N and rf sN “ rp11 sN drp12 sN .
     (2) q “ p1 f p2 , q1 “ q1 αpxi qp1 ep11 and q2 “ p12 ep2 αpyi qq2 .
Let t1 “ τ pa1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ai q, t11 “ p1 ep11 ps1 p1 ep11 qω , t2 “ τ pai`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ an q and t12 “ pp12 ep2 s2 qω p12 ep2 . We
prove that we have q1 “ q1 t1 t11 and q2 “ t12 t2 q2 . Let us first explain why this implies that q
stabilizes pq1 , d, q2 q.
    We have rt1 t2 sN “ ηpwq “ d since w P F . Furthermore, using the equalities rp1 f p2 sN “ 1N ,
rf sN “ rp11 sN drp12 sN and rs1 s2 sN “ d, we deduce,
                        1N    “ rpp1 f p11 s1 qω`1 sN 1N rps2 p12 f p2 qω`1 sN ,
                              “ rp1 f p11 ps1 p1 f p11 qω sN rs1 s2 sN rpp12 f p2 s2 qω p12 f p2 sN ,
                              “ rt11 sN drt12 sN .
Furthermore, q “ τ pwq “ τ pxi yi q “ s1 s2 . Thus, if q1 “ q1 t1 t11 and q2 “ t12 t2 q2 ., we get
              q
pq1 , d, q2 q Ý
              Ñ pq1 , d, q2 q as desired.
   It remains to show that q1 “ q1 t1 t11 and q2 “ t12 t2 q2 . By symmetry, we only detail the
former. We already established that ηpvj q “ 1N for all j. Hence, rτ pvj qsN “ 1N “ r1Q sN
and it follows from Lemma 44 that p1Q , τ pvj qq is a good pair. Since t1 “ τ pa1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ai q and
s1 “ τ pv0 a1 ¨ ¨ ¨ vi´1 ai q, closure under multiplication yields that pt1 p1 ep11 , s1 p1 ep11 q is a good
pair. We now apply Lemma 42 to get,
                               ps1 p1 ep11 qω`1 “ ps1 p1 ep11 qω t1 p1 ep11 ps1 p1 ep11 qω .
We multiply by q1 on the left. As q1 “ q1 s1 p1 ep11 , this yields q1 “ q1 t1 p1 ep11 ps1 p1 ep11 qω which
exactly says that q1 “ q1 t1 t11 , completing the proof.                                                

5.6. Second case: J non-maximal. Building KSs. To build the pq1 , q2 q-safe BPolpCq-cover
         s the argument goes roughly as follows. In a first step, we build a PolpCq-cover H of
of τ ´1 pSq,
  ´1  s
τ pSq with Proposition 17. In a second step, we look independently at each language H P H
and build a pq1 , q2 q-safe BPolpCq-cover of H. The union of all these covers is the desired BPolpCq-
                     s The hard part is building the BPolpCq-cover of H. For this, the intuition
cover KSs of τ ´1 pSq.
is the following: by definition of PolpCq, the language H P PolpCq is a concatenation of basic
languages in C. We use induction to construct a BPolpCq-cover of each basic language. Then,
we use the weak concatenation principles (Lemmas 15 and 16) to combine these covers into the
desired BPolpCq cover of H.
   We start with the first step, building a PolpCq-cover H of τ ´1 pSq.s Unfortunately, we cannot
apply Proposition 17 directly because J needs not be η-alphabetic. To fix this, we define a new
alphabet B and an auxiliary morphism ηB : B˚ Ñ N such that J is ηB -alphabetic. Let T be the
set of all triples pu1 , a, u2 q P A˚ ˆ A ˆ A˚ such that J ăJ ηpu1 q, J ăJ ηpu2 q and ηpu1 au2 q P J.
We now let B “ tτ pu1 au2 q P Q | pu1 , a, u2 q P T u and define τB : B˚ Ñ Q by τB pbq “ b P B Ď Q
for each letter b P B. We also define ηB “ r¨sN ˝ τB : B˚ Ñ N . By definition, ηB pbq P J for all
b P B: the J-class J Ď N is ηB -alphabetic.
                                            DOT-DEPTH THREE                                                  23

   We define a morphism γ : B˚ Ñ Q ˆ 2Q (which is a monoid for the natural componentwise
multiplication on Q ˆ 2Q ). For every b P B, we let γpbq “ pb, Rq P Q ˆ 2Q where R is the set
of all r P Q such that pb, rq is a good pair. Since good pairs are preserved under multiplication,
we have the following fact.
Fact 51. Let z P B` , and pq, Rq “ γpzq. Then, q “ τB pzq and pq, rq is a good pair for every
r P R.
   We are ready to use Proposition 17. By definition, rqsN “ d for each q P Ss and d P J. Hence,
 ´1 s
τB pSq Ď ηB´1 pdq Ď ηB´1 pJq and since J is ηB -alphabetic, Proposition 17 yields a finite set P of
γ-guarded ηB -patterns such that πps            s for all ps P P and tÒη ps | ps P P u is a cover of
                                     pq P τB´1 pSq                       B
 ´1 s
τB pSq.
   We now use P to build the PolpCq-cover H of τ ´1 pSq.     s    First, we associate a language
                                    `
Uz P PolpCq to each word z P B . This is where we use induction on the index of J in
Proposition 45. In the statement, we say that a cover L of some language U is tight to indicate
that L Ď U for all L P L.
Lemma 52. Let z P B` and pq, Rq “ γpzq. Then, there exists Uz P PolpCq such that
τ ´1 pqq Ď Uz Ď η ´1 prqsN q Ď A˚ , τ pUz q Ď R and there exists a tight safe BPolpCq-cover of
Uz .
Proof. We first consider the special case where z P B: we have z “ τ pu1 au2 q P Q where
pu1 , a, u2 q P T . For i P t1, 2u, we let qi “ τ pui q. Lemma 43 yields languages Hi P PolpCq
such that τ ´1 pqi q Ď Hi Ď η ´1 prqi sN q and pqi , rq is a good pair for all r P τ pHi q. Let Ji Ď N
be the J class of rqi sN . Since rqi sN “ ηpui q, we have J ăJ Ji by definition of T . Hence,
induction on the index of J in Proposition 45 yields a safe BPolpCq-cover K1i of η ´1 pJi q. Let
Ki “ tK X Hi | K P K1i u. Since Hi Ď η ´1 prqi sN q and rqi sN P Ji , it follows that Ki is
a tight safe BPolpCq-cover of Hi . Let Uz “ H1 aH2 P PolpCq. Since q “ q1 τ paqq2 , we get
τ ´1 pqq Ď Uz Ď η ´1 prqsN q. Also, since Ki is a BPolpCq-cover of Hi P PolpCq for i P t1, 2u,
Lemma 16 yields a BPolpCq-cover K of Uz such that each K P K satisfies K Ď K1 aK2 for some
K1 P K1 and K2 P K2 . Since K1 and K2 are tight and safe, one can verify that K is itself a
tight safe BPolpCq-cover of Uz “ H1 aH2 .
   We turn to the general case. Let z1 , . . . , zn P B such that z “ z1 ¨ ¨ ¨ zn and pqi , Ri q “ γpzi q for
all i. The previous case yields Ui P PolpCq such that τ ´1 pqi q Ď Ui Ď η ´1 prqi sN q and τ pUi q Ď Ri ,
and a tight safe BPolpCq-cover Ki of Ui for all i. We define Uz “ U1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Un . It belongs to
PolpCq by closure under concatenation. Clearly, τ ´1 pqq Ď Uz Ď η ´1 prqsN q and αpUz q Ď R since
q “ q1 ¨ ¨ ¨ qn and R “ R1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Rn . Since U1 , . . . , Un P PolpCq, Lemma 15 yields a BPolpCq-cover K
of U1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Un such that for all K P K, there is Ki P Ki for each i ď n such that K Ď K1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Kn .
As the covers Ki are tight and safe, the cover K is also tight and safe.                                   
   Now, let ps “ pz1 , g1 , . . . , zn , gn , zn`1 q be an ηB -pattern such that ps ‰ pεq. In this case zi P B`
for all i ď n by definition and Lemma 52 yields a language Uzi P PolpCq. We let,
                         Hps “ Uz1 η ´1 pg1 q ¨ ¨ ¨ Uzn η ´1 pgn q Uzn`1 Ď A˚ .
Note that Hps is defined for all ps P P . Indeed, as τB pπps          s we have ηB pπps
                                                               pqq P S,               pqq “ d. Thus
                                                                                                s
ps ‰ pεq since d ăJ 1N . Finally, we let H “ tHps | ps P P u. This is our PolpCq-cover of τ ´1 pSq.
                                        s
Lemma 53. The set H is a cover of τ ´1 pSq.
                     s
Proof. Let w P τ ´1 pSq. We exhibit H P H containing w. By definition of S,    s we have
ηpwq “ d P J. Since J ăJ 1N , there exists a decomposition w “ w1 a1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wn an wn`1 with
n ě 1, such that J ăJ ηpwi q for all i ď n ` 1 and J J ηpwi ai q for all i ď n. We let
24                                   THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

bi “ pηpwi ai q, τ pwi ai qq P B for all i ă n. Let now bn “ pηpwn an wn`1 q, τ pwn an wn`1 qq P B.
We consider the word z “ b1 ¨ ¨ ¨ bn P B` . By construction, τB pzq “ τ pwq P S.          s Since the set
                                   ´1 s
tÒηB ps | ps P P u is a cover of τB pSq, we get ps P P such that z P ÒηB ps. We consider Hps P H
and prove that w P Hps. Let ps “ pz1 , g1 , . . . , zℓ , gℓ , zℓ`1 q P pB` ˆ EpN qq ˆ B` . Since z P ÒηB ps,
we know that z “ z1 y1 ¨ ¨ ¨ zn yℓ zℓ`1 with yi P ηB´1 pgi q for all i. By definition of z from w, we
have a decomposition w “ u1 v1 ¨ ¨ ¨ uℓ vℓ uℓ`1 with τ pui q “ τB pzi q and τ pvi q “ τB pyi q for all i.
By Lemma 52, we obtain τ ´1 pτB pzi qq Ď Uzi for all i, which yields ui P Uzi . From the equal-
ity τ pvi q “ τB pyi q, we deduce that ηpvi q “ ηB pyi q “ gi for every i. Therefore, vi P η ´1 pgi q.
Altogether, we obtain finally that w P Uz1 η ´1 pg1 q ¨ ¨ ¨ Uzℓ η ´1 pgℓ qUzℓ`1 . This exactly says that
w P Hps, completing the proof.                                                                           
   This concludes the first step in the outline of the argument sketched at the beginning of
Section 5.6. Let us proceed to the second: for eachŤH P H, we build a pq1 , q2 q-safe BPolpCq-cover
KH of H. Lemma 53 will then imply that KSs “ HPH KH is the desired pq1 , q2 q-safe BPolpCq-
               s We fix H P H for the proof. This yields ps “ pz1 , g1 , . . . , zn , gn , zn`1 q P P such
cover of τ ´1 pSq.
               ´1 s
       pq P τB pSq and H “ Uz1 η ´1 pg1 q ¨ ¨ ¨ Uzn η ´1 pgn qUzn`1 . Therefore, H is a concatenation of
that πps
languages in PolpCq (recall that η is a C-morphism). We build a BPolpCq-cover of each language
in the concatenation and then use Lemma 15 to build a cover of the whole language H. First,
Lemma 52 provides a tight safe BPolpCq-cover Li of Uzi for all i.
   We cover the languages η ´1 pgi q by induction on the rank of pq1 , d, q2 q. As πps                  s
                                                                                             pq P τB´1 pSq,
we have ηB pπps pqq “ d P J. By definition of ηB -patterns, it follows that g1 , . . . , gn P J. Thus,
we may consider the triples pr1 , gi , r2 q P Q ˆ J ˆ Q.
Lemma 54. For 1 ď i ď n, there is a tight BPolpCq-cover Vi of η ´1 pgi q that is pr1 , r2 q-safe for
all r1 , r2 P Q satisfying pq1 , d, q2 q ă pr1 , gi , r2 q.
Proof. Let X Ď Q2 be the set of all pairs pr1 , r2 q P M 2 such pq1 , d, q2 q ă pr1 , gi , r2 q. For each
pr1 , r2 q P X, the rank of pr1 , gi , r2 q is strictly smaller than the one of pq1 , d, q2 q. Hence, we may
use induction on the rank of pq1 , d, q2 q to get a pr1 , r2 q-safe BPolpCq-cover Vr1 ,r2 of η ´1 pgi q. Let
ℓ “ |X| and tpr1,1 , r2,1 q, . . . , pr1,ℓ , r2,ℓ qu “ X. We define,
                       Vi “ tV1 X ¨ ¨ ¨ X Vℓ X η ´1 pgi q | Vj P Vr1,j ,r2,j for all j ď ℓu.
Since η is a C-morphism and BPolpCq is closed under intersection, it is immediate that Vi is
tight BPolpCq-cover of η ´1 pgi q. One can verify that it satisfies the desired property. 
   Lemma 15 yields a BPolpCq-cover KH of H such that for every K P KH , there exist languages
Li P Li and Vi P Vi for all i such that K Ď L1 V1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Ln Vn Ln`1 . We prove that KH is pq1 , q2 q-
safe. For K P KH and u, u1 P K, we show that q1 τ puqq2 “ q1 τ pu1 qq2 .
   By definition, we have K Ď L1 V1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Ln Vn Ln`1 where Li P Li and Vi P Vi for all i. Since
u, u1 P K, we get ui , u1i P Li and vi , vi1 P Vi for all i such that u “ u1 v1 ¨ ¨ ¨ un vn un`1 and
u1 “ u11 v11 ¨ ¨ ¨ u1n vn1 u1n`1 . Let u2 “ u1 v11 ¨ ¨ ¨ un vn1 un`1 . Since the covers Li are safe, we have
τ pui q “ τ pu1i q for all i. Thus, τ pu1 q “ τ pu2 q. It remains to prove that q1 τ puqq2 “ q1 τ pu2 qq2 . For
each i such that 1 ď i ď n, we define,
                                                                    1
                         xi “ u1 v1 u2 ¨ ¨ ¨ vi´1 ui and yi “ ui`1 vi`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ un vn1 un`1 .
In particular, we let x1 “ u1 and yn “ un`1 . Observe that u “ xn vn yn , u2 “ x1 v11 y1 and
xi vi1 yi “ xi´1 vi´1 yi´1 for all i. We prove that q1 τ pxi vi yi qq2 “ q1 τ pxi vi1 yi qq2 for all i. By
transitivity, this will yield q1 τ pxn vn yn qq2 “ q1 τ px1 v11 y1 qq2 , i.e. q1 τ puqq2 “ q1 τ pu2 qq2 , as desired.
We now fix i and prove that q1 τ pxi vi yi qq2 “ q1 τ pxi vi1 yi qq2 . We write s1 “ τ pxi q and s2 “ τ pvi q.
The proof is based on the following lemma, which is where we need Equation (6) (as we apply
Lemma 42, whose proof relies on this equation).
                                                   DOT-DEPTH THREE                                                           25

Lemma 55. We have pq1 , d, q2 q ă pq1 s1 , gi , s2 q2 q.
   By definition of Vi in Lemma 54, it follows from Lemma 55 that Vi is a pq1 s1 , s2 q2 q-safe
BPolpCq-cover of η ´1 pgi q. Thus, as Vi P Vi and vi , vi1 P Vi , we get q1 s1 τ pvi qs2 q2 “ q1 s1 τ pvi1 qs2 q2 ,
i.e., q1 τ pxi vi yi qq2 “ q1 τ pxi vi1 yi qq2 as desired.
Proof of Lemma 55. Recall that ps “ pz1 , g1 , . . . , zn , gn , zn`1 q. Let prj , Rj q “ γpzj q for all j. By
Fact 51, prj , rq is a good pair for all r P Rj . Since ps is γ-guarded, we get pej , Fj q P EpQ ˆ 2Q q
for every 1 ď j ď n that satisfy ηB´1 pgj q X γ ´1 ppej , Fj qq ‰ H, prj ej , Rj Fj q “ prj , Rj q and
pej rj`1 , Fj Rj`1 q “ prj`1 , Rj`1 q. In particular, gj “ rej sN . By Fact 51, pej , rq is a good pair for
all r P Fj . Let rp1 “ r1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ri and rp2 “ ri`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ rn .
    First, we show that Fi Ď Fi ei Fi . Let m P Fi . Since Fi Fi “ Fi , we obtain m1 , . . . , m|Q| P Fi
such that m “ m1 ¨ ¨ ¨ m|Q|. The pigeonhole principle yields 0 ď k ă ℓ ď |Q| such that
m1 ¨ ¨ ¨ mk “ m1 ¨ ¨ ¨ mℓ . Define f “ pmk`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ mℓ qω , which is an idempostent of Q. We can
now write m “ m1 ¨ ¨ ¨ mk f mℓ`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ m|M | . Since Fi P Ep2Q q, we get f P Fi and m P Fi f Fi .
Thus, pei , f q is a good pair and Lemma 42 yields f “ f ei f . Hence, m P Fi f ei f Fi Ď Fi ei Fi .
    We now prove that pq1 , d, q2 q ď pq1 s1 , gi , s2 q2 q. We show that s1 “ s11 ei s21 and s2 “ s22 ei s12 for
two elements s11 , s12 P Q such that rs11 sN “ rrp1 sN and rs12 sN “ rrp2 sN , and s21 , s22 P Fi . This will
give rs11 ei s12 sN “ rrp1 ei rp2 sN “ rrp1 rp2 sN . Since rp1 rp2 “ τB pπps             pqq P S,  s we obtain rs1 ei s1 sN “ d.
                                                                                                                  1    2
             2           2                                       2    2
Also, rs1 sN “ rs2 sN “ rei sN “ gi since s1 , s2 P Fi . Thus, rei sN “ rs21 sN gi rs22 sN . Alto-
gether, we get pq1 , d, q2 q ď pq1 s1 , gi , s2 q2 q. By symmetry, we only decompose s1 . By defini-
tion, s1 “ τ pxi q where xi “ u1 v1 u2 ¨ ¨ ¨ vi´1 ui . We have uj P Uzj for all j since uj P Lj and
Lj is a tight cover of Uzj . Thus, τ puj q P Rj for all j by Lemma 52. Moreover, Ri “ Ri Fi
and since Fi Ď Fi ei Fi , this yields τ pui q “ pi ei s21 with pi P Ri and s21 P Fi . Therefore, we
have s1 “ s11 ei s21 with s11 “ τ pu1 v1 u2 ¨ ¨ ¨ vi´1 qpi . We also have ηpvj q “ gj “ rej sN for all
j since vj P Vj and Vj is a tight cover of η ´1 pgj q. Finally, Fact 51 yields that for all j,
if r P Rj , then prj , rq is a good pair. This implies that rrsN “ rrj sN . Altogether, we get
rs11 sN “ rr1 e1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ri´1 ei´1 ri sN “ rr1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ri sN “ rrp1 sN .
    It remains to prove that the inequality is strict. By contradiction, assume that we have
pq1 s1 , gi , s2 q2 q ď pq1 , d, q2 q. Let q “ τB pπps      pqq. We show that q stabilizes pq1 , d, q2 q. Since q P Ss
(as ps P P ), this is a contradiction. By hypothesis, we get t1 , t2 , t11 , t12 P Q and f P EpQq such
that rt1 f t2 sN “ gi , rf sN “ rt11 sN drt12 sN , q1 “ q1 s1 t1 f t11 and q2 “ t12 f t2 s2 q2 . We will now
construct r11 , r21 P Q such that q1 rp1 ei r11 “ q1 , r21 ei rp2 q2 “ q2 , rr11 sN “ rt1 f t11 prp1 t1 f t11 qω sN and
rr21 sN “ rpt12 f t2 rp2 qω t12 f t2 sN . Let us first explain why this implies that q stabilizes pq1 , d, q2 q.
As seen above, rrp1 ei rp2 sN “ d. Moreover, as rt1 f t2 sN “ gi , rf sN “ rt11 sN drt12 sN and gi “ rei sN ,
we have,
                             gi “ rpt1 f t11 rp1 qω`1 sN gi rprp2 t12 f t2 qω`1 sN ,
                                   “ rt1 f t11 prp1 t1 f t11 qω sN rrp1 ei rp2 sN rpt12 f t2 rp2 qω t12 f t2 sN ,
                                   “ rr11 sN drr21 sN .
Moreover, q “ τB pπps            pqq “ τ prp1 ei rp2 q. Thus, if q1 rp1 ei r11 “ q1 and r21 ei rp2 q2 “ q2 , we get
               q
pq1 , d, q2 q ÝÑ pq1 , d, q2 q.
    It remains to build r11 and r21 . By symmetry, we focus on r11 . As seen above, we have
s1 “ τ pu1 v1 u2 ¨ ¨ ¨ vi´1 ui q with prj , τ puj qq a good pair and ηpvj q “ gj for all j. We define
m1 “ r1 τ pv1 q ¨ ¨ ¨ ri´1 τ pvi´1 qri . By closure under multiplication, we get that pm1 t1 f t11 , s1 t1 f t11 q
is a good pair. We get ps1 t1 f t11 qω`1 “ ps1 t1 f t11 qω m1 t1 f t11 ps1 t1 f t11 qω from Lemma 42. Since
q1 “ q1 s1 t1 f t11 , multiplying by q1 on the left yields the equality q1 “ q1 m1 t1 f t11 ps1 t1 f t11 qω . We
let m11 “ t1 f t11 ps1 t1 f t11 qω . Thus, q1 “ q1 m1 m11 . For all j, we have rτ pvj qsN “ gj “ rej sN and
pej , ej τ pvj qej q is a good pair by Lemma 44. Since rj ej “ rj and ej rj`1 “ rj`1 for all j, closure
under multiplication yields that prp1 m11 , m1 m11 q is a good pair as well. We use Lemma 42 to get
26                                    THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

pm1 m11 qω`1 “ pm1 m11 qω rp1 m11 pm1 m11 qω . Since q1 “ q1 m1 m11 , multiplying by q1 on the left yields
q1 “ q1 rp1 m11 pm1 p11 qω . If we define r11 “ m11 pm1 m11 qω , we get indeed rr11 sN “ rt1 f t11 prp1 t1 f t11 qω sN .
                                                                                                                     
5.7. Second step: full cover of η ´1 pdq. This step is the same whether J is maximal or not.
                                                                            s We let,
Indeed, in both cases, we have a pq1 , q2 q-safe BPolpCq-cover KSs of τ ´1 pSq.
                         ď
                  K1 “       K, KK “ η ´1 pdqzK 1 and K “ tKK u Y KSs .
                              KPKSs

Since η is a C-morphism and K P BPolpCq for all K P KSs , we have KK P BPolpCq. Therefore,
K is a BPolpCq-cover of η ´1 pdq by definition. We prove that it is pq1 , q2 q-safe. Let K P K,
w, w1 P K, q “ τ pwq and r “ τ pw1 q. We show that q1 qq2 “ q1 rq2 . If K P KSs, this is because
KSs is pq1 , q2 q-safe.
   Assume   Ť now that K “ KK . sBy definition of KK , we ´1              know that w, w1 P η ´1 pdq and
      1
w, w R KPKSs K. Thus, q, r R S since KSs is a cover of τ pSq.                s In other words, we have
               q                                 r
pq1 , d, q2 q Ý                                 Ñ pq1 , d, q2 q. We get s1 , s2 , s11 , s12 , t1 , t2 , t11 , t11 P Q and
              Ñ pq1 , d, q2 q and pq1 , d, q2 q Ý
e, f P EpQq such that,
     (1) rs1 es2 sN “ d, resN “ rs11 sN drs12 sN ,
           rt1 f t2 sN “ d, rf sN “ rt11 sN drt12 sN .
     (2) q “ s1 es2 , q1 “ q1 s1 es11 , q2 “ s12 es2 q2 ,
           r “ t1 f t2 , q1 “ q1 t1 f t11 , q2 “ t12 f t2 q2 .
This yields resN “ rs11 t1 f t2 s12 sN and rf sN “ rt11 s1 es2 t12 sN . Hence, we apply Lemma 41 (which
follows from (3)) to get,
                                        pes11 t1 f t11 s1 eqω pes2 t12 f t2 s12 eqω “
                                    pes11 t1 f t11 s1 eqω s11 t1 f t2 s12 pes2 t12 f t2 s12 eqω
We multiply by q1 s1 on the left and s2 q2 on the right. Recall that q1 “ q1 s1 es11 , q2 “ s12 es2 q2 ,
q1 “ q1 t1 f t11 and q2 “ t12 f t2 q2 . We deduce that q1 s1 es2 q2 “ q1 t1 f t2 q2 . Since we have q “ s1 es2
and r “ t1 f t2 , we finally obtain q1 qq2 “ q1 rq2 , as desired.

                                  6. Handling full levels above two
  We specialize Theorem 35 to characterize the classes BPolpCq when C is itself of the form
C “ BPolpDq. More precisely, we prove that in this case, Equation (3) (which is based on
C-swaps) is equivalent to a property based on C-sets.
Proposition 56. Let D be a prevariety and C “ BPolpDq. Let α : A˚ Ñ M be a surjective
morphism. Then, α satisfies (3) if and only if it satisfies the following condition:
                            peqf reqω pesf teqω “ peqf reqω qf tpesf teqω for every
(7)
                             C-set tq, r, s, t, e, f u Ď M such that e, f P EpM q.
  Before we prove Proposition 56, let us combine it with Theorem 35. This yields the following
theorem.
Theorem 57. Let D be a prevariety, let C “ BPolpDq and let α : A˚ Ñ M be a surjective
morphism. Then, α is a BPolpCq-morphism if and only if it satisfies the two following equations:
                                   pesetqω`1 “ pesetqω etpesetqω for every t P M
(2)
                                       and every C-pair pe, sq P EpM q ˆ M .
                            peqf reqω pesf teqω “ peqf reqω qf tpesf teqω for every
(7)
                             C-set tq, r, s, t, e, f u Ď M such that e, f P EpM q.
                                              DOT-DEPTH THREE                                                  27

  Given a prevariety C with decidable covering, Lemmas 26 and 31 imply that the C-pairs
and the C-sets associated to an input morphism can be computed. Hence, one may decide (2)
and (7) in this case. We get the following corollary.
Corollary 58. Let D be a prevariety and let C “ BPolpDq. If C-covering is decidable, then so
is BPolpCq-membership.
   Corollary 58 implies that given a concatenation hierarchy, if a non-zero full level has decidable
covering, then the next full level has decidable membership. Together with Theorem 24 (which
is proved in [41, 35]), this yields the following.
Corollary 59. If G is a group prevariety with decidable separation, the classes BPol2 pGq and
BPol2 pG` q have decidable membership.
   Also, applying Theorem 25 (which is proved in [42]) yields the decidability of membership
for the levels three in both the Straubing-Thérien hierarchy and the dot-depth.
Corollary 60. The classes BPol3 pSTq and BPol3 pDDq have decidable membership.

Remark 61. For an arbitrary prevariety C, it remains true that (2) and (7) form a necessary
condition for being a BPolpCq-morphism. On the other hand, they need not be sufficient. For
instance, consider the class MOD of modulo languages. One can reformulate the equations with
a notion tailored to MOD: stable monoids [53]. Specifically, one can prove that a morphism
satisfies (2) and (7) if and only if its stable monoid is J-trivial. It is well-known that this
property is not sufficient for membership in BPolpMODq (see e.g. [12]).
   On the other hand, Theorem 57 does hold for some input classes C which are not of the form
BPolpDq. For instance, this is the case for C “ AT as seen in Corollary 37. This is also the
case when C “ ST (for ST “ tH, A˚ u) or C “ GR (for the class GR of all group languages).
6.1. Proposition 56: “only if ” direction. Let C “ BPolpDq for a prevariety D and let
α : A˚ Ñ M be a morphism. We start with the simpler “only if” direction, which does not
require the hypothesis C “ BPolpDq. Assume that α satisfies (3). We show that (7) holds as
well. Let tq, r, s, t, e, f u Ď M be a C-set such that e, f P EpM q. We show that,
(8)                             peqf reqω pesf teqω “ peqf reqω qf tpesf teqω .
Lemma 34 yields a C-morphism η : A˚ Ñ N such that the C-swaps are exactly the η-swaps.
Since tq, r, s, t, e, f u Ď M is a C-set, Lemma 33 implies that it is an η-set. We obtain a set
F Ď A˚ such that αpF q “ tq, r, s, t, e, f u and ηpuq “ ηpu1 q for every u, u1 P F . Therefore, there
exist x P N and, for each p P tq, r, s, t, e, f u, a word up P F such that αpup q “ p and ηpup q “ x.
Let k “ ωpN q. We define the following words:
                        u1q “ uq ufk´1 , u1r “ ur uek´1 , u1s “ uek´1 us , u1t “ ufk´1 ut ,
                                            u1e “ uke and u1f “ ukf .
Since e, f P EpM q, we have αpu1q q “ qf , αpu1r q “ re, αpu1s q “ es, αpu1t q “ f t, αpu1e q “ e
and αpu1f q “ f . Also, ηpu1p q “ xk P EpN q for all p P tq, r, s, t, e, f u by definition of k. Thus,
ηpu1q u1f u1t q “ ηpu1e q and ηpu1r u1e u1s q “ ηpu1f q. Hence, pqf, re, es, f t, e, f q is an η-swap and a C-swap
by definition of η. We now apply (3) to get (8) as desired.

6.2. Proposition 56: “if ” direction, preliminaries. We now turn to the more difficult “if”
direction, where we need the hypothesis that C is of the form BPolpDq. Assume now that α
28                               THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

satisfies (7). We prove that (3) holds as well. Therefore, we fix a C-swap pq, r, s, t, e, f q P M 6
such that e, f P EpM q and show that,
(9)                          peqf reqω pesf teqω “ peqf reqω qf tpesf teqω .
We adopt the same strategy as for the “only if” direction: we build a C-set from pq, r, s, t, e, f q
and then apply (7) to it to get (9). First, we build a C-morphism η such that the η-sets are
exactly the C-sets and satisfying properties tied to the hypothesis C “ BPolpDq.
Lemma 62. There exists a PolpDq-morphism η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq satisfying the two following
properties:
     ‚ For all p P N , the set αpη ´1 ppqq Ď M is a C-set for α.
     ‚ For all g, g 1 P EpN q, if g ď g1 , then g 1 “ g1 gg1 .
Proof. By Corollary 13, the class C “ BPolpDq is a prevariety. Hence, it follows from Lemma 33
that there exists a C-morphism β1 : A˚ Ñ T1 such that for every S Ď M , S is a C-set for α
if and only if S is a β1 -set. Additionally, since PolpDq is a positive prevariety by Theorem 12
and C “ BPolpDq, Lemma 14 yields a PolpDq-morphism β2 : A˚ Ñ pT2 , ďq and a morphism
δ : T2 Ñ T1 such that β1 “ δ ˝ β2 . Finally, it follows from Lemma 27 that there exists a
D-morphism γ : A˚ Ñ Q such that for every pair px, yq P N 2 , px, yq is a D-pair for β2 if and
only if px, yq is a γ-pair. Since D Ď PolpDq, γ is also a PolpDq-morphism (recall that we view
Q as ordered monoid pQ, “q). We now consider the ordered monoid pT2 ˆ Q, ďq equipped with
componentwise multiplication and whose ordering is defined by pt, qq ď pt1 , q 1 q if and only if
t ď t1 and q “ q 1 for all pt, qq, pt1 , q 1 q P T2 ˆ Q. Moreover, we let β3 : A˚ Ñ pT2 ˆ Q, ďq as
the morphism which is defined by β3 pwq “ pβ2 pwq, γpwqq for every w P A˚ . Finally, we let
η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq as the surjective restriction of β3 . Since PolpDq is a positive prevariety by
Theorem 12, it is clear that η is a PolpDq-morphism. Indeed, the definition implies that every
language recognized by η is built by making unions and intersections of languages recognized
by the PolpDq-morphisms β2 and γ. It remains to verify that η satisfies the two assertions.
   For the first assertion, let p P N . By definition of η, all words in η ´1 ppq have the same image
under β2 and therefore under β1 as well since β1 “ δ ˝ β2 . Hence, αpη ´1 ppqq is a β1 -set for α. It
follows from the definition of β1 that αpη ´1 ppqq Ď M is a C-set for α.
   We turn to the second assertion. Let g, g1 P EpN q such that g ď g 1 . We prove that g 1 “ g1 gg1 .
Since g1 P EpN q and g ď g1 , it is immediate that g1 gg1 ď g1 . Hence, it suffices to show that
g1 ď g 1 gg1 . Since η is surjective by construction, there exist u, u1 P A˚ such that ηpuq “ g
and ηpu1 q “ g1 . It remains to prove that ηpu1 q ď ηpu1 uu1 q. Since for all w P A˚ , we have
ηpwq “ pβ2 pwq, γpwqq, this amounts to proving that β2 pu1 q ď β2 pu1 uu1 q and γpu1 q “ γpu1 uu1 q.
Since ηpu1 q P EpN q, we have γpu1 q P EpQq and β2 pu1 q P EpT2 q. From ηpuq ď ηpu1 q, we deduce
γpuq “ γpu1 q, yielding γpu1 q “ γpu1 uu1 q. Moreover, γpuq “ γpu1 q also implies that pβ2 pu1 q, β2 puqq
is a γ-pair for β2 . Therefore, it is a D-pair for β2 by definition of γ. Since β2 pu1 q P EpT2 q and
β2 is a PolpDq-morphism, we deduce that β2 pu1 q ď β2 pu1 uu1 q from Theorem 29, completing the
proof.                                                                                                 
   We use the PolpDq-morphism η : A˚ Ñ pN, ďq to construct a C-morphism β : A˚ Ñ R. Since
pq, r, s, t, e, f q is a C-swap, this will imply that it is also a β-swap. We shall then exploit the
definition of β to build our C-set from η using the first assertion in Lemma 62.
   For every v P A˚ , we let rvsη “ tv 1 P A˚ | ηpvq ď ηpv 1 qu which a language recognized by
η. Hence, rvsη P PolpDq since η is a PolpDq-morphism. Let k “ |M |2 ˆ |N |2 ` 2. We define
H “ trv1 sη ¨ ¨ ¨ rvℓ sη | ℓ ď k and v1 , . . . , vℓ P A˚ u. Since PolpDq is closed under concatenation by
Theorem 12, it follows that H is a finite set of languages in PolpDq Ď C. Thus, Proposition 10
yields a C-morphism β : A˚ Ñ R recognizing every H P H. Since v P rvsη for all v P A˚ , one
                                             DOT-DEPTH THREE                                                 29

may verify that for all w, w1 P A˚ , we have βpwq “ βpw1 q ñ ηpwq “ ηpw1 q. We shall use this
fact repeatedly.
Remark 63. The construction of η and β is where we need the hypothesis that C “ BPolpDq.
6.3. Proposition 56: “if ” direction, main proof. We are ready to start the construction
of a C-set from our C-swap pq, r, s, t, e, f q. By definition of the C-swaps, the hypothesis that
β : A˚ Ñ R is a C-morphism yields uq , ur , us , ut , ue , uf P A˚ such that βpue q, βpuf q P EpRq,
βpue q “ βpuq uf ut q, βpuf q “ βpur ue us q and αpux q “ x for every x P tq, r, s, t, e, f u. We define
pq “ ηpuq q, pr “ ηpur q, ps “ ηpus q, pt “ ηput q, ge “ ηpue q and gf “ ηpuf q.
   Recall that βpwq “ βpw1 q ñ ηpwq “ ηpw1 q for all w, w1 P A˚ . Hence, by hypothesis on
uq , ur , us , ut , ue , uf P A˚ , the definitions imply that ge , gf P EpN q, ge “ pq gf pt and gf “ pr ge ps .
Fact 64. We have the following equalities:
     ‚ ge “ ge ps gf pr ge “ pge ps gf pt ge qω and
     ‚ gf “ gf pt ge pq gf “ pgf pt ge ps gf qω .
Proof. First, observe that since ge , gf P EpN q, ge “ pq gf pt and gf “ pr ge ps , we have the
equalities ge “ ge pq gf pt ge and gf “ gf pr ge ps gf .
   We now prove that ge “ pge ps gf pt ge qω . By Lemma 2, it suffices to prove that ge H ge ps gf pt ge .
It is clear that ge ps gf pt ge ďH ge . Furthermore, since ge “ ge pq gf pt ge and gf “ gf pr ge ps gf ,
we get ge “ ge pq pgf pr ge ps gf qpt ge “ ge pq gf pr pge ps gf pt ge q. Therefore, ge ďJ ge ps gf pt ge and
Lemma 1 yields ge H ge ps gf pt ge as desired. The proof of the equality gf “ pgf pt ge ps gf qω is
symmetrical.
   We turn to proving that ge “ ge ps gf pr ge and gf “ gf pt ge pq gf . By symmetry, we only prove
the first equality. Observe that since gf “ pr ge ps , we have ge ps gf pr ge ge ps gf pr ge “ ge ps gf pr ge .
Thus, ge ps gf pr ge P EpN q and by Lemma 2 it suffices to prove that ge ps gf pr ge H ge . Clearly,
ge ps gf pr ge ďH ge . Furthermore, since we have gf “ pr ge ps and gf “ pgf pt ge ps gf qω , we know
that gf ďJ ge ps gf pr ge . Finally, since we have ge “ pq gf pt , we get ge ďJ gf ďJ ge ps gf pr ge . It
then follows from Lemma 1 that ge H ge ps gf pr ge , which completes the proof.                             
  We now use the morphism β to decompose ue and uf . We shall then use the factors to
construct our C-set.
Lemma 65. There exist six words xe , ye , ze , xf , yf , zf P A˚ and g 1 P EpN q satisfying the fol-
lowing conditions:
     ‚ αpye q P EpM q, e “ αpxe ye ze q and ge “ ηpxe ye ze q
     ‚ αpyf q P EpM q, f “ αpxf yf zf q and gf “ ηpxf yf zf q.
     ‚ g 1 “ ηpye q “ ηpyf q and g1 “ g1 gf g1 .
     ‚ gf ď ηpxf q, gf ď ηpzf q.
     ‚ ge pq gf ď ηpxe q and gf pt ge ď ηpze q.
Proof. We let w1,0 “ ¨ ¨ ¨ “ wk,0 “ uf and use induction on an integer h ě 1 to build 2k words
v1,h , . . . , vk,h , w1,h , . . . , wk,h P A˚ satisfying the following conditions:
        ‚ ue “ v1,h ¨ ¨ ¨ vk,h and uf “ w1,h ¨ ¨ ¨ wk,h .
        ‚ ηpwi,h´1 q ď ηpvi,h q ď ηpwi,h q for 2 ď i ă k.
        ‚ ge pq ηpw1,h´1 q ď ηpv1,h q and gf pr ηpv1,h q ď ηpw1,h q.
        ‚ ηpwk,h´1 qpt ge ď ηpvk,h q and ηpvk,h qps gf ď ηpwk,h q.
Let h ě 1. Assume that w1,h´1 , . . . , wk,h´1 are defined. We have βpw1,h´1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wk,h´1 q “ βpuf q.
Since βpue q P EpRq and βpue q “ βpuq uf ut q, we get βpue q “ βpue uq w1,h´1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wk,h´1 ut ue q.
Furthermore, β recognizes the following language by definition,
                      H “ rue uq w1,h´1 sη rw2,h´1 sη ¨ ¨ ¨ rwk´1,h´1 sη rwk,h´1 ut ue sη .
30                                THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

Since ue uq w1,h´1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wk,h´1 ut ue P H, we get ue P H. Therefore, there exist words v1,h , . . . , vk,h
such that ue “ v1,h ¨ ¨ ¨ vk,h , v1,h P rue uq w1,h´1 sη , vi,h P rwi,h´1 sη for every 2 ď i ă k, and
vk,h P rwk,h´1 ut ue sη . We obtain ge pq ηpw1,h´1 q ď ηpv1,h q, ηpwi,h´1 q ď ηpvi,h q for 2 ď i ă k and
ηpwk,h´1 qpt ge ď ηpvk,h q. Since βpuf q P EpRq and βpuf q “ βpur ue us q by hypothesis. A symmet-
rical argument yields words w1,h , . . . , wk,h such that uf “ w1,h ¨ ¨ ¨ wk,h , gf pr ηpv1,h q ď ηpw1,h q,
ηpvi,h q ď ηpwi,h q for 2 ď i ă k and ηpvk,h qps gf ď ηpwk,h q. This concludes the construction of
the 2k words satisfying the desired construction.
   Let d “ ωpM qˆωpN q. Since N is finite, there are two indices m ă m1 and ηpwi,dm q “ ηpwi,dm1 q
for 2 ď i ă k. We fix these two numbers m, m1 ě 1. Since k ´ 2 “ |M |2 ˆ |N |2 , the pigeonhole
principle yields 1 ď i ă j ă k such that,
                          αpw2,dm ¨ ¨ ¨ wi,dm q       “   αpw2,dm ¨ ¨ ¨ wj,dm q,
                          αpv2,dm`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ vi,dm`1 q   “   αpv2,dm`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ vj,dm`1 q,
                          ηpw2,dm ¨ ¨ ¨ wi,dm q       “   ηpw2,dm ¨ ¨ ¨ wj,dm q,
                          ηpv2,dm`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ vi,dm`1 q   “   ηpv2,dm`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ vj,dm`1 q.
We now define,
                      xe “ v1,dm`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ vi,dm`1       xf “ w1,dm ¨ ¨ ¨ wi,dm ,
                      ye “ pvi`1,dm`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ vj,dm`1 qd yf “ pwi`1,dm ¨ ¨ ¨ wj,dm qd ,
                      ze “ vj`1,dm`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ vk,dm`1     zf “ wj`1,dm ¨ ¨ ¨ wk,dm .
It remains to prove that the conditions in the lemma are satisfied. For the first two, we have
αpye q, αpyf q P EpM q by definition of d. In addition, by definition of i and j, we know that we
have
                         αpxe ye ze q “ αpv1,dm`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ vk,dm`1 q “ αpue q “ e,
as well as
                            αpxf yf zf q “ αpw1,dm ¨ ¨ ¨ wk,dm q “ αpuf q “ f.
Furthermore, ηpxe ye ze q “ ηpue q “ ge and ηpxf yf zf q “ ηpuf q “ gf .
   We turn to the third assertion. Define g1 “ ηpye q. By choice of d, we have g1 P EpN q.
Moreover, for 2 ď ℓ ă k, we have ηpwℓ,0 q ď ηpwℓ,dm q ď ηpvℓ,dm`1 q ď ηpwℓ,dm1 q. Hence,
since wi,0 “ uf , gf “ ηpuf q and ηpwℓ,dm q “ ηpwℓ,dm1 q for 2 ď ℓ ă k, we obtain that
gf ď ηpwℓ,dm q “ ηpvℓ,dm`1 q. One can multiply these inequalities for i ` 1 ď ℓ ď j. Since
gf P EpN q, this yields gf ď ηpye q “ ηpyf q by definition. Hence, g1 “ ηpye q “ ηpyf q and gf ď g1 .
We get g 1 “ g1 gf g1 from Lemma 62.
   For the remaining assertions, we only show that gf ď ηpxf q and ge pq gf ď ηpxe q. The proof of
the other inequalities is symmetrical. By definition, we have w1,0 “ uf , ge pq ηpw1,h´1 q ď ηpv1,h q
and gf pr ηpv1,h q ď ηpw1,h q for all h ě 1. Since gf P EpN q, we get ge pq pgf pr ge pq gf qh´1 ď ηpv1,h q
and pgf pr ge pq gf qh ď ηpw1,h q by a simple induction. Also, gf “ pgf pr ge pq gf qω by Fact 64.
Thus, we have gf ď ηpw1,dm q and ge pq gf ď ηpv1,dm`1 q by definition of d. Finally, we have
gf ď ηpwℓ,dm q “ ηpvℓ,dm`1 q for 2 ď i ă k. Hence, gf ď ηpxf q and ge pq gf ď ηpxe q.                   

  We fix the words xe , ye , ze , xf , yf , zf P A˚ and the element g 1 P EpN q given by Lemma 65.
Let h “ ωpM q ˆ ωpN q. We let,
                         yq “ ye ze uq xf yf , yr “ yf zf pur ue uq uf qh´1 ur xe ye ,
                         yt “ yf zf ut xe ye , ys “ ye ze us puf ut ue us qh´1 xf yf .
Let x̂ “ αpyx q for x P tq, r, s, t, e, f u. Recall that in order to apply Equation (7), we need to
construct a C-set. We will show below that tq̂, r̂, ŝ, t̂, ê, fˆu is such a C-set. Note that ê, fˆ P EpM q
                                                 DOT-DEPTH THREE                                                     31

by Lemma 65. Since αpyf q, αpye q P EpM q and αpxf yf zf q “ αpuf q “ f by Lemma 65, one can
verify that,
                         êq̂ fˆr̂ê “ αpye ze qqf preqf qh´1 rαpxe ye q,
                                     “ αpye ze qpqf reqh´1 qf rαpxe ye q.
Symmetrically, one can verify that,

                                   êŝfˆt̂ê “ αpye ze qspf tesqh´1 f tαpxe ye q,
                                              “ αpye ze qsf tpesf tqh´1 αpxe ye q.
Since αpxe ye ze q “ e by Lemma 65, it follows that,

                             αpxe qpêq̂ fˆr̂êqω pêŝfˆt̂êqω αpze q “ peqf reqω pesf teqω .

Moreover, the definitions yield q̂ fˆt̂ “ αpye ze qqf tαpxe ye q. Hence, using again the equality
αpxe ye ze q “ e of Lemma 65, we get,

                        αpxe qpêq̂ fˆr̂êqω q̂ fˆt̂pêŝfˆt̂êqω αpze q “ peqf reqω qf tpesf teqω .

We prove that pêq̂ fˆr̂êqω pêŝfˆt̂êqω “ pêq̂ fˆr̂êqω q̂ fˆt̂pêŝfˆt̂êqω . In view of the above, this will imply
that (9) holds as desired (namely that peqf reqω pesf teqω “ peqf reqω qf tpesf teqω ). Since α
satisfies (7), it suffices to prove that tq̂, r̂, ŝ, t̂, ê, fˆu Ď M is a C-set. We show that tq̂, r̂, ŝ, t̂, ê, fˆu
is a subset of αpη ´1 pg1 qq, which is a C-set by Lemma 62. Thus, tq̂, r̂, ŝ, t̂, ê, fˆu is itself a C-set
by Fact 32.
   By definition, we have to prove that for y P tyq , yr , ys , yt , ye , yf u, we have ηpyq “ g1 . By
Lemma 65, we already know this for y “ ye and y “ yf . By symmetry, we only treat the cases
y “ yq and y “ yr . It suffices to prove that ηpyq H g1 and g1 ď ηpyq. Indeed, since g1 P EpN q,
Lemma 2 and ηpyq H g1 imply pηpyqqω “ g1 . Moreover, g1 ď ηpyq yields g1 ď pηpyqqω´1 .
Multiplying by ηpyq yields g1 ηpyq ď pηpyqqω “ g 1 . Since g 1 ηpyq “ ηpyq (by definition of yq , yr as
ηpye q “ ηpyf q “ g 1 ), we get ηpyq ď g1 . Altogeter, we obtain g1 “ ηpyq, as desired.
   We first show that ηpyq q H g 1 and g1 ď ηpyq q. We know that yq “ ye ze uq xf yf and
Lemma 65 yields gf ď ηpxf q and gf pt ge ď ηpze q. We get g1 gf pt ge pq gf g1 ď ηpyq q. Thus,
since gf pt ge pq gf “ gf by Fact 64 and g1 gf g1 “ g1 by Lemma 65, we get g1 ď ηpyq q. Moreover,
since g1 “ ηpye q “ ηpyf q, it is clear that ηpyq q ďH g1 . Thus, we show that g1 ďJ ηpyq q. This will
imply ηpyq q H g 1 by Lemma 1. By definition, yq “ ye ze uq xf yf . Hence, Lemma 65 yields,
                        ηpxe yq zf q “ ηpxe pye ze uq xf yf qzf q “ ηpue uq uf q “ ge pq gf .
Since gf pt ge pq gf “ gf by Fact 64, we get gf ďJ ηpyq q. Also, g1 ďJ gf since g1 “ g1 gf g1 . We get
g1 ďJ ηpyq q as desired.
   We now prove that ηpyr q H g 1 and that g 1 ď ηpyr q. We have yr “ yf zf pur ue uq uf qh´1 ur xe ye .
Lemma 65 yields gf ď ηpzf q and ge pq gf ď ηpxe q. Thus, g1 pgf pr ge pq gf qh g1 ď ηpyr q. Since h
is a multiple of ωpN q, this yields g1 gf g1 ď ηpyr q by Fact 64. Thus, g1 ď ηpyr q by Lemma 65.
Also, the definition of yr and the fact that g 1 “ ηpye q “ ηpyf q yield ηpyr q ďH g1 . Thus,
it suffices to show that g1 ďJ ηpyr q. This implies ηpyr q H g1 by Lemma 1. By definition,
yr “ yf zf pur ue uq uf qh´1 ur xe ye . Thus, Lemma 65 yields,

                                        ηpxf yr ze q “ pgf pr ge pq gf qh pr ge .

Moreover, pgf pr ge pq gf qh “ gf by Fact 64. Thus, gf ďJ ηpyr q. Finally, since g 1 “ g 1 gf g 1 , we also
have g1 ďJ gf . We get g 1 ďJ ηpyr q, which completes the proof.
32                                  THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

                                               7. Conclusion
   In this paper, we studied the BPol operator used in the construction of concatenation hi-
erarchies. We proved a generic characterization of the classes BPolpCq that depends on an ad
hoc property of the class C. While it is not clear when this property on C is decidable in gen-
eral, a first consequence is a new effective characterization of levels two in the dot-depth and
Straubing-Thérien hierarchies, which is simpler than the previously known ones.
   When C is itself of the form BPolpDq, our characterization simplifies and yields a reduction
from BPolpCq-membership to C-covering. The latter problem was known to be decidable for
level one in several hierarchies whose bases consist of group languages such as the group and
modulo hierarchies. Combined with our results, this implies that level two is decidable in these
hierarchies. Finally, it was known that level two has decidable covering in the Straubing-Thérien
hierarchy and the dot-depth. Hence, we obtain that level three is decidable in these hierarchies.

                                                 References
 [1] Jorge Almeida. Implicit operations on finite j-trivial semigroups and a conjecture of I. Simon. Journal of
     Pure and Applied Algebra, 69:205–218, 1990.
 [2] Jorge Almeida. Implicit operations and Knast’s theorem. In Semigroups (Luino, 1992), pages 1–16. World
     Sci. Publ., River Edge, NJ, 1993.
 [3] Jorge Almeida and Ondrej Klı́ma. A counterexample to a conjecture concerning concatenation hierarchies.
     Information Processing Letters, 110(1):4–7, 2009.
 [4] Jorge Almeida and Ondrej Klı́ma. New decidable upper bound of the 2nd level in the Straubing-Thérien con-
     catenation hierarchy of star-free languages. Discrete Mathematics & Theoretical Computer Science, 12(4):41–
     58, 2010.
 [5] Mustapha Arfi. Polynomial operations on rational languages. In Proceedings of the 4th Annual Symposium
     on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS’87, pages 198–206. Springer, 1987.
 [6] Mustapha Arfi. Opérations polynomiales et hiérarchies de concaténation. Theoretical Computer Science,
     91(1):71 – 84, 1991.
 [7] Christopher J. Ash. Inevitable graphs: a proof of the type II conjecture and some related decision procedures.
     International Journal of Algebra and Computation, 1(1):127–146, 1991.
 [8] F. Blanchet-Sadri. On dot-depth two. RAIRO - Theoretical Informatics and Applications - Informatique
     Théorique et Applications, 24(6):521–529, 1990.
 [9] F. Blanchet-Sadri. On a complete set of generators for dot-depth two. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 50(1):1–
     25, 1994.
[10] Janusz A. Brzozowski and Rina S. Cohen. Dot-depth of star-free events. Journal of Computer and System
     Sciences, 5(1):1–16, 1971.
[11] Janusz A. Brzozowski and Robert Knast. The dot-depth hierarchy of star-free languages is infinite. Journal
     of Computer and System Sciences, 16(1):37–55, 1978.
[12] Laura Chaubard, Jean-Éric Pin, and Howard Straubing. First order formulas with modular predicates. In
     Proceedings of the 21th IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS’06), pages 211–220, 2006.
[13] David Cowan. Inverse monoids of dot-depth two. International Journal of Algebra and Computation,
     03(04):411–424, 1993.
[14] Wojciech Czerwiński, Wim Martens, and Tomáš Masopust. Efficient separability of regular languages by
     subsequences and suffixes. In Proceedings of the 40th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages,
     and Programming, ICALP’13, pages 150–161. Springer, 2013.
[15] James Alexander Green. On the structure of semigroups. Annals of Mathematics, 54(1):163–172, 1951.
[16] Karsten Henckell, Stuart Margolis, Jean-Éric Pin, and John Rhodes. Ash’s type II theorem, profinite topology
     and Malcev products. International Journal of Algebra and Computation, 1:411–436, 1991.
[17] Karsten Henckell and John Rhodes. The theorem of knast, the pg=bg and type II conjectures. Monoids and
     semigroups with applications, Word Scientific, pages 453–463, 1991.
[18] Peter Higgins. A proof of simon’s theorem on piecewise testable languages. Theoretical computer science,
     178(1):257–264, 1997.
[19] Ondrej Klima. Piecewise testable languages via combinatorics on words. Discrete Mathematics, 311(20):2124–
     2127, 2011.
                                              DOT-DEPTH THREE                                                    33

[20] Robert Knast. A semigroup characterization of dot-depth one languages. RAIRO - Theoretical Informatics
     and Applications, 17(4):321–330, 1983.
[21] Manfred Kufleitner and Alexander Lauser. Around dot-depth one. International Journal of Foundations of
     Computer Science, 23(6):1323–1340, 2012.
[22] Manfred Kufleitner and Tobias Walter. One quantifier alternation in first-order logic with modular predicates.
     RAIRO Theor. Informatics Appl., 49(1):1–22, 2015.
[23] Stuart W. Margolis and Jean-Éric Pin. Products of group languages. In FCT’85. Springer, 1985.
[24] Crispin St. John Alvah Nash-Williams. On well-quasi-ordering finite trees. Mathematical Proceedings of the
     Cambridge Philosophical Society, 59(4):833–835, 1963.
[25] Dominique Perrin and Jean-Éric Pin. First-order logic and star-free sets. Journal of Computer and System
     Sciences, 32(3):393–406, 1986.
[26] Jean-Éric Pin. Varieties Of Formal Languages. Plenum Publishing Co., 1986.
[27] Jean-Éric Pin. PG = BG, a success story. NATO Advanced Study Institute, Semigroups, Formal Languages
     and Groups, pages 33–47, 1995.
[28] Jean-Éric Pin. An explicit formula for the intersection of two polynomials of regular languages. In DLT 2013,
     volume 7907 of Lect. Notes Comp. Sci., pages 31–45. Springer, 2013.
[29] Jean-Éric Pin. The dot-depth hierarchy, 45 years later, chapter 8, pages 177–202. World Scientific, 2017.
[30] Jean-Éric     Pin.     Mathematical       foundations       of    automata      theory.     In     preparation
     https://www.irif.fr/„ jep/PDF/MPRI/MPRI.pdf, 2019.
[31] Jean-Éric Pin and Howard Straubing. Monoids of upper triangular boolean matrices. In Semigroups. Struc-
     ture and Universal Algebraic Problems, volume 39, pages 259–272. North-Holland, 1985.
[32] Jean-Éric Pin and Pascal Weil. Profinite semigroups, Mal’cev products and identities. Journal of Algebra,
     182(3):604–626, 1996.
[33] Jean-Éric Pin and Pascal Weil. Polynomial closure and unambiguous product. Theory of Computing Systems,
     30(4):383–422, 1997.
[34] Jean-Éric Pin and Pascal Weil. A conjecture on the concatenation product. RAIRO Informatique Théorique,
     35(6):597–618, 2001.
[35] Thomas Place and Marc Zeitoun. A generic polynomial time approach to separation by first-order logic
     without quantifier alternation. In 42nd IARCS Annual Conference on Foundations of Software Technology
     and Theoretical Computer Science, FSTTCS 2022, December 18-20, 2022, IIT Madras, Chennai, India,
     volume 250 of LIPIcs, pages 43:1–43:22. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
[36] Thomas Place and Marc Zeitoun. Going higher in the first-order quantifier alternation hierarchy on words.
     In Proceedings of the 41st International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP’14,
     pages 342–353. Springer, 2014.
[37] Thomas Place and Marc Zeitoun. The covering problem. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 14(3), 2018.
[38] Thomas Place and Marc Zeitoun. Separating without any ambiguity. In Proceedings of the 45th International
     Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP’18, pages 137:1–137:14, 2018.
[39] Thomas Place and Marc Zeitoun. Generic results for concatenation hierarchies. Theory of Computing Systems
     (ToCS), 63(4):849–901, 2019. Selected papers from CSR’17.
[40] Thomas Place and Marc Zeitoun. Going higher in first-order quantifier alternation hierarchies on words.
     Journal of the ACM, 66(2):12:1–12:65, 2019.
[41] Thomas Place and Marc Zeitoun. Separation and covering for group based concatenation hierarchies. In
     Proceedings of the 34th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS’19, pages
     1–13, 2019.
[42] Thomas Place and Marc Zeitoun. Separation for dot-depth two. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 17(3),
     2021.
[43] Thomas Place and Marc Zeitoun. All about unambiguous polynomial closure. TheoretiCS, 2(11):1–74, 2023.
[44] Thomas Place and Marc Zeitoun. Group separation strikes back. In 38th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium
     on Logic in Computer Science, LICS’23, pages 1–13. IEEE Computer Society, 2023.
[45] Marcel Paul Schützenberger. On finite monoids having only trivial subgroups. Information and Control,
     8(2):190–194, 1965.
[46] Imre Simon. Hierarchies of Events of Dot-Depth One. PhD thesis, University of Waterloo, Department of
     Applied Analysis and Computer Science, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 1972.
[47] Imre Simon. Piecewise testable events. In Proceedings of the 2nd GI Conference on Automata Theory and
     Formal Languages, pages 214–222. Springer, 1975.
34                                 THOMAS PLACE AND MARC ZEITOUN

[48] Larry J. Stockmeyer. The complexity of decision problems in automata theory and logic. PhD thesis, 1974.
     PHD.
[49] Howard Straubing. A generalization of the schützenberger product of finite monoids. Theoretical Computer
     Science, 13(2):137–150, 1981.
[50] Howard Straubing. Finite semigroup varieties of the form V ∗ D. Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra,
     36:53–94, 1985.
[51] Howard Straubing. Semigroups and languages of dot-depth 2. In Proceedings of the 13th International Col-
     loquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP’86, volume 226 of Lecture Notes in Computer
     Science, pages 416–423. Springer, 1986.
[52] Howard Straubing. Semigroups and languages of dot-depth two. Theoretical Computer Science, 58(1):361–
     378, 1988.
[53] Howard Straubing. Finite Automata, Formal Logic and Circuit Complexity. Birkhauser, Basel, Switzerland,
     1994.
[54] Howard Straubing and Denis Thérien. Partially ordered finite monoids and a theorem of I. Simon. Journal
     of Algebra, 119(2):393–399, 1988.
[55] Howard Straubing and Pascal Weil. On a conjecture concerning dot-depth two languages. Theoretical Com-
     puter Science, 104(2):161–183, 1992.
[56] Denis Thérien. Classification of finite monoids: The language approach. Theoretical Computer Science,
     14(2):195–208, 1981.
[57] Denis Thérien. Categories et langages de dot-depth un. RAIRO Theor. Informatics Appl., 22(4):437–445,
     1988.
[58] Gabriel Thierrin. Permutation automata. Theory of Computing Systems, 2(1):83–90, 1968.
[59] Wolfgang Thomas. Classifying regular events in symbolic logic. Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
     25(3):360–376, 1982.
[60] Pascal Weil. Inverse monoids and the dot-depth hierarchy. PhD thesis, University of Nebraska, 1988.
[61] Pascal Weil. Inverse monoids of dot-depth two. Theoretical Computer Science, 66(3):233–245, 1989.
[62] Pascal Weil. Some results on the dot-depth hierarchy. Semigroup Forum, 46(1):352–370, 1993.
[63] Georg Zetzsche. Separability by piecewise testable languages and downward closures beyond subwords. In
     Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS’18, pages
     929–938, 2018.
   Email address: firstname.name@labri.fr

     Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, LaBRI, UMR 5800, F-33400 Talence, France
