The Relative Efficiency of Propositional Proof Systems
Author(s): Stephen A. Cook and Robert A. Reckhow
Source: The Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 44, No. 1 (Mar., 1979), pp. 36-50
Published by: Association for Symbolic Logic
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2273702
Accessed: 26/02/2010 18:07

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=asl.

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.




                Association for Symbolic Logic is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
                Journal of Symbolic Logic.




http://www.jstor.org
 THE JOURNAL   OF SYMBOLIC LOGIC
 Volume 44, Number 1, March 1979




                            THE RELATIVE EFFICIENCY
                        OF PROPOSITIONAL PROOF SYSTEMS

                         STEPHEN   A. COOK   AND   ROBERT   A. RECKHOW




    ?1. Introduction.We are interested in studying the length of the shortest proof
 of a propositional tautology in various proof systems as a function of the length of
 the tautology. The smallest upper bound known for this function is exponential,
 no matter what the proof system. A question we would like to answer (but have not
 been able to) is whether this function has a polynomial bound for some proof
 system. (This question is motivated below.) Our results here are relative results.
    In ??2 and 3 we indicate that all standard Hilbert type systems (or Frege systems,
 as we call them) and natural deduction systems are equivalent, up to application of
 a polynomial, as far as minimum proof length goes. In ?4 we introduce extended
 Frege systems, which allow introduction of abbreviations for formulas. Since these
 abbreviations can be iterated, they eliminate the need for a possible exponential
 growth in formula length in a-proof, as is illustrated by an example (the pigeon-
 hole principle). In fact, Theorem 4.6 (which is a variation of a theorem of Statman)
 states that with a penalty of at most a linear increase in the number of lines of a
 proof in an extended Frege system, no line in the proof need be more than a con-
 stant times the length of the formula proved. The most difficult result is Theorem
4.5, which states that all extended Frege systems, regardless of which set of con-
nectives they use, are about equivalent, as far as minimum proof length goes.
 Finally, in ?5 we discuss the substitution rule, and show that Frege systems with
 this rule can simulate extended Frege systems.
   Some of our results here appeared earlier in the conference proceedings [1], and
Reckhow's Ph. D. thesis [2]. (These two papers also establish and report non-
polynomial lower bounds on some proof systems more restricted than the ones
mentioned above.)
   To motivate the study of propositional proof systems, let us briefly review some
of the theory of 9 and X9 (see [3], [4], and Chapter 10 of [5]). By convention, 9
denotes the class of sets of strings recognizable by a deterministic Turing machine
in time bounded by a polynomial in the length of the input. X9 is the same for
nondeterministic Turing machines. If we let TAUT denote the set of tautologies
over any fixed adequate set of connectives, then the main theorem in [3] implies
that 9 = XV if and only if TAUT is in g. Now 9- = X9A not only would imply
the existence of relatively fast algorithms for many interesting and apparently
unfeasible combinatorial algorithms in X9 (see [4]), it would also have an in-
teresting philosophical consequence for mathematicians. If 9 = X9, then there
is a polynomial p and an algorithm &/ with the following property. Given any

 Received   May 24, 1977.

                                              36
                                                                1979, Association   for Symbolic Logic
                                        PROOFSYSTEMS
                             PROPOSITIONAL                                             37

 proposition S of set theory and any integer n, &/ determines within only p(n) steps
 whether S has a proof of length n or less in (say) Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. To
 see that the existence of Q/follows from g = X9, observe that the problem solved
 by &/ is in X9A. In fact, a nondeterministic Turing machine can write any string
 of length n on its tape and then verify that the string is a proof of the given proposi-
 tion. For any reasonable logical theory, this verification can be performed within
 time bounded by some polynomial in n.
    Hence the importance of showing g : X9 (or 9 = XgA ?). A related important
 question is whether X9 is closed under complementation, i.e. C* - L is in X9
 whenever L is in XgV. (Here we use the notation 2* for the set of all finite strings
 over the finite alphabet 2 under consideration, and the assumption L c C*. This
 notation will be used throughout.) If X9 is not closed under complementation,
 then of course 9 :AX9A. On the other hand, if X9 is closed under complementa-
 tion, this would have interesting consequences for each of the combinatorial prob-
 lems in [4]. Hence the following result is important.
     1.1. PROPOSITION.   X9 is closed under complementationif and only if TAUT is
 inX.
     1.2. Notation. Y is the set of functions f:Z* -- 2 21, ,2 any finite alphabets,
 such that f can be computed by a deterministic Turing machine in time bounded
 by a polynomial in the length of the input.
    PROOFOF 1.1. The complement of the set of tautologies is in X9, since to verify
 that a formula is not a tautology one can guess at a truth assignment and verify
 that it falsifies the formula. Conversely, suppose the set of tautologies is in X9?. By
 the proof of the main theorem in [3], every set L in X9 is reducible to the com-
 plement of the tautologies in the sense that there is a functions in Y such that for
 all strings x, x e L ifff(x) is not a tautology. Hence a nondeterministic procedure
 for accepting the complement of L is: on input x, computef(x), and accept x if
f(x) is a tautology, using the nondeterministic procedure for tautologies assumed
 above. Hence the complement of L is in X9A.                   D
    The question of whether TAUT is in X9 is equivalent to whether there is a
 propositional proof system in which every tautology has a short proof, provided
 "proof system" and "short" are properly defined.
    1.3. DEFINITIONS.   If L c 27*, a proof system for L is a functions: * -- L for some
 alphabet 21 and f in Y such that f is onto. We say that the proof system is poly-
 nomially boundediff there is a polynomial p(n) such that for all y e L there is x e 2
 such that y = f(x) and Jxl < p(jyl), where Jzjdenotes the length of a string z.
    If y = f(x), then we will say that x is a proof of y, and x is a short proof of y if in
 addition lxi < p(jyl). Thus a proof systemf is polynomially bounded iff there is a
 bounding polynomial p(n) with respect to which every y e L has a short proof.
    1.4. PROPOSITION.    A set L is in X9 if L = 0 or L has a polynomially bounded
proof system.
    The analogous statement for recursive function theory is that L is recursively
 enumerable iff L = 0 or L is the range of a recursive function. The proof of the
 present proposition is straightforward. If L e X9, then some nondeterministic
 Turing machine M accepts L in polynomial time. If L : 0, we definef such that
 if x codes a computation of M which accepts y, then f(x) = y. If x does not code an
 accepting computation, then f(x) = y0 for some fixed y0 e L. Then f is clearly a
38                           S. A. COOK AND R. A. RECHKOW


polynomially bounded proof system for L. Conversely, if f is a polynomially
bounded proof system for L, then a fast nondeterministic algorithm for accepting
L is, on input y, guess a short proof x of y and verifyf(x) = y.     L1
   Putting Propositions 1.1 and 1.4 together we see that X9 is closed under com-
plementation if and only if TAUT has a polynomially bounded proof system, in
the general sense of Definition 1.3. It is easy to see (and is argued below) that any
conventional proof system for tautologies can naturally be made to fit the defini-
tion of proof system in 1.3. Although it is doubtful that every general proof system
for TAUT is natural, nevertheless this general framework helps explain the moti-
vating question of this paper: Are any conventional propositional proof systems
polynomially bounded?
   We cannot answer that question directly (except negatively for certain restricted
systems: see [1] and [2], and also [8]), but at least we can put different proof
systems into equivalence classes such that the answer is the same for equivalent
systems. We conjecture that the answer is always no.
     1.5. DEFINITION.Iff1:   * -- L and f2:      -   L are proof systems for L, then f2
                                            12
p-simulates fi provided there is a function g: 1 -? 2 such that g is in A, and
f2(g(x)) = fi(x) for all x.
   Thus g translates a proof x of y in the systemf into a proof g(x) of y inf2. It is
 easy to see, using the fact that Y'4s closed under composition, that p-simulation is a
 transitive reflexive relation, so that its symmetric closure is an equivalence relation.
                    If a proof system f2 for L p-simulates a polynomially bounded
     1.6. PROPOSITION.
proof systemf1 for L, then f2 is also polynomiallybounded.
   This is an immediate consequence of the definitions of "proof system" and
"polynomially bounded", and the fact that every function in Y is bounded in
length by a polynomial in the length of its argument.       C]
   We close this section by establishing some notation and terminology specific
for propositional proof systems which will be used in the rest of this paper. The
letter X will always stand for an adequate set of propositional connectives which are
binary, unary, or nullary (have two, one, or zero arguments). Adequatehere means
that every truth function can be expressed by formulas built up from members of K.
A formula refers to a propositional formula built up in the usual way from atoms
(propositional variables) and connectives from some set K, using infix notation.
(We speak of a formula over X if its connectives are from x.) If Al, ..., A", B are
formulas, then we write Al, ..., An l= B if B is a logical consequence of Al, ..., An
(i.e. every truth assignment satisfying Al, ..., An,satisfies B). Each of our proposi-
tional proof systems will be defined relative to some connective set K, and will be
capable of proving all tautologies over X by proofs using formulas over K. A
derivation(from zero or more lines called hypotheses) in such a system is a finite
sequence of lines, ending in the line proved. A line is always a formula, except in
the case of natural deduction systems (?3). Each line must either be a hypothesis,
or follow from earlier lines by a rule of inference. (In case the rule itself has no
hypothesis, the rule is an axiom scheme.) If the derivation has no hypothesis, it
is called a proof.
   Thus to specify a propositional proof system for our purposes, it is only neces-
sary to specify K, the definition of a line, and a finite set of rules of inference. To
make this notion of proof system be an instance of our abstract Definition 1.3, we
                            PROPOSITIONAL
                                       PROOFSYSTEMS                                39

note first of all that formulas can be naturally regarded as strings over a finite al-
phabet. The only problem is that an atom itself must be regarded as a string (say
the letter P followed by a string over {O, 1}) in order that there be an unlimited
supply of atoms. Then a proof X in the propositional system which is, say, a se-
quence of formulas, can naturally be regarded as a string over a finite alpha-
bet which includes the comma as a separator symbol, as well as the symbols
necessary to specify the formulas. The function f which abstractly specifies the
system would be given by f(z) = A if r proves A, and f(z) = AOfor some fixed
tautology AOif z is a string not corresponding to a proof in the system.
  The notation Al, ..., An,K B means that z is a derivation of B from hypotheses
Al, ..., An in the proof system Y. (The notation K-y means that there is some der-
ivation z in the system Y.) We use the following notation for various length
measures:
  l(A) is the number of occurrences of atoms and nullary connectives in a formula
(or sequence) A.
  A(z) is the number of lines in a derivation z.
  p(z) = maxil(Ai), if z is (A1, ..., A).
   Iznor JAlis the length of z or A as a string.
   ?2. Frege systems. In the most usual propositional proof systems the rules of
inference are formula schemes, and an instance of the scheme is obtained by
applying a substitution to the scheme. We shall call such systems Frege systems,
after Frege [6].
   Throughout this section we assume that all formulas are over some fixed ade-
quate connective set K. The following terms are defined relative to K.
   2.1. DEFINITIONS. If D1, ..., Dk are formulas and P1, ..., Pk are distinct atoms,
then of = (D1, ..., Dk)/(P1, ..., Pk) is a substitution, and uA is the formula which
results by simultaneously replacing Pi by Di, i = 1, ..., k, in formula A. A Frege
rule is a system of formulas (C1, ...,CQ)/D, where C1, ..., Cn,l= D. If n = 0, the
rule is an axiom scheme. For any substitution of we say that uD follows from
uC1,..., u Cnby the rule(C1, ..., CI)/D. An inferencesystem is a finite set of Frege
rules. The notions of derivationand the symbol F- for F are defined as in the end
of ? 1, where now a line in a derivation is a formula. By our condition on the defini-
tion of Frege rule, it is clear that if Al, ..., A, F-gB then Al, .. ., A, l= B.
   2.2. DEFINITIONS.An inference system F is implicationallycomplete if Al, ..., An
Kg B whenever Al, ...An, l= B. A Frege system is an implicationally complete in-
ference system.
   In fact, Frege's original system in [6] does not fit the above definition, because
it has axioms instead of axiom schemes, and tacitly includes the substitution rule
(see ?5). According to Church [12, p. 158], the idea of axiom schemes used to
replace the substitution rule is due to von Neumann [13]. If we modify Frege's
system to be a Frege system, the result has connectives X = { D, v }, and the rule
                                     A, A DDB
                                          B
and the six axiom schemes
          A D(BDA),           (CD(BDA))         D ((CDB)D(CDA)),
 40                             S. A. COOK AND R. A. RECHKOW


             (D D(B   DA))    D    (B D (D vDA)),       (B DA)   D   (-AA :-B),
                                  -i--IA   D A,     A D -i--A.
   2.3. THEOREM. For any two Frege systems iF and F2 over K there is afunctionf
in S and constant c such that for all formulas Al, ..., An, B and derivations zc, if
A1, ..., An~Ks B then Al, ..., An            Wf2)B, and A(f(z)) < ca(zc) and pff(iz)) <
cp(z). (See the end of ?1for notation.)
   2.4. COROLLARY. Any two Frege systems over K p-simulate each other. Hence one
Frege system over X is polynomially boundedif all Frege systems over X are.
   The corollary is an immediate consequence of the theorem and Proposition 1.6.
Reckhow [2] proves a generalization of the corollary to cover the case of Frege
systems with different connective sets simulating each other, even when some of the
connectives have arity greater than two. His proof is much more complicated than
our proof of Theorem 2.3 given below, largely because of the difficulty of simulat-
ing systems using the connectives _ and $ by systems without these connectives.
Fortunately, Corollary 4.6. below, concerning extended Frege systems, makes
Corollary 2.4 and Reckhow's generalization less important than they might appear
at first, since extended Frege systems seem to be more natural than Frege systems
when measuring proof lengths.
  The lemma below is used in the proof of Theorem 2.3. (The notation u(7) means
uA1,  ...,UAk, if z is a derivation Al, ..., Ak.)
  2.5. LEMMA. If iZ is a derivationof A from B1, ..., Bk in a Frege system F, then
q(7c)is a derivationof qAfrom uBl, ..., uBk in F, for any substitutionI.
  The proof is an easy induction on the length of z.          D
   To prove Theorem 2.3, assume 91 and F2 are Frege systems over K. For each rule
R = (C1, ..., Cm)/D in Fl, let ZCRbe a derivation of D from C1, ..., Cm in F2. Now
suppose z is a derivation of B from Al, . . ., An in F, and suppose y = (B1, ..., Bk).
To construct     the F2-derivationf(z)   from a, if Bi follows from earlier Bj's by the
 Fl-rule Ri and substitution    ui, simply replace Bi by the derivation Ui(JRj) (with
hypotheses deleted). According to Lemma 2.5, Ui(JCRj) is a derivation of Bi from the
same earlier B 's. Clearly 2(f(tz))   < cl2(z), where cl is the number of lines in the
longest derivation ZCR,as R ranges over the finite set of rules of Y1. Finally, p(ftz))
 < c2p(W),  where c2 is an upper bound on l(A) as A ranges over all formulas in all
the derivations ZCR,R a rule of F1.        D1

   ?3. Natural deduction systems. The purpose of this section is to indicate the
sense in which natural deduction systems are equivalent to Frege systems. Rather
than presenting     a specific natural deduction   system, such as one appearing       in
Prawitz [7], we shall introduce       a general definition  analogous     to our general
notion of Frege system. To make the classical proposition      system of Prawitz fit our
definition, it is necessary to allow Prawitz's notion of proof to be a more general
directed acyclic graph, rather than a tree. That is, once a formula is derived from a
set of assumptions,     we do not require that it be derived again if it is used twice.
Alternatively,   we could stick to Prawitz's tree proofs, provided that if a formula
occurred several times in a proof with the same assumptions,         it be counted only
once in measuring the length of the proof. In fact, we shall present our natural
deduction proofs as sequences of lines, and each line will have the form Al, ..., A,
-+  A, where Al, .. An are assumptions    which imply A. Thus our proofs require re-
                            PROPOSITIONALPROOF SYSTEMS                                 41

peating the assumptions for a formula with each step, which makes them a little
longer and harder to write down, but easier to analyze. For convenience, we allow
only the right-most formula An to be discharged. Reckhow [2] gives a more general
treatment of natural deduction systems, as well as Gentzen's sequent systems.
   Part of the appeal of a natural deduction system is that it allows the "deduction
theorem" to be used as a rule. According to the deduction theorem, from a deriva-
tion w in a Frege system F showing Al, ..., Am F- B we can construct a derivation
w' in F showing Al, ..., Am,- K Am D B. The trouble is that a' may be twice as
long as w, so that if a natural deduction derivation has m nested uses of this deduc-
tion rule and they are eliminated sequentially to obtain a Frege derivation, the
result might be longer by a factor of 2mthan the original derivation. Fortunately,
they can be eliminated simultaneously, as shown by the construction fr(X) below.
   The following definitions are relative to a given adequate connective set K.
   3.1. Notation. Even if 'or V is not in a, formulas N(P) and O(P, Q) over X can
always be found such that N(P) and O(P, Q) are equivalent to -P and P V Q,
respectively, and such that P and Q each has at most one occurrence in each of N(P)
and O(P, Q). A fixed "dummy" atom POmay occur several times, however. For
example, if K is {E, D } then N(P) could be (P * (Po D PO))and O(P, Q) could be
((P E (Po D Po)) D Q). (See ?5. 3.1.1 of [2] for an argument showing how this
can be done in general.) Thus we will take -iA or A V B to mean N(A) or O(A, B),
respectively, if or V is not in K. We use V (A1, ..., Am)to stand for ( ...(A1 V A2)
* VAm) (association to the left), and V'(A1,        , Am) to stand for (A1 v
(Am-, v Am).) (association to the right).
  3.2. DEFINITIONS. A naturnal deduction line (or just line) is a pair r -? A, where
F is any finite sequence of formulas, and A is a formula. If r is empty, the line is
written simply -? A. Associated with a line L = (A1, ..., Am)  A are two equiva-
lent formulas L* = V ( A1, . . , - Am, A) and LO = V'( A1, ..., IAm, A). (If m =
0, the L* = LP= A.) The line L takes on the same truth value under a truth assign-
ment as formulas L* and LO,so that the concepts of validity, logical consequence,
etc. are well defined for lines. If a is a sequence B1, ..., B, of formulas and L is the
line (Al, ..., Am) -+ A, then /JL is the line (B1, ..., ByI Al, ..., Am) -+ A. If A is a
set of lines, L is a line, a is a sequence of formulas, and of is a substitution, then A
I= L implies that zk(A) I= Ju(L), where the operations a and of are extended to
sets of lines in the natural way. If A is a finite set of lines and L is a line such that
A 1= L, then the system R = A/L is a natural deductionrule. Line L' follows from
A' by rule R provided for some substitution of and sequence z, A' = J1(A), and
L' =     (4L). A natural deduction system is a finite set of natural deduction rules
which is implicationally complete (implicationally complete being defined in a
manner analogous to that for Frege systems). A formula A is represented in a
natural deduction system X by the line -+ A. This convention allows us to speak
of proofs of formulas and derivations of a formula from formulas in X, and thus
write for example A1, ..., An ,      B instead of   A1, ...,    A    n - B.
  If L = (A1, ..., A*)    A is a line, then l(L) = I(A1) +   ...   + l(Ak) + I(A). If Z is
a derivation, then A(z) is the number of lines in a, and p(z) is the maximum of l(L),
for all Lin z.
   An example of a natural deduction rule, which embodies the deduction theorem,
is R1 = (P -+ Q)/(-- -iP V Q). This rule together with its converse R2 =
(-    'P V Q)/(P -+ Q) can turn any Frege system F into a natural deduction sytem
 42                         S. A. COOK AND R. A. RECHKOW

  nd(F), provided we reinterpret every rule R = (C1, ..., CJ)/D of the Frege system
  to be R' = (ACE ..., -CE)/ --D. In fact, if A 1= L, then to deduce L from A
  in nd(F), we first observe that every hypothesis M in A can be changed to -M
  by repeated use of the rule R1. By the implicational completeness of F, we can
  derive --ELMin nd(F) from these lines --AMP. Now L can be derived from --LP
 by repeated use of the rule R2.
      Notice that every derivation in F, of say B from Al, ..., A", can be turned into a
 derivation of B from Al, ..., An in nd(F) simply by adding the symbol -+ to the
 left of every formula in the derivation.
      Conversely, every natural deduction system X can be turned into a Frege
 system fr(X), where the rules of fr(X) consist of the two rules R' and R" for every
 rule R of X. To explain R' and R" we need to recall the notation M* for V(- Al,
  ...,IAm, A) and introduce the notation(PM)* for V(P, --Al, ..., -1Am, A), where
 M is a line (Al, ..., Am) -? A and P is an atom. If R = AXL,then R' = A*/L* and
 R" = (PA)*/(PL)*, where P is some atom not occurring in A or L, and we have
 extended the * notation to sets A of lines in the obvious manner. It is easy to see
 that the rules R' and R" are sound if R is sound.
      Now if z = L1, ..., L,, is any derivation in X, then we claim that Z* = L*
 L* is a derivation in fr(X). For suppose Li follows from earlier L 's by the the rule
 R = AXL in X. Then for some substitution of and sequence z, Li is JI(L) and the
 earlier L 's comprise the set J1(A). If a is empty, the Lie follows from earlier
 Lx's by the Frege rule R' = A*/L* by a, since for any line M, (q(M))* = (M*).
 If J is not empty, then LiP follows from earlier Lj*'s by the Frege rule R" =
 (PA)*/(PL)* and substitution a', where a' is the substitution obtained by simul-
 taneously applying the substitution of and V( A1, ..., -A,*)/P, where a is (A1,
 ...I Ak). We need the fact that for any line M with no occurrence of P, u'((PM)*) =
 (Juf(M))*.
     Thus z* is a derivation in fr(X) for every derivation z in X. Notice that since
 (--HA)* = A, if z is a derivation in X of B from Al, ..., Al, then il* is a derivation
 in fr(X) of B from AI, ..., Al. Further, notice that ,(ii*) = {(ic) and p(ii*) < cp(ic),
 where the constant c depends only on the underlying connective set K.
     Although the constructions above allow us to translate back and forth between
 Frege and natural deduction systems, the following result still needs a separate
 proof
     3.3. THEOREM.Givennaturaldeductionsystems X1 andX2 overK thereis afunction
f in S and a constant c such that for all lines L1, ..., L, L and derivations ic, if
 L1 ... Ln 7r L, then L1, ..., L, Kf: L, and 2Af(ic)) < c4(7c) and p(f(tz)) <
 cp(7z).
     The proof is very similar to the proof of Theorem 2.3. Lemma 2.5 is replaced by
the statement that if z is a derivation in X of line M from lines M1, ..., Mk, then
Jo(z) is a derivation of JI(M) from JI(Ml), ..., ZI(Mk).             D
     3.4. COROLLARY. Let K be any adequate set of connectives. All Frege and natural
deductionsystems over X p-simulate all other Frege and natural deduction systems
over K. Hence one such system over X is polynomially bounded if and if all such
systems over X are polynomially bounded.
     The corollary follows immediately from Theorems 2.3 and 3.3, together with the
constructions nd(F) and fr(X) given above.            D
                             PROPOSITIONAL PROOF SYSTEMS                                  43

   Reckhow [2] treats a kind of natural deduction system in which r in a line r-+
A is regarded as a set of formulas rather than a sequence of formulas. Such a sys-
tem might allow for shorter proofs, since in effect there are implicit rules which
allow r to be reordered. In [2] it is shown that the above corollary holds for this
system, and that the second part holds even when the systems have different con-
nective sets.
   The corollary also holds for Gentzen systems with cut, provided a Gentzen proof
is considered to be a sequence of sequents, so that a given occurrence of a sequent
can be used more than once in a proof, as opposed to the more usual definition
that a Gentzen proof is a tree of sequents. When a Gentzen proof is defined to be
a tree, an exponential lower bound for the number of sequents in a minimum cut-
free proof of a formula follows from an unpublished result of Statman. More
recently, Cook and Rackoff have an unpublished result showing an exponential
lower bound for Gentzen proofs considered as sequences, provided both the cut
and thinning rules are disallowed.

    ?4. Extended Frege systems. The previous sections have indicated that certain
standard proof systems for the propositional calculus are about equally power-
ful. We now look for natural extensions of these systems which might be more
powerful, in the sense that they yield shorter proofs. To motivate this search,
we try to use Frege systems to simulate an informal proof of the "pigeon-hole
principle".
   One statement of the pigeon-hole principle is that no injective function maps
{1, 2, ..., n} to {1, 2, ..., n - 1}, n > 2. For each value of n, this statement may be
formalized in the propositional calculus as follows. Let Pi1, 1 < i < n, I < j <
n - 1, be a set of atoms, whose intended meaning is "i is mapped to j". Let wn be
the set (or sometimes the conjunction of the formulas in the set) {Pi         ... V Pi, _1 I
1 < i < n} U {_-1Pik V -PijI 1 < i             < n, 1 <k< n- 1}. If atruthassign-
ment were given for which each formula in Yn is true then one could define a
function f which by the first set of disjunctions is from {1, 2, ..., n} to {1, 2, ....
n - 1} and which by the second set is injective. Thus the formula An =               n is a
tautology.
   An informal proof of the pigeon-hole principle proceeds by induction on n.
It is obvious for n = 2. In general, iff: {1, ..., n}        {1, ..., n - 1}, then let f':
{1, ..., n - 1} -+ {1, ..., n - 2} be defined by f'(i) =f(i) iff(i) o n - 1; other-
wise f'(i) = f(n). Iff is injective, it is easy to see thatf' is also, contradicting the
induction hypothesis.
   To mimic this proof in a Frege system, we try to deduce Yn-1 from Yn. For each
i, j, we introduce a formula Bij which means f'(i) = j. Bij = Pii V (Pin-I &
Pnj), 1 < i < n-i         1 < j < n -2. Let aUn- be the substitution Bij/Pij (1 < i <
n - 1 1 <j ? n - 2). The argument that finjective implies f' injective shows
y    i#    n-1(yn-1).   By   completeness,   OYn F-   aUn-l(5yn-0    Similarly,   5Yn-1   K
Un-2G5"n-2),   so by Lemma 2.5, there is a derivation of the same number of lines
showing Un-l(>"n-1) K an-l Jn-2(G9n-2), SO Yn K an-1 Un-2(yn-2).          Proceeding this
way, we finally obtain a derivation showing Y5n F An- -11             (2(52)   But Y"2 is
{P11, P21, -iP11 V -P21}, from which a contradiction is easily derived, so by the
deduction theorem, F- --lyn; i. e. F- An
44                          S. A. COOK AND R. A. RECHKOW

    It is not hard to see that by choosing the rules of our Frege system conveniently,
 the derivation of gn-iGy'n-l)     from Yn'nhas 0(n3) lines. Hence the entire proof of
 An has 0(n4) = O(N4/3) lines, where N is OAnI.    On the other hand, each application
 of a substitution vi triples the length of a formula, so the longest formulas in the
 proof of Angrow exponentially in n.
    A simple device to reduce the formula length in the above proof is to introduce
 new atoms which abbreviate the formulas Bij. Thus the atom Q!; has a defining
 formula Qb       (Pij V (Pis, 1 & PO)), 1 < i < n - 1 1 < j < n- 2. From these
 defining formulas and the formulas Yn, the formulas Z~n-iGy'n-l)     are easily derived,
 where ZCn-1is the substitution Qb-/Pij (I < i < n-1        1 < j < n -2). In general,
 a new atom Qk*l is introduced for gn-1 ... an-k(Bij) with defining formula Qk*J1_
 (Q-j V (Q, n-k-l & Qn-k,j)),      and the formulas Vn-k-1l(yn-k-l)   are easily derived
 from these defining formulas and the formulas Vn-kGy'n-k) where rn-k is the sub-
 stitution Q4l/Pij (1 < i < n - k, 1 < j < n - k - 1). In this way, a contradiction
 is derived from Yn'n in 0(n4) lines, where now each formula has length only 0(n).
 Hence An has a proof of length 0(n5) in this framework. This kind of proof system
 can be formalized as follows:
    4.1. DEFINITION.  An extendedFrege system over a connective set K is a proof sys-
 tem which consists of a Frege system Y over X together with the extension rule
 which allows formulas of the form P _ A to be added to a derivation, where A
 is any formula over K, and P is any "new" atom. (P must not occur in A, in any
 lines preceding P      A, or in any hypotheses to the derivation. P can occur in later
 lines,
 4
        but not in the last line.) We say P is a defined atom and P      A is its defining
formula. If      is not in a, we choose some short formula P         Q over X which is
 equivalent to P _ Q, and let P         A be the defining formula for P. The extended
 Frege system based on F is denoted by eY.
    (The extension rule was first suggested by Tseitin [8], in the context of resolution
proofs.)
     4.2. PROPOSITION(SOUNDNESS OF eY).      If A1, ..., An KeF   B, then A1, ..., An 1 B.
     PROOF.Let z- be any truth assignment to the atoms of Al, ..., An and B which
satisfies Al, ..., An. Then z- can be extended to make each line in the derivation
true. In particular, if P _ A is a defining formula, then P has not occurred earlier
in the derivation, so we are free to extend z so z(P) = z(A). Hence z(B) is true,
since B is the last line of the derivation.   D1
   Although the extension rule apparently allows the lengths of formulas in a
derivation to be greatly reduced, the following result shows the number of lines in
a proof cannot be much reduced.
  4.3. Proposition. If zc is a derivationof B from Al, ..., An in eF, then there is a
derivationiz' of B from A1, ..., An in Y with A(ic') < A(ic) + cm where c depends
only on Y, and m is the numberof definingformulas in iz.
  PROOF.Suppose Pi           Ci, 1 < i < m, are the defining formulas in iz (given in
the order in which they occur in ir). Then iz is a derivation in F of B from
Al, ..., An, P1   C1, ..., Pmn   Cm. Now let a be the composed substitution

                                 Cm   Cm-I 0        C1
                                                  0 _C
                                 Pm    m-1          P1
By Lemma 2.5, u(iz) is a derivation of aB from uA1 ...,,                U(P1
                                                                     BAnM         C1), ...
                                PROPOSITIONALPROOF SYSTEMS                                        45

u(Pm Cm).By the restrictionson the defined atoms Pi, (iz) is a derivation in F of
B from Al, ..., A, u, -           .., Cm -Cm.     But Q     Q has some fixed proof
in F of some number of lines (say c lines), so by Lemma 2.5, each aCi-C,
has a proof in F of c lines. Also A(o(iz)) = A(iz). Hence we construct lz' from
o(iz) together with these m proofs, and the proposition follows.      D1
   Of course the formulas of lz' can grow exponentially in m, even if the formulas
of iz are short, as shown by the pigeon-hole example at the beginning of this sec-
tion.
   We mentioned that Reckhow [2] strengthened Theorem 2.3 to cover the case of
different connective sets, but the proof was complicated by the difficulties of find-
ing a short translation for a formula containing into one containing, say, just
&, v, and -i. In the case of extended Frege systems, this difficulty can be circum-
vented. Theorem 4.5 below states that if the number of lines in the shortest proof of
a tautology A is bounded by some function L(l(A)) in some extended Frege system,
then essentially the same is true of any extended Frege system over any connective
set, and furthermorethe lengths of the formulas in a proof need not be much longer
than the formula proved. (The latter is in sharp contrast to the apparent situation
for Frege proofs without extension.)
   4.5. THEOREM. Suppose eY and eY' are extended Frege systems over K and K', re-
spectively,and supposeL(n) > nis a naturalnumberfunctionsuch that every tautology
A over K has a proof iz in eY with A(ic) < L(l(A)). Then every tautology A' over
K' has a proof iz' in eY' such that A(ic') < cL(cl(A')) and p(z;') < cl(A'), where the
constant c dependsonly on F and Y'.
   4.6. THEOREM (STATMAN)1. For any extended Frege system eY and tautology A,
if z is a proof of A in eY, then there is a proof iz' of A in eY such that A(ic') <
c(A(ic) + I(A)) and p(ic') < cl(A), wherethe constant c dependsonly on F.
   4.7. COROLLARY(TO THEOREM4.5). A given extendedFrege system is polynomially
boundedif and only if all extended Frege systems over all connective sets are poly-
nomially bounded. Also, an extended Frege system eY is polynomially bounded if
and only if there is a polynomial boundon the numberof lines in proofs in eSF. Hence,
if 9      A
         X9,   then there is no polynomial bound on the numberof lines in proofs in
extended Frege systems, Frege systems, or (by ?3) natural deductionsystems.
   Propositions 4.5, 4.6, and 4.7 are evidence that the extended Frege systems are
a very natural class of proof system. Further evidence is provided by results in
[11], which show that extended Frege system proofs can simulate the proof of any
theorem of a certain number theory system PV. ("Simulate" here means something
similar to the way in which extended Frege proofs simulate the proof of the pigeon
hole principle in the example given at the beginning of this section.) The same
paper [11] shows that extended Frege systems are the most efficient systems whose
soundness is provable in PV.
   The remainder of this section is devoted to proving Theorems 4.5 and 4.6. Let us


   'After proving a version of Theorem 4.5 without the bound on p(7r') in course notes [9], the
first author received an earlier version of Statman [10] and realized the proof in the notes could be
strengthened to yield the present Theorems 4.5 and 4.6. Statman's theorem in [10] has a more
general setting than 4.6, but a weaker bound on A(7r').The authors wish to thank Martin Dowd for
helpful discussions concerning Theorem 4.6.
46                          S. A. COOK AND R. A. RECHKOW

start by showing that a bound on proof length in an extended Frege system gives
us a bound on derivation length.
  4.8. LEMMA.Suppose eF and L(n) satisfy the hypothesesof Theorem4.5. If A1,
    Am,B are formulas over /c such that Al, ..., Am1 B, then there is a derivation
X in eY of B from A1, ..., Amwith A(X) < cL(cn), wheren = l(A1) + * + l(Am)+
1(B), and c dependsonly on F.
  PROOF.Suppose first that the connective set c of F contains V and --. Since Al,
  I AmF=B, we have 1 (-A1(-A2 V . V(-Am) VB) ...)). Hence this formula
has a proof iz' in eY with A(iz') < L(n), n = l(A1) +        ...   + l(Am) + I(B). If we
assume Y has the cut rule
                                     PF--P V Q
                                          Q
then by appending m applications of this rule to lt', we obtain a derivation iz of B
from Al, ..., Am satisfying the lemma, with A(iz) < 2L(n). If the cut rule is not in
Y, then by Theorem 2.3 the rule can be simulated to produce a derivation l: with
A(1z) < cL(n).
  If V or 'is not in K, one can check that neverthelessthere are formulas O(P, Q)
and N(P) over X equivalent to P v Q and 'P. respectively, such that O(P, Q) and
N(P) have at most one occurrenceeach of P and Q (see 3.1). In this case we obtain
the bound A(iz) < cL(cn).       El
   To prove Theorems 4.5 and 4.6 we need the notion of a defining set of formulas
def(A) for a formula A. We assume that every formula B (over any connective set)
has associated with it an atom PB such that PQ is Q for any atom Q. and distinct
nonatomic formulas have distinct associated atoms. To be definite, we could let
PB be the string consisting of the letter P followed by the string B, if B is nonatomic.
In any case, we shall also assume for convenience later, that there are infinitely
many atoms P, called admissibleatoms, which are not of the form PB for any non-
atomic B.
   Let us call a formula A admissible if all its atoms are admissible. If A is admis-
sible, then every truth assignment z-to the atoms of A has a unique extension a' to
the atoms PB, B any subformula of A, such that 'Z'(PB)= z(B). We shall define
def(A) such that any extension z" of z satisfies def(A) iff z" agrees with .' on the
atoms PB. For example, if A is Q V (R & S), then def(A) might be {(P(R&S)
(R & S)),   (PA   Q V P(R&S))} In fact, it is useful to more generally define def(),
where Tis any adequate set of connectives, perhaps different from the set of con-
nectives appearing in A.
   4.9. DEFINITION. Let Tj and KT2be connective sets. Corresponding to each null-
ary connective (constant) K1 in Tj we associate a fixed formula K2 over KT2
                                                                          equivalent
to K1; corresponding to each unary connective u1 over A, we associate a fixed for-
mula u2P over K2 equivalent to ujP, and corresponding to each binary connective
01 in x, we associate a fixed formula P 02 Q over K2equivalent to P oi Q. We assume
the formulas P      1 Q over Tj and P 2 Q over T2 are each equivalent to P        Q.
For each formula Al over x, we associate a set def,2(Al) of formulas over KT2defined
by induction on the length of Al as follows:
   def,2(P) = 0 (the empty set) for each atom P.
   def,9(K1)    {PK1 2 K2} for each constant K1 in xj.
                                PROPOSITIONAL PROOF SYSTEMS                        47

   def,2(uA) = def,2(A) U {PUqA -2 U2PA}, for each unary connective u1in K,.
   def,2(AoB) = def12(A)U def12(B)U {PA?1B 2 PA 02 PB}, for each binary con-
nective o1in xi.
  In case xi = K2, we assume K1 = K2, ul = u2, and ol = ?2 It is easy to check that
 the total number of occurrences of atoms in def12(A) is bounded by a linear function
 of l(A).
   4.10. LEMMA.Suppose eY is an extended Frege system over X, A is an admissible
formula over X, and def,(A) K-F PA. Thenfor some I' we have Add A, where
 AGz') < A(X) + cl(A) and p(z') < (p(z) + c)l(A), and c depends only on y.
   PROOF.Let a be the simultaneous substitution EIPE for all nonatomic subfor-
 mulas E of A, so in particular JPA = A. Then every formula in o(def,(A)) is an
 instance of P   P, and each of these instances will have a proof in Y of some fixed
 number of lines, and a number of atoms bounded by a constant times l(A). These
proofs, together with o(iz), comprise ir'.    F]
   4.1 1. LEMMA.If eY and eF' are extendedFrege systems over Kand K' respectively,
A' is an admissible formula over I', and def,(A') KXF PA,, then for some derivation
 Z', def,,(A') KX     PA,, where A(z') < cA(z) and p(z') < d, and the constants
c and d dependonly on Y and Y'.
  PROOF. Suppose l: is B1, ..., Bin. We may assume, by renaming if necessary, that
all atoms of each Bi are admissible, except possible those which occur in the hypo-
theses or conclusion of l: (i.e. except those of the form Pct where C' is a subformula
of A'). We shall construct the derivation lz' in eY' by filling out the skeleton deri-
vation PB1, .,   PBm. (Notice    that PBm is PA, since Bm is PA, and in general PQ = Q
for any atom Q.) In fact, we shall show that for some constants c and d depending
only on Y and Y', each PB, can be derived from earlier PB1's and def,,(A') in at
most c lines by formulas C with l(C) < d.
  To see how to derive PB, in lz' we consider three cases, depending on how Bi was
obtained in lz. For each of these cases we assume that some of the formulas of
def,,(Bi) are available in lt', either because they are among the hypotheses def,,(A')
of ir' or because they are introduced at the beginning of lz' by the extension rule.
The defining formula for Pc, where C is a subformula of Bj, is in def,,(A') if C is
also a subformula of A'. If C is not a subformula of A', then the defining formula
for PC can legally be included in lz' by the extension rule.
  Case I. Bi is a hypothesis for lz, so Bi is in def,(A'). We may assume Bi has the
form PC      (PD' ? PE'), where C', D', E' are subformulas of A', P o Q is the fixed
formula over X equivalent to P o' Q, and C' is D' o' E'. (The cases of unary and
0-ary connectives are similar.) Then PC -a' (PD' ?' PE') is in def,,(A'), and so is a
hypothesis of lt'. Let H(o') be the formula P     (Q o R) over x. Note that H(o')
depends only on the connective o', and not otherwise on Bi. Then the rule

                               P       '(Q o' R),
                            R= P              n
                                                  def,,(H(o'))
                                              PH(-')

is sound, so by Theorem 2.3 we may assume it is a rule of Y'. Let a be an extension
of the substitution
48                          S. A. COOK AND R. A. RECHKOW


such that o(def,,(H(o'))) = def,,(Bi). Then PB,follows in one step by R and a from
def,,(A') and defK,(Bi).
   Case II. Bi is introduced in l: by the extension rule. Then Bi has the form P   C,
where P is a new defined atom. The constraints governing the use of the extension
rule imply that P does not occur in the hypotheses or conclusion of lZ,and by our
assumption at the beginning of this proof, P is admissible. Therefore, P does not
occur in the hypotheses or conclusion of lt'. We note that the formula P -' PC,
together with any subset of the formulas of def,,(Bi) not introduced earlier could be
introduced by the extension rule in iz', after any necessary formulas of def,,(Bi-1)
and before formulas of def,,(Bi+,) are introduced. The order of introduction could
be def,,(C), P -' Pc, followed by one or more formulas whose conjunction is
equivalent to PB, '(P -' Pc). This last formula itself will be in def,,(Bi) if _ is
in K, in which case Bi is P _ C. In this case, it follows from Theorem 2.3 that PB
can be deduced in a bounded number of bounded steps in ir' from P - ' PC and
PBS -' (P -' Pc). If -is     not in X, there are nevertheless a bounded number of
formulas in def,,(Bi) which imply PB, -' (P -' PC), and the number and structure
of these formulas depends only on the way          is represented in X and K'. Hence
again PB, can be deduced in lz' from defK,(Bi)and P -' PC by a bounded number of
bounded formulas.
  Case III. Bi follows from earlier formulas in l: by a rule R = (C1, ..., Ck)ID in
Y by the substitution a. Then C1, ..., Ck F D, so the rule

                 R' = def,,(D), def,,(C1), ..., def,,(Ck),   PC1,   PCk
                                               PD

 is sound, and by Theorem 2.3 we may assume it is a rule of Y'. We may assume all
formulas C1, . . ., C*, D are admissible. Let a' be the composition of the substitutions
a(E)!PE for all subformulas E of formulas in the set {C1, ..., C*, D}. Then
9'(def,,(Cj)) c defv,(a(Cj)), 1 < j < k, and u'(def,,(D)) c def,,(a(D)). Of course
each a(Cj) is some B1, 1 < i, and v(D) is Bi. By the induction hypothesis Pa(C,)
occurs earlier in lt'. Hence PB, follows by R' and a' from earlier formulas ic' and a
bounded number of formulas from defK,(B,),for various B,.
    This completes the proof of Lemma 4.11.
    Now assume the hypotheses of Theorem 4.5, and let A' be any valid formula over
t'. We may assume A' is admissible, for if not, we may rename the atoms in A' so
that it is admissible, find a suitable proof of the result, and then rename all atoms
in the proof to obtain a suitable proof of A'. Then def,(A') # PA', so by hypothesis,
the bounds on l(def,(A')), and Lemma 4.8, there is a derivation iz in eF of PA'
from defK(A')such that A(iz)< c1L(c1l(A')). By Lemma 4.11, there is a derivation
iZ' in eY' Of PA' from def,,(A') such that A(iZ')< c2L(c1l(A')) and p(-z') < d.
Theorem 4.5 now follows by Lemma 4.10.
    To prove Theorem 4.6, we may assume as above that A is admissible. By in-
duction on the length of B, it is easy to see that for every admissible formula B over
K there is a derivation iCB in Y of PB       B from def,(B) such that Az(B) < c1l(B)
and P(ZB) < c21(B),where x is the connective set of F. By putting together iCA with
iz in the theorem, we obtain a derivation lz of PA from def,(A) such that A(zl) <
C3(AiAZ) + 1(A)) and p(zl) < C41(Z). We now apply Lemma 4.11 with a' = X,
                                PROPOSITIONALPROOF SYSTEMS                             49

eY' = eY, and z = lz to modify lz so its formulas have bounded length, and
finally apply Lemma 4.10 to the resulting derivation. El
   ?5. The Substitution Rule. Frege's original propositional proof system [6] tacitly
assumed the following:
  5.1. Substitution Rule. From A conclude uA, for any substitution o in the no-
tation of the system.
   5.2. DEFINITION. A Frege system withsubstitution,s., is obtained from a Frege
system F by addition of the substitution rule. Hypotheses are not allowed in
derivations in s,.
  The reason hypotheses are not allowed in s.-derivations is that in general not
A l= uA. Thus the substitution rule is unsound in this sense. On the other hand, if
l= A then l= uA, so if -F A then l= A. In other words, sF is a sound system for
proving tautologies, but not for deriving formulas from hypotheses.
  The theorem below shows that Frege systems with substitution can p-simulate
extended Frege systems. The converse may be false, however. (We conjecture
Frege systems with substitution are not p-verifiable in the sense of [11], whereas
extended Frege systems are p-verifiable.)
  5.3. THEOREM. Given an extended Frege system e,9Fthere is a function f in Y and
constant c such that for all proofs iz and formulas A, if H.      A, then Kf (1) A,
and A(flz)) < cA(c)p(2) and p(f(z)) < cA(2)p(c).
  PROOF. Suppose P1 C1, ..., Pk - Ck are the defining formulas introduced by
extension in iz. As discussed before Theorem 3.3, F can be turned into a natural
deduction system X by including the rules
                                P      p                               Q
                   R,       -              VQ Q and    R2 =    p

Let us assume in addition that X has the rules

                        3                       4and   R4=    RP
                                P. R        Q                      Q
and the axiom P-+ P. Then for each i, 1 < i < k, the line E1, ...,Ek -+E can be
derived from the axiom and k - 1 uses of R3 and R4, for any formulas E1, ..., E*.
The derivations of these k lines, together with iz, describe a derivation gz in X of
E, ..., Ek-+   A, where now Ei is the defining formula Pi          Ci, and A(zl) < A(Z) +
k2 and P(zl) < (k + l)p(z). Now by adding k applications of rule R1, we obtain a
derivation in X of B, where B is --E1 V (-iE2 V * V (--E-, V A) ...). Hence not-
ing k < A(z), we have by the proof of corollary 3.4 a derivation s in 5 of B,
where A(Z2) < c1(({Z))2 and P(1Z2) < cli(z)p(z). Now assume the defining formulas
P1 C1, .., Pk1 Ck are numbered in reverse of the order in which they appear
in iz. Then P1 C1 appears last, so P1 has no occurrence in any Ci or in A. By
applying the substitution rule to B with the substitution C1/Pl, and applying the
Frege rule (-i(P-P)    V Q)/Q, we can derive --E2 V ... V (-- EkvA)...) from B.
By k 1 further applications of the substitution rule and this Frege rule, each
       -
of the Ei's can be pruned, and we obtain a proof of A in s5J which satisfies the
conditions of the theorem.      Cl
  By combining the above theorem with Theorem 4.5, we obtain the following.
 50                            S. A. COOK AND R. A. RECHKOW

   5.4. COROLLARY.   If there exists a polynomially boundedextended Frege system,
 then all Frege systems with substitution over all connectives sets are polynomially
 bounded.     D
   A result similar to Theorem 4.5 can be proved for Frege systems with substitu-
tion, using the methods in that proof and in the above argument. In particular, one
Frege system with substitution is polynomially bounded if and only if all such
systems over all connective sets are polynomially bounded. Reckhow [2] proves
this result by different methods.

                                           REFERENCES

    [1] S. A. COOKand R. A. RECKHOW, On the lengths of proofs in the propositional calculus,
 Preliminary version, Proceedings of the Sixth Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of
 Computing, May 1974, pp. 135-148. (See also corrections for the above in SIGACT News,
 vol. 6(1974), pp. 15-22.)
    [2] R. A. RECKHOW, On the lengths of proofs in the propositional calculus, Ph.D. Thesis, Depart-
 ment of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 1976.
    [3] S. A. COOK, The complexity of theorem proving procedures, Proceedings of the Third
 Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, May 1971, pp. 151-158.
    [4] R. M. KARP, Reducibility among combinatorial problems, Complexity of computer compu-
 tations (R. E. Miller and J. W. Thatcher, Editors), Plenum Press, NY, 1972, pp. 85-103.
    [5] A. V. AHO, J.E. HOPCROFT and J. D. ULLMAN, The design and analysis of computer
algorithms, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1974.
   [6] G. FREGE, Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des reinen
Denkens, Halle, 1879. English translation in From Frege to Godel, a source book in mathema-
tical logic (J. van Heijenoort, Editor), Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1967, pp. 1-82.
    [7] D. PRAWITZ, Natural deduction. A proof-theoretic study, Stockholm, 1965.
   [8] G. S. TSEITIN, On the complexity of derivations in propositional calculus, Studies in mathe-
matics and mathematical logic, Part II (A. 0. Slisenko, editor), 1968, pp. 115-125. (Translated
from Russian)
   [9] S. A. COOK,C. W. RACKOFF ET AL, Lecture notes for CSC2429F, "Topics in the theory of
computation", a course presented by the Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
during the fall, 1976.
   [10] R. STATMAN, Complexity of derivations from quantifier-free horn formulae, mechanical intro-
duction of explicit definitions, and refinement of completeness theorems, Proceedings of Logic
Colloquium '76 (Gandy and Hyland, Editors), Studies in Logic and Foundations of Mathematics,
vol. 87(1977), North-Holland, Amsterdam.
   [11] S. A. COOK,Feasibly constructive proofs and the propositional calculus, Proceedings of
the Saventh Annual ACM Conference on the Theory of Computing, May 1976, pp. 83-97.
   [12] A. CHURCH, Introduction to mathematical logic, vol. I, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, 1956.
   [13] J. VON NEUMANN, Zur Hilbertschen Beweistheorie, Mathematische Zeitschrift, vol. 26
   (1927), pp. 1-46.
  DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE
      UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
        TORONTO, CANADA    M5S 1A7
  DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTING SCIENCE
      UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA
        EDMONTON, CANADA    T6G 2E1
