                        Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity, Report No. 111 (2026)




       Doubly-Efficient Interactive Arguments for Bounded-Space
                        from One-Way Functions
                                               Guy N. Rothblum∗
                                                    Apple



                                                      Abstract
          We show that one-way functions suffice for constructing very efficient argument systems for
      proving the correctness of bounded-space computations. Taking κ to be a cryptographic security
      parameter and n to be the input length, our argument system applies to general computations
      running in time T and space S. The protocol has polylog(T ) rounds, the communication com-
      plexity is S · poly(log(T ), κ) and the verifier runtime is (S + n) · poly(log(T ), κ). In particular, the
      complexity of the verifier is only poly-logarithmic in the computation length. The honest prover
      runs in time poly(T, κ), so the protocol is doubly-efficient. If the one-way function is secure
      against λ(κ)-size adversaries, then the argument system is sound against cheating provers of
      size λ(κ)/poly(T ).
          Prior to this work, doubly-efficient argument systems with poly-logarithmic dependence on
      T required assuming (at least) the existence of collision-resistant hash functions [Kilian, STOC
      1992]. For unconditionally sound doubly-efficient protocols, the RRR protocol for bounded-
      space computations [Reingold, Rothblum and Rothblum, STOC 2016] has communication and
      verification complexities that grow with T σ for an arbitrarily small constant σ > 0.




∗
    Email: rothblum@alum.mit.edu.




                                                                                                              ISSN 1433-8092
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                         1
  1.1 Our Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
  1.2 Further Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3

2 Technical Overview                                                                              4
  2.1 Recursive Honing Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
  2.2 Improvements to Unconditional DEIPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

3 Preliminaries and Definitions                                                                       13
  3.1 Cryptographic Security, UOWHFs and Hash Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             14
  3.2 Succinct Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
  3.3 Reversible Computation, Tableau and Multi-Tableau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           17
  3.4 Polynomials, Low Degree Extensions and Checksums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            19
  3.5 Holographic Interactive Proofs and Arguments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          22
  3.6 Interactive Proofs of Proximity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24
  3.7 Honing Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    30

4 Main Construction                                                                                   32
  4.1 Base of The Recursion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     32
  4.2 The Recursive Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    33
  4.3 The Resulting Honing Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       50
  4.4 Arguments for Bounded Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         54

5 Improved Unconditional DEIP                                                                         56
  5.1 Base of The Recursion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     56
  5.2 The Recursive Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    57
  5.3 The Resulting Honing Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       61
  5.4 The Resulting DEIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      64

A The AR Argument System                                                                              67
1    Introduction
A proof-system allows an untrusted prover to convince a verifier that a complex claim is true. The
claim is usually framed as the membership of an input x in a language L, where verification should
be more efficient than deciding membership in L. In this work, we focus on proof systems that take
the form of an interactive challenge-response protocol between the prover and the verifier. Such a
protocol can be unconditionally sound against any (unbounded) cheating prover, i.e. an interactive
proof system [GMR89]. Computationally sound argument systems [BCC88] relax soundness to hold
only against computationally bounded cheating provers and under cryptographic assumptions.
     In this work, we study the resources and the computational assumptions needed to prove and
to verify general claims. Our starting point is a simple and appealing cut-and-choose protocol.
Suppose the prover claims that the input is in a language that can be decided by a Turing Machine
running in time T and space S. In each round of the cut-and-choose protocol, the prover sends
the mid-point state of the computation currently under consideration, and the verifier chooses at
random whether to check the first or the second half of the computation. In more detail: initially
the computation is of length T , the prover and the verifier agree on the initial state u0 , and the
prover claims that the final state is ufT . The prover sends the alleged mid-point of the computation
ugT /2 , and the verifier decides at random  whether to check the first or second half. The protocol
then recurses whichever half of the computation the verifier chose. After log(T ) rounds, at the base
of the recursion, the claim is about a computation of length 1, and the verifier can verify this claim
on its own. The ideas underlying this protocol are important to foundational results in complexity
theory, most notably the proof that the language TQBF is PSPACE-complete and the study of
alternating computation [CKS81]. The proof-system is incredibly efficient: the honest prover runs
in time O(T ) and essentially just needs to run the computation. The communication complexity is
only O(S · log(T )) and there are only O(log(T )) rounds. The verifier’s runtime is O(S · log(T ) + n)
(in the base of the recursion, the verifier needs to read the input to perform a single step of the
computation). The main issue is that the soundness error of the simple cut-and-choose protocol is
huge: in each round, if the current claim is false, a cheating prover can decide at random whether
to cheat on the first or the second half of the computation. With probability 1/2 the verifier will
recurse on the “wrong” half (the half where the prover’s claim is true), and from this point on the
prover can convince the verifier with probability 1. Thus, the verifier’s probability of catching a
cheating prover is only (1/T ): the soundness error is 1 − (1/T ). We study the following question:
Question 1.1. Under what assumptions can we construct a proof system with negligible soundness
error that matches, up to polynomial factors, the complexities of the cut-and-choose protocol?
    In particular, we focus on doubly-efficient proof systems (DEIPs) [GKR15], where the honest
prover’s running time should be poly(T ) (as it is in cut-and-choose). Reingold, Rothblum and
Rothblum [RRR16] constructed unconditionally sound DEIPs: for an arbitrarily small constant
power σ > 0, their proof system has T σ ·poly(S) communication, (T σ ·poly(S)+O(n))
                                                                              e     verifier runtime
and constant round complexity (the round complexity is quasi-exponential in (1/σ)). Question
1.1, however, asks for doubly-efficient proofs whose communication and verification time are poly-
logarithmic in T . No such result is known for unconditionally sound protocols.
    Thus, we turn our attention to doubly-efficient argument systems, which are sound against
computationally bounded cheating provers and under cryptographic assumptions. The weakest
cryptographic assumption under which previous work gives a positive answer to Question 1.1 is the
existence of collision-resistant hash functions (CRH). Under this assumption, Kilian’s argument

                                                  1
system [Kil92] matches the cut-and-choose protocol, and even goes beyond it. Taking κ to be a
cryptographic security parameter, the communication is poly(log(T ), κ) and the verifier’s runtime
is (poly(log(T ), κ) + O(n)).
                       e      Indeed, there is no dependence on the space and the protocol also
applies to non-deterministic computations. For an argument system, we expect the communication
and verifier runtime to be polynomial in the security parameter, so we view this as “matching” (or
surpassing) cut-and-choose. Thus, CRHs suffice for answering Question 1.1 in the affirmative, but
what about weaker assumptions? In particular, could one-way functions (OWFs), often referred to
as a “minimal” assumption for cryptography, suffice?

1.1   Our Results
Our main result shows that one-way functions are sufficient for constructing an argument system
with negligible soundness error that matches cut-and-choose up to polynomial factors:
Theorem 1.2. Suppose that one-way functions exist. Let L be a language that can be decided in
time T = T (n) ≥ n and space S = S(n). Let κ = κ(n) ≤ T be a cryptographic security parameter.
     L has an polylog(T )-round public-coin interactive argument. The communication complexity is
S · poly(log(T ), κ). The honest prover runs in time poly(T, κ) and the verifier runs in time ((S + n) ·
poly(log(T ), κ)). The protocol has perfect completeness. If the one-way function is secure against
λ(κ)-size adversaries, then the protocol is sound against (λ(κ)/poly(T ))-size cheating provers.
    See Theorem 4.22 for a fuller statement. Comparing our result to Kilian’s protocol, we only
assume the existence of OWFs (rather than CRHs). On the other hand, our round complexity is
poly-logarithmic (rather than constant), our communication and verifier time have a linear depen-
dence on the space used by the computation, and our protocol doesn’t apply to non-deterministic
computations. For the class of deterministic computations using space S = poly(κ) our communi-
cation and verifier runtime are polynomially related to those achieved by Kilian’s protocol.
    Comparing our result to the RRR protocol, the communication and verifier runtime in our
protocol have a polylogarithmic dependence on T , rather than T σ for an arbitrarily small constant
power σ in RRR. Thus, our protocol answers Question 1.1 in the affirmative, whereas RRR (and all
known protocols with unconditional soundness) do not. On the other hand, our round complexity is
polylog(T ) (rather than constant) and our protocol is only computationally sound (assuming OWFs).
While the results of RRR were stated for an arbitrarily small constant power σ > 0, their work,
and the recent improvement in Berger et al. [BGHK25], give results in the sub-constant regime.
                                                                                        c
In this regime, the rounds, communication and verifier runtime grow with exp(O(log e      (T ))) for a
constant c ∈ (0, 1). In another recent work, Amit and Rothblum [AR24] constructed constant-round
argument systems for bounded-space computations assuming the existence of one-way functions.
Similarly to the RRR protocol, the verifier runtime and communication complexity are T σ for an
arbitrarily small constant power σ, whereas we aim for (and achieve) polylogarithmic dependence on
T . The advantage of the [AR24] protocol (compared to [RRR16]) was an exponential improvement
in the dependence of the round complexity on 1/σ.

Setting the security parameter. Similarly to Kilian’s protocol (and as expected for an argu-
ment system), the communication and verifier runtime in our protocol are polynomial in the security
parameter. We prefer to treat the security parameter, the input length and the computation time as
separate parameters. Indeed, one can view the security parameter as a “fixed” parameter, whereas
the input and the computation length can grow (this is the view in many more applied works).

                                                   2
Nonetheless, taking n to be the input length, it is also natural to think about adversaries that run
in poly(n) time and set the security parameter appropriately. With this approach in mind, if we
assume that the one-way functions have sub-exponential security, then we can set κ = polylog(n)
and Theorem 1.2 gives arguments with polylog(n) communication for the class of poly(n)-time and
polylog(n)-space computations. This is the first polylogarithmic proof system for this class that
assumes only subexponential OWFs (rather than subexponential CRHs in [Kil92]). Alternatively,
if we assume only the existence of polynomially hard OWFs, we can set κ = nε for arbitrarily
small constant ε > 0. For poly(n)-time computations, the communication can be O(S  e · nO(ε) ). The
complexities do not grow with 1/ε, whereas in prior works [RRR16, AR24, BGHK25] achieving
 e · nO(σ) ) communication for a small constant σ, the verifier runtime and communication are
O(S
(at least) exponential in (1/σ) (in [RRR16, BGHK25] the round complexity, while constant, grows
exponentially with (1/σ). In [AR24] the round complexity only grow polynomially with (1/σ)).

Improvements to unconditional DEIPs. Along the way, our new techniques also imply an
improved construction of information-theoretically sound DEIPs for space-bounded computations:
for a computation running
                     √      in time T and space S, the communication, rounds and verification time
                                                                                     c
grow with S · exp(O( log T )). This improves on prior work that achieved exp(O(log
                                                                               e       (T ))) depen-
dence for a constants c > 1/2 [BGHK25] and matches the state of the art verification complexity,
which was recently obtained in an independent work of Chen et al. [CHKX26]. See the overview
in Section 2.2. The full statement is in Theorem 5.5 and the construction is detailed in Section 5.

Organization. We discuss related work in Section 1.2. Moving beyond the introduction, we
highlight several ideas from our construction in a technical overview in Section 2. Preliminaries
and definitions are in Section 3, including new definitions of honing protocols and nested IPPs. Our
recursive honing protocol construction, and its application to constructing argument systems, are
in Section 4. Section 5 details the improved construction of unconditional DEIPs for bounded-space
computations.

1.2   Further Related Work
Comparison to known (unconditionally sound) proof systems. We compared our results
to [RRR16, BGHK25] above. The celebrated IP = PSPACE Theorem [LFKN92, Sha92] gives proof
systems for general computations with a poly(S, log(T ))-time verifier (matching cut and choose).
The honest prover runtime, however, is super-polynomial in T (also, the round complexity was
poly(S)). We focus on doubly-efficient proof systems and require poly(T )-honest prover runtime.
The GKR proof system [GKR15] works for computations described by uniform circuits of bounded
depth, whereas we are interested in computations described by Turing machines with bounded
space. Bounded-space Turing Machines can be translated into bounded-depth circuits, but this
incurs an overhead that is exponential in the space complexity, and would not give a poly(T )-time
honest prover.     Goldreich and Rothblum [GR20] give a constant-round proof system for NC1
circuits and for lower complexity classes, under suitable notions of uniformity.

Comparison to known (computationally sound) argument systems. We compared our
results to [Kil92, AR24] above. Amit and Rothblum [AR23] showed that one-way functions are
sufficient for constructing constant-round argument systems for uniform bounded-depth circuits,


                                                 3
whereas (similarly to the comparison to [GKR15]) we are interested in bounded-space Turing Ma-
chine computations. We note, however, that we use the [AR23] protocol in our construction, and
we also build on techniques pioneered in [AR23, AR24].
    Under stronger assumptions, arguments exist even beyond NP, and some require only 2 messages
or even no interaction at all (starting with Micali’s CS proofs [Mic94], see also Kalai, Raz and
Rothblum [KRR22] and Choudhuri, Jain and Jin [CJJ21], as well as the expositions by Thaler
[Tha22] and Ishai [Ish20a, Ish20b], and the references therein). The vast majority of works on
argument systems use assumptions that (at the very least) imply CRHs. One exception is works
by Bitansky, Kalai and Paneth [BKP18] and by Komargodski, Naor and Yogev [KNY18], who
construct argument systems based on the existence of the more relaxed primitive of multi-collision-
resistant hash functions, though the recent work of Rothblum and Vasudevan [RV22] indicates that
the gap between collision-resistance and multi-collision-resistance might not be wide.


2       Technical Overview
For a Turing Machine (TM) M and an input x (fixed throughout), a configuration of the machine
specifies the complete state of the machine at an intermediate computation point: it includes the
contents of all memory tapes, the TM’s internal state and the location of the input reading head.
For a machine with space bound S, its configuration can be described using O(S) bits. A tableau of
M on x, starting at a configuration u and proceeding for ℓ steps, is the sequence of configurations
reached by the machine when its state is set to u and it is run for ℓ steps. Note that we are interested
in tableau that start at arbitrary configurations, not just the starting configuration ustart .1

Honing protocols. Honing protocols, which we define and study, are central in our construction.
A honing protocol is an interactive protocol between an untrusted prover and a verifier. Given a
collection of computations and a claim about their tableaux, the goal is to produce a new claim that
“hones in” on (the tableaux of) a smaller subset of the computations. The protocol receives as input
a table U containing N initial states, where each state is the beginning of a (long) computation
of length ℓ. While all computations are performed using the same Turing Machine and on the
same input, they differ in their initial states. The verifier does not access the table U during the
protocol and should run in sublinear time in N and in ℓ. The input also specifies succinct predicate
ϕ that is claimed to hold for the concatenation of all the tableaux of these computations (the
concatenation of the tableaux contains N × ℓ states). The protocol’s output is a smaller output
subset B ⊆ [|U |] of “surviving” states in U , as well as an output predicate ψ that is claimed to hold
for the concatenation of the tableaux of computations in U |B . The protocol’s honing parameter η
is the fractional size of B within [U ], i.e. the fraction of surviving states. Actually, in the body of
the paper we use η to denote a bound on the expected fraction of surviving rows (the expectation
is over the verifier’s coins), but we ignore this throughout the overview.
    For a certain distance measure, defined below, if the table U is far from inducing tableaux that
satisfy the predicate, then w.h.p. the tableaux of the computations in the output subset should
fail to satisfy the output predicate. The aforementioned distance (measuring “farness”) is taken
over the table of initial states: being δ-far from satisfying the predicate means that a δ-fraction of
the initial states would need to be changed in order for the concatenation of the modified states’
    1
     ustart is the one where the memory tapes are blank, the internal state is in the initial state, and the reading head
is on the first bit of the input.


                                                           4
tableaux to satisfy the predicate (we emphasize that the distance is not over the tableaux: we always
consider the correct tableaux computed from the given table of initial states). The verifier in a
honing protocol “makes progress” because the output claim pertains to a computation of smaller
total size (|B| · ℓ) than the input claim (|U | · ℓ).

Honing protocols and IPPs. A honing protocol can be viewed as an Interactive Proof (or
Argument) of Proximity (an IPP or IAP) over the table of states: a protocol where the verifier only
needs to read a subset of the input to decide whether to accept or reject. We find this framing to
be helpful, and we use IAPs to construct honing protocols. However, unlike most IPPs, while the
output claim is only over a sublinear subset of the input, it can be quite computationally complex:
it pertains to long computations induced by states in that subset. See also Remark 3.37.

From honing protocols to arguments. While we find honing protocols to be interesting ob-
jects in their own right, their study is motivated by applications to constructing argument systems.
Suppose we have built a honing protocol with distance δ and honing parameter η ≤ 1/2 for com-
putations of length ℓ. We can use it to build an efficient argument system for computations of
length T ≈ ℓ as follows: the prover sends to the verifier a table U containing polylog(T ) midpoints
of the computation: the i-th state in U should be the configuration reached by a computation of
length ((i − 1) · (T /polylog(T ))) starting at ustart . The predicate ϕ for the honing protocol checks
that: (i) the first state is ustart , (ii) the final state in the last tableau is the accepting state, and
(iii) the tableaux induced by the states in U describe a single consecutive computation: the first
configuration in the (i + 1)-th tableau proceeds the last configuration in the i-th tableau. If the
prover is honest, then the table U should satisfy the predicate ϕ. On the other hand, if the prover
is cheating then the computation should reject and there is no possible table that would satisfy
ϕ: in particular the table sent by the prover is far (at “infinite” distance) from satisfying ϕ. The
prover and verifier now run the honing protocol on U . They end up with an output predicate ψ
on a subset B of at most half the states. Intuitively, progress has been made because if the prover
was cheating, we now have a false claim about a sequence of tableaux of total length (T /2) (rather
than T ). The prover and the verifier can now iterate on this new claim. We need to take care to
maintain the invariant that in each iteration, the new input is far from satisfying the new predicate,
and that the complexity of the predicates does not explode: see Section 4.4 for further details.

2.1   Recursive Honing Protocol
We use a recursive construction to obtain honing protocols for increasingly large computation
lengths. Taking N to be the input table size and ℓ to be the computation length, we use T = N · ℓ
to denote the total size of the computation induced by all the rows of the table. We focus on
protocols where the communication and verifier run time are poly-logarithmic in T and on the
parameter regime where the distance δ = O(polylog(T )/|U |) is very small (in much of the body
of the paper we work with absolute distance δABS = polylog(T )). A protocol’s honing parameter
η is the fractional size of the output subset of table states (this is analogous to the relative query
complexity of an IPP). We aim for honing parameter of order 1/polylog(T ).

Base of the recursion, ℓ = polylog(T ). At the base of the recursion we use a standard IPP or
IAP to construct the “base” honing protocol. We need a protocol with the property that the verifier


                                                    5
does not need to read the input during the protocol: after interacting with the prover, it produces
an output predicate over a subset of its input. If the prover was honest then the predicate will
be true, otherwise it will be false (in the case of an IAP the latter guarantee is only for bounded
adversaries). Many protocols have this form [RVW13, RR20, AR23], as does any protocol in the
pre-coordinated model of Goldreich, Rothblum and Skverer [GRS23].
    The construction is as follows: for an input U and predicate ϕ for the honing protocol, we define
a circuit C that takes the table U as input, computes (in parallel) the ℓ-length tableau for each
state in U , and then applies the predicate ϕ. We run an IPP that checks that U (approximately)
satisfies the circuit C. Completeness and soundness follow by construction. It was important that
the computation lengths be small, because this affects the depth of the circuit C (its depth will be
O(ℓ)
 e + depth(ϕ)), which shows up in the communication complexity and verifier runtime of known
protocols. In particular, we use the IAP of [AR23] to achieve honing parameter O(1/polylog(T ))
and (S · poly(κ, log(T ))) communication (the advantage of that construction is in smaller round
complexity, see Section 3.6). We remark that we assume here that |U | ≤ poly(T ), which will be
case in the base of the recursion (more generally, the complexity is poly-logarithmic in |U |).

From length ℓ to length (k · ℓ): naive attempt. Assume we have a honing protocol for
computations of length ℓ. We would like to construct a protocol for computations of length k · ℓ.
We begin with a naive (and unsuccessful) but instructive approach. The idea is to take each of
the N input computations of length (k · ℓ) and split it into k consecutive computations of length ℓ.
For each state Ui in the original input table, the new input table U ′ contains a block of k states,
corresponding to each ℓ-step sub-computation in the original (k · ℓ)-step computation (i.e. the i-th
block contains Ui and the configurations reached by making ℓ, 2ℓ, . . . , ((k − 1) · ℓ) steps from Ui ).
    We also adapt the predicate. The input to the original predicate ϕ was the concatenation of N
tableaux, each of length (k · ℓ). The input to the new predicate ϕ′ is the new and larger collection of
shorter tableaux. The new predicate ϕ′ checks two things: first, it enforces “internal” consistency
inside each block by verifying that the initial state of each ℓ-step sub-computation is the result of
applying a single computation step to the last state in the previous sub-computation (we emphasize
that ϕ′ gets as input the complete tableau of length-ℓ computations from each state in U ′ , so it
can access the last state in each length-ℓ sub-computation directly). Second, ϕ′ checks that the
original predicate ϕ would accept the concatenation of all length-ℓ tableaux for the states in U ′ .
The additional “internal” consistency checks are lightweight and only add minimal complexity.
    We show that if the original input U was δ-far from satisfying ϕ, the new input U ′ is also δ-far
from satisfying ϕ′ . Note that this is not completely obvious: e.g. it could be that changing the state
Ui to a value v would make ϕ accept (U was at absolute distance 1), but the tableaux induced by
Ui and by v are identical except for the initial state, so the “expanded’ input U ′ is also at absolute
distance 1 from making ϕ′ accept (and the relative distance has degraded, because U ′ is a larger
input). We resolve concern this by considering computations where such “configuration-collisions”
shouldn’t happen. In particular, we assume the computation is reversible, and show this guarantees
that distances are maintained. See Section 3.3 and in particular Fact 3.12 and Remark 3.13.
    Thus, we can recursively apply a honing protocol for length-ℓ computations to the new, larger
instance (U ′ , ϕ′ ). The recursive call outputs a subset B ′ of the states in U ′ with fractional size η,
and a predicate ψ ′ that detects violation within the length-ℓ tableaux of this smaller subset. Going
back to the original input U , we could now output a subset B containing each state in U whose
corresponding block in U ′ contains a state that “survived” in B ′ (and also output essentially the


                                                    6
same predicate ψ ′ , applied to the length-(k · ℓ) tableaux of states in B). The failure point of this
approach is that for any block of k states in U ′ where at least one of the states “survives”, that
entire block also “survives” in the original set U . This means that a (k · η) fraction of the states of
U might survive, a k-fold degradation in the honing parameter that makes the entire recursion fail.
    Our main technical contribution is a different recursive construction, which maintains the honing
parameter, while also making only a single recursive call and adding minimal communication,
verifier runtime, and complexity to the predicates being checked.

The tableau UOWHF tree. An important tool in our recursive construction is a hash tree, built
from Universal One-Way Hash Functions (UOWHFs) [NY89]. The tree functions as a succinct
commitment to a long string (sometimes referred to as a vector commitment). In our case, the
string is an encoding of the tableau of a computation induced by a given initial configuration. After
the initial configuration is fixed, the receiver / verifier (who need not know the initial configuration
or the tableau it induces) sends randomly chosen hash keys. The (honest) sender / prover sends
back the correct root of a hash tree built on the encoded tableau. An honest prover, who has
committed to the correct root of the hash tree, can then convincingly and succinctly open any
location in the encoding of the tableau. A dishonest prover who sends the correct hash root for
the encoding of the tableau induced by the fixed initial state, cannot later equivocate and open
any location to a value different from that of the encoded tableau (at least not without breaking
the underlying cryptographic assumption). We emphasize that this guarantee only applies if the
dishonest prover chooses to send the correct hash root: a dishonest prover can send a false root,
and in this case it can later equivocate in its openings. Thus, this is a much weaker guarantee
than we could get using full-blown collision-resistant hash functions. However, even this weaker
guarantee is helpful: it forces a cheating prover to choose, either it sends a cheating hash root w.r.t.
a fixed encoded tableau (and perhaps the verifier can detect this, as below), or it binds itself and its
openings have to be consistent with the (encoding of the) correct tableau. Succinct commitments
based on UOWHF hash trees were also used in [AR23, AR24] to construct argument systems.

Holographic proofs. Holographic interactive proofs (or arguments) allow a sublinear verifier,
who has query access to an input encoded using an appropriate error-correcting code, to verify
complex properties of the input in poly-logarithmic time. Holographic proof systems were intro-
duced by Babai et al. [BFLS91] in the context of PCPs. Gur and Rothblum [GR17] formalized
and studied generalizations in the context of interactive proof systems. As examples, in this work
we use such protocols to verify that the input is the correct encoding of a certain tableau, or that a
given hash root is the correct root of the tree built on the tableau encoded in the input. We use an
argument system due to Amit and Rothblum [AR23]: it achieves poly-logarithmic round complex-
ity, with communication and verifier runtime that are polynomial in the security parameter, linear
in the circuit depth, and only poly-logarithmic in the circuit size. We note that [AR23] focused on
a parameter regime of constant round complexity and abritrarily small polynomial communication
and verifier time (see above). Their construction also applies to our (simpler) parameter regime,
see Section 3.5 and Appendix A.
     Combining UOWHF trees with holographic proofs can yield useful guarantees: if a cheating
prover sends a correct hash root for an encoded tableau, it can then only open the commitment to
the encoding of that tableau, and the verifier can use a holographic proof system to verify complex
assertions about the computation (simulating query access to the encoded tableau using openings


                                                   7
of the UOWHF tree). On the other hand, if the prover cheats and sends an incorrect hash root,
then this is a deviation that the verifier can hope to detect (see below).

Checksums. Ideally, we would have the prover send a hash root for the (encoded) tableau of
each configuration u ∈ U . However, this would require too much communication. Instead, the
prover sends checksums for these values. We view the input U as a matrix, where each row has a
configuration u. The prover computes a checksum C        fU for this matrix and sends it to the verifier.
The checksum guarantees that there is a unique matrix U        e that differs from U in at most d rows
whose actual correct checksum is CU (we assume there indeed exists U
                                     f                                     e with the claimed checksum
that differs from U in at most d rows, this is the more difficult case to handle). Throughout the
protocol we leverage an important insight from the work of [RRR16]: once the prover sends the
checksum, the matrix U   e is well defined (even though the verifier cannot directly access it). After
the prover sends the checksum C   fU , the verifier chooses hash keys h for a UOWHF. The hash keys
induce a hash root ρ for the encoded tableau starting at each configuration u ∈ U   e . Since the matrix
Ue was well defined before the verifier sent its hash keys, the binding guarantee of the UOWHF tree
applies. Let R(U e ) be the matrix of these hash roots (with dimensions |U | × poly(κ)). The prover
also sends a checksum C   fR for the matrix R(U  e ), and let R
                                                              e be the unique matrix that is consistent
with the checksum CR and differs from R(U ) in at most 2d rows (as above, we assume that R
                      f                         e                                                      e
exists). If the prover is honest, then Ue = U and R   e = R(U ) is the matrix of correct hash roots.

(U
 e , R):
     e The only game in town. At this point the prover has, in a sense, “committed” itself
to the matrices U e and R:e if the prover (responding to challenges from the verifier) makes further
assertions that are not consistent with these matrices, this can be quite helpful to the verifier. In
particular, suppose the protocol produces a predicate µ where the prover claims that µ(U      e , R)
                                                                                                  e =1
but this assertion is false. The prover and the verifier now run an IPP to check that the prover’s
assertions are true for the correct input U and the matrix of correct hash roots R(U ): i.e. that these
matrices are consistent with the checksums C    fU and C fR (respectively) and that µ(U, R(U )) = 1.
Claim 2.1 shows that in this case (U, R(U )) is at least d-far from satisfying the prover’s assertions.
Thus, the verifier can use an IPP or IAP to get a false claim about a subset of O(1/d) of (U, R(U ))’s
rows!2 We remark that the claim produced by the IPP is also about R(U ): this can be expressed as
a low-complexity predicate that takes as input the tableaux of a subset of U ’s rows. The verifier’s
goal in the honing protocol is exactly producing such a (false) predicate. Moreover, this does not
require any recursive calls to a honing protocol (beyond calls used to obtain the false assertions
about U  e , R),
             e and achieves excellent honing: the communication complexity is quasi-linear in d!
Thus, it is in the interest of a cheating prover to avoid producing false claims about (U e , R).
                                                                                              e

Claim 2.1 (Informal). The matrix (U, R(U )) differs in at least d rows from any matrix (A, B) that
is consistent with the checksums and satisfies µ(A, B) = 1.

Proof. U
       e is the unique matrix with checksum C
                                            fU that differs from U in at most d rows. This means
that R(U ) and R(U ) differ in at most d rows. The matrix R
                   e                                         e is the unique matrix of roots that
   2
    The sharp-eyed reader may notice that we need to switch from distance in rows to fractional distance of the
entire matrix. In the full protocol the rows of the matrices always are encoded using a high-distance error correcting
code (and this is checked by any IPP we run), so these two distances are within a constant multiplicative factor of
each other. For the sake of readability, we ignore this detail in the overview.



                                                          8
differs from R(U  e ) in at most 2d rows and is consistent with C
                                                                fR . By a triangle inequality, R
                                                                                               e is the
unique matrix of roots with checksum CR that differs from R(U ) in at most d rows.
                                           f
    If µ(Ue , R)
              e = 0, then for every matrix (A, B) that differs from (U, R(U )) in at most d rows
we have either: (i) (A, B) ̸= (U   e , R),
                                       e and so (A, B) is not consistent with the checksums, or (ii)
(A, B) = (U , R) and thus µ(A, B) = 0.
             e  e

A case analysis. From this point, the verifier’s goal in the protocol is forcing the prover to make
false assertions about (U
                        e , R),
                            e or to make other false statements that can be caught using a recursive
call to the recursive honing protocol.
    The protocol pivots on a case analysis on the number of rows in which the prover “committed”
to a false root w.r.t the configurations in U
                                            e : the number of rows i in Re that do not contain the
correct root of the encoded tableaux for the i-th state in U
                                                           e . We call such a row “corrupted”, and
the analysis diverges depending on the number of corrupted rows.

2.1.1    Case I: Many Corrupted Rows
Suppose that more than k rows in U     e are corrupted (i.e., the corresponding root in R    e is not correct).
In this case, the verifier chooses a uniformly random subset J ⊆ [|U |] of (|U |/k) rows. By a birthday-
paradox-type argument, with good probability, the sub-matrix (U           e , R)|
                                                                              e J still contains a corrupted
                                                           ′
row. The prover responds with new checksums C           fU (with distance d) and C       fR ′ for the smaller
matrices U |J and R|J . As explained above, if C    fU ′ is not the correct checksum for U     eJ or if CfR ′ is
not the correct checksum for R   eJ , then the verifier will catch this at a later point (using an IPP).
    Consider now the predicate ψroot that gets a list of encoded tableaux (of length (k · ℓ)) induced
by |J| initial configurations, computes the hash root for each encoded tableau, checks that: (i)
the initial configurations are consistent with the checksum C     fU ′ , (ii) the resulting correct roots are
consistent with the checksum C    fR ′ (and also that each encoded tableaux is correct w.r.t. its initial
state). If there is indeed at least one corrupted root in R|    e J , then the encoded tableaux induced
by the states in U |J do not satisfy the predicate ψroot . We argue that this implies that the actual
                   e
input U |J (restricted to the rows in J) is at absolute distance d from any table inducing a tableau
that satisfies ψroot .
    The verifier initiates a recursive call to the honing protocol on the smaller instance U |J with
the predicate ψroot . Following the naive recursive strategy described above, this call splits each
of the |J| computations of length (k · ℓ) into k sub-computations of length ℓ, creating an input
with (k · |J|) initial states for the recursive honing protocol. As established before, this leads to a
k-fold degradation in the honing parameter. However, since we started this step by restricting the
instance from |U | to |J| = (|U |/k) rows, we can afford this degradation. If the recursive honing
protocol reduces the number of states by a factor of η, the final number of surviving states from
the original set U will be (η|U |). We emphasize that it was crucial that we could argue that the
input to the recursive call—the sub-instance defined by J—was far from any table whose induced
tableaux satisfy the predicate ψroot (this promise is needed for the recursive honing protocol call).

2.1.2    Case II: Few Corruptions
Suppose that there are at most k rows where the root in R   e is incorrect for the corresponding
configuration in U . This means that for all but a few of configurations in U
                 e                                                          e , the corresponding


                                                       9
UOWHF tree root binds the prover to that configuration’s correct computation tableau. In this
case, we use a recursive honing protocol call as described in the naive approach: this results in a
predicate ψrecurse and a subset I ⊂ [|U |] of (k · η)-fractional weight, where ψrecurse is false on (the
tableaux induced by) U |I . As in the naive construction, this blow-up is too large to be helpful on
its own. Here, however, the recursive call serves a different purpose: taking (k · η) ≪ 1/k, since
there were few corrupted rows to begin with, now with good probability, the roots for all the rows
in I are correct. These correct roots bind the cheating prover to the encoded tableaux of U      e |I .
    Now we can imagine having implicit access to (an encoding of) the tableaux induced by the
states Ue |I . The prover and the verifier run a holographic proof on this huge implicit input, showing
that ψrecurse accepts the tableaux induced by U      e |I . By the above, the holographic proof should
reject w.h.p. However, verifying the holographic proof requires accessing an encoding of the huge
implicit input. The verifier does not have direct access to these encodings. Still, we can build on
this idea: one fact we leverage is that the verifier’s check in the holographic proof can be performed
using a single location v in the encoded tableau of each row in U   e |I (the same location for all rows).
    Consider the matrix M with |U | rows. For each i ∈ [|U |], the i-th row of M contains the
initial configuration Ui , the root Rei , and the correct opening of the v-th location in the encoded
tableau of the computation starting at U     ei (the opening is with respect to the hash root R  ei ). Let
ψopen be the predicate that checks, for a given matrix of openings as above, that: (i) each opening
is consistent with its corresponding root, (ii) the initial configurations and the opened values of
the rows in I (one per row) would make the holographic proof verifier accept, and (iii) the initial
configurations and roots are consistent with the checksums C       fU and C fR . We would like to argue
that the “real” matrix M is at absolute distance Θ(d) from satisfying this predicate. This is almost
true: there might be false openings that would make the holographic verifier accept, but they are
computationally hard to find (due to the UOWHF binding guarantee). This computational distance
is sufficient for our purposes: we show running an IPP (or IAP) on the matrix M with the predicate
ψopen allows the verifier to hone in on a small subset BIPP of rows and to obtain a false claim about
the tableau induced by the states in U |BIPP . Indeed, this allows the verifier to reduce the set of
surviving rows by a Θ(1/d) multiplicative factor (the communication and verification time of the
protocol only grow polynomially with d). Note that here we didn’t use the honing property of the
recursive call to reduce the size of the output set, but rather to “catch” the prover in a lie about a
set of rows where its checksums induce binding commitments.

2.1.3   Handling Both Cases
Error probabilities. Taking q to be the number of corrupted rows, there are two events that
help the verifier make progress towards catching a cheating prover:

   • In the “many corruptions” case, we need the random subset J of |U |/k rows to contain a
     corrupted row. We take q = Θ(k log log(T )), which means the probability of failure (i.e. the
     probability that there is no corrupted row) is bounded by 1/(10 log(T )). When this failure
     event does not occur, the soundness guarantee of the recursive call kicks in: w.h.p. the
     verifier makes progress towards honing in on a smaller set and a corresponding false claim.
     The failure probability of 1/(10 log(T )) is sufficiently small for our purposes, as the depth
     of the recursion is o(log(T )). We remark that in the full construction, for succinctness, the
     choice of the random set J is q-wise independent, which suffices for the above analysis.



                                                   10
   • In the “few corruptions” case, we need the recursive call (on the entire set of states) to hone in
     on a set (of fractional size (k·η)) that does not contain any corrupted rows. Assuming that the
     rows chosen by the recursive call are 1-wise uniform, by a union bound this happens with prob-
     ability at least 1−(k·η·q). For q = Θ(k·log log(T )), assuming η = O(1/(k 2 log(T ) log log(T ))),
     the failure probability here is smaller than 1/(10 log(T )). When the failure event does not
     occur w.h.p. the verifier makes a lot of progress: the subsequent IPP reduces the size of the
     set by a Θ(1/d) factor w.h.p. As above, the failure probability is small enough to compose
     nicely over all levels of the recursion.

From two recursive calls to one. We argued (loosely) that each case can be handled using
a single recursive honing protocol call. However, we cannot afford for the recursion to make two
separate recursive calls (the depth of the recursion is logk T , and the cost would end up being more
than polylog(T )). Note, however, that the two calls are independent (the input to one call does
not depend on the other). We extend the functionality of the honing protocol so that it takes as
input a sequence of subsets of the entire collection of states, and a sequence of corresponding input
predicates (one per subset). It returns a sequence of smaller subsets and corresponding output
predicates. The soundness guarantee is that w.h.p. if there was an input set of size s rejected by
its corresponding input predicate, then there will be an output set of size roughly (η · s) rejected
by its corresponding output predicate. The recursion now makes a single call to a protocol with
this extended functionality.
    The full-blown recursive construction needs to itself provide this extended functionality, i.e.
to work for a given sequence of subsets and predicates. This is achieved in a similar manner,
where one crucial point is that the latter of the two recursive calls described above considers a
significantly smaller set of states (of fractional size (O(1/d)). The complexity of the protocol grows
polynomially with the number of input subsets. See Section 3.7 for a formal definition of this
extended functionality, and see Section 4 for the full construction.

2.2   Improvements to Unconditional DEIPs
We can also use our techniques to construct an improved unconditionally sound DEIP for bounded-
space computations. This result follows from an unconditionally sound recursive honing protocol
(by a similar argument to the one used to construct our argument system from a computationally
sound honing protocol). The main disadvantage of the unconditionally sound construction is that
we make two recursive calls in each level of the recursion, which leads to a much less efficient proof
system (albeit without using any assumptions or cryptographic machinery). To properly balance   √
parameters, here we focus on the parameter   regime where the absolute distance is δABS = O(2
                                                                                            e     log T )
                                      √
and the honing parameter is η = 1/2 log T .

Base of the recursion, length ℓbase . We use an unconditionally sound IPP at the base of the
recursion. In particular, we use the IPP from [RR20]: so long as the input predicate has O(ℓbase )
depth we get a honing protocol with honing parameter η = O(1/δABS ) and O((Se     · δABS + ℓbase ) ·
polylog(T )) communication (as before, we assume |U | ≤ poly(T )).

Redux of the naive recursion.        Recall the naive recursion described in Section 2.1. Starting
with a honing protocol for computations of length ℓ, the idea was to construct a protocol for length


                                                   11
(k · ℓ) by splitting each computation of length (k · ℓ) into k consecutive computations of length ℓ.
Taking U to be the table of states and ϕ to be the predicate that takes as input |U | tableaux of
length (k · ℓ), the naive recursion uses a single call to a honing protocol for length-ℓ computations
on a larger table U ′ and a predicate ϕ′ that takes as input |U ′ | tableaux of length ℓ. We use the
fact that the table U ′ is comprised of |U | blocks, where each block contains k mid-points of a
(k · ℓ)-length computations induced by the single state in U that corresponds to that block.
     As before, the recursive call outputs a subset B ′ of the states in U ′ with fractional size η, and
a predicate ψ ′ on the length-ℓ tableaux of the U ′ -states in this smaller subset. Going back to the
original input U , we can take B to be the subset containing each state in U whose corresponding
block in U ′ contains at least one state that “survived” in B ′ . Similarly, we can take ψ to be the
predicate over the (k · ℓ)-length tableaux of states in B that checks that ψ ′ accepts the length-ℓ
sub-tableaux corresponding to states that survived in B ′ . This naive recursion is sound: if the
tableaux of U were far from satisfying ϕ, then the tableaux of the surviving states in B ′ should not
satisfy ψ. The issue (as before) is that a (k · η)-fraction of the states in U “survive” in B, and this
is too large of a degradation in the honing parameter.

Adding a second recursive call. To further improve the homing parameter, we make a second
recursive call, checking that ψ accepts the tableaux of the states in B. As with the first call, we
“expand” each state u in U |B into k states in a new table (U |B )′ , corresponding to the k mid-points
of the (k·ℓ)-length computation starting at u, and also define a new predicate ϕ2 over k·|B| tableaux
of length ℓ, which checks internal consistency and that ψ accepts. Following the above logic, we’d
get a new predicate ψ2 over a (k · η)-fraction of the states in B. Overall, only a (k · η)2 ≪ η-fraction
of the states in U survive, so the honing parameter is maintained (we can assume that η < 1/k 2
and guarantee this throughout the recursion). The remaining issue is that the second recursive
call is only guaranteed to be sound if its input is far from satisfying the predicate, and we have
no distance guarantee: all we know is that the tableau of the states in B fail to satisfy ψ, so the
tableaux of the states in the expansion of U |B fail to satisfy ϕ2 , but there is no guarantee that they
are far from satisfying it.

Ensuring distance. Before the first recursive call, the prover sends a checksum C        fU for the table
of states U (as in the construction of Section 2.1). We show that after the recursive call w.h.p. U
is far from any table V that both: (i) has checksum C    fU , and (ii) the (k · ℓ)-tableaux of the states
V |B satisfy the predicate ψ. Importantly, the first of these two conditions only looks at the honest-
to-God states in U , rather than their tableaux. We can now look at an expanded table U ′′ , where
we only expand the rows of states in B. Namely, U ′′ includes each state in U , and for the states in
B it also includes the block of k intermediate states of that state’s (k · ℓ)-length computation. By
the above, the length-ℓ tableau of U ′′ are far from satisfying the predicate ϕ′′ that checks that (i)
the first states in the tableaux of the states that are in U have checksum C    fU , and (ii) the tableau
of blocks corresponding to states in B are internally consistent (each block of k tableaux of length
ℓ corresponds to a correct computation of length (k · ℓ)) and they satisfy the predicate ψ. Now,
since we have distance, the recursive call should return a subset B ′′ of an η-fraction of the rows of
U ′′ and a predicate ψ ′′ over the length-ℓ tableaux of those rows. We translate this into a predicate
ψ2 over the (k · ℓ)-length tableaux of the rows in a subset B2 of U ’s rows. The subset B2 includes:
(a) the rows of U that were not in B (and thus were not expanded in U ′′ ) but survived in B ′′ , and
(b) the rows of U in the set B for which at least one of their k midpoints survived in B ′′ . By the


                                                   12
guarantee of the recursive call, an η fraction of U ′ states that were outside B survive, and a (k · η)
fraction of the states in B. Since B itself was of fractional weight (k · η) in U , we conclude that the
fraction of states in U that survive the second recursive call is:

                                    (1 + k 2 · η) · η ≤ (1 + 1/k) · η,

where the inequality holds assuming that η ≤ 1/k 3 . We can guarantee this at the base of the
recursion and maintain it throughout the recursion (the depth of the recursion is less than k, so
the mild growth in η stays under control).

Cost of the recursion. Other than adding a second recursive call (which doubles the cost of the
protocol), the main additional cost is the communication for sending the checksum: we need the
honing parameter to satisfy η ≤ 1/k 3 (see above). We always need the absolute distance to be at
least 1/η, so this requires δABS = Ω(1/η). We pay for this absolute distance in the checksum, which
                        e ABS · S) (to guarantee the aforementioned distance). Thus, the recursion
needs to be of length O(δ
              3
incurs a O(k · S) additive communication and verifier runtime overhead. We remark that the
          e
polynomial dependence on k can be improved (in this construction we can allow a constant factor
degradation in the honing parameter from each recursive call), but this would not improve the
asymptotic complexity of the resulting protocol.

The resulting honing protocol. Each recursive step roughly doubles the cost of the protocol,
while increasing the length of the computations by a multiplicative factor of k. The recursive calls
are expensive, so we want to take k to be as large as possible, but we pay for this with an additive
 e 3 · S) term in the communication and verifier runtime. In the base of the recursion, we start
O(k
with a base protocol for length-k computations that has communication complexity O(k  e · S). After
r levels of recursion we get a protocol for computations of length k r+1 = T . The communication
                 r
complexity is (2 · poly(k) · S). To balance                           r
                                    √                 √ we want 2 ≈ poly(k), which is achieved
                                            the parameters
(asymptotically) by taking k = 2 √log T and r = O( log T ). The resulting honing protocol for
computations of length T has (2O( log T ) · S) communication and verifier runtime. The improved
DEIP of Theorem 5.5 follows from this honing protocol similarly to the template used above for
argument systems.


3    Preliminaries and Definitions
For a string x ∈ Σn and an index i ∈ [n], we denote by xi ∈ Σ the ith entry in x. If I ⊆ [n] is a set
then we denote by x|I the sequence of entries in x corresponding to coordinates in I.
   Let x, y ∈ Σn be two strings of length n ∈ N over a (finite) alphabet Σ. We define the (relative
                                             def
Hamming) distance of x and y as ∆ (x, y) = |{xi ̸= yi : i ∈ [n]}| /n. If ∆ (x, y) ≤ ε, then we say
that x is ε-close to y, and otherwise we say that x is ε-far from y. We define the distance of x from
                                          def
a (non-empty) set S ⊆ Σn as ∆ (x, S) = miny∈S ∆ (x, y). If ∆ (x, S) ≤ ε, then we say that x is
ε-close to S and otherwise we say that x is ε-far from S. We extend these definitions from strings to
functions by identifying a function with its truth table. For a set S, take its minimum distance to
be the minimum, over all distinct vectors x, y ∈ S of ∆ (x, y). We use ∆(S) to denote the minimum
distance of S. Fixing a vector space, for a set S and a vector x, we denote (x + S) = {x + y : y ∈ S}.
For a scalar c, we denote (c · S) = {c · y : y ∈ S}.


                                                   13
Nested sets.    We use sequences of sets (Ai ⊆ U )i∈[m] that are nested (where m is a positive
integer):

Definition 3.1 (Nested sets). We say that a sequence of subsets (Ai ⊆ U )i∈[m] over a universe
U are nested if Am ⊆ Am−1 ⊆ . . . A2 ⊆ A1 . By convention, the largest subset is the first and the
subsets shrink as i increases.
                                                                   `
Disjoint union. For two sets A and B, the disjoint union C = A B includes each element that
appears in A or in B. Similarly to a multi-set, elements that appear in both sets appear twice in
C. However, the disjoint union indexes elements to identify their origin:

Definition 3.2 (Disjoint Union). The disjoint union of A and B is:
                            a
                          A    B = {(a, 0) : a ∈ A} ∪ {(b, 1) : b ∈ B}.
                                           `
    We use disjoint unions such as C = A B to index the rows of matrices. For such a matrix
M with |C| = |A| + |B| rows, we use C to refer to the row-set of the matrix. We abuse notation
and index the first |A| rows of M using the elements of A (implicitly referring to A × {0}) and the
last |B| rows using elements of B (implicitly referring to B × {1}). This is an abuse of notation
because the same element can appear in both sets, but we find that it simplifies the notation. The
“origin” of each element we refer to (from A or from B) will always be clear from the context.

3.1   Cryptographic Security, UOWHFs and Hash Trees
We focus on security against non-uniform adversaries. We parameterize security using a security
parameter κ and functions λ : N → N, ε : N → (0, 1), we say that a cryptographic object is (λ, ε)-
secure if the success probability of any adversary of size λ(κ) is bounded by ε(κ). For example, the
standard notion of one-way functions requires security (hardness to invert) against any polynomial
size function λ and any inverse-polynomial success probability ε. Subexponential one-way functions
require that there exists a constant σ > 0 where security holds for any size bound of the form
O(exp(σ · κ)) and success probability of the form Ω(exp(−σ · κ)).
    Throughout this work, when we say that a construction is (λ(κ)/poly(κ), ε(κ) · poly(κ))-secure,
we mean there exists a fixed polynomial function f s.t. it is (λ(κ)/f (κ), ε(κ) · f (κ))-secure

Definition 3.3 (UOWHF [NY89]). Let κ be a security parameter, let λ : N → N, ε : N → [0, 1]
be functions controlling security and let {n1i } and {n0i } be two polynomially related increasing
sequences that depend on κ, such that for all i, n0i ≤ n1i . Let Hk be a collection of functions such
that for all h ∈ Hκ , h : {0, 1}n1κ → {0, 1}n0κ .
    Let A be a probabilistic poly(κ)-time algorithm that on input 1κ outputs x(1) ∈ {0, 1}n1κ that
we call an initial value, then given a random h ∈ Hκ attempts to find x(2) ∈ {0, 1}n1κ such that
h(x(1) ) = h(x(2) ) but x(1) ̸= x(2) . Such an H = Hκ is called a family of (λ, ε)-secure universal
one-way hash functions (UOWHFs) if for all λ(κ)-size adversaries A, for sufficiently large k:

  1. If x(1) ∈ {0, 1}n1k is A’s initial value, then Pr[A(h, x(1) ) = x(2) , h(x(1) ) = h(x(2) ), x(2) ̸=
     x(1) ] ≤ ε(κ), where the probability is taken over h ∈ H and the random choices of A.

  2. ∀h ∈ H there is a description of h of length polynomial in n1κ , such that given h’s description
     and x, h(x) is computable in polynomial time.

                                                  14
  3. H is accessible: there exists an efficient algorithm G such that on input 1κ , G generates
     uniformly at random a description of h ∈ H.

We note that we treat H as a collection of descriptions of functions.

  Rompel gave the first construction of UOWHFs from arbitrary one-way functions. Katz and
Koo gave a full proof for Rompel’s construction.

Theorem 3.4 ([Rom90, KK05]). The existence of (λ, ε)-secure one-way functions implies the ex-
istence of (λ(κ)/poly(κ), ε(κ) · poly(κ))-secure UOWHFs.

    We follow the hash tree construction and definition from the work of Amit and Rothblum
[AR23]. They define a “relaxed” (when comparing to CRHs) security property that a commitment
scheme based on a Merkle tree may satisfy, and call such a commitment a “2-PLOSC” (Definition
3.7). They show in Claim 3.8 that instantiating a Merkle tree with a family of UOWHFs results in
a 2-PLOSC. We emphasize that this construction is not a “standard” commitment scheme in the
sense that it is not necessarily hiding, and that its security is a “targeted” binding property.

Construction 3.5 (Hash Tree [AR23]). Fix N, nin , nout ∈ N and a finite alphabet Σ. Set3 L = nNin ,
and let ℓ = ℓ(N, nin , nout ) to be defined below. Given a string z ∈ ΣN and functions h1 , ..., hℓ :
Σnin → Σnout , the Merkle Tree T = T (z, h1 , ..., hℓ ) is defined in the following manner:

      • The tree has ℓ + 1 layers. The first layer is the root and the last layer is the leaves;

      • There are L leaves. For j = 1, ..., L, the j th leaf is denoted by c(ℓ+1,j) and contains
        z[(j − 1)nin ]...z[j · nin − 1];

      • For i ∈ [ℓ], the ith layer is denoted by wi and is created by applying hi on the i + 1st layer:
        The j th block in the ith layer is denoted by c(i,j) and contains hi (c(i+1,j) ) for j = 1, ..., |wni+1
                                                                                                             in
                                                                                                                |
                                                                                                                  ;

      • The root is denoted by y = h1 (c(2,1) ), thus w1 = y.

    Following [AR23], we index “chunks” of nin nodes, which they call a block: for each fixed tree
layer i, the blocks in this layer are indexed as c(i,1) , . . . , c(i,M ) for M = |wi |/nin .

Definition 3.6 (Valid Path). Let N, nin , nout , Σ, L, ℓ and h1 , ..., hℓ be as in Construction 3.5. Given
a string y ∈ Σnout and a leaf index q ′ ∈ [L], a path p = (p1 , ..., pℓ+1 ) is called a valid path from q ′
to y if it satisfies the following properties:

      • ∀i ∈ [ℓ + 1] : pi ∈ Σnin ;

      • ∀i ∈ [ℓ] : pi = hi (pi+1 );

      • p1 = y.

Definition 3.7 (2-PLOSC [AR23]). Let λ : N → N, ε : N → (0, 1), let N, nin , nout , Σ, ℓ and h1 , ..., hℓ
be as in Construction 3.5 and parameterized by a security parameter κ. Assume that nout ≪ N . A
Second-Preimage Locally Openable Succinct Commitment using a Merkle tree for strings in ΣN is
defined via a pair of probabilistic polynomial-time algorithms (S, R) such that:
  3
      We assume that N , as well as any other layer length, is a multiple of nin . This is w.l.o.g. by a padding argument.


                                                            15
   • Commit Phase:

        – S chooses a string z ∈ ΣN ;
        – R sends hash functions h1 , ..., hℓ : Σnin → Σnout ;
        – S sends a commitment y ∈ Σnout : the (correct) hash root of the Merkle Tree T =
           T (z, h1 , ..., hℓ ).
                                                                                     l m
   • Local-Opening Phase: S outputs an index q ∈ [N ] and an opening of a leaf q ′ = nqin ,
     that is, a path p = (p1 , ..., pℓ+1 ).

   • Security: For every string z ∈ ΣN , for every λ(κ)-size adversary A that follows the protocol
     in the commit phase (sending the correct y) and then later
                                                             l ∗tries
                                                                 m to cheat in the local opening
                          ∗                    ∗         ′     q
     phase by outputting q ∈ [N ] and a path p , taking q = nin :

           Pr [p∗ is a valid path from q ′ to y and p∗ℓ+1 ̸= z[(q ′ − 1)nin ]...z[q ′ · nin − 1]] ≤ ε(κ).
        A’s coins
         h1 ,...,hℓ


Claim 3.8 (A UOWHF tree is a 2-PLOSC [AR23]). In the setting of Definition 3.7, if R samples
h1 , ..., hℓ uniformly at random from a (κ, ε) UOWHFs family H : Σnin → Σnout , and nin and N are
polynomially related, then the commitment scheme is (λ′ , ε′ ) secure, where λ′ = λ(κ)/poly(κ, N, log |Σ|)
and ε′ = ε(κ) · poly(κ, N, log |Σ|).

3.2   Succinct Descriptions
Throughout this work we use NC to refer to the class of logspace uniform Boolean circuits of
polylogarithmic depth and constant fan-in. Namely, L ∈ NC if there exists a logspace Turing
machine M that on input 1n outputs a full description of a polylogarithmic depth circuit C :
{0, 1}n → {0, 1} such that for every x ∈ {0, 1}n it holds that C(x) = 1 if and only if x ∈ L. NC1 is
the subclass of NC where the depth is logarithmic.
    Following [RR20], we use succinct representations of functions and sets. Loosely speaking,
a function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} has a succinct representation if there is a short string ⟨f ⟩ that
describes f . That is, ⟨f ⟩ can be expanded to a full description of f . The actual technical definition
is slightly more involved and in particular requires that the full description of f be an NC (i.e.,
polylogarithmic depth) circuit:

Definition 3.9 (Succinct Description of Functions). We say that a function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}
of size s(n) has a ρ(n)-succinct description if there exists a string ⟨f ⟩ of length ρ(n) and a logspace
Turing machine M (of constant size, independent of n) such that on input 1n , the machine M
outputs a full description of an NC circuit C such that for every x ∈ {0, 1}n it holds that C(⟨f ⟩ , x) =
f (x). We refer to ⟨f ⟩ as the succinct description of f . If ρ(n) = polylog(n) then we say that the
function is fully succinct.

    We also define succinct representation for sets S ⊆ [k]. Roughly speaking this means that the
set can be described by a short string. The formal definition is somewhat more involved:




                                                    16
Definition 3.10 (Succinct Description of Sets). We say that a set S ⊆ [k] of size s(k) has a
ρ(k)-succinct description if there exists a string ⟨S⟩ of length ρ(k) and a logspace Turing machine
M such that on input 1k , the machine M outputs a full description of a depth polylog(k) and size
poly(s, log k) circuit (of constant fan-in) that on input ⟨S⟩ outputs all the elements of S as a list
(of length s · log(k)). If ρ(k) = polylog(k) then we say that the set is fully succinct.

   We emphasize that the size of the circuit that M outputs is proportional to the actual size of
the set S, rather than the universe size k.

3.3   Reversible Computation, Tableau and Multi-Tableau
For simplicity, we focus on single-tape Turing Machines (TMs). A configuration of a Turing machine
M can be described by a string that includes the contents of the work tape, the head positions on the
input and the work tape, and the current state (extending this to multi-tape TMs is straightforward
and would not meaningfully change any of our results). Note that we do not include the input x
in the description of a configuration. If the machine has space bound S ≥ log(|x|), then the
configuration can be described using O(S) bits. The machine has a starting configuration ustart
and w.l.o.g we assume it has a unique accepting configuration uaccept .

Reversible computation. In a reversible Turing Machine, the transition function comes with
an inverse, so the computation can be run forward or backward. We capture this by assuming that
the Turing Machine has a step / successor function succ (as usual) and also a predecessor function
pred. These functions take as input a configuration u for the machine (formally, these functions
also depends on the input x: we assume x is fixed and ignore it in the notation for now). For
every configuration u on the computation path starting at ustart : pred(succ(u)) = u. Note that for
configurations that are not on the path starting at ustart this equality might not hold.
    Bennett [Ben89] studied reversible computation and showed that any Turing Machine running
in time T and space S could be simulated by a reversible Turing Machine running in time poly(T )
and space O(S · log(T )). In this work, we assume all Turing Machines are reversible. This incurs
an overhead that does not meaningfully change any of our results.
    The main advantage in using reversible TMs is that if we look at two computations that start
at different states u and u′ and run for the same number of steps (and on the same input): either at
some point one of the computations reaches a state where the successor and predecessor functions
disagree (and this means it isn’t on the correct computation path), or the configurations traversed
by the two computations disagree at every point on the two paths. See Fact 3.12 below.

Computation tableau (reversible computation). Fixing an input x, an initial state u and
a computation length ℓ, the tableau of M’s computation on x starting in state u is a sequence of ℓ
such configurations, representing the evolution of the machine’s state over each computation step
(we consider tableaux beginning at general states u, not only the machine’s specified start state
ustart ). If the computation terminates before ℓ steps, the remaining configurations are set to a
default “blank” symbol. If at any point in the computation, the successor and predecessor disagree
then the remaining configurations are set to a special “corrupted” symbol ⊥.

Definition 3.11 (Computation tableau, multi-tableau). Let M be a Turing machine, let x be an
input, let S ≥ log(|x|) be a bound on the space used by M on inputs of length |x| and let ℓ be a


                                                 17
computation length (we usually assume that ℓ is smaller than the worst-case runtime of M, starting
at ustart , on inputs of length |x|). The computation tableau Tu,x,S,ℓ is a sequence of configurations
u0 , u1 , . . . , uℓ , where:

   • u0 = u.

   • For i ← 1, . . . , ℓ:
      if ui−1 = pred(succ(ui−1 )), then ui = succ(ui−1 ) (both the successor and predecessor functions
      are computed with x on the input tape).
      Otherwise, ui =⊥, and we define succ(⊥) = pred(⊥) =⊥, so also for every j ∈ [i + 1, ℓ] uj =⊥

The tableau can thus be represented as a string of length O(ℓ·S). We sometimes omit the subscripts
x, u, ℓ, S (or subsets thereof ) when they are clear from the context.
    For a tuple U = (U1 , . . . , UN ) of configurations, we define concatenation of the tableaux:

                                  TU,x,S,ℓ = (TU1 ,x,S,ℓ , . . . , TUN ,x,S,ℓ ) .

We refer to TU,x,S,ℓ as a multi-tableau. We sometimes view U as a matrix of dimensions |U |×O(S)
(so we refer to configurations in U as “rows”). Similarly, we sometimes view TU,x,S,ℓ as a matrix
of dimensions N × O(ℓ · S)

Fact 3.12. For a reversible Turing Machine M, for any two configurations u, u′ and any input
x, space bound S and computation length ℓ, either it is the case that Tu,x,S,ℓ and Tu′ ,x,S,ℓ differ in
all locations, or for at least one of them there is a location in the tableau where the successor and
predecessor functions disagree: e.g. if this holds for u then ∃j ∈ [0, ℓ − 1] s.t. uj ̸= pred(succ(uj ))
and thus Tu,x,S,ℓ |[j+1,ℓ] = (⊥, . . . , ⊥).

Remark 3.13. In this work, whenever we say that a sequence is a consistent (or valid) tableau
for a Turing Machine, this means that none of the configurations is corrupted / has value ⊥. In
particular, for every configuration in a consistent tableau, the successor and predecessor functions
must agree. By Fact 3.12, if we check that the tableaux beginning at states u ̸= u′ are both consistent,
then these tableaux disagree everywhere. Further, this holds even if only one of the tableaux is
consistent: suppose u’s tableau is the valid one, then the two tableau disagree on the prefix where
u′ ’s is uncorrupted, and they also disagree on the suffix where u′ ’s is corrupted (because u’s is not).

The Multi-Tableau Language. We define a language that asserts properties of a sequence of
computation tableaux. The computations are all specified w.r.t the same Turing machine M, input
x, space bound S, and computation length ℓ, but they each begin at a different initial configuration
taken from a tuple U : for each configuration u ∈ U , we consider the ℓ-step tableau Tu starting at
u (a string of length O(ℓ · S)). The language checks that the entire table of all tableaux satisfies a
given (succinct) predicate.
    For technical reasons (see below), rather than considering a single tuple of configurations and
a single predicate (to be applied to the concatenation of the tableaux), we consider a sequence of
nested subsets (see Definition 3.1) of the tuple, and a corresponding sequence of succinct predicates
ϕi (one predicate for the tableaux of the rows in each subset).




                                                       18
Definition 3.14 (Multi-tableau Language). Let M be a Turing machine, x ∈ {0, 1}∗ be an input,
S ∈ N be a space bound and ℓ ∈ N be a computation length. Let U be a tuple of configurations, and
let A1 , . . . , Am ⊆ [|U |] be a sequence of nested subsets (i.e. Am ⊆ · · · ⊆ A2 ⊆ A1 ). Let (ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm )
be a corresponding sequence of succinct predicates (see Definition 3.10 and Definition 3.9).
    An instance (M, x, S, ℓ, U, (Ai )m              m
                                         i=1 , (ϕi )i=1 ) is in the language Lmulti-tableau if for every i ∈ [m]:
                                                                
                                                ϕi TU |A ,x,ℓ,S = 1.
                                                      i


Remark 3.15 (Single-Set Multi-Tableau). In some cases we focus on the case where there is only
a single predicate ϕ that applies to the entire tableau (i.e. the full set [|U |]). We refer to this as the
single-set case, and in this case we omit the collection of sets (Ai ) from the notation and refer to
a single predicate ϕ (with no subscript).

Expanding and contracting multi-tableau. Our protocols move from considering a (tuple
of) (k · ℓ)-length tableau, to k tableaux, each of length ℓ. The idea is to look at k mid-points in the
(k · ℓ)-length computation, each reached from the previous one by taking ℓ computation steps. We
refer to this as the k-fold expansion of a tableau or a multi-tableau.
Definition 3.16 (Expanding and contracting multi-tableau). Fix a Turing machine M, an input
x, a space bound S, a computation length ℓ and a parameter k. Let U be a tuple of configurations.
The k-fold expansion of U , which we denote U expd , is a tuple of (k · |U |) configurations. For
i ∈ [U ], j ∈ [k], the (i, j)-th configuration in U expd is the ((j − 1) · ℓ)-th configuration in TUi ,x,S,ℓ :
i.e. the ((j − 1) · ℓ)-th configuration reached by a computation starting at the configuration Ui .
    We alternate between indexing the rows of the k-fold expansion by elements in [|U |] × [k] or by
elements in [k · |U |] in the natural way. The i-th block of U is the states (U(i,1) , . . . , U(i,k) ). For a
subset A ⊆ [|U |], its k-fold expansion Aexpd = A × [k] is a subset of the rows of U expd .
    For a set B ⊆ [|U |] × [k] of rows in the k-fold expansion, we also define its k-fold contraction
B ctrt = {i : ∃j ∈ [k] s.t. (i, j) ∈ B}. Note here that B itself might not be a product set: for some
indices i ∈ [|U |] it might have 1 row or a few rows from the i-th block.
    For a matrix W with [|U |] × [k] rows, the k-fold contraction of W , which we denote W ctrt is the
sub-matrix of W that only includes the first row of each block, i.e. the rows of the form {(i, 1)}i∈[|U |] .
Alternatively: W ctrt = W |([U ]×[k])ctrt .
    By construction it always holds that U = (U expd )ctrt . Similarly, for a matrix W with row
set [|U |] × [k], if each block i of W contains the correct mid-points of the tableau starting at
configuration W [(i, 1)], then W = (W ctrt )expd .
Remark 3.17. Our recursive honing protocol construction for computations of length (ℓ · k) recur-
sively operates on the k-fold expansion of an input matrix U . The recursive call returns a subset
B of the rows of U expd and a claim about the ℓ-length tableaux of those rows. We can (and do)
interpret this as a claim about the (k · ℓ)-length tableaux of the rows of U that are in B ctrt : the
(k · ℓ)-length tableau of a state Ui includes within it the ℓ-length tableau of every state (Ui,j )j∈[k] .

3.4    Polynomials, Low Degree Extensions and Checksums
We recall some important facts on multivariate polynomials (see [Sud95] for a far more detailed
introduction). A basic fact, captured by the Schwartz-Zippel lemma is that low degree polynomials
cannot have too many roots.

                                                       19
Lemma 3.18 (Schwartz-Zippel Lemma). Let P : Fm → F be a non-zero polynomial of total degree
d. Then,
                                                d
                                Prm P (x) = 0 ≤      .
                               x∈F               |F|
     An immediate corollary of the Schwartz-Zippel Lemma is that two distinct polynomials P, Q :
                                                       d
Fm → F of total degree d may agree on at most a |F|      -fraction of their domain Fm .
     Throughout this work we consider fields in which operations can be implemented efficiently
(i.e., in poly-logarithmic time in the field size). Formally we define such fields as follows.

Definition 3.19. We say that an ensemble of finite fields F = (Fn )n∈N is constructible if elements
in Fn can be represented by O(log(|Fn |)) bits and field operations (i.e., addition, subtraction, mul-
tiplication, inversion and sampling random elements) can all be performed in polylog(|Fn |) time
given this representation.

   A well known fact is that for every S = S(n), there exists a constructible field ensemble of size
O(S) and its representation can be found in polylog(S) time (see, e.g., [Gol08, Appendix G.3] for
details).

3.4.1    Low Degree Extension
Let H be a finite field and F ⊇ H be an extension field of H. Fix an integer m ∈ N. A basic fact is
that for every function ϕ : Hm → F, there exists a unique extension of ϕ into a function ϕ̂ : Fm → F
(which agrees with ϕ on Hm ; i.e., ϕ̂|Hm ≡ ϕ), such that ϕ̂ is an m-variate polynomial of individual
degree at most |H| − 1. Moreover, there exists a collection of |H|m functions {τ̂x }x∈Hm such that
each τ̂x : Fm → F is the m-variate polynomial of degree |H| − 1 in each variable defined as:

                                               def
                                                     Y         Y       zi − h
                                         τ̂x (z) =                            .
                                                                       xi − h
                                                     i∈[m] h∈H\{xi }

and for every function ϕ : Hm → F it holds that
                                                   X
                            ϕ̂(z1 , . . . , zm ) =   τ̂x (z1 , . . . , zm ) · ϕ(x).
                                                     x∈Hm

The function ϕ̂ is called the low degree extension of ϕ (with respect to F, H and m). In the special
case in which H = GF(2), the function ϕ̂ (which has individual degree 1) is called the multilinear
extension of ϕ (with respect to F| and m).

A low-degree extension for multiple strings. We extend the LDEF,H encoding to encode
multiple strings (of varying lengths). A natural way of doing so is by simply concatenating the
strings and applying LDEF,H to the concatenated string. However, following past work and in par-
ticular [RRR16], we take a slightly different approach. This is useful both for composing encodings
of individual strings to a single joint encoding, and for decomposing such a joint encoding into
individual encodings. This approach leverages the fact that the low degree extension is a tensor
code [Wol65].
    Given strings x1 ∈ {0, 1}n1 , . . . , xk ∈ {0, 1}nk , we define an encoding LDEF,H (x1 , . . . , xk ) as
follows. Let mk = log|H| (k), m(i) = log|H| (ni ), mmax = maxi∈[k] m(i) and m = mk + mmax . We

                                                          20
identify [k] with Hmk and identify [max(|xi |)] with Hmmax by viewing the respective integers in
base |H|. Let P : Hm → {0, 1} be a function such that for every z ∈ Hmk , and every (w, y) ∈
   (z)             (z)                                                                             (z)
Hm × Hm−mk −m , it holds that: P (z, w, y) is equal to the wth bit of xz if y = 0m−mk −m , and
                                                 (z)
P (z, w, y) = 0 otherwise (i.e., if y ̸= 0m−mk −m ). We define LDEF,H (x1 , . . . , xk ) as the low degree
extension of P with respect to F, H and m.
Proposition 3.20. Let H and F be constructible field ensembles such that F is an extension field
of H and |H| ≥ log(|F|). There exist procedures Compose and Decompose as follows:

      • Compose: Given oracle access to LDEF,H (x1 ), . . . , LDEF,H (xk ) and a point z ∈ Fm , where m
        is as above, the procedure Compose makes a single query to each LDEF,HP    (xi ) (the same query
        to each of these LDEs and k queries in total), runs in time k · poly(|H|, i log|H| (ni ), log(k))
        and outputs the z th entry of LDEF,H (x1 , . . . , xk ).
                                                                                                                   (i)
      • Decompose: Given oracle access to LDEF,H (x1 , . . . , xk ), some i ∈ [k] and a point w ∈ Fm ,
        where m(i) is asPabove, the procedure Decompose makes a single oracle query, runs in time
        poly(|H|, log(k), i log|H| (ni )) and outputs the wth entry of LDEF,H (xi ).

LDE predicates. We point out some specific scenarios where we use LDEs in this work. The
first is an LDE predicate: a function that checks whether the LDE of its input string takes on a
                                                                                   m
given value v ∈ F at a given coordinate z ∈ Fm . An LDE predicate fH,F,m,z,v : FH → {0, 1} outputs
1 iff, when we view its input string as a function ϕ : Hm → F, it holds that ϕ(z) = v (otherwise
it returns 0). LDE predicates can be decomposed as per Proposition 3.20: the input is viewed as
the concatenation of several sub-inputs x = (x1 , · · · , xk ), and verifying an LDE claim about the
entire input can be reduced to verifying LDE sub-claims about the sub-inputs (the untrusted sends
alleged values for the sub-claims to the verifier).

Encoded tableau. For given fields H, F, space bound S, initial configuration u and runtime ℓ,
the encoded tableau of a machine M on input x is the encoding we get by interpreting the tableau
Tu,x,S,ℓ as a string in Hm for m = ⌈log|H| |Tu,x,S,ℓ |⌉ (if we need to round m up, we pad the suffix of
the tableau with 0’s). The encoding is performed by recursively diving the tableau into |H| sub-
tableaux, each of (up to) ⌊ℓ/|H|⌋ configurations, encoding the sub-tableaux and composing those
encodings as in Proposition 3.20.
    We typically take |H| = O(log(T )) and |F| = polylog(T ) where T is the total size of a com-
putation of interest in the protocol we are constructing (this can be longer than the particular
parameter ℓ we encode at any one point in the protocol).

3.4.2      Checksum
                                                                 k
We use a checksum construction from [RRR16]. Let k ∈ N and d ≤ log(k) , we use a systematic 4
linear error-correcting code C : Fk → Fk+2d·log(k) with absolute distance 2d + 1 and poly(log(|F|), k)
time encoding and decoding. We use this code as a d-checksum function, where for any fixed
checksum value chksum ∈ F2d log(k) , and any vector x ∈ Fk , there is at most one vector x′ ∈ Fk with
checksum chksum at absolute distance d from x. Moreover, x′ can be recovered from (x, chksum)
in quasi-linear time.
  4
      Recall that an error-correcting code C is systematic if there exists a function ENC such that C(η) ≡ (η, ENC(η)).


                                                           21
   The parameters are captured in the following proposition from [RRR16], where we take d to be
the blowup in the checksum, which is linear in the unique decoding radius.

Proposition 3.21 ([RRR16]). Let F be a constructible field ensemble (see Definition 3.19) and let
k = k(n) ≥ 1 and d = d(n) ≤ k/ log(k). There exists a systematic F-linear error-correcting code
C : Fk → Fk+d·log(k) with absolute distance d + 1 and k · poly(log(|F|), log(k))-time encoding and
decoding. For fields of (at most) poly(n) size, the encoding function is in log-space uniform NC.

    The classical Reed-Solomon code almost satisfies the requirements in Proposition 3.21 (even
with slightly better rate): it requires the field size to be quite large (i.e., |F| ≫ k), which can be
inconvenient (unlike [RRR18], this is not a crucial issue for us, but it is still more convenient to
avoid a dependence of |F| on k). The construction of [RRR16] uses a Reed-Solomon code, but over
a (sufficiently large) extension field.
    Since C is systematic, there exists a function ENC : Fk → Fd·log(k) such that C(η) ≡ (η, ENC(η)).
We will often refer to chksum = ENC(η) as the checksum of the vector η.
    The function DEC : Fk+d·log(k) → Fk is the decoding function for C that preserves checksums.
That is, on input η ∈ Fk and chksum ∈ Fd log(k) , the function DEC outputs a vector η ′ ∈ Fk at
distance ⌊(d + 1)/2⌋ from η with ENC(η ′ ) = chksum if such an η ′ exists, or ⊥ otherwise. We
remark that the regular notion of unique decoding suffices here: if such an η ′ exists, then it is
the unique codeword of C that is ⌊(d + 1)/2⌋-close to C(η). I.e., the checksum decoder DEC runs
the unique decoding algorithm of C. If the unique decoder returns a ⌊(d + 1)/2⌋-close codeword
with checksum chksum then DEC can simply output (the prefix of) that codeword. Otherwise,
if the unique decoding algorithm fails or returns a closest codeword with checksum different from
chksum, then DEC can safely return ⊥ (there is no close codeword with checksum chksum).
    We extend ENC and DEC to operate over matrices (rather than just vectors) by operating row- 
by-row. That is, ENC : Fm×k → Fm×(d·log(k)) is defined as ENC(η1 , . . . , ηm ) ≡ ENC(η1 ), . . . , ENC(ηm )
(where the ηi ’s are the rows of the matrix). Similarly, we define DEC : Fm×k × Fm×d·log(k) → Fk×m :
                                                                                                   
    DEC (η1 , chksum1 ), . . . , (ηm , chksumm )) ≡ DEC(η1 , chksum1 ), . . . , DEC(ηm , chksumm ) .

3.5   Holographic Interactive Proofs and Arguments
In a Holographic Interactive Proof (HIP) the verifier, rather than having explicit access to its input,
has query access to an encoding of its input. The hope is that the redundancy provided by the
encoding will allow for improving the efficiency of the proof-system (in particular, allowing the
verifier to run in sublinear or even polylogarithmic time). Most commonly, the encoding is a low-
degree extension, as originally proposed by [BFLS91] (in the PCP context). Holographic proofs
with general codes were formalized by Gur and Rothblum [GR17].
    We focus on LDE encodings, and on protocols where the verifier never accesses its holographic
input during the interaction: at the end of the protocol, it outputs a claim about the value of the
encoding at a single coordinate, i.e. it outputs an LDE predicate (see Section 3.4.1).
    We give definitions for pair languages. On input (x, z), we interpret x as the explicit input and
z as the holographic input. The prover gets both inputs, while the verifier only gets (x, |z|). The
claim about the encoding of the input is only about the holographic input z.

Definition 3.22 (Holographic Interactive Proof (HIP)). Fix finite fields H ⊆ F and a low degree
extension encoding LDE = LDEF,H . A Holographic Interactive Proof for a pair language L, with

                                                   22
respect to the low degree extension LDE, is an interactive protocol between a prover P and a verifier
V. Both parties get as input x ∈ {0, 1}nexp . The prover also gets w ∈ {0, 1}nhol whereas the verifier
only gets |w| = nhol . We take m = ⌈log|H| nhol ⌉. At the end of the interaction, either the verifier
rejects or it outputs a coordinate z ∈ Fm , and a value v ∈ F, such that:
   • Completeness. If (x, w) ∈ L and the prover honestly follows the protocol, then LDE(w)[z] = v.
   • ε-Soundness. If (x, w) ∈    / L, then for any (unbounded) cheating prover, with probability at
     least ε over the verifier’s coins, LDE(w)[z] ̸= v.
   We also define holographic argument systems, where soundness is relaxed to hold against
bounded cheating provers:
Definition 3.23 (Holographic Interactive Proof (HIA)). A holographic Interactive Argument for a
language L is defined similarly to an HIP (Definition 3.22), except that all parties also get as input
a security parameter κ, and ε-soundness is relaxed to hold only against cheating provers of size at
most sizeA (κ, nexp , nhol ).

HIA construction.     We use a variant on the HIA of Amit and Rothblum [AR23] for bounded-depth
circuits:
Theorem 3.24 (Holographic Argument [AR23]). Assume (λ, ε)-secure one-way functions exist,
and let κ = κ(n) be a security parameter. Let L be a pair language with input length nexp =
nexp (n) ≤ nhol = nhol (n) that is computable by log-space uniform circuits of fan-in 2, depth D =
D(n) and size S = S(n) ≥ nhol , κ. For constructible field ensembles H, F, where |H| ≤ polylog(S)
and polylog(S) ≤ |F| ≤ S, there is an HIA for L w.r.t LDEH,F . The protocol is public-coin with
perfect completeness and has:
   • round complexity: polylog(S),
   • communication complexity: D · poly(κ, log(S)),
   • verifier runtime: D · poly(κ, log(S)) + nexp · polylog(S).
   • honest prover runtime: poly(S).
                            
   • polylog(S)
         |F|    + ε · poly(S)  -soundness against cheating provers of size λ(κ)/poly(S).

   The main theorem of [AR23] was stated for a constant-round protocol (a more challenging
parameter regime), but allowed for nσ communication and verifier runtime for an arbitrarily small
constant σ. For a different choice of parameters, the same construction (or rather a simplification
thereof) uses a polylogarithmic number of rounds, and the overhead is reduced to poly-logarithmic.
We give an overview in Appendix A.

HIP construction.     For unconditional results, we use the HIP of GKR:
Theorem 3.25 (Holographic IP [GKR15]). Let L be a pair language with input length nexp =
nexp (n) ≤ nhol = nhol (n) that is computable by log-space uniform circuits of fan-in 2, depth D =
D(n) and size S = S(n) ≥ nhol . For constructible field ensembles H, F, where |H| ≤ polylog(S) and
polylog(S) ≤ |F| ≤ S, there is an HIP for L w.r.t LDEH,F . The protocol is public-coin with perfect
completeness and:

                                                 23
      • round complexity: D · polylog(S),

      • communication complexity: D · polylog(S),

      • verifier runtime: (D + nhol ) · polylog(S).

      • honest prover runtime: poly(S).

      • soundness error: D · polylog(S)/|F|.

3.6      Interactive Proofs of Proximity
IPPs [EKR04, RVW13] are interactive proofs in which the verifier runs in sub-linear time in the
input length, where the soundness requirement is relaxed to rejecting inputs that are far from
the language w.h.p. (for inputs that are not in the language, but are close to it, no requirement is
made). Interactive arguments of proximity relax the soundness requirement to hold against cheating
provers of bounded size. We think of the input of the verifier as being composed of two parts: an
explicit input x ∈ {0, 1}nexp to which the verifier has direct access, and an implicit (longer) input
y ∈ {0, 1}nimp to which the verifier has oracle access. The goal is for the verifier to run in time
that is sub-linear in nimp and to verify that y is far from any y ′ such that the pair (x, y ′ ) are in the
language. Since such languages are composed of input pairs, we refer to them as pair languages.
    We define IPPs and IAPs below. In this work we focus on protocols where the verifier doesn’t
need to query the input during its interaction with the prover. After the interaction, the verifier
rejects or it outputs a claim about a sublinear subset of the locations in the input. We call
these output-predicate IPPs (and IAPs). There are many examples of such protocols, including any
public-coin IPP (where the verifier’s are just random coins) or protocols in the pre-coordinated
model [GRS23], so long as the verifier’s queries to the implicit input are non-adaptive.

Definition 3.26 (Interactive Proof of Proximity (IPP)). An interactive proof of proximity (IPP)
for the pair language L is an interactive protocol with two parties: a (computationally unbounded)
prover P and a computationally bounded verifier V. Both parties get as input x ∈ {0, 1}nexp , a
soundness error ε > 0 and a proximity parameter δ > 0. The verifier also gets oracle access to
y ∈ {0, 1}m , whereas the prover has full access to y. The proof system gives the following guarantees:

  1. Completeness: For every pair (x, y) ∈ L, and parameters ε, δ > 0 it holds that
                                 h                           i
                              Pr P(y), V y (x, |y|, δ, ε) = 1 = 1.
                                            


  2. Soundness: For every ε, δ > 0, x ∈ {0, 1}n and y that is ε-far from the set {y ′ : (x, y ′ ) ∈ L},
     and for every computationally unbounded (cheating) prover P ∗ it holds that
                                  h                              i
                               Pr P ∗ (y), V y (x, |y|, δ, ε) = 1 ≤ 1/2.
                                              


   The verifier’s runtime should be polynomial in nexp and 1/δ and sublinear in nimp and 1/ε.5 The
query complexity q = q(nexp , nimp , δ, ε) bounds the number of queries the verifier makes to y. The
communication complexity cc = cc(nexp , nimp , δ, ε) bounds the number of bits communicated between
  5
      The soundness error can be reduced by repetition, so the runtime is usually logarithmic in 1/ε.


                                                          24
V and P. If the honest prover’s running time is polynomial in nexp and nimp , then we way that the
IPP is doubly-efficient.
    In an output-predicate IPP, the verifier has the following special form: the verifier does not
access the input during its interaction with the prover. At the end of the protocol, the verifier either
rejects or it outputs a succinct subset Q ⊆ [nimp ] and a succinct predicate ψ (see Definition 3.9 and
Definition 3.10). The verifier’s decision (accept or reject) corresponds to whether ψ(x, y|Q ) = 1
(for acceptance). W.l.o.g. we usually let the verifier output the all-0 predicate rather than explicitly
reject during the protocol. Here the query complexity is |Q|.
Definition 3.27 (Interactive Argument of Proximity (IAP)). An interactive argument of proximity
is defined similarly to an IPP, but soundness only holds against bounded cheating provers.
    Formally, the definition is as in Definition 3.26, with the following modifications. The the two
parties also get as input a security parameter κ. The soundness property is relaxed, and only holds
against cheating provers of size at most sizeA (κ, nexp , nimp ). The running time of the honest parties
is polynomial in κ. Output-predicate IAPs are defined analogously.
    In this work we sometimes use IPPs and IAPs with an absolute proximity parameter (measur-
ing the absolute distance of y from membership in the pair language w.r.t x) and relative query
complexity (measuring the fractional density of the set Q within the implicit input).

IPP Construction. Our information-theoretic results use the IPP of [RVW13, RR20]. We use
absolute distance and relative query complexity for compatibility with the honing protocols that
we construct using IPPs:
Theorem 3.28 (IPP for Bounded Depth). Let L be a pair language decidable by a ρ = ρ(nimp )-
succinct circuit family of depth D = D(nimp ) ≥ log(nimp ) and size S = S(nimp ) ≥ nimp (nimp ≥ nexp
are the implicit and explicit input lengths).
    There is a public-coin output-predicate IPP for L: for absolute hamming distance δABS =
δABS (nimp ) ≤ nimp and desired soundness error ε′ ≥ 1/S, the protocol has:

   • Relative query complexity: q = O((1/δABS ) · log(1/ε′ )).

   • Communication Complexity: cc = (δABS + D) · polylog(S).

   • Round Complexity: D · polylog(S).

   • Verifier Running Time: (nexp + ρ + δABS + D) · polylog(S).

   • Prover Running Time: poly(S).

   At the end of the interaction either the verifier rejects or it outputs (as in Definition 3.26):
   • A polylog(S)-succinct description ⟨Q⟩ of a set Q ⊆ [nimp ] of “surviving” indices of density q.
     The circuit computing this set has size nimp · polylog(S) and depth polylog(S).

   • a polylog(nimp )-succinct predicate ψ : {0, 1}|Q| → {0, 1} computable by a circuit of size |Q| ·
     polylog(S) and depth polylog(S).
    Morover, the surviving indices in the set Q are 1-wise uniform (this holds for any prover strategy,
as the query set depends only on the verifier’s coins).

                                                  25
3.6.1     Extractable IPP
An extractable interactive proof (or argument) of proximity is an IPP (or IAP) where any cheating
prover that convinces the verifier must “know” a close input in the language. “Knowing” means
that the input can be efficiently extracted from the cheating prover: there is an efficient extractor
Ext, such that for any cheating prover P ∗ that convinces the verifier with probability greater than
the soundness error ε, the extractor (using black-box access to P ∗ ) produces y ′ s.t. (x, y ′ ) ∈ L and
y ′ is δ-close to y.
     We view extractable soundness as a natural notion that may be of independent interest. Several
remarks are in order: first, extractable soundness implies the normal soundness notion of IPPs (or
IAPs): if the input is far from the language, then no close input in the language can be extracted,
so the proof system must be sound. In the other direction, any IPP or IAP is extractable using
brute-force search: if the cheating prover breaks the IPP’s soundness, this means that the input
is not far from the language. We can find a close input in the language using brute-force search,
but this is not an efficient (polynomial-time) extractor. Finally, we remark that we use extractable
IPPs and IAPs as a building block in constructing computationally sound protocols: the extractor
is used towards showing that a cheating prover breaks some underlying cryptographic assumption,
and this is why it is important that it is efficient (regardless of whether the original soundness
guarantee was information theoretic or computational).
Definition 3.29 (Extractable IPPs and IAPs). An extractable IPP for the pair language L is an
interactive protocol between a prover P and verifier V as in Definition 3.26, with the following
modified soundness property:

   • Extractable Soundness: There exists a polynomial-time extractor Ext such that for every
     ε, δ > 0, x ∈ {0, 1}nexp , y ∈ {0, 1}nimp , and every (cheating) prover P ∗ , if
                                       h                                i
                                    Pr P ∗ (y), V y (x, nimp , δ, ε) = 1 > ε,
                                                    

                  ∗
        then ExtP (·) (x, 1nimp , 11/δ , ε) outputs some y ′ that is δ-close to y such that (x, y ′ ) ∈ L with
                                                ∗
        probability at least 1/2, where ExtP (·) denotes that Ext has black-box access to P ∗ . The success
        probability of the extractor is over its own coins and can be amplified by repetition.

    Similarly, an output-predicate extractable IPP is an output-predicate IPP (as in Definition 3.26),
with the above modified soundness guarantee. In particular, if the probability that the verifier outputs
a predicate that accepts (the sublinear subset of ) the input is larger than ε, then the extractor should
recover a close input in the language.
    An extractable IAP (or output-predicate extractable IAP) is defined as in Definition 3.27, but
with the above extractable soundness guarantee. I.e., the extractor is only guaranteed to work for
computationally bounded cheating provers that can make the verifier accept w.p. greater than ε.

First-message extractor. A particularly strong form of extractability is when the extractor
does not need oracle access to the cheating prover, but can extract a valid input y ′ solely from
observing the first message sent by the prover. Following the prover’s first message, either its
probability of convincing the verifier is at most ε, or the extractor can extract a close input in
the language. This strong extractability notion simplifies the security analysis of (computationally
sound) protocols that use the IPP or the IAP as a building block.

                                                      26
Definition 3.30 (First-Message Extractable IPP). A first-message extractable IPP for the pair
language L is an interactive protocol between a prover P and verifier V as in Definition 3.26, with
the following modified soundness property:

       • First-Message Extractable Soundness: There exists a polynomial-time extractor Ext
         such that for every ε, δ > 0, x ∈ {0, 1}nexp , y ∈ {0, 1}nimp , and every (cheating) prover P ∗ , if
         the first message α = P ∗ (x, nimp , 11/δ , ε) leads to a high probability that V accepts, i.e. if:
                              h                                                       i
                           Pr P ∗ (y), V y (x, nimp , δ, ε) = 1 | first message = α > ε,
                                           


         then Ext(α, x, nimp , 11/δ , ε) outputs some y ′ that is δ-close to y such that (x, y ′ ) ∈ L with
         probability at least 1/2. Note that Ext takes only the first message α as input and does not
         require black-box access to P ∗ .

    As before, an output-predicate first-message extractable IPP is an output-predicate IPP (as in
Definition 3.26), with the above modified soundness guarantee.
    A first-message extractable IAP (or output-predicate first-message extractable IAP) is defined
as in Definition 3.27, but with the above extractable soundness guarantee. Here we do require the
extractability guarantee to hold for any first message, and for any bounded prover strategy in the
subsequent rounds.6 I.e. we require extractable soundness to hold for any first message, and every
bounded strategy that the prover can employ in subsequent rounds.

Constructions. The IPPs of [RVW13, RR20] (which natively produce an output predicate) can
be modified to achieve first-message extractability. The main idea is for the prover to send a
(δ · nimp )-checksum for y in its first message. The prover an the verifier run an IPP that checks both
membership in L and that y is consistent with the checksum. There is at most one input y ′ within
a δ-radius of y satisfying the checksum. The extractor efficiently decodes this y ′ from the prover’s
first message. Soundness follows because if (x, y ′ ) ̸∈ L, then y is far from the language that the
IPP checks w.r.t the explicit input x (note that this is the case even if y is close to some other y ′′
s.t. (x, y ′′ ) ∈ L), and the IPP verifier will reject w.h.p. A similar construction works for ensuring
first-message extractability for IAPs, where we note that indeed the extractability guarantee holds
for any first-message (namely any checksum), so long as the subsequent argument system is sound
against cheating provers running within the specified computational bounds. This transformation
incurs a O(δe · nimp ) communicaiton overhead for sending the checksum, but this is smaller than the
communication complexity of the protocols we use.
     See Section 3.6.3 for formal statements of the results we can get.

3.6.2      Nested IPPs
In a nested IPP, there are m explicit-implicit input pairs (xi ∈ {0, 1}nexp , yi ∈ {0, 1}nimp )i∈[m] , and a
sequence of m claims about nested subsets (see Definition 3.1) Am ⊆ . . . ⊆ A1 ⊆ [nimp ] of locations
in the corresponding implicit inputs. One could run m independent output-predicate IPPs to verify
these claims, where the i-th IPP verifies the claim about (xi , yi |Ai ), returning a set Qi ⊆ Ai and
a predicate ψi . However, this would mean that the output subsets (Qi ) are unrelated, and might
   6
    We focus on this definition because it is achieved by natural constructions. However, one could also relax the
requirement to focus on bounded provers that produce the first message.


                                                       27
not preserve the nested structure. A nested IPP guarantees that the output claims are also about
nested subsets. We restrict our attention to the case where all the claims are with respect to the
same absolute proximity parameter, so the relative query complexity is the same for each of the
claims. We focus on output-predicate IPPs and IAPs throughout, as we are concerned with the
structure of the output subsets. For convenience, we also focus on first-message extractability (the
definition can be extended to other soundness notions).
    In the definition below, we consider “universal” protocols that get a description of the relevant
pair language as part of their input (this analogous to a universal Turing Machine or circuit, which
gets a description of the machine or circuit, respectively). The pair language is described via a
succinct predicate that takes the explicit input and (a subset of) the implicit input and accepts or
rejects. The protocol should work for any predicates within a pre-specified family Φ.
Definition 3.31 (Nested IPP or IAP). A nested (first-message extractable) IPP for a family of
predicates Φ is an interactive protocol between a prover P and verifier V with the following inputs:
   • m explicit inputs x1 , . . . , xm ∈ {0, 1}nexp ,
   • m implicit inputs y1 , . . . , ym ∈ {0, 1}nimp (only the prover has access to the yi ’s),
   • an absolute proximity parameter δABS ∈ N and soundness error ε > 0,
   • m nested succinct input sets Am ⊆ . . . ⊆ A1 ⊆ [nimp ],
   • m succinct input predicates ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm ∈ Φ.
   At the end of the protocol, the verifier outputs a succinct subset Q ⊆ [nimp ]. For each i ∈ [m] let
Qi = Ai ∩ Q. The m (succinct) output sets are Qm ⊆ . . . ⊆ Q1 ⊆ [nimp ]. The verifier also outputs
m succinct output predicates ψ1 , . . . , ψm . We require:
   • Completeness: For every i ∈ [m], if ϕi (xi , yi |Ai ) = 1, then
                                      h                      i
                                   Pr ψi (xi , yi |Qi ) = 1 = 1.

   • First-Message Extractable Soundness: There exists a polynomial-time extractor Ext
     such that for every δABS ∈ N, ε > 0, inputs (xi , yi )i∈[m] , i ∈ [m], and every (cheating) prover
     P ∗ , if the prover’s first message α leads to a high probability that ψi is true:
                                   h                                         i
                                 Pr ψi (xi , yi |Qi ) = 1 | first message = α > ε,

      then with probability at least 1/2, Ext(α, xi , nimp , i, 1δABS , ε) outputs some y ′ that is at absolute
      distance at most δABS from yi such that ϕi (x, y ′ |Ai ) = 1.
   A nested (first-message extractable) IAP is defined analogously: the parties also get a security
parameter κ in their inputs (see Definition 3.27), and soundness is relaxed to only hold for cheating
provers of a specified size bound sizeA (κ, nexp , nimp ). As in first-message extractable IAPs (Definition
3.30), the extractability guarantee to holds for every first message sent by the cheating prover, so
long as a bounded prover strategy convinces the verifier to accept w.p. ε in the subsequent rounds.
   The (relative) query complexity of a nested IPP is (the worst-case bound on) |Q|/nimp .The
choice of indices in Q is always at least 1-wise uniform, so for each i ∈ [m] the expected fractional
density of Qi in Ai is (at most) |Q|/nimp . We remark that it is natural to run nested IPPs when the
implicit inputs are all equal, but we also allow for running nested IPPs for differing implicit inputs.

                                                        28
Constructions. Any IPP or IAP where the query set is just a function of the verifier’s coin tosses
(and the absolute distance parameter) can be made into a nested IPP as follows. Run in parallel
m separate IPPs, one for each of the claims, where all executions use the same coin tosses for the
verifier. In the i-th execution, the implicit input is yi′ , where all of the bits of yi that are outside the
set Ai are set to 0 (and the bits in Ai are as in yi ), and the protocol checks that ϕi (xi , yi′ ) accepts
(we abuse notation and allow ϕi to take the entire input yi′ , where it ignores the bits outside Ai ).
Note that the absolute distance of yi′ from satisfying ϕi (xi , ·) is the same as the absolute distance
of yi . The IPPs all use the same coins, so the query set Q is the same in all of them. The i-th IPP
outputs a predicate ψi over yi′ |Q . The nested verifier outputs ψi′ which sets the bits of the input
that are outside Ai to 0 and then checks if ψi accepts. Completeness and extractable soundness
now follow by construction (the extractor uses the first message sent for the i-th protocol to extract
a close satisfying input input for that predicate). By construction, the query set for the i-th output
predicate ψi is exactly Q ∩ Ai (since all bits outside Ai are set to 0). See Section 3.6.3 for a formal
statement.

3.6.3   Extractable Nested IPPs: Protocols
As described above, the IPPs of [RVW13, RR20] can be transformed into nested and first-message
extractable IPPs. To reduce the round complexity, we use an IAP derived from the protocol of
[AR23], see Theorem 3.24. This gives the following result for uniform bounded-depth circuits:
Theorem 3.32 (IAP from [AR23]). Assume there exist (λ, ε)-secure one-way functions. Let Φ
be the class of ρ = ρ(nimp )-succinct predicates of depth D = D(nimp ) ≥ log(nimp ) and size S =
S(nimp ) ≥ nimp (where nimp ≥ nexp are the implicit and explicit input lengths).
    There is a public-coin first-message extractable nested IAP for Φ. For absolute hamming distance
δABS = δABS (nimp ) ≤ nimp , security parameter κ = κ(nimp ) ≤ S, desired soundness error ε′ ≥ 1/S,
and m = m(nimp ) ∈ N nested inputs, where the sets Ai are ρ-succinct, the protocol has:

   • Expected relative query complexity: q = O((1/δABS ) · log(1/ε′ )).

   • Communication Complexity: cc = m · (δABS + D) · poly(κ, log(S)).

   • Round Complexity: polylog(S).

   • Verifier Running Time: m · (nexp + ρ + δABS + D) · poly(κ, log(S)).

   • Prover Running Time: m · poly(S).

   • Soundness: the IAP is (ε′ + ε · poly(S))-sound against adversaries of size λ(κ)/poly(m, S).

   At the end of the interaction either the verifier rejects or it outputs (as in Definition 3.31):
   • A polylog(S)-succinct description ⟨Q⟩ of a set Q ⊆ [nimp ] of “surviving” indices of expected
     density q. The circuit computing this set has size nimp · polylog(S) and depth polylog(S).,

   • m descriptions (⟨ψi ⟩)i∈[m] of polylog(S)-succinct predicates ψi : {0, 1}|Q∩Ai | → {0, 1} i∈[m] .
                                                                                              

     The circuit computing ψi has size |Q ∩ Ai | · polylog(S) and depth polylog(S).
    Morover, the surviving indices in the set Q are 1-wise uniform (this holds for any prover strategy,
as the query set depends only on the verifier’s coins).

                                                     29
Notes about the construction. The IAP is derived from the HIA of Theorem 3.24. We can derive a
regular IAP as follows:

   • Following the template from [RVW13], we first use the holographic argument to reduce check-
     ing proximity to L to checking proximity to a PVAL instance.

   • We then run the (unconditionally sound) IPP for PVAL from [RR20].

   Moving from a regular IAP to a nested first-message extractable IAP is done as described in
Section 3.6.1 and 3.6.2 (the “constructions” paragraph at the end of each section).

3.6.4    Running IPPs on configuration tables
In this work we run nested IPP on input tables that include configurations of the machine M from
the computation we are trying to prove and verify. When this is the case, the input is a “tall”
and “skinny” matrix, where each row corresponds to a certain configuration (of size O(S)), with
potential auxiliary information. We find it helpful to work directly with absolute row distance on
such tables:

Definition 3.33 (Absolute row distance). The absolute row distance between a table U and a
predicate ϕ is:

                   ∆ABS (U, ϕ) =             min              {# rows on which U , U ′ differ}.           (1)
                                   U ′ : |U |=|U ′ |, ϕ(U ′ )=1

Remark 3.34 (Row distance and Hamming distance). When we run the IPP of Theorem 3.32 on
a table of configurations to check that the table satisfies a predicate ϕ, we implicitly first encode
each configuration, and run an IPP checking a new predicate ϕ′ , which checks that all configurations
in the input are properly encoded and then that their decoding satisfies ϕ. The encoding ensures
that the encoded input’s Hamming distance from satisfying ϕ′ is Θ(|row| · δABS (U, ϕ)). We then run
the IPP with this absolute Hamming distance, which only incurs communication and verifier time
blowups that are linear in the width of a row.

3.7     Honing Protocols
A honing protocol is a protocol between a prover and a verifier, where both take as input an
instance for the multi-tableau language, (M, x, S, ℓ, (Ai )m          m
                                                           i=1 , (ϕi )i=1 ) (the verifier gets implicit access
to the collection of configurations). The goal is refining the search for inconsistencies within the
computation tableaux to smaller sets: the verifier outputs a sequence of (succinct) nested subsets
of the configurations in the Ai ’s and a sequence of corresponding (succinct) predicates. If for some
i ∈ [m], the configurations in Ai are far from any table whose induced tableau satisfy ϕi , then the
protocol’s output should induce a significantly smaller set and a corresponding predicate that rejects
(the concatenation of) that set’s tableaux. Intuitively, this is “progress” because the inconsistency
is on a shorter overall computation (and so we can hope it is easier to detect). Distance is measured
using the absolute row distance (Definition 3.33) between U and the predicate that expands the
tableaux and then checks whether ϕ accepts. I.e. the number of rows we’d need to change in U to
get a table U ′ whose induced tableau satisfy ϕ.
    We parameterize a honing protocol by the computation length of the tableaux it can handle,
and by a “honing parameter” η that gives a bound on how much smaller the output set containing

                                                             30
the inconsistency will be. We emphasize
                                   P           that we are interested in protocols where the verifier’s
runtime is much smaller than ( i |Ai |) (and much smaller than the computation length ℓ). In
particular, the verifier treats the Ai ’s as an implicit input and outputs succinct descriptions of the
subsets it chooses.
   Looking ahead, a honing protocol is a type of nested IPP (with minor differences), but we find it
helpful to provide an explicit definition. We focus on computational soundness against non-uniform
adversaries. The definition can be adapted to unconditional soundness. See Remarks 3.36 and 3.37.

Definition 3.35 ((η, δABS , ℓ)-Honing Protocol). A honing protocol is a protocol between an un-
trusted prover and a (sublinear) verifier. It has the following parameters, which can all be functions
of the input length: honing parameter η ∈ (0, 1], absolute proximity parameter δABS ∈ N, computa-
tion length ℓ ∈ N, completeness and soundness errors εc , εs : N → [0, 1] and a bound sA : N → N
on the adversary’s size.7 The input includes a security parameter κ and an instance for the multi-
tableau language (M, x, 1S , ℓ, U, (Ai )m          m
                                        i=1 , (ϕi )i=1 ). The verifier gets implicit access to the table U of
configurations and explicit access to M, x, 1S , ℓ, 1κ , to the succinct descriptions of the sets (Ai ) and
the predicates (ϕi ), and to the security parameter.
    The verifier does not query the table U during the protocol. At the end of its interaction with
the prover, it either rejects, or it outputs a succinct a subset B ⊆ [|U |] of “surviving rows” and
predicates (ψi )m
                i=1 . The protocol guarantees:

      • η-honing: For every j ∈ [|U |]:

                                                    Pr [j ∈ B] ≤ η,                                            (2)

        where the probability is only over the coin tosses of the verifier (so Equation (2) holds for
        every prover strategy, cheating or honest).
        For every i ∈ [m], Bi = Ai ∩ B: i.e. surviving rows survive in all subsets (and non-surviving
        ones are dropped from every subset). This structure implies that if the Ai ’s are nested sets,
        then so are the Bi ’s. Moreover, the expected size of each Bi is at most η · |Ai |.
                                                      
      • Completeness: If for all i ∈ [m], ϕi TU |A ,ℓ = 1, then with probability at least 1 − εc (κ),
                                                     i
                                   
        for all i ∈ [m], ψi TU |B ,ℓ = 1.
                                   i


      • Proximity-soundness: For every non-uniform cheating adversary A of size at most sA (κ),
        for every input and every index i ∈ [m], if U |Ai is at absolute row distance at least δABS from
        a table that     tableaux satisfying ϕi , then the probability that for every j ∈ [i, m] it holds
                 induces
        that ψj TU |B ,ℓ = 0 is at most εs (κ).
                       j


The above probabilities are over the verifier’s and the prover’s (or the adversary’s) coin tosses.

      Several remarks are in order:

Remark 3.36 (Variations on the definition). The above definition assumes the subsets Ai are
nested (see Definition 3.1), but the definition can be adapted to general subsets (in the general case,
the subsets Bi will also not necessarily be nested). The definition can also be generalized to have
  7
      We focus on soundness against non-uniform adversaries. For uniform soundness, sA bounds their runtime.


                                                        31
unrelated sets of surviving rows in the different Ai ’s (rather that having a “global” decision on
whether a row survives, i.e. is in the set B, which determines its survival in all the Ai ’s). Another
natural variation is soundness against unbounded adversaries: in this case we call the protocol a
proof system, or refer to it as unconditionally sound: we construct such protocols in Section 5.

Remark 3.37 (Honing protocols and nested IPP.). Any honing protocol is (almost) an output-
predicate nested IAP (Definition 3.31). Syntactically, there is a minor difference in the soundness
requirement of a honing protocol: if the i-th input is far from the predicate, then we allow for the
false output claim to be on any set j ∈ [i, m], whereas requiring it to be on the i-th output claim in
the general definition of a nested IPP, but we don’t view this as a meaningful distinction (indeed,
it is possible to incorporate all the claims (ψj )j∈[i,m] into a single claim about U |Bi ). There is a
contextual difference in that the output predicates of IPPs are usually quite efficient to compute,
whereas for a honing protocol the output claim still requires computing tableaux of length ℓ, which
can be quite large.
    We view honing protocols as a natural object, and they play a pivotal role in our constructions,
so we view them as a type of IPP that is worth defining and studying in its own right. We note
that we use nested IPPs in our recursive construction of honing protocols: both in the base of the
recursion, and in the recursive step (see Sections 2 and 4).


4     Main Construction
We detail our recursive honing protocol construction, and its application to constructing arguments.

Organization The base of the recursion is in Section 4.1. The recursive step and its analysis are
in Section 4.2. We put things together to obtain the resulting honing protocol in Section 4.3, and
we derive an efficient argument system in Section 4.4.

4.1    Base of The Recursion
Corollary 4.1. Assume there exists a one-way function secure against λ(κ)-size adversaries. There
is a honing protocol for the multi-tableau language as follows: for (absolute) distance δABS               base , an

instance (M, x, 1S , ℓbase , U, (Ai )i∈[m] , (ϕi )i∈[m] ), take T = |U | · ℓbase . We require that the sets Ai and
predicates ϕi are ρbase -succinct with depth poly(κ, log T ) and size poly(T ), that |x|, S, m, κ, ρbase ≤ T .
The protocol is public-coin with perfect completeness. For desired soundness ε ≥ poly(1/κ), it is
ε-sound against adversaries of size (λ(κ)/poly(T )) size and has:
                                                         
    • Honing parameter: η base = O log(1/ε)        δ base
                                                            .
                                                 ABS


    • Communication complexity: ccbase = m · δABS
                                              base · S · ℓbase · poly(κ, log(T )).


    • Round complexity: rbase = polylog(T ).

    • Verifier runtime: Vtimebase = m · δABS
                                         base · (|x| + ρbase ) · poly(ℓbase , κ, log(T )).


    • Honest prover runtime: Ptimebase = poly(T ).




                                                        32
    The output sets Bi and predicates ψi are polylog(T )-succinct, and computable by circuits of depth
polylog(T ) and size |U | · S · polylog(T ) (for Bi ) and |Bi | · S · polylog(T ) (for ψi ). We emphasize that
he succinctness and complexities of these circuits are independent of those of the input predicate ϕ.

Proof. The corollary follows from Theorem 3.32 by viewing the honing protocol as a nested IAP
(see Remark 3.37). For each i ∈ [m], the i-th predicate ϕ′i for the nested IAP first expands each
state in U to the ℓbase -length tableau starting at that state, and then applies the predicate ϕi for
the honing protocol to the resulting tableaux. The tableau expansion is performed by the standard
O(log(T ))-space-uniform circuit of depth O(ℓbase ·log T ) and size O(ℓbase ·S ·log T ) that takes a state
and outputs the ℓbase states that follow it in the Turing machine’s computation. By construction,
the composed predicates ϕ′i are ρbase -succinct and have (ℓbase · polylog(T )) depth and poly(T ) size.
The complexity bounds follow directly from those of Theorem 3.32.

4.2    The Recursive Step
We formalize the recursive step of the honing protocol. The main theorem of this section shows
how to construct a protocol for computations of length (k · ℓ) using a single oracle call to a protocol
for computations of length ℓ. The construction is in Figure 1. We prove its soundness and honing
properties in Lemma 4.3 and analyze its complexity in Lemma 4.2.
    We remark that an important parameter throughout this construction is the total size T of the
computation being proven: the table U is of size |U |, and each of its entries induces a length-ℓouter
tableau that is given as input to the predicates ϕouter
                                                      i   , so we view the total computation size as
T = |U | · ℓouter and use this quantity to control several other parameters.

Checksum-UOWHF subprotocol. In Step 1 of the protocol of Figure 1, the prover and the
verifier engage in a “checksum-UOWHF” commitment protocol. For each subset i (ignoring the
i subscript), the prover first sends a checksum that “binds” it (in some sense) to a large implicit
table Ue : the unique table U that agrees with the checksum and differs from U in at most d rows.
After this step is performed, the verifier reveals the keys to the hash functions used for the tree
commitment (Definition 3.7): for each row in U , the prover computes the LDE encoding of its
tableau (see Section 3.4.1 for the definition of an encoded tableau), and then computes the hash
root of the tree applied to that LDE. This gives a corresponding table of hash roots, and the prover
also sends a checksum for that table. We spell this out here to emphasize the order of events: since
the UOWHF is only targeted-collision resistant, it is important that the matrix Ue was well defined
and efficiently computable before the verifier reveals its hash keys.

Lemma 4.2 (Recursive construction complexity). For every input tuple (M, x, 1S , ℓouter , U ) and
ρouter -succinct sets (Aouteri   )i∈[m] and predicates (ϕouter
                                                           i   )i∈[m] , for parameters κ, d and k ≤ ℓouter , let
T = |U | · ℓ outer . We assume that T ≥ |x|, S, κ, d, m, ρ     outer . We also assume that the circuits Aouter
                                                                                                           i
and predicates ϕ     outer i have poly(T ) size and poly(log(T ), κ) depth.

    Let ccinner , rinner , Vtimeinner , Ptimeinner denote the communication, rounds and verifier and prover
runtimes (respectively) of the inner honing protocol when it is run as follows:

   • the parameters are η inner , δABS
                                   inner , |x|, S, ℓouter /k, |U ′expd | ≤ (k · |U | · (1 + 1/k)), (m + 1),


   • the sets Ainner
               i     and the predicates ϕinner
                                         i     are ρinner = (ρouter + m · S · poly(κ, k, d, log T ))-succinct.



                                                      33
Outer protocol Πouter , with a recursive call to inner protocol Πinner
Parameters: honing η inner , absolute proximity δABS
                                                   inner
                                                         , security κ, expansion k, checksum d.
               S outer
Input: (M, x, 1 , ℓ    = (k · ℓ), U, nested sets (Aouter
                                                    i     )m       outer m
                                                           i=1 , (ϕi    )i=1 ). Take T = |U | · ℓouter .

   1. Checksum-UOWHF commitments: For each i ∈ [m] (in parallel): the prover sends a d-
      checksum C fU i for the table U |Aouter , the verifier then chooses and sends a UOWHF-tree key h (the
                                        i
      same key for all i ∈ [m]), the prover computes the matrix R of hash tree roots for the encodings of
      the tableaux of U , and sends a d-checksum C      fRi for R|Aouter .
                                                                    i

   2. Sampling subsets: The verifier picks a subset Asamp of U ’s rows: each row is chosen w.p. 1/2k
      and the choices are 10k log log T -wise indep. If |Asamp | ≥ (1 + 1/k)|U |, then the verifier accepts.
                                                                                                samp
      Otherwise, ∀i ∈ [m], Asamp
                               i    = Aouter
                                        i    ∩ Asamp . The prover sends d-checksums: C       fU i    for U |Asamp
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                  and
          samp
      CR i
       f       for R|Asamp
                       i
                           .
                                                      
                                                 U
   3. Recursive Call: Define U ′ =                       . We index the rows of U ′ using the disjoint union
                                              U |Asamp
                     (see Definition 3.2). Let (U ′ )expd be the k-fold expansion of U ′ (see Definition 3.16). For
            ` samp
      [|U |] A
      each i ∈ [m], let Aexpd
                           i  and Asamp−expd
                                    i         be the k-fold index expansions of Aouter
                                                                                     i   and Asampi   (respectively).
                                           expd      samp−expd            samp−expd        expd
      For i ∈ [m + 1], define Ainner
                                                S
                                  i    = Ai       Ai−1         (define A0           and Am+1 to be empty), and
      let ϕinner
            i    be a predicate on the ℓ-length tableaux of (U ′ )expd |Ainner
                                                                           i
                                                                               that checks:

        (a) ϕouter
             i     accepts the concatenation of the tableaux of the states in (U ′ )expd |Aexpd .
                                                                                                   i
        (b) each k-row block of (U ′ )expd |Ainner
                                             i
                                                   corresponds to a single longer computation of length (k · ℓ):
            the j-th state in the block is the ((j − 1) · ℓ)-th state of the longer computation.
                               samp
        (c) The checksum C  fU i−1 is consistent with (U ′ )expd | samp−expd (on the first row of each k-block).
                                                                  A     i−1
                                  samp
        (d) The checksum C fR i−1 is consistent with hash roots computed on the encodings of the (k · ℓ)-
            length tableaux in (U ′ )expd |Asamp−expd (one root for each k-row block in Asamp−expd
                                                                                         i−1       ).
                                                 i−1

       The prover and verifier run Π     inner
                                                on (M, x, 1S , ℓ, (U ′ )expd , (Ainner
                                                                                 i     )m+1     inner m+1
                                                                                        i=1 , (ϕi    )i=1 ) with parameters
         inner inner         inner                inner m+1
       η      , δABS . Let B       ⊆ [|U |] and (ψi )i=1 be the output set and LDE-predicates.
       For i ∈ [m+1], let Bictrt ⊆ Aouter
                                     i    be the k-fold index contraction of (B inner ∩Aexpd
                                                                                           i   ), and let Bisamp−ctrt ⊆
         samp                                            inner       samp−expd
       Ai      be the k-fold index contraction of (B           ∩ Ai            ) (see Definition 3.16). The prover
       splits the LDE-predicate ψiinner into LDE-predicates ψictrt on the length-(k · ℓ) tableaux of U |Bictrt and
         samp−ctrt
       ψi−1        on the length-(k · ℓ) tableaux of U |B samp−ctrt (see Proposition 3.20).
                                                             i−1


   4. Holographic argument: For each i ∈ [m], the prover and verifier run an HIA on the matrix of
      (k · ℓ)-length tableaux induced by U |Bictrt , to check that ψictrt accepts, with soundness error εhol =
      1/polylog(T ). This gives an output claim (zihol , vihol ) about a single coordinate in the LDE of these
      tableaux. Decomposing the LDE into one row per element of Bictrt , the zihol -th coordinate is a linear
      combination of the zi -th coordinate in the LDE of each row (see Section 3.4.1).
   5. The consistency IAP: Let M be a |U |-row matrix, where M [j] = (U [j], R[j], (vi,j , openi,j )i∈[m] ):
      vi,j is the value of the zi -th coordinate in the LDE of the (k · ℓ)-length tableau starting at U [j], and
      openi,j is the opening of this value w.r.t. the root R[j]. The prover and verifier run a nested IAP with
      absolute proximity parameter d, relative query complexity O(1/d)
                                                                   e        and soundness εIAP = 1/polylog(T ).
      The i-th execution in the nested IAP is for the subset Aouter   i     and checks that M |Aouter
                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                      is close to the
                      IAP
      language Li (Definition 4.8): that all the openings are correct, that the linear combination of the
                                                                             samp    samp
      vi,j ’s is vihol and that M |Aouter
                                    i
                                          is consistent with C
                                                             fU i , C
                                                                    fRi , C
                                                                          fU i , CfR i . Let B IAP ⊆ Aouter be the
                                                                                               i          i
      set of rows queried by the i-th IAP and let ψiIAP be the IAP’s output predicate. We view ψiIAP as a
      predicate over the (k · ℓ)-length tableaux of rows in BiIAP , see Remark 4.13.
   6. Output: The i-th output set is Biouter = BiIAP Bisamp−ctrt . The i-th output LDE-predicate ψiouter is
                                                            S
      obtained by running a final holographic argument on the (k · ℓ)-length tableaux of states in U |Biouter ,
      checking that ψisamp−ctrt accepts (tableaux of) U |B samp−ctrt and that ψiIAP accepts (tableaux of) U |BiIAP .
                                                                   i



                                  Figure 1: Recursive Outer Protocol Πouter
      Moreover, for every i ∈ [m]:

            size(Ainner
                  i     ) ≤ size(Aouter
                                  i     ) + poly(T ), depth(Ainner
                                                             i     ) ≤ depth(Aouter
                                                                              i     ) + polylog(T )
             size(ϕinner
                   i     ) ≤ size(ϕouter
                                   i     ) + poly(T ), depth(ϕinner
                                                              i     ) ≤ depth(ϕouter
                                                                               i     ) + poly(κ, log T )

Suppose the output set B inner of surviving indices in the inner protocol is µinner -succinct , where
µinner ≤ T , size(B inner ) ≤ poly(T ) and depth depth(B inner ) ≤ polylog(T ). Finally, suppose that the
output predicates (ψiinner )i∈[m] are LDE predicates (and are thus fully succinct).
    The complexities of the outer honing protocol are then:
   • communication complexity ccouter = ccinner + m · S · poly(κ, k, d, log T ).
   • round complexity router = rinner + polylog(T ).
   • prover runtime Ptimeouter = Ptimeinner + poly(T, m, κ, ρouter ).
   • verifier runtime Vtimeouter = Vtimeinner + m · (S + ρouter + µinner ) · poly(κ, k, d, log T )).
   • the set B outer of surviving indices is q outer = (q inner + poly(k, log T ))-succinct where:

      size(B outer ) ≤ size(B inner ) + poly(|U |, k, log T )), depth(B outer ) ≤ depth(B inner ) + polylog(T )).

   • the predicates (ψiouter )i∈[m] are LDE predicates (and thus fully succinct).
Proof. The parameters of the recursive call are as in the lemma statement: for the size of U ′expd ,
recall that if Asamp has density larger than 1/k then the verifier accepts immediately in Step 2,
so |U ′ | ≤ |U | · (1 + 1/k). To bound the succinctness of the inner predicates ϕinner
                                                                                 i     and sets Ainner
                                                                                                  i
observe that, by construction, the description of each ϕinner
                                                          i    includes the description  for the outer
predicate, the checksums for the state matrices and the hash root matrices (and the hash tree
key). The descriptions of each inner set Ainner
                                              i    includes the description of the outer set and the
10k log log(T )-wise independent function. The sizes and depths of the predicates and sets are by
construction (note that the inner predicates need to compute the hash tree over the tableau, which
results in increased depth).
    This accounts for the contributions of the recursive calls to the complexities. The further
overheads come from:
   • The checksums and UOWHF commitment use (S + poly(κ)) · m · poly(d, log T ) communication
     and verfier runtime, a constant number of rounds, and m · poly(T, κ) prover runtime.
   • The HIAs of Step 4 add m·(ρouter +µinner )·poly(κ, log(T )) communication and verifier runtime,
     polylog(T ) rounds, and poly(T ) prover runtime (see Theorem 3.24, note that ψictrt are fully
     succinct). The succinctness only comes into play in letting the prover and verifier restrict
     their attention in the i-th HIA to the appropriate subset of rows: the subset Bictrt , which can
     be computed from the intersection of Aouter
                                              i    and B inner is (ρouter + µinner )-succinct.
   • The nested IAPs of Step 5 add (m · d · poly(κ, log(T ))) communication, (m · (|x| + S + ρouter +
     µinner ) · d · poly(κ, log(T ))) verifier runtime, polylog(T ) rounds and poly(T ) prover runtime (see
     Theorem 3.32, the nested sets are ρouter -succinct and the predicates, which need to know the
     description of Bictrt , are µinner -succinct). The IAP’s output set B IAP of surviving indices and
     its output predicates ψiIAP are fully succinct.

                                                      35
   • The final holographic argument of Step 6 adds m · (ρouter + µinner ) · poly(κ, log(T )) communica-
     tion and verifier runtime, polylog(T ) rounds, and poly(T ) prover runtime (see Theorem 3.24,
     note that ψisamp−ctrt and ψiIAP are fully succinct). Here too succinctness only comes into play
     in letting the prover and verifier restrict their attention in the i-th holographic argument to
     Biouter .

     The set B of surviving indices for the honing protocol is derived from: (i) the set Asamp , (ii)
the honing protocol’s surviving set B inner , and (iii) the nested IAP’s surviving set B IAP . Thus,
it is (µinner + poly(k, log T ))-succinct. As claimed, the circuit computing the set B only requires
an additive overhead of poly(|U |, log(T )) size and polylog(T ) depth over computing B inner . The
predicates ψiouter , which are produced by the final holographic argument, are fully succinct (these
are LDE predicates over the tableaux).

Lemma 4.3 (Recursive construction soundness). Suppose that Πinner is a (η inner , δABS  inner , ℓ)-honing

protocol with soundness error εs (κ) against adversaries of size sA (κ) (see Definition 3.35), where
ηinner ≤ 100k2 log 1T log log T , δABS
                                   inner ≤ d · k and that HIA and IAP have soundness error εhol , εIAP =

1/polylog(T ) against adversaries of size sA (κ). Suppose also that the UOWHF tree commitment
scheme is (sA (κ), εUOWHF (κ))-secure (see Definition 3.7).
    Then Πouter is a (η outer , δABS outer , k · ℓ)-honing protocol, where:

                 inner
                                        
    • η outer = η 2 + O log log    d
                                       T
                                            .
                 inner
                δABS
   • δABS
      outer =
                  k + d.
                                                                                                                     
   • for adversaries of size (sA (κ)−poly(T, m, κ)), the soundness error is εs (κ) + (εUOWHF (κ) · |U | · m) + 2 log
                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                     T .

Proof of Lemma 4.3. We begin by bounding the honing parameter. The heart, namely bounding
the soundness error, follows below.

Honing parameter. For each i ∈ [m], the set of surviving rows is Biouter = BiIAP ∪ Bisamp−ctrt .
Since the IAP executions are nested (see Definition 3.31), there is a set B IAP ⊂ [|U |] of surviving
rows where for each i ∈ [m]: BiIAP = Aouter
                                          i    ∩ B IAP . By the parameters chosen for the IAP in Step
5 and by Theorem 3.32, each row in [|U |] survives with probability at most O(log log(T )/d). The
sets Bisamp−ctrt are formed as follows. First, the sampling step chooses the set Asamp where each
row survives with probability 1/2k. Then, in the recursive protocol call in Step 3, there is a subset
of surviving rows Ainner ⊆ (Asamp )expd within the (expansion of) the part of U ′ that corresponds
to Asamp . Each row in (Asamp )expd survives with probability η inner . By a union bound, for each
k-row block of (Asamp )expd (corresponding to a single row of Asamp ), the probability that there is a
surviving row in that block is at most k · η inner . Let B samp−ctrt ⊆ Asamp be the k-fold contraction
of the set of surviving rows in (Asamp )expd , so that Bisamp−ctrt = Asamp
                                                                        i     ∩ B samp−ctrt . By the above,
each row in Asamp survives in B samp−ctrt is at most k · η inner . Putting this together, each row in
[U ] survives in B samp−ctrt w.p. at most (1/2k) · (k · η inner ) = η inner /2. Overall, the “global” set
of surviving rows is B IAP ∪ B samp−ctrt . By a Union Bound, the probability that each row of [U ]
survives to be included in this set is at most (η inner /2 + O(log log T /d)).




                                                    36
Bounding the soundness error. We proceed with the proof of soundness, building up to
Lemma 4.17 below. First, note that by the parameters chosen in the lemma, it holds that:
                                  inner            outer
                                                               
                                δABS    ≤ k · min δABS   − d, d .                        (3)

This fact is used in the proof of Lemma 4.17. By that lemma, and accounting also for a 1/polylog(T )
probability that the verifier terminates and accepts in Step 2, the soundness error is bounded by:
         1                                                             1
               + εs (κ) + (εUOWHF (κ) · |U | · m) + εIAP + 2εhol +          + η inner · 10k 2 log log T ≤
   polylog(T )                                                     10 log T
                                         1
   εs (κ) + (εUOWHF (κ) · |U | · m) +         ,
                                      2 log T

where the last inequality follows by the bound on η inner in the Lemma statement and by the choice
of soundness parameters for the HIAs and the IAPs.

Notation and preliminaries.          Following the notation in the overview, for each i ∈ [m] define:

   • Uei : the matrix closest in row-distance to U |Aouter
                                                     i
                                                           that has checksum C
                                                                             fU i .

   • R(U
       ei ): the matrix of hash tree roots for the encodings of the tableaux of Uei .

   • R
     ei : the matrix closest in row-distance to R(U
                                                  ei ) with checksum C
                                                                     fRi .

                                                                           fU samp .
     e samp : the closest matrix in row-distance to U | samp with checksum C
   • Ui                                                A                      i
                                                            i

       e samp ): the matrix of hash tree roots for the encoding of the tableaux of U
   • R(U                                                                           e samp .
        i                                                                            i
                                                                                       samp
     esamp : the closest matrix in row-distance to R(U
   • R                                               e samp ) with checksum C
                                                                            fR                .
      i                                                i                       i

By the properties of the checksum, for each of these definitions there can be at most one matrix with
the given checksum at distance d from the appropriate matrix. Unless we explicitly note otherwise,
we assume all of these matrices exist (i.e. that the checksum values are realizable). Otherwise, we
syntactically define the appropriate matrix to be at infinite distance from the matrix it is supposed
to be close to. We index the rows of Uei , R(Uei ), R ei using the set Aouter in the natural way. Similarly,
                                                                         i
                         samp        samp      samp                 samp
we index the rows of U e
                        i     , R( U
                                   e
                                     i    ), R
                                             e
                                               i    using the set A i     in the natural way.
    For i ∈ [m], we say that a row in Ui is “corrupted” if the value in that same row in R
                                             e                                                     ei is not
the correct hash tree root for (the tree built on) the encoding of the tableaux of Uei , i.e. if R(U     ei )
and Ri differ in that row. We define the event:
     e

                 Ecorrupt
                  i       (A ⊆ Aouter
                                i     ) : 1 {one of the rows in the set A is corrupted} .                (4)

Note that if this event doesn’t occur then the hash roots should be binding for all rows in the set
A. We syntactically define the event Ecorrupt
                                        m+1 to be false (on any set).




                                                     37
Setting the table. Suppose the i-th input predicate is δABS  outer -far from satisfying the (tableaux of

the) states in Aouter
                  i   . The crux of the soundness proof is showing that w.h.p. after the recursive
protocol call, for some i′ ≥ i, one of three “good” (for the verifier) outcomes occur:

   • Option I: cheating on the sample. The prover’s claim about Bisamp−ctrt ′       (a subset of the
     sampled set) is false. This is a small set, so the verifier has made progress.

   • Option II: bound to a false claim: the rows of the set Bictrt   ′  are all non-corrupted (and so
     the commitment is binding) AND the prover made a false claim about the tableaux of rows
     in this set. While here the set isn’t small, this is progress for the verifier because it can use
     the binding property to derive a false claim about a much smaller set (see the overview).
      For i ∈ [m] we define the event:
                                                             ^                                         
                      Ebinding−cheat
                       i             = ¬Ecorrupt
                                         i       (Bictrt )        ψictrt       TUei | ctrt ,(k·ℓ)       =0 .       (5)
                                                                                    B
                                                                                        i



   • Option III: cheating on a checksum. Lastly, the verifier can also make progress if the
     checksums sent are themselves inconsistent. We distinguish between inconsistencies before
     and after the verifier chooses its sub-sampled sets.
     After Step (1), the i-th checksums are inconsistent if U |Aouter i
                                                                         or R(Uei ) are far from being
     consistent with their respective checksums, or if they are inconsistent with a checksum sent
     for a set j ≥ i: since the sets are nested, the matrix U     ei induces values for the checksums
     (CU )j∈[i,m] , and similarly for Ri . For i ∈ [m] we define the event:
       f                              e


                                     n                      o
                   Echksum−cheat−1
                    i              =1 ∆row
                                        ABS U |Aouter
                                                i
                                                      , U
                                                        ei > d
                                 _ n                       o
                                        row
                                    1 ∆ABS R(U ei ), R ei > d
                                _    n                                                o
                                    1 checksum C                            ei |Aouter ,
                                                fU j is not consistent with U
                                                                                 j
                               j∈[i,m]
                                  _       n                                              o
                                         1 checksum C                          ei |Aouter .
                                                    fRj is not consistent with R                                   (6)
                                                                                    j
                               j∈[i,m]


      After Step (2), the prover is cheating on the i-th checksums if they are inconsistent with the
      checksums for the sampled sets for any set j ∈ [i, m]: For i ∈ [m] we define the event:


                                                       fU samp
                                   _         n                                                   o
              Echksum−cheat−2
               i              =             1 checksum C  j    is not consistent with U
                                                                                      e  |
                                                                                        i A samp
                                                                                                               j
                                  j∈[i,m]

                                                       fR samp is not consistent with R
                                   _         n                                                 o
                                            1 checksum C                              ei | samp .                  (7)
                                                          j                               A                    j
                                  j∈[i,m]


      We say that the prover is cheating on the i-th checksum if either of these events occurs:



                                                       38
                                                                      _
                                  Echksum−cheat
                                   i            = Echksum−cheat−1
                                                   i                      Echksum−cheat−2
                                                                           i              ,                             (8)

        where we syntactically define the events Echksum−cheat
                                                  0            , Echksum−cheat
                                                                  m+1          to be false.
        In this case, the cheating claim allows the verifier to directly hone its search to a smaller set
        using an IAP (see the overview).
   The following fact about the checksum events follows immediately from the construction and
the nesting structure of the sets, and will be helpful throughout the analysis:
Fact 4.4. For every i ∈ [1, m], if Echksum−cheat
                                            i           does not occur, then for every j ∈ [i, m] it holds
that: Uj = Ui |Aouter
      e    e
                j
                      , Rj = Ri |Aouter
                        e    e
                                  j
                                        , and the event Echksum−cheat
                                                         j            also does not occur.

Breaking the recursive call. Our goal is showing that, assuming that the recursive call is
sound, one of the aforementioned “good” outcomes occurs. This is shown in Proposition 4.5 and
Claim 4.6. Towards this we define an event that indicates that the prover broke the recursive
(inner) protocol’s soundness on the i-th set. When we say that the prover “breaks” the recusions,
we define this w.r.t. a particular input table. For i ∈ [m + 1] we define:
                                                           !
                                                     U
                                                     ei
                                           Vei =                                              (9)
                                                  U |Asamp
                                                                i−1


(Ue samp and U em+1 are empty matrices). I.e. the matrix Vei has two parts: the top part takes values
    0
by Ui and the bottom part takes values by U (the original input table). Similarly to the matrix
      e
U ′ in the protocol, we index the rows of Vei using the set (Aouter i     ∪ Asamp
                                                                               i−1 ) in the natural way. Note,
however, that the same row can appear in both parts of Vei , and can take different values. Intuitively,
if the hash roots in R    ei are uncorrupted, then the cheating prover is “committed” to U           ei . Even if
there are only a few corruptions, w.h.p. after the recursive call the prover will still be committed to
tableaux for which the verifier has derived a false claim (see the overview and above). On the other
hand, if there are corruptions in U    e samp , then the recursive call will result in a false claim about an
                                        i−1
even smaller subset of the rows of U (here we do not need a binding commtiment, but we do need
the claim to be false about the rows of the actual input U ).8
      The soundness property of the recursive call is w.r.t. a single global input table that is fixed
before that protocol begins, whereas the (Vei )i∈[m+1] tables might not be consistent with a single
global table (because the U    ei parts might not be consistent). However, if Echksum−cheat doesn’t occur,
                                                                                     i
then (U ej )j≥i are all consistent with the single input table U  ei , and we define breaking the recursion
on the i-th set as breaking it w.r.t. a global input table that agrees with Vei on its row set (the
values of the rows outside Vei are immaterial).
                    n                                                                                o
Erecurse−break
  i            =  1   A outer breaks soundness of Πinner on the i-th set w.r.t. input table V     ei
       (                                                                                                     !    !)
                                                         ^
                    expd
          ∆row Ve        , Z : ϕinner (TZ,ℓ ) = 1 ≥ δ inner           ∀j ∈ [i, m + 1] : ψ inner T e expd
                          
 =1          ABS     i            i                       ABS                                 j      Vi
                                                                                                                =1
                                                                                                          |B inner ,ℓ
                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                             j

                                                                                                                   (10)
  8
      As shown below, the adversary has some latitude to decide which of two types of false claims ensues.


                                                          39
   Intuitively, if Erecurse−break
                    i             happens with noticeable probability, then we can build an adversary
that breaks the recursive protocol on input Vei with similar probability (see below).

Soundness from Step (3). We show that if the rows of the i-th set are far from satisfying their
predicate, then unless the prover breaks soundness on the recursive call, either it is cheating on
one of the checksums, or for some set j ∈ [i, m + 1], in the j-th output of the recursive call, the
corresponding (tableaux of the) rows of that output set do not satisfy the corresponding predicate
AND the hash roots are uncorrupted (and thus binding).
                                               n                                      o
Proposition 4.5. For every i ∈ [m], if ∆row
                                          ABS  U,  W   : ϕ outer T
                                                           i       W |Aouter ,(k·ℓ)   = 1      outer , then
                                                                                            ≥ δABS
                                                                                            i
the prover’s messages in Step (1) define an index i∗ ∈ [i, m + 1] and:
                                    ^                  ^
                  Pr ¬Echksum−cheat
                         i              ¬Erecurse−break
                                          i∗
                                                                                 _                 
                                    ∗                                                   corrupt
                         ∀j ∈ [i , m + 1] :       ψjinner       TVe expd ,ℓ       =1   Ej         ctrt
                                                                                                (Bj )
                                                                   j

                               1
                         ≤          + η inner · 10k 2 log log T.
                           10 log T
Moreover, i∗ is computable in time poly(T, m, κ) from the messages sent in Step (1).
    We remark that the fact that i∗ is efficiently computable (from messages that are sent before
the recursive call is made) is important towards allowing us to use an efficient adversary that breaks
the recursive call to construct an efficient adversary for the inner / recursive protocol.
    We defer the proof of Proposition 4.5 (see below). The following claim states that if the (tableaux
of the) i-th output set of the recursive call do not satisfy the corresponding output predicate, then
                                 samp−ctrt
one of the predicates ψictrt or ψi−1       won’t accept the (tableaux of the) rows of its set.
Claim 4.6. For every i ∈ [m + 1]:
                                                    _                                 
      inner                      ctrt                          samp−ctrt
     ψi       TVe expd ,ℓ = 0 ⇒ ψi     TUei | ctrt ,k·ℓ = 0   ψi−1        TU | samp−ctrt ,k·ℓ = 0 ,
                i                                 B                                                B
                                                      i                                             i−1

                      ctrt and ψ samp−ctrt are syntactically defined to always accept their inputs.
where the predicates ψm+1       0

Proof of Claim 4.6. The prover splits the LDE-predicate ψiinner on the (tableaux of) Vei into LDE-
predicates: (i) ψictrt on the on the length-(k · ℓ) tableaux of U     ei |B ctrt , and (ii) ψ samp−ctrt on the
                                                                           i                 i−1
length-(k · ℓ) tableaux of U |B samp−ctrt (see Proposition 3.20). If the initial LDE-predicate is false on
                                    i−1
its input, then one of the two resulting predicates must be false on its input (we remark that a
cheating prover has latitude to choose which of the resulting claims is false).

Soundness from the HIA. If the predicate ψictrt doesn’t accept (the tableaux of) U   ei , then either
the cheating prover breaks the HIA in Step 4, or the HIA output claim is false for U
                                                                                   ei :

Claim 4.7. For every cheating prover strategy A for Πouter , if the HIA is εhol -sound against adver-
saries of size |A|, then for every i ∈ [m]:
                                                                 h     i         
                  ctrt                                                    hol       hol
                 ψi      TUei | ctrt ,k·ℓ = 0 ⇒ Pr LDE TUei | ctrt ,k·ℓ zi      ̸= vi     ≤ εhol
                            B                                                 B
                                i                                              i



                                                            40
Distance for the consistency IAP. We show that for every i ∈ [m], if either: (i) the prover
cheats on the i-th checksums (the event Echksum−cheat
                                             i          ), or (ii) the prover doesn’t cheat on the i-th
checksums, but the holographic claim is false w.r.t the (encoding of the tableaux of the) matrix
Uei |B ctrt , then the matrix Mi constructed in Step (5) of the protocol is computationally far from
      i
satisfying the cheating prover’s claim in the IAP: it is hard to find a close matrix Mi′ that satisfies
the prover’s claim. This latter condition is sufficient for our purposes. Towards this, we define the
language checked by the IAP:
Definition 4.8. The pair language LIAP considers:
                                                                       fU samp               samp
                                                                                                 
  • an explicit input (k, ℓ, T, 1d , 1κ , h, i, z hol , v hol C
                                                     i     i
                                                               fU i′ , C  i ′  , C
                                                                                 f Ri ′ , C
                                                                                          f Ri ′                    ),
                                                                                                        i′ ∈[i,m]

    • an implicit input: a matrix Mi with |Aouter    i   | rows as follows. The j-th row is of the form
      (uj , ρj , vj , openj ): uj corresponds to the j-th state in U |Aouter
                                                                       i
                                                                             , ρj corresponds to the hash root
      for the encoded tableau starting at uj , vj corresponds to the value of the z-th coordinate of
      the encoded tableau, and openj should correspond to the opening of this value w.r.t. the hash
      root ρj (this is all as in the construction of the matrix Mi in Step (5) of the protocol).
The matrix is in the language if the following all hold:
                                                                                  samp
   1. the (uj ) values are consistent with the checksums (C
                                                          fU i′ , C
                                                                  fU ′
                                                                    i                    )i′ ∈[i,m] ,

   2. the (ρj ) values are consistent with the checksums (C      fR samp
                                                          fRi′ , C  i′   )i′ ∈[i,m] ,

   3. every opening openj is a valid opening for the value vj w.r.t. the hash root ρj and location zi ,

   4. the appropriate linear combination of the values (vi,j ) equals vihol .
    For i ∈ [m], the pair language LIAP
                                    i   is derived from LIAP by fixing the value of i.
    For a matrix Wi with |Aouter
                             i   | rows, we define M (Wi ) to be the “honestly constructed” matrix
where the j-th row contains: the j-th state in Wi , the hash root of its encoded tableau, and the true
values and openings for that encoding in the z-th coordinate. Thus in the protocol Mi = M (U |Aouter
                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                     ).
Fact 4.9 (Computing M ). For any table W of states, computation length ℓouter , and coordinate z
in the encoded tableau, the matrix M (W ) defined above can be computed in time |W | · poly(ℓouter , κ).
    The following claim will be helpful in analyzing the soundness of the IAP call.
Claim 4.10. Suppose M ′ differs from M (U |Aouter i
                                                       ) in at most d rows. If the state-column of M ′
                                                  ei . If it is also true that the root-column of M ′ is
                   fU i , then it is identical to U
is consistent with C
consistent with CRi , then it is identical to Ri and differs from R(U
                 f                             e                        ei ) in at most d rows.

Proof of Claim 4.10. If M ′ differs from M (U |Aouter
                                                    i
                                                        ) in at most d rows then its state column can
only differ from U |Aouter in at most d rows, and if its checksum is C
                         i
                                                                     fU i then, by the properties of the
checksum, it must be identical to U  ei .
    If it also holds that the root column of M ′ has checksum C        fRi , then let J1 be the set of rows
on which M (U |Aouter                                      ′
                      ) and M (Ui ) are identical and M differs from both of them. Let J2 be the set
                                e
                   i
of rows in which M (U |Aouter ) and M (U  ei ) differ and M ′ differs from M (U ei ). By construction, these
                              i
                                                      ei ) and M ′ is exactly |J1 | + |J2 |.
two sets are disjoint and the row-distance between M (U

                                                               41
    We know that M ′ differs from M (U |Aouter
                                            i
                                               ) on every row in J1 . Further, since M ′ has checksum
C
fU i , the uj values in Uei must be identical to those in M ′ (see above). Thus, M ′ and M (U |Aouter )
                                                                                                    i
must differ on every row in J1 ∪ J2 . Since M ′ differs from M (U |Aouter
                                                                     i
                                                                          ) in at most d rows it must be
the case that |J1 | + |J2 | ≤ d. Since the roots column of M ′ is at distance d from M (U   ei ) and has
checksum C  fRi , it must equal Rei .

   In what follows we fix the explicit input (except for i) and use LIAP to refer to the set of implicit
inputs that are in the pair language with the i-th explicit input (i will be clear from the context).
                                                                                           
Claim 4.11. For every i ∈ [m], if Echksum−cheat
                                      i           occurs  then ∆ row
                                                                 ABS   M (U |  outer
                                                                              Ai     ), LIAP ≥ d.


Proof. Recall the definition of Echksum−cheat
                                      i          (Equations (6), (7), (8)). If the event holds, then:
                            
   • if ∆row
           ABS U |Aouter
                   i
                          ei > d: the state-column of M (U |Aouter ) is at distance d from having
                         ,U                                          i

      checksum CfU i ,
                                        
   • otherwise, if ∆row
                      ABS    R(Uei ), Rei > d: no matrix of roots at distance d from R(Uei ) has checksum
      fRi . Suppose for contradiction that M ′ is d-close to M (U |Aouter ) and has checksums C
      C                                                                                                fU i
                                                                            i
      and CfRi . By Claim 4.10, the root-column of M ′ is at distance at most d from R(U
                                                                                       ei ): a
      contradiction.

   • otherwise, there are unique matrices Uei that differs from U |Aouter in at most d rows and agreed
                                                                    i
     with C
          fU i , and R
                     ei that differs from R(U
                                            ei ) in at most d rows and agrees with C    fRi .

      if ∃j ∈ [i + 1, m] s.t. U
                              ei is not consistent with CfU j , then there is no matrix of states at
      row-distance d from U |Aouter
                               i
                                    that agrees with both C
                                                          fU i and CfU j .

      if ∃j ∈ [i + 1, m] s.t. R ei is not consistent with C  fRj : for any matrix M ′ that d-close to
      M (U |Aouter ) and has checksums C       fRi , by Claim 4.10, the row-column of M ′ must equal
                                        fU i , C
             i
      Rei and cannot be consistent with the checksum C     fRj , so M ′ ̸∈ LIAP .

      the cases where ∃j ∈ [i+1, m] s.t. U                         fU samp or that R
                                         ei is not consistent with C               ei is not consistent
                                                                      j
               samp
      with CfR j    (the event Echksum−cheat−2 ) are handled analogously.



   The next claim shows that if the LDE claim is false for the tableaux of U         ei , then while there
                      ′
might be matrices M ∈ L      IAP that are close to M (U |Aouter )), then even though the matrix has the
                                                           i
              e                                       ctrt
same roots as Ri , one of its values in the row-set Bi is opened to a different value than in M (U     ei ).
                                                                    ctrt
We later use this claim to argue that whenever the rows in Bi are uncorrupted, i.e. the roots are
binding, we can find a hash collision between the opening in M ′ and in M (U      ei ).

Claim 4.12. For every i ∈ [m], if
                                                       h    i
                                    LDE TUei | ctrt ,k·ℓ zihol ̸= vihol ,
                                               B
                                                i




                                                     42
                                                             
then for any matrix M ′ ∈ LIAP s.t. ∆row
                                       ABS M (U |Aouter
                                                     i
                                                        ), M ′ ≤ d, the root-column of M ′ equals R    ei
and for some row j ∈ B ctrt a different vi,j value is opened successfully in M ′ [j] and in M (U
                          i
                                                                                               ei )[j].

Proof. By Claim 4.10, the state-column of M ′ must equal U        ei and the root-column must equal Rei .
         ′       IAP
Since M ∈ L , the openings for every row, and in particular in every row in Bi , must be   ctrt

legal. Suppose for contradiction that the values (vi,j   ′ )                                  ′
                                                            j∈Bictrt opened in the rows of M equal the
values (e
        vi,j )j∈Bictrt in M (U
                             ei ). The appropriate linear combination of the vei,j values does not equal
                                  
  hol
vi (because LDE TUei | ctrt ,k·ℓ zihol ̸= vihol ). Thus, the same linear combination of the vi,j′ values
                                        
                         B
                          i
won’t equal vihol , and M ′ ̸∈ LIAP : a contradiction.

Remark 4.13 (The IAP predicate). The IAP’s output claim is a predicate on (a subset of ) the
rows of M (U ). This includes claims about the root of the hash tree and an opening of a certain
value. We interpret this as a predicate over the tableaux of those rows in U , where the low-depth
predicate computes the hash tree and the appropriate opening from the encoded tableau.).

Soundness from the consistency IAP. Building on the claims above, we show that if either:
(i) the prover cheats on the i-th checksums (the event Echksum−cheat
                                                                 i          ), or (ii) the prover doesn’t
cheat on the i-th checksums, but the holographic claim is false w.r.t the (encoding of the tableaux
of the) matrix Uei |B ctrt , then the IAP ends with a false claim (predicate) about a small subset of the
                     i
tableau of the input U . The latter case assumes that the prover cannot break the commitment.
Claim 4.14. For every cheating prover strategy A for Πouter , if the IAP is εhol -sound against
adversaries of size |A|, then for every i ∈ [m]
                                                                  
                                IAP                     chksum−cheat
                           Pr ψ      TU | IAP ,k·ℓ = 1 Ei              ≤ εIAP .
                                          B
                                           i


Proof. By Claim 4.11, the input to the IAP (the matrix M (U |Aouter i
                                                                       )) is at absolute row-distance
                            IAP
d from the language L . Since the absolute row distance for the IAP is d (see Remark 3.34),
the soundness of the IAP implies that the output claim is not satisfied by the subset of rows
M (U |Aouter
       i
             )|B IAP . The claim follows because we treat the output claim of the IAP as a predicate
                i
over the tableaux of those rows, see remark 4.13.

    For the second case (the holographic claim is false) we need to define an event indicating that
the adversary broke the commitment scheme. For every i ∈ [m], if the input to the IAP of Step (5)
is not d-far from the language LIAP , then the prover’s first message in the IAP defines an (efficiently
computable) Mi′ ∈ LIAP that is d-close to M (U )|Aouter
                                                    i
                                                         (or otherwise the verifier will reject w.h.p.):

        def
    Mi′ = the matrix guaranteed by Theorem 3.32 for the i-th IAP execution in Step (5).             (11)

By the first-message extractability guarantee of Theorem 3.32 we know that either: (i) Mi′ ∈ LIAP
and given the prover’s first message in the protocol, Mi′ is computable in time poly(|M (U )|) =
poly(|U |, κ, log(T )), or (ii) the verifier in the IAP will reject w.h.p.




                                                    43
   If the former happens, we say that there is a hash collision if:

Ecommit−break = 1 ∃i ∈ [m], j ∈ Aouter : j-th row of Mi′ and M (U
                 
                                 i
                                                                ei ) agree on state and its correct root,
                                             openings of zihol -th coordinate are to different values.
                                                                                                                       (12)

this is a targeted collision (breaking the commitment scheme) because the states in U
                                                                                    ei , their encoded
tableaux, and the hash roots were defined in Step (1) before the verifier sent the UOWHF key.

Claim 4.15. For every cheating prover strategy A for Πouter , if the IAP is εhol -sound
                                                                                              against  adver-
saries of size |A|, then for every i ∈ [m], if ¬Ecorrupt (Bictrt ) occurs and also LDE TUei | ctrt ,k·ℓ zihol ̸=
                                                                                                            
                                                 i                                                    B
                                                                                                          i
vihol :

                                            ^                      
                                commit−break    IAP
                           Pr ¬E               ψi    TU | IAP ,k·ℓ = 1 ≤ εIAP .
                                                                      B
                                                                       i


Proof. If M (U |Aouter
                     i
                           ) is d-far from LIAP (in absolute row distance), then the claim follows similarly
to the proof of Claim 4.14. Otherwise, by the first message extractability guarantee, after the
prover’s first message, either the verifier rejects w.h.p. or there exists a matrix Mi′ ∈ LIAP that is
d-close to M (U |Aouteri
                            ). By Claim 4.12, the root-column of Mi′ equals R      ei , but for some row j ∈ B ctrt ,
                                                                                                                i
                                          ′
a different value is opened in Mi [j] and in M (U )i ). Both openings are legal w.r.t their respective
                                                         e
roots: in M (U e )i ) this is by construction, and M ′ this is because the matrix is in LIAP (which checks
                                                         i
this condition). It remains to show that the roots in the j-th row of these two matrices are identical.
    By the conditions of the claim, the event ¬Ecorrupt    i      (Bictrt ) occurs, so for every row j ∈ Bictrt the
root in Rei is uncorrupted: the roots in R        ei and R(U ei ) agree on these rows. Since by the above the
                         ′
root-column of Mi also equals R          ei , we have that the roots in the j-th row of M ′ and M (U      e )i ) are
                                                                                                 i
identical, and thus the event E         commit−break occurs.

Soundness from the final holographic argument. The HIA run in Step (6) checks that both
predicates ψiIAP and ψisamp−ctrt accept the tableaux of their corresponding rows (which are both
subsets of Aouter
              i   ). Intuitively it “combines” these two initial claims into a single LDE predicate
that will be false w.h.p. if either of the initial claims was false. The following claim follows directly
from Step (6) of the protocol and the soundness of the HIA.
Claim 4.16. For every cheating prover strategyA for Πouter                hol
                                                         , if the HIA is ε -sound
                                                                                  against adver-
                                                                                             
saries of size |A| then for every i ∈ [m], if ψ IAP TU | IAP ,k·ℓ          = 0 or if ψisamp−ctrt TU | samp−ctrt ,k·ℓ     =
                                                                 B                                        B
                                                                  i                                           i
0:
                                       h                         i
                                     Pr ψiouter TU |Bouter ,k·ℓ = 1 ≤ εhol
                                                        i


Soundness: Putting it together. The soundness of the recursive construction puts together
the above claims to show that any adversary who breaks soundness must either be able to find
UOWHF collisions or must break the recursive call (we ignore here the probability that the verifier
accepts in Step 2, as that is a low-probability event).

                                                            44
Lemma 4.17. For every cheating prover strategy A for Πouter s.t. the soundness guarantees of the
HIA and the IAP hold against adversaries of size A, for every i ∈ [m], if it holds that:
                             n                                     o
                      ∆row
                        ABS   U, W   : ϕ outer
                                         i       TW |Aouter ,k·ℓ   = 1      outer
                                                                         ≥ δABS   ,
                                                          i


then for every α, β ∈ [0, 1] if:
                                          
                   outer                                                       1
Pr ∀j ∈ [i, m] : ψj       TU |Bouter ,k·ℓ = 1 ≥ α + β + εIAP + 2εhol +              + η inner · 10k 2 log log T,
                                j                                          10 log T

then there exists either:
                                                                                       β
   • an adversary Acommit of size |A| + poly(T, m, κ) that breaks the commitment w.p. m·|U |,

   • or an adversary Ainner of size |A| + poly(T, m, κ) that breaks Πinner w.p. α.

Moreover, if A is a uniform machine then so are Acommit and Ainner .

Proof of Lemma 4.17. By Proposition 4.5, the prover’s messages in Step (1) define an efficiently
computable index i∗ ∈ [i, m + 1]. After the recursive call of Step (3), with all but ( 10 log
                                                                                           1
                                                                                              T +η
                                                                                                   inner ·

10k 2 log log T ) probability, one of the following holds:

   • either Echksum−cheat
              i           occurs: in this case, by Claim 4.14, after Step (5), with all but εIAP
     probability, the IAP’s output claim on the i-th set will be false. When this holds, by Claim
     4.16, the output claim ψiouter will be false with all but εhol probability.

   • or Erecurse−break
         i∗            occurs: this will contribute towards constructing an adversary that breaks the
     recursive protocol, see below.
                                                                                      
   • or there is j ∈ [i∗ , m + 1] s.t. ¬Ecorrupt
                                          j      (Bjctrt ) and also ψjinner TVe expd ,ℓ = 0.
                                                                             j

      By Claim 4.6, this means that:
                                      samp−ctrt
        1. either the corresponding ψj−1        claim is false (this can only happen for j > i∗ ). By
           Claim 4.16, the output claim ψj−1 will be false with all but εhol probability.
                                          outer

        2. or the corresponding ψjctrt claim is false (this can only happen for j < m + 1). By Claim
           4.7 and Claim 4.15, with all but εhol + εIAP probability, either the event Ecommit−break
           happens, or the IAP’s output claim ψjIAP is false. If the latter happens, then by Claim
           4.16, the output claim ψjouter will be false with all but εhol probability.

We conclude that with all but at most (εIAP +2εhol +(1/10 log T )+η inner ·10k 2 log log T ) probability,
either one of the output claims (ψjouter )j∈[i∗ ,m] is false, or the event Erecurse−break
                                                                            i∗            occurs, or the event
E commit−break occurs. If the overall probability that at least one of the latter two events occurs is less
than α + β then we are done. Otherwise, either the probability of Erecurse−break
                                                                              i∗           (for the i∗ defined
after Step (1)) is at least α, or the probability of Ecommit−break is at least β. We handle these below:




                                                     45
Breaking the recursive call. If the probability of Erecurse−break   i∗            is at least α we construct an
adversary A  inner for the recursive protocol Π      inner  with parameters η     inner    inner . Ainner simulates a
                                                                                        , δABS
run of the outer protocol between A and the verifier. The messages sent by A in Step (1) define the
index i∗ , which is computable in time poly(T, m, κ) (see Remark 4.18). The recursive call in Step
(3) defines an input (M, x, 1S , ℓ, (U ′ )expd , (Ainner
                                                   i     )m+1     inner )m+1 ) to the inner protocol. This is the
                                                          i=1 , (ϕi      i=1
input for which A   inner breaks the recursive protocol (on index i∗ ). If the event Erecurse−breaki∗          occurs
(see Equation (10)), then the adversary successfully breaks the soundness of the inner protocol. By
construction, the total success probability of Ainner is α and its runtime is |A| + poly(T, m, κ).

Breaking the commitment. If the probability that Ecommit−break happens is at least β, then we
construct an adversary Acommit that breaks the commitment scheme. When Ecommit−break happens,
this means that for some i ∈ [m], there is a row in Aouteri     whose correct root in M (U  ei ) is opened
to two different values in M (U  ei ) and in M ′ (see Equation (12)). Acommit simulates a run of Πouter
                                               i
between the cheating prover and the verifier as follows. First, it “guesses” uniformly and at random
a value i ∈ [m] and a row j ∈ Aouteri    to attack. The input string to the commitment security game
is the encoding of the (k · ℓ)-length tableau of that row in Uei (importantly, this is defined before the
verifier sends the UOWHF-tree keys). The sender in the commitment game sends a commitment key
h, and this is used as the key sent by the verifier in Πouter . Acommit then completes the simulation
of Πouter . It computes all messages of the cheating prover and the verifier and the matrices M (U     e )i
and Mi′ , which are both computable in time poly(T, κ) (see Fact 4.9 and the discussion following
Equation (11)). If Ecommit−break occurs for the value i and the row j that the adversary guessed,
then it breaks the commitment scheme. This happens with probability at least (β/(m · |U |)).

Deferred proofs.         We conclude with the deferred proof of Proposition 4.5.

Proof of Proposition 4.5. We analyze the protocol’s soundness using several additional events. For
j ∈ [m], we take qj to be the number of corrupted rows in U   fj . We define complement events
depending on whether there are “many” or “few” corrupted rows:

              Emany−corrupt
               j            = 1 {qj ≥ 10k log log T } , Efew−corrupt
                                                         j           = 1 {qj < 10k log log T } .                (13)

After the prover sends its messages in Step (1), for each row j ∈ [m] exactly one of these comple-
mentary events occurs. The index i∗ ∈ [i, m + 1] is then defined as follows:

    • If Echksum−cheat−1
          j              holds for some j ∈ [i, m], then, by Fact 4.4, Echksum−cheat−1
                                                                        i              also holds. We
            ∗
      take i = i and the proposition follows.

    • Otherwise, i.e. if Echksum−cheat−1
                          j              is false for all j ∈ [i, m], then we take i∗ to be the smallest
      index for which Efew−corrupt
                       i∗          holds.

    • Finally, if Echksum−cheat−1
                   j              and Efew−corrupt
                                       j           are false for all j ∈ [i, m], then we take i∗ = m + 1
      (we syntactically define the event Efew−corrupt
                                          m+1         to be true).

Remark 4.18 (Efficiently computing i∗ ). As claimed, i∗ is efficiently computable from messages
sent in Step (1): For j ∈ [m], each of the matrices U        ej is computable in time poly(|U |, S) from
the respective matrix Uj (because the checksum is efficiently decodable, see Proposition 3.21). Each
matrix R(U ej ) is computable in time poly(|U |, (k · ℓ), κ) from Uej (by computing the hash root for the

                                                         46
encoded computation for each state). Finally, R  ej is computable from R(U   ej ) in in time poly(|U |, κ)
(again, by decoding the checksum). These matrices allow the cheating prover to compute whether
Echksum−cheat−1
  i             holds, and whether Efew−corrupt
                                    j           or Emany−corrupt
                                                    j            holds for each j ∈ [i, m]. We conclude
      ∗
that i can indeed be computed in time poly(T, m, κ) (recall that we assume T ≥ max{|U |, (k·ℓ), S}).
     We need to prove the proposition for the case that Echksum−cheat−1
                                                                    j                is false for all j ∈ [i, m].
By Fact 4.4, we can assume for the remainder of the proof that the single “global” matrix U                     ei
is consistent with every matrix Uj and checksum CU j for j ∈ [i, m], and that the single “global”
                                        e                   f
matrix R   ei is consistent with every matrix R   ej and checksum C  fRj for j ∈ [i, m]. Thus, the question of
whether a certain row is corrupted does not depend on the index j of the matrices being considered:
either the row is corrupted in all matrices j ∈ [i, m] or it is not.
     By the choice of i∗ , Efew−corrupt
                              i∗          holds, and so does Efew−corrupt
                                                              j           for every j ∈ [i∗ , m]. Let C ⊆ Aouter
                                                                                                             i∗
be the set of corrupted rows in Aouteri ∗  . Because  of the nested structure   of the sets, the set of corrupted
rows in each Aouterj    is a subset of C. Let D ⊂ [|U |] be the (k-fold contraction of the) set of surviving
rows after the recursive call of Step (3). Since the surviving rows are 1-wise uniform, the probability
that each row in C survives is at most η inner · k (each row in the k-fold expansion survives w.p.
η inner ). Taking a Union Bound, we can bound the probability that there exists a row in C that
survives. When no rows in C survive, , none of the corrupted rows in any set Aouter           j    survive:
                 h                                  i
               Pr ∃j ∈ [i∗ , m] : Ecorrupt
                                   j       (Bj
                                              ctrt
                                                   )  ≤ η inner · k · |C| ≤ η inner · 10k 2 log log T.         (14)

This is important because when the sets are uncorrupted their hash roots should be binding (to
the corresponding rows in U  ei ).
    Next, we show that the i∗ -th inner predicate ϕinner
                                                   i∗    in the recursive call is far from being satisfied
by (the tableaux of) Vei∗ . This is shown in Claim 4.19 below. In turn, this implies that either the
adversary needs to break soundness of the recursive call, or one of the outer predicates is not
satisfied by the (tableaux of) the corresponding rows in the corresponding output matrix. The
claim follows using the binding guarantee of Equation (14).
Claim 4.19. Assume that Echksum−cheat−1
                         i              does not hold, then:
   h               ^      
                            e expd , Z : ϕinner
                                                                                  i                        1
 Pr ¬Echksum−cheat   ∆row                                              outer
                                    
      i               ABS Vi∗             i∗    (TZ,ℓ ) = 0 < k · min δABS   − d, d ≤                             .
                                                                                                         10 log T
Proof. The proof proceeds by a case analysis over the value of i∗ . Before diving into the details,
at a high level: if i∗ = i, the table U is far from satisfying the outer predicate ϕouter
                                                                                      i   . This implies
that the k-fold expansion of Ui is far from satisfying the inner predicate ϕi
                                e                                              inner (which checks that
the outer predicate is satisfied on the appropriate part of its input). In the case where i∗ > i, we
know that Emany−corrupt
             i∗ −1         holds (otherwise i∗ would be smaller). This means that w.h.p. there will
be a corrupted row in the sampled set Asamp  i∗ −1 , which in turn means that the k-fold expansion of
Vi∗ will be far from satisfying the inner predicate ϕinner
e
                                                        i∗   (or the checksums sent in Step (2) will be
inconsistent). We proceed with the detailed analysis of both cases:

Case I: i∗ = i. We show that either the i-th checksum is corrupted, or the matrix Vei is far from
satisfying its corresponding predicate. Under the conditions
                                                    n          ofProposition 4.5 the oi-th “outer”
                                             row
input is far from satisfying its predicate: ∆ABS U, W : ϕi outer  TW |Aouter ,(k·ℓ) = 1       outer . If
                                                                                          ≥ δABS
                                                                                    i



                                                         47
the event Echksum−cheat−1
            i
                                              ei differs from U |Aouter in at most d rows. By a triangle
                          doesn’t occur, then U                   i
                                               
inequality: ∆row U ei , W : ϕouter TW,(k·ℓ) = 1 ≥ δ outer − d.
                                           
               ABS              i                              ABS
    Since ϕinner
           i     checks that ϕouter
                              i     accepts (the tableaux of) its input restricted to the corresponding
rows (Step (3a)), for any matrix W at absolute row-distance (δABS  outer − d) from U
                                                                                   ei and for any matrix
  ′         samp
W with |Ai | rows:
                                                          

                                        ϕinner
                                                                    
                                               T                   = 0.
                                         i          W expd    ,ℓ
                                                                     
                                                     W ′expd
                                                 



We conclude that ϕinner   i      rejects the (encoded tableaux of the) k-fold expansion of any matrix at
overall row-distance (δABS −d) from Vei (the values in the rows corresponding to Asamp
                              outer
                                                                                           i    don’t matter).
     Since ϕinner    also  checks   “internal consistency” (Step (3b)),   we conclude   that e expd must also
                                                                                             V
               i                                                                              i
differ in at least k · (δABS outer − d) rows from any Z that makes ϕinner accept: suppose that there is a
                                                                       i
Z at the aforementioned row-distance from Veiexpd that makes ϕinner     i    accept. Because of the internal
consistency test, this means that if we take Z ctrt to be the k-fold contraction of Z (containing the
first entry from each k-entry block of Z), then the k-fold expansion of Z ctrt equals Z. For every row
j in which Z ctrt differs from Vei , their k-fold expansions differ in every state in the j-th block. This
follows by Fact 3.12 and Remark 3.13, using the fact that the j-th block of Z does not contain any
corrupted states (i.e. the predecessor and successor functions always agree, otherwise ϕinner      i   rejects
Z). Thus, the absolute row distance between Z ctrt and Vei is at most (δABS      outer − d). This means that

ϕinner
  i    ((Z ctrt )expd ) = ϕinner
                            i     (Z) = 0: a contradiction. Indeed, even if only one of the two tableaux is
valid, they disagree everywhere: suppose u’s tableau is the valid one. By the above, the two tableau
disagree in the prefix of u′ ’s tableau where the states are uncorrupted, and they also disagree in
the suffix where u′ ’s tableau is corrupted (because u’s is not).

Case II: i∗ ∈ [i + 1, m + 1]. Emany−corrupt
                                  i∗ −1       holds (otherwise i∗ would be smaller). Here w.h.p. the
                  samp
subsampled set Ai∗ −1 includes a corrupted row. Since the choices are 10k 2 log log T -wise indepen-
dent:
                                                               i      1 10k log log T
                    h                                                    
                       many−corrupt                     samp
                                     ^
                 Pr Ei∗ −1              ¬corrupti∗ −1 (Ai∗ −1 ) ≤ 1 −
                                                                      2k
                                                                       1 2k·5 log log T
                                                                        
                                                                = 1−
                                                                      2k
                                                                       ≤ e−5 log log T
                                                                              1
                                                                       ≤              ,                  (15)
                                                                         10 log(T )
where the final inequality holds for T larger than some constant.
      When there is a corrupted row in the (i∗ − 1)-th subsampled set, the cheating prover has two
bad choices: if the checksum it sends for the sampled set is not consistent with U ei , then the event
  chksum−cheat                        samp
Ei             occurs. Otherwise, Ui∗ −1 has a corrupted root and those rows will be rejected by
                                    e
ϕinner
  i ∗  (which  checks the values of the roots). In turn, this also means that the rows of U |Asamp   are
                                                                                               i∗ −1
far from making that predicate accept. We formalize this in the following claim:

                                                      48
Subclaim 4.20.
                                                                                                      
        corrupti∗ −1 (Asamp                                         e expd
                                                       _
                                  chksum−cheat
                                                             ∆row                   inner
                                                                             
                       i∗ −1 ) ⇒ Ei                           ABS   V i ∗  ,  Z : ϕ i ∗   (T Z,ℓ ) = 1   ≥k·d

Proof of Subclaim 4.20. Since we assume that the event corrupti∗ −1 (Asamp
                                                                      i∗ −1 ) occurs:
                                          
                                R U  ei∗ −1 | samp ̸= R
                                                      ei∗ −1 | samp .                                           (16)
                                             A∗               A∗
                                                            i −1               i −1


Assume that the event Echksum−cheat
                         i∗ −1      doesn’t occur (otherwise we are done: by Fact 4.4, Echksum−cheat
                                                                                         i∗ −1       ⇒
 chksum−cheat                                                samp
Ei            ). This means that there exists a matrix U    i −1 at absolute row-distance d from
                                                           e∗
                                    samp
ei∗ −1 | samp with the checksum C
U                               fU ∗     and that the matrices U                    e samp
                                                                  ei∗ −1 | samp and U  ∗    both have
       A ∗                                  i −1                                      Ai∗ −1        i −1
        i −1
this checksum. Thus, these matrices must be identical:
                                                               e samp
                                               ei∗ −1 | samp = U
                                               U       A∗   i −1i∗ −1 .                                         (17)

A similar argument shows that (assuming Echksum−cheat
                                         i∗ −1        doesn’t occur):
                                                               esamp
                                               ei∗ −1 | samp = R
                                               R       A∗   i −1i∗ −1 .                                         (18)

By Equations (16), (17), (18) we conclude that:
                                                     e samp      esamp
                                                   R(Ui∗ −1 ) ̸= Ri∗ −1 .                                       (19)
We now argue that the k-fold expansion of the matrix
                                                                           !
                                                                 Uei∗
                                                   Vei∗ =
                                                               U |Asamp
                                                                    ∗
                                                                    i −1


is far from satisfying the predicate ϕinner                                    outer | + |Asamp | rows.9
                                      i∗ . Consider any matrix W (with |Ai∗                i∗ −1
that differs from Vi∗ in at most d rows. In particular, this means that W |Asamp
                  e
                                                                             ∗
                                                                                 differs from U |Asamp
                                                                                                     ∗
                                                                                          i −1                  i −1

in at most d rows. If the checksum of W |                                     fU samp
                                                               does not equal C  i∗ −1 , then W
                                                                                                expd won’t satisfy
                                                      Asamp
                                                       i∗ −1
ϕinner
 i∗    (which checks consistency with this checksum in Step (3c)). Otherwise, if the checksums are
equal, then similarly to Equation (17):
                                                   W |Asamp  e samp
                                                            =U
                                                        ∗
                                                        i −1  i∗ −1 .                                           (20)

Putting together Equations (19) and (20) we conclude that:
                                               R(W |Asamp      esamp
                                                          ) ̸= R
                                                      ∗  i −1   i∗ −1 .                                         (21)

Recall that R  esamp                    e samp
                 i∗ −1 differs from R(Ui∗−1 ) in at most d rows. By Equation (20), we conclude that
esamp
R i∗ −1 , also differs from R(W |A ∗ ) in at most d rows, but but they are not equal (by Equation
                                    samp
                                     i −1

(21)). Thus, the checksum of R(W |Asamp                  fR samp
                                             ) cannot be C               expd cannot satisfy ϕinner (which
                                       i∗ −1
                                                            i∗ −1 and W                       i∗
checks this in Step (3d)).
    Vei∗ is at absolute row distance d from any W s.t. ϕinner
                                                           i∗    accepts W expd . This implies that Veiexpd
                                                                                                       ∗

is at absolute distance (k · d) from making ϕinneri ∗  accept   due to the  “internal consistency”   check,
Step (3b) (see the argument that concludes the proof for Case I above).
                                             ` samp
   9
    The row sets of Vei∗ and of W are Aouter
                                         i∗    Ai∗ −1 , where we abuse notation and use indices in Aouter
                                                                                                    i∗    ∪ Asamp
                                                                                                             i∗ −1 in
the natural way. See Definition 3.2 and the discussion that follows it.


                                                               49
      For the soundness argument, we imagine that the adversary is trying to cheat in the recursive
call when imagining that the values of the rows in the sets (Ainner i , . . . , Ainner
                                                                                 m+1 ) equal the values in
                     chksum−cheat
Vei . Assume that Ei              doesn’t occur: by Claim 4.19, w.h.p. the i∗ -th set in the recursive
call is at (absolute row) distance
                                               outer           inner
                                                           
                                      k · min δABS   − d, d ≥ δABS                                    (22)

from its corresponding predicate (the inequality is by Equation (3)). Thus, unless the event
Erecurse−break
  i∗            occurs (see Equation (10)), for some j ≥ i∗ , the recursive call returns a false claim
about the tableau of Vei |B inner = Vej |B inner (the last inequality is because Echksum−cheat
                                                                                   i             doesn’t occur).
                             j            j
Thus:
                                                                                                    !     !
                    samp
                           ^                                          _
                                chksum−cheat          recurse−break             inner
     corrupti∗ −1 (Ai∗ −1 ) ¬Ei                  ⇒ E i∗                       ψj      TVe expd |      =0 .
                                                                                        j    B inner ,ℓ
                                                                                              j
                                                                j∈[i∗ ,m+1]
                                                                                                            (23)

Further, by Equation (14), the hash roots are binding on all these sets. The claim follows by
combining Equations (14), (15) and (23).

4.3    The Resulting Honing Protocol
Theorem 4.21. Assume there exists a one-way function secure against λ(κ)-size adversaries.
There is a honing protocol for the multi-tableau language as follows: for an instance to that language
(M, x, 1S , ℓ, U, (Ai )i∈[m] , (ϕi )i∈[m] ). Take T = 2|U | · ℓ, where we require that |x|, S, κ, m, ρ ≤ T , that
polylog(T ) ≤ |U |, and that the sets Ai and predicates ϕi are ρ-succinct with poly(T ) size and
polylog(T ) depth. The protocol is public-coin with perfect completeness. For desired soundness
ε ≥ poly(1/κ), it is ε-sound against adversaries of size (λ(κ)/poly(T )) and has:

   • Absolute row distance: δABS = polylog(T ).
                                      
   • Honing parameter: η = Θ log(1/ε)
                                log(T ) .

   • Communication complexity: cc = m · S · poly(κ, log T ).

   • Round complexity: r = polylog(T ).

   • Verifier runtime: Vtime = m · (|x| + S + ρ) · poly(κ, log T ).

   • Honest prover runtime: Ptime = poly(T ).

    The output sets {Bi }i∈[m] are (ρ + polylog(T ))-succinct, where each Bi has size (size(Ai ) +
poly(|U |, log(T ))) and depth (depth(Ai ) + polylog(T )). The output predicates ψi are LDE predicates.

Proof. The idea is to use recursion, with the protocol of Corollary 4.1 as the base of the recursion,
and the recursive step using the protocol of Figure 1 (Lemmas 4.2 and 4.3). We number the
layers of the recursion from 0 (the top / outermost layer) to r (the bottom / base). The recursion
keeps track of parameters using a (parenthetical) superscript. For each level j ∈ [r], we construct
                                        (j−1)
the protocol for parameters (η (j−1) , δABS ) using the recursive construction of Figure 1, with the

                                                       50
protocol for level j as the inner protocol. At the base of the recursion, we use the IAP of Corollary
4.1. At the top level of the recursion ℓ(0) = ℓ is the length of each tableau, u(0) = |U | is the input
table size and T (0) = u(0) · ℓ(0) is the total size of the computation. The j-th level of the recursion
gives protocols for tableaux of length ℓ(j) = ℓ/k j . Taking u(j) to be the size of the table U (j) in
the j-th level of the recursion, we take T (j) = u(j) · ℓ(j) to be the total size of the computation in
the j-th level of the recursion. The computation size increases (mildly) as the recursion progresses,
because add the sampled rows to the table U ′ before taking the k-fold expansion). We have:
                                                                
                                          (j)      (j)         1
                           ∀j ∈ [0, r] : u = |U | ≤ 1 +            · k · |U (j−1) |,
                                                               k
                                                                   1 j
                                                                    
                                           (j)    (j)   (j)
                                         T =u ·ℓ ≤ 1+                     · T (0)
                                                                   k

   Looking ahead, the recursion depth will be smaller than k/2, so the computation size at the
base of the recursion can be upper bound by T :

                                 ∀j ∈ [0, r] : T (0) ≤ T (j) ≤ T ≜ 2|U (0) | · ℓ(0)

    We fix k = log(T ) (the same value of k is used at all levels of the recursion), and we stop
the recursion when we get to computations of length ℓ(r) = polylog(T ), where we ensure that
ℓ(r) ≥ k (and thus l(j) ≥ k holds at all levels of the recursion). The depth of the recursion is
r = ⌈logk (ℓ(0) /ℓ(r) )⌉ = O(log(ℓ)/ log log(T )). Note that indeed, as we required above, r ≤ k/2.

Parameter setting.          For j ∈ [0, r], we set the parameters as follows:

    • Checksum parameter. d(j) = 1 + k1 · d(j+1) , where d(r) = 100k 2 log3 T = polylog(T )
                                                        

      (the definition for the bottom level of the recursion is syntactic: there is no checksum there,
      we use the IAP of Corollary 4.1).
                                        (j)
    • Absolute distance promise. δABS = 1 + k1 d(j) .
                                                      

                                         n         (j+1)
                                                                       o                             
    • Honing parameter. η (j) = max η (j+1) , η 2 + O logdlog(T   (j)
                                                                      )
                                                                          , where η (r) = O logdlog(T
                                                                                                 (r)
                                                                                                      )



                                                                                  (r)       (r)
    For the base of the recursion,
                                    promise on the absolute distance is δABS ≥ d and the
                                   the
honing parameter is η (r) = logdlog (r)
                                        T
                                          . The soundness error is ε(r) = 1/polylog(T ). This setting of
parameters is achievable (for large enough T ) for the IAP of Corollary 4.1.
     For the other levels of the recusion, the parameter settings satisfy the conditions of Lemmas
4.2 and 4.3. Lemma 4.2 requires that k ≤ ℓ(j) (which always holds, see above) and |x|, S, κ, d(j) , m ≤
T (j) , which all hold. For the j-th recursive call, Lemma 4.3 requires that η (j+1) ≤ 100k2 log(T (j)1) log log(T (j) )
      (j+1)
and δABS ≤ d(j) · k. The latter condition holds by construction. The former condition also holds—
we prove by induction that for all j ∈ [0, r]:

                                                            log(T )
                                                  η (j) ≤                                                      (24)
                                                              d(r)



                                                        51
This is true by construction at the base of the induction (j = r). For larger j, we assume by
induction that η (j+1) ≤ log(T
                           d(r)
                                )
                                  . Thus also:

                     η (j+1)
                                                                                  
                                      log log T         log(T )          log log T           log(T )
                             +O                       ≤         +O                       ≤           ,
                         2               d(j)            2d(r)              d(j)               d(r)

where the final inequality holds for T large enough that the O(log log T ) term is smaller than
log(T )/2. Thus we also have that:
                                (                                 )
                                             (j+1)
                                                      
                                           η            log log T      log(T )
                     η (j) = max η (j+1) ,         +O       (j)
                                                                     ≤         .
                                               2           d             d(r)

   The relationship between the parameters for the outer and inner protocols in the j-th level of
the recursion is consistent with the guarantees of Lemma 4.3:

   • The absolute distance guarantee is:
                                                                 (j+1)
                                          (j)    (j) d(j)   (j) δABS
                                         δABS = d +       ≥d +         .
                                                      k            k

   • The honing parameter for the outer call is:

                             η (j+1)
                                                    
                                           log log T       (j)   log(T )
                                     +O                ≤ η     ≤         ,
                                 2             d(j                 d(r)

     see Equation (24).
                                                                                (j)
   Since r ≤ k/2 (see above), for all levels of the recursion d(j) , δABS = polylog(T ).
   Finally, the number of sets for the j-th call is m(j) = (m + j), so the number of sets is always
bounded by (m + log(T )).

Soundness error. At the base of the recursion, the IAP of Corollary 4.1 has soundness error ε(r) =
                                             (r)
1/polylog(T ) against adversaries of size sA = (λ(κ)/poly(T )). We assume that the UOWHF tree
commitment guarantees that any adversary of size λ(κ)/poly(T ) has success probability εUOWHF ≤
1/(4T · m(r) · log(T )) (otherwise, there is a fixed polynomial f s.t. T ≥ f (λ(κ)), and the soundness
guarantee is vacuous).
   By an inductive argument using Lemma 4.17, for j ∈ [r], we conclude that the protocol obtained
by the j-th level of the recursion is sound against adversaries of size
                 (j−1)
                sA       = λ(κ)/poly(T ) − (r − j + 1) · poly(T, m, κ) = λ(κ)/poly(T ),

with soundness error at most:
                                                                        3     1
                                ε(j−1) = ε(r) + (r − j + 1) ·                ≤ ,
                                                                     4 log T  2

where the last inequality uses the fast that r ≤ log(T )/2 and ε(r) ≤ 1/8. We amplify the soundness
error to ε ≥ 1/T using parallel repetition [BIN97, Hai13] with O(log(1/ε)) = O(log(T )) overhead.

                                                          52
                                                                                                  (0)
Circuit succinctness and complexities. At level 0 of the recursion the predicates ϕi = ϕi
                (0)
and the sets Ai = Ai are (ρ(0) = ρ)-succinct circuits of size size(0) = poly(T ) and depth depth(0) =
polylog(T ). By induction, using Lemma 4.2 and the above bounds on k, m and d(j) , the predicates
and sets for the j-th recursive call are (ρ(j) = ρ + (S + poly(κ)) · polylog(T ))-succinct circuits of size
poly(T ) and depths (j · poly(κ, log(T ))) (for the predicates) and (j · polylog(T )) (for the sets).
    The recursion depth is smaller than log(T ), so we conclude that in every recursive call, the
sets and predicates are ((S + poly(κ)) · polylog(T ))-succinct circuits of poly(T ) size and depths
poly(κ, log(T )) (for the predicates) and polylog(T ) (for the sets).
                                                                                (0)
    Similarly, using induction and Lemma 4.2, the output sets Bi = Bi are (ρ + polylog(T ))-
succinct circuits of size poly(T ) and depth polylog(T ).

                                                                                        (r)
Protocol complexities: base of the recursion. At the bottom level r with δABS = polylog(T )
and soundness error ε(r) = 1/polylog(T ), the complexities from Corollary 4.1 are:
                                                               (r)
   • Communication complexity: cc(r) = m(r) · δABS · ℓ(r) · S · polylog(T ) = m · S · polylog(T ).

   • Round complexity: r(r) = ℓ(r) · polylog(T ) = polylog(T ).
                                                         (r)
   • Verifier running time: Vtime(r) = m(r) · δABS · (|x| + ρ(r) ) · poly(ℓ(r) , log(T )) = m · (|x| +
     S + poly(κ) + ρ) · polylog(T ).

   • Prover running time: Ptime(r) = m(r) · poly(T ) = poly(T ).

Complexity overheads: inductive step.              For each recursive level j ∈ [r], by Lemma 4.2, the
additive overhead is:

   • cc overhead: (S + poly(κ)) · m(j−1) · poly(k, d(j−1) , log T ) = (S + poly(κ)) · m · polylog(T ).

   • Round overhead: polylog(T ).

   • Vtime overhead: (|x| + S + poly(κ) + ρ(j−1) ) · m(j−1) · poly(k, d(j−1) , log T ) = (|x| + S +
     poly(κ) + ρ) · m · polylog(T ).

   • Ptime overhead: poly(T, m(j−1) , κ, ρ(j−1) ) = poly(T ).

Total complexity.       The recursion depth is r = O(log T ), so the total complexities are bounded:

   • Total communication: cc = m · (S + poly(κ)) · polylog(T ).

   • Total rounds: r = polylog(T ).

   • Total verifier time: Vtime = m · (|x| + S + poly(κ) + ρ) · polylog(T ).

   • Total prover time: Ptime = poly(T ).




                                                    53
4.4   Arguments for Bounded Space
Theorem 4.22 (Formal statement of Theorem 1.2). Assume there exists a one-way function secure
against λ(κ)-size adversaries. There is an argument system for space-S = S(n) time-T = T (n) ≥ n
computations, where we require that κ ≤ T . The protocol is public-coin with perfect completeness.
For desired soundness ε ≥ poly(1/κ) it is ε-sound against adversaries of size λ(κ)/poly(T ) and has:

   • Communication complexity: cc = S · poly(κ, log(T ), log(1/ε)).

   • Round complexity: r = polylog(T ).

   • Verifier runtime: Vtime = (|x| + S) · poly(κ, log(T ), log(1/ε)).

   • Honest prover runtime: Ptime = poly(T ).

Proof of Theorem 4.22. The argument system is derived from the honing protocol of Theorem 4.21.
Let M be the Turing machine describing the computation, with initial state ustart and accepting
state uaccept , and let x be the input.

The protocol. The protocol proceeds in iterations j ← 1, . . . r = O(log T ). In the j-th iteration,
the prover and the verifier begin with the description of a computation whose total size decreases
as the iterations proceed. The computation for the j-th iteration is described by a table U (j) of
configurations. This table is explicitly sent by prover to the verifier. In the beginning of the j-
th iteration the prover and verifier also agree on a computation length ℓ(j) and a predicate ϕ(j)
over the concatenated tableaux TU (j) ,x,S,ℓ(j) . The predicate is ρ(j) -succinct, with size bounded by
poly(|U (j) |, length(j) ) and depth bounded by poly(log T ). As the iterations proceed, the computa-
tion length will shrink but the size of the table will not grow. After the final iteration, the table
size and computation length will both be polylog(T ), and the verifier can check on its own whether
the final predicate is satisfied by the tableaux in polylog(T ) time.

Input for first iteration. In the first iteration, the table U (1) includes k = polylog(T ) con-
figurations: the initial configuration of the machine, and the k intermediate configurations (each
proceeding the previous one by (T /k) computation steps). The computation length is ℓ(1) = (T /k)
and the predicate ϕ(1) checks that the concatenated tableau describes an accepting computation
of the machine M on the input x: i.e., that the first configuration is the initial configuration, that
the (k − 1) proceeding configurations are the appropriate mid-points, and that the computation
reaches the accepting state.

Iteration j. In the j-th iteration, the prover and the verifier run the honing protocol of Theo-
rem 4.21 on the table U (j) with computation length ℓ(j) , the predicate ϕ(j) and soundness error
1/polylog(T ). There is only one set A(j) = [U (j) ], which includes all the rows in the table. The
honing protocol outputs a subset B (j) ⊆ [U (j) ] of the configurations and an LDE predicate ψ (j) over
their concatenated tableax.
    Assume that |B (j) | ≤ |U (j) |/2, i.e. that at most half of the rows survive (we expect only
O(log log(T )/ log(T )) of the rows to survive). For each surviving row of the table, which induces
a tableau of length ℓ(j) , the prover also sends the mid-point of its computation. This gives a new
table of size 2|B (j) | ≤ |U (j) |, which is explicitly known to the prover and the verifier. This table

                                                  54
will be used as U (j+1) for the next iteration. The new computation length is ℓ(j+1) = ℓ(j) /2. The
new predicate ϕ(j+1) checks that:

   1. the new configurations are indeed the mid-points of their respective computations.

   2. the output predicate ψ (j) from the previous iteration accepts the concatenated tableaux.

   3. the initial states equal U (j+1) : for each a ∈ [|U (j+1) |] the first state in the a-th tableau given
      as input to ψ (j) equals U (j+1) [a].

    Finally, if |B (j) | > |U (j) |/2, then the prover and the verifier “ignore” the results of the honing
protocol and use the same table, computation length, and predicate for the next iteration. Since
the expected fractional size of B (j) is Θ(1/  e   log(|U (j) | · ℓ(j) )), by Markov’s inequality this should
happen with probability smaller than say 0.01 in each iteration (the probability is only over the
verifier’s coin tosses). If it happens in more than half of the O(log(T )) iterations in the protocol,
then the verifier aborts and accepts.

Completeness and soundness. Completeness follows by design. For soundness, first observe
that the probability that there are too many “ignored” iterations is smaller than 1/poly(T ) by the
analysis above. Otherwise, in the final iteration the computation length is indeed polylog(T ) and
the verifier can check for itself whether the predicate accepts.
    If the prover’s initial claim in the argument system is false, then the correct tableau leads to a
rejecting state, and the there is no table that would make ϕ(1) accept, so U (1) is at infinite distance
from an input whose induced tableaux would make ϕ(1) accept.
    In the j-th iteration, if the input is far from (a table that induces tableaux) making the predicate
accept, then by the soundness of the honing protocol, the output predicate should also reject the
tableaux induced by the subset of rows in B (j) with all but 1/polylog(T ) probability. This means
that there is no table whose induced tableau would make ϕ(j+1) accept (since that predicate checks
that the table states are equal the subset of rows in B (j) , and internal consistency of the induced
tableaux). Thus the input table for the next iteration is far from (a table that induced tableaux)
making the next’s iteration’s predicate accept.
    Taking a Union bound over all the iterations, w.h.p. the final iteration results in a predicate
that rejects the tableaux induced by its table, and the verifier (who can check this on its own) will
also reject. The soundness error can be reduced by parallel repetition [BIN97, Hai13].

Complexity. The circuits describing the subset for reach iteration are fully succinct (the subset
is the complete set). The predicates are (S · polylog(T ))-succinct, because each predicate (except
the first) includes the entire alleged table of states. Thus, in each call to the honing protocol of
Theorem 4.21, the communication complexity is (S · poly(κ, log(T )), there are polylog(T ) rounds,
the verifier’s runtime is (|X| + S) · poly(κ, log(T )) and the honest prover runs in poly(T ) time. Note
that the verifier can compute the set of surviving rows in polylog(T ) time (and each time the set of
rows for the next iteration is the full set in the new table). The complexity bounds for the theorem
follow.




                                                     55
5     Improved Unconditional DEIP
We detail our improved unconditionally sound DEIP for bounded-space computations, following the
overview in Section 2.2. The construction follows from an unconditionally sound recursive honing
protocol (by the same protocol used in Section 4.4 for argument systems). The main difference
from the construction of Section 4 is that the resulting protocol is less efficient. This is because the
recursive construction makes two recursive calls in each level of the recursion. On the other hand,
soundness is unconditional and uses no cryptographic assumptions or machinery.
    The construction in this section is also simpler in that it suffices to construct honing protocols
for the single-set case (i.e. there is no collection of nested subsets), see Remark 3.15. We restrict
our attention to this case throughout.

Organization The base of the recursion is in Section 5.1. The recursive step and its analysis are
in Section 5.2. We put things together to obtain the resulting honing protocol in Section 5.3, and
we derive the unconditional DEIP in Section 5.4.

5.1    Base of The Recursion
We use an unconditionally sound IPP at the base of the recursion: the IPP from [RR20], see Theorem
3.28. That construction gives the following parameters:

Corollary 5.1. There is an unconditionally sound honing protocol for the (single set) multi-tableau
language as follows: for an instance (M, x, 1S , ℓbase , U, ϕ) and (absolute) row distance δABSbase ≤ |U |,

take T = |U | · ℓbase . We require that the predicate ϕ is ρbase -succinct with depth D and size poly(T ),
and that |x|, S, ρbase ≤ T . The protocol is public-coins with perfect completeness. For desired
soundness ε, it has:
                                                    
   • Honing parameter: η base = O log(1/ε)    δ base
                                                       .
                                             ABS


    • Communication complexity: ccbase = (δABS
                                           base · S + ℓbase + D) · polylog(T ).


    • Round complexity: rbase = (ℓbase + D) · polylog(T ).

    • Verifier runtime: Vtimebase = (|x| + ρbase + δABS
                                                    base · S + ℓbase + D) · polylog(T ).


    • Honest prover runtime: Ptimebase = poly(T ).

    The output set B and predicate ψ are polylog(T )-succinct, and computable by circuits of depth
polylog(T ) and size |U | · S · polylog(T ) (for B) and |B| · S · polylog(T ) (for ψ). We emphasize that
the succinctness and complexities of these circuits are independent of those of the input predicate
ϕ).

Proof. The honing protocol follows directly from the IPP of Theorem 3.28, applied to the circuit that
takes as input the table U , computes (in parallel) the length-ℓbase tableau that starts in each state
of U , and then applies the predicate ϕ. See also the proof of Corollary 4.1 for further details.




                                                    56
5.2    The Recursive Step
We formalize the recursive step of the unconditional construction. The main result of this section
shows how to construct an unconditional honing protocol for computations of length (k · ℓ) using
two oracle calls to a protocol for computations of length ℓ. The construction is in Figure 2. We
prove its soundness and honing properties in Lemma 5.3 and analyze its complexity in Lemma 5.2.

Lemma 5.2 (Unconditional recursive construction complexity). For every input tuple (M, x, 1S , ℓouter , U )
and ρouter -succinct predicate ϕouter , for parameters d and k ≤ ℓouter , let T = |U | · ℓouter . We assume
that T ≥ |x|, S, d, ρouter and that the predicate ϕouter has size S outer ≤ poly(T ) and depth Douter .
    Suppose that the following conditions hold for the inner honing protocol: let ccinner , rinner ,
Vtimeinner , Ptimeinner bound the communication, rounds, verifier runtime and prover runtime (re-
spectively) of the inner honing protocol when it is run as follows:

   • the parameters are η inner , δABS
                                   inner , |x|, S, ℓouter /k,


   • the table size satisfies |U inner | ≤ max{k · |U |, |U | · (1 + η inner · k 2 )}.

   • the predicate ϕinner is ρinner -succinct, has size at most S inner and depth at most Dinner (the
     succinctness and complexity of ϕinner can depend on those of ϕouter ).
      Suppose that the subset of surviving rows B inner and the output predicate ψ inner are both com-
      putable by µinner -succinct circuits of size S inner−out and depth Dinner−out .
      We require that ρinner ≥ max{ρouter , 2µinner +d·S·polylog(T )}, that S inner ≥ max{S outer , 2S inner−out }+
      poly(T ), and that Dinner ≥ max{Douter , 2Dinner−out } + polylog(T ).

   Under the above conditions, the complexities of the outer honing protocol are:

   • communication complexity ccouter = 2 · ccinner + S · d · polylog(T ).

   • round complexity router = 2 · rinner + 1.

   • prover runtime Ptimeouter = 2 · Ptimeinner + poly(T ).

   • verifier runtime Vtimeouter = 2 · Vtimeinner + S · d · polylog(T ).

   • the set B outer of surviving indices is 2µinner -succinct and computable by a circuit of size
     2S inner−out + poly(T ) and depth Dinner−out + polylog(T ).

   • the predicate ψ outer is 3µinner -succinct and computable by a circuit of size 3S inner−out + poly(T )
     and depth 2Dinner−out + polylog(T ).

Proof. We analyze each component of the outer protocol’s complexity.

Inner protocol calls. The first call operates on table U expd of size k · |U | with the predicate
ϕinner , which is ρouter ≤ ρinner -succinct and has size S outer + poly(T ) and depth Douter + polylog(T ).
By the lemma conditions, this uses ccinner communication, rinner rounds, Vtimeinner verifier time,
and Ptimeinner prover time, producing output set B ′ and predicate ψ ′ with the stated succinctness,
size, and depth bounds.



                                                         57
Outer protocol Πouter , with two recursive calls to inner protocol Πinner
Parameters: honing η inner , absolute proximity δABSinner
                                                          , expansion k, checksum d.
               S outer                outer
Input: (M, x, 1 , ℓ    = (k · ℓ), U, ϕ      ). Take T = |U | · ℓouter .

   1. Checksum: The prover sends a d-checksum C
                                              fU for the table of states U .

   2. First recursive call: Let U expd be the k-fold expansion of U (Definition 3.16), containing the k
      mid-point states of the (k ·ℓ)-length computation induced by each state in U . Let ϕinner be a predicate
      on the length-ℓ tableaux of U expd that checks:

        (a) internal consistency: the tableaux of each k-row block of U expd correspond to a longer compu-
            tation of length (k · ℓ).
       (b) ϕouter accepts the concatenation of the length-ℓ tableaux of U expd .
      The prover and verifier run Πinner on (M, x, 1S , ℓ, U expd , ϕinner ) with parameters η inner , δABS
                                                                                                        inner
                                                                                                              . Let B ′
                                ′
      be the output set and ψ be the output predicate. Let B ⊆ [|U |] be the k-fold index contraction of
      B ′ , and let ψ be the corresponding predicate over the (k · ℓ)-length tableaux of U |B .
   3. Second recursive call: Define the table U ′′ that includes each state in U , and for the states in B
      also includes the block of k intermediate states of that state’s (k · ℓ)-length computation. Define the
      predicate ϕ′′ on the length-ℓ tableaux of U ′′ that checks:

        (a) the first states in the tableaux of the states that are in U have checksum C
                                                                                       fU .
       (b) the blocks corresponding to states in B are internally consistent and their concatenated tableaux
           satisfy ψ.
      The prover and verifier run Πinner on (M, x, 1S , ℓ, U ′′ , ϕ′′ ) with parameters η inner , δABS
                                                                                                   inner
                                                                                                         . Let B ′′ ⊆
         ′′                          ′′
      [|U |] be the output set and (ψ ) the output predicates.
   4. Output: The output set B outer ⊆ [|U |] includes: (a) the rows of U that were not in B but survived
      in B ′′ , we call these rows B1outer , and (b) the rows of U in B for which at least one of their k mid-points
      survived in B ′′ , we call these rows B2outer .
      The output predicate ψ outer over the (k · ℓ)-length tableaux of the rows in B checks that the predicate
      ψ ′′ is satisfied by the (concatenation of) the sequence of length-ℓ tableau that includes: (a) the first
      ℓ configurations for each row in B1outer , and (b) for each row in B2outer , the length-ℓ block (or blocks)
      corresponding to the midpoint (or midpoints) that survived in B ′′ .

                       Figure 2: Unconditional Recursive Outer Protocol Πouter
    The second call operates on table U ′′ of size at most |U | · (1 + k 2 · η inner ). The predicate ϕ′′
includes: (i) the checksum C  fU (of description size S · d · polylog(T )), and (ii) a description of the
set B of surviving rows from the first call, and (iii) the predicate ψ ′ from the first call to check the
intermediate tableaux of rows in B. Thus ϕ′′ is (2µinner + S · d · polylog(T ))-succinct. It has size at
most 2S inner−out + poly(T ) and depth at most 2Dinner−out + polylog(T ). By the Lemma conditions,
the second call also uses ccinner , rinner , Vtimeinner , Ptimeinner and produces B ′′ , ψ ′′ with the stated
succinctness, size and depth bounds.

Checksum overhead. In Step 1, the prover sends a d-checksum for U , requiring S · d · polylog(T )
communication. This adds 1 round and the verifier needs to read the checksum, which adds to its
runtime.

Output set B outer .    The set B outer is constructed from B ′ and B ′′ as follows (see Step 4):

   • Compute B (the k-fold contraction of B ′ ), which indicates which rows of U have at least one
     surviving mid-point from the first call.

   • For each row i ∈ [|U |]: (a) if i ∈
                                       / B and i ∈ B ′′ , include i in B1outer ; (b) if i ∈ B and at least
     one of its k mid-points survived in B ′′ , include i in B2outer .

The circuit for B outer is thus 2µinner -succinct and can be implemented with size size(B ′ ) + size(B ′′ ) +
poly(|U |, k, log T ) by composing the circuits for B ′ and B ′′ with additional poly(|U |, k, log T ) logic
for the contraction and combination.
    For the depth: the contraction of B ′ and the combination logic add only polylog(T ) additional
depth (they involve polylog(T )-depth arithmetic for index computations and comparisons). The
same is true for the contraction of B ′′ . B ′ and B ′′ can be evaluated independently and their results
combined in polylog(T )-depth. Thus, the total depth is max{depth(B ′ ), depth(B ′′ )} + polylog(T ).

Output predicate ψ outer . The predicate ψ outer takes as input the (k · ℓ)-tableaux for the row in
B outer and applies the predicate ψ ′′ to (the concatenation of) the following ℓ-length tableaux:

   • For rows in B1outer : the first ℓ steps.

   • For rows in B2outer : the block(s) of ℓ steps corresponding to surviving mid-point(s) in B ′′ .

The circuit for ψ outer needs to: (i) determine which case applies (using membership in B ′ and B ′′ ),
(ii) extract the appropriate ℓ-tableau segment, and (iii) apply ψ ′′ . This requires the circuit for ψ ′′
plus the circuits for B ′ , B ′′ (to determine membership), plus poly(|U |, k, log T ) additional logic for
index selection. Thus size(ψ outer ) ≤ size(ψ ′′ ) + size(B ′ ) + size(B ′′ ) + poly(|U |, k, log T ).
    For the depth: the index selection logic adds polylog(T ) depth. The sets B ′ and B ′′ can be
computed in parallel, but the input to ϕ′′ depends on their output. Thus, the total depth is
depth(ψ ′′ ) + max{depth(B ′ ), depth(B ′′ )} + polylog(T ).

Lemma 5.3 (Unconditional recursive construction soundness). Suppose that Πinner is a (η inner , δABS
                                                                                                 inner , ℓ)-

honing protocol with soundness error εs (see Definition 3.35), where η inner ≤ 1/k 3 and δABS
                                                                                          inner ≤ d.

   Then Π    outer is a (η outer    outer
                                 , δABS , k · ℓ)-honing protocol, where:

   • η outer ≤ 1 + k1 · η inner .
                        


                                                     59
                  inner
                 δABS
    • δABS
       outer =
                   k + d.

    • The soundness error is at most 2εs .

Proof of Lemma 5.3. We begin by bounding the honing parameter. The proof of soundness follows.

Honing parameter. Following the construction in Figure 2, the output set B outer is formed from
two sources (see Step 4):

    • Rows of U that were not in B (the contraction of the set output by the first recursive call),
      but survived in B ′′ (the set output by the second recursive call). These rows are not expanded
      in the input U ′′ to the second recursive call, thus the expected number of surviving rows of
      this type is at most |U | · η inner .

    • Rows of U that survived in B, for which at least one of their k mid-points survived in B ′′ .
      By the honing guarantee of the first call, the expected fraction of rows of U in B is at most
      k · η inner . Each row in B is expanded to k midpoint-rows in the input U ′′ to the second
      recursive call. By linearity of expectation, the expected number of surviving rows of this type
      is at most |U | · (k · η inner )2 .

Putting this together, the expected total fraction of surviving rows is:
                                                            
                                inner       inner 2        1
                                                               · η inner ,
                                                 
                              η       + k·η         ≤ 1+
                                                           k

where the inequality holds because η inner ≤ 1/k 3 implies (k · η inner )2 ≤ η inner /k.

Bounding the soundness error. Suppose the table U is δABS      outer -far from a table whose tableaux

satisfy the input predicate ϕ. Let U
                                   e be the matrix closest in row-distance to U that has checksum
CU . By the properties of the checksum, there is at most one such matrix at distance d.
f

First recursive call (Step 2). Suppose U         e is at distance at most d from U (the second call
handles the case where this is not true). By a triangle inequality, U          e is (δ outer − d)-far from any
                                                                                      ABS
table whose tableaux satisfy ϕ. We conclude that U        e expd , the k-fold expansion of U     e , is at least
      outer        inner
k · (δABS − d) ≥ δABS -far from satisfying ϕ inner : see the analogous proof of Claim 4.19.10
     By the soundness of Π inner , with probability at least 1 − εs , either the recursive call rejects, or
the output predicate ψ ′ does not accept the tableaux of (U     e expd )|B ′ . In the latter case, the derived
predicate ψ does not accept the tableaux of U    e |B . We assume for the remainder of the proof that
this latter case holds.
  10
     In more detail: let Z be a table whose length-ℓ tableaux are accepted by ϕinner . Since ϕinner also checks internal
consistency, it must be the case that Z = (Z ctrt )expd . Since ϕinner checks that ϕouter accepts the concatenation of
the length-ℓ tableaux of each k-block, for any Z whose k-fold contraction Z ctrt is at absolute row-distance less than
  outer               e , it must be the case that ϕouter rejects Z expd . By Fact 3.12 and Remark 3.13 we conclude that
(δABS   − d) from U
          ctrt expd                   outer               e expd (i.e. the distance of the k-fold expansion blows up by a
Z = (Z )            is at least k · (δABS   − d) far from U
multiplicative factor of k).




                                                           60
Ensuring distance. We show that U is d-far from any table V that both: (i) has checksum C       fU ,
and (ii) the (k · ℓ)-tableaux of V |B satisfy ψ. If U (the closest table to U with checksum CU ) is
                                                    e                                        f
itself d-far from U then this follows immediately. Otherwise, assume for contradiction that there
exists V that is d-close to U and satisfies the conditions (i) and (ii) above. By the uniqueness of
Ue , we must have V = U e . But we know from the soundness of the first call that ψ does not accept
the tableaux of Ue |B .

Second recursive call (Step 3). Consider the expanded table U ′′ constructed in Step 3. By
the above, U ′′ is at absolute distance at least d from any table V ′′ whose ℓ-tableaux satisfy ϕ′′ .11
By the lemma’s condition, δABSinner ≤ d, so U ′′ is at least δ inner -far from satisfying ϕ′′ .
                                                              ABS
    By the soundness of Πinner , with probability at least 1 − εs , either the second recursive call
rejects, or the output predicate ψ ′′ does not accept the tableaux of U ′′ |B ′′ . In the latter case, the
derived predicate ψ outer does not accept the tableaux of B outer .

Final bound.        By a union bound, the total soundness error is at most 2εs .

5.3       The Resulting Honing Protocol
Theorem 5.4. There is an unconditionally sound honing protocol for the (single-set) multi-tableau
language as follows: for an instance (M, x, 1S , ℓ, U, ϕ), take T = 2|U | · ℓ, where
                                                                                 √ we require that
|x|, S, ρ ≤ T , and that the predicate ϕ is ρ-succinct with poly(T ) size and 2O( log T ) depth. The
protocol is public-coin with perfect completeness. For desired soundness ε ≥ 1/T , it has:
                                                     √
       • Absolute distance: δABS = min{O(2
                                         e 3 log T ), |U |}.
                                          
       • Honing parameter: η = O e log(1/ε) .
                                     δABS
                                                              √
       • Communication complexity: cc = S · 2O( log T ) .
                                          √
       • Round complexity: r = 2O( log T ) .
                                                                  √
       • Verifier runtime: Vtime = (|x| + S + ρ) · 2O( log T ) .

       • Honest prover runtime: Ptime = poly(T ).
                                                         √
    The output set B √and predicate ψ are 2O( log T ) -succinct and computable by circuits of size
poly(T ) and depth 2O( log T ) (these are independent of the succinctness, size and depth of the input
predicate ϕ).

Proof. The proof uses the same recursive structure as Theorem 4.21, with the protocol of Corollary
5.1 at the base and the recursive step of Figure 2 (Lemmas 5.2 and 5.3). We assume w.l.o.g. that
|U | ≥ δABS (otherwise we pad the input with dummy states until the bound is satisfied).
  11
    In more detail: any V ′′ satisfying ϕ′′ must have its rows corresponding to U agree with some table that has
checksum C fU (since ϕ′′ checks this in Step 3(a)), and the length-ℓ tableaux of its k-row blocks corresponding to B
(one block for each state in B) must satisfy ψ (and each block must correspond to a single length-(k · ℓ) computation,
see Step 3(b)). By the distance-ensuring argument above, we conclude any such table V ′′ must be at row-distance
greater than d from U ′′ . Note that we do not have a k-fold distance blowup here (because the rows outside of B are
not expanded).


                                                         61
   We number the layers of the recursion from 0 (the top / outermost layer) to r (the bottom
/ base). For each level j ∈ [1, r], we construct the protocol for level j − 1 using the recursive
construction of Figure 2, with the protocol for level j as the inner protocol. At the base of the
recursion we use the unconditional IPP of Corollary 5.1.

Bounding computation sizes. At the top level of the recursion ℓ(0) = ℓ is the length of each
tableau, u(0) = |U | is the input table size and T (0) = u(0) · ℓ(0) is the total size of the computation.
     The j-th level of the recursion gives protocols for tableaux of length ℓ(j) = ℓ/k j . We take u(j)
to be a bound on the table sizes for calls to this protocol. If we unwind the recursion, there are
2j executions of the protocol constructed in the j-th level: each execution of the protocol of level
j − 1 on a table U (j−1) results in two executions of the protocol of level j: the first execution is on
                    expd                                                                            ′′
the table U (j−1)        , which has size at most k · u(j−1) . The second call, on the table U (j−1) has
size at most k · (1 + ηk 2 ) · u(j−1) ≤ k · (1 + 1/k) · u(j−1) (we use the fact that η < 1/k 2 ). We take
T (j) = u(j) · ℓ(j) to be a bound on the total size of the computation in calls to the protocol in the
j-th level of the recursion. We have:

                                                        1 j (0)
                                                         
                                           (j)    j
                            ∀j ∈ [0, r] : u = k · 1 +       ·u ,
                                                        k
                                                              1 j
                                                               
                                           (j) (j)  (j)
                                          T =u ·ℓ = 1+            · T (0)
                                                              k

    Looking ahead, the recursion depth will be (much) smaller than k/2, so the computation size
at the base of the recursion can be upper bound by T :

                               ∀j ∈ [0, r] : T (0) ≤ T (j) ≤ T ≜ 2u(0) · ℓ(0)
                  √
    We fix k = 2 log T (the same k at all levels). The j-th level gives protocols for tableaux of
length ℓ(j) = ℓ/k j . We stop the recursion at depth r when ℓ(r) = k, i.e.:
                                       &           '
                                              ℓ(0)      p      
                                   r = logk          =O   log T .
                                               k
                                                          √               √
Note that indeed r ≤ k/2, as assumed above (because r = O( log T ) ≪ k = 2 log T ).

Parameter setting.       For j ∈ [0, r]:
                                                                                                   √
   • Checksum parameter. d(j) = ⌈(1 + 1/k) · d(j+1) ⌉, where d(r) = k 3 · polylog(T ) = O(2e 3 log T )
     (the definition of d(r) is syntactic, the protocol at the base of the recursion does not use the
     recursive construction and has no additional checksum).
                               (j)
   • Absolute distance. δABS = (1 + 1/k) · d(j) .

   • Soundness error. ε(j) = 2ε(j+1) , where ε(r) = 1/2r+2 .
                                                                                        (r)
   • Honing parameter. η (j) = (1 + 1/k) · η (j+1) , where η (r) = O(log(1/ε(r) )/δABS ).



                                                      62
                                                                                          (j+1)
   The conditions of Lemma 5.3 at each level require η (j+1) ≤ 1/k 3 and δABS ≤ d(j) . The latter
holds by construction. For the former, ∀j ∈ [1, r]:
                                   r                               (r) )
                                                                           
                                  1                       O  log(1/ε           1
                      η (j) ≤ 1 +      · η (r) ≤ 2η (r) =                 3
                                                                             ≤ 3,
                                  k                       polylog(T ) · k     k
where the last inequality holds for T large enough that the polylog(T ) term is larger than the
O log(1/ε(r) ) = O(r) = o(log(T )) term.

Soundness. At the base of the recursion, the IPP of Corollary 5.1 achieves soundness error ε(r) .
By Lemma 5.3, each level of the recursion at most doubles the soundness error (union bound over
two recursive calls). Thus:

                                              ε(0) ≤ 2r · ε(r) .

We set ε(r) = 1/2r+2 , so that ε(0) ≤ 1/4. We amplify the soundness error from 1/4 to ε using
parallel repetition with O(log(1/ε)) overhead.
                                                    √
                                  (j)
   Since r ≤ k/2, we have d(j) , δABS = O(k
                                        e 3 ) = O(2
                                                e 3 log T ) at all levels.

Circuit succinctness, size and depth. By construction (and by the bound on the size of the
initial input predicate ϕ), the input predicates to all calls have size poly(T ). We show by induction
that the output sets and predicates at level j ∈ [0, r] are (2O(r−j) · polylog(T ))-succinct, with size
poly(T ) and depth (2O(r−j) · polylog(T )). At the base of the recursion, Corollary 5.1 implies that
the circuits have succinctness and depth polylog(T ) and size u(r) · polylog(T ). By Lemma 5.2, the
succinctness, depths and sizes grow by a constant multiplicative factor. The size grows by an
additional fixed additive poly(T ) term and the depth grows by an additive polylog(T ) term.
    We also use induction to bound the succinctness, size and depth of the input predicates in the
calls to the protocols at each level of the recursion (so we can apply the complexity bounds of
Lemma 5.2). Let ρ(j) and D(j) denote the succinctness and depth of the input predicate at level j.
We claim that for every j ∈ [0, r]:
                                                 √                             √
                          ρ(j) ≤ max{ρ, S · 2O( log T ) },         D(j) ≤ 2O( log T ) ,

and the size is always poly(T ). At level 0 this follows from the conditions on ϕ in the theorem
statement. For the inductive step, consider the two recursive calls from level j to level j + 1:
   • The first call’s input predicate is just ϕ(j) , so it is ρ(j) -succinct, with size size(ϕ(j) ) + poly(T )
     and depth D(j) + polylog(T ).

   • By the output-set/output-predicate bounds above, the second call’s   √       input predicate is built
     from circuits of succinctness and depth 2O(r−j) · polylog(T ) ≤   O(    log T ) and size poly(T ), plus
                                                                   √ 2
                                        (j)
     the checksum of succinctness S · d · polylog(T ) = S · 2   O(  log T ) . Thus it is also within the
     claimed bounds.
   Note that these bounds on the input and output predicate complexities and succinctness satisfy
the conditions in Lemma 5.2.                                         √
   The output set B  and    predicate ψ  at level 0 are therefore 2O( log T ) -succinct, have size poly(T ),
                   √
and have depth 2O( log T ) , as stated in the theorem.

                                                     63
                                                                                                                              √
                                                                                                                    (r)
Protocol complexities:
            √
                            base of √the recursion. At the base level r, √with δABS = 2O( log T ) ,
ℓ(r) = k = 2 log T , depth D(r) = 2O( log T ) , and soundness error ε(r) = 2−O( log T ) , the complexities
from Corollary 5.1 are:
                                                                                            √
                (r)
   • cc(r) = (δABS · S + ℓ(r) + D(r) ) · polylog(T ) = S · 2O( log T ) .
                                                      √
   • r(r) = ℓ(r) · polylog(T ) = 2O( log T ) .
                                                                                                                          √
                                             (r)
   • Vtime(r) = (|x| + ρ(r) + δABS · S + ℓ(r) + D(r) ) · polylog(T ) = (|x| + S + ρ) · 2O( log T ) .

   • Ptime(r) = poly(T ).

Complexity overheads: inductive step. By Lemma 5.2, at each level j ∈ [r] the outer             √ pro-
tocol runs two inner calls and adds a checksum overhead of S · d(j) · polylog(T ) = S · 2O( log T )
communication and verifier time, plus 1 round and poly(T ) prover time. The inner calls already
account for the cost of evaluating the predicates, so the only additional verifier work is reading the
checksum.

Total complexity.              Since each level runs two inner calls, unrolling the recursion gives:
                                                              r−1
                                                              X                     √                   √
                               (0)      r          (r)
                          cc         = 2 · cc             +         2j · S · 2O( log T ) = 2r · S · 2O( log T ) ,
                                                              j=0

and analogously:
                                                          r−1
                                                          X                     √                                   √
                    (0)         r               (r)
           Vtime          = 2 · Vtime                 +         2j · S · 2O( log T ) = 2r · (|x| + S + ρ) · 2O( log T ) ,
                                                          j=0
                                                                     √
                    (0)         r     (r)
                r         =2 ·r             + r = 2r · 2O( log T ) .
               √
With 2r = 2O( log T ) , after O(log(1/ε)) parallel repetitions, the final complexities are:
                                                                     √
   • Total communication: cc = S · 2O( log T ) .
                                            √
   • Total rounds: r = 2O( log T ) · log(1/ε).
                                                                                        √
   • Total verifier time: Vtime = (|x| + S + ρ) · 2O( log T ) · log(1/ε).

   • Total prover time: Ptime = poly(T ).



5.4   The Resulting DEIP
Theorem 5.5 (Unconditional DEIP for bounded space). There is an unconditionally sound doubly-
efficient interactive proof for space-S = S(n) time-T = T (n) ≥ n computations. The protocol is
public-coin with perfect completeness. For desired soundness ε ≥ 1/T it has:
                                                                                √
   • Communication complexity: cc = S · 2O( log T ) .

                                                                           64
                                       √
   • Round complexity: r = 2O( log T ) .
                                                     √
   • Verifier runtime: Vtime = (|x| + S) · 2O( log T ) .

   • Honest prover runtime: Ptime = poly(T ).

Proof. The DEIP is derived from the honing protocol of Theorem 5.4, mirroring the proof of The-
orem 4.22. Let M be the Turing machine with initial state ustart and accepting state uaccept , and
let x be the input.

The protocol. The protocol proceeds in iterations j = 1, . . . , r = O(log T ). In the j-th iteration,
the prover and verifier begin with an explicit table U (j) of configurations, an agreed computation
length ℓ(j) , and a predicate ϕ(j) over the concatenated tableaux TU (j) ,ℓ(j) . The predicate is ρ(j) -
                                                      √
succinct with size poly(|U (j) |, ℓ(j) ) and depth 2O( log T ) . As the iterations proceed, the computation
length is halved; the table size does not grow.
    We remark that      we could reduce the computation length by larger factors, corresponding to the
                √
η =O e 1/2    3   log T   honing parameter obtained in Theorem 5.4, but this would not substantially
improve the parameters of the resulting DEIP.

Input for the first iteration. Take k = polylog(T ). The table U (1) consists of k configurations:
the initial configuration of M on x, plus k − 1 intermediate configurations spaced T /k steps apart.
The prover explicitly sends these mid-points to the verifier in its first message. The computation
length is ℓ(1) = T /k. The predicate ϕ(1) checks that the concatenated tableau describes an ac-
cepting computation: the first configuration is the initial configuration, the last reaches uaccept ,
and the intermediate configurations are the correct mid-points (these intermediate configurations
are hardwired into the predicate). This predicate is (k · S)-succinct, has size poly(T ), and depth
polylog(T ).

Iteration j. In the j-th iteration, the prover and verifier run the honing protocol of Theorem
5.4 on the table U (j) with computation length ℓ(j) , predicate ϕ(j) , and soundness error εh =
1/(2 log T ). The honing protocol outputs a subset B (j) ⊆ [|U (j) |] and an LDE predicate ψ (j)
over the concatenated                                 (j)                       (j) is at most η · |U (j) |,
                    √ tableaux of the rows in B . The expected size of B
where η = O(1/2
              e    3  log T                                  (j)       (j)
                            ). By Markov’s inequality, |B | ≤ |U |/2 with probability at least
1 − 2η = 1 − o(1) in each iteration.
    Assume that |B (j) | ≤ |U (j) |/2 (the non-degenerate case). For each surviving row, which induces
a tableau of length ℓ(j) , the prover also sends the mid-point of that computation. This yields a
new table U (j+1) of size 2|B (j) | ≤ |U (j) |. The new computation length is ℓ(j+1) = ℓ(j) /2. The new
predicate ϕ(j+1) checks that:

   1. the new configurations are the correct mid-points of their respective computations, and

   2. the output predicate ψ (j) from the previous iteration accepts the concatenated tableaux of
      all the rows, and

   3. the initial state of each tableau given to ψ (j) equals the corresponding row of U (j+1) .



                                                    65
                  √                                        √
                         (j)                                     (j)
Since ψ (j) is 2O( log T ) -succinct and has depth 2O( log T ) , the predicate ϕ(j+1) also satisfies the
depth and succinctness requirements of Theorem 5.4.
    If instead |B (j) | > |U (j) |/2 (the degenerate case), the prover and verifier ignore the result of the
honing protocol and carry over the same table U (j+1) = U (j) , the same predicate ϕ(j+1) = ϕ(j) , and
halve the computation length to ℓ(j+1) = ℓ(j) /2. We call such an iteration ignored. As argued above,
each iteration is ignored with probability at most 2η = o(1). If more than half of the r = O(log T )
iterations are ignored, the verifier aborts and accepts.

Final iteration. The probability that more than half of the r = O(log T ) iterations are ignored
is at most 1/poly(T ) by a Chernoff bound (since each is ignored independently with probability
2η = o(1) This probability depends only on the verifier’s coins). Conditioned on this not happening,
after r = O(log T ) iterations the computation length has been halved at least r/2 times, giving
ℓ(r) ≤ T /(k · 2r/2 ) = polylog(T ). The final table U (r) has polylog(T ) size. The verifier can therefore
evaluate the final predicate ϕ(r) on its own in time polylog(T ).

Completeness and soundness. Completeness follows by design: an honest prover sends the
correct configurations and tableaux, and every predicate is satisfied.
    For soundness, first observe that the probability of too many ignored iterations is at most
1/poly(T ) as argued above; conditioned on this not happening, the final predicate is reached and
the verifier evaluates it directly.
    If the prover’s initial claim is false, then the correct tableau leads to a rejecting state, so ϕ(1)
is not satisfiable, and U (1) is at infinite distance from any table whose induced tableaux make ϕ(1)
accept. In each non-ignored iteration j, if ϕ(j) is not satisfiable then the input table is at infinite
distance from a table making ϕ(j) accept, and by the soundness of the honing protocol the output
predicate ψ (j) rejects the tableaux of B (j) with probability at least 1 − εh . In that case, since
ϕ(j+1) checks that the initial states equal U (j+1) and that the new configurations are correct mid-
points, ϕ(j+1) is also not satisfiable. For an ignored iteration, ϕ(j+1) = ϕ(j) is also not satisfiable
by assumption.
    By a union bound over the r = O(log T ) non-ignored iterations, with probability at least
1 − r · εh = 1/2 the final predicate is not satisfiable and the verifier rejects. The soundness error is
reduced to ε by O(log(1/ε)) parallel repetitions.

Complexity. The      √      predicates in all iterations satisfy the conditions
                                                                             √             of Theorem 5.4: they are
poly(T )-size, 2  O(   log T )                (j)
                               -depth, and ρ√ -succinct with ρ ≤ 2  (j)   O(   log T ) . In each iteration, the honing
                                                                                √
protocol  uses   communication        S · 2 O( log T ) · log(1/ε ), rounds 2O( log T ) , and verifier time (|x| + S) ·
   √                                                            h
2O( log T ) · log(1/εh ). The prover runs in poly(T ) time per iteration. There are O(log T ) iterations,
and claimed complexity bounds follow.


Acknowledgments
We thank Noga Amit, Oded Goldreich and Ron Rothblum for helpful and illuminating discussions
on these topics.




                                                         66
A      The AR Argument System
We sketch the construction and proof behind the HIA of Theorem 3.24, we refer to this protocol as
the AR argument system [AR23] throughout this appendix.

Layer-by-layer commitment. We view the circuit as a layered circuit with fan-in 2. The AR
argument begins with the prover committing to the LDE of each layer in the circuit: we number
the layers from 1 (the top gate) to D (the input). Fixing the explicit and holographic inputs, let
Vi ∈ {0, 1}S be the vector of values of the gates at layer i on that input. Let Vbi ∈ Fpoly(S) be the
LDE of the i-th layer (which we view as a string or as a function in the usual way). For now we
take |H| = polylog(S), |F| = poly(|H|), see Remark A.1 for working with general field sizes.

Remark A.1 (General field sizes). The construction is described w.r.t fields H and F of sizes that
are polylogarithmic in S. We want the protocol to support general field sizes, e.g. because this is
needed for compatibility with the PVAL IPP of [RR20]. We can move from LDE claims over fields
H, F to new fields H′ , F′ by running the GKR protocol as a holographic proof w.r.t. H′ , F′ on the
circuit that computes LDEH,F . This is a log-space uniform NC circuit, so the communication, round
complexity and (holographic) verifier runtime are poly-logarithmic in the length n ≤ S of the input
being encoded. For |H|′ ≤ polylog(S), the soundness error of the GKR protocol is (polylog(S)/|F′ |).
The soundness error of the original HIA is 1/polylog(S): if needed, this can be reduced by repetition
(where we then use the GKR protocol to verify all the claims about LDEH,F in these repetitions),
giving the soundness bound claimed in Theorem 3.24.

    The verifier sends to the prover a key (hash functions) for a the succinct locally openable com-
mitment scheme, and the prover responds with a commitment yi for each layer. The commitment
to the LDE of the i-th layer is computed using a UOWHF tree, as described in the overview and in
Section 3.1. The original AR protocol aimed for constant round complexity, and used a constant-
depth hash tree with polynomial arity. Since we only aim for polylog(S) rounds, we can use a
binary hash tree of logarithmic depth. The commitment yi is the root of this hash tree.
    To begin, the verifier asks the prover to open the succinct commitment to the output layer and
checks that the circuit’s output gate outputs 1. The main technical tool used in the protocol is a
holographic hash root (HHR) protocol: the verifier in this protocol takes the alleged hash root yi
as an explicit input, and outputs a claim about a single coordinate in the LDE of layer (i + 1). If
yi was not the correct hash root for Vbi , then w.h.p. the claim about Vbi+1 will also be false (this
soundness guarantee is unconditional).
    The prover and the verifier run the HHR protocol in parallel for each layer i ∈ [D − 1], resulting
in holographic claims ((zi , vi ))i∈[2,D] . For each i ∈ [2, D − 1], the verifier also asks the prover to
open the commitment yi at location zi and verifies that the opening is to the value vi . If all these
tests pass, then the verifier outputs the claim (zD , vD ) about the LDE of the input.12
    For soundness: if the hash root for the next-to-last layer was corrupted (i.e. not the correct
hash root for VbD−1 ), then the claim (zD , vD ) about the input layer will be false and the verifier
indeed outputs a false claim about the LDE of the input. Otherwise, since we know that the root
  12
     If there is an explicit input, then we decompose the claim about the input layer into claims about the holographic
and the explicit parts, see Proposition 3.20. The prover sends alleged values for both these parts, the verifier checks
that the decomposition is valid, explicitly checks that the explicit part is true, and if so then it outputs the prover’s
claim about the holographic part.



                                                           67
y1 was corrupted (it opens to an accepting output wire, whereas in the soundness proof we assume
that the circuit rejects the input), for some i ∈ [D − 2], we have that the commitment to layer i is
a corrupted hash root, but the commitment to layer (i + 1) was correct. Crucially, the committed
values (Vbi )i∈[D] were fixed before the verifier sent its hash keys, so the correct hash roots are binding.
Now in the i-th HHR execution, since the root yi was corrupted, the resulting holographic claim
(zi+1 , vi+1 ) about the LDE of the (i + 1)-th layer will be false. However, the prover’s commitment
on the (i + 1)-th layer is binding: it cannot open that commitment to the alleged value, and the
verifier will reject (unless the prover breaks the targeted collision-resistance of the UOWHF).
    Before proceeding to describe the HHR protocol, we decompose it into two parts: reducing from
the claim about the hash root of layer i to a claim about the LDE of layer i, and then reducing
from a claim about the LDE of layer i, to a claim about the LDE of layer (i + 1). In our setting,
the latter part can be performed in polylog(S) rounds, communication and verifier runtime using
the GKR protocol (whereas the parameter setting of [AR23] needed a constant-round protocol for
this part). We thus focus on the first part: an HHR protcol that verifies the hash root of a layer
and outputs a claim about the LDE of that same layer.

Holographic hash root (HHR) protocol. So far, we followed the template of the AR protocol,
except for our use of a binary hash tree (rather than a tree with arbitrarily small polynomial arity).
The HHR protocol of [AR23] was designed to work with hash trees of constant depth, and in
constant round complexity. We use the same construction, but for trees of logarithmic depth and
with polylogarithmic round complexity. The advantage is that the communication complexity and
verifier runtime are reduced from nσ · poly(κ) to polylog(S) · poly(κ). The details follow.
    We present an unconditionally sound holographic IP that verifies the hash root y of an LDE
V , and outputs a single claim about that LDE. The AR protocol follows the computation of the
b
hash tree. Taking M to be the length of the LDE (viewed as a binary string), we assume w.l.o.g.
that M is a power of 2 and take m = log2 M to be the depth of the hash tree. We assume that
the UOWHFs map string of length 2κ to strings of length κ. In the i-th layer of the hash tree there
                                               i
are 2i nodes, each of size κ. Let Wi ∈ {0, 1}2 ·κ be the concatenation of the values of the nodes at
layer i of the tree. Thus, treating each bit of the input layer as a node, we have the “tree input”
layer Wm = Vb and the “tree output” layer W0 = y.
    The HHR protocol proceeds by sequential applications of a tree-layer subprotocol to reduce from
verifying a claim about LDE(Wi ) to a claim about LDE(Wi+1 ). We detail this protocol below: in our
setting of parameters, there are m = log(|Vb |) = O(log(S)) sequential applications of this protocol
within each of the (D − 1) HHR protocols that are performed in parallel.
    There are some subtleties in dealing with the bottom layer of the hash tree: we don’t want to
end up with a claim about the LDE of (the binary representation of) an LDE. These are handled
in the AR protocol by viewing the input to the hash tree as the unencoded string V , and including
the encoding of that string in the computation, see [AR23, Remark A.2]. This is easy to extend to
our parameter setting and we ignore this subtlety here.

Tree-layer sub-protocol. In the i-th tree layer subprotocol call we consider the i-th layer of the
hash tree, which is computed using a hash function h (a different function is used for each layer, see
Construction 3.5). Fixing the input Vb , in the i-th layer we have an output Wi = (y1 , . . . y2i ) where
each yj ∈ {0, 1}κ , and an input Wi+1 = (z1 , . . . z2i ), where each zj ∈ {0, 1}2κ . We want a holographic
proof system that verifies the input claim about LDE(Wi ) and also that ∀j ∈ [2i ], yj = h(zj ). The


                                                    68
key insight in this part of the AR protocol is that this is a batch-verification problem, and it can
be verified using a protocol similar to the UP verification protocols of [RRR18, RR20]. The idea is
to run in iterations, where in each iteration ℓ ← k . . . i′ ≤ i:

   • At the beginning of the k-th iteration, we have a claim about a subset S k ⊆ [2i ] of the yj
     values. The claim is an easy-to-compute predicate ϕk that is claimed to hold about the values
     (yj )j∈S k . Initially, the set S 1 = [2i ] includes all the rows, and the predicate ϕ1 checks that
     the claim about the LDE of Wi is true.

   • The prover and verifier run an output-predicate IPP (Definition 3.26): the implicit input is
     (yj )j∈S k and the IPP also takes the entire Wi+1 = (z1 , . . . , z2i ) as a holographic input. It
     checks that ϕk ((yj )j∈S k ) = 1 and that for every j ∈ S k , yj = h(zj ). The IPP outputs a
     holographic claim about the LDE of Wi+1 and an output predicate ϕk+1 about a subset of
     the locations in the implicit input (yj )j∈S k . We take S k+1 to be the set of yj ’s that are read
     by the IPP’s output predicate, and the parameters of the IPP are set so that |S k+1 | ≤ |S k |/2.
      Fixing the holographic input Wi+1 , if the prover’s claim was false, then there is no implicit
      input satisfying the predicate (if the implicit input is the one induced by the holographic
      input, then it doesn’t satisfy ϕk ). As in the UP batching protocol of [RR20], this means that
      w.h.p. either the holographic output claim is false or the output predicate ϕk+1 is false on
      the subset S k+1 of inputs.
      Using the IPP of [RR20], for each iteration the communication complexity and verifier runtime
      are poly(κ, log(S)). The main distinction from the parameter setting of [AR23], is that they
      could only afford a constant number of iterations, so the size of S k needed to be reduced by
      a polynomial factor in each iteration, which required polynomial communication complexity
      and verifier runtime. We remark that in the full-blown AR construction (and here too), the
      implicit input to the IPP also needs to include the tableau of the computation of h on each
      (zj )j∈S k . This is done so the depth of the predicate ϕk does not depend on the depth of
      computing h and does not meaningfully change the parameters.
                                                                  ′
    The iterations end at iteration i′ = O(log(S)), when |S i | = polylog(S), at which point the
                                                                                            ′
prover can sent the explicit values (yj )j∈S i′ to the verifier. The verifier checks that ϕi accepts these
values, and runs a final holographic proof to verify that they are consistent with Wi+1 . Finally, the
verifier “combines” the (i′ + 1) claims it accrued about the LDE of Wi+1 into a single holographic
claim that it outputs (the combination is done, as usual, by passing a curve through all the points,
asking the prover to interpolate the composition of the LDE with the curve, and then having the
verifier choose a random point on the interpolated curve).


References
[AR23]      Noga Amit and Guy N. Rothblum. Constant-round arguments from one-way func-
            tions. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
            STOC 2023, page 1537–1544, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing
            Machinery.

[AR24]      Noga Amit and Guy N. Rothblum. Constant-round arguments for batch-verification and
            bounded-space computations from one-way functions. In Leonid Reyzin and Douglas

                                                   69
          Stebila, editors, Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2024 - 44th Annual International
          Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 18-22, 2024, Proceedings,
          Part X, volume 14929 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 3–37. Springer,
          2024.

[BCC88]   Gilles Brassard, David Chaum, and Claude Crépeau. Minimum disclosure proofs of
          knowledge. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 37(2):156–189, 1988.

[Ben89]   Charles H. Bennett. Time/space trade-offs for reversible computation. SIAM Journal
          on Computing, 18(4):766–776, 1989.

[BFLS91] László Babai, Lance Fortnow, Leonid A. Levin, and Mario Szegedy. Checking compu-
         tations in polylogarithmic time. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual ACM Symposium
         on Theory of Computing, May 5-8, 1991, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, pages 21–31,
         1991.

[BGHK25] Bonnie Berger, Rohan Goyal, Matthew M. Hong, and Yael Tauman Kalai. Efficiently
         batching unambiguous interactive proofs. In 66th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foun-
         dations of Computer Science, FOCS 2025, Sydney, Australia, December 14-17, 2025,
         pages 818–863. IEEE, 2025.

[BIN97]   Mihir Bellare, Russell Impagliazzo, and Moni Naor. Does parallel repetition lower the
          error in computationally sound protocols? In 38th Annual Symposium on Foundations
          of Computer Science, FOCS 1997, Miami Beach, Florida, USA, October 19-22, 1997,
          pages 374–383. IEEE Computer Society, 1997.

[BKP18]   Nir Bitansky, Yael Tauman Kalai, and Omer Paneth. Multi-collision resistance: a
          paradigm for keyless hash functions. In Ilias Diakonikolas, David Kempe, and Monika
          Henzinger, editors, Proceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on The-
          ory of Computing, STOC 2018, Los Angeles, CA, USA, June 25-29, 2018, pages 671–
          684. ACM, 2018.

[CHKX26] Liyan Chen, Matthew M. Hong, Yael Tauman Kalai, and Zoe Xi. Towards a doubly
         efficient ip=pspace. ECCC, TR26-102, 2026.

[CJJ21]   Arka Rai Choudhuri, Abhishek Jain, and Zhengzhong Jin. Snargs for P from LWE.
          In 62nd IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2021,
          Denver, CO, USA, February 7-10, 2022, pages 68–79. IEEE, 2021.

[CKS81]   Ashok K. Chandra, Dexter Kozen, and Larry J. Stockmeyer. Alternation. J. ACM,
          28(1):114–133, 1981.

[EKR04]   Funda Ergün, Ravi Kumar, and Ronitt Rubinfeld. Fast approximate probabilistically
          checkable proofs. Inf. Comput., 189(2):135–159, 2004.

[GKR15]   Shafi Goldwasser, Yael Tauman Kalai, and Guy N. Rothblum. Delegating computation:
          Interactive proofs for muggles. J. ACM, 62(4):27, 2015.

[GMR89]   Shafi Goldwasser, Silvio Micali, and Charles Rackoff. The knowledge complexity of
          interactive proof systems. SIAM J. Comput., 18(1):186–208, 1989.

                                             70
[Gol08]    Oded Goldreich. Computational complexity - a conceptual perspective. Cambridge Uni-
           versity Press, 2008.

[GR17]     Tom Gur and Ron D. Rothblum. A hierarchy theorem for interactive proofs of proximity.
           In 8th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, ITCS 2017, January
           9-11, 2017, Berkeley, CA, USA, pages 39:1–39:43, 2017.

[GR20]     Oded Goldreich and Guy N. Rothblum. Constant-round interactive proof systems for
           AC0[2] and NC1. In Oded Goldreich, editor, Computational Complexity and Property
           Testing - On the Interplay Between Randomness and Computation, volume 12050 of
           Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 326–351. Springer, 2020.

[GRS23]    Oded Goldreich, Guy N. Rothblum, and Tal Skverer. On interactive proofs of proximity
           with proof-oblivious queries. In Yael Tauman Kalai, editor, 14th Innovations in Theoret-
           ical Computer Science Conference, ITCS 2023, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA,
           January 10-13, 2023, LIPIcs, pages 59:1–59:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
           Informatik, 2023.

[Hai13]    Iftach Haitner. A parallel repetition theorem for any interactive argument. SIAM J.
           Comput., 42(6):2487–2501, 2013.

[Ish20a]   Yuval Ishai.      Zero-knowledge proofs from information-theoretic proof
           systems - part i.          Available at https://zkproof.org/2020/08/12/
           information-theoretic-proof-systems/, 2020.

[Ish20b]   Yuval Ishai.      Zero-knowledge proofs from information-theoretic proof
           systems - part ii.         Available at https://zkproof.org/2020/10/15/
           information-theoretic-proof-systems-part-ii/, 2020.

[Kil92]    Joe Kilian. A note on efficient zero-knowledge proofs and arguments (extended ab-
           stract). In STOC, pages 723–732, 1992.

[KK05]     Jonathan Katz and Chiu-Yuen Koo. On constructing universal one-way hash functions
           from arbitrary one-way functions, 2005. jkatz@cs.umd.edu 13051 received 16 Sep 2005,
           last revised 24 Sep 2005.

[KNY18]    Ilan Komargodski, Moni Naor, and Eylon Yogev. Collision resistant hashing for para-
           noids: Dealing with multiple collisions. In Jesper Buus Nielsen and Vincent Rijmen,
           editors, Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2018 - 37th Annual International Con-
           ference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Tel Aviv, Israel,
           April 29 - May 3, 2018 Proceedings, Part II, volume 10821 of Lecture Notes in Computer
           Science, pages 162–194. Springer, 2018.

[KRR22]    Yael Tauman Kalai, Ran Raz, and Ron D. Rothblum. How to delegate computations:
           The power of no-signaling proofs. J. ACM, 69(1):1:1–1:82, 2022.

[LFKN92] Carsten Lund, Lance Fortnow, Howard J. Karloff, and Noam Nisan. Algebraic methods
         for interactive proof systems. J. ACM, 39(4):859–868, 1992.

[Mic94]    Silvio Micali. CS proofs (extended abstracts). In FOCS, pages 436–453, 1994.

                                               71
[NY89]    Moni Naor and Moti Yung. Universal one-way hash functions and their cryptographic
          applications. In David S. Johnson, editor, Proceedings of the 21st Annual ACM Sym-
          posium on Theory of Computing, May 14-17, 1989, Seattle, Washington, USA, pages
          33–43. ACM, 1989.

[Rom90]   John Rompel. One-way functions are necessary and sufficient for secure signatures. In
          Harriet Ortiz, editor, Proceedings of the 22nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
          Computing, May 13-17, 1990, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, pages 387–394. ACM, 1990.

[RR20]    Guy N. Rothblum and Ron D. Rothblum. Batch verification and proofs of proximity
          with polylog overhead. In Rafael Pass and Krzysztof Pietrzak, editors, Theory of Cryp-
          tography - 18th International Conference, TCC 2020, Durham, NC, USA, November
          16-19, 2020, Proceedings, Part II, volume 12551 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
          pages 108–138. Springer, 2020.

[RRR16]   Omer Reingold, Guy N. Rothblum, and Ron D. Rothblum. Constant-round interactive
          proofs for delegating computation. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual ACM SIGACT
          Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2016, Cambridge, MA, USA, June 18-21,
          2016, pages 49–62, 2016.

[RRR18]   Omer Reingold, Guy N. Rothblum, and Ron D. Rothblum. Efficient batch verification
          for UP. In 33rd Computational Complexity Conference, CCC 2018, June 22-24, 2018,
          San Diego, CA, USA, pages 22:1–22:23, 2018.

[RV22]    Ron D. Rothblum and Prashant Nalini Vasudevan. Collision-resistance from multi-
          collision-resistance. In Yevgeniy Dodis and Thomas Shrimpton, editors, Advances
          in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2022 - 42nd Annual International Cryptology Conference,
          CRYPTO 2022, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 15-18, 2022, Proceedings, Part III,
          volume 13509 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 503–529. Springer, 2022.

[RVW13]   Guy N. Rothblum, Salil P. Vadhan, and Avi Wigderson. Interactive proofs of proximity:
          delegating computation in sublinear time. In STOC, pages 793–802, 2013.

[Sha92]   Adi Shamir. IP = PSPACE. J. ACM, 39(4):869–877, 1992.

[Sud95]   Madhu Sudan. Efficient Checking of Polynomials and Proofs and the Hardness of Ap-
          proximation Problems, volume 1001 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer,
          1995.

[Tha22]   Justin Thaler. Proofs, arguments, and zero-knowledge. Available at https://people.
          cs.georgetown.edu/jthaler/ProofsArgsAndZK.html, 2022.

[Wol65]   Jack K. Wolf. On codes derivable from the tensor product of check matrices. IEEE
          Trans. Information Theory, 11(2):281–284, 1965.




                                              72
                                                                     ECCC                          ISSN 1433-8092

                                                                     https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il
