                                                THREE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN
                                                           CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION

                                                  MICHAEL PINSKER, JAKUB RYDVAL, MORITZ SCHÖBI, CHRISTOPH SPIESS,
                                                                        AND PAUL WINKLER

                                                  Abstract. The Feder-Vardi dichotomy conjecture for Constraint Satisfaction Problems
                                                  (CSPs) with finite templates, confirmed independently by Bulatov and Zhuk, has an
                                                  extension to certain well-behaved infinite templates due to Bodirsky and Pinsker which
                                                  remains wide open. We formulate three fundamental questions on the scope of the
arXiv:2502.06621v4 [math.LO] 6 May 2026




                                                  Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture and provide positive answers to them.
                                                     Our first two main results provide two simplifications of this scope, one of structural,
                                                  and the other one of algebraic nature. The former simplification implies that the
                                                  conjecture is equivalent to its restriction to templates without algebraicity, a crucial
                                                  assumption in the most powerful classification methods. The latter yields that the
                                                  higher-arity invariants of any template within its scope can be assumed to be essentially
                                                  injective, and any algebraic condition characterizing any complexity class within the
                                                  conjecture closed under Datalog reductions must be satisfiable by injections, thus lifting
                                                  the mystery of the better applicability of certain algebraic conditions over others.
                                                     Our third main result uses the first one to show that any non-trivially tractable template
                                                  within the scope serves, up to a Datalog-computable modification of it, as the witness of
                                                  the tractability of a non-finitely tractable finite-domain Promise Constraint Satisfaction
                                                  Problem (PCSP) by the so-called sandwich method. This provides a particularly strong
                                                  connection between the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture and finite-domain PCSPs.
                                                     In the light of the third main result, we initiate a new case study—of phylogeny
                                                  CSPs—which we investigate from the perspective of descriptive complexity. Within
                                                  this study, we show that there exists a tractable phylogeny CSP that pp-constructs
                                                  a finite-domain PCSP inexpressible in fixed-point logic with counting but does not
                                                  pp-construct any finite-domain CSP with this property.




                                                                                    1. Introduction
                                          1.1. The finite-domain CSP dichotomy theorem. Fixed-template Constraint Satis-
                                          faction Problems are computational problems parametrized by structures A with a finite
                                          relational signature, called templates; they are denoted by CSP(A) and ask whether a
                                          given structure X with the same signature as A admits a homomorphism to A. The
                                          general CSP framework is incredibly rich, in fact, it contains all decision problems up
                                          to polynomial-time equivalence [23]. For this reason, CSPs are typically studied under
                                          additional structural restrictions on the template A. The restriction that has received
                                          most attention is requiring the domain of A to be finite, and the problems arising in this

                                             Michael Pinsker, Jakub Rydval, and Moritz Schöbi : This research was funded in whole or in part by
                                          the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) [I 5948, ESP 1571225]. For the purpose of Open Access, the authors
                                          have applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript (AAM) version
                                          arising from this submission.
                                          Michael Pinsker, Christoph Spiess, and Paul Winkler : This research is funded by the European Union
                                          (ERC, POCOCOP, 101071674). Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only
                                          and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive
                                          Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.
                                          A conference version of this material appeared in the Proceedings of the 50th International Symposium
                                          on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS), #83, 1–20, 2025 [75].
                                                                                               1
2              M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

way are called finite-domain CSPs. Already in this setting, one obtains many well-known
problems such as HORN-SAT, 2-SAT, 3-SAT, or 3-COLORING.
   Consider the example of 3-COLORING. This NP-complete problem can be modeled as
CSP(K3 ), where K3 stands for the complete graph on three vertices: indeed, a homomor-
phism to K3 from a given structure X in the same signature (i.e. from a graph X) is simply
a mapping that does not map any two adjacent vertices of X to the same vertex of K3 . A
key observation in the theory of CSPs is that the NP-completeness of CSP(K3 ) can be
extended to CSPs of other structures which can “simulate” K3 over their domain or over
a finite power thereof using primitive positive (pp) formulas (such simulations are called
pp-interpretations). Enhancing this by the additional observation that homomorphically
equivalent templates have equal CSPs, one arrives at the notion of pp-constructibility [11].
If A′ is pp-constructible from A, then CSP(A′ ) is reducible to CSP(A) in logarithmic
space; moreover, this reduction can be formulated in the logic programming language
Datalog. This uniform reduction between CSP templates is sufficiently powerful, as we
will see below, to describe all NP-hardness amongst finite-domain CSPs.
   In the early 2000s, the field of finite-domain constraint satisfaction quickly rose in fame,
in particular due to the discovery of tight connections with universal algebra. The most
basic of these connections is that two structures with identical domains have the same sets
of pp-definable relations if and only if they have the same sets of polymorphisms [61, 60].
Here, a polymorphism of a relational structure A is simply a homomorphism from a finite
power of A into A itself; we denote by Pol(A) the set of all polymorphisms of A, the
polymorphism clone of A. Since taking expansions by pp-definable relations does not lead
to an increase in complexity, the study of finite-domain CSPs is subsumed by the study
of finite algebras.
   Over the past two decades, the link between universal algebra and CSPs was gradually
refined. After an intermediate stop at pp-interpretations [42], today we know that
also pp-constructibility between finite relational structures is fully encoded in their
polymorphisms [11, Thm. 1.3]: A′ is pp-constructible from A if and only if Pol(A′ ) satisfies
all height-1 identities of Pol(A). By a breakthrough result of Bulatov [41] and Zhuk [81, 82],
the pp-construction of K3 is the unique source of NP-hardness for finite-domain CSPs (if
P̸=NP), and in fact, they provided a polynomial-time algorithm for any such CSP which
does not pp-construct K3 . Besides its complexity-theoretic significance (in particular, of
confirming the dichotomy conjecture of Feder and Vardi [50]), this result has the additional
appeal that the border for tractability can be described by a neat universal-algebraic
condition on polymorphism clones. We state the theorem of Bulatov and Zhuk in a
formulation which takes into account the results in [11, 78].

Theorem 1.1 (Bulatov and Zhuk [41, 81]). Let A be a finite relational structure. Either
A pp-constructs K3 and CSP(A) is NP-complete, or Pol(A) satisfies the Siggers identity
s(x, y, z, x, y, z) ≈ s(y, z, x, z, x, y) and CSP(A) is solvable in polynomial time.

1.2. The infinite-domain CSP tractability conjecture. Arguably, the two main
reasons for the popularity of finite-domain CSPs over CSPs which require an infinite
template are immediate containment of such problems in the class NP (a homomorphism
can be guessed and verified in polynomial time) as well as the above-mentioned applicability
of algebraic methods which had been developed independently of CSPs for decades. Yet,
even within the class NP, finite-domain CSPs are of an extremely restricted kind: already
simple problems such as ACYCLICITY of directed graphs (captured by the template
(Q; <)), various natural coloring problems for graphs such as NO-MONOCHROMATIC-
TRIANGLE, and more generally the model-checking problem for natural restrictions
        FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                        3

of existential second-order logic such as the logic MMSNP of Feder and Vardi [50], are
beyond its primitive scope despite their containment in NP.
   The quest for a CSP framework including such problems whilst staying within NP and
allowing for an algebraic approach akin to the one for finite templates started with the
popularization of ω-categoricity by Bodirsky and Nešetřil [32] as a sufficient structural
restriction ensuring the latter: for countable ω-categorical structures, pp-definability is
determined by their polymorphisms and, as was subsequently shown, so are the general
reduction of pp-interpretability [34] as well as the pp-constructibility of K3 [11]. The
ω-categoricity of A can be interpreted as A being “finite modulo automorphisms”: more
precisely, the action of its automorphism group Aut(A) on d-tuples has only finitely
many orbits for all finite d ≥ 1. It is, however, a mathematical property with little
computational bearing: the CSPs of ω-categorical structures can be monstrous from this
perspective [55, 54], namely, complete for a variety of complexity classes of arbitrarily
high complexity. For this reason, and based on strong empirical evidence, Bodirsky
and Pinsker [35] identified a proper subclass of countable ω-categorical structures as a
candidate for an algebraic complexity dichotomy extending the theorem of Bulatov and
Zhuk which does not seem to suffer from this deficiency.
   Their first requirement on A is that the orbit under Aut(A) of any d-tuple is determined
by the relations that hold on it: we call a relational structure A homogeneous if every
isomorphism between its finite substructures extends to an automorphism of A. This gives
an effective way of representing orbits, which are central to ω-categoricity. They then
additionally impose an effective way of determining whether a given finite substructure
is contained in A, which places the CSP in NP: a relational structure A over a finite
signature τ is finitely bounded [65] if there exists a finite set N of finite τ -structures
(bounds) such that a finite τ -structure embeds into A if and only if it does not embed any
member of N ; equivalently, the finite substructures are up to isomorphism precisely the
finite models of some universal first-order sentence (see e.g. [17, Lem. 2.3.14]).
Example 1.2. A standard example of a countable finitely bounded homogeneous structure
is (Q; <). Its finite substructures are all finite strict linear orders, which can be axiomatized
by irreflexivity, totality, and transitivity:
                                                                                        
         ∀x, y, z ¬(x < x) ∧ (x < y ∨ x = y ∨ y < x) ∧ (x < y ∧ y < z ⇒ x < z) .
Moreover, every isomorphism between two such finite substructures can be extended to
an automorphism of (Q; <), e.g. by a piecewise affine transformation.
   Finite boundedness and homogeneity taken together are a very strong assumption.
Bodirsky and Pinsker observed that for all practical purposes, in particular the applicability
of polymorphisms to complexity as well as containment in NP, it is sufficient that the
template A be a first-order reduct of a structure B enjoying these, i.e. first-order definable
therein. This yields sufficient flexibility to model a huge class of computational problems
which includes in particular the ones mentioned above. Requiring A to be a reduct of a
finitely bounded homogeneous structure B, i.e. obtained from B by forgetting relations,
turns out to be equivalent (see [4, Prop. 7]), and we shall find this approach convenient.
Example 1.3. The CSP of the template (Q; {(x, y, z) | x < y < z ∨ z < y < x}), first-order
definable in (Q; <), is the classical NP-complete betweenness problem from the 1970s [73].
  The following formulation of the original conjecture from 2012 takes into account later
progress [11, 12, 13, 8, 9].
Conjecture 1.4 (Bodirsky and Pinsker [35]). Let A be a reduct of a countable finitely
bounded homogeneous structure B. Then exactly one of the following holds.
4              M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

     • A pp-constructs K3 (and consequently, CSP(A) is NP-complete);
     • A does not pp-construct K3 ; in this case Pol(A) satisfies the pseudo-Siggers identity
                        α ◦ s(x, y, z, x, y, z) ≈ β ◦ s(y, z, x, z, x, y)
       and CSP(A) is solvable in polynomial time.
   It is important to note that the open part of Conjecture 1.4 is only the consequence
of polynomial-time tractability: the negation of the first item does yield the satisfaction
of the pseudo-Siggers identity by a theorem due to Barto and Pinsker [13]. It is even
equivalent to it for model-complete cores [8, Thm. 1.3]: an ω-categorical model-complete
core is a template A whose endomorphisms preserve all orbits of Aut(A); an ω-categorical
model-complete core exists for all CSPs with an ω-categorical template and is unique up
to isomorphism [15].
1.3. Promise CSPs. One of the currently most vibrant branches of research in constraint
satisfaction is the study of Promise CSPs (PCSPs). For two relational structures S1
and S2 such that S1 maps homomorphically to S2 , the problem PCSP(S1 , S2 ) asks
to decide whether a given finite structure X in the same signature as S1 and S2 maps
homomorphically to S1 or does not even map homomorphically to S2 ; the instance
X is promised to satisfy one of those two cases. Thus, the problem PCSP(S1 , S2 )
asks to compare CSP(S1 ) to a relaxation CSP(S2 ) of it, and since PCSP(S1 , S1 ) =
CSP(S1 ), promise constraint satisfaction problems generalize the CSP framework. This
generalization is vast, and contains many well-known computational problems such
as APPROXIMATE GRAPH COLORING [52], (2 + ε)-SAT [3], and HYPERGRAPH
COLORING [47]. Although formally not necessary, research has focused on finite templates
(S1 , S2 ): this is justified for example by the fact that even for structures over a Boolean
domain, there is no complete complexity classification yet. Hence, the two extensions
considered here of finite-domain CSPs to ω-categorical templates, or alternatively to
PCSPs, are somewhat orthogonal, and it is natural to wonder whether there exist any
connections, in particular of algorithmic nature.
1.4. Contributions. We formulate and affirmatively answer three fundamental questions
around Conjecture 1.4 that have been implicitly present in the field for some years
now. The first concerns the scope of Conjecture 1.4; the second the algebraic invariants
of templates therein; and the third its connection with the rapidly evolving field of
(finite-domain) PCSPs.
Main Question 1. Are there significant additional structural assumptions, perhaps of
model-theoretic nature, that can be imposed onto the structures of Conjecture 1.4 without
loss of generality, i.e. without affecting the truth of the conjecture?
Main Question 2. Are there significant algebraic assumptions that can be imposed on
the polymorphisms of the structures of Conjecture 1.4 without loss of generality?
Main Question 3. Are there significant connections between CSPs from Conjecture 1.4
and finite-domain PCSPs?
1.4.1. Algebraicity is irrelevant. Conjecture 1.4 has been confirmed for many different
subclasses. Mottet and Pinsker speak of first- and second-generation classifications [71]:
those of the former kind can roughly be described as exhaustive case-by-case analyzes,
using Ramsey theory, of the available polymorphisms for the first-order reducts of a fixed
finitely bounded homogeneous structure B – extensive complexity classifications such
as those for temporal CSPs [27], Graph-SAT problems [33], Poset-SAT problems [64],
and CSPs with templates first-order definable in arbitrary homogeneous graphs [29] were
       FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                    5

obtained this way. Second-generation classifications take a more structured approach
mimicking advanced algebraic methods for finite domains; they were employed, for example,
to achieve classifications for the logic MMSNP [28], Hypergraph-SAT problems [70], and
certain graph orientation problems [51, 14]. However, even the most advanced methods
as described in [71] require the assumption of additional abstract structural properties of
the template. The first aim of this paper is to investigate whether any such property can
be assumed without loss of generality when investigating whether Conjecture 1.4 holds.
   One such assumption is that the template A, or even the structure B in which it is first-
order defined, has no algebraicity. It is present virtually everywhere in the infinite-domain
CSP literature; and in particular an important prerequisite in most of the general results of
the theory of smooth approximations developed by Mottet and Pinsker [71], as well as in all
results of Bodirsky and Greiner [21, 22] about CSPs of generic superpositions of theories.
We will show that the following strengthening of this property (for model-complete cores,
see Proposition 3.2) can be assumed when resolving Conjecture 1.4: a structure A is
CSP-injective if every finite structure that homomorphically maps to A also does so
injectively; in other words, if there is a solution to an instance of CSP(A), then there is
also an injective one. CSP-injectivity played an essential role in the universal-algebraic
proof of the complexity dichotomy for Monotone Monadic SNP [28] and, more recently,
certain finitely bounded homogeneous uniform hypergraphs [70].
   In our first main result, Theorem 1.5, we show that any structure A in the scope of
Conjecture 1.4 can be transformed to a CSP-injective structure (Q ≀ A, ̸=) such that there
are Datalog-reductions in both directions between CSP(A) and CSP(Q ≀ A, ̸=). We further
show that A pp-constructs K3 if and only if (Q ≀ A, ̸=) pp-constructs K3 and essential
model-theoretic properties of A are passed on to (Q ≀ A, ̸=). In particular, (Q ≀ A, ̸=) is
again in the scope of Conjecture 1.4 and both tractability and the hardness criterion of
the conjecture are preserved.
   This is essentially done by blowing up every point in A to a countably infinite set and
then defining relations on the union of those infinite sets in a way that remembers the
structure of A. Formally, it is achieved by the so-called relational wreath product of an
infinite set with the structure A.

       Throughout the present article, the notation C ≀ A stands for the relational
       wreath product of two structures C and A, introduced formally in Section 3.1.

   The only assumption necessary to guarantee Datalog-interreducibility of CSP(A) and
CSP(Q ≀ A, ̸=) is that A is non-contractible, i.e. its CSP is not the CSP of a one-element
structure.
Theorem 1.5. Let B be a countable structure over a finite relational signature. Then
                      
  (1) (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= is a countably infinite structure without algebraicity over a finite
      relational signature.                             
  (2) If B is ω-categorical, then so is (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= .
  (3) If B is homogeneous, then so is (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= . In this case, B is Ramsey if and
      only if (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= is Ramsey.                   
  (4) If B is finitely bounded, then so is (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= .
 Moreover, if A is a non-contractible reduct of B, then
                                                                              
  (5) (Q ≀ A, ̸=) is a non-contractible CSP-injective reduct of (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= .
  (6) CSP(A) and CSP(Q ≀ A, ̸=) are Datalog-interreducible.
  (7) If A is ω-categorical, then so is (Q ≀ A, ̸=), and A is a model-complete core if and
      only if (Q ≀ A, ̸=) is.
6              M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER
                                                                     d
    (8) If the number of orbits of d-tuples of A grows slower than 22 , then A pp-constructs
        K3 if and only if (Q ≀ A, ̸=) pp-constructs K3 .
   It is well-known and not hard to see that item 8 of Theorem 1.5 applies to reducts of
homogeneous structures in a finite relational signature [65], in particular to all structures
in the scope of Conjecture 1.4.
1.4.2. Polymorphisms are injective. Comparing Theorem 1.1 with Conjecture 1.4, one
notices the replacement of the Siggers identity by its (weaker) pseudo-variant. This is not
just an inconvenience arising from the proof of [13, Thm. 1.6] by Barto and Pinsker (or
the more recent proof in [6]), but there are examples showing the necessity to weaken the
condition.
Example 1.6. Consider the template (Q; I4 ), where I4 is defined by
                            I4 := {(x, y, u, v) | x = y ⇒ u = v}.
Its CSP is solvable in Datalog (Sections 2.5 and 3.2). Since CSP(K3 ) is not, and pp-
constructions provide Datalog-reductions [2], it follows that (Q; I4 ) does not pp-construct
K3 . Hence, its polymorphisms satisfy the pseudo-Siggers identity by the above-mentioned
theorem of Barto and Pinsker. However, any polymorphism of I4 is injective up to dummy
variables [18], and hence cannot satisfy the Siggers identity. This makes it clear that the
characterization of tractability of CSPs by the Siggers identity cannot be lifted from finite
to infinite domains.
   One prominent example of a condition that can actually be lifted is the satisfiability
of quasi near-unanimity identities, which captures bounded strict width of CSPs both in
the finite and in the infinite [19]; bounded strict width corresponds to solvability in a
particular proper fragment of Datalog that is not closed under the Datalog-reductions in
Theorem 1.5.
   In order to shed light on which algebraic criteria might be applicable to characterize
tractability (or perhaps finer complexity classes) within the scope of Conjecture 1.4,
we investigate whether one can impose any assumptions on the polymorphisms of the
templates therein without loss of generality. We say that a template is Pol-injective if
all of its polymorphisms are essentially injective, i.e. injective up to dummy variables –
this is the case if and only if the relation I4 is invariant under its polymorphisms. As
it turns out, the relation I4 can be added to the templates constructed in Theorem 1.5
at no computational cost (up to Datalog reductions). It thus follows that any algebraic
condition on polymorphisms capturing a complexity class closed under Datalog-reductions
for CSPs of structures within the scope of Conjecture 1.4 must necessarily be satisfiable by
essentially injective operations. Until now, various concrete examples of natural templates
all of whose polymorphisms are essentially injective had pointed towards a statement of
this kind (see, e.g. [8]); we provide a rigorous confirmation.
                                                                      
Theorem 1.7. The structures(Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) and (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸=, I4 enjoy all properties
of (Q ≀ A, ̸=) and (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= from Theorem 1.5 except that CSP-injectivity is replaced
by Pol-injectivity.
  For finite structures the only essentially injective polymorphisms are at most unary
up to dummy variables. It is therefore of no surprise that so few universal-algebraic
conditions for CSPs from the finite have been successfully lifted to the infinite. Examples of
conditions for polymorphism clones that can be satisfied by essentially injective operations
are any pseudo height-1 identities (e.g., the pseudo-Siggers identity), but also the dissected
near-unanimity identities [54] which were proposed in [37] as a possible candidate for
solvability of CSPs in Fixed-Point logic with Counting (FPC).
       FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                   7

  Marimon and Pinsker have recently provided a negative answer, within the scope
of Conjecture 1.4, to a question of Bodirsky [17, Q. 14.2.6(27)] asking whether every
ω-categorical CSP template without algebraicity solvable in Datalog has a binary injective
polymorphism [66, Cor. 8.10]. We contrast this negative result with a corollary to
Theorem 1.7 that implies that up to Datalog reductions the answer is positive.
Corollary 1.8. Let A be a relational structure that does not pp-construct K3 . Then
(Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) has a binary injective polymorphism.
1.4.3. Everything is a cheese. While research on both infinite-domain CSPs and finite-
domain PCSPs has been very fruitful in recent years, few connections between these
two branches have been discovered so far. One natural link is the use of CSP templates
as cheeses in the so-called sandwich method to prove tractability of PCSPs, as follows.
Note that if S1 maps homomorphically to A and A maps homomorphically to S2 , then
PCSP(S1 , S2 ) trivially reduces to CSP(A); we call A a cheese sandwiched by the template
(S1 , S2 ). This simple observation is more powerful than it might first appear: in fact, so
far, every known tractable (finite-domain) PCSP can be reduced to the tractable CSP
of some cheese structure via the sandwich method [68, 46]. On the other hand, it can
be necessary to pick large finite cheeses even for PCSPs on a Boolean domain [62], and
Barto [5] even provided an example of a PCSP template sandwiching an infinite polynomial-
time tractable cheese while not being finitely tractable, i.e. such that every finite-domain
cheese has an NP-complete CSP [5]. Since Barto’s cheese is not ω-categorical, he raised
the question whether such an example could also be constructed with an ω-categorical
cheese ([5, Q. IV.1]). Subsequently the question arose, and was promoted by Zhuk at the
CSP World Congress 2023, whether structures within the scope of Conjecture 1.4 could
ever serve as tractable cheeses in the absence of a finite one.
   The first two examples of tractable ω-categorical cheeses for non-finitely tractable
finite-domain PCSPs were recently obtained in [69]; these structures fall within the
scope of Conjecture 1.4. In the present paper, we strengthen this result by creating
non-finitely tractable finite-domain PCSPs from virtually every structure A within the
scope of Conjecture 1.4. Our construction consists of two steps. First, we show that such
a construction is possible in general under the additional assumption that A is equipped
with an inequality predicate and that it is a reduct of a structure B which is linearly
ordered. We then combine this construction with Theorem 1.5. Modulo an extra step
consisting of taking generic superpositions (Proposition 4.9) of structures with (Q; <) (for
which we need the property of no algebraicity), this finishes our proof.
Theorem 1.9. Let A be a non-contractible reduct of a countable finitely bounded ho-
mogeneous structure B. Then there exists a reduct A′ of a countable finitely bounded
homogeneous structure B′ together with Datalog-reductions J and J ′ from CSP(A) to
CSP(A′ ) and vice versa such that, for every n ∈ N, there exists a finite PCSP template
(S1 , S2 ) with the following properties:
   (1) A′ is a cheese for PCSP(S1 , S2 ); thus, PCSP(S1 , S2 ) reduces to CSP(A) via J ′ .
   (2) J is correct as a reduction from CSP(A) to PCSP(S1 , S2 ) when limited to in-
       stances X with the property that X homomorphically maps to A if and only if X
       homomorphically maps to a substructure of A of size ≤ n.
   (3) Every finite cheese for PCSP(S1 , S2 ) pp-constructs K3 ; thus PCSP(S1 , S2 ) is not
       finitely tractable.
   (4) A pp-constructs K3 if and only if A′ pp-constructs K3 .
   (5) If A is a model-complete core, then A′ is a model-complete core as well.
   (6) If B is Ramsey, then B′ is Ramsey as well.
8              M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

   Item 2 is not necessary for obtaining non-finitely tractable PCSPs from Conjecture 1.4,
but provides an additional link that makes it possible to transfer logical inexpressibility
results from infinite-domain CSPs to PCSPs, e.g., for FPC (see Section 5.3).
   By omitting the part of the proof of Theorem 1.9 which relies on Theorem 1.5 (i.e. re-
moving algebraicity and adding a linear order), we additionally get that A and A′ are
pp-bi-interpretable (which leads to gadget reductions between their CSPs) at the cost of
dropping the requirement that the resulting PCSP is non-finitely tractable. However, this
construction still generalizes the two concrete examples of non-finitely tractable PCSPs
from [69].
Theorem 1.10. Let A be a reduct of a countable finitely bounded homogeneous structure
B. Then there exists a reduct A′ of a countable finitely bounded homogeneous structure
B′ such that A and B are pp-bi-interpretable with A′ and B′ , respectively, and such that
for all n ∈ N, there exists a finite PCSP template (S1 , S2 ) and gadget-reductions J and
J ′ from CSP(A) to CSP(A′ ) and vice versa such that
    (1) A′ is a cheese for PCSP(S1 , S2 ); thus, PCSP(S1 , S2 ) reduces to CSP(A) via J ′ ;
    (2) J is correct as a reduction from CSP(A) to PCSP(S1 , S2 ) when limited to in-
        stances X with the property that X homomorphically maps to A if and only if it
        homomorphically maps to a substructure of A of domain size ≤ n.
  By a well-known result due to Barto, Kozik, Larose, Zádori, Atserias, Bulatov, and
Dawar, a finite-domain CSP is expressible in FPC if and only if it does not pp-construct
any non-trivial finite Abelian group [37, Thm. 1.1]. This correspondence does not extend
to the CSPs in the scope of Conjecture 1.4; in fact, it already fails within temporal
CSPs—the CSPs of the first-order reducts of (Q; <) [37, Thm. 1.5]. However, using
Theorem 1.10 and the results in [37], one can show that a temporal CSP is expressible in
FPC if and only if it does not pp-construct any finite-domain PCSP inexpressible in FPC.
We remark that this fact can essentially already be derived from the results in [37, 69].
Theorem 1.11. A temporal CSP is expressible in FPC if and only if it does not pp-
construct any finite-domain PCSP inexpressible in FPC.
1.4.4. Phylogeny CSPs. We initiate a new case study—of phylogeny CSPs—from the
perspective of descriptive complexity. Phylogeny CSPs are the CSPs of structures first-
order definable in the (finitely bounded) homogeneous C-relation, and hence fall into the
scope of Conjecture 1.4. As the name suggests, phylogeny CSPs can be used to model
certain decision problems arising in evolutionary biology. We show that similarly as in
the temporal case, there exists a (tractable) phylogeny CSP which pp-constructs a finite-
domain PCSP inexpressible in FPC but it does not pp-construct any such finite-domain
CSP. This provides further evidence that the complexity of the CSPs in the scope of
Conjecture 1.4 is intimately connected to the complexity of finite-domain PCSPs.
Theorem 1.12. There is a tractable phylogeny CSP that:
  (1) pp-constructs a finite-domain PCSP inexpressible in FPC;
  (2) does not pp-construct any finite-domain CSP inexpressible in FPC.
1.5. Related work. Our results in Theorem 1.9 compare to the above-mentioned examples
of tractable ω-categorical cheeses for finite-domain PCSPs that are not finitely tractable
from [69, Props. 35 and 36] as follows.
   First, the PCSPs from [69, Thm. 2] are reducible to the associated ω-categorical
templates under gadget reductions. The main advantage of gadget reductions over general
Datalog-reductions is that, in many settings, gadget reductions between (P)CSPs are
captured by the transfer of height-1 identities between polymorphism clones (or more
          FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                                               9

generally polymorphism minions); see [44]. While Theorem 1.10 generalizes these cases,
its construction fails to ensure that the resulting PCSP is not finitely tractable in general.
To address this, Theorem 1.9 employs Datalog-reductions rather than gadget-reductions.
Notably, it can be shown that in many cases, the resulting finite-domain PCSPs do not
admit a gadget reduction to the original ω-categorical template (Example 3.4).
   Second, [69] also contains a result (Theorem 1) showing that every CSP within the
scope of the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture is polynomial-time equivalent to the PCSP
of a half-infinite template, more precisely a template (S1 , S2 ) such that S1 is in the
scope of the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture and S2 is finite. In contrast, our Theorem 1.9
provides non-finitely tractable finite-domain PCSP templates (S1 , S2 ) sandwiching a
given structure A from Conjecture 1.4 up to Datalog interreducibility. Since our PCSP
templates (S1 , S2 ) are finite and not half-infinite, we cannot guarantee polynomial-time
equivalence between PCSP(S1 , S2 ) and CSP(A). However, we may still approximate
CSP(A) to an arbitrary degree in the sense of Theorem 1.9(2).

1.6. Organization of this paper. In Section 2, we provide definitions and general
notation. In Section 3, we show that one can without loss of generality assume that the
templates in Conjecture 1.4 have no algebraicity and essentially injective polymorphisms
by providing proofs of Theorem 1.5, Theorem 1.7, and Corollary 1.8. Theorem 1.5 is then
used in Section 4 to construct sandwiches of non-finitely tractable finite-domain PCSPs
from all structures in the scope of the aforementioned conjecture via Theorem 1.9. At the
end of Section 4, we also provide a full proof of Theorem 1.11. Finally, in Section 5, we
investigate the class of phylogeny CSPs from the perspective of the descriptive complexity.
We provide an example of a phylogeny problem that is not definable in FPC and show
that this inexpressibility result transfers to the finite-domain PCSP constructed from this
template via Theorem 1.10, ultimately proving Theorem 1.12. At the end of Section 5
and in Section 6 we moreover use the opportunity to pose new open questions which we
believe need to be addressed in order to assure continued progress on Conjecture 1.4.
Section 6 also provides a more detailed discussion on specific aspects of our results.

                                                2. Preliminaries
  The set {1, . . . , n} is denoted by [n], and we use the bar notation t̄ for tuples. The
component-wise action of a function f : An → B on k-tuples is given by
                                                                                                                        
   f (x1,1 , . . . , x1,k ), . . . , (xn,1 , . . . , xn,k ) := f (x1,1 , . . . , xn,1 ), . . . , f (x1,k , . . . , xn,k ) .

2.1. Relational structures. A (relational ) signature τ is a set of relation symbols, each
R ∈ τ with an associated natural number called arity. A (relational ) τ -structure A
consists of a set A (the domain) together with the relations RA ⊆ Ak for each R ∈ τ with
arity k. An expansion of A is a σ-structure B with A = B such that τ ⊆ σ and RB = RA
for each relation symbol R ∈ τ . Conversely, we call A a reduct of B and denote it by B|τ .
We denote by (A, R) the expansion of a structure A by a relation R over its domain. The
substructure of a τ -structure A on a subset B ⊆ A is the τ -structure B with domain B
and relations RB = RA ∩ B k for every R ∈ τ of arity k; we use the notation A[B] := B.
   The factor of a τ -structure A through an equivalence relation E ⊆ A2 is the τ -structure
A/E with domain A/E and relations RA/E = qE (RA ), where qE denotes the factor map
x 7→ [x]E . Let σ ⊂ τ be arbitrary. We say that E is a relational congruence on A if the
definitions of the corresponding relations of A/E do not depend on the choices of the
representatives of the equivalence classes of E: for every R ∈ τ and all tuples t̄ we have
qE (t̄) ∈ RA/E if and only if t̄ ∈ RA .
10             M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

  For a positive integer d and a τ -structure A, the d-th power of A is the τ -structure Ad
with the domain Ad and relations as follows. For each R ∈ τ of arity k:
            d
         RA = { (a1,1 , . . . , a1,d ), . . . ,(ak,1 , . . . , ak,d ) ∈ (Ad )k
                                                                     

                                        | (a1,1 , . . . , ak,1 ), . . . , (a1,d , . . . , ak,d ) ∈ RA }
  A homomorphism h : A → B for τ -structures A and B is a mapping h : A → B that
preserves each τ -relation, i.e., if t̄ ∈ RA for some relation symbol R ∈ τ , then h(t̄) ∈ RB .
We write A → B if A maps homomorphically to B; formally,
                              CSP(A) := {X finite | X → A}.
If A → B and B → A, then we say that A and B are homomorphically equivalent. An
endomorphism of A is a homomorphism from A to itself; we denote by End(A) the set
(monoid) of all endomorphisms of A. We say that A is contractible [26] if it has a constant
endomorphism; otherwise non-contractible. Clearly, A is contractible if and only if its
CSP is the CSP of a one-element structure, and hence, solved by an algorithm that only
checks whether certain fixed relations are empty in an instance.
   An embedding is an injective homomorphism h : A → B that additionally satisfies the
following condition: for every k-ary relation symbol R ∈ τ and t̄ ∈ Ak we have h(t̄) ∈ RB
only if t̄ ∈ RA . The age of A, denoted by age(A), is the class of all finite structures which
embed into A. An isomorphism is a surjective embedding. Two structures A and B are
isomorphic if there exists an isomorphism from A to B. A partial isomorphism between
two structures A and B is an isomorphism from a substructure of A to a substructure
of B; if A = B, then we speak of a partial isomorphism on A. An automorphism is an
isomorphism from A to A; we denote by Aut(A) the set (group) of all automorphisms
of A. The orbit of a tuple t̄ ∈ Ak in A is the set {g(t̄) | g ∈ Aut(A)}. Any tuples
belonging to the same orbit satisfy precisely the same first-order formulas over A. The
orbit equivalence relation provides a natural way to factorise relational structures: given a
relational structure A and a subgroup G ⊆ Aut(A), we denote by A/G the structure A/E
for
                          E := {(x, y) ∈ A2 | ∃g ∈ G : g(x) = y}.
   We say that a structure A has no algebraicity (in the group-theoretic sense) if, for
every k ≥ 1 and every ā ∈ Ak , the automorphisms of A which stabilize ā do not stabilize
any a′ ∈ / ā (by this notation we mean that a′ does not appear as an entry of ā). In
ω-categorical structures this is the case if and only if for every k ≥ 1 and every tuple
ā ∈ Ak it is not possible to first-order define any finite set of elements outside ā using ā
as parameters. In other words, any non-trivial first-order property relative to ā is always
satisfied by infinitely many elements.
   Recall from the introduction that an ω-categorical structure A is a model-complete
core if the endomorphisms of A preserve all orbits of Aut(A). A reformulation of this
definition that will be more convenient for us is that for every e ∈ End(A) and every finite
F ⊆ A, there exists α ∈ Aut(A) such that e|F = α|F (see e.g. [17]).

2.2. The KPT correspondence. For structures S and M, we denote by M
                                                                               
                                                                             S
                                                                                 the set of
all embeddings of S into M. A class K of structures over a common signature τ has the
Ramsey property(RP) if, for all S, M ∈ K and  k ∈ N, there exists L ∈ K such that, for
every map f : SL → [k], there exists e ∈ M  L
                                               such that f is constant on the set

                                {e ◦ u | u ∈ M    } ⊆ SL .
                                                       
                                               S
        FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                      11

It is a folklore fact that considering the special case k = 2 is enough for verifying the
RP [59], and we call any L satisfying the above in this case a Ramsey witness for (S, M).
A homogeneous structure is Ramsey if its age has the Ramsey property.
   In the proof of one of our auxiliary results (Proposition 3.1), we use the Kechris-Pestov-
Todorčević (KPT) correspondence, which links the Ramsey property for homogeneous
structures over countable signatures to a property of their automorphism group viewed as
a topological group. A topological group is a pair (G, T ), where G is a group and (G; T )
a topological space, such that both taking inverses and composition in the group G are
continuous with respect to T . A topological group (G, T ) is called extremely amenable if
every continuous action α of (G, T ) on a compact Hausdorff topological space (X, T ′ ) has
a fixed point, i.e. there exists x ∈ X such that α(g)(x) = x for every g ∈ G; the action α
being continuous means that the map (g, x) 7→ α(g)(x) is. A bijective map f between
two topological groups is a topological isomorphism if it is a group isomorphism and both
f and f −1 are continuous. Clearly, topological group isomorphisms preserve extreme
amenability. The formulation of the KPT correspondence below (Theorem 2.1) refers to
the extreme amenability of Aut(B), without mentioning any specific topology: this is
because it is understood to be equipped with the topology of pointwise convergence. This is
the smallest topology on Aut(B) containing all sets of the form {g ∈ Aut(B) | g(t̄) = s̄}
for some tuples t̄, s̄ over B, the basic open sets of the topology.
Theorem 2.1 (Kechris, Pestov, and Todorcevic [63]). Let B be a countable homogeneous
structure over a countable relational signature. Then B is Ramsey if and only if Aut(B)
is extremely amenable.
2.3. Universal algebra. An (equational ) condition is a set of identities, i.e. formal
expressions of the form s ≈ t, where s and t are terms over a common set of function
symbols. An equational condition is height-1 if it contains neither nested terms nor
terms consisting of a single variable. A polymorphism of a relational structure A is a
homomorphism from Ak into A for some k ∈ N; the set of all polymorphisms of A is
denoted by Pol(A). We say that Pol(A) (or some set S of operations on A) satisfies an
equational condition Σ if the function symbols can be interpreted as elements of Pol(A)
(of S) so that, for each identity s ≈ t in Σ, the equality s = t holds for any evaluation of
variables in A. An example is the cyclic identity of arity n ≥ 2 given by
                              f (x1 , . . . , xn ) ≈ f (x2 , . . . , xn , x1 ),
for a symbol f of arity n ≥ 2. An operation is called cyclic if it satisfies the cyclic identity.
Theorem 2.2 ([10]). Let A be a finite relational structure. If A does not pp-construct K3 ,
then Pol(A) contains a cyclic operation.
   A pseudo-version of a height-1 identity s ≈ t is of the form α ◦ s ≈ β ◦ t for fresh unary
function symbols α and β. An example is the pseudo-Siggers identity from Conjecture 1.4.
Allowing for different unary symbols in different identities, this definition naturally extends
to height-1 conditions.
   We extend the notion of a polymorphism to PCSP templates (S1 , S2 ) in the usual
way: a polymorphism of (S1 , S2 ) is a homomorphism from a finite power of S1 to S2 ; we
denote by Pol(S1 , S2 ) the set (minion) of all such polymorphisms. Also the satisfaction
of height-1 conditions can be generalized to the PCSP setting in a straightforward manner.
The same is not true for nested identities, because the composition of polymorphisms
between different structures is not defined.
   We say that a height-1 condition Σ is satisfied in Pol(S1 , S2 ) modulo a set H of unary
operations on S2 if the function symbols in Σ can be interpreted as elements of Pol(S1 , S2 )
12                  M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

such that for each identity s ≈ t in Σ there exist α, β ∈ H such that α ◦ s = β ◦ t holds
for any evaluation of variables in S1 .

2.4. First-order logic. We say that a first-order formula is k-ary if it has k free variables.
For a first-order formula ϕ, we use the notation ϕ(x̄) to indicate that the free variables
of ϕ are among x̄. This does not mean that the truth value of ϕ depends on each entry
in x̄. We assume that equality = as well as the nullary predicate symbol ⊥ for falsity
are always available when building first-order formulas. Thus, atomic τ -formulas over a
relational signature τ are of the form ⊥, (x = y), and R(x̄) for some R ∈ τ and a tuple
x̄ of first-order variables matching the arity of R. A first-order τ -formula ϕ is primitive
positive (pp) if it is of the form ∃x1 , . . . , xm (ϕ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ϕn ), where each ϕi is atomic. Let A
and B be relational structures and d a natural number. A d-dimensional First-Order (FO)
interpretation of B in A is a partial surjection I : Ad → B with the property that, for
every relation R defined by a k-ary atomic formula in B, the dk-ary (preimage) relation
      I −1 (R) := (a11 , . . . , a1d , . . . , ak1 , . . . , akd ) | I(a11 , . . . , a1d ), . . . , I(ak1 , . . . , akd ) ∈ R
                                                                                                                        

has a first-order definition in A. Since the equality is allowed as an atomic formula, there
must in particular be first-order formulas defining the domain and the kernel of I.
   If the defining formulas of an interpretation can be chosen primitive positive, then we
call it a pp-interpretation. We say that A and B are first-order bi-interpretable (pp-bi-
interpretable) if there exist first-order interpretations (pp-interpretations) IB and IA of B
in A and vice versa such that the relations
                  {(x̄, y) | IA ◦ IB (x̄) = y}             and         {(x̄, y) | IB ◦ IA (x̄) = y}
are first-order definable (pp-definable) in A and B, respectively. Two countable ω-
categorical structures are first-order bi-interpretable if and only if their automorphism
groups are isomorphic as topological groups [1] and they are pp-bi-interpretable if and
only if their polymorphism clones are isomorphic as topological clones [34].
   The property of being a model-complete core for an ω-categorical structure is encoded
in the polymorphism clone (the closure of the automorphism group under the topology
of pointwise convergence is the endomorphism monoid). Consequently, if A and B are
ω-categorical and pp-bi-interpretable, then A is a model-complete core if and only if B is.
Moreover, by Theorem 2.1, first-order bi-interpretations between homogeneous structures
preserve the Ramsey property.
   A pp-construction between CSP templates is a pp-interpretation composed with homo-
morphic equivalence [11]: A pp-constructs B if A pp-interprets a structure A′ which is
homomorphically equivalent to B; this notion naturally extends to PCSP templates. For
a full definition, we refer the reader to [7]; in the present article, we need the following
characterization: a structure A pp-constructs the template (S1 , S2 ) if there exists a
structure A′ such that A pp-constructs A′ and S1 → A′ → S2 .

2.5. Fixed-Point logic. Fixed-Point logic (FP) is defined by adding formation rules
to first-order logic whose semantics is defined with inflationary fixed-points of definable
operators: every first-order formula is an FP formula and, if ϕ(x̄) is an FP formula over
some relational signature τ ∪ {R} with R ∈  / τ , then [ifpR ϕ](x̄) is an FP formula over the
signature τ whose semantics is given as follows. For a τ -structure A and a tuple ā over A
matching the arity of x̄, say k, we have A |= [ifpR ϕ](ā) if and only if ā is contained in the
inflationary fixed-point of the operator
                                    A
                                   Fϕ,R (X) := {x̄ ∈ Ak | (A, X) |= ϕ(x̄)},
        FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                     13

                                                                     A
i.e., the limit of the sequence X0 := ∅ and Xi+1 := Xi ∪ Fϕ,R           (Xi ). For example, the
formula
                         [ifpT E(x, z) ∨ (∃y. T (x, y) ∧ T (y, z))](x, z)
computes the transitive closure of E.
   The logic programming language Datalog can be viewed as the existential positive
fragment of FP. It is not hard to see that every Datalog formula is specified by a finite set
of rules of the form R(x̄) ⇐ R1 (x̄1 ) ∧ · · · ∧ Rm (x̄m ) where R is a fixed-point variable. In
the case of the above Datalog formula computing the transitive closure of E, for example,
the rules are T (x, z) ⇐ E(x, z) and T (x, z) ⇐ T (x, y) ∧ T (y, z).
   Fixed-Point logic with Counting FPC is obtained from FP by adding a mechanism for
counting the members of definable queries. Here, we only need to know the following
well-known game-theoretic invariant. The bijective k-pebble-game is played by two players,
the Spoiler and the Duplicator, on a pair of structures A and B. The players have a set
of pairs of pebbles {(pA1 , pB              A B
                             1 ), . . . , (pk , pk )}. In each move:

   (1) The Spoiler chooses i ∈ [k].
   (2) The Duplicator selects a bijection f : A → B.
   (3) The Spoiler places pAi on any element a ∈ A and pB
                                                        i on f (a).

  We write A ≡k B if the Duplicator can ensure for arbitrarily many rounds that pAi 7→ pB
                                                                                        i
specifies a partial isomorphism between the pebbled elements.
Theorem 2.3 (Immerman and Lander [74]). For every FPC sentence ϕ, there exists k ∈ N
such that, for all finite structures A and B, we have that A ≡k B implies A |= ϕ ⇔ B |= ϕ.
2.6. Descriptive complexity of (P)CSPs. For a relational τ -structure A and a logic
L (in the sense of Gurevich [57, 56]), we say that CSP(A) is solvable or expressible
in L if there exists an L-sentence defining the class of all finite τ -structures which do
not homomorphically map to A. Here, the extra negation is included to account for
certain logics which are not closed under negation, e.g. Datalog. More generally, we say
that PCSP(S1 , S2 ) is solvable in L if there exists an L-sentence Φ that is true in all
negative instances, and false in all positive instances. A typical strategy to show that
PCSP(S1 , S2 ) is not solvable in FPC is to use Theorem 2.3: it suffices to find, for all
k ∈ N, a YES-instance Ak and a NO-instance Bk such that Ak ≡k Bk . We call such
families fooling instances. If, in addition, there is a finite substructure S of S1 such that
for all k, Ak maps homomorphically to S, we call the family fixed-image fooling.
Example 2.4. CSP(Q; <) is solvable in Datalog, as witnessed by the sentence
                       ∃u[ifpT (x < z) ∨ (∃y. T (x, y) ∧ T (y, z))](u, u).
   First-order interpretations defined in Section 2.4 naturally generalize to the notion
of an L-interpretation for arbitrary logics L by allowing L-formulas for defining the
preimages of the relations. Let τ and τ ′ be two finite relational signatures and R a tuple
consisting of a dk-ary τ -formula ϕα in some logic L for every k-ary atomic τ ′ -formula
α. Let dom(R) := {x̄ ∈ X d : ϕx=x (x̄)} and ∼R := {(x̄, ȳ) ∈ (X d )2 : ϕx=y (x̄, ȳ)}. Then
we can assign to any τ -structure X a unique τ ′ -structure R(X) on dom(R)/ ∼R with an
L-interpretation in X as given by the formulas in R. For a τ -structure A and τ ′ -structure
A′ , we say that R is an L-reduction from CSP(A) to CSP(A′ ) if
                            X → A if and only if R(X) → A′ .
Logical reductions compose whenever the associated interpretations do. For any logic
L closed under conjunction of formulas and existential quantification over first-order
variables, L-reductions preserve the expressibility of CSPs in L and other logics extending
14                 M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

L. Some authors require the kernel of the associated interpretation to be trivial (cf. [2,
Def. 1] and [44, Sec. 3.1]). We choose not to impose this restriction, since this is only a
convention stemming from the fact that factorization is not necessary in most (if not all)
use cases of logical reductions. For example, any pp-interpretation of a structure A′ in
A yields a factor-free Datalog-reduction from CSP(A′ ) to CSP(A) [2].1 Let (A1 , A2 ) and
(A′1 , A′2 ) be PCSP templates over the signatures τ and τ ′ , respectively. We say that R is
an L-reduction from PCSP(A1 , A2 ) to PCSP(A′1 , A′2 ) if
               X → A1 implies R(X) → A′1                and X ↛ A2 implies R(X) ↛ A′2 .
More generally, we say that PCSP(A1 , A2 ) L-reduces to PCSP(A′1 , A′2 ) if there exists an
L-reduction R from PCSP(A1 , A2 ) to PCSP(A′1 , A′2 ).

                    3. Simplifying the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture
     In the present section, we give proofs of Theorem 1.5, Theorem 1.7, and Corollary 1.8.

3.1. Wreath products. Given groups G and H acting on sets A and B, respectively,
their wreath product G ≀ H is given by GB × H acting on A × B via
                                  ((gb )b∈B , h)) (a, b) := (gh(b) (a), h(b)).
The wreath product G ≀ H again forms a group, with the neutral element ((eG )b∈B , eH )
and the group operation
                      ((gb )b∈B , h)) · ((gb′ )b∈B , h′ )) := ((gb · gh′ −1 (b) )b∈B , h · h′ )).
Note that the permutation group on A × B induced by the component-wise action of the
Cartesian product G × H is contained by that induced by the action of G ≀ H thereon: the
permutations induced stemming from the former are represented in G ≀ H by all elements
of the form ((g)b∈B , h).
   Below we give an important construction on structures (here also called wreath product)
which corresponds to group-theoretic wreath products in terms of their automorphism
groups. Let A and B be structures over disjoint relational signatures τ and σ, and let E
be a fresh binary symbol. The wreath product A ≀ B is the structure over the signature
τ ∪ {E} ∪ σ with domain A × B whose relations are defined as follows. First, we set
                         E A≀B := {((x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 )) ∈ (A × B)2 | y1 = y2 }.
Then, for R ∈ τ and S ∈ σ of arities k and m:
     RA≀B := {((x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xk , yk )) ∈ (A × B)k | (x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ RA and y1 = · · · = yn },
     S A≀B := {((x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xm , ym )) ∈ (A × B)m | (y1 , . . . , ym ) ∈ S B }.

Proposition 3.1 (Basic properties of wreath products). Let A and B be structures over
disjoint finite relational signatures τ and σ. Then:
    (1) Aut(A ≀ B) = Aut(A) ≀ Aut(B).
    (2) If A has no algebraicity, then A ≀ B has no algebraicity.
    (3) If A and B are ω-categorical, then A ≀ B is ω-categorical.
    (4) If A and B are homogeneous, then A ≀ B is homogeneous.
    (5) If A and B are finitely bounded, then A ≀ B is finitely bounded.
    (6) If A and B are homogeneous Ramsey, then A ≀ B is homogeneous Ramsey.
     1Datalog reductions in [2] are additionally allowed to have finitely many exceptions and use finitely
many parameters in the defining formulas.
         FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                                 15

  Proofs of items 4, 5, and 6 can be found in [38, Lem. 2.2.49] (see also [39, Lem. 2.33]).
The statement in item 6 can also be found in [77, Thm. 5.13]. We include a full proof of
Proposition 3.1 for the convenience of the reader.

Proof. For (1), we first show that Aut(A) ≀ Aut(B) is a subgroup of Aut(A ≀ B). Clearly,
the wreath product is a subgroup of Sym(A × B) and preserves E A≀B . Moreover, as
every group element ((gb )b∈B , h) simply acts like h in the second component, all σ-
relations are preserved. Concerning τ -relations, note that all pairs occurring within
a tuple ((a1 , b1 ), . . . , (ak , bk )) ∈ RA≀B share the same second entry b = b1 = · · · = bk .
Therefore, the same gh(b) ∈ Aut(A)) is picked to act on all the first entries, and the image
((gh(b) (a1 ), h(b)), . . . , (gh(b) (ak ), h(b))) lies within RA≀B .
    To prove the equality of the two groups, it remains to show that every w ∈ Aut(A ≀ B)
can be written in the above form. As w acts on the equivalence classes of E A≀B , it induces
an automorphism h′ on the σ-reduct of (A ≀ B)/E A≀B , which is isomorphic to B. Further,
for any b ∈ B, w also induces an automorphism g ′ on the τ -reduct of the substructure
induced by A × {b}, which is in turn isomorphic to A. Denoting the corresponding
automorphisms of A and B by gh(b) , b ∈ B and h, it is now easy to check that ((gb )b∈B , h)
and w coincide.
    For (2), we must show that fixing any tuple t̄ of parameters does not yield any nontrivial
fixed point of the automorphism group when stabilizing t̄. Let (a′ , b′ ) be any element
outside t̄. Let A′ be the set of all elements a ∈ A such that (a, b) appears in t̄ for some
b ∈ B. Move a′ to a different element via some g ∈ Aut(A) whilst fixing A′ ; this is possible
because A has no algebraicity. Then ((gb )b∈B , id) with gb := g if b = b′ and id otherwise is
an automorphism of Aut(A ≀ B) fixing every entry in t̄ and moving (a′ , b′ ).
    For (3), recall that, by item (1), we have Aut(A ≀ B) = Aut(A) ≀ Aut(B). But note that
Aut(A) ≀ Aut(B) in particular contains the Cartesian product Aut(A) × Aut(B). Since
the Cartesian product already witnesses that there are only finitely many orbits of tuples
of each arity, the statement follows.
    For (4), let t̄ and s̄ be tuples of the same length such that the map sending t̄ to s̄ is
a partial isomorphism. By reordering, we split t̄ into subtuples (t̄b1 , . . . , t̄bn ) for distinct
elements bi ∈ B such that the second projection of all entries of t̄bi is bi . Similarly, we
obtain (s̄c1 , . . . , s̄cn ). Pick gci ∈ Aut(A) sending the first projections of t̄bi to those of
s̄ci . Pick h ∈ Aut(B) sending bi to ci . The automorphism ((gb )b∈B ), h), where gb = id if
hitherto undefined, sends t̄ to s̄.
    For (5), let ΦA and ΦB be any universal sentences defining age(A) and age(B), respec-
tively. Denote their quantifier-free parts by ϕA and ϕB . For two tuples x̄1 , x̄2 of the same
arity k, we use E(x̄1 , x̄2 ) as a shortcut for the formula stating that, for every i ∈ [k], the
i-the entry of x̄1 and the i-the entry of x̄2 are E-equivalent. Then the following sentence
ΦA ≀ ΦB defines age(A ≀ B):
                                                                                                          
            ∀x, y, z E(x, x) ∧ E(x, y) ⇒ E(y, x) ∧ E(x, y) ∧ E(y, z) ⇒ E(x, z)
                                              ^                                                         
                                            ∧         ∀x̄1 , x̄2 E(x̄1 , x̄2 ) ⇒ R(x̄1 ) ⇔ R(x̄2 )
                                                 R∈σ
                                                              _                                         
                                            ∧ ∀x̄ ϕB (x̄) ∨                   E(x1 , x2 ) ∧ (x1 ̸= x2 )
                                                                   x1 ,x2 ∈x̄
                                                        ^                       ^                          
                                                     ∧            ∀x̄ R(x̄) ⇒                   E(x1 , x2 )
                                                           R∈τ                       x1 ,x2 ∈x̄
                                                                             _                         
                                                        ∧ ∀x̄ ϕA (x̄) ∨                   ¬E(x1 , x2 ) .
                                                                        x1 ,x2 ∈x̄

To see this, note that:
16             M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

      • the first line ensures that E is an equivalence relation,
      • the second line ensures that E is a relational congruence on (A ≀ B)|σ ,
      • the third line ensures that the factor by E satisfies ΦB ,
      • the fourth line ensures that τ -relations do not stretch over different E-classes,
      • the fifth line ensures that each E-class satisfies ΦA .
   For (6), recall that, by Theorem 2.1, Aut(A) and Aut(B) are extremely amenable. By
Proposition 3.1(1), we have Aut(A ≀ B) = Aut(A) ≀ Aut(B). Hence, we can use the folklore
fact that Aut(A) ≀ Aut(B) is a semidirect product Aut(A)B ⋊ Aut(B). In particular,
we immediately get that Aut(A)B is a normal subgroup of Aut(A ≀ B). We claim that
Aut(A)B is closed with respect to the topology of pointwise convergence. This follows
from the fact that the complement of Aut(A)B can be written as
                    [
                                 {((gb )b∈B , h)) ∈ Aut(A ≀ B) | h(x) = y},
                     x∈B,y∈B\{x}

which is a union of basic open sets. By Lemma 6.7(iii) in [63], products of extremely
amenable groups are extremely amenable, and hence Aut(A)B is extremely amenable. If
we can show that also Aut(A ≀ B)/Aut(A)B is extremely amenable, then it follows from
Lemma 6.7(ii) in [63] that Aut(A ≀ B) is extremely amenable as well.
  The composition π ◦ ι of the natural embedding ι : Aut(B) → Aut(A ≀ B) with the
natural quotient map π : Aut(A ≀ B) → Aut(A ≀ B)/Aut(A)B is a topological isomorphism
between Aut(B) and Aut(A ≀ B)/Aut(A)B . Hence, the claim follows from the fact that
Aut(B) is extremely amenable. Recall that, by item 4, we have that A ≀ B is homogeneous.
Since Aut(A ≀ B) is extremely amenable, we conclude using Theorem 2.1 that A ≀ B is
homogeneous Ramsey.                                                                  □
3.2. Removing algebraicity and adding injectivity. In the context of Conjecture 1.4,
the concepts of CSP-injectivity and having no algebraicity are closely related. On the one
hand, if B is a homogeneous structure with no algebraicity and its relations only contain
tuples with pairwise distinct entries, then it is CSP-injective [17, Lem. 4.3.6]. On the
other hand, we can prove the following.
Proposition 3.2. CSP-injective ω-categorical model-complete cores have no algebraicity.
Proof. Let B be a CSP-injective ω-categorical model-complete core. We show that B has
no algebraicity. Suppose, on the contrary, that there exists b̄ ∈ B k and b′ ∈
                                                                             / b̄ such that the
                  ′
unary relation {b } is first-order definable in B using b̄ as parameters. By [17, Thm. 4.5.1
and Lemma 4.5.5], the expansion (B, {b̄}) is an ω-categorical model-complete core, and
there exists a primitive positive formula ϕ(x) defining {b′ } in (B, {b̄}). Also, by [17,
Thm. 4.5.1], there exists a primitive positive formula ψ(ȳ) defining the orbit of b̄ in B.
We may assume that ψ does not contain any equality atoms, otherwise we eliminate them
by identifying variables. Let ϕ′ be the primitive positive formula obtained by replacing
the constants b̄ in ϕ with the variables ȳ, and set
                                ϕ′′ := ψ(ȳ) ∧ ϕ′ (x1 ) ∧ ϕ′ (x2 );
we may again assume that ϕ′ and ϕ′′ do not contain any equality atoms. We use ϕ′′ to
create an instance A of CSP(B) that maps homomorphically to B but has no injective
such homomorphism.
    The domain of A consists of the variables of ϕ′′ , and the relations are determined by the
atomic subformulas of ϕ′′ . Clearly, A has a homomorphism to B, because we can substitute
b̄ for ȳ in ϕ′′ and b for both x1 and x2 . However, A has no injective homomorphism to B.
Indeed, if this was the case, then there would exist distinct witnesses ȳ, x1 , and x2 for
the satisfaction of ϕ′′ in B. By definition, there would exist α ∈ Aut(B) with α(ȳ) = b̄.
         FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                               17

But then α(x1 ) = α(x2 ) = c, a contradiction to the injectivity of α. We conclude that A
does not have any injective homomorphism to B, and hence B is not CSP-injective, a
contradiction to our assumption. Hence, B has no algebraicity.                          □
  We shall now see that CSP-injectivity and Pol-injectivity cannot hold simultaneously in
ω-categorical structures; yet, we shall observe immediately thereafter that CSP-injectivity
can be traded against Pol-injectivity.
Proposition 3.3. CSP-injective ω-categorical structures cannot be Pol-injective. On the
other hand, the expansion AI4 of any CSP-injective structure A by the relation
                                I4 := {(x, y, u, v) | x = y ⇒ u = v}
is Pol-injective, and CSP(A) and CSP(AI4 ) are Datalog-interreducible.
Proof. For the first part, we show that an ω-categorical Pol-injective structure cannot be
CSP-injective. This leads to the same conclusion as the original statement, namely, that
the formal intersection between the two properties is empty.
   Let B be an ω-categorical Pol-injective structure. Note that every essentially injective
operation preserves the relation I4 . Hence, every polymorphism of B preserves I4 , and so
I4 is pp-definable in B. Let ϕ(x, y, u, v) be a primitive positive formula that defines I4 in
B. Since I4 contains all 4-tuples with pairwise distinct entries, we may assume that ϕ
contains no equality atoms, otherwise we eliminate them by identifying variables. But
now we can use ϕ to create an instance A of CSP(B) that maps homomorphically to B
but has no injective such homomorphism. More specifically, the domain of A consists of
the variables of ϕ, except that we identify x and y (but not u and v), and the relations
are determined by the atomic subformulas of ϕ. We conclude that B is not CSP-injective.
   Regarding the second part, the Pol-injectivity of AI4 follows from the known fact that
every polymorphism of I4 is essentially injective [18] (also [17, Lem. 7.5.1]). We proceed
with the proof of Datalog-interreducibility. We first give a Datalog-reduction I ∗ from
CSP(AI4 ) to CSP(A). Let τ be the signature of A. Given an instance X of CSP(AI4 ), the
relation ≈ is defined in X by the following Datalog program:
      • (x ≈ y) ⇐ (x = y),
      • (x ≈ y) ⇐ (y ≈ x),
      • (x ≈ z) ⇐ (x ≈ y) ∧ (y ≈ z),
      • (x ≈ y) ⇐ I4 (u, v, x, y) ∧ (u ≈ v).
   By definition, this relation is an equivalence relation on X; denote by q≈ the induced
quotient map X → X/≈, x 7→ [x]≈ . We define I ∗ (X) as the τ -structure with domain X
and whose relations are the preimages of all τ -relations in X/≈ under q≈ . It remains to
verify that I ∗ is a reduction.
   First, suppose that I ∗ (X) → A. Note that (X/≈)|τ is a substructure of I ∗ (X),
and hence (X/≈)|τ → A. Since A is CSP-injective, there exists an injective homo-
morphism h : (X/≈)|τ → A. By the definition of ≈, if we have [x1 ]≈ = [x2 ]≈ and
                                        X/≈
([x1 ]≈ , [x2 ]≈ , [x3 ]≈ , [x4 ]≈ ) ∈ I4 , then we also have [x3 ]≈ = [x4 ]≈ . Since h is injective, it
follows that h is also a homomorphism from X/≈ to AI4 . Then the composition h ◦ q≈ is
a homomorphism from X to AI4 .
   Now suppose that there exists a homomorphism g : X → AI4 . Note that, by defi-
                                                                             ∗
nition, for every k-ary R ∈ τ , we have (si1 , . . . , sik ) ∈ RI (X) if and only if there are
j1 ∈ [si1 ]≈ , . . . , jk ∈ [sik ]≈ such that (j1 , . . . , jk ) ∈ RX . By the definition of ≈, every func-
tion preserving I4 must identify ≈-equivalent elements, and therefore (g(si1 ), . . . , g(sik )) =
(g(j1 ), . . . , g(jk )), which implies (g(si1 ), . . . , g(sik )) ∈ RAI4 . Therefore, g is a homomor-
phism from I ∗ (X) to A.
18               M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

  The reduction in the opposite direction is trivial. Given an instance X of CSP(A), we
define I(X) as the (τ ∪ {I4 })-expansion of X by an empty relation.                  □
     Finally, we give the proofs of Theorem 1.5 and Theorem 1.7, restated below.
Theorem 1.5. Let B be a countable structure over a finite relational signature. Then
                        
    (1) (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= is a countably infinite structure without algebraicity over a finite
        relational signature.                             
    (2) If B is ω-categorical, then so is (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= .
    (3) If B is homogeneous, then so is (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= . In this case, B is Ramsey if and
        only if (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= is Ramsey.                   
    (4) If B is finitely bounded, then so is (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= .
   Moreover, if A is a non-contractible reduct of B, then
                                                                                
    (5) (Q ≀ A, ̸=) is a non-contractible CSP-injective reduct of (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= .
    (6) CSP(A) and CSP(Q ≀ A, ̸=) are Datalog-interreducible.
    (7) If A is ω-categorical, then so is (Q ≀ A, ̸=), and A is a model-complete core if and
        only if (Q ≀ A, ̸=) is.
                                                                     d
    (8) If the number of orbits of d-tuples of A grows slower than 22 , then A pp-constructs
        K3 if and only if (Q ≀ A, ̸=) pp-constructs K3 .
                                                                       
Theorem 1.7. The structures(Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) and (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸=, I4 enjoy all properties
of (Q ≀ A, ̸=) and (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= from Theorem 1.5 except that CSP-injectivity is replaced
by Pol-injectivity.
  As the two theorems only differ in the presence of the relation I4 , large parts of the
proofs of Theorem 1.5 and Theorem 1.7 are essentially the same. For this reason, we
conduct both proofs simultaneously, and differentiate whenever necessary.
Proof of Theorem 1.5 and Theorem 1.7. Let τ and σ be the signatures of A and B, re-
spectively. We first define the auxiliary structure B′ := (Q; <) ≀ B. By Example 1.3, the
structure (Q; <) is finitely bounded homogeneous. It is also CSP-injective: a digraph
maps homomorphically to (Q; <) if and only if it is acyclic; in this case there is always
an injective homomorphism. It is a model-complete core, and hence has no algebraicity
(Proposition 3.2). It follows immediately from Proposition 3.1(2) that B′ has no alge-
braicity. The expansion (B′ , ̸=) of B′ by the binary inequality has no algebraicity because
taking expansions by first-order definable relations does not change the automorphism
group, proving item 1; the same is true for the structure (B′ , ̸=, I4 ).
   Proof of item 2. This follows directly from Proposition 3.1(3) applied to B′ and the
fact that we take an expansion by relations which are preserved by all bijections, and in
particular all automorphisms of B′ .
   Proof of item 3. Since (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸=, I4 is an expansion of B′ by two relations that are
                                            
preserved by all embeddings, we can ignore these relations and only prove the statement
for B′ . Recall that B′ = (Q; <) ≀ B. The first part of item 3 follows directly from
Proposition 3.1(4) because (Q; <) is homogeneous. We continue with the second part.
There the forward direction follows directly from Proposition 3.1(6) because (Q; <) is
homogeneous Ramsey [63]. We continue    with the backward direction.
   Suppose that age (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸=, I4 has the RP. Then clearly also age(B′ ) has the RP.
Let S, M ∈ age(B) be arbitrary. We transform them into S′ , M′ ∈ age(B′ ) by letting
E interpret as the diagonal relation and < as the empty relation. Since age(B′ ) has the
                                                                                         ′
RP, thereexists a Ramsey witness L′ ∈ age(B′ )for (S′ , M′ ). We set L := (L′ /E L )|σ .
                                                    ′
Let f : SL → [2] be arbitrary. We define f ′ : SL ′ → [2] as follows. For an embedding
        FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                             19
         ′
e′ ∈ SL ′ , we set f ′ (e′ ) := f (qE ◦ e′ ), where qE denotes the factor map x 7→ [x]E . We have
that qE ◦ e′ ∈ SL because E interprets as the diagonal relation in S′ and as a relational
                   
                                                                                                   L′
congruence on L′ |σ . SinceL′ is a Ramsey′ witness′ for (S′ , M′ ), there exists e′ ∈ M
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                     ′

such that f ′ is constant on e′ ◦ u′ | u′ ∈ M      S′
                                                        ⊆ SL ′ . Since E interprets as the diagonal
               ′
relation   in M and as a relational congruence        on L′ |σ , the map e := qE ◦ e′ is contained in
  L
      . By construction, f is constant on e ◦ u | u ∈ M              ⊆ SL .
                                                                
  M                                                             S
                                                                              
   Proof of item 4. The finite boundedness of (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸=, I4 can be deduced from
Proposition 3.1(5), and the fact that we take an expansion by relations definable by a
Boolean combination of equality atoms. More specifically, as explained in the introduction,
up to isomorphism, the finite substructures of a finitely bounded structure are just the
finite models of a universal sentence. By adding new clauses, that define the relations ̸=
                                                                            ′
and I4 in terms of equalities, to the     universal sentence for age(B ), we obtain a universal
sentence for age (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸=, I4 .
   Proof of items 5 and 6. Note that removing all symbols in σ \ τ as well as the symbol <
from (B′ , ̸=) yields the structure (Q ≀ A, ̸=). We claim that (Q ≀ A, ̸=) is CSP-injective. Let
X be an arbitrary finite structure for which there exists a homomorphism h : X → (Q≀A, ̸=).
We define Xπ as the (τ ∪ {E})-structure with domain X such that, for every R ∈ τ ∪ {E},
we have x̄ ∈ RXπ if and only if h(x̄) ∈ R(Q≀A,̸=) . It is easy to see that Xπ embeds into the
(τ ∪ {E})-reduct of B′ (if multiple elements in X are mapped to (q, a) for some q ∈ Q
and a ∈ A, we can always map them to different elements in Q × {a} since this does not
affect the relations in τ ∪ {E}). Hence, Xπ expanded by the binary inequality predicate
embeds into (Q ≀ A, ̸=). This yields an injective homomorphism from X. We conclude that
(Q ≀ A, ̸=) is CSP-injective.
   Next, we informally describe two Datalog-reductions I ∗ and I: from CSP(Q ≀ A, ̸=)
to CSP(A) and back, starting with the former. Let X be an instance of CSP(Q ≀ A, ̸=).
Denote by ∼ the equivalence closure of E X , and let q∼ : X → (X/∼), x 7→ [x]∼ be the
induced quotient map. We define I ∗ (X) as the τ -structure with domain X and whose
relations are the preimages of all τ -relations in X/∼ under q∼ , except that we additionally
add, for every x ∈ X such that (x, x) ∈ ̸=X , the tuple (x, . . . , x) to every τ -relation. It
is easy to see that I ∗ (X) is definable in Datalog; we verify that I ∗ is a reduction from
CSP(Q ≀ A, ̸=) to CSP(A). Clearly, if X maps homomorphically to (Q ≀ A, ̸=), then I ∗ (X)
maps homomorphically to A. Suppose that there exists a homomorphism h : I ∗ (X) → A.
Since by non-triviality A does not have a constant endomorphism, there is no x ∈ X
such that (x, x) ∈ ̸=X : otherwise, the map on A sending every element to h(q∼ (x)) would
provide a constant endomorphism. Denote by X′ the structure obtained from X by
removing all tuples from ̸=X . Now, choosing representatives x1 , . . . , xk for all classes of
X/∼, the function sending the entirety of [xi ]∼ to (0, h(xi )) for all i ≤ k is a homomorphism
from X′ to (Q ≀ A, ̸=). By the CSP-injectivity of (Q ≀ A, ̸=), it can be replaced by an
injective homomorphism, which is then also a homomorphism from X to (Q ≀ A, ̸=). We
continue with the reduction from CSP(A) to CSP(Q ≀ A, ̸=), which is trivial. Let X be
an instance of CSP(A). We define I(X) as the (τ ∪ {E, =         ̸ })-expansion of X by empty
relations. By CSP-injectivity, there exists a homomorphism h : I(X) → (Q ≀ A, ̸=) if and
only if there exists an injective such homomorphism i. This is the case if and only if the
relation E (Q≀A,̸=) restricted to i(X) describes the kernel of a homomorphism from X to A.
Therefore, X → A if and only if I(X) → (Q ≀ A, ̸=).
   We now consider (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ). By Proposition 3.3, we have that (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) is
Pol-injective and CSP(Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) and CSP(Q ≀ A, ̸=) are Datalog-interreducible. That
CSP(Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) and CSP(A) are Datalog-interreducible then follows from the fact that
Datalog-reductions can be composed.
20                 M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

    Finally, we verify the properties in items 7–8. We only explicitly cover the case where
I4 is present, our arguments clearly also hold in the case without I4 .
                                                                         
    Proof of item 7. By item 2 applied to A, (Q; <) ≀ A, ̸= is ω-categorical, and therefore
so is its reduct (Q ≀ A, ̸=). Next, assume that A is a model-complete core and suppose
that e∗ is an endomorphism of (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ). Let S ∗ be an arbitrary finite subset of Q × A.
Since e∗ preserves ̸=, it is injective. Since e∗ preserves E (Q≀A,̸=,I4 ) , which is an equivalence
relation, it naturally acts on its classes. Let e be the map on (Q × A)/E (Q≀A,̸=,I4 ) mapping
each [x]E (Q≀A,̸=,I4 ) to [e∗ (x)]E (Q≀A,̸=,I4 ) , and let S := {[x]E (Q≀A,̸=,I4 ) | x ∈ S ∗ }. Similarly as in
Proposition 3.1(1), we have that e is an endomorphism of A. Since A is a model-complete
core, there exists an automorphism α of A such that α|S = e|S . We claim that there exists
an automorphism α∗ of (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) such that α∗ |S ∗ = e∗ |S ∗ . To see this, note that we
can simply fix a permutation of each equivalence class of E (Q≀A,̸=,I4 ) and extend α, which
is a permutation of the equivalence classes, according to it. Since S ∗ is finite, we can
moreover select the permutations so that α∗ coincides with e∗ on S ∗ .
    Next, suppose that e is an endomorphism of A, and let S be an arbitrary finite subset
of A. Define S ∗ := {0} × S. Let e∗ be the map on Q × A defined via e∗ (q, a) := (q, e(a)).
This function is an endomorphism of (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ). Since (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) is a model-complete
core, there exists an automorphism α∗ of (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) such that α∗ |S ∗ = e∗ |S ∗ . Let α be
the map on A mapping each [x]E (Q≀A,̸=,I4 ) to [e∗ (x)]E (Q≀A,̸=,I4 ) . As before, we have that α is
a well-defined automorphism of A extending e on S.
    Proof of item 8. One direction is simple (and does not use the assumption on the orbit
growth), because (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) clearly pp-constructs A; the pp-construction is given by
A = ((Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 )/E (Q≀A,̸=,I4 ) )|τ . Thus, if A pp-constructs K3 , then so does (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ).
    For the other direction, we use a characterization via the pseudo-Siggers identity from [8,
Thms. 1.3 and 3.4]. Suppose that A does not pp-construct K3 . Let C be the model-
complete core of A. Since A and C are homomorphically equivalent, C also does not
pp-construct K3 . Then, by Theorem 1.3 in [8], there exist α, β, s ∈ Pol(C) witnessing the
pseudo-Siggers identity. Consider the structure (Q ≀ C, ̸=, I4 ). By item 7, (Q ≀ C, ̸=, I4 ) is
an ω-categorical model-complete core. Note that we can lift the homomorphic equivalence
between A and C to a homomorphic equivalence between (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) and (Q ≀ C, ̸=, I4 )
by setting, for any homomorphism h between A and C and irrespectively of its direction,
h∗ (x, y) := (e(x, y), h(y)), where e is an arbitrary injection from the Cartesian product
of Q with the domain of h into Q. The inclusion of the injection in the first coordinate
ensures that h∗ preserves I4 and ̸= (because they are preserved by all injective operations).
Since (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) and (Q ≀ C, ̸=, I4 ) are homomorphically equivalent, (Q ≀ C, ̸=, I4 ) is
the model-complete core of (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ). Next, we lift the pseudo-Siggers identity from
Pol(C) to Pol(Q ≀ C, ̸=, I4 ). Let e be an arbitrary injection from Q × C into Q. The
structure (Q; ̸=, I4 ) is an ω-categorical model-complete core that does not pp-construct
K3 [17, Thms. 12.0.1, 12.7.3, 12.9.2, and Cor. 6.4.4]. Hence, by Theorem 1.3 in [8] (since
pp-constructions are more general than pp-interpretations with parameters), there are
α′ , β ′ , s′ ∈ Pol(Q; ̸=, I4 ) witnessing the pseudo-Siggers identity. Set:
      • α∗ (x, y) := (α′ (x), α(y)),
      • β ∗ (x, y) := (β ′ (x), β(y)), and
      • s∗ ((x1 , y1 ), . . . , (x6 , y6 )) := (s′ (e(x1 , y1 ), . . . , e(x6 , y6 )), s(y1 , . . . , y6 )).
  It is easy to verify that α∗ , β ∗ , s∗ are polymorphisms of (Q ≀ C, ̸=, I4 ) and that these
operations witness the pseudo-Siggers identity. It moreover follows by inspection of the
proof of Proposition 3.1(3) that also the structure (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) has less than double
exponential orbit growth, and therefore so does its model-complete core (Q ≀ C, ̸=, I4 ) by
the proof of [8, Cor. 1.8]. Combining this with the pseudo-Siggers identity, it follows
        FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                        21

from Theorem 3.4 in [8] (whose item (ii) is equivalent to the pp-construction of K3 by
Theorem 1.8 in [11]) that (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) does not pp-construct K3 .               □
  With the proof of Theorem 1.7 at hand, we can easily prove Corollary 1.8.
Corollary 1.8. Let A be a relational structure that does not pp-construct K3 . Then
(Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) has a binary injective polymorphism.
Proof of Corollary 1.8. Suppose that A does not pp-construct K3 . By Theorem 1.7(8), the
structure (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) does not pp-construct K3 either. Let C be the model-complete core
of A. By the proof of Theorem 1.7(8), we have that (Q ≀ C, ̸=, I4 ) is the model-complete
core of (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ). Hence, also (Q ≀ C, ̸=, I4 ) does not pp-construct K3 .
   By [66, Thm. 3.14], we have that Pol(Q ≀ C, ̸=, I4 ) contains a binary essential operation
f . Let g and h be any homomorphisms witnessing the homomorphic equivalence between
(Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) and (Q ≀ C, ̸=, I4 ), respectively. Then (x, y) 7→ h ◦ f (g(x), g(y)) is a binary
essential polymorphism of (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ). Since (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) is Pol-injective, this operation
must be injective.                                                                               □
  We conclude this section with an example.
Example 3.4. Consider the two structures
               A1 := ({0, 1}; {1}, {(x, y, z) ∈ {0, 1}3 | x + y + z = 0 mod 2}),
               A2 := (Q; <, {(x, y, z) ∈ Q3 | x ≥ y or x ≥ z}).
The former is a finitely bounded homogeneous model-complete core with algebraicity (due
to it being finite) and the latter is a finitely bounded homogeneous model-complete core
without algebraicity. Note that A1 is preserved by the symmetric operation
                                   (x1 , . . . , xn ) 7→ x1 + · · · + xn mod 2
for every odd n ≥ 2 and A2 is preserved by the symmetric operation
                                      (x1 , . . . , xn ) 7→ min{x1 , . . . , xn }
for every n ≥ 2. Thus, in both cases the polymorphism clone satisfies the cyclic identity
of arity n for some n ≥ 2. Since pp-constructions preserve the satisfaction of height-1
identities in polymorphism clones [11] and no cyclic operation f of arity n ≥ 2 preserves
̸= over an infinite set, Ai does not pp-construct (Q ≀ Ai , ̸=) for both i ∈ [2]. Hence, our
 Datalog-reduction in Theorem 1.5 is not subsumed by gadget reductions.
                            4. ω-categorical cheeses for PCSPs
  In the present section, we give a proof of Theorem 1.9.
4.1. Full powers. Our basic tool for creating ω-categorical cheeses for PCSPs that are
not finitely tractable are full powers (see, e.g., Bodirsky [17, Sect. 3.5]). Roughly speaking,
a full power A[d] is a higher-dimensional representation of A that is pp-bi-interpretable
with A. Its central feature is that its polymorphisms are the polymorphisms of A acting
on d-tuples, thus allowing to factor it by the orbit-equivalence of Aut(A) on d-tuples
(rather than on elements). In other words, the orbits of d-tuples of A are represented
by orbits of 1-tuples (elements) of A[d] , which is crucial in applications of the sandwich
method. Let A be a relational structure with a signature τ and let d ∈ N be arbitrary.
The d-th full power of A, denoted A[d] , is the structure with domain Ad and the following
relations for every k ∈ [d]:
      • for every R ∈ τ of arity k and every injection ι : [k] → [d], the unary relation
                           [d]
                     RιA         := {(a1 . . . , ad ) ∈ Ad | (aι(1) , . . . , aι(k) ) ∈ RA };
22                  M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

       • for every R ∈ τ of arity k and every function ι : [k] → [d], the k-ary relation
           bιA[d] := {((a11 , . . . , a1d ), . . . , (ak1 , . . . , akd )) ∈ (Ad )k | (a1ι(1) , . . . , akι(k) ) ∈ RA };
           R
       • for all functions ι, ι′ : [k] → [d], the binary compatibility relation
                A  [d]      1          1      2            2        d 2              1       2
               Eι,ι′ := {((a1 . . . , ad ), (a1 , . . . , ad )) ∈ (A ) | ∀i ∈ [k] : aι(i) = aι′ (i) }.


Below we give several important properties of full powers. For an operation f : An → A, we
denote the component-wise action of f on d-tuples by f ↷ Ad . For a set F of operations
on A, we set F ↷ Ad := {f ↷ Ad | f ∈ F }.
Proposition 4.1 (Basic properties of full powers). Let A be a relational structure over a
finite signature τ and let its relations be of arity ≤ d. Then:
    (1) Pol(A[d] ) consists of the component-wise actions of Pol(A) on d-tuples.
    (2) The structures A and A[d] are pp-bi-interpretable.
    (3) If A is ω-categorical, then A[d] is ω-categorical.
    (4) If A is homogeneous, then A[d] is homogeneous.
    (5) If A is a model-complete core, then A[d] is a model-complete core.
    (6) If A is finitely bounded, then A[d] is finitely bounded.
    (7) If A is homogeneous Ramsey, then A[d] is homogeneous Ramsey.
    (8) If A is a reduct of B, then A[d] is a reduct of B[d] .
     We include a full proof of Proposition 4.1 for the convenience of the reader.
Proof. For i ∈ [d], we denote by ιi the function from [1] to [d] defined by ιi (1) := i.
   For (1), let f ∈ Pol(A[d] ) be arbitrary, and let n be its arity. In what follows, we shall
use the abbreviation ā = (a1 , . . . , an ). If ā appears as the i-th row of (x̄1 , . . . , x̄n ) ∈ (Ad )n
(viewed as a d × n-matrix) and as the j-th row in (ȳ1 , . . . , ȳn ) ∈ (Ad )n , then, since f
               [d]
preserves EιAi ,ιj , the i-th entry of f (x̄1 , . . . , x̄n ) equals the j-th entry of f (ȳ1 , . . . , ȳn ). This
ensures that there exists a well-defined operation f ′ : An → A such that f = f ′ ↷ Ad .
                         A[d]
The definition of Rid         for every k-ary relation RA , where id is the identity map on [k],
guarantees that f ′ ∈ Pol(A). Thus, we have that Pol(A[d] ) ⊆ Pol(A) ↷ Ad . The other
inclusion is trivial.
   For (2), we proceed as in the proof of [17, Lem. 3.5.4]; the identity map yields a
d-dimensional pp-interpretation of A[d] in A and the first projection gives a 1-dimensional
pp-interpretation of A in A[d] . It is easy to verify that this gives a pp-bi-interpretation
between A and A[d] .
   For (3), note that Aut(A[d] ) = Aut(A) ↷ Ad by item (1). Since every n-orbit in A[d]
corresponds to a dn-orbit in A, there are finitely many n-orbits in A[d] for each n ∈ N.
Hence, A[d] is ω-categorical as well.
   For (4), let α : D1 → D2 be an isomorphism between two finite substructures of A[d] and
let A1 , A2 be the sets of elements of A appearing as entries in some d1 ∈ D1 or d2 ∈ D2 ,
                                            [d]
respectively. Then the relations EιAi ,ιj and R           b A[d] for R ∈ τ guarantee that α induces an
isomorphism β between A1 and A2 . Since A is homogeneous, we can extend β to some
automorphism β ∗ of A. Now α∗ := β ∗ ↷ Ad is an automorphism of A[d] extending α.
   For (5), let e ∈ End(A[d] ) be arbitrary and let D be an arbitrary finite subset of Ad .
Define AD as the set of all elements of A appearing as entries in some d ∈ D. By item (1),
we have e = e′ ↷ Ad for some e′ ∈ End(A). Since A is a model-complete core, there exists
α′ ∈ Aut(A) such that α′ |AD = e′ |AD . Then α := α′ ↷ Ad is an automorphism of A[d]
satisfying α|D = e|D .
   Item (6) can be shown in a similar fashion as [17, Lem. 3.5.4].
         FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                                           23

   For (7), note that, by item (1) and since the topology of pointwise convergence is
determined by the behaviour of functions on finite subsets, the mapping α 7→ α ↷ Ad is
a topological isomorphism from Aut(A) to Aut(A[d] ). By Theorem 2.1, we have that A[d]
is homogeneous Ramsey.
   Item (8) follows directly from the definition of A[d] .                          □
4.2. Our sandwich recipe. To construct a finite PCSP sandwich for a structure A it is
sufficient to select any finite substructure S1 and finite factor S2 of A. The issue is that,
in many cases, PCSP(S1 , S2 ) will be finitely tractable, possibly because already CSP(S1 )
or CSP(S2 ) is tractable. Proposition 4.2 describes a general condition for structures in
the scope of Conjecture 1.4 under which this does not happen, i.e., where PCSP(S1 , S2 )
is provably not finitely tractable. Intuitively, in order to obtain a non-finitely tractable
sandwich for a structure in the scope of Conjecture 1.4, it is enough to take a sufficiently
large full power thereof, a finite substructure S1 whose polymorphisms preserve the
inequality, and a finite factor S2 by an arbitrary subgroup of automorphisms preserving a
linear order and acting with finitely many orbits.
Proposition 4.2. Let A be a reduct of a linearly ordered finitely bounded homogeneous
structure B such that one of the relations of A interprets as ̸=. Let d ∈ N be such that
the bounds of B have size ≤ d and its relations are of arity ≤ d − 1. Then, for every
finite substructure S of A with |S| ≥ 3, every finite cheese for PCSP(S[d] , A[d] /Aut(B))
pp-constructs K3 .
  We split the proof of Proposition 4.2 into several statements. We start with the following
easy observation (cf. also [69]) about pseudo-cyclic polymorphisms.
Lemma 4.3. Let A be a reduct of a linearly ordered structure B and S a finite substructure
of A. If f ∈ Pol(S, A) is pseudo-cyclic modulo Aut(B), then f is cyclic.
Proof. Let n be the arity of f and let α1 , α2 ∈ Aut(B) be such that
                              α1 ◦ f (s1 , . . . , sn ) = α2 ◦ f (s2 , . . . , sn , s1 )
for all s1 , . . . , sn ∈ S. Suppose, on the contrary, that f is not cyclic. Then there are
s1 , . . . , sn ∈ S such that f (s1 , . . . , sn ) ̸= f (s2 , . . . , sn , s1 ). Let < denote the linear order of
B and set s˜i := (si , . . . , sn , s1 , . . . , si−1 ) for i ≤ n. By assumption, we have f (s˜1 ) ̸= f (s˜2 ).
Assume without loss of generality that f (s˜1 ) < f (s˜2 ). Since α1 , α2 preserve < and its
complement, we have
   f (s˜1 ) < f (s˜2 ) ⇔ α1 (f (s˜1 )) < α1 (f (s˜2 )) ⇔ α2 (f (s˜2 )) < α2 (f (s˜3 )) ⇔ f (s˜2 ) < f (s˜3 )
                                                                                       ..
                                                                                        .
                                                                                           ⇔ f (s˜n ) < f (s˜1 ),
a contradiction to < being a linear order. Thus, f is cyclic.                                                       □
   The next lemma explains how height-1 identities can be lifted from full powers.
Lemma 4.4(1) essentially states that I(X) := X[d] is a reduction from CSP(A) to
CSP(A[d] /Aut(B)); we will, however, use it in the more general setting of PCSPs. The
fact that this reduction exists is a folklore result in infinite-domain constraint satisfaction,
which was popularized by [30, Thm. 3] but in fact goes back to [36, Sect. 5.5]. We include
a full proof of Lemma 4.4; an analogous statement can be found in [69, Lem. 27].
Lemma 4.4. Let A be a reduct of a finitely bounded homogeneous structure B and let S
be a finite structure over the signature of A. Suppose that the bounds of B have size ≤ d
and its relations are of arity ≤ d − 1.
24                           M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

     (1) If there is a homomorphism h : S[d] → A[d] /Aut(B), then there exists a homomor-
         phism g : S → A such that h(x̄) = g(x̄)/Aut(B) for every x̄ ∈ S d .
     (2) If Σ is a height-1 condition satisfied in Pol(S[d] , A[d] /Aut(B)), then Σ is satisfied
         in Pol(S, A) modulo Aut(B).
Proof. We start with item 1. Let S and h be as in the statement of the lemma.
  First, we define an auxiliary structure S′ on S with the same signature as S. For
                                             ′
every k-ary relation RB of B, the relation RS is defined as the preimage of the relations
   [d]
RιB /Aut(B) in the following sense:
                     ′
              RS := {(xι(1) , . . . , xι(k) ) ∈ S k | ι : [k] → [d],(x1 , . . . , xd ) ∈ S d ,
                                                                                               [d]
                                                                  h(x1 , . . . , xd ) ∈ RιB /Aut(B) }.                                   (1)
By the definition of full powers, for every ι : [k] → [d] and all x1 , . . . , xd , yk+1 , . . . , yd ∈ S,
we have
                                                                                                 S[d]
                                                                                             
               (xι(1) , . . . , xι(k) , yk+1 . . . , yd ), (x1 . . . , xk , xk+1 . . . , xd ) ∈ Eid,ι ,
where id denotes the identity map on [k]. This and the fact that h is a homomorphism
yield
              ′                                                                                                      [d] /
          RS = {(x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ S k | ∀xk+1 , . . . , xd ∈ S : h(x1 , . . . , xd ) ∈ RidB                            Aut(B) }.      (2)
Next, we define an auxiliary equivalence relation ∼ on S by relating two elements if they
appear as entries of some z̄ = (z1 , . . . , zd ) ∈ S d that is mapped via h to an orbit where
the corresponding entries are equal:
       x ∼ y :⇔ ∃z̄ ∈ S d ∃i1 , i2 ∈ [d] x = zi1 , y = zi2 , and ∀ā ∈ h(z̄) : ai1 = ai2 .
                                                                                        
                                                                                           (3)
Here, ā ∈ h(z̄) is to be understood in the sense that h(z̄) represents the orbit of ā under
Aut(B). Note that, since h preserves Eι,ι′ for all ι, ι′ : [2] → [d], eq. (3) is equivalent to
     x ∼ y ⇔ ∀z̄ ∈ S d ∀i1 , i2 ∈ [d] : x = zi1 and y = zi2 ⇒ ∀ā ∈ h(z̄) : ai1 = ai2 . (4)
                                                                                        


Claim 4.5. ∼ is a relational congruence on S′ .
                                                                                                     ′
Proof (claim). We must show that, for every k-ary relation RS , every i ∈ [k], and all
y1 , . . . , yi−1 , yi+1 , . . . , yk , x1 , x2 ∈ S, we have that: if x1 ∼ x2 , then
                         ′                                                  ′
                  RS (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , x1 , yi+1 , . . . , yk ) ⇔ RS (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , x2 , yi+1 , . . . , yk ).
To this end, define
     y¯1 := (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , x1 , yi+1 , . . . , yk ),     z¯1 := (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , x1 , yi+1 , . . . , yk , x2 , . . . , x2 ),
     y¯2 := (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , x2 , yi+1 , . . . , yk ),     z¯2 := (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , x2 , yi+1 , . . . , yk , x1 , . . . , x1 ).
Here, the arity of z̄1 and z̄2 is d. As before, we denote by id the identity map on [k].
Additionally, (i 7→ k + 1) denotes the map from [k] to [d] sending i to k + 1 and fixing
all other elements. This map is well-defined since all relations are of arity ≤ d − 1. By
eq. (4), for all ā = (a1 , . . . , ad ) ∈ h(z̄1 ) ∪ h(z̄2 ), we have ai = ak+1 . Hence:
                                  ′   (1)&(2)                [d]
                    y¯1 ∈ RS ⇐⇒ h(z¯1 ) ∈ RidB /Aut(B)
                             def.                      ai =ak+1
                                                 B[d]                       B[d]
                             ⇐⇒ ∃ā ∈ h(z¯1 ) ∩ Rid     ⇐⇒ ∃ā ∈ h(z¯1 ) ∩ R(i7 →k+1)
                                                                                def.                B[d] /Aut(B)
                                                                           ⇐⇒ h(z¯1 ) ∈ R(i7→k+1)
                                                                                def.                     [d] /
                                                                           ⇐⇒ h(z¯2 ) ∈ RidB                     Aut(B)
                                                                           (1)&(2)             S′
                                                                           ⇐⇒ y¯2 ∈ R .
This is what we had to show.                                                                                                              ⋄
         FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                                             25

  Finally, we combine the two constructions from before by setting S̃ := S′ /∼.

Claim 4.6. S̃ embeds into B.
Proof (claim). Suppose, on the contrary, that this is not the case. Then there exists some
bound F of B that embeds into S̃. Without loss of generality, F = {[x1 ]∼ , . . . , [xn ]∼ } ⊆ S̃.
Since all bounds have size ≤ d, we have n ≤ d. As before, we shall use the abbreviations
x̄ := (x1 , . . . , xd ) and ā := (a1 , . . . , ad ). Now, for every k-ary relation RS̃ and every
ι : [k] → [n], we have
                                                                                                                  ′
    ([xι(1) ]∼ , . . . , [xι(k) ]∼ ) ∈ RS̃ ⇔ ∃x′1 ∈ [xι(1) ]∼ , . . . , x′k ∈ [xι(k) ]∼ : (x′1 , . . . , x′k ) ∈ RS
                                                                            ′
                                           ⇔ (xι(1) , . . . , xι(k) ) ∈ RS
                                                                                       [d]
                                           ⇔ ∀xn+1 , . . . , xd ∈ S : h(x̄) ∈ RιB /Aut(B)
                                                                                                 [d]
                                             ⇔ ∀xn+1 , . . . , xd ∈ S ∀ā ∈ h(x̄) : ā ∈ RιB
                                             ⇔ ∀xn+1 , . . . , xd ∈ S ∀ā ∈ h(x̄) : (aι(1) , . . . , aι(k) ) ∈ RB .
By fixing some xn+1 , . . . , xd ∈ S and setting e([xi ]∼ ) := ai for i ≤ n and some ā ∈ h(x̄),
we have that e is an embedding of F into B, a contradiction.                                  ⋄

  Let e′ be an embedding from S̃ to B, which exists by Claim 4.6. It follows from
Claim 4.5 that e′ induces a homomorphism g : S′ → B via g(x) := e′ ([x]∼ ).
Claim 4.7. h(x̄) = g(x̄)/Aut(B) for every x̄ ∈ S d .
Proof (claim). Let i, j ∈ [d] be arbitrary. If every ȳ ∈ h(x̄) satisfies yi = yj , then xi ∼ xj
and thus g(xi ) = g(xj ). On the other hand, if g(xi ) = g(xj ), then xi ∼ xj since e′ is an
embedding. Thus, every ȳ ∈ h(x̄) satisfies yi = yj . Moreover, for all x1 , . . . , xd ∈ S, every
                  ′
k-ary relation RS , and every ι : [k] → [d], we have
                               [d] /                                           ′
                 h(x̄) ∈ RιB           Aut(B) ⇔ (x
                                                  ι(1) , . . . , xι(k) ) ∈ R
                                                                             S

                                               ⇔ ([xι(1) ]∼ , . . . , [xι(k) ]∼ ) ∈ RS̃
                                               ⇔ (g(xι(1) ), . . . , g(xι(k) )) ∈ RB
                                                                                      [d]
                                               ⇔ (g(x1 ), . . . , g(xd ))/Aut(B) ∈ RιB /Aut(B) .
Now the statement of the claim follows from the homogeneity of B.                                                     ⋄
Claim 4.8. g is a homomorphism from S to A.
Proof (claim). Let R ∈ τ and (x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ RS be arbitrary. Since h is a homomorphism,
                                  [d]
we have h(x1 , . . . , xd ) ∈ RidA /Aut(B) for all xk+1 , . . . , xd ∈ S. Since every automorphism of
B is also an automorphism of A, by Claim 4.7, we have that (g(x1 ), . . . , g(xk )) ∈ RA . ⋄

  We continue with item 2. It is not hard to show that (Sn )[d] ≃ (S[d] )n (cf. [69,
Cor. 22]) for all d, n ∈ N. Hence, every homomorphism h : (S[d] )n → A[d] /Aut(B) is also
a homomorphism from (Sn )[d] to A[d] /Aut(B). Suppose that h is a function symbol
appearing in Σ that is assigned an element of Pol(S[d] , A[d] /Aut(B)). By item 1, there is
a homomorphism g : Sn → A such that
                                   s¯1      g(s¯1 )
                                                 

                               h  ...  =  ...  /Aut(B)
                                   s¯d      g(s¯d )
26                     M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

for all s¯1 , . . . , s¯d ∈ S n . For each function symbol in Σ, we fix such a homomorphism.
Suppose now that h1 , h2 ∈ Pol(S[d] , A[d] /Aut(B)) witness the satisfaction of the identity
                                       h1 (xi1 , . . . , xin ) ≈ h2 (xin+1 , . . . , xin+k ),
where all iℓ ≤ m for some m ∈ N, and let g1 : Sn → A and g2 : Sk → A be the associated
homomorphisms.
   Let s̄1 , . . . , s̄m be arbitrary tuples over S of arity k large enough so that, for every
s̄ ∈ S m , there exists ℓ ∈ [k] such that s̄ equals the ℓ-th row in (s̄1 , . . . , s̄m ) (viewed as a
k × m-matrix). Define the m-ary operations g˜1 and g˜2 by
      g˜1 (x1 , . . . , xm ) := g1 (xi1 , . . . , xin )      and          g˜2 (x1 , . . . , xm ) := g2 (xin+1 , . . . , xin+k ).
Then g˜1 (s̄1 , . . . , s̄m ) and g˜2 (s̄1 , . . . , s̄m ) satisfy the same equalities and relations w.r.t. B
on all d-subtuples. Since all relations of B have arity ≤ d and B is homogeneous,
g˜1 (s̄1 , . . . , s̄m ) and g˜2 (s̄1 , . . . , s̄m ) lie in the same orbit. Thus, there are α1 , α2 ∈ Aut(B)
such that
                                     α1 ◦ g˜1 (s̄1 , . . . , s̄m ) = α2 ◦ g˜2 (s̄1 , . . . , s̄m ).
This is equivalent to
                                  α1 ◦ g1 (si1 , . . . , sin ) = α2 ◦ g2 (sin+1 , . . . , sin+k )
for all s1 , . . . , sm ∈ S. Thus, Σ is satisfied in Pol(S, A) modulo Aut(B).                                                      □
     Now we can finally prove Proposition 4.2.
Proof of Proposition 4.2. Clearly, for every finite substructure S of A, we have S[d] →
A[d] → A[d] /Aut(B). Let S ⊆ A be arbitrary with 3 ≤ |S| < ∞. Suppose that there
is a finite cheese D of (S[d] , A[d] /Aut(B)) that does not pp-construct K3 . Then, by
Theorem 2.2, there exists a cyclic operation f in Pol(D) of some arity n. Take any
homomorphisms g : S[d] → D and h : D → A[d] /Aut(B). Then we get a cyclic n-ary
f ′ ∈ Pol(S[d] , A[d] /Aut(B)) by setting
                                     f ′ (x1 , . . . , xn ) := h ◦ f (g(x1 ), . . . , g(xn )).
By Lemma 4.4(2) there is some n-ary g ∈ Pol(S, A) that is pseudo-cyclic modulo Aut(B).
By Lemma 4.3, this operation is cyclic. Take pairwise distinct elements s1 , s2 , s3 ∈ S. We
now show that the cyclicity of g contradicts the fact that it preserves ̸=. To this end, we
consider the following three cases:
     n ≡ 0 mod 3: g(s1 , s2 , s3 , . . . , s1 , s2 , s3 ) = g(s2 , s3 , s1 , . . . , s2 , s3 , s1 )
     n ≡ 1 mod 3: g(s1 , s2 , s3 , . . . , s1 , s2 , s3 , s1 ) = g(s3 , s1 , s2 , . . . , s3 , s1 , s1 , s2 )
     n ≡ 2 mod 3: g(s1 , s2 , s3 , . . . , s1 , s2 , s3 , s1 , s2 ) = g(s2 , s3 , s1 , . . . , s2 , s3 , s1 , s2 , s1 )
  In all three cases, g does not preserve ̸=. Hence, the assumption that such D exists
was wrong, and consequently PCSP(S[d] , A[d] /Aut(B)) is not finitely tractable.    □
   The prerequisites of Proposition 4.2 are fairly general but clearly not sufficient to cover
the entire scope of Conjecture 1.4 (cf. Section 6.3). Given an arbitrary reduct A of a
finitely bounded homogeneous structure B, one does not generally have an inequality
relation on A or a linear order on B; this is where Theorem 1.5 becomes useful. On
the one hand, removing algebraicity from A using Theorem 1.5 allows us to expand our
structure by the binary inequality relation without fundamentally changing the complexity
of its CSP. On the other hand, removing algebraicity from B allows us to take the generic
superposition of (Q; <) and B (see Proposition 4.9), which can be seen as expanding B
by a linear order without losing the property of being finitely bounded homogeneous.
        FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                      27

Proposition 4.9 (Section 2.3.6 in [17]). Let A1 , A2 be countable homogeneous structures
without algebraicity over disjoint finite relational signatures τ1 , τ2 . Then there exists an
up to isomorphism unique countable homogeneous (τ1 ∪ τ2 )-structure A1 ⊛ A2 , called the
generic superposition of A1 , A2 , such that any finite (τ1 ∪ τ2 )-structure embeds into A1 ⊛ A2
if and only if its τi -reduct embeds into Ai for both i ∈ {1, 2}. Moreover, if A1 , A2 are both
finitely bounded, then so is A1 ⊛ A2 .
  Finally, we prove Theorem 1.9. On the way, we also explain which part of the proof
needs to be adjusted in order to obtain a proof of Theorem 1.10.
Proof of Theorem 1.9. Let A be a non-contractible reduct of a finitely bounded homoge-
neous structure B.                                                                    
  First, we move to the structures without algebraicity (Q ≀ A, ̸=) and (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= from
Theorem 1.5; recall that (Q ≀ A, ̸=) pp-constructs K3 if and only if A does and that CSP(A)
and CSP(Q ≀ A,  ̸=) are Datalog-interreducible. Next, we take the generic superposition of
 (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= with (Q; <), which exists by Proposition 4.9. We set
                                                   
                              Bb := (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= ⊛ (Q; <)

and define A b as the reduct of B b to the signature of (Q ≀ A, ̸=). For Theorem 1.10, we
would instead keep B      b := B.
   By Proposition 4.9, we have that A   b and (Q ≀ A, ̸=) are isomorphic and B  b is finitely
bounded homogeneous. But now A       b and Bb satisfy the prerequisites of Proposition 4.2.
Let J be the composition of the Datalog reduction I from A to (Q ≀ A, ̸=) ∼        =Ab from
                                                [d]                 ′
                                                        b and let J be the composition of
Theorem 1.5 and the pp-interpretation of A    b from A
the pp-interpretation and Datalog reduction running in the opposite direction. The fact
that J and J ′ are Datalog-reductions from CSP(A) to CSP(A′ ) and vice versa follows
directly from Theorem 1.5 and Proposition 4.1(2).
   We select a finite substructure S of A with |S| ≥ 3 large enough so that every finite
structure which has a homomorphism to a substructure of A of size ≤ n also has a
homomorphism to S (this can be done since A has finite signature). Now let S        b be the
substructure of A  b induced by {0} × S. We claim that, for d chosen as in Proposition 4.2,
the structures
      • A′ := Ab [d] ,
      • B′ := Bb [d] ,
      • S1 := S b [d] , and
      • S2 := Ab [d] /Aut(B) b
witness items 1–6 of the theorem.
   Item 1 follows immediately from the definition of full powers.
   For item 2, note that if X maps homomorphically to a substructure of A of size ≤ n,
then X → S. Since the Datalog reduction I from Theorem 1.5 is just the expansion of a
structure by empty relations ̸= and E, we have I(X) → S.    b Since every homomorphism
between two structures clearly induces a homomorphism between their corresponding
full powers, we have J (X) = I(X)[d] → S   b [d] = S1 . On the other hand, if X ↛ A, then
I(X) ↛ A  b by Theorem 1.5. By Lemma 4.4(1), if I(X)[d] → S2 , then also I(X) → A,         b
                         [d]
hence J (X) = I(X) ↛ S2 .
   Item 3 follows Proposition 4.2. We remark that, if we have kept B  b := B for the purpose
                                                              ′
of proving Theorem 1.10, then we instead get that A and A pp-interpret each other due
to Proposition 4.1(2).
   Item 4 follows from Theorem 1.5(8) and Proposition 4.1(2).
28                M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

     Item 5 follows from Theorem 1.5(7) and Proposition 4.1(5).
     Item 6 follows from Theorem 1.5(3), Proposition 4.1(7), and [16, Thm. 1.5].                   □

4.3. Proof of Theorem 1.11. The main object of our focus is (Q; X), where
                   X = {(x, y, z) ∈ Q3 | x = y < z ∨ y = z < x ∨ z = x < y}.
In [37, Sect. 4.2], it was shown that CSP(Q; X) is inexpressible in FPC. The idea is that
CSP(Q; X) can be reformulated as a decision problem for systems of mod-2 equations:
       INSTANCE: A finite homogeneous system S of mod-2 equations of length 3.
       QUESTION: Does each non-empty subset of S have a solution other than 0̄?
   The above reformulation was obtained in [37, Prop. 4.12] as a direct consequence of the
correctness of the polynomial-time algorithm for CSP(Q; X) from [37] (see Figure 1). The
algorithm runs a loop where, in each step, it eliminates the potentially minimal elements
of the remaining variables (those that are assigned 1 after interpreting the relational
constraints as mod-2 equations) and inductively builds a satisfying assignment.

     INPUT: An instance A of CSP(Q; X)
     OUTPUT: true or false
     if A = ∅ then
        return true
     end if
     for x ∈ A do
        // interpret each (xi , xj , xk ) ∈ X A as xi + xj + xk = 0
        if A ∪ {x = 1} mod 2 has a solution s then
           return divide-and-conquer(A[s−1 (0)])
        end if
     end for
     return false

                  Figure 1. A divide-and-conquer algorithm for CSP(Q; X)

  A similar reformulation can be obtained for other relations pp-definable in (Q; X), e.g.,
equations x1 + · · · + xi = 0 in the case of the following higher-ary generalizations:
            Xi = {(x1 , . . . , xi ) ∈ Qi | |{j ∈ [i] | xj = min(x1 , . . . , xi )}| = 0 mod 2}.
  It is well-known that the class of all satisfiable systems of mod-2 equations cannot
be defined in FPC [2]. However, the fact that CSP(Q; X) is not solvable in FPC does
not immediately follow from the aforementioned result about mod-2 equations. Instead,
one needs to specifically prove the inexpressibility in FPC for overdetermined systems of
equations, i.e., those whose homogeneous companion only has the trivial solution 0̄. Such
systems are then only one step away from fixed-image fooling instances of CSP(Q; X) for
FPC. The following auxiliary result was obtained in [37].
Lemma 4.10 (Proof of Theorem 4.23 in [37]). For every k ∈ N, there exist structures
Ak , Bk in the signature consisting of symbols Ri with arities i for i ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5} with
Ak ≡k Bk and such that the following holds if Ri (x1 , . . . , xi ) is interpreted as the equation
x1 + · · · + xi = 0 mod 2:
    (1) Ak has a solution mapping in each equation at least one variable to 1;
    (2) Bk only has the trivial solution 0̄.
        FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                      29

   Since CSP(Q; X2 , X3 , X4 , X5 ) admits fixed-image fooling instances for FPC and is
pp-definable from (Q; X) [37], it follows from Theorem 1.10 that (Q; X) pp-constructs
a finite-domain PCSP inexpressible in FPC. This was essentially already shown in [69,
Prop. 38], except that the author did not comment on how to push the fixed-image fooling
instances from CSP(Q; X2 , X3 , X4 , X5 ) to CSP(Q; X) or the fact that the right-hand side
of the (half infinite) PCSP can be chosen finite if one additionally applies the full-power
construction. We now give a full proof of Theorem 1.11.

Proof of Theorem 1.11. Let B be a first-order reduct of (Q; <). By [37, Thm. 1.3], we
have two cases. If B is expressible in FPC, then it cannot pp-construct any finite-domain
PCSP inexpressible in FPC, because pp-constructions between (P)CSP-templates give
Datalog-reductions between the (P)CSPs. Otherwise, B pp-constructs K3 or (Q; X). In
the former case, the statement follows immediately because CSP(K3 ) is inexpressible
in FPC. In the latter case, recall that (Q; X) pp-defines (Q; X2 , X3 , X4 , X5 ). Then the
statement follows from the fact that CSP(Q; X2 , X3 , X4 , X5 ) admits fixed-image fooling
instances together with Theorem 1.10 for n chosen large enough.                          □


                           5. Case study: phylogeny CSPs
  In the present section, we introduce phylogeny CSPs and give a proof of Theorem 1.12.

5.1. Phylogeny CSPs. Phylogeny problems are motivated by evolutionary biology.
Every species uniquely stems from a prior species, and all species have a common ancestor.
A natural question in the area is how to reconstruct the full phylogenetic tree using only
observations about recent species, i.e., the leaves of the tree. For the leaves x, y, z of a
rooted tree, we write x|yz if the youngest common ancestor of y and z lies strictly below
the youngest common ancestor of x, y and z. The set of all leaves of a rooted tree together
with this ternary relation is called the leaf structure of the tree.
   The basic phylogeny (decision) problem asks whether, for a given set of constraints
of the form xi |xj xk over variables V , there exists a mapping s from V to the leaves of
some rooted tree such that s(xi )|s(xj )s(xk ) holds for every constraint xi |xj xk . It is known
that this problem can be solved in quadratic time using a simple divide-and-conquer
algorithm [25]. Matters get more difficult, however, when we allow Boolean combinations
as constraints. For example, consider the ternary relation N defined by the formula
(x|yz ∨ z|xy). The problem whether there exists a rooted tree whose leaves satisfy a given
set of constraints of the form N (xi , xj , xk ) is NP-hard [25]. The class of all phylogeny
problems is obtained by considering all sets of relations which are specified by Boolean
combinations of formulas of the form (x|yz) or (x = y).
   The key to a successful complexity classification for phylogeny problems was the
observation that they can be viewed as CSPs of ω-categorical structures; in fact, they fall
within the scope of Conjecture 1.4. Given a finite rooted tree T (i.e. a directed graph
without loops that has at most one vertex without incoming edges (the root) and whose
undirected graph reduct is acyclic), we denote by L(T) the set of all its leaves (vertices
without outgoing edges); for our purposes, we may assume that all trees have branching
factor two. On L(T), we then consider the ternary relation x|yz from above and call
(L(T); | ) the leaf structure of T. It is well-known that T is uniquely determined by its
leaf structure (L(T); | ) up to isomorphism [79, Thm. 3]. The class of the leaf structures
of all finite rooted trees forms a Fraı̈ssé class [24, Prop. 7], and hence there exists an up
to isomorphism unique homogeneous structure L whose age consists of all possible leaf
30                 M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

structures.2 One can moreover show that L is finitely bounded [17, Sect. 5.1.2]:
              ∀x, y, z, u ¬(x|yz ∧ y|xz) ∧ (x|yz ⇒ x|zy) ∧ (x|yz ⇒ x|uz ∨ u|yz)
                                                                                 
                            ∧ (x ̸= y ⇒ x|yy) ∧ (x|yz ∨ xy|z ∨ xz|y ∨ x = y = z)
We denote the domain of L by L, and write L = (L; | ).
   The basic phylogeny problem can equivalently be phrased as CSP(L; | ), and arbitrary
phylogeny problems correspond to CSPs of first-order reducts of (L; | ). It is useful to view
L as the set of all {0, 1}-sequences with only finitely many non-zero entries and where
xy|z holds if and only if there exists n ∈ N such that the first index where x and y differ
is n and the first index where x or y differ from z is less than n. In the following, we are
interested in the specific case of the four-ary relation Y defined by the formula
                                  Y := (xy|wz ∨ xw|yz ∨ xz|yw).                                     (5)
Here, the notation L1 |L2 for sets of leaves L1 , L2 naturally generalizes the original ternary
relation |. Intuitively, it states that the youngest common ancestors of L1 and L2 are
incomparable. Formally, L1 |L2 if and only if x|yz for all x ∈ Li and y, z ∈ L3−i (i ∈ {1, 2}).
Note that, for every finite F ⊆ L with |F | ≥ 2, there exist unique non-empty subsets
F0 , F1 ⊆ F with F = F0 ∪ F1 and F0 |F1 ; these subsets represent the leaves of the left and
the right branches of the rooted binary tree encoded by L[F ]. We call {F0 , F1 } the split-
partition of F . Since (L; |) and (L; Y ) are first-order interdefinable using quantifier-free
formulas and (L; |) is homogeneous, it follows that (L; Y ) is homogeneous as well.
   A split of a tuple (t1 , . . . , tn ) over L is any {0, 1}-tuple (s1 , . . . , sn ) with the property
that, for all i, j, k ∈ [n], we have ti |tj tk whenever si ̸= sj = sk [25] (note that besides
the constant tuples there is at most one split up to swapping 0’s and 1’s). Note that
the relation Y consists of all 4-tuples over L with a non-constant even split in L, i.e.,
the split contains a non-zero even number of 0s and 1s. The formula in eq. (5) and
more generally all formulas defining sets of tuples with only even splits fall within the
affine Horn fragment of phylogeny languages as defined in [25]. By the results obtained
therein, the CSPs of all affine Horn phylogeny languages, and in particular CSP(L; Y ),
are solvable in polynomial time, using an algorithm based on Gaussian elimination and
local consistency checking.
   What we show here is that there exists a relation Y ′ pp-definable in (L; Y ) such that
CSP(L; Y, Y ′ ) is inexpressible in FPC and that this is witnessed by fixed-image fooling
instances. We then use this fact to show the existence of a finite-domain PCSP template
(B1 , B2 ) pp-constructible from (L; Y ) such that PCSP(B1 , B2 ) is inexpressible in FPC.
Finally, we prove that there is no finite-domain CSP template with these properties.

5.2. A tractable phylogeny CSP not in FPC. We show that CSP(L; Y ) is inexpress-
ible in FPC. Our proof of FPC-inexpressibility builds on the proof of FPC-inexpressibility
for CSP(Q; X) from [37, Sect. 4.2]. A detailed inspection of the polynomial-time algorithm
for CSP(L; Y ) from [25, Figure 3] (rephrased in Figure 2 below) reveals that CSP(L; Y )
admits a similar reformulation as CSP(Q; X):
       INSTANCE: A finite homogeneous system S of mod-2 equations of length 4.
       QUESTION: Does each non-empty subset of S have a non-constant solution?
   Instead of eliminating minimal elements in each step as in the algorithm in Figure 1,
we divide the instance into the “left half” and “right half” of a corresponding solution
tree. We can easily extend Lemma 4.10 to its analogue tailored to this problem.
     2In literature on model theory, this structure is commonly known as the homogeneous C-relation.
        FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                           31


  INPUT: An instance A of CSP(L; Y )
  OUTPUT: true or false
  if A = ∅ then
     return true
  end if
  for x0 , x1 ∈ A do
     // interpret each (xi , xj , xk , xℓ ) ∈ Y A as xi + xj + xk + xℓ = 0
     if A ∪ {x0 = 0, x1 = 1} mod 2 has a solution s then
        return divide-and-conquer(A[s−1 (0)]) ∧ divide-and-conquer(A[s−1 (1)])
     end if
  end for
  return false

                  Figure 2. A divide-and-conquer algorithm for CSP(L; Y )

Lemma 5.1. For every k ∈ N, there exist structures Ak , Bk in the signature consisting of
symbols Ri with arities i for i ∈ {4, 6} with Ak ≡k Bk and such that the following holds if
Ri (x1 , . . . , xi ) is interpreted as the equation x1 + · · · + xi = 0 mod 2:
    (1) Ak has a solution taking both values in each equation;
    (2) Bk only has a constant solution.
Proof. Let A′k , B′k be the structures from Lemma 4.10 (formerly Ak , Bk ). We obtain new
structures Ak , Bk by extending their domain by a fresh element e and specifying the
relations as follows:
                                                            A′      B′
      • (x1 , x2 , e, e) ∈ R4Ak (R4Bk ) if (x1 , x2 ) ∈ R2 k (R2 k );
                                                                   A′       B′
      • (x1 , x2 , x3 , e) ∈ R4Ak (R4Bk ) if (x1 , x2 , x3 ) ∈ R3 k (R3 k );
                                                                                A′    B′
      • (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , e, e) ∈ R6Ak (R6Bk ) if (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ) ∈ R4 k (R4 k );
                                                                                    A′    B′
      • (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 , e) ∈ R6Ak (R6Bk ) if (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 ) ∈ R5 k (R5 k ).
  It is easy to see that Ak ≡k Bk holds given that A′k ≡k B′k ; the Duplicator may simply
extend the original bijections by e 7→ e in order to obtain a winning strategy.
  For (1), let s be an assignment witnessing Lemma 4.10(1). Then extending s by e 7→ 0
witnesses the condition in item 1.
  For (2), suppose that there is a non-constant solution s to Bk . Since the equations in
Bk are of even length, also 1̄ − s is a solution to Bk ; hence, without loss of generality,
we may assume that s(e) = 0. But then the restriction of s to Bk′ provides a non-trivial
solution to Bk , contradicting Lemma 4.10(2). Hence, item (2) holds as well.            □
  Consider the 6-ary relation Y ′ defined in (L; Y ) by the pp-formula
                                                                       
                         ∃h Y (x1 , x2 , x3 , h) ∧ Y (h, x4 , x5 , x6 ) .
Theorem 5.2. CSP(L; Y, Y ′ ) is not definable in FPC. Moreover, this is witnessed by
fixed-image fooling instances.
Proof. We claim that Y and Y ′ consist of all tuples over L of arity 4 and 6, respectively,
which have a non-constant even split in L. In the case of Y , this follows directly from the
definition. For Y ′ , we show that (s1 , . . . , s6 ) ∈ Y ′ if and only if there exists a permutation
π such that sπ(1) sπ(2) |sπ(3) sπ(4) sπ(5) sπ(6) .
  “⇒” We prove this direction by contradiction. First, suppose that s1 |s2 · · · s6 holds. Then
there is some h ∈ L such that Y (s1 , s2 , s3 , h) and Y (h, s4 , s5 , s6 ) hold in L. Now s1 h|s2 s3
must hold, and hence also s1 h|s2 s3 s4 s5 s6 . But then we get h|s4 s5 s6 , a contradiction to
32                 M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

the definition of Y . Secondly, suppose that s1 s2 s3 |s4 s5 s6 holds; without loss of generality,
we have s1 s2 |s3 h and hs4 |s5 s6 . But this implies s1 s2 s3 h|s4 s5 s6 as well as s1 s2 s3 |hs4 s5 s6 ,
which contradict each other. Finally, assume that s1 s2 s4 |s3 s5 s6 . It follows that s1 s2 |s3 h;
thus, s4 |hs5 s6 , which is a contradiction as well. The above case distinction is exhaustive
since Y is symmetric.
  “⇐” By the symmetry of Y , there are only two cases to consider. First, suppose that
s1 s2 |s3 s4 s5 s6 . Without loss of generality, we have s4 |s5 s6 . Due to the homogeneity of
(L; | ), there exists some h ∈ L such that hs4 |s5 s6 . Clearly, this implies s1 s2 |s3 h. Secondly,
consider the case that s1 s4 |s2 s3 s5 s6 . The homogeneity of (L; | ) provides some h ∈ L such
that s1 s4 h|s2 s3 s5 s6 . Hence, s1 h|s2 s3 and s4 h|s5 s6 .
   This concludes the proof of our claim; given this characterization of Y and Y ′ via
non-constant even splits, we can now prove the theorem.
   For every k ∈ N, let Ak , Bk be the structures from Lemma 5.1. Then Ak ≡k Bk . By
Lemma 5.1(2), Bk does not have any non-constant solution when viewed as a system
of mod 2 equations. Since the algorithm in Figure 2 is correct for CSP(L; Y, Y ′ ) (after
transforming a CSP(L; Y, Y ′ )-instance into a CSP(L; Y )-instance according to the pp-
definition of Y ′ ), we have that Bk ↛ (L; Y, Y ′ ). On the other hand, by Lemma 5.1(1),
there exists a solution s such that both Ak [s−1 (0)]) and Ak [s−1 (1)] contain no equations.
Again, it follows immediately from the correctness of the algorithm in Figure 2 that
Ak → (L; Y, Y ′ ). On the other hand, a homomorphism h : A′k → (L; Y, Y ′ ) can also be
obtained explicitly by selecting arbitrary a, b ∈ L with a ̸= b and setting h(x) := a if
s(x) = 0 and b otherwise. Note that the cardinality of the image of h is bounded by two.
The statement of the theorem for CSP(L; Y, Y ′ ) now follows from Theorem 2.3.                        □

5.3. Transfer of logical inexpressibility results. Theorem 5.2 combined with Theo-
rem 1.10 shows that, similarly to (Q; X), the phylogeny template (L; Y ) pp-constructs
a finite-domain PCSP that is not expressible in FPC. Note that, since pp-constructions
provide Datalog-reductions between (P)CSPs, we can actually interpret this as the reason
why (Q; X) and (L; Y ) are not expressible in FPC. The inexpressibility of finite-domain
CSPs in FPC is characterized by the ability to pp-construct a non-trivial finite Abelian
group [37, Thm. 1.1]; here, a finite Abelian group (G; +, 0) is typically represented by a
relational structure with domain G and relations
                               {(x1 , . . . , xi ) ∈ Gi | x1 + · · · + xi = a}
for all i ∈ [3] and a ∈ G.
   The above correspondence does not extend to the CSPs in the scope of Conjecture 1.4 [37,
Thm. 1.5]. In fact, it already fails within the first-order reducts of (Q; <), witnessed by the
structure (Q; X). By [37, Prop. 7.4], the polymorphism clone of (Q; X) satisfies a certain
height-1 condition called (3 + 3)-terms, originally introduced by Olšák [72]. Operations
f, g, and h of arities 6, 3, and 3, respectively, are called (3 + 3)-terms 3 if they satisfy
                                     f (y, x, x, x, x, x) ≈ g(y, x, x),
                                     f (x, y, x, x, x, x) ≈ g(x, y, x),
                                     f (x, x, y, x, x, x) ≈ g(x, x, y),
                                     f (x, x, x, y, x, x) ≈ h(y, x, x),
                                     f (x, x, x, x, y, x) ≈ h(x, y, x),
                                     f (x, x, x, x, x, y) ≈ h(x, x, y).

     3In our work, we do not require (3 + 3)-terms to be idempotent, which was the case in [72].
         FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                              33

It is easy to show that the polymorphism clone of a non-trivial finite Abelian group cannot
have (3 + 3)-terms; see the paragraph below Theorem 1.7 in [72]. Since Pol(Q; X) contains
(3 + 3)-terms and pp-constructions preserve satisfiability of height-1 identities, we get that
(Q; X) cannot pp-construct any non-trivial finite Abelian group [37, Cor. 7.5].
   We will show that the above described phenomenon is not isolated, and that (L; Y ) is
another template within the scope of Conjecture 1.4 whose CSP is not definable in FPC
and yet it does not pp-construct any non-trivial finite Abelian group.
Theorem 5.3. The polymorphism clone of (L; Y ) contains (3 + 3)-terms.
                                                          S
Proof. Let (Si )i∈N be a chain of finite subsets of L with i∈N Si = L, i.e., so that Si ⊆ Si+1
for every i ∈ N.
Claim 5.4. For every i ∈ N, there exist polymorphisms fi , gi , hi from (Si ; Y ∩ Si4 ) to (L; Y )
witnessing the (3 + 3)-terms condition.
  Fix i ∈ N. We prove Claim 5.4 by induction on |Si |. We will in fact use a stronger
induction hypothesis than the original statement, which is captured by Claim 5.5.
Claim 5.5. Let F, F0 , F1 be finite substructures of L such that {F0 , F1 } is the split-partition
of F . Suppose that, for both i ∈ {0, 1}, Pol((Fj ; Y ∩ Fj4 ), (L; Y )) contains injective (3 + 3)-
terms fi , gi , hi with gi (Fi3 ) ⊆ fi (Fi6 ) and hi (Fi3 ) ⊆ fi (Fi6 ). Then Pol((F ; Y ∩ F 4 ), (L; Y ))
contains injective (3 + 3)-terms f, g, h with g(F 3 ) ⊆ f (F 6 ) and h(F 3 ) ⊆ f (F 6 ). Moreover,
there exist α0 , α1 ∈ Aut(L; Y ) such that f |Fi6 = αi ◦ fi , g|Fi3 = αi ◦ gi , and h|Fi3 = αi ◦ hi .
Proof (claim). We may assume that f0 (F06 )|f1 (F16 ). Indeed, otherwise, by the homogeneity
of Aut(L; Y ), there exists an automorphism α ∈ Aut(L; Y ) such that f0 (F06 )|α ◦ f1 (F16 ).
In this case, f1′ := α ◦ f1 , g1′ := α ◦ g1 and h′1 := α ◦ h1 also satisfy the prerequisites of this
lemma, and we can continue with these operations instead.
   We first define the 6-ary operation f , show that it is a polymorphism, and then use
it to define the ternary operations g and h. Before we define f , we need one auxiliary
definition. We define the code of a tuple x̄ = (x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ (F0 ∪ F1 )k with respect to F0
and F1 as the unique {0, 1}-tuple Jx̄K = (Jx1 K, . . . , Jxk K) with the property that xi ∈ FJxi K
for every i ∈ [k]. Note that if F0 |F1 , then codes of tuples are essentially splits where
the values 0 and 1 explicitly denote the left and the right branch (or vice versa). Now,
consider a rooted balanced binary tree of height 6; we will refer to its 26 many leaves
as bubbles, and each bubble will be represented by a tuple b̄ = (b1 , . . . , b6 ) ∈ {0, 1}6 . We
define f by extending each bubble b̄ by a binary tree and assigning the leaves in this tree
to tuples x̄ ∈ F 6 in such a way that Jx̄K = b̄. In other words, we will map tuples with the
same code w.r.t. F0 and F1 to the same bubble. We make a particular choice of branching
when constructing T, specified by Table 1.

                                    level left half right half
                                    1st      b1 = b2      b1 ̸= b2
                                    2nd      b2 = b3      b2 ̸= b3
                                    3rd      b4 = b5      b4 ̸= b5
                                    4th      b5 = b6      b5 ̸= b6
                                    5th      b3 = b4      b3 ̸= b4
                                    6th      b1 = 0       b1 = 1


        Table 1. An assignment of leaves to bubbles. Here, the 0- and the 1-entries
        do not necessarily specify branching to the left and the right (or vice versa).
34                   M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

     We illustrate this choice in Figure 3.

                                          root


               b1 = b 2                                       b1 ̸= b2


                ..      ..       b2 = b 3                                             b2 ̸= b3
                 .       .

                                  ..      ..                   b4 = b5                                    b4 ̸= b5
                                   .       .

                             b5 = b 6                                                      b5 ̸= b6       ..     ..
                                                                                                           .      .

          b3 = b4                              b3 ̸= b4                       b3 = b 4                b3 ̸= b4



     010000     101111                 010111          101000         010001          101110     010110        101001




         Figure 3. An illustration of the definition-tree of f . The figure covers the
         subtree of all codes (b1 , . . . , b6 ) such that b1 ̸= b2 , b2 ̸= b3 , and b4 = b5 .


Let us now define the subtrees extending the bubbles. If b̄ = (i, . . . , i) for some i ∈ {0, 1},
then we extend b̄ by a tree such that its leaf structure is isomorphic to fi (Fi6 ). For all
other bubbles, we want to have the image under f lexicographically dominated : That
means for all x̄ = (x1 , . . . , xℓ ), ȳ = (y1 , . . . , yℓ ), z̄ = (z1 , . . . , zℓ ) ∈ F ℓ such that Jx̄K =
JȳK = Jz̄K ∈  / {(0, . . . , 0), (1, . . . , 1)} the following holds: if there exists k ∈ [ℓ] such that
xi = yi = zi for every i < k while xk |yk zk , then f (x̄)|f (ȳ)f (z̄). To this end, we extend the
bubble b̄ = (b1 , . . . , b6 ) by a tree whose leaf structure is isomorphic to Fb1 , then each of its
leaves by a tree whose leaf structure is isomorphic to Fb2 , etc. This way, we get a tree
that has |Fb1 | · · · · · |Fb6 | many leaves and, for the definition of f , we assign to each tuple
x̄ = (x1 , . . . , x6 ) with Jx̄K = b̄ the leaf that is reached by going to x1 in the first level, then
to x2 in the subtree extending x1 , etc. It can be easily checked that an operation defined
in this way is lexicographically dominated.
   Now consider the leaf structure (L(T); |) of this tree; it can be embedded into L = (L; |).
Since Y is defined in (L; |) using a quantifier-free formula, namely the formula in eq. (5),
there exists an embedding from S := (L(T); Y ∩ L(T)4 ) into (L; Y ). This embedding
defines a function f : F 6 → L. Clearly, for both i ∈ {0, 1}, we have f |Fi6 = αi ◦ fi for some
αi ∈ Aut(L; Y ). Since f0 and f1 are injective, so is f .
Claim: f is a polymorphism.
  Let x̄, ȳ, z̄, w̄ ∈ F 6 be arbitrary such that F |= Y (xi , yi , zi , wi ) for every i ∈ [6]. We have
to show that
                                               (f (x̄), f (ȳ), f (z̄), f (w̄)) ∈ Y L .                               (6)
         FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                                           35

   First, suppose that Jx̄K = JȳK = Jz̄K = Jw̄K. If the codes are constant, then (6) follows
from f0 or f1 being a polymorphism. Otherwise, we get (6) because the split relation |
in the image is determined by the projection (xk , yk , zk , wk ) to the first argument k ∈ [6]
where the tuples x̄, ȳ, z̄, w̄ differ.
   Second, suppose that Jx̄K, JȳK, Jz̄K, Jw̄K are not all equal. Then we consider the first
branching rule that divides the tuples into the left and right half of the corresponding
subtree (Table 1). E.g, it could be the branching step dividing between b4 = b5 and b4 =     ̸ b5
for Jx̄K and JȳK, in which case Jx4 K = Jx5 K and Jy4 K ≠ Jy5 K. Without loss of generality, we
assume that Jx4 K = 0 and Jy4 K = 0 (0 and 1 are treated symmetrically). Since F0 |F1 and
the relation Y is charaterized by non-constant even splits, we have that either Jz4 K = Jz5 K
and Jw4 K = ̸ Jw5 K or Jz4 K = ̸ Jz5 K and Jw4 K = Jw5 K. Hence, two of the codes will branch
to the left and two to the right. Therefore, we get (6). All other cases in the first five
branching rules work analogously.
   If all the tuples are only divided by the last branching rule, then again the characteriza-
tion of Y by non-constant even splits yields that two tuples will branch to the left and
two to the right, yielding (6). Thus, f is a polymorphism.
   Now, we define g and h. Let x̄ = (x1 , x2 , x3 ) ∈ F 3 be arbitrary. We distinguish the
following two cases. Suppose that Jx̄K ∈ {(0, 0, 0), (1, 1, 1)}. Recall that f |Fi6 = αi ◦ fi for
both i ∈ {0, 1}. Then, for both i ∈ {0, 1} and x̄ ∈ Fi3 , we set
                            g(x̄) := αi ◦ gi (x̄)      and     h(x̄) := αi ◦ hi (x̄).
Otherwise Jx̄K ∈
               / {(0, 0, 0), (1, 1, 1)}. Since Jx̄K is non-constant, it contains either two 0s or
two 1s. Let x∗ be the second entry in x̄ from Fi , where i appears twice in Jx̄K.4 We set
           g(x̄) := f (x1 , x2 , x3 , x∗ , x∗ , x∗ )   and      h(x̄) := f (x∗ , x∗ , x∗ , x1 , x2 , x3 ).
Clearly, we have g(F 3 ) ⊆ f (F 6 ) and h(F 3 ) ⊆ f (F 6 ). Moreover, since g0 , g1 , h0 , h1 , and f
are injective, so are g and h.
Claim: g is a polymorphism.
  Let x̄, ȳ, z̄, w̄ ∈ F 3 be arbitrary such that F |= Y (xi , yi , zi , wi ) for every i ∈ [3]. We need
to show that
                                       (g(x̄), g(ȳ), g(z̄), g(w̄)) ∈ Y L .                                    (7)
To this end, we distinguish three cases.
    First, suppose that Jx̄K = JȳK = Jz̄K = Jw̄K. If the code is constant, then (7) follows
follows from gi being a polymorphism. Otherwise (7) follows since g inherits being
lexicographically dominated from f .
    Next, suppose that JȳK, Jz̄K, Jw̄K are all equal to Jx̄K or its complement mod 2. If Jx̄K is
constant, then since F0 |F1 , there must be two tuples from F03 and two from F13 among
x̄, ȳ, z̄, w̄. Since g(Fi3 ) ⊆ f (Fi6 ) for both i ∈ {0, 1} and f (F06 )|f (F16 ), we get (7). Otherwise
Jx̄K is non-constant. If JȳK = Jx̄K, then also
              (Jy1 K, Jy2 K, Jy3 K, Jy∗ K, Jy∗ K, Jy∗ K) = (Jx1 K, Jx2 K, Jx3 K, Jx∗ K, Jx∗ K, Jx∗ K).
If JȳK ̸= Jx̄K, then
  (Jy1 K, Jy2 K, Jy3 K, Jy∗ K, Jy∗ K, Jy∗ K) = (Jx1 K, Jx2 K, Jx3 K, Jx∗ K, Jx∗ K, Jx∗ K) + (1, . . . , 1) mod 2.
The same clearly holds for z̄ and w̄ extended by (z∗ , z∗ , z∗ ) and (w∗ , w∗ , w∗ ), respectively.
In the definition of f , all extended tuples agree on the first 5 branching steps. Since Y
is characterized by non-constant even splits and F0 |F1 , the codes of the extended tuples
  4Here we could have chosen the first entry as well.
36                 M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

contain two pairs. Hence, also the images of the extended tuples under f which correspond
to the images of x̄, ȳ, z̄, w̄ under g yield an even split. In sum, we get (7).
  In the last remaining case, there exist i, j ∈ [3] such that, without loss of generality,
Jxi K = Jxj K and Jyi K ̸= Jyj K. Then, since
                                 F |= Y (xi , yi , zi , wi ) ∧ Y (xj , yj , zj , wj ),
either Jzi K = Jzj K and Jwi K =  ̸ Jwj K, or Jzi K = ̸ Jzj K and Jwi K = Jwj K. Since g(Fi3 ) ⊆ f (Fi6 )
for both i ∈ {0, 1} and since the image of a tuple v̄ ∈ F 3 \(F03 ∪ F13 ) under g lies in the
bubble (Jv1 K, Jv2 K, Jv3 K, Jv∗ K, Jv∗ K, Jv∗ K) in the definition tree of f (see Figure 3), we only
need to check whether the bubbles corresponding to x̄, ȳ, z̄, w̄ satisfy Y . But it can be
easily checked that one of the first two branching steps will split the codes evenly. Hence,
we get (7). The case distinction is exhaustive, and hence g is a polymorphism.
Claim: h is a polymorphism.
   The arguments are the same as for g except for the last case. First, note that h(Fi3 ) ⊆
f (Fi6 ) and that all tuples x̄ with a non-constant code Jx̄K are mapped to some element
in the bubble corresponding to (Jx∗ K, Jx∗ K, Jx∗ K, Jx1 K, Jx2 K, Jx3 K) in the definition tree of f
(see Figure 3). Hence, the images also satisfy Y , since they fall into the branch specified
by b1 = b2 and b2 = b3 and then end up being split evenly at the third or fourth branching
step by the same arguments as for g.
Claim: f, g, h satisfy the (3 + 3)-terms condition.
     Let x, y ∈ F be arbitrary. If x, y ∈ Fi for i ∈ {0, 1}, then
            g(y, x, x) = αi ◦ gi (y, x, x) = αi ◦ fi (y, x, x, x, x, x) = f (y, x, x, x, x, x).
Otherwise, we have JyK ≠ JxK, hence, x is the second entry in (y, x, x) with code JxK. Thus,
we also have g(y, x, x) = f (y, x, x, x, x, x). All other cases can be treated analogously.
     This finishes the proof of Claim 5.5.                                                                     ⋄
   We can now prove Claim 5.4. If |Si | = 1, then we choose the operations fi , gi , hi that
all map the only possible input (x, . . . , x) to x. Now, suppose that fi , gi , hi satisfying the
stronger induction hypothesis from Claim 5.5 have already been defined on each subset of
Si of size < |Si |. We set F := Si and consider the split-partition {F0 , F1 } thereof. Then
Claim 5.5 immediately yields the desired operations on Si . We now show that we can
impose an additional requirement on said operations.
Claim 5.6. Let fi , gi , hi for i ∈ N be constructed as above. Then for every i ∈ N, there
exists αi+1 ∈ Aut(L; Y ) such that αi+1 ◦ fi+1 |Si = fi .
Proof (claim). Fix an arbitrary i ∈ N. By the homogeneity of (L; Y ), it suffices to show
that, for all x̄, ȳ, z̄, w̄ ∈ Si6 , we have
         (L; Y ) |= Y (fi (x̄), fi (ȳ), fi (z̄), fi (w̄)) ⇔ Y (fi+1 (x̄), fi+1 (ȳ), fi+1 (z̄), fi+1 (w̄))   (8)
To this end, let M be the set of all entries appearing in x̄, ȳ, z̄, and w̄. Without loss
of generality, we may assume that |M | > 1; otherwise the claim is trivially true. Let
{M0 , M1 } and {F0 , F1 } be the split-partitions of M and F := Si , respectively. If M ⊆ F0
or M ⊆ F1 , then we only need to look at the recursive definition of fi and fi+1 on F06 or
F16 . Hence, we may without loss of generality assume that M0 ⊆ F0 and M1 ⊆ F1 ; if M is
not fully contained in some Fi , we always have M ∩ F0 |M ∩ F1 . We may also assume that
the split-partition {F0′ , F1′ } of F ′ := Si+1 satisfies Fi ⊆ Fi′ for both i ∈ {0, 1}. Otherwise
Si ⊆ F0′ or Si ⊆ F1′ . In this case, in what follows, we only need to inspect the definition of
fi+1 on (F0′ )6 or (F1′ )6 .
        FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                                37

  Note that the splits between the bubbles associated to Jx̄K, JȳK, Jz̄K, Jw̄K (interpreted as
codes marking which entries lie in F0 and which in F1 or, equivalently, which lie in F0′
and which in F1′ ) are exactly the same for fi and fi+1 . Thus, if not all of the codes are
the same, the splits between the images of the tuples under fi and fi+1 agree since they
are determined by the position of the bubbles in Figure 3. Otherwise, if all the codes are
equal, they fall into the same bubble. Since this must be a bubble with a non-constant
code, the splits between the images of the tuples under fi and fi+1 agree since they are
determined by lexicographic domination. Hence, eq. (8) indeed holds.                          ⋄
   Note that following the same arguments and since gi and hi are defined via fi , we
also get αi+1 ◦ gi+1 |Si = gi and αi+1 ◦ hi+1 |Si = hi . Finally, by setting f0′ := f0 , g0′ := g0 ,
h′0 := h0 , and
       fi′ := α1 ◦ · · · ◦ αi ◦ fi ,    gi′ := α1 ◦ · · · ◦ αi ◦ gi ,   h′i := α1 ◦ · · · ◦ αi ◦ hi ,
we get chains of polymorphisms (fi′ )i∈N , (gi′ )i∈N , and (h′i )i∈N . Now
                         [                    [                        [
                    f :=     fi′ ,     g :=            gi′ ,    h :=       h′i
                                  i∈N                   i∈N                 i∈N
are the required (3 + 3)-terms in Pol(L; Y ).                                                           □
  We can now prove Theorem 1.12.
Proof of Theorem 1.12. The concrete template is (L; Y ).
   For item (1), recall that Y ′ is pp-definable in (L; Y ). By Theorem 5.2, CSP(L; Y, Y ′ ) is
inexpressible in FPC, and this is witnessed by fixed-image fooling instances. Consequently,
the PCSP provided by Theorem 1.10 from CSP(L; Y, Y ′ ) for n large enough is not
expressible in FPC. By construction, said PCSP template is pp-constructible from (L; Y ).
   For item (2), we use the fact that, by Theorem 5.3, the polymorphism clone of (L; Y )
contains (3 + 3)-terms. As in the proof of [37, Cor. 7.5], we conclude that (L; Y ) does not
pp-construct any non-trivial finite Abelian group. Then the claim follows because, for a
finite structure B, we have that CSP(B) is expressible in FPC if and only if B does not
pp-construct any non-trivial finite Abelian group ([37, Thm. 1.1]).                          □
   Recall that while definability in FPC and the ability to pp-construct a non-trivial
finite Abelian group complement each other in the realm of finite-domain CSPs, there are
infinite structures within the scope of Conjecture 1.4 who satisfy neither the former nor
the latter. Yet, it is still possible that every structure within that scope whose CSP is not
definable in FPC pp-constructs a finite-domain PCSP that is not definable in FPC.
Open Question 5.7. Does every structure in the scope of Conjecture 1.4 whose CSP is
not definable in FPC pp-construct a finite-domain PCSP that is not definable in FPC?
5.4. The quest for uniform algorithms. Theorem 5.2 combined with Theorem 1.10
shows that, analogously to (Q; X), also (L; Y ) pp-constructs a finite-domain PCSP that
is not expressible in FPC. As discussed in Section 5.2, CSP(Q; X) and CSP(L; Y ) are
similar decision problems, in the sense that the classic divide-and-conquer algorithms for
solving them are similar. Recently, uniform algorithms for all tractable temporal CSPs,
in particular for CSP(Q; X), were presented in [69]; they are based on a combination of
polynomial-time sampling and either singleton arc-consistency or singleton affine integer
programming. Unfortunately, the correctness proofs for these algorithms still use the
ad-hoc framework of free sets, and in contrast to linear orders, it is not clear how to
efficiently sample over leaf structures: for every n ∈ N, there are exponentially many
non-isomorphic trees with n leaves (but only a single linear order of length n). Hence,
despite the fact that CSP(Q; X) and CSP(L; Y ) are similar, it is unclear how to efficiently
solve the latter using an algorithm based on numeric relaxation.
38             M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

Open Question 5.8. Can tractable phylogeny CSPs, and hence also the PCSPs produced
from them via Theorems 1.9 and 1.10, be solved using a uniform algorithm based on local
consistency checking and numeric relaxation — similarly to temporal CSPs?
                             6. Conclusion and outlook
  In the present article, we have given two significant simplifications of the scope of
Conjecture 1.4 – Theorems 1.5 and 1.7. We believe this will have rich consequences for
the approach to the conjecture itself, but also for other applications; we offer one concrete
example, Theorem 1.9. Below we offer some further more detailed discussion of our results.
6.1. Is everything Ramsey? In the proof of Theorem 1.9, we use Theorem 1.5 to
ensure that the obtained finite-domain PCSPs are not finitely tractable, which we could
otherwise only show in certain specific cases. The precise contribution of Theorem 1.5 is
that it allows us to select:
      • a finite substructure whose polymorphisms preserve the inequality and
      • a finite factor by an arbitrary subgroup of automorphisms preserving a linear order
        and acting with finitely many orbits.
   Regarding the former, while the inequality is often not even the only possible choice
of a relation that would make our argument work, some structures in the scope of
Conjecture 1.4 provably require a non-trivial modification before they can be used as a
cheese of a non-finitely tractable PCSP; see Section 6.3.
   The latter is often possible without any modifications of the original structure – it is
conjectured that every finitely bounded homogeneous structure has a finitely bounded
homogeneous ordered Ramsey expansion [36, Prob. 27]; see also [80].
   In the proof of Theorem 1.5 we modify templates in order to reduce the scope of
Conjecture 1.4 to structures without algebraicity. Motivated by this, we ask if something
similar can be achieved with regards to the existence of finitely bounded homogeneous
Ramsey expansions, a question weaker than [17, Conj. 11.1.1] and another concretization
of Main Question 1.
Open Question 6.1. Is Conjecture 1.4 equivalent (under suitable reductions) to its
restriction to templates with a finitely bounded homogeneous Ramsey expansion?
   For details about structural Ramsey theory, we refer the reader to [58] where the authors
also provide a concrete example of a finitely bounded homogeneous structure with no
algebraicity for which no Ramsey expansion is known (Sect. 8.1.1).
6.2. Topology seems irrelevant. In the context of infinite-domain CSPs, the influence of
topological properties of the polymorphism clones of ω-categorical structures has received
much attention, with various results claiming their relevance [31] or irrelevance [13]: while
generally, whether or not an ω-categorical structure A pp-constructs K3 (or pp-interprets
another ω-categorical structure A′ ) does depend on such topological properties [11, 34, 53,
35], in many situations it does not (see, e.g., [48, 67]). By moving from any ω-categorical
model-complete core template to one without algebraicity, Theorem 1.5 allows us to
restrict Conjecture 1.4 to a class of topologically well-behaved structures. Namely, for
those recent research suggests that often the algebraic structure determines the topological
one; at least this is a fact for the endomorphism monoid, where the relevant topology
(pointwise convergence) can then be defined from the algebraic structure of the monoid
alone [76]. For ω-categorical structures with algebraicity, on the other hand, various
examples [49, 20, 76, 45] show that this need not be the case. This also implies that
there is no hope of lifting isomorphisms between endomorphism monoids or polymorphism
clones of ω-categorical structures to their counterparts constructed in Theorem 1.5.
        FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                        39

6.3. Necessity of cheese preprocessing. In our proof of Theorem 1.9, we apply
Proposition 4.2 to a structure which we previously “preprocessed” using Theorem 1.5
(removing algebraicity) and generic superpositions. It is natural to ask how strong
Proposition 4.2 is on its own: can a result similar to Theorem 1.9 be proved directly using
this proposition, perhaps under a more general structural assumption, e.g. that A is a
model-complete core? Here the answer seems to be negative.
Example 6.2. Consider the model-complete core structure
                        A = (Q; <, {(x, y, z) ∈ Q3 | x ≥ y or x ≥ z})
within the scope of Conjecture 1.4 (A2 in Example 3.4); its CSP is polynomial-time
tractable [27]. Let S be any finite structure for which there exists a homomorphism
h : S → A[d] , and let B be an arbitrary ω-categorical expansion of A. Let AS be the set
of the elements in A that appear as an entry of some element of h(S), and let AS be the
                                                                              [d]
substructure of A on AS . Since A[d] → A[d] /Aut(B), the structure AS is a finite cheese
for PCSP(S, A[d] /Aut(B)).
                               [d]
   We claim that CSP(AS ) is tractable, and hence this PCSP is finitely tractable. To see
this, recall from Example 3.4 that the n-ary minimum operation is a polymorphism of
A for every n ≥ 2. This operation is conservative: min{x1 , . . . , xn } ⊆ {x1 , . . . , xn } holds
for all x1 , . . . , xn . Hence, its restriction to A2S induces a polymorphism of AS , which itself
                                     [d]
induces a polymorphism of AS through its component-wise action. Since this operation is
          [d]
cyclic, AS does not pp-construct K3 [11, Thm. 1.4], and hence we are done by Theorem 1.1.
This issue cannot be fixed simply by taking an expansion of A by the inequality relation
̸= because CSP(A; ̸=) is NP-complete [27].
6.4. Algorithmic properties of sandwiches. An interesting open question is whether
the PCSP templates generated by Theorem 1.9 can be solved by some uniform algorithm.
Many known PCSP problems admitting infinite tractable cheeses can be solved by numeric
relaxation algorithms such as BLP (the basic linear programming relaxation), AIP (the
basic affine integer relaxation) or BLP+AIP (a combination of both) (see, e.g., [7, 40]). The
proof of Proposition 4.2 shows that none of the PCSP templates produced by Theorem 1.9
admits a cyclic polymorphism. Since solvability of PCSPs by BLP is characterized by
admitting symmetric polymorphisms of all arities [7, Thm. 7.9], which would also be
cyclic, BLP does not solve any of those PCSPs. Regarding      the combination BLP+AIP,
we remark that replacing (Q ≀ A, ̸=) and      (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸= in the proof of Theorem 1.9
by (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) and (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸=, I4 ensures that there is no cyclic and no 2-block
symmetric operation in Pol(S, (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 )). In fact, we get the following much stronger
statement, which follows directly from the fact that we take an expansion by I4 .
Proposition 6.3 (cf. proof of Lemma 7.5.1 in [17]). Let Σ be any finite height-1 condition
that cannot be satisfied by any set of essentially injective operations from an at least 2-
element set S1 to a countably infinite set S2 . Then, for every at least 2-element substructure
S of (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ), we have that Pol(S, (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 )) does not satisfy Σ.
   Similarly to cyclic identities, also the 2-block symmetric identities can be lifted from
Pol(S[d] , A
           b [d] /G) to Pol(S, A),
                               b where
      • A
        b := (Q ≀ A, ̸=, I4 ) and
                                               
      • G := Aut (Q; <) ≀ B, ̸=, I4 ⊛ (Q; <) .
Thus, since solvability of a finite-domain PCSP by BLP+AIP is characterized by the
existence of 2-block symmetric polymorphisms [40, Thm. 4], we get that PCSP(S[d] , A b [d] /G)
is not solvable by BLP+AIP. For details, we refer the reader to [69, Thm. 2], where this
40               M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

idea was used in concrete cases of non-finitely tractable PCSPs. It follows that we can
exclude BLP and BLP+AIP as potential algorithms solving all tractable PCSPs produced
by Theorem 1.9. As demonstrated in [69, Lem. 33], the above idea can in fact be extended
to any uniform algorithm such that solvability of finite-domain PCSPs by this algorithm
is captured by a set of height-1 identities specified by non-trivial permutations of variables.
Most known uniform algorithms for finite-domain PCSPs are either captured by such
height-1 conditions or their algebraic description is rather complicated [43]. However, the
lifting method we and [69] use provably cannot be extended to all height-1 conditions
covered by Proposition 6.3. To see this, note that the Olšák identities
                    f (y, x, x, x, y, y) ≈ f (x, y, x, y, x, y) ≈ f (x, x, y, y, y, x)
cannot be satisfied by essentially injective operations but every finite-domain PCSP whose
template does not have an Olšák polymorphism must be NP-hard [7, Cor. 6.3]. This
means that the Olšák identities cannot possibly be prevented in our PCSPs without losing
solvability in polynomial time (unless P=NP).

6.5. Algorithmic properties of infinite-domain CSPs. Bodirsky and Rydval [37,
Thm. 1.6] showed that the expressibility of CSPs from Conjecture 1.4 in Datalog is not
captured by any set of identities for polymorphisms. Our Theorem 1.7 shows that the
complexity classes of CSPs in Conjecture 1.4 closed under Datalog-reductions can only be
captured by identities satisfiable by essentially injective operations. It might seem that
these results essentially rule out the usefulness of height-1 conditions in the infinite-domain
setting. However, a recently announced result of Zhuk [83] points in the exact opposite
direction: there might be a way to link the tractability of infinite-domain CSPs to height-1
identities—by considering modified versions of the notion of a polymorphism.
   Zhuk [83] shows that the applicability of the uniform algorithms from [69] to temporal
CSPs is always witnessed by the so-called palette totally symmetric identities, a certain
type of height-1 identities that cannot be satisfied by essentially injective operations.
But how can this be true, say, for the template (Q; ̸=, I4 ), which only has essentially
injective polymorphisms? The important detail we omitted is that these identities only
need to be satisfied in a certain palette-variant of the polymorphism clone [83], not the
polymorphism clone itself. In some cases, the polymorphism clone provably does not
contain any palette totally symmetric operations; the structure (Q; ̸=, I4 ) is an example
of this phenomenon [83]. Understanding Zhuk’s palette-polymorphisms might help us in
further development of the algebraic approach to infinite-domain CSPs.

                                            References
 [1] G. Ahlbrandt and M. Ziegler. Quasi finitely axiomatizable totally categorical theories. Annals of
     Pure and Applied Logic, 30(1):63–82, 1986.
 [2] A. Atserias, A. A. Bulatov, and A. Dawar. Affine systems of equations and counting infinitary logic.
     Theor. Comput. Sci., 410(18):1666–1683, 2009.
 [3] P. Austrin, V. Guruswami, and J. Håstad. (2+ε)-Sat Is NP-hard. SIAM J. Comput., 46(5):1554–1573,
     2017. A conference version appeared in the proceedings of the 55th IEEE Annual Symposium on
     Foundations of Computer Science - FOCS’14.
 [4] F. Baader and J. Rydval. Using model theory to find decidable and tractable description logics with
     concrete domains. J. Autom. Reason., 66:357–407, 2022.
 [5] L. Barto. Promises make finite (constraint satisfaction) problems infinitary. In Proceedings of the
     34th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science - LICS’19, pages 1–8. IEEE,
     2019.
 [6] L. Barto, B. Bodor, M. Kozik, A. Mottet, and M. Pinsker. Symmetries of graphs and structures that
     fail to interpret a finite thing. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in
     Computer Science - LICS’23, pages 1–13. IEEE, 2023.
         FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                                  41

 [7] L. Barto, J. Bulı́n, A. Krokhin, and J. Opršal. Algebraic approach to promise constraint satisfaction.
     J. ACM., 68(4):28:1–28:66, 2021.
 [8] L. Barto, M. Kompatscher, M. Olšák, V. P. Trung, and M. Pinsker. Equations in oligomorphic clones
     and the constraint satisfaction problem for ω-categorical structures. J. Math. Log., 19(02):Article
     1950010, 2019.
 [9] L. Barto, M. Kompatscher, M. Olšák, T. V. Pham, and M. Pinsker. The equivalence of two dichotomy
     conjectures for infinite domain constraint satisfaction problems. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
     ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science – LICS’17, pages 1–12, 2017.
[10] L. Barto and M. Kozik. Absorbing subalgebras, cyclic terms, and the constraint satisfaction problem.
     Log. Methods Comput. Sci., 8(1):7:1–7:27, 2012.
[11] L. Barto, J. Opršal, and M. Pinsker. The wonderland of reflections. Isr. J. Math., 223(1):363–398,
     2018.
[12] L. Barto and M. Pinsker. The algebraic dichotomy conjecture for infinite domain constraint satisfaction
     problems. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science -
     LICS’16, pages 615–622. ACM, 2016.
[13] L. Barto and M. Pinsker. Topology is irrelevant (in a dichotomy conjecture for infinite domain
     constraint satisfaction problems). SIAM J. Comput., 49(2):365–393, 2020.
[14] Z. Bitter and A. Mottet. Generalized completion problems with forbidden tournaments. In Proceedings
     of the 49th International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science - MFCS’24,
     volume 306 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 28:1–28:17. Schloss
     Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
[15] M. Bodirsky. Cores of countably categorical structures. Log. Methods Comput. Sci., 3(1):2:1–2:16,
     2007.
[16] M. Bodirsky. New Ramsey classes from old. Electron. J. Comb., 21(2):P2.22, 2014.
[17] M. Bodirsky. Complexity of infinite-domain constraint satisfaction, volume 52. Cambridge University
     Press, 2021. Postprint available online.
[18] M. Bodirsky, H. Chen, and M. Pinsker. The reducts of equality up to primitive positive interdefinability.
     J. Symb. Log., 75(4):1249–1292, 2010.
[19] M. Bodirsky and V. Dalmau. Datalog and constraint satisfaction with infinite templates. J. Com-
     put. Syst. Sci., 79(1):79–100, 2013. A conference version appeared in the proceedings of the 34th
     Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science - STACS’06.
[20] M. Bodirsky, D. M. Evans, M. Kompatscher, and M. Pinsker. A counterexample to the reconstruction
     of ω-categorical structures from their endomorphism monoid. Isr. J. Math., 224:57–82, 2018.
[21] M. Bodirsky and J. Greiner. The complexity of combinations of qualitative constraint satisfaction
     problems. Log. Methods Comput. Sci., 16(1):21:1–21:19, 2020.
[22] M. Bodirsky and J. Greiner. Tractable combinations of theories via sampling. In Proceedings of the
     17th European Conference on Logics in Artificial Intelligence - JELIA’23, pages 133–146. Springer,
     2021.
[23] M. Bodirsky and M. Grohe. Non-dichotomies in constraint satisfaction complexity. In Proceedings of
     the 35th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming - ICALP’08, pages
     184–196. Springer, 2008.
[24] M. Bodirsky, P. Jonsson, and T. V. Pham. The Reducts of the Homogeneous Binary Branching
     C-relation. J. Symb. Log., 81(4):1255–1297, 2016.
[25] M. Bodirsky, P. Jonsson, and T. V. Pham. The complexity of phylogeny constraint satisfaction
     problems. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic (TOCL), 18(3):1–42, 2017.
[26] M. Bodirsky and M. Junker. ℵ0 -categorical structures: endomorphisms and interpretations. Algebra
     universalis, 64(3):403–417, 2010.
[27] M. Bodirsky and J. Kára. The complexity of temporal constraint satisfaction problems. J. ACM.,
     57(2):9:1–9:41, 2010. A conference version appeared in the proceedings of the 40th ACM Symposium
     on Theory of Computing - STOC’08.
[28] M. Bodirsky, F. R. Madelaine, and A. Mottet. A proof of the algebraic tractability conjecture for
     monotone monadic SNP. SIAM J. Comput., 50(4):1359–1409, 2021.
[29] M. Bodirsky, B. Martin, M. Pinsker, and A. Pongrácz. Constraint satisfaction problems for reducts
     of homogeneous graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 48(4):1224–1264, 2019. A conference version appeared in
     the proceedings of the 43rd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming -
     ICALP’16.
42               M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

[30] M. Bodirsky and A. Mottet. Reducts of finitely bounded homogeneous structures, and lifting
     tractability from finite-domain constraint satisfaction. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM/IEEE
     Symposium on Logic in Computer Science - LICS’16, pages 623–632, 2016.
[31] M. Bodirsky, A. Mottet, M. Olšák, J. Opršal, M. Pinsker, and R. Willard. Topology is relevant (in a
     dichotomy conjecture for infinite-domain constraint satisfaction problems). In Proceedings of the 34th
     Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science - LICS’19, pages 1–12. IEEE, 2019.
[32] M. Bodirsky and J. Nešetřil. Constraint satisfaction with countable homogeneous templates. J. Log.
     Comput, 16(3):359–373, 2006. A conference version appeared in the proceedings of Computer Science
     Logic - CSL’03.
[33] M. Bodirsky and M. Pinsker. Schaefer’s theorem for graphs. J. ACM., 62(3):19:1–19:52, 2015. A
     conference version appeared in the proceedings of the 43rd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
     - STOC’11.
[34] M. Bodirsky and M. Pinsker. Topological Birkhoff. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 367(4):2527–2549, 2015.
[35] M. Bodirsky, M. Pinsker, and A. Pongrácz. Projective clone homomorphisms. J. Symb. Log., 86(1):148–
     161, 2021.
[36] M. Bodirsky, M. Pinsker, and T. Tsankov. Decidability of definability. J. Symb. Log., 78(4):1036–1054,
     2013. A conference version appeared in the proceedings of the 26th Annual IEEE Symposium on
     Logic in Computer Science - LICS’11.
[37] M. Bodirsky and J. Rydval. On the descriptive complexity of temporal constraint satisfaction
     problems. J. ACM., 70(1):2:1–2:58, 2022. A conference version under the title “Temporal Constraint
     Satisfaction Problems in Fixed-Point Logic” appeared in the proceedings of the 35th Annual
     ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science - LICS’20.
[38] B. Bodor. CSP dichotomy for ω-categorical monadically stable structures. Phd thesis, Technische
     Universität Dresden, 2021.
[39] B. Bodor. Classification of-categorical monadically stable structures. The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
     89(2):460–495, 2024.
[40] J. Brakensiek, V. Guruswami, M. Wrochna, and S. Živný. The power of the combined basic linear
     programming and affine relaxation for promise constraint satisfaction problems. SIAM J. Comput.,
     49(6):1232–1248, 2020.
[41] A. A. Bulatov. A dichotomy theorem for nonuniform CSPs. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE Annual
     Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science - FOCS’17, pages 319–330. IEEE, 2017.
[42] A. A. Bulatov, P. Jeavons, and A. A. Krokhin. Classifying the complexity of constraints using finite
     algebras. SIAM J. Comput., 34(3):720–742, 2005.
[43] L. Ciardo and S. Živný. Hierarchies of minion tests for PCSPs through tensors. In Proceedings of the
     2023 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms - SODA’23, pages 568–580. SIAM,
     2023.
[44] V. Dalmau and J. Opršal. Local consistency as a reduction between constraint satisfaction problems.
     In Proceedings of the 39th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science - LICS’24,
     pages 1–15, 2024.
[45] J. de la Nuez Gonzalez, Z. Ghadernezhad, P. Marimon, and M. Pinsker. Minimal and intrinsic
     topologies on monoids of elementary embeddings, 2026. Preprint arXiv:2603.28419.
[46] G. Deng, E. E. Sai, T. Manders, P. Mayr, P. Nakkirt, and A. Sparks. Sandwiches for promise
     constraint satisfaction. Algebra Univers., 82(1):15:1–15:8, 2021.
[47] I. Dinur, O. Regev, and C. Smyth. The hardness of 3-uniform hypergraph coloring. In Proceedings of
     the 43rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 33–40. IEEE, 2002.
[48] L. Elliott, J. Jonušas, J. Mitchell, Y. Péresse, and M. Pinsker. Polish topologies on endomorphism
     monoids of relational structures. Advances in Mathematics, 431:Article 109214, 2023.
[49] D. M. Evans and P. R. Hewitt. Counterexamples to a conjecture on relative categoricity. Ann. Pure
     Appl. Log., 46(2):201–209, 1990.
[50] T. Feder and M. Y. Vardi. The computational structure of monotone monadic SNP and constraint
     satisfaction: A study through datalog and group theory. SIAM J. Comput., 28(1):57–104, 1998.
[51] R. Feller and M. Pinsker. An algebraic proof of the graph orientation problem dichotomy for forbidden
     tournaments. Preprint arXiv:2405.20263, 2024.
[52] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson. The complexity of near-optimal graph coloring. J. ACM., 23(1):43–49,
     1976.
[53] M. Gehrke and M. Pinsker. Uniform Birkhoff. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 222(5):1242–1250, 2018.
        FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS IN INFINITE-DOMAIN CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                              43

[54] P. Gillibert, J. Jonusas, M. Kompatscher, A. Mottet, and M. Pinsker. When symmetries are not
     enough: A hierarchy of hard constraint satisfaction problems. SIAM J. Comput., 51(2):175–213,
     2022.
[55] P. Gillibert, J. Jonušas, M. Kompatscher, A. Mottet, and M. Pinsker. Hrushovski’s encoding and
     ω-categorical CSP monsters. In Proceedings of the 47th International Colloquium on Automata, Lan-
     guages, and Programming- ICALP’20, volume 168 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
     (LIPIcs), pages 131:1–131:17. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.
[56] M. Grohe. The quest for a logic capturing PTIME. In 2008 23rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic
     in Computer Science, pages 267–271. IEEE, 2008.
[57] Y. Gurevich. Logic and the Challenge of Computer Science, pages 1–57. Computer Science Press,
     July 1988.
[58] J. Hubička and Konečný. Twenty years of Nešetřil’s classification programme of Ramsey classes.
     Computer Science Review, 59:100814, 2026. available on arXiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.
     17293.
[59] J. Hubička and J. Nešetřil. All those Ramsey classes (Ramsey classes with closures and forbidden
     homomorphisms). Adv. Math., 356:Article 106791, 2019.
[60] P. Jeavons. On the algebraic structure of combinatorial problems. Theor. Comput. Sci., 200(1-2):185–
     204, 1998.
[61] P. Jeavons, D. Cohen, and M. Gyssens. Closure properties of constraints. J. ACM., 44(4):527–548,
     1997.
[62] A. Kazda, P. Mayr, and D. Zhuk. Small promise csps that reduce to large csps. Logical Methods in
     Computer Science, 18(3), Aug. 2022.
[63] A. S. Kechris, V. G. Pestov, and S. Todorcevic. Fraı̈ssé limits, Ramsey theory, and topological
     dynamics of automorphism groups. Geom. Funct. Anal., 15:106–189, 2005.
[64] M. Kompatscher and T. V. Pham. A complexity dichotomy for poset constraint satisfaction. In
     Proceedings of the 34th Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science - STACS’17, volume 66
     of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 47:1–47:12. Schloss Dagstuhl –
     Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2017.
[65] D. Macpherson. A survey of homogeneous structures. Discrete Math., 311(15):1599–1634, 2011.
[66] P. Marimon and M. Pinsker. Binary symmetries of tractable non-rigid structures (Minimal operations
     over permutation groups). To appear at LICS’25; preprint arXiv:2410.22060, 2024.
[67] P. Marimon and M. Pinsker. A guide to topological reconstruction on endomorphism monoids and
     polymorphism clones, 2025. Preprint arXiv:2512.01086.
[68] A. Mottet. Promise and infinite-domain constraint satisfaction. In Proceedings of the 32nd EACSL
     Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic - CSL’24, volume 288 of Leibniz International
     Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 41:1–41:19. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für
     Informatik, 2024.
[69] A. Mottet. Algebraic and algorithmic synergies between promise and infinite-domain CSPs . In
     2025 40th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), pages 357–371,
     Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2025. IEEE Computer Society. Preprint arXiv:2501.13740.
[70] A. Mottet, T. Nagy, and M. Pinsker. An order out of nowhere: A new algorithm for infinite-
     domain CSPs. In Proceedings of the 51st International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
     Programming - ICALP’24, volume 297 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs),
     pages 148:1–148:18. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
[71] A. Mottet and M. Pinsker. Smooth approximations: An algebraic approach to CSPs over finitely
     bounded homogeneous structures. J. ACM., 71(5):36:1–36:47, 2024.
[72] M. Olšák. Maltsev conditions for general congruence meet-semidistributive algebras. J. Symb. Log.,
     86(4):1432–1451, 2021.
[73] J. Opatrny. Total ordering problem. SIAM J. Comput., 8(1):111–114, 1979.
[74] M. Otto. Bounded variable logics and counting, volume 9. Cambridge University Press, 2017.
[75] M. Pinsker, J. Rydval, M. Schöbi, and C. Spiess. Three Fundamental Questions in Modern Infinite-
     Domain Constraint Satisfaction. In P. Gawrychowski, F. Mazowiecki, and M. Skrzypczak, editors,
     50th International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS 2025),
     volume 345 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 83:1–83:20, Dagstuhl,
     Germany, 2025. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
[76] M. Pinsker and C. Schindler. On the Zariski topology on endomorphism monoids of omega-categorical
     structures. J. Symb. Log., 2023. To appear.
[77] L. Scow. Ramsey transfer to semi-retractions. Ann. Pure Appl. Log., 172(3):Article 102891, 2021.
44               M. PINSKER, J. RYDVAL, M. SCHÖBI, C. SPIESS, AND P. WINKLER

[78] M. H. Siggers. A strong Mal’cev condition for locally finite varieties omitting the unary type. Algebra
     Univers., 64:15–20, 2010.
[79] M. Steel. The complexity of reconstructing trees from qualitative characters and subtrees. Journal
     of classification, 9(1):91–116, 1992.
[80] L. N. Van Thé. A survey on structural Ramsey theory and topological dynamics with the Kechris-
     Pestov-Todorcevic correspondence in mind. available on arXiv, 2014.
[81] D. Zhuk. A proof of CSP dichotomy conjecture. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE Annual Symposium
     on Foundations of Computer Science - FOCS’17, pages 331–342. IEEE, 2017.
[82] D. Zhuk. A proof of the CSP dichotomy conjecture. J. ACM., 67(5):30:1–30:78, 2020.
[83] D. Zhuk. Singleton algorithms for the constraint satisfaction problem. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2509.18434, 2025.



     Institut für Diskrete Mathematik und Geometrie, FB Algebra, TU Wien, Austria
     Email address: {michael.pinsker,jakub.rydval,moritz.schoebi,christoph.spiess}@tuwien.ac.at

     Institut für Algebra, TU Dresden, Germany
     Email address: paul.winkler1@tu-dresden.de
