                                              Constraint Satisfaction Problems over Finitely
                                             Bounded Homogeneous Structures: a Dichotomy
                                                         between FO and L-hard∗

                                                                         Leonid Dorochko1 and Michal Wrona1
                                                     1
                                                         Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Jagiellonian University, Poland

                                                                                         July, 2026



                                                                                          Abstract
arXiv:2601.22691v3 [cs.CC] 14 Jul 2026




                                                     Feder-Vardi conjecture, which proposed that every finite-domain Constraint Satisfac-
                                                 tion Problem (CSP) is either in P or it is NP-complete, has been solved independently by
                                                 Bulatov and Zhuk almost ten years ago. Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture which states a sim-
                                                 ilar dichotomy for countably infinite first-order reducts of finitely bounded homogeneous
                                                 structures is wide open.
                                                     In this paper, we prove that CSPs over first-order expansions of finitely bounded ho-
                                                 mogeneous model-complete cores are either first-order definable (and hence in non-uniform
                                                 AC0 ) or L-hard under first-order reduction. It is arguably the most general complexity
                                                 dichotomy when it comes to the scope of structures within Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture.
                                                 Our strategy is that we first give a new proof of Larose-Tesson theorem, which provides
                                                 a similar dichotomy over finite structures, and then generalize that new proof to infinite
                                                 structures.

                                         Keywords: constraint satisfaction problems, finitely bounded homogeneous structure, infinite structures,
                                         first-order definability, L-hardness, computational complexity, dichotomies


                                         1       Introduction
                                         The goal of computational complexity is to describe the amount of certain resources, such as time and
                                         space, required to solve a computational problem under consideration. Instead of working on a single
                                         problem, it is reasonable to work on the whole family of problems admitting a uniform formulation. A
                                         general formalism that allows the formulation of many natural computational problems is the Constraint
                                         Satisfaction Problem CSP(A), parametrized by a relational structure A. Every A contributes to a differ-
                                         ent computational problem, e.g., a Boolean satisfiability problem, graph coloring, or solving equations
                                         over a finite field. An instance of CSP(A) is a set of constraints built out of variables and relations in A.
                                         The goal is to satisfy all constraints simultaneously by the same assignment to variables. Feder-Vardi
                                         conjecture [FV98], settled in 2017 independently by Bulatov [Bul17] and Zhuk [Zhu17, Zhu20] states
                                         that whenever A is finite, CSP(A) is either in P or it is NP-complete. That result stands in opposition
                                         to Ladner’s theorem [Lad75] on the existence of NP-intermediate problems on the condition that P⊊NP.
                                         Although obtaining the dichotomy was the original motivation, the algorithms for all polynomial-time
                                         CSP(A) are arguably of no less importance. They generalize Gaussian elimination [IMM+ 10] and local-
                                         consistency techniques [BK14], which are ubiquitous in constraint solving. Thus, they provide the same
                                         way of solving many natural problems in P. On the other hand, a simple algebraic condition provides a
                                         polynomial time gadget reduction from monotone 1-in-3-SAT to any NP-complete CSP(A) [BJK05].
                                             ∗
                                              Funded by the National Science Centre, Poland under the Weave-UNISONO call in the Weave programme,
                                         project no. 2021/03/Y/ST6/00171


                                                                                              1
     Although the holy grail of the CSP community has been achieved, it is not the end of the story.
Indeed, there is a number of active research directions generalizing CSP(A) over finite structures A. In
particular, Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture [BPP21] extends Feder-Vardi conjecture to some well-behaved
infinite structures A which cover a number of problems not expressible as CSP(A) if A is finite, e.g.,
in temporal reasoning [BK10, MMZ15], phylogenetic reconstruction [BJP17, CM23] and graph the-
ory [BP15, BMPP19]. The well-behaved structures A are described in two steps. We start with a
Fraı̈ssé class [Hod93] of finite structures C given by a finite number of finite structures (obstructions)
which are forbidden to embed into the members of C. The Fraı̈ssé limit of C is the basic structure
B. By Fraı̈ssé theorem, the structure B is homogeneous1 and by the choice of C it is finitely bounded.
Then, one considers and asks about the complexity of CSP(A) for structures A first-order definable in
B, known as first-order reducts of B.
Conjecture 1.1. (Bodirsky-Pinsker) For every finite-signature first-order reduct A of a finitely boun-
ded homogeneous structure B, CSP(A) is in P or it is NP-complete.
     Although not resolved in full generality, the conjecture has been confirmed in the number of particu-
lar cases such as all first-order reducts of (Q, <), known also as temporal (constraint) languages [BK10],
first-order reducts of the so-called rooted triple relation, known also as phylogeny languages [BJP17],
or all first-order reducts of all homogeneous graphs [BP15, BMPP19]. Another classification considers
CSPs that are expressible in the logic MMSNP [BMM21]. Despite these attempts, it is fair to say that
the general conjecture is wide open.
     At the same time, the boundary between P and NP-complete has not been the only one studied for
finite-domain CSPs [BKL08]. In [LT09], one can find a number of not yet resolved conjectures on which
CSPs are, e.g., in L (logarithmic space) or NL (non-deterministic logarithmic space). The questions
have not yet been answered despite certain partial results in the literature; see, e.g., [BKW12, EHLR14,
DEH+ 15, CDK08]. Furthermore, [LT09] contains the following dichotomy built on the characterization
of first-order definable finite-domain CSPs from [LLT07].
Theorem 1.2. (Larose-Tesson) Let A be a finite structure over a finite signature. Then one of the
following holds.
       • CSP(A) is L-hard (under first-order reduction).
       • CSP(A) is first-order definable, and hence in non-uniform AC0 .
     Recall that a canonical example of an L-hard problem is Graph Reachability, where given an undi-
rected graph G and two distinguished vertices s and t, we ask whether there is a path from s to t [Rei08].
More appropriate in the context of constraint satisfaction problems is the Graph Unreachability prob-
lem, the complement of the Graph Reachability problem, which is L-hard but can actually be expressed
as CSP({0, 1}; {(0)}, {(1)}, {(0, 0), (1, 1)}). A similar problem, but for directed graphs: Digraph Reacha-
bility is easily NL-hard. By the Immerman-Szelepcsényi theorem [Imm88,Sze88], the Digraph Unreacha-
bility is also NL-hard. The latter problem is equivalent to CSP({0, 1}; {(0)}, {(1)}, {(0, 0), (1, 1), (0, 1)}).
Non-uniform AC0 , as already mentioned in the abstract, is the complexity class consisting of all lan-
guages accepted by polynomial-size constant-depth families of Boolean circuits with AND/OR gates of
unlimited fan-in. The proof of the Larose-Tesson theorem and the proof of our main contribution below
show first-order definability in the easy case, from which follows the containment in non-uniform AC0
(see, e.g., Theorem 6.4 in [Lib04]). Recall that there are problems in L which are not in non-uniform
AC0 [FSS84], i.e., non-uniform AC0 ⊊ L. In particular, any problem that is L-hard under first-order
reduction cannot lie in non-uniform AC0 . To see that the dichotomies between L-hard and non-uniform
AC0 are non-trivial, observe that PARITY is an example of a computational problem in L that is
provably neither in AC0 nor L-hard; see, e.g., [Vol99] for an introduction to circuit complexity.
     Since the question on the P versus NP-complete dichotomy for first-order reducts of finitely-bounded
homogeneous structures is notoriously resistant and the conjectures from [LT09] on CSPs in L and NL
are not even solved for finite structures, it is reasonable to ask if at least Theorem 1.2 may be generalized.
In this paper, we achieve this goal for a huge class of structures within Conjecture 1.1.
Theorem 1.3. (Main theorem) Let A be a finite-signature first-order expansion of a finitely bounded
homogeneous model-complete core B. Then one of the following holds.
       • CSP(A) is L-hard (under first-order reduction).
   1
       All notions are carefully defined in Section 2.


                                                         2
    • CSP(A) is first-order definable, and hence in non-uniform AC0 .
     In the algebraic approach to the computational complexity of CSPs, instead of CSP(A), one usually
considers CSP(A′ ), which is equivalent to CSP(A) but A′ is a structure with better properties known as
the core of A, or in the case of infinite-domain CSPs, a model-complete core. Theorem 1.2 was proved
without loss of generality for finite core structures. For infinite structures, we cannot simply restrict to
model-complete cores — it is not even known if a model-complete core of a reduct of a finitely bounded
homogeneous structure is a reduct of a finitely bounded homogeneous structure — see Question (5)
on the list of open problems in [Bod21], in Section 14.2. (Note that this question has been settled
affirmatively in the case of Ramsey structures [MP21].) Irrespective of the answer to this question,
our proof requires the assumption that A and B have the same automorphism group, or equivalently,
they are first-order interdefinable. Thus, A needs to be a first-order expansion of B. We agree that it
restricts the scope of infinite structures under consideration. Regardless, we still believe that our result
is essentially the most general complexity classification when it comes to the scope of Conjecture 1.1.
Indeed, the partial dichotomies mentioned above usually start with a very simple basic structure such as
(Q; <) or a homogeneous graph, and then consider all its first-order reducts. Despite the development
and use of certain general methods [BP21,MP24], all these proofs are tailored to specific basic structures
and are not generalizable. The only notable exception is the classification of CSPs definable in the logic
MMSNP, but that proof relies on representing CSPs as MMSNP formulae.
Example 1.4. The order (Q; <) over rational numbers is a finitely bounded homogeneous model-comple-
te core. Theorem 1.3 covers all its expansions by first-order definable relations. In this case, all corre-
sponding CSPs are L-hard, in fact, even NL-hard.
     On the other hand, consider (V ; E, N ) which is the expansion of the countable universal homoge-
neous graph (or the countable homogeneous triangle-free graph) by the non-edge relation which holds on
different vertices not connected by an edge. Its CSP is first-order definable (and hence in non-uniform
AC0 ) but, as we will see, some of its first-order expansions give rise to L-hard CSPs.
   In order to prove Theorem 1.3, we first provide a new proof of Theorem 1.2 and then generalize the
new proof to infinite structures covered by Theorem 1.3.

1.1    Proof strategy
Finite duality. Throughout the paper, we freely change the perspective on CSP(A), seeing its
instances sometimes as sets of constraints over relations in A to be solved and sometimes as structures
C over the same signature as A which are to be verified whether they homomorphically map to A or
not. Using the latter perspective, one can show that CSP(A) is first-order definable if and only if A has
finite duality, i.e., a finite set of obstructions O such that C admits a homomorphism to A if and only
if no D ∈ O maps homomorphically to C. For the result, see Theorem 5.6.2 in [Bod21], proved using
Rossman’s preservation theorem [Ros08]. For finite structures, we first knew this characterization of
first-order definable CSPs thanks to Atserias [Ats05].

efpp-definitions and first-order reductions. Further, we observe that a finite core structure
A with |A| ≥ 2 containing the equality = and all constants in its signature gives rise to an L-hard
CSP(A). A first-order reduction from Graph Unreachability can now be simply achieved by marking
a constant s in A as a source, some other constant t as a target, and introducing a constraint x = y
between vertices connected by an edge in the graph. Therefore, as it is sometimes the case, we cannot
include the equality in the signature of A if it is not explicitly there, and we cannot use primitive
positive definitions with a free use of equality as a reduction between considered CSPs. Hence, instead
of primitive positive formulae, we use equality-free primitive positive formulae (efpp) where only atoms
built out of relational symbols in the signature of A are used, see e.g. [Bör08] for different types of pp-
formulae. We show in Section 2 that efpp-definitions (provided by efpp-formulae) give rise to first-order
reductions between the corresponding CSPs.

Proof sketch for Theorem 1.2 Without loss of generality, we assume that A is a core and
contains all constants. An efpp-formula ϕ(x, y) with free variables x and y is called a (C, x, D, y)-impli-
cation in A if C, D are efpp-definable, strictly contained in the projections of ϕ to x and y, respectively,
and if D = {y | ∃x ∈ C ∧ R(x, y)}. A (C, x, D, y)-implication in A is balanced if C = D and the
projections of ϕ to x and y coincide. Now, if there is an efpp-definition of a balanced implication in


                                                     3
A, then we can also efpp-define an equivalence relation on a subset of the domain A of A with at least
two equivalence classes, which together with all constants naturally admit a first-order reduction from
Graph Unreachability. On the other hand, if a balanced implication is not efpp-definable, then CSP(A)
is solvable by the (1)-minimality algorithm, also known as generalized arc-consistency. We reformulate
this well-known algorithm, so that we could produce what we call tree efpp-formulae defining every
domain, also empty, deduced by it on an instance of CSP(A). A tree efpp-formula defining an empty set
over an unsatisfiable instance gives rise to an obstruction. We show that the number of indistinguishable
obstructions is finite, or from a huge enough tree efpp-formula witnessing the unsatisfiability of some
instance, we may produce a balanced implication.

Proof sketch for Theorem 1.3 Our main contribution is proved in a similar fashion. The main
differences are that we need to consider implications as formulae over pairs of tuples of variables rather
than pairs of variables.
Example 1.5. Consider an expansion B = (V, E, N ) of a universal countable homogeneous graph by
a binary non-edge relation N . This structure is a model-complete core. It is homogeneous, in fact,
2-homogeneous, i.e., every orbit is definable by a conjunction of binary atoms: with E, N and =. It is
also finitely bounded: a structure C embeds into B if and only if E C contains neither (x, x) (an E-loop)
nor (x, y) without (y, x) (an E-arrow) and N C contains neither (x, x) (an N -loop) nor (x, y) without
(y, x) (an N -arrow) and there are no {x, y} marked both as an edge and a non-edge or marked neither
as en edge nor as a non-edge. Since all the bounds are of size at most 2, B is a 2-bounded structure that
satisfies the prerequisites needed for Theorem 1.3.
     The group of automorphisms of B is transitive, that is, every element can be mapped onto any
other by an appropriate automorphism. Therefore, one cannot define a non-trivial subset of V , and
hence an implication over a pair of variables as defined above for a finite structure. On the other hand,
ϕ(x1 , x2 , y1 , y2 ) ≡ (E(x1 , x2 ) ∧ E(y1 , y2 )) ∨ (N (x1 , x2 ) ∧ N (y1 , y2 )) is, according to Definition 4.1, an
(E, (x1 , x2 ), E, (y1 , y2 ))-implication. It is quite easy to see that there is a first-order reduction from
Graph Unreachability to CSP(B′ ) where B′ extends B with the relation defined by ϕ. We replace any
vertex with a pair of variables, adding E(x1 , x2 ) for the source and N (y1 , y2 ) for the target. On the
other hand, the structure B is easily seen to have finite duality (the only obstructions are an E-loop, an
N -loop, and a two-element structure which imposes both E and N on its elements). Hence, CSP(B) is
first-order definable and in non-uniform AC0 .
    A very similar example may be given for the universal homogeneous triangle-free graph. We consider
the rational order below.
Example 1.6. The structure (Q; <) is 2-homogeneous and 3-bounded. Observe also that ϕ(x, y, z) ≡
y < z is a (<, (x, y), <, (x, z))-implication. By Proposition 4.7, it follows that CSP(Q; <) is L-hard
under first-order reduction.
    In general, a finite-signature finitely bounded homogeneous model-complete core B is k-homoge-
neous and ℓ-bounded for some k, ℓ ∈ N. For its first-order expansion A, either we may efpp-define an
implication similar to these from examples above or, as we prove, CSP(A) may be solved by establishing
(k, max(k, ℓ))-minimality. The (k, max(k, ℓ))-minimality algorithm is then reformulated so that we can
have so-called k-tree efpp-formulae of all at most k-ary relations derived by the minimality algorithm.
Again, either there are finitely many k-tree efpp-formulae witnessing unsatisfiable instances, and hence
a finite set of obstructions, or we can efpp-define an implication as in the examples above. Although
based on similar arguments as the proof for finite structures, the proof for infinite structures appears to
be much more involved when it comes to details.

Implications in other papers. Although in other contexts, implications themselves have been
used before. Over finite structures, e.g. in [BK12], one writes C +R to denote D = {y | ∃x ∈ C R(x, y)}.
It is, unfortunately, somehow troublesome to generalize this notation to infinite structures where one
has to deal also with non-binary relations or formulae over more than two free variables. It is why we
stick to the implications defined above (and also in more detail below). We note that they were also
used in research on bounded strict width [Wro20b, Wro20a, NP24] and the tractability of quasi Jonsson
operations [NPW25] over infinite structures.




                                                          4
1.2    Significance and the future work
Our main result, Theorem 1.3, is arguably the most general dichotomy theorem concerning structures
within the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture. Indeed, other dichotomies concern either first-order reducts of
some simple structures or problems definable in some logics.
    The theorem was obtained by first reproving the analogous result for finite structures and then
generalizing the proof to infinite structures. A similar general idea has been adopted in [BBK+ 23,
BKNP25] in order to provide new loop lemmata over ω-categorical structures:

old proofs for finite structures are not easily generalizable to infinite structures, so what about
providing new proofs that can be more easily generalized?

     This way of thinking brings a new hope for open problems over infinite-domain CSPs. We may
just need a slightly different proof of the Bulatov-Zhuk theorem to generalize it to first-order reducts
of finitely bounded homogeneous structures. Such a new proof may be, of course, hard to obtain
straightaway, but we believe that the methods from this paper may be used to identify both finite and
infinite structures of bounded width (solvable by the minimality algorithm) that give rise to CSPs in
NL and L. We discuss this possible direction at the end of the paper in Section 5 when our methods are
already known.

1.3    Organization of the paper
All necessary notions are defined and explained carefully in Section 2. The new proof of Theorem 1.2
is provided in Section 3 and the proof of our main contribution in Section 4. Both sections display
some similarities, but the advantage of providing both proofs separately is that the reader interested
only in finite-domain CSPs does not have to go through some model-theoretic notions characteristic of
infinite-domain CSPs.


2     Preliminaries
We write [n] for the set {1, . . . , n}. Most of the definitions from below may also be found in [Bod21].

2.1    Structures and formulae
All structures in this article are assumed to be relational and at most countable. Let A be a relational
structure, we denote the domain of A by a plain letter A. Sometimes, for the sake of simplicity, we use
the same letter R both to denote a relational symbol and the corresponding relation RA . Let ϕ be a
first-order formula over the signature of A and free variables Var(ϕ). We identify the interpretation ϕA
of ϕ in A with the set of satisfying assignments a : Var(ϕ) → A for ϕ. Let u = (u1 , . . . , uk ) be a tuple of
elements of Var(ϕ). We define the projection of ϕA onto u as the relation proju (ϕA ) := {f (u) | f ∈ ϕA }
where f (u) is a shorthand for (f (u1 ), . . . , f (uk )) used throughout the text.
     A first-order expansion of a structure B is an expansion of B by relations which are first-order
definable in B, i.e., for which there exists ϕ over free variables u such that R = {f (u) | f ∈ ϕA }.
     We write Aut(A) to denote the set of automorphisms of A. An orbit of a k-tuple a = (a1 , . . . , ak ) in
A where a1 , . . . , ak ∈ A is the set {α(a) | α ∈ Aut(A)}. An orbit O is injective if the projection of O to
any two different coordinates is contained in disequality, and it is almost injective if the projection to
any two different coordinates is either contained in disequality or consists only of one pair of elements
(a, a) with a ∈ A. A countable relational structure A is ω-categorical if its automorphism group is
oligomorphic, i.e., for all n ≥ 1, the number of orbits of n-tuples in A is finite. For an ω-categorical
relational structure A and for every n ≥ 1 it holds that two n-tuples of elements of the structure are in
the same orbit in A if and only if they have the same type, i.e., they satisfy the same first-order formulae.
The atomic type of an n-tuple is the set of all atomic formulae satisfied by this tuple; the structure A
is homogeneous if any two tuples of the same atomic type belong to the same orbit. For k ≥ 1, we say
that a relational structure A is k-homogeneous if for all tuples a, b of arbitrary finite equal length, if all
respective k-subtuples of a and b are in the same orbit in A, then a and b are in the same orbit in A.
If a homogeneous A has a finite signature, then it is ω-categorical and k-homogeneous for some k ∈ N.
For ℓ ≥ 1, we say that A is ℓ-bounded if for every finite X, if all substructures Y of X of size at most
ℓ embed in A, then X embeds in A. A structure A is finitely bounded if it is ℓ-bounded for some ℓ. In


                                                      5
this case there is a finite set of structures FA over at most ℓ elements such that some finite structure X
embeds into A if and only if no structure from FA embeds into X.
     A structure A is a model-complete core if for all endomorphisms of A and all finite subsets of its
domain, there exists an automorphism of A which agrees with the endomorphism on the subset. If A is
finite and satisfies this condition, we simply say that it is a core.
     A first-order formula is called primitive positive (pp) if it is built exclusively from atomic formulae,
existential quantifiers, and conjunctions. Primitive positive formulae usually allow equalities even if
they are not in the signature of A. We say that a first-order formula is an equality-free primitive positive
(efpp) formula for a relational structure A if it is a pp-formula which allows only atomic formulae built
from relational symbols in the signature of A. A relation is pp-definable or efpp-definable in a relational
structure if it is first-order definable by a pp-formula or an efpp-formula, respectively.
     It is well known that for any ω-categorical model-complete core A, for all n ≥ 1, all orbits of n-tuples
in A are pp-definable [Bod07]. For efpp-definitions, we have the following.
Observation 2.1. Let B be a model-complete core, then every almost injective orbit of tuples in B is
efpp-definable in B.

Proof. Let k ≥ 1 and O be an almost injective orbit of k-tuples in B. By [Bod07], there exists a pp-
definition ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk ) of O with free variables x1 , . . . , xk . We assume without loss of generality that
ϕ consists of a quantifier prefix and a quantifier-free part. The goal is to remove all equalities from ϕ
without affecting the relation defined by ϕ. We first add to ϕ all equalities of the form x = x for every
variable x in the definition of ϕ, we also add x = y if it contains y = x or there exists z such that both
x = z and z = y are in ϕ. We add equalities to ϕ in this way as long as the fixed point is not reached.
Then, the pairs of variables x, y, such that x = y is in the new ϕ, form an equivalence relation E.
    We now consider two cases. If k = 1, then there are no equalities of the form xi = xj with i, j ∈ [k]
such that i ̸= j, and hence every equivalence class of E contains at most one element in {x1 , . . . , xk }.
Thus, we can replace all variables in ϕ by the representatives of their equivalence class. If possible, we
choose xi for i ∈ [k]. Now, we can safely remove all equalities from ϕ without affecting the relation it
defines. The second case is where k ≥ 2. Now we can have xi = xj in ϕ with i, j ∈ [n] such that i ̸= j.
In this case, since O is almost injective, the projection of ϕ to xi and xj is C ⊆ A with |C| = 1. By the
previous case, C is efpp-definable in A. Thus, we can add a constraint C(y) for every variable y in the
equivalence class of E that contains both xi and xj . Then we can safely remove all equalities between
the variables in this equivalence class. In the same vein, we remove equalities in other equivalence
classes of E containing at least two variables in {x1 , . . . , xk }. If there is one or zero such variables in
the considered equivalence class, then we proceed as in the case where k = 1. Hence, in this case as
well, we showed how to remove equalities from ϕ without changing the relation it defines.

2.2     CSPs and the minimality algorithm
For the relation R ⊆ Ak over a non-empty set A and i1 , . . . , iℓ ∈ [k], we write proj(i1 ,...,iℓ ) (R) for the
ℓ-ary relation {(ai1 , . . . , aiℓ ) | (a1 , . . . , ak ) ∈ R}. The number k is the arity of R. The scope, i.e., the
set of all entries of a tuple t is denoted by S(t). We write IkA for the          relation containing all injective,
i.e., with pairwise different entries, k-tuples of elements in A, and Sk to denote the set of all k-element
subsets of the set S.
     Let R ⊆ Ak and U be a set of variables. Then a constraint C over R and with the scope U is
a subset of AU such that there exists an enumeration u1 , . . . , uk of the elements of U so that for all
f : U → A, it holds that f ∈ C if, and only if, (f (u1 ), . . . , f (uk )) ∈ R. An instance of CSP(A) is a pair
I = (V, C), where V is a finite set of variables and C is a finite set of constraints over relations in A and
whose scopes are subsets of V. The relational structure A is called the template of CSP(A). A solution
of a CSP instance I = (V, C) is a mapping f : V → A such that for every C ∈ C with scope U , f |U ∈ C.
     An instance I = (V, C) of CSP(A) is non-trivial if it does not contain any empty constraint; oth-
erwise, it is trivial. Given a constraint C ⊆ AU with U ⊆ V and a tuple v ∈ U k for some k ≥ 1, the
projection of C onto v is defined by projv (C) := {f |S(v) | f ∈ C}.
Definition 2.2. Let 1 ≤ k ≤ ℓ. We say that an instance I = (V, C) of CSP(A) is (k, ℓ)-minimal if both
of the following hold:
   1. the scope of every tuple of elements of V of length at most ℓ is contained in the scope of some
      constraint in C;


                                                         6
   2. for every m ≤ k, for every tuple u ∈ V m , and for all constraints C1 , C2 ∈ C whose scopes contain
      the scope of u, the projections of C1 and C2 onto u coincide.
We say that an instance I is k-minimal if it is (k, k)-minimal.
     Let 1 ≤ k. If I = (V, C) is a k-minimal instance and u is a tuple of variables of length at most k,
then there exists a constraint in C whose scope contains the scope of u. Then the projection of this and
all other constraints in I containing u to u is the very same constraint, it is denoted by proju (I) and
called the projection of I onto u.
     Let 1 ≤ k ≤ ℓ, let A be an ω-categorical structure. Clearly not every instance I = (V, C) of CSP(A)
is (k, ℓ)-minimal. However, it is well known that every instance I is equivalent to a (k, ℓ)-minimal
instance I ′ of CSP(A′ ) where A′ is the expansion of A by all at most ℓ-ary pp-definable relations in the
sense that I and I ′ have the same solution set. In particular, if I ′ is trivial, then I has no solutions.
Moreover, I ′ can be computed from I in polynomial time by enforcing both conditions in the natural
way. First, by introducing a full constraint over an l-ary subset of V when necessary, and then by
repeatedly removing assignments from constraints so that the second condition was satisfied. In the
remainder of this paper, we refer to this algorithm as the (k, l)-minimality algorithm.
     For the purposes of this paper, we need a slightly stronger result. Indeed, we will show that it
is enough to look at the expansion A′ of A by all efpp-definable relations, i.e., every instance I is
equivalent to a (k, ℓ)-minimal instance I ′ of CSP(A′ ) where A′ is the expansion of A by all at most ℓ-ary
efpp-definable relations.
Observation 2.3. Let I be an instance of CSP(A) and A′ an expansion of A that contains all efpp-
definable relations in A of arity at most ℓ. Then there exists a (k, ℓ)-minimal instance I ′ of CSP(A′ )
equivalent to I where A′ is an expansion of A by all at most ℓ-ary efpp-definable relations.

Proof. Indeed, we first add a full constraint over an l-ary subset of V whenever necessary. All full
relations are efpp-definable in A by empty formulae. In order to enforce the second condition, we
repeatedly look at some C1 , C2 ∈ C and a set of variables U of size at most k contained in both the
scope of C1 and C2 and replace C1 with some C1′ so that the projection of C1′ to U was contained
in the projection of C2 to U . That is, we replace C1 with C1′ := {f ∈ C1 | ∃g ∈ C2 g|U = f |U }.
Observe that C1′ is a constraint over the relation with an efpp-definiton: ∃v1 . . . vt R1 (x1 ) ∧ R2 (x2 )
where U = S(x1 ) ∩ S(x2 ) and {v1 , . . . , vt } = S(x2 ) \ U and Ci with i ∈ [2] is a constraint over Ri .

    We say that the (k, l)-minimality algorithm solves CSP(A) if it transforms a given instance I into
a trivial instance if and only if I does not have a solution. In this case, one says that A has relational
width (k, l). If A has relational width (k, k), then it has relational width k.
    Alternatively, an instance I of CSP(A) may be seen as a finite structure over the same signature
as A. One can transform a set of constraints C over variables V into an appropriate structure just by
taking V as its domain and including a tuple u of variables into RI always when there is a constraint
C ⊆ AU with S(u) = U such that RA = {f (u) | f ∈ C}. On the other hand a structure I may be
transformed into the appropriate set of constraints by taking its domain as a set of variables V and
including a constraint C ⊆ AU over the relation RA always when RI contains u.
Definition 2.4. Let A be a τ -structure. A set of finite τ -structures O is called an obstruction set for
A if, for any finite τ -structure C, we have that C maps homomorphically to A if and only if no D ∈ O
maps homomorphically to C.
    We say that a structure has finite duality if it has a finite obstruction set.

2.3     FO-reductions and efpp-formulae
Definition 2.5. Let σ and τ = {R1 , . . . , Rs } be two relational signatures. A k-ary first-order interpreta-
tion with p parameters of τ in σ is an (s + 1)-tuple ι = (ϕU , ϕR1 , . . . , ϕRs ) of first-order formulae over σ,
where ϕU = ϕU (x, y) has k+p free variables x = (x1 , . . . , xk ) and y = (y1 , . . . , yp ) and ϕRi (x1 , . . . , xr , y)
has k · r + p free variables where r is the arity of Ri and each xj = (xj1 , . . . , xjk ) and y is as above.
     Let C be a σ-structure. A tuple c = (c1 , . . . , cp ) of elements of C is said to be proper if ci ̸= cj when
i ̸= j. Let c = (c1 , . . . , cp ) be proper. The interpretation of C through ι with parameters c, denoted by
ι(C, c), is the τ -structure whose universe is {a ∈ C k : ϕU (a, c)} and whose interpretation for Ri is

                   {(a1 , . . . , ar ) ∈ (C k )r | ϕU (a1 , c) ∧ · · · ∧ ϕU (ar , c) ∧ ϕRi (a1 , . . . , ar , c)}


                                                                 7
Definition 2.6. Let σ and τ be finite relational signatures, let C be a class of σ-structures and let D
be a class of τ -structures closed under isomorphisms. We say that a first-order interpretation ι with
p parameters of τ in σ is a first-order reduction of C to D if for every σ- structure C with at least p
elements the following two equivalences hold:
    1. C ∈ C iff ι(C, c) ∈ D for every proper c,
    2. C ∈ C iff ι(C, c) ∈ D for some proper c.
   The next step is to prove a version of Lemma 2.6 in [LT09] trimmed to efpp-formulae. The difference
between the lemmata is that in our version we disallow equalites.
Lemma 2.7. Let A be an arbitrary relational structure, let R be a relation over A and let A′ be an
expansion of A by R. Then the following two conditions are equivalent:
    • R has an efpp-definition in A,
    • there exists a finite sequence A = A0 , . . . , As = A′ , such that each relational structure Ai is
      obtained from the previous one by one of the following operations:
         (1) removing a relation,
         (2) adding an r-ary relation R′ (x1 , . . . , xr ) ≡ R′′ (xπ(1) , . . . , xπ(l) ) obtained from an l-ary R′′
             already in the structure by rearranging the coordinates in R′′ according to a map π : [l] → [r],
         (3) adding the intersection of two relations of the same arity,
         (4) adding the product of two relations,
         (5) adding a relation obtained by projecting an r-ary relation to its first r − 1 variables.

Proof. We first observe that if there is a sequence from A to A′ as in the formulation of the lemma, then
A′ is efpp-definable in A. Indeed, it is clear regarding the first kind of operation. When it comes to the
rearranging of the coordinates, the efpp-definition of R′ from R′′ is given already in the formulation of
the lemma. The intersection of two relations R1 and R2 of arity r is efpp-definable by R1 (x1 , . . . , xr ) ∧
R2 (x1 , . . . , xr ), the product of an r-ary R1 and an l-ary R2 is R1 (x1 , . . . , xr ) ∧ R2 (xr+1 , . . . , xr+l ).
Finally, the efpp-definition of the projection of an r-ary relation R′ to its first r − 1 coordinates is
∃xr R′ (x1 , . . . , xr ).
     On the other hand, every efpp-definition ϕ is built inductively from simpler efpp-formulae ϕ1 and
ϕ2 by establishing a conjunction ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yl ) ≡ ϕ1 (x1 , . . . , xk ) ∧ ϕ2 (y1 , . . . , yl ) with possibly
{x1 , . . . , xk } ∩ {y1 , . . . , yl } ̸= ∅, by attaching an existential quantifier in front of a simpler formula,
without loss of generality we consider ϕ ≡ ∃y ϕ1 (x1 , . . . , xn ), or by rearranging the variables in ϕ1 . For
the latter operation, we simply use the operation from Item (2). When it comes to adding an existential
quantifier in front of a formula, we assume that Rϕ1 = {(x1 , . . . , xk ) | ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk )}. In order to
obtain Rϕ efpp-defined by ∃y Rϕ1 (x1 , . . . , xn ) we first rearrange the variables so that y was the last
variable in the atom, then project the corresponding relation to its first (r−1)-coordinates and finally we
rearrange the coordinates back so that they were in same order as before with an exception of the missing
coordinate corresponding to y. Finally, we look at the conjunction of two efpp-formulae. By arranging
the variables, we may assume without loss of generality that Rϕ (x1 , . . . , xp+r+l ) ≡ Rϕ1 (x1 , . . . , xp+r ) ∧
Rϕ2 (xp , . . . , xp+r+l ). In order to obtain Rϕ by the available operations, we first obtain Rϕ′ 1 , which is the
product of Rϕ1 and the full l-ary relation as well as Rϕ′ 2 which is the product of the full p-ary relation
and Rϕ2 . Observe that a full m-ary relation may be obtained by the operation in Item (2) so that every
variable in R′ is a dummy variable that is they do not occur on the right hand side in R′′ . Then Rϕ is
simply the intersection of Rϕ′ 1 and Rϕ′ 2 which are of the same arity.

   In [LT09], one can find proofs that operations (1) and (3)–(5) give rise to first-order reductions. See
Lemma 2.7 and Lemmas 2.9–2.11, respectively. For the operation in Item (2), we provide the following
lemma.
Lemma 2.8. Let A be a relational structure, and A′ an expansion of A by an r-ary relation R′ (x1 , . . . , xr )
≡ R(xπ(1) , . . . , xπ(l) ) that rearranges coordinates of some R in A according to a map π : [l] → [r]. Then
there is a 1-ary 0-parameter reduction from CSP(A′ ) to CSP(A).




                                                                 8
Proof. Assume witout loss of generality that A = (A; R1 , . . . , Rn , R). We define our 1-ary 0-parameter
interpretation ι = (ϕU , ϕR , ϕR1 , . . . , ϕRn ) as follows:

                                                          ϕU (x) = TRUE

                                                           ϕRi (x) = Ri (x)
                                                                     r
                                                                     ^                                     ^             ^
       ϕR (x1 , . . . , xl ) = R(x1 , . . . , xl ) ∨ ∃z1 · · · ∃zr         R′ (z1 , . . . , zr ) ∧                                  zi = xj
                                                                     i=1                             i∈[r]:π −1 (i)̸=∅ j∈π −1 (i)




We are now ready to turn to the main result of this subsection.
Lemma 2.9. Let A be a relational structure and A′ be an expansion of A by a relation R which has an
efpp-definition in A. Then there exists a first-order reduction from CSP(A′ ) to CSP(A) where A′ is an
expansion of A by R.

Proof. It follows from Lemma 2.7 that the relation R may be obtained from A by a series of operations
allowed by the formulations of the lemma. By Lemma 2.7 and Lemmas 2.9–2.11 in [LT09] as well as
Lemma 2.8, and since first-order reductions are preserved by compositions, see e.g. Proposition 1.28
in [Imm99], it follows that every sequence of these operations gives rise to a first-order reduction from
CSP(A′ ) to CSP(A). The lemma follows.

    Let arity(A) be the maximum of all arities of relations in A. In particular, without affecting the
complexity of the problem, we may say that a finite A contains all relations of arity at most arity(A)
efpp-definable in A and that an expansion A of a k-homogeneous ℓ-bounded structure contains all at
most max(k, ℓ, arity(A))-ary efpp-definable relations in A. On the additional assumption that A is a
model-complete core, by Observation 2.1, we may assume that A contains all almost injective orbits
of at most max(k, ℓ, arity(A))-ary tuples in A. All these assumptions will be in effect throughout the
paper.


3     Reproving Larose-Tesson theorem
We now give a formal definition of an implication in a finite structure A.
Definition 3.1 (Implication). Let A be a finite relational structure and C, D ⊆ A be efpp-definable in
A and non-empty. We say that an efpp-formula ϕ over the signature of A with distinguished different
free variables {u, v} ⊆ Var(ϕ) is a (C, u, D, v)-implication in A if all of the following hold:
    1. C ⊊ proj(u) (ϕA ),
    2. D ⊊ proj(v) (ϕA ),
    3. for all f ∈ ϕA , it holds that f (u) ∈ C implies f (v) ∈ D,
    4. for every a ∈ D, there exists f ∈ ϕA such that f (u) ∈ C and f (v) = a.
We say that an implication ϕ is balanced if C = D and proju (ϕA ) = projv (ϕA )
We say that A is unbalanced if there is no balanced implication in A. The next step is to define a
composition of two implications.
Definition 3.2 (Composition). Let A be a relational structure, let C, D, E ⊆ A be non-empty, let
ϕ1 be a (C, u1 , D, v 1 )-implication in A, and ϕ2 a (D, u2 , E, v 2 )-implication in A such that proj(v1 ) ϕA
                                                                                                             1 =
                     ′                                   2                 1
proj(u2 ) ϕA
           2 . Let ϕ 2 be  a copy  of ϕ2 with variable u   renamed    to v   and all other variables renamed   so
that they are not in ϕ1 . We define ϕ1 ◦ ϕ2 to be a (C, u1 , E, v 2 )-implication given by the efpp-formula
(ϕ1 ∧ ϕ′2 ).
    Let ψ be a balanced (C, u, C, v)-implication. For n ≥ 2, we write ψ ◦n for the efpp-formula ψ ◦ · · · ◦ ψ
where ψ appears exactly n times.
We now compose a balanced implication with itself in order to show L-hardness.



                                                                     9
Proposition 3.3. Let A be a finite relational structure that is a core. If there exists a balanced impli-
cation in A, then CSP(A) is L-hard under FO-reduction.

Proof. Let ϕ be a balanced (C, x, C, y)-implication in A with projx ϕA = projy ϕA = D. Define Bϕ to be
a directed graph over elements in D such that there is an arc a → b in Bϕ if ϕA contains a mapping m
with m(x) = a and m(y) = b. A component in Bϕ is a strongly connected component that contains at
least one arc. A component F in Bϕ is a sink in Bϕ if every arc originating in F ends up in F . On the
other hand, F is a source in Bϕ if every arc targeting an element in F starts also in F. Observe that Bϕ
restricted to the vertices in C contains a sink and restricted to D \ C a source.
     Let M be the least common multiple of the lengths of all cycles in Bϕ . Then consider η := ϕ◦M .
Observe that Bη contains a loop (a, a) always when a is in a component in Bϕ . Since any two elements
connected in Bη are also connected in Bϕ , every component in Bϕ is a union of components in Bη , and
hence also Bη contains a loop for all elements existing in some component of Bη .
     The next step is to consider ψ := η |D| . Observe that Bψ and Bη have the same components, and
every component in the former graph contains all possible arcs. Indeed, there is obviously a path of
length at most |D| between any two elements in any component in Bη , but since every component
contains all loops, there is actually a path of length exactly |D| between any two elements in every
component. The claim follows.
     Now, Bθ where θ(x, y) := ψ(x, y) ∧ ψ(y, x) is a disjoint union of components in Bψ . It follows
that R = {m(x, y) | m ∈ θA } is an equivalence relation on a subset of D which contains at least two
equivalence classes.
     By Lemma 2.9, it is now enough to show that there is a first-order reduction from CSP({0, 1}; R0 , R1 ,
=), where = is the equality on {0, 1}, to CSP(A; R, Rc , Rd ), where Rc = {(c)}, Rd = {(d)} and c, d are
elements from two different equivalence classes of R. To this end we will provide a 1-ary interpretation
with 0 parameters ι of the signature τ = {R, Rc , Rd } in the signature σ = {=, R0 , R1 }. It is simple,
the formula ϕU (x) ≡ TRUE, ϕRc (x) ≡ R0 (x), ϕRd (x) ≡ R1 (x) and ϕR (x, y) ≡ ϕ= (x, y). It is now
straightforward to show that an instance I of CSP({0, 1}; R0 , R1 , =) has a solution if and only if ι(I)
is a solvable instance of CSP(A; R, Rc , Rd ).

3.1    Rewriting the (1)-minimality algorithm
In this section, we show that if a finite core structure A is unbalanced, then it has finite duality. We
start with proving that A has relational width 1.
Proposition 3.4. Let A be a finite relational structure that is a core. If A is unbalanced, then CSP(A)
is solvable by the (1)-minimality algorithm.

Proof. Let I = (V, C) be a non-trivial (1)-minimal instance of CSP(A). Define the instance graph GI of
I to be a digraph whose vertices are pairs of the form (C, x) where x is a variable in I and C ⊊ proj(x) I
is efpp-definable in A. There is an arc (C, x) → (D, y) in GI if there is a constraint C ⊆ AU in C such
that RC (u), where u satisfies S(u) = U and RC = {f (u) | f ∈ C}, is a (C, x, D, y)-implication.
     Since all constants are in A, we have that either projx (I) is a singleton for every variable x in V
or GI is non-empty. In the former case, since I is (1)-minimal and non-trivial, the singletons projx (I)
determine the solution of I and we are done. In the latter case, we will show that we can replace I with
an instance I ′ of CSP(A) which is non-trivial, (1)-minimal, satisfies projx I ′ ⊆ projx I for all x ∈ V
and projx I ′ ⊊ projx I for at least one x ∈ V. Observe that it is enough to complete the proof of the
proposition. Indeed, we may now repeatedly reduce projections of an instance to variables until every
projection holds only one element.
     The next step is to observe that GI is acyclic. Suppose it is not. Then, from the constraints
on a cycle in GI , we can extract some (Ci , xi , Ci+1 , xi+1 )-implications ψi in A with i ∈ [n − 1] for
some n ∈ N as well as a (Cn , xn , C1 , x1 )-implication ψn in A such that proj(x1 ) (ψ1 ) = proj(x1 ) (ψn ). It
follows that ϕ := ψ1 ◦ · · · ψn−1 ◦ ψn′ , where ψn′ is a copy of ψn with x1 renamed to xn+1 , is a balanced
(C1 , x1 , C1 , xn+1 )-implication. It contradicts the assumption that A is unbalanced.
     Let now (B, x) be a sink in GI . We set I ′ = (V, C ′ ) to be an instance of CSP(A) obtained from
I by replacing every constraint C ⊆ AU whose scope contains x with C ′ = {f ∈ C | f (x) ∈ B}. The
goal is to show that I ′ is a non-trivial and (1)-minimal instance of CSP(A) with projx I ′ = B and
projy I ′ = projy I for any y different from x. The instance I ′ is non-trivial since I is (1)-minimal. It
is an instance of CSP(A) because of our assumption that a finite template contains all efpp-definable
relations of arity arity(A). To see that I ′ is also (1)-minimal, assume on the contrary that there is a


                                                      10
constraint C ′ ∈ C ′ , originating from a constraint C ∈ C, with the scope U such that projy C ′ is not as
desired. Clearly y is not x, and clearly x is in the scope of C ′ . It follows that projy C ′ ⊊ projy C. Set
D := {f (y) | f ∈ C ′ } and observe that RC (u), where u satisfies S(u) = U and RC = {f (u) | f ∈ C}, is
a (B, x, D, y)-implication. It contradicts the fact that (B, x) is a sink in GI .

    Let A be a finite structure and I = (V, C) be an instance of CSP(A). Algorithm 1 produces a set
of constraints DV (I) = {Dz | z ∈ V}. We prove in Proposition 3.5 that a (1)-minimal instance I ′
equivalent to I satisfies projz I ′ = Dz for every z ∈ V.

Algorithm 1 Let A be a finite structure and I = (V, C) an instance of CSP(A).
 1: for all u ∈ V do                                              ▷ Step 1: Initialization
 2:    Du ← {f (u) | f ∈ C} for some C ∈ C with u ∈ S(C)
 3: end for
 4:
 5: while true do                                                                        ▷ Step 2: Pruning
 6:     For some C ⊆ AU in C and u ∈ V set:
        cu ← {f ∈ A{u} | ∃g ∈ C : (f = g|{u} ) ∧ V
 7:    D                                           z∈U (g|{z} ∈ Dz )}
 8:    if for all C, u, their D
                              cu contains Du then
 9:        break
10:    else
11:        Du ← Du ∩ D   cu
12:    end if
13: end while
14:
15: return D V (I)                                                                        ▷ Step 3: Return


Proposition 3.5. Let A be a finite structure, and I = (V, C) be an instance of CSP(A). Then I ′ =
(V, C ′ ) obtained from I by replacing every C ∈ C of the scope U with
                                                      ^
                                       C ′ = {f ∈ C |    f |{z} ∈ Dz }
                                                     z∈U

is (1)-minimal with proj(u) (I ′ ) = Du for all u ∈ V and equivalent to I.

Proof. To see that I ′ is equivalent to I, it is enough to observe that whenever Algorithm 1 reduces the
set Du for some u ∈ V , the removed values cannot be a part of a solution to I.
    To prove (1)-minimality of I ′ assume on the contrary that there is a constraint C ′ as defined in the
formulation of the lemma and u ∈ U such that proj(u) (C ′ ) does not contain Du . Then,
                                                                  ^
                       cu = {f ∈ A{u} | ∃g ∈ C : (f = g|{u} ) ∧
                       D                                                (g|{z} ∈ Dz )}
                                                                  z∈U

does not contain Du , which implies that Algorithm 1 could not return Du . It completes the proof of
the proposition.

    The next step is to introduce tree efpp-formulae, which play an important role in producing ob-
structions for unbalanced A.
    Let I = (V, C) be an instance of CSP(A) and X be a set of copies of variables from V such that
every variable in V has infinitely many copies in X . We say that a constraint C ′ is a copy of a constraint
C ∈ C if it is obtained from C by replacing every variable from S(C) by its copy in X . We will also say
that an atom R(x) is a copy of a constraint C ∈ C if there exists a constraint C ′ with the scope S(x)
which is a copy of C over the relation R.
Definition 3.6. Let I = (V, C) be an instance of CSP(A) and X a set containing infinitely many copies
of every variable in V. A tree efpp-formula ϕ over I with a distinguished variable r0 ∈ Var(ϕ) called a
root, is a conjunction of copies of constraints in C and is in one of the following forms.


                                                    11
   1. It is a single atomic formula R(x) with r ∈ S(x).
   2. It is a conjunction of tree efpp-formulae ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm with the roots r1 , . . . , rm and a new copy
      ϕ0 := R(x) of a constraint in C such that
            S
       (a) i∈{0,...,m} {ri } ⊆ S(x),
         (b) Var(ϕ0 ) ∩ Var(ϕi ) = {ri } for all i ∈ [m], and
         (c) Var(ϕi ) ∩ Var(ϕj ) = {ri } ∩ {rj } for all i, j ∈ [m].

    The subformulae ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm of ϕ in Item 2 will be called the leaf subformulae of ϕ and ϕ0 the root
subformula of ϕ. A formula path in ϕ is a sequence ψ1 , . . . , ψt+1 of subformulae of ϕ such that ψt+1 is
ϕ, ψ1 is an atomic formula and for every i ∈ [t], ψi is a leaf subformula of ψi+1 .
    A tree efpp-formula is a tree efpp-formula over I for some instance I of CSP(A).
   Observe that tree efpp-formulae are quantifier-free. In the following, we will be interested in projr ϕA
where ϕ is a tree efpp-formula and r is the root of ϕ.
Definition 3.7. We say that a tree efpp-formula ϕ with the root r is a minimal tree efpp-formula over
I if projr ϕA = B and ϕ is minimal with respect to the number of atoms among all tree efpp-formulae
ψ over I with the same root r satisfying projr ψ A = B.
Note that in the above definition, we allow B to be equal to ∅. We will now prove that whenever
Algorithm 1 derives some new Du over an instance I, then there is a tree efpp-formula ϕ over I with
the root r which is a copy of u so that the projection of ϕA onto r is {f (u) | f ∈ Du } with Du from
DV (I).
Proposition 3.8. Let A be a finite structure and I an instance of CSP(A). It follows that whenever
Algorithm 1 computes Du either in Step 1 or Step 2, then there exists a tree efpp-formula ϕ over I with
the root r being a copy of u in X so that projr (ϕ)A = {f (u) | f ∈ Du }.

Proof. The proof goes by the induction of the number of steps executed by Algorithm 1. For any Du
computed in Step 1 we just take an atom R(x) which is a copy of the constraint C and set the root to
a copy of u in x.
    Assume now that Algorithm 1 computes Du in Step 2 from Dz1 , . . . , Dzm with U = {z1 , . . . , zm }. By
the induction hypothesis, there are ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm with the roots r1 , . . . , rm , respectively, being the copies
                                                1 , . . . , ϕm onto r1 , . . . , rm are the sets {f (z1 ) | f ∈ Dz1 }, . . . ,
of z1 , . . . , zm such that the projection of ϕA            A

{f (zmS) | f ∈ Dzm }. Let ϕ0 = R(x) be a copy of the constraint C ∈ C of the scope U used in Step 2 such
that i∈[m] {ri } = S(x). Since X is infinite, we may secure the conditions (2a)–(2c) in Definition 3.6.
                               V
Observe now that ψ := i∈[m] ϕi with the root rj , where j ∈ [m] and rj is a copy of u, is a tree
efpp-formula over I satisfying projrj ψ A = {f (u) | f ∈ Du }.

We are now ready to prove that unbalanced finite structures have finite duality.
Proposition 3.9. Let A be a finite core structure over a finite signature. If A is unbalanced, then it
has finite duality.

Proof. By Propositions 3.4, 3.5, and 3.8, for every unsatisfiable instance I of CSP(A) there is a minimal
tree efpp-formula ϕI over I such that the projection of ϕAI onto its root is ∅. Without loss of generality,
we assume that no proper subformula of ϕI that is a tree efpp-formula has this property.
    Let Φ′A be the set of all formulae ϕI over all unsatisfiable instances I of CSP(A) and ΦA be a
maximal subset of Φ′A such that no two formulae in ΦA may be obtained from each other by renaming
the variables.
    Assume first that every formula in ΦA has the longest formula path shorter than d = (2|A| )2 · |A| + 2.
We will show that in this case ΦA is of finite size. By the induction of l ≤ d, we will show that there
are only finitely many minimal tree efpp-formulae of the longest formula path shorter than or equal
to l up to the renaming of variables. Since the signature of A is finite, there are clearly only finitely
many different atoms up to the renaming of the variables. All other tree efpp-formulae are constructed
according to Item 2 and hence their longest formula paths are of length strictly greater than 1. We may
therefore assume that the induction hypothesis holds for l and we will prove that it also holds for (l + 1).
Consider a tree efpp-formula composed out of an atom ϕ0 := R(x) and tree efpp-formulae ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm
with the longest formula paths shorter than or equal to l. Since the number of different values in A is


                                                             12
|A| and ϕ is supposed to be minimal, we observe that m ≤ |A| · | S(x)|. By the induction hypothesis,
there are only finitely many possible ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm up to the renaming of the variables. Since the signature
of A is finite, we have that there are only finitely many tree efpp-formulae of the longest formula path
shorter than or equal to l + 1, up to the renaming of the variables. It proves the induction step and
completes the proof of the claim. It follows that ΦA is finite.
     We write Dϕ for the canonical structure of a tree efpp-formula ϕ, that is, a structure whose domain
is the set of variables in ϕ and RDϕ has a tuple x if and only, if ϕ contains an atom R(x).
     In order to complete the proof of the first case, we will show that O = {Dϕ | ϕ ∈ ΦA } is an
obstruction set for A. Assume first that I is unsatisfiable. Then, there exists a minimal tree efpp-
formula ϕI ∈ Φ′A over I such that the projection of ϕA          I onto its root is ∅. The formula ψI which is
ϕI with the variables renamed is therefore in ΦA . The canonical structure Dψ maps to I, seen as the
structure over domain V, first by renaming the elements of its domain so that they were named as the
variables of ϕI and then by taking a homomorphism sending every variable in ϕI , which is a copy of
a variable in I, to the original variable. It follows that if I is unsatisfiable, then there is D ∈ O that
maps homomorphically to I. On the other hand, the projection of ϕA onto its root is ∅ and hence Dϕ
does not map to A. Thus, if Dϕ maps to I, then it has no solution. It completes the proof of the fact
that O defined above is a finite obstruction set for A.
     To complete the proof of the proposition, we will show that whenever ΦA contains a tree efpp-
formula of a longest formula path longer than d = (2|A| )2 · |A| + 2, then there is a balanced implication
in A. Suppose that ϕ′ is such a tree efpp-formula and that the projection of ϕ′A onto its root r is ∅.
By the assumption made above, the projection of ϕA onto its root is a non-empty set for every leaf
subformula ϕ of ϕ′ . Take such a leaf subformula ϕ of ϕ′ with a longest formula path π consisting of
(d − 1) tree efpp-formulae: ψ1 , . . . , ψd−1 with roots r1 , . . . , rd−1 , respectively, such that ψ1 is an atomic
formula and ψd−1 is ϕ. Let ξ be ϕ with ψ1 removed from it. Since ϕ is minimal, it follows that the
                                                                                     ′
projection Cd−1 of ϕA onto rd−1 is strictly contained in the projection Cd−1              of ξ A onto rd−1 . In fact, it
follows that the projection Ci of ϕA onto ri is strictly contained in the projection Ci′ of ξ A onto ri for
every i ∈ [d − 1]. The roots r1 , . . . , rd−1 do not have to be pairwise different but by the construction
of a tree efpp-formula presented in Definition 3.6, we have that if ri is the same variable as rj for some
i, j ∈ [d − 1], then rj is rk for all k ∈ [i, j]. Since ϕ is minimal, the interval [i, j] cannot contain more
than |A| numbers. By the counting argument, there are different roots ri , rj with i < j in [d − 1] such
that (Ci , Ci′ ) equals (Cj , Cj′ ). Observe that ξ is a balanced (Ci , ri , Ci , rj )-implication. It completes the
proof of the proposition.

We are now ready to reprove the Larose-Tesson theorem using the results provided in this section.
Theorem 1.2. (Larose-Tesson) Let A be a finite structure over a finite signature. Then one of the
following holds.
    • CSP(A) is L-hard (under first-order reduction).
    • CSP(A) is first-order definable, and hence in non-uniform AC0 .

Proof. Without loss of generality, we may assume that A is a core. If there is a balanced implication
in A, then by Proposition 3.3, we have that CSP(A) is L-hard. Otherwise, by 3.9 the structure A has
finite duality. Hence, CSP(A) is first-order definable and it is in non-uniform AC0 .


4     Infinite CSPs
In this section, we prove Theorem 1.3. We start by redefining the notion of an implication to capture
atomic dependencies over tuples of elements.
Definition 4.1 (Implication). Let A be a relational structure, k, l ∈ N and C ⊆ Ak , D ⊆ Al be efpp-
definable in A and non-empty. Let u and v be tuples of pairwise different variables of length k and l,
respectively. We say that an efpp-formula ϕ with (S(u) ∪ S(v) ⊆ Var(ϕ)) is a (C, u, D, v)-implication
in A if all of the following hold:
    1. C ⊊ proju (ϕA ),
    2. D ⊊ projv (ϕA ),
    3. for all f ∈ ϕA , it holds that f (u) ∈ C implies f (v) ∈ D,


                                                          13
   4. for all a ∈ D, there exists f ∈ ϕA such that f (u) ∈ C and f (v) = a.
We sometimes write a (C, D)-implication if u, v are irrelevant or understood from the context. Moreover,
we call an implication balanced if (C, proju (ϕA )) equals (D, projv (ϕA )).
    Implications, as defined above, are often composed as follows.
Definition 4.2 (Composition). Let A be a relational structure, let lC , lD , lE ≥ 1, let C ⊆ AlC , D ⊆
AlD , E ⊆ AlE be non-empty, let ϕ1 be a (C, u1 , D, v1 )-implication in A, and let ϕ2 be a (D, u2 , E, v2 )-
                                                           ′                               1      2
implication in A such that projv1 ϕA              A
                                     1 = proju2 ϕ2 . Let ϕ2 be a copy of ϕ2 such that v = u and so
that Var(ϕ1 ) and Var(ϕ′2 ) do not share any other variables. We define ϕ1 ◦ ϕ2 to be the efpp-formula
(ϕ1 ∧ ϕ′2 ).
    Let ψ be a (C, u, C, v)-implication. For n ≥ 2, we write ψ ◦n for the efpp-formula ψ ◦ · · · ◦ ψ where
ψ appears exactly n times.
We will now define a few important properties of the implication that are helpful in proofs.
Definition 4.3 (Propriety). We say that a (C, u, D, v)-implication with z satisfying S(z) = S(u)∩S(v)
is proper if projz ϕA = projz (C(u))A = projz (D(v))A .
     For a (C, u, D, v)-implication ϕ in A we define πϕ ⊆ [k] × [l] to be a binary relation with (i, j) ∈ π
if ui is the same variable as vj . Since both u and v are tuples of pairwise different variables; it cannot
happen that (i, j), (i, j ′ ) ∈ πϕ for j ̸= j ′ or (j, i), (j ′ , i) ∈ πϕ for j ̸= j ′ . From which we conclude, that
both πϕ and (πϕ )−1 are injective partial functions. Also notice that πϕ1 ◦ϕ2 = πϕ2 ◦ πϕ1 .
Definition 4.4 (Nontriviality, Stability). We say that a (C, u, D, v)-implication is nontrivial if
neither πϕ nor (πϕ )−1 is a total function and that it is stable if it is nontrivial and πϕ is an identity on
its domain.
   The following two auxiliary lemmata show that the composition of implications preserves some
properties defined above. A version of the first of the lemmata is Lemma 31 in [NPW25].
Lemma 4.5. Let k ≥ 1 and A be a first-order expansion of a k-homogeneous structure B. Let ϕ1 , ϕ2 be
implications in A as in Definition 4.2 with lC , lD , lE ≤ k.
     Then ϕ := ϕ1 ◦ ϕ2 is a (C, u1 , E, v2 )-implication in A with proju1 ϕA = proju1 ϕA               A
                                                                                         1 and projv2 ϕ =
projv2 ϕ2 . Moreover, for all orbits O1 ⊆ proju1 (ϕ1 ), O3 ⊆ projv2 (ϕ2 ) in B, ϕ contains an O1 O3 -
         A                                              A                  A         A

mapping if and only if there exists an orbit O2 in B such that ϕA    1 contains an O1 O2 -mapping and ϕ2
                                                                                                         A

contains an O2 O3 -mapping.
     Furthermore, if both ϕ1 and ϕ2 are nontrivial or proper, then ϕ is also nontrivial or proper, respec-
tively, and if both ϕ1 , ϕ2 are both balanced and stable, then also ϕ is balanced and stable.

Proof. Let m1 be an O1 O2 -mapping in ϕA    1 and m2 an O2 O3 -mapping in ϕ2 . Since lD ≤ k and A is
                                                                                 A

k-homogeneous, there is an automorphism α ∈ Aut(B) sending m1 (v ) to m2 (u2 ). It follows that ϕ
                                                                            1

contains an O1 O3 -mapping m : Var(ϕ) → A satisfying m(u1 ) = α(m1 (u1 )) and m(v2 ) = m2 (v2 ). On
the other hand, if m is an O1 O3 -mapping in ϕA , then by the definition of ϕ we have that m(v1 ) = m(u2 )
in O2 for some orbit O2 ∈ projv1 ϕA . Then ϕ1 contains an O1 O2 -mapping and ϕ2 an O2 O3 -mapping.
It is now straightforward to verify that ϕ is a (C, u1 , E, v2 )-implication with proju1 ϕA = proju1 ϕA
                                                                                                      1 and
projv2 ϕA = projv2 ϕA 2.
     If ϕ1 is nontrivial, then πϕ1 is a partial function and hence πϕ1 ◦ϕ2 = πϕ2 ◦ πϕ1 is also a partial
function. It follows that ϕ is nontrivial provided both ϕ1 and ϕ2 are nontrivial.
     Let now z1 , z2 and z be such that S(z1 ) = S(u1 ) ∩ S(v1 ), S(z2 ) = S(u2 ) ∩ S(v2 ) and S(z) =
S(u )∩S(v2 ). Notice that S(z) equals to S(z1 )∩S(z2 ). Let now both efpp-formulae ϕ1 and ϕ2 be proper.
     1
                                         1 A                  1 A                                    2 A
It follows that projz1 ϕA                                                            A
                         1 = projz1 (C(u )) = projz1 (D(v )) and that projz2 ϕ2 = projz2 (D(u )) =
projz2 (E(v )) . To see that ϕ is proper, observe that projz (C(u )) = projz ϕ1 = projz ϕ2 = projz (E(v2 ))A .
             2 A                                                   1 A

     Finally, if both ϕ1 and ϕ2 are balanced and stable, then ϕ is clearly balanced but also stable since
πϕ = πϕ1 ◦ πϕ2 is also an identity if both πϕ1 and πϕ2 are.

Finally, we show that one can construct a stable, balanced and proper implication from a nontrivial,
balanced and proper one.
Lemma 4.6. Let k ≥ 1 and A be a first-order expansion of a finitely bounded k-homogeneous structure
and ϕ be a nontrivial, balanced and proper (C, C)-implication in A. Then ϕ efpp-defines a stable,
balanced and proper (C, C)-implication in A.


                                                         14
Proof. Let ϕ be a balanced, proper and nontrivial (C, C)-implication in A with C ⊆ Am for some m ≤ k.
Observe that πϕ◦ϕ = πϕ ◦ πϕ . Since both πϕ and (πϕ )−1 is a partial injective function, πϕ seen as a
digraph is a disjoint union of directed cycles and directed paths. Let now l be a common multiple of
the lengths of all cycles in πϕ greater than m. It follows that πϕ◦l seen as a digraph is an independent
set with some vertices having loops, hence ϕ◦l is a stable (C, C)-implication. It is balanced and proper
by Lemma 4.5.

4.1      Hardness results
In this section, we provide hardness results. First, we prove that an expansion of any model-complete
core B by a balanced implication with some extra reasonable properties gives rise to an L-hard CSP.
Proposition 4.7. Let k, l ≥ 1 and A be a first-order expansion of a k-homogeneous l-bounded model-
complete core B. Suppose that there is a stable, balanced, and proper (C, u, C, v)-implication ϕ in A.
Then CSP(A) is L-hard under first-order reduction.

Proof. Let D := proju ϕA = projv ϕA . We first define Bϕ to be a directed graph over orbits of tuples in
B contained in D such that there is an arc O → P if ϕA contains an OP-mapping. We call a strongly
connected component in Bϕ that has at least one arc a component. A component F in Bϕ is a sink in
Bϕ if every arc originating in F ends up in F . On the other hand, a component F is a source in Bϕ if
every arc targeting an element in F starts also in F .
     Let z be such that S(z) = S(u) ∩ S(v) and assume that both u and v are of length m ≤ k. Since
ϕ is stable, we may assume that z = (ur+1 , . . . um ) = (vr+1 , . . . , vm ) for some r ∈ [m]. If r = m,
then we assume that S(z) is empty. Further we assume that all free variables of ϕ(u1 , . . . , ur , v1 , . . . , vr ,
vr+1 , . . . , vm ) are those mentioned in the brackets. Since ϕ is proper, there exists an orbit P ∈ projz ϕA
of (m − r)-tuples in B, an orbit O1 ∈ C and an orbit O2 ∈ D \ C such that the projection of both O1
and O2 to the last (m − r) coordinates equals to P . The graph Bϕ is finite and smooth. Observe that
for any arc (O1 , O2 ) in Bϕ the projection of O1 and O2 to the last (m − r) coordinates is the same orbit
P . It follows that Bϕ contains two different components such that the projection of any orbit in the
union of these two components to the last (m − r) coordinates equals P .
     Now, as in the proof of Proposition 3.3, let M be the least common multiple of the length of all
cycles in Bϕ . Then observe that Bη with η := ϕ◦M contains a loop (O, O) always when O is in a
component in Bϕ . Since any two elements connected in Bη are also connected in Bϕ , every component
in Bϕ is a union of components in Bη , and hence also Bη contains a loop for all elements existing in
some component of Bη .
     Consider ψ := η |orb(D)| , where orb(D) is the set of orbits of m-tuples in B contained in D, and observe
that Bψ and Bη have the same components, and every component in the former digraph contains all possi-
ble arcs. Now, Bθ where θ(u1 , . . . , ur , v1 , . . . , vr , vr+1 , . . . , vm ) ≡ ψ(u1 , . . . , ur , v1 , . . . , vr , vr+1 , . . . , vm ) ∧
ψ(v1 , . . . , vr , u1 , . . . , ur , vr+1 , . . . , vm ) is a disjoint union of components in Bψ . It follows that Rθ =
{(m(u), m(v)) | m ∈ θA } seen as a relation over orbits of m-tuples in B is an equivalence relation on a
subset of orb(D) which contains at least two equivalence classes such that for any O1 , O2 in their union
the projection of O1 and O2 to the last (m − r) variables is the same.
     For the first-order reduction, it would be natural to reduce from CSP({0, 1}; R0 , R1 , =), where =
is the equality on {0, 1}, to CSP(A; R, O1 , O2 ) where R = {m(u1 , . . . , ur , v1 , . . . , vm ) | m ∈ θA } and
O1 , O2 are orbits from two different equivalence classes of Rθ . The problem is that O1 and O2 may not
be efpp-definable. Therefore, in addition to R, we will need ROi ,− with i ∈ [2] which is R where Oi is
imposed on (u1 , . . . , ur , vr+1 , . . . , vm ) such that whenever proji,j O1 ⊆ {(a, a) | a ∈ A}, then we identify
the corresponding variables. All other atoms in the pp-definition of O1 are also efpp-definable, so we
can use them in the definition of ROi ,− . Similarly, we also need R−,Oi with i ∈ [2] which is like ROi ,−
but we impose Oi on (v1 , . . . , vm ). Furthermore we need ROi ,Oj with i, j ∈ [1, 2] which is again like R
but this time Oi is imposed on (u1 , . . . , ur , vr+1 , . . . , vm ) and Oj is imposed on (v1 , . . . , vm ).
     Assume without loss of generality that the definition of ROi ,− is over variables (u1 , . . . , uqi , v1 , . . . ,
vm ), the definition of R−,Oi is over variables (u1 , . . . , ur , v1 , . . . , vqi , vr+1 , . . . , vm ) with qi ≤ r. In
the same fashion, the definition of ROi ,Oj with i, j ∈ [2] is over variables (u1 , . . . , uqi , v1 , . . . , vqj ,
ur+1 , . . . , um ).
     We will now provide a 2-ary interpretation with m parameters ι of the signature τ containing R,
ROi ,− , R−,Oi and ROi ,Oj with i, j ∈ [2] in the signature σ = {R= , R0 , R1 }.
     Our intention is to interpret an element of a σ-structure in aWτ -structure as a pair consisting of
                                                                                         m
the element and one of the parameters. Thus, we set ϕU (x, p) ≡ i=1 (x2 = pi ) for x = (x1 , x2 ) and


                                                                     15
p = (p1 , . . . , pm ). Then we define an auxiliary formula parametrized by a natural number q ≤ r:

                                                       ^                        m
                                                                                ^                      q
                                                                                                       ^                      m
                                                                                                                              ^
    ηq (x1 , . . . , xq , xr+1 , . . . , xm , p) ≡          (xi1 = xj1 ) ∧            (xi1 = pi ) ∧        (xi2 = pi ) ∧            (xi2 = pi )
                                                     i,j∈[q]                  i=r+1                    i=1                  i=r+1


which is satisfied by ((x, p1 ), . . . , (x, pq ), (pr+1 , pr+1 ), . . . , (pm , pm )) for any x. We now turn to defining
the formulae interpreting the relations over τ . First we set the formula ϕR (x1 , . . . , xr , y1 , . . . , ym , p)
to be equivalent to

ηr (x1 , . . . , xr , yr+1 , . . . , ym , p)∧ηr (y1 , . . . , ym , p)∧R= (x11 , y11 )∧¬R0 (x11 )∧¬R0 (y11 )∧¬R1 (x11 )∧¬R1 (y11 ).

The interpretation of ROi ,− with i ∈ [2] is ϕROi ,− (x1 , . . . , xqi , y1 , . . . , ym , p) equivalent to

   ηqi (x1 , . . . , xqi , yr+1 , . . . , ym , p) ∧ ηr (y1 , . . . , ym , p) ∧ R= (x11 , y11 ) ∧ Ri (x11 ) ∧ ¬R0 (y11 ) ∧ ¬R1 (y11 ).

The interpretation of R−,Oi with i ∈ [2] is ϕR−,Oi (x1 , . . . , xr , y1 , . . . , yqi , yr+1 , . . . ym , p) equivalent to


 ηr (x1 , . . . , xr , yr+1 , . . . , ym , p) ∧ ηqi (y1 , . . . , yqi , yr+1 , . . . ym , p) ∧ R= (x11 , y11 ) ∧ ¬R0 (x11 ) ∧ ¬R1 (x11 ) ∧ Ri (y11 ).

Finally, the interpretation of ROi ,Oj with i, j ∈ [2] is ϕROi ,Oj (x1 , . . . , xqi , y1 , . . . , yqj , yr+1 , . . . ym , p)
equivalent to

   ηqi (x1 , . . . , xqi , yr+1 , . . . , ym , p) ∧ ηqj (y1 , . . . , yqj , yr+1 , . . . ym , p) ∧ R= (x11 , y11 ) ∧ Ri (x11 ) ∧ Rj (y11 ).



The second proposition addresses the case where a model-complete core is expanded by equality.
Proposition 4.8. Let A be a first-order expansion of a finitely bounded homogeneous model-complete
core B. Suppose that there is an efpp-definition of =C (x, y) ≡ C(x) ∧ C(y) ∧ x = y in A where C is
a unary orbit that contains at least two different elements. Then CSP(A) is L-hard under first-order
reduction.

Proof. Let OC be a binary injective orbit in B such that the projection to either of the coordinates is C.
We will provide a 1-ary interpretation with no parameters ι of the signature τ = {OC , =} in the signature
σ = {R= , R0 , R1 } where R= is the equality on {0, 1}. We set ϕU (x) ≡ TRUE for the interpretation of
the universe and ϕOC (x, y) ≡ R0 (x) ∧ R1 (y) and ϕ=C (x, y) ≡ R= (x, y) for the relations.

4.2       Equality-free and unbalanced structures
We will say that a first-order expansion A of a finitely bounded homogeneous structure is equality-free
if =A (x, y) ≡ (x = y ∧ A(x) ∧ A(y)), where A is an unary orbit with |A| ≥ 2, is not efpp-definable. We
say that A is unbalanced when there is no stable, balanced, and proper implication in A. The goal now
is to show that an equality-free and unbalanced A has finite duality. We take steps analogous to what
we did in the previous section for finite structures.
     A version of the following lemma is Lemma 20 in [NPW25].
Lemma 4.9. Let k, ℓ ≥ 1 and B be a k-homogeneous ℓ-bounded model-complete core and A be an
unbalanced and equality-free first-order expansion of B. Let I = (V, C) be a nontrivial, (k, max(k, ℓ))-
minimal instance of CSP(A) such that for every v ∈ IkV , projv (I) contains precisely one almost injective
orbit of k-tuples in B. Then I has a solution.

Proof. Observe first that since A is k-homogeneous and I is (k, max(k, ℓ))-minimal and nontrivial, every
constraint in I contains precisely one orbit. Also, notice that since A is equality-free, this is an almost
injective orbit. Let I ′ be an extension of I which additionally contains a constraint Cv = {f | f ∈
projv (I)} for every tuple of at most k pairwise different variables. Since B is k-homogeneous and ℓ-
bounded, we have that I ′ is an instance of CSP(A) by the assumption from Section 2.3 that A as a
model-complete core and an expansion of a k-homogeneous ℓ-bounded structure contains all almost
injective orbits of at most max(k, ℓ, arity(A))-tuples. Then for every one element set C definable in A
we identify all variables y in I ′ such that proj(y) (I) is a constraint over C. The identification involves


                                                                         16
replacing constraints with new ones in which several identified variables are replaced by a single variable,
and the mappings in the constraints are altered accordingly. Observe that now every constraint is over
exactly one injective orbit. Name this new instance I ′′ . It is also an instance of CSP(A). Consider
now an instance I ′′B which is a restriction of I ′′ to the constraints that correspond to relations which
are actually in B. In particular, this instance contains all constraints Cv introduced above. By the
k-homogeneity of B, it follows that I ′′B has a solution if and only if I has a solution.
      In order to show the former, consider the structure DB over the domain V which for every R in the
signature τB of B contains a tuple v if and only if there is a constraint Cv in I ′′B with the scope S(v)
such that {f (v) | f ∈ Cv } = RB . We claim that DB embeds into B. Suppose, for contradiction, that it
is not the case. Then there exists a bound F of size b with b ≤ ℓ such that F embeds into DB via g. Let
v1 , . . . , vb be all elements in the image of this embedding. Find a constraint C ∈ I such that v1 , . . . , vb
are contained in its scope. Since C is non-empty, there exists f ∈ C which, by the observation above, is
injective. Further, the composition of g and f is an embedding of F into B, which yields a contradiction.
Now, the embedding of DB into B is a solution of I ′′B . It completes the proof of the lemma.

   We now turn to proving that every unbalanced and equality-free A has relational width (k, max(k, ℓ)).
The following proposition is a generalization of Proposition 21 in [NPW25].
Proposition 4.10. Let k, ℓ ≥ 1 and B be a k-homogeneous ℓ-bounded model-complete core and A be an
unbalanced and equality-free first-order expansion of B. Then A has relational width (k, max(k, ℓ)).

Proof. Let I = (V, C) be a non-trivial (k, max(k, ℓ))-minimal instance of CSP(A); we will show that
there exists a solution to I. To this end, we will inductively define, for every i ≥ 0, a (k, max(k, ℓ))-
minimal instance I i = (V, C i ) of CSP(A) with the same variable set as I such that I 0 = I and such
that for every i ≥ 1, C i contains for every constraint Ci−1 ∈ C i−1 a constraint Ci such that Ci ⊆ Ci−1 ,
                                                V
and such that moreover for some vi ∈ Im            with m ≤ k, it holds that projvi (I i ) ⊊ projvi (I i−1 ), or for
              V
every v ∈ Ik , it holds that projv (I i ) contains only one almost injective orbit in B.
    Let I 0 := I. Let i ≥ 1. We define Gi to be the digraph over vertices of the form (C, v) where v
is a tuple of pairwise different variables of length m ≤ k and C ⊊ projv (I i−1 ) is efpp-definable in A.
We have an arc (C, v) → (D, w) in Gi if there is a proper and nontrivial (C, v, D, w)-implication ϕ in
A with projx ϕA = projx (I i−1 ) for all x ∈ {v, w}.
    We now claim that under the assumptions of the lemma, either for every v ∈ IkV the projection
projv (I i ) contains only one almost injective orbit in B, and we can invoke Lemma 4.9, or there is
      V
v ∈ Im   for some m ≤ k such that O ⊊ {f (v) | f ∈ projv (I i )} for some almost injective orbit O, and, by
Observation 2.1, Gi contains at least one vertex. Indeed, otherwise there exist two variables u1 , u2 ∈ V
such that proj(u1 ,u2 ) (I i−1 ) is a union of orbits of the form =A (x, y) ≡ A(x) ∧ A(y) ∧ x = y with
|A| ≥ 2. If the union is trivial, that is, it consists of only one such =A , then we have a contradiction
with the fact that A is equality-free. If the union is nontrivial, that is proj(u1 ,u2 ) (I i−1 ) contains both
=A (x, y) as well as some =B (x, y) ≡ B(x) ∧ B(y) ∧ x = y with |B| ≥ 2, then RC (x, y) such that
RC = {f (u1 , u2 ) | f ∈ proj(u1 ,u2 ) (I i−1 )} is a balanced, proper and non-trivial (A, x, A, y)-implication.
The latter contradicts the assumption that A is unbalanced. From now on, we assume that Gi has at
least one vertex.

Claim 1. For every i, the graph Gi is acyclic.

Proof. Assume, on the contrary, that Gi contains a cycle. Then there exists n ∈ N, a proper and nontriv-
ial (Ci , xi , Ci1 , xi+1 )-implication ψi in A for all i ∈ [n − 1] as well as a (Cn , xn , C1 , x1 )-implication ψn in
A. Rename the variables x1 in ψn to xn+1 so that the obtained implication ϕ′ was a (Cn , xn , C1 , xn+1 )-
implication. By Lemma 4.5, it follows that ϕ := ψ1 ◦ · · · ◦ ψn−1 ◦ ϕ′ is a non-trivial, proper and balanced
(C1 , x1 , C1 , xn+1 )-implication. By Lemma 4.6, we may obtain from ϕ a stable, proper and balanced
implication in A which contradicts the fact that A is unbalanced.
                                                                                 V
    By the claim above, the graph Gi has a sink (Fvi , vi ) in Gi for some vi ∈ Im with m ≤ k. We intend
to choose a sink in Gi with an additional property. We say that (Fvi , vi ) is simplified if for every wi
with S(wi ) ⊊ S(vi ) it holds that projwi (Fvi (vi ))A = projwi (I i−1 ).

Claim 2. There exists a sink (Fvi , vi ) in Gi which is simplified.




                                                          17
Proof. Observe first that if (Fvi , vi ) is not simplified because (projwi (Fvi (vi ))A ̸= projwi (I i−1 )) for
some subtuple wi of vi , then the pair (projwi (Fvi (vi ))A , wi ) is a vertex in Gi . In particular, there is
a subtuple wi of vi such that (projwi (Fvi (vi ))A , wi ) is simplified. In the worst case, wi contains only
one variable.
     Choose therefore some simplified vertex (D1 , w1 ) in Gi . Either it is a sink or there is some non-
trivial and proper (D1 , w1 , D2 , w2 )-implication ϕ in A. We claim that in the latter case, we can choose
(D2 , w2 ), which is simplified. Indeed, suppose (D2 , w2 ) is not simplified and (D2 , w2 ) is a pair with the
shortest w2 so that such an implication ϕ in A exists. Then, there exists x with S(x) ⊊ S(w2 ) such that
projx (D2 (w2 ))A ̸= projx (I i−1 ). Since ϕ is proper we have that S(x) is not contained in S(w1 ) ∩ S(w2 ).
It follows that ϕ is also a proper and non-trivial (D1 , w1 , projx (D2 (w2 ))A , x)-implication. Since x is
shorter than w2 we have the contradiction and we can assume that (D2 , w2 ) is simplified. In the same
fashion, we can choose (D3 , w3 ), . . . , (Dm , wm ) which are all simplified and such that for every i ∈ [m−1]
there is a (Di , wi , Di+1 , wi+1 )-implication ϕ in A with projz (ϕA  i ) = projz (I i−1 ) for all z ∈ {wi , wi+1 }.
It follows that Gi contains a path (D1 , w1 ) → · · · → (Dm , wm ). Since Gi is acyclic, with m large enough
we may conclude that (Dm , wm ) is a desired simplified sink in Gi .

     In order to define I i we set Ci := {f ∈ Ci−1 | f (vi ) ∈ Fvi } when the scope of Ci contains S(vi ) and
Ci := Ci−1 otherwise. Clearly, Ci ⊆ Ci−1 . Finally, we define C i = {Ci | Ci−1 ∈ C i−1 }. Observe that the
following claim completes the proof of the proposition.

Claim 3. Assume that Gi is acyclic. Then, for every i ≥ 1, the instance I i , as defined above, is a
                                                                                          V
nontrivial and (k, max(k, ℓ))-minimal instance of CSP(A). Moreover, for every v ∈ Im          with m ≤ k and
S(vi ) ⊆ S(v) we have projv (I i ) = {f | f ∈ projv (I i−1 ) ∧ f (vi ) ∈ Fvi } and projv (I i ) = projv (I i−1 )
otherwise.

Proof. The instance I i is nontrivial since I i−1 is (k, max(k, l))-minimal.
     To show that I i is (k, max(k, l))-minimal and that the projections of I i to tuples of at most k
variables are as in the formulation of the claim, assume on the contrary that there is a constraint Ci whose
scope contains v of length at most k and projv (Ci ) is not as desired. Observe first that by (k, max(k, ℓ))-
minimality of I i−1 we have that S(v) cannot contain S(vi ). However, by the construction of I i , the scope
of Ci contains vi . It follows that the desired value of projv (Ci ) is projv (I i−1 ) = projv (Ci−1 ). Since it
is not the case, we have that RCi−1 (x) where S(x) is the scope of Ci−1 and RCi−1 = {f (x) | f ∈ Ci−1 }
is a (Fvi , vi , Fv , v)-implication for some Fv ⊊ projv (RCi−1 (x))A . Since (Fvi , vi ) is simplified, we have
that S(v) cannot be contained in S(vi ). Hence S(vi ) is not comparable with S(v) w.r.t. the inclusion.
It follows that ϕ is non-trivial. It is also proper since (Fvi , vi ) is simplified. Thus, the existence of ϕ
contradicts the fact (Fvi , vi ) is a sink in Gi . It completes the proof of the fact that I i is (k, max(k, l))-
minimal.
     By the assumption in Section 2, all efpp-definable relations of arity up to max(k, ℓ, arity(A)) are in
A; it follows that I i is an instance of CSP(A).



4.3     Rewriting (k, max(k, l))-minimality
Let k, l ≥ 1 and A be a first-order expansion of a k-homogeneous l-bounded model-complete core B
and I = (V, C) be an instance of CSP(A). We define I max = (V, C max ) so that C max contains C and
additionally all constraints AU for all max(k, l)-element subsets U of V. Algorithm 2 presented below
enforces the second condition in the definition of a (k, max(k, l))-minimal instance working over I max .
                                                                              Sk
It first updates iteratively the collection of constraints DkV (I) = {DU | U ∈ i=1 Vi } and then updates
                                                                                     

I max so that the projections of constraints in new C max to sets of at most k-variables were equal to the
constraints in DkV (I).
     The goal of the next proposition is to show that the outcome of Algorithm 2 induces on I max a
(k, max(k, l))-minimal instance of CSP(A). It is a generalization of Proposition 3.5.
Proposition 4.11. Let k, ℓ ≥ 1 and A be a first-order expansion of a k-homogeneous ℓ-bounded model-
complete core, I = (V, C) be an instance of CSP(A), and I max = (V, C max ) an extension of I such that
C max contains C and additionally all constraints AU over all max(k, ℓ)-element subsets U of V. Then




                                                         18
Algorithm 2 Let A be a first-order expansion of a k-homogeneous l-bounded model-complete
core and I max = (V, C max ) an extension of an instance I = (V, C) of CSP(A) such that C max
contains C and additionally all constraints AU over all max(k, l)-element subsets U of V.
                Sk    V
                        
 1: for all U ∈ i=1 i do                                               ▷ Step 1: Initialization
 2:    DU ← AU
 3: end for
 4:
 5: while true do                                                                          ▷ Step 2: Pruning
                                              Sk     U
           For some C ⊆ AU in C
                                                       
 6:                            max , and T ∈    i=1 i set:
 7:        cT ← {f ∈ AU | ∃g ∈ C : (f = g|T ) ∧ V Sk U (g|Z ∈ DZ )}
           D                                      Z∈     ( )   i=1    i

 8:    if for all C, T , their D
                               cT contains DT then
 9:        break
10:    else
11:        DT ← DT ∩ D     cT
12:    end if
13: end while
14:
15: return DkV (I)                                                                           ▷ Step 3: Return


 ′
Imax = (V, C ′max ) obtained from Imax by replacing every C ⊆ AU with
                                                     ^
                                   C ′ = {f ∈ C |              f |Z ∈ DZ }
                                                           U
                                                  Z∈ k   (   )
                                                    S
                                                      i=1 i



is (k, max(k, ℓ))-minimal and equivalent to I.
                    ′
Proof. To see that Imax  is        to I, it is enough to observe that whenever Algorithm 2 reduces
                          Sequivalent
the set DT for some T ∈ i∈[k] Vi , the removed values cannot be a part of a solution of I.
    To prove (k, max(k, l))-minimality of I ′max assume the contrary. Then, there exists a constraint C
                        Sk
of the scope U and T ∈ i=1 Ui such that
                                

                                                                     ^
                             {f ∈ AT | ∃g ∈ C (f = g|T ) ∧              (g|Z ∈ DZ )}
                                                                 Sk       U
                                                              Z∈ i=1 ( )  i


does not contain DT . Because of Step 2, it contradicts the fact that the run of Algorithm 2 over I max
is completed and proves the proposition.

     We will now define k-tree efpp-formulae. To this end, let I = (V, C) be an instance of CSP(A) and
X be a set of copies of variables from V such that every its element has infinitely many copies in X . We
say that x is a copy of u, both of length m, if xi is a copy of ui for all i ∈ [m]. We say that a constraint
C ′ is a copy of a constraint C ∈ C if it is obtained from C by replacing every variable from S(C) by
its copy in X . We will also say that an atom R(x) is a copy of a constraint C ∈ C if there exists a
constraint C ′ with the scope S(x) which is a copy of C and R = {f (x) | f ∈ C ′ }.
Definition 4.12. Let I = (V, C) be an instance of CSP(A), I max as defined above, and X a set con-
taining infinitely many copies of every variable in V. Let k ≥ 1, a k-tree efpp-formula ϕ over I with a
distinguished tuple r0 of at most k pairwise different variables in Var(ϕ), called a root, is a conjunction
of copies of constraints in Cmax and is in one of the following forms.

      1. It is a single atom R(x) with S(r0 ) ⊆ S(x).
      2. It is a conjunction of k-tree efpp-formulae ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm with the roots r1 , . . . , rm and a new copy
         ϕ0 := R(x) of a constraint in C max such that
               S
          (a) i∈{0,...,m} S(ri ) ⊆ S(x),


                                                        19
        (b) Var(ϕ0 ) ∩ Var(ϕi ) = S(ri ) for all i ∈ [m], and
        (c) Var(ϕi ) ∩ Var(ϕj ) = S(ri ) ∩ S(rj ) for all i, j ∈ [m].

    Furthermore, the subformulae ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm of ϕ in Item 2 will be called the leaf subformulae of ϕ and
ϕ0 the root subformula of ϕ. A formula path in ϕ is a sequence ψ1 , . . . , ψt+1 of subformulae of ϕ such
that ψt+1 is ϕ, ψ1 is an atomic formula and for every i ∈ [t], ψi is a leaf subformula of ψi+1 .
    A k-tree efpp-formula is a k-tree efpp-formula over I for some instance I of CSP(A).
Observe that for every k, a k-tree efpp-formula ϕ over I is quantifier-free.
Definition 4.13. We say that a k-tree efpp-formula ϕ with the root r0 is a minimal k-tree efpp-formula
over I if projr ϕA = B and ϕ is minimal with respect to the number of atoms among all k-tree efpp-
formulae ψ over I with the same root r satisfying projr ψ A = B.
    Note that in the above definition, we allow B to be equal to ∅. The next step is to prove that whenever
Algorithm 2 derives some constraint DT then there is a k-tree efpp-formula ϕ whose projection onto its
root is the relation corresponding to DT .
Proposition 4.14. Let k, ℓ ≥ 1 and I be an instance of CSP(A) over a first-order expansion of a
k-homogeneous ℓ-bounded model-complete core. It follows that whenever Algorithm 2 computes DT with
T = S(t) either in Step 1 or Step 2, then there exists a k-tree efpp-formula with the root r which is a
copy of t in X such that projr ϕA = {f (t) | f ∈ DT }.

Proof. The proof goes by the induction of the number of steps executed by Algorithm 2. For any DU
computed in Step 1, we just take a copy R(x) of the appropriate full constraint and set the root to x.
      Assume nowSthat Algorithm        2 computes DT in Step 2 from     Pak constraint    C ⊆ AU in C max . Assume
                           U                                                    |U |
                                                                                    
moreover that i∈[k] k = {S(z1 ), . . . , S(zm )} where m =                 i=1   i     and z1 , . . . , zm are tuples of
elements in U . By the induction hypothesis there are k-tree efpp-formulae ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm over the roots
r1 , . . . , rm which are copies of z1 , . . . , zm in X such that for all i ∈ [m]Sthe projection of ϕA     i onto ri is
{f (zi ) | f ∈ DS(zi ) }. Let R(x) be a copy of the constraint C such that i∈[m] S(ri ) ⊆ S(x). Since X is
infinite we may secure conditions in Items 2a–2c in Definition 4.12. It is straightforward to check that the
conjunction ψ of ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm and R(x) seen as a k-tree efpp-formula with the root rj satisfying j ∈ [m] and
S(zj ) = T is the desired k-tree efpp-formula. Indeed, we have that projrj ψ A = {f (zj ) | f ∈ DT }.

    The final step is to show that an unbalanced and equality-free A has finite duality. However, this
step is more complicated for infinite A than for finite. We need the following two auxiliary lemmata.
Lemma 4.15. Let k, ℓ ≥ 1 and A be a first-order expansion of a k-homogeneous ℓ-bounded model-
complete core which is also both unbalanced and equality-free. Let Z ∈ N, ϕ be a k-tree efpp-formula
with a formula path containing at least Z k formulaeTψ1 , . . . , ψZ k with roots r1 , . . . , rZ k such that for all
i ∈ [Z k − 1], ψi is a leaf subformula of ψi+1 and i∈[Z k ] S(ri ) ̸= ∅. Then there exists p1 , . . . , pZ ∈
{r1 , . . . , rZ k } and z of length at most k satisfying S(z) = S(pi ) ∩ S(pj ) for all i, j ∈ [Z].

Proof. Observe first that by Item 2b in Definition 4.12, we have S(ri ) ∩ S(ri+1 ) ⊇ S(ri ) ∩ S(ri+2 ) for all
i ∈ [Z k − 2]. It generalizes to S(ri ) ∩ S(rj1 ) ⊇ S(ri ) ∩ S(rj2 ) for all i < j1 < j2 in [Z k ]. In particular, we
have that if S(rj1 ) ∩ S(rj2 ) = S and S(rj2 ) ∩ S(rj3 ) = S, then S(rj1 ) ∩ S(rj3 ) = S for all j1 < j2 < j3 in
[Z k ].                         T
      Let now x be such that i∈[Z k ] S(ri ) = S(x) and consider a maximal sequence i1 = 1 < · · · < iT ≤
Z k constructed so that for every j ∈ [T − 1] the index ij+1 is the smallest larger than ij such that
S(rij ) ∩ S(rij+1 ) = S(x). By the observation above, it holds S(rij1 ) ∩ S(rij2 ) = S(x) for all j1 , j2 ∈ [T ].
Now, either T ≥ Z and we are done or there exists j ∈ T such that ij+1 − ij ≥ (Z)k−1 . By the
constructionT of the sequence and the      observation above we have that there exists x′ with S(x′ ) ⊋ S(x)
such that m∈[ij ,ij+1 ) S(rm ) = S(x ). Now, either | S(x′ )| = k and we are done or we repeat the above
                                        ′

reasoning with x′ instead of x. Since the size of a root in a k-tree efpp-formula is at most k, the above
reasoning repeated at most (k − 1) times gives us the desired set of roots {p1 , . . . , pZ }.

We now turn to the second auxiliary lemma.
Lemma 4.16. Let k, ℓ ≥ 1 and A be an unbalanced first-order expansion of a k-homogeneous ℓ-bounded
model-complete core B such that there are exactly K pairwise different orbits of k-tuples in B and let
L = 2K be the number of all k-ary first-order definable relations in B.


                                                          20
    Let ϕ be a minimal k-tree efpp-formula such that the projection of ϕA onto its root is nonempty, and
let π be a formula path in ϕ. ThenTπ contains less than P = (K · (L2 · k + 3))k formulae ψ1′ , . . . , ψP′
with the roots r1 , . . . , rP such that i∈[P ] S(ri ) ̸= ∅.

Proof. Assume, on the contrary, that there is such a formula path in ϕ which contains at least P formulae
ψ1′ , . . . , ψP′ satisfying the condition from the formulation of the lemma. By Item 2b in Definition 4.12,
we may assume that ψ1′ , . . . , ψP′ are consecutive in π, that is, ψi′ is a leaf subformula of ψi+1      ′
                                                                                                               for all
                                                                                        2
i ∈ [P − 1]. By Lemma 4.15, the formula path π contains at least Z = K · (L · k + 3) pairwise different
k-tree efpp-subformulae ψ1 , . . . , ψZ with roots p1 , . . . pZ such that ψi is a subformula of ψi+1 for all
i ∈ [Z − 1] and S(z) = S(pi ) ∩ S(pj ) for all i, j ∈ [Z] and some tuple z of at most k pairwise different
variables in X .
       For all i ∈ [Z], set now Di := projz (ψi )A . It follows that D1 ⊇ · · · ⊇ DZ since for all i ∈ [Z − 1], ψi
is a subformula of ψi+1 . Furthermore, since there are at most K different orbits of k-tuples in B, there
are at most K pairwise different values in the sequence above. By the choice of Z, there exists i ∈ [Z]
so that Di = · · · = Di+L2 ·k+2 . Set j := i + L2 · k + 2. Since ϕ is minimal, then also ψj is minimal.
       Let now ζi′ be a copy of ψi with the variables renamed so that the only variables contained both in
ζi and ψj are the variables in z and let ζi be a k-tree efpp-formula created from ζi′ by perhaps removing
  ′

certain variables from the root of ζi′ so that the root of the new formula ζi was just z. This perhaps new
root is the only difference between ζi and ζi′ . Then, assume without loss of generality that ψj consists of
a root subformula R(x) and leaf subformulae ξ1 , . . . , ξo . Construct θj according to the recipe in Item 2
in Definition 4.12 out of R(x) as a root subformula and ξ1 , . . . , ξo but also ζi as its leaf-subformulae. By
the choice of i and the construction of ζi , it follows that the projection of both (ζi )A and (ψj )A , and in
consequence of (θj )A onto z is the same. It follows that the projections of (θj )A and (ψj )A onto pj are
the same. Denote this projection by Cj .
       Clearly, θj is not minimal. Remove therefore, one by one, atoms from the bottom of ψi , which is
by the construction, a subformula of θj , so that the obtained formula was always a k-tree efpp-formula,
and until we obtain a subformula θj′ of θj such that the projection Cj′ of (θj′ )A onto pj is a non-trivial
superset of Cj or until all atoms from ψi are removed. Since ψi has the same number of atoms as ζi ,
in the latter case, the obtained formula has the same number of atoms as ψj , and hence it is minimal.
Thus, remove one more constraint from ψi+1 . Since |j − i| ≥ 3, observe that the new formula is a k-tree
efpp-formula and denote the new formula by θj′ . By minimality, also in this case, the projection Cj′ of
(θj′ )A onto pj is a nontrivial superset of Cj . By the construction, the formula θj′ may not contain the
formula ψi+1 but it contains all ψi+2 , . . . , ψj and hence roots pi+2 , . . . , pj . For all k ∈ [i + 2, j], denote
by Ck and Ck′ the projection of θjA and (θj′ )A onto pk , respectively. Since Cj ⊊ Cj′ , by the construction
of a k-tree efpp-formula, it follows that Ck ⊊ Ck′ for all k ∈ [i + 2, j].
       Now, by the counting argument, there are k1 < k2 in [i + 2, j] such that (Ck1 , Ck′ 1 ) equals (Ck2 , Ck′ 2 ).
Denote that pair by (C, C ′ ). It follows that θj′ is a balanced (C, pk1 , C, pk2 )-implication with C ′ =
projpk (θj′ )A = projpk (θj′ )A . Since Di = · · · = Dj , by the minimality of ψj , we may assume that S(z)
           1                 2
is strictly contained in both S(pk1 ) and S(pk2 ), Thus, S(pk1 ) and S(pk2 ) are incomparable with respect
to the inclusion, which implies that the implication is nontrivial. Furthermore, since θj′ contains ζi , the
projection of both (θj′ )A and (θj )A to z is Di . Hence, the implication is proper. By Lemma 4.6, the
existence of a nontrivial, proper, and balanced implication in A contradicts the assumption that A is
unbalanced and completes the proof of the lemma.

We are now ready to prove that every unbalanced and equality-free A has finite duality.
Proposition 4.17. Let k, ℓ ≥ 1 and A be a finite-signature first-order expansion of a k-homogeneous
ℓ-bounded model-complete core B. Suppose that A is unbalanced and equality-free, then A has finite
duality.

Proof. By Propositions 4.10, 4.11, and 4.14, for every unsatisfiable instance I of CSP(A) there is a
minimal k-tree efpp-formula ϕI over I such that the projection of ϕA       I is ∅. Without loss of generality,
we assume that it does not hold for any proper subformula of ϕI that is a k-tree efpp-formula.
    Let Φ′A be the set of all formulae ϕI over all unsatisfiable instances I of CSP(A) and ΦA be a maximal
subset of Φ′A such that no two formulae in ΦA may be obtained from each other by renaming the variables.
Assume first that every formula in ΦA has a longest formula path shorter than M = P · (k · L2 + 1) + 1
where P = (K · (L2 · k + 3))k is the constant from Lemma 4.16, K is the number of pairwise different
orbits of k-tuples in B and L = 2K the number of all k-ary first-order definable relations in B. We will
show that in this case ΦA is of finite size.


                                                         21
Claim 1. Let i ∈ N. Then there are only finitely many, up to the renaming of variables, minimal k-tree
efpp-formulae with a longest formula path shorter than i.

Proof. The proof goes by induction on i. Since the signature of A is finite, there are clearly only finitely
many different atomic formulae up to the renaming of the variables, and hence finitely many minimal
k-tree efpp-formulae with a longest formula path of length 1. For the induction step, assume that we
are done for i and we want to show that there are finitely many, up to the renaming of the variables,
minimal k-tree efpp-formulae of a longest formula path shorter than i + 1. All such k-tree efpp-formulae
ϕ are formed as in Item 2 of Definition 4.12. According to the definition, ϕ with the root r0 is formed
out of an atomic formula R(x) and k-tree efpp-formulae ϕ1 , . . . , ϕt . We claim that if ϕ is minimal, then
t ≤ i∈[k] S(x)     · K. Assume the contrary. Then there exists r which is a root of K ′ > K formulae
    P            
               i
out of ϕ1 , . . . , ϕt . Denote them ψ1 , . . . , ψK ′ and recall from the definition that Var(ψj ) ∩ Var(ψj ′ ) = S(r)
for any j, j ′ ∈ [K ′ ]. Since the number of pairwise different orbits V       of k-tuples in B is K, it follows that
there are ζ1 , . . . , ζK ⊆ {ψ1 , . . . , ψK ′ } such that the projection of ( j∈K ′ ψj )A onto r is the same as the
projection of ( j∈K ζj )A onto r. It follows that the projection (ϕ′ )A for ϕ′ obtained from ϕ by replacing
                    V
V                    V                                                A
  j∈K ′ ψj with          j∈K ζj is the same as the projection of ϕ onto r. It contradicts the assumption that
ϕ is minimal. Thus, a minimal k-tree formula ϕ with a longest formula path shorter than i + 1 is built
from at most t = i∈[k] S(x)
                          P              
                                     i     · K pairwise different k-tree efpp-formulae of a longest formula path
shorter than i and a new single atom. By the induction hypothesis, there are finitely many different,
up to the renaming of the variables, of those, and hence finitely many, up to the renaming of variables,
k-tree efpp-formulae of a longest formula path shorter than i + 1.

     Let ϕ be a k-tree efpp-formula in Φ′A . We will write ϕ∗ for a subformula of ϕ which contains only
atoms that are copies of constraints in I. We write Dψ for the canonical structure of an efpp-formula
ψ. The domain of Dψ is the set of variables in ψ and RDψ for R in a signature of A has a tuple x iff ψ
contains an atom R(x).
     In order to complete the proof of the first case, we will show that O = {Dϕ∗ | ϕ ∈ ΦA } is an
obstruction set for A. Assume first that I does not have a solution. Then there exists a minimal k-tree
efpp-formula ϕ′ over I defining ∅. The formula ϕ′ is in Φ′A and its renaming ϕ in ΦA . The canonical
structure Dϕ∗ maps to I by first renaming the variables so that the image contained the variables in
ϕ′ and then by taking a homomorphism which sends every variable in ϕ′ , which is a copy of a variable
in I, to the original variable. On the other hand, the projection of ϕ on its root is empty, and hence
Dϕ does not map to A. Since the only difference between ϕ∗ and ϕ is that the latter formula contains
atoms built out of full relations, there is also no homomorphism from Dϕ∗ to A, and hence if it does
map to I, then it has no solution.
     To complete the proof we will show that whenever ΦA contains a minimal k-tree efpp-formula ϕ with
a formula path π ′ longer than or equal to M = P · (k · L2 + 1) + 1, then there is a non-trivial, proper and
balanced implication in A, which contradicts the fact that A is unbalanced. Let ψ be a leaf subformula
of ϕ containing π ′ and π be the restriction of π ′ to ψ. By the assumption above, the projection of ψ A
to its root is non-empty. Furthermore, ψ is minimal since ϕ is minimal. It also holds that the formula
path π in ψ is longer than or equal to M − 1 and, in particular, it has roots r1 , . . . , rM −1 counting from
the bottom of π to the root subformula of the whole formula. We will now show that the sequence
above contains at least k · L2 + 1 roots of pairwise different scope. By Item 2b in Definition 4.12, for
all i < i1 < i2 ≤ M − 1 we have that S(ri ) ∩ S(ri1 ) ⊇ S(ri ) ∩ S(ri2 ). Thus, by Lemma 4.16, it follows
                TP +1
not only that i=1 S(ri ) = ∅ but also that S(r1 ) ∩ S(rP +1 ) = ∅. By the choice of M , we have that π
contains at least (k · L2 + 1) k-tree efpp-formulae ψ1 , . . . , ψk·L2 +1 with roots p1 , . . . , pk·L2 +1 of pairwise
disjoint scopes.
     Consider now ψ ′ obtained from ψ by removing an atom from the bottom of π. Since ψ is minimal,
we have that the projection Ci of ψ A to pi is strictly contained in the projection Ci′ of (ψ ′ )A to pi for all
i ∈ [k ·L2 +1]. By the counting argument, there exist j1 , j2 ∈ [k ·L2 +1] such that (Cj1 , Cj′1 ) = (Cj2 , Cj′2 ).
Denote the pair by (C, C ′ ). It is now easy to see that ψ ′ is a balanced (C, C)-implication. Since
S(pj1 ) ∩ S(pj2 ) = ∅, the implication is proper and non-trivial. By Lemma 4.6, it contradicts the fact
that A is unbalanced and completes the proof of the proposition.

    We are now ready to provide the proof of the main theorem of this paper.
Theorem 1.3. (Main theorem) Let A be a finite-signature first-order expansion of a finitely bounded
homogeneous model-complete core B. Then one of the following holds.


                                                          22
    • CSP(A) is L-hard (under first-order reduction).
    • CSP(A) is first-order definable, and hence in non-uniform AC0 .

Proof. Since the signature of B is finite, this structure is k-homogeneous and ℓ-bounded for some k, ℓ ∈ N.
If there is an efpp-definition of a stable, balanced, and proper implication or of equality in A, then
CSP(A) is L-hard under first-order reduction by Propositions 4.7 and 4.8, respectively. Otherwise, the
structure A is called unbalanced and equality-free. By Proposition 4.17, it has finite duality. Thus,
CSP(A) is first-order definable and in nonuniform AC0 . It completes the proof of the theorem.


5    Summary and Future Work
The main contribution of this paper is the dichotomy between non-uniform AC0 and L-hard for all
finite-signature first-order expansions of finitely bounded homogeneous structures — Theorem 1.3. In
order to obtain the result, we first provided a brand new proof of Theorem 1.2, and then generalized
this new proof to infinite structures. We believe that the methods provided may be used further, in
particular, to approach the following research question.
Research Question 1. Is it true that every first-order reduct (expansion) of a k-homogeneous ℓ-bounded
structure (model-complete core) of relational width (k, ℓ) gives rise to CSPs that are in NL or P-complete?
     This question is interesting in its own right — a number of infinite-domain CSPs are solvable by local
consistency methods [BD13], but it is also directly connected to an open question over finite-domain
CSPs. Indeed, it is still not known which finite-domain CSPs are P-complete, and which are in NL. In
particular, we do not even know it for problems solvable by the 1-minimality algorithm. On one hand,
in this class of problems, we have the P-complete Horn-3SAT, which is CSP({0, 1}; R0 , R1 , RHorn-3SAT )
with R0 = {(0)}, R1 = {(1)} and RHorn-3SAT = {(x, y, z) ∈ {0, 1}3 | (x ∧ y =⇒ z)}, and on the other
hand, for instance, structures with finite duality studied in this paper, which clearly give rise to CSPs
in NL. We will now try to convince the reader that the approach in this paper is plausible to generalize
to solve this problem and its infinite counterpart. Indeed, we already start with structures solvable by
the (1)-minimality or the (k, l)-minimality algorithm in the case of infinite structures, and hence we
would not need to prove the counterparts of Proposition 3.4 or Proposition 4.10, respectively. But we
would definitely need different hardness criteria, this time, P-hardness criteria. Perhaps, an implication
which resembles a formula of the form A(x) =⇒ A(y) could have been replaced by a relation more
similar to (A(x) ∧ A(y) =⇒ A(z)) that looks like Horn-SAT — a canonical P-complete problem. One
can imagine (we do not know how at the moment) that such a relation may be obtained from a tree
or a k-tree efpp-formula that looks like a large enough binary tree, similarly, as to how we obtained
balanced implications from a high enough tree or a k-tree efpp-formulae in the proofs of Proposition 3.9
and Proposition 4.17, respectively. If all tree or k-tree formulae in A originating from unsatisfiable
instances omit large binary trees, then likely they have bounded pathwidth duality, which implies that
the corresponding CSPs are in NL [Dal05]. What we just presented is definitely not a solution to the
Research Question 1, but it is not impossible that, in this way or another, the proofs in this paper may
influence a solution to this important problem.


References
[Ats05]     Albert Atserias. On digraph coloring problems and treewidth duality. In 20th IEEE Sym-
            posium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS 2005), 26-29 June 2005, Chicago, IL, USA,
            Proceedings, pages 106–115. IEEE Computer Society, 2005.
[BBK+ 23] L. Barto, B. Bodor, M. Kozik, A. Mottet, and M. Pinsker. Symmetries of graphs and
          structures that fail to interpret a finite thing. In 2023 38th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium
          on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), pages 1–13, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, jun 2023. IEEE
          Computer Society.
[BD13]      Manuel Bodirsky and Vı́ctor Dalmau. Datalog and constraint satisfaction with infinite
            templates. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 79(1):79–100, 2013. A conference version appeared in the
            Proceedings of the 34th Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS
            2006), pages 646–659.


                                                    23
[BJK05]    Andrei Bulatov, Peter Jeavons, and Andrei Krokhin. Classifying the complexity of con-
           straints using finite algebras. SIAM Journal on Computing, 34(3):720–742, 2005.
[BJP17]    Manuel Bodirsky, Peter Jonsson, and Trung Van Pham. The complexity of phylogeny con-
           straint satisfaction problems. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, 18(3), 2017. An
           extended abstract appeared in the conference STACS 2016.
[BK10]     Manuel Bodirsky and Jan Kára. The complexity of temporal constraint satisfaction prob-
           lems. Journal of the ACM, 57(2), 2010. An extended abstract appeared in the Proceedings
           of the Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC).
[BK12]     Libor Barto and Marcin Kozik. Absorbing subalgebras, cyclic terms, and the constraint
           satisfaction problem. Log. Methods Comput. Sci., 8(1), 2012.
[BK14]     Libor Barto and Marcin Kozik. Constraint satisfaction problems solvable by local consistency
           methods. J. ACM, 61(1):3:1–3:19, 2014.
[BKL08]    Andrei A. Bulatov, Andrei A. Krokhin, and Benoı̂t Larose. Dualities for constraint satis-
           faction problems. In Nadia Creignou, Phokion G. Kolaitis, and Heribert Vollmer, editors,
           Complexity of Constraints - An Overview of Current Research Themes [Result of a Dagstuhl
           Seminar], volume 5250 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 93–124. Springer, 2008.
[BKNP25] Johanna Brunar, Marcin Kozik, Tomás Nagy, and Michael Pinsker. The sorrows of a smooth
         digraph: the first hardness criterion for infinite directed graph-colouring problems. In 40th
         Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2025, Singapore, June
         23-26, 2025, pages 403–416. IEEE, 2025.
[BKW12]    Libor Barto, Marcin Kozik, and Ross Willard. Near unanimity constraints have bounded
           pathwidth duality. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer
           Science, LICS 2012, Dubrovnik, Croatia, June 25-28, 2012, pages 125–134. IEEE Computer
           Society, 2012.
[BMM21] Manuel Bodirsky, Florent Madelaine, and Antoine Mottet. A proof of the algebraic tractabil-
        ity conjecture for monotone monadic SNP. SIAM Journal on Computing, 50(4):1359–1409,
        2021.
[BMPP19] Manuel Bodirsky, Barnaby Martin, Michael Pinsker, and András Pongrácz. Constraint
         satisfaction problems for reducts of homogeneous graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 48(4):1224–
         1264, 2019. A conference version appeared in the Proceedings of the 43rd International
         Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2016, pages 119:1-119:14.
[Bod07]    Manuel Bodirsky. Cores of countably categorical structures. Logical Methods in Computer
           Science, 3(1):1–16, 2007.
[Bod21]    Manuel Bodirsky. Complexity of Infinite-Domain Constraint Satisfaction. Lecture Notes in
           Logic. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2021.
[Bör08]   Ferdinand Börner. Basics of galois connections. In Nadia Creignou, Phokion G. Kolaitis,
           and Heribert Vollmer, editors, Complexity of Constraints - An Overview of Current Research
           Themes [Result of a Dagstuhl Seminar], volume 5250 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
           pages 38–67. Springer, 2008.
[BP15]     Manuel Bodirsky and Michael Pinsker. Schaefer’s theorem for graphs. J. ACM, 62(3):19:1–
           19:52, 2015. A conference version appeared in the Proceedings of STOC 2011, pages 655-664.
[BP21]     Manuel Bodirsky and Michael Pinsker. Canonical functions: a proof via topological dynam-
           ics. Homogeneous Structures, A Workshop in Honour of Norbert Sauer’s 70th Birthday,
           Contributions to Discrete Mathematics, 16(2):36–45, 2021.
[BPP21]    Manuel Bodirsky, Michael Pinsker, and András Pongrácz. Projective clone homomorphisms.
           Journal of Symbolic Logic, 86(1):148–161, 2021.
[Bul17]    Andrei A. Bulatov. A dichotomy theorem for nonuniform CSPs. In Chris Umans, editor,
           58th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2017, Berkeley,
           CA, USA, October 15-17, 2017, pages 319–330, Berkeley, 2017. IEEE Computer Society.



                                                 24
[CDK08]    Catarina Carvalho, Vı́ctor Dalmau, and Andrei A. Krokhin. Caterpillar duality for constraint
           satisfaction problems. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic
           in Computer Science, LICS 2008, 24-27 June 2008, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, pages 307–316.
           IEEE Computer Society, 2008.
[CM23]     Vaggos Chatziafratis and Konstantin Makarychev. Triplet reconstruction and all other phy-
           logenetic csps are approximation resistant. In 64th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations
           of Computer Science, FOCS 2023, Santa Cruz, CA, USA, November 6-9, 2023, pages 253–
           284. IEEE, 2023.
[Dal05]    Vı́ctor Dalmau. Linear datalog and bounded path duality of relational structures. Log.
           Methods Comput. Sci., 1(1), 2005.
[DEH+ 15] Vı́ctor Dalmau, László Egri, Pavol Hell, Benoı̂t Larose, and Arash Rafiey. Descriptive
          complexity of list h-coloring problems in logspace: A refined dichotomy. In 30th Annual
          ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2015, Kyoto, Japan, July
          6-10, 2015, pages 487–498. IEEE Computer Society, 2015.
[EHLR14] László Egri, Pavol Hell, Benoı̂t Larose, and Arash Rafiey. Space complexity of list H -
         colouring: a dichotomy. In Chandra Chekuri, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth An-
         nual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2014, Portland, Oregon, USA,
         January 5-7, 2014, pages 349–365. SIAM, 2014.
[FSS84]    Merrick L. Furst, James B. Saxe, and Michael Sipser. Parity, circuits, and the polynomial-
           time hierarchy. Math. Syst. Theory, 17(1):13–27, 1984.
[FV98]     Tomás Feder and Moshe Y. Vardi. The computational structure of monotone monadic SNP
           and constraint satisfaction: A study through Datalog and group theory. SIAM Journal on
           Computing, 28(1):57–104, 1998.
[Hod93]    Wilfrid Hodges. Model Theory. Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications. Cam-
           bridge University Press, 1993.
[Imm88]    Neil Immerman. Nondeterministic space is closed under complementation. SIAM J. Com-
           put., 17(5):935–938, 1988.
[Imm99]    Neil Immerman. Descriptive complexity. Graduate texts in computer science. Springer, 1999.
[IMM+ 10] Pawel M. Idziak, Petar Markovic, Ralph McKenzie, Matthew Valeriote, and Ross Willard.
          Tractability and learnability arising from algebras with few subpowers. SIAM J. Comput.,
          39(7):3023–3037, 2010.
[Lad75]    Richard Emil Ladner. On the structure of polynomial time reducibility.            J. ACM,
           22(1):155–171, jan 1975.
[Lib04]    Leonid; Libkin. Elements of Finite Model Theory. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004.
[LLT07]    Benoit Larose, Cynthia Loten, and Claude Tardif. A Characterisation of First-Order Con-
           straint Satisfaction Problems. Logical Methods in Computer Science, Volume 3, Issue 4,
           November 2007. An extended abstract appeared in the 21st Annual IEEE Symposium on
           Logic in Computer Science (LICS’06).
[LT09]     Benoı̂t Larose and Pascal Tesson. Universal algebra and hardness results for constraint
           satisfaction problems. Theor. Comput. Sci., 410(18):1629–1647, 2009. An extended abstract
           appeared in the 34th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming,
           ICALP 2007.
[MMZ15]    Konstantin Makarychev, Yury Makarychev, and Yuan Zhou. Satisfiability of ordering csps
           above average is fixed-parameter tractable. In Venkatesan Guruswami, editor, IEEE 56th
           Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2015, Berkeley, CA, USA,
           17-20 October, 2015, pages 975–993. IEEE Computer Society, 2015.
[MP21]     Antoine Mottet and Michael Pinsker. Cores over Ramsey structures. The Journal of Symbolic
           Logic, 86(1):352–361, 2021.
[MP24]     Antoine Mottet and Michael Pinsker. Smooth approximations: An algebraic approach to
           csps over finitely bounded homogeneous structures. J. ACM, 71(5):36:1–36:47, 2024.


                                                 25
[NP24]     Tomás Nagy and Michael Pinsker. Strict width for constraint satisfaction problems over
           homogeneous strucures of finite duality. CoRR, abs/2402.09951, 2024.
[NPW25]    Tomás Nagy, Michael Pinsker, and Michal Wrona. New sufficient algebraic conditions for
           local consistency over homogeneous structures of finite duality. CoRR, abs/2502.02090, 2025.
[Rei08]    Omer Reingold. Undirected connectivity in log-space. J. ACM, 55(4):17:1–17:24, 2008.
[Ros08]    Benjamin Rossman. Homomorphism preservation theorems. J. ACM, 55(3):15:1–15:53,
           2008.
[Sze88]    Róbert Szelepcsényi. The method of forced enumeration for nondeterministic automata.
           Acta Informatica, 26(3):279–284, 1988.
[Vol99]    Heribert Vollmer. Introduction to Circuit Complexity - A Uniform Approach. Texts in
           Theoretical Computer Science. An EATCS Series. Springer, 1999.
[Wro20a]   Michal Wrona. On the relational width of first-order expansions of finitely bounded ho-
           mogeneous binary cores with bounded strict width. In Holger Hermanns, Lijun Zhang,
           Naoki Kobayashi, and Dale Miller, editors, LICS ’20: 35th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium
           on Logic in Computer Science, Saarbrücken, Germany, July 8-11, 2020, pages 958–971,
           Saarbrücken, 2020. ACM.
[Wro20b]   Michal Wrona. Relational width of first-order expansions of homogeneous graphs with
           bounded strict width. In Christophe Paul and Markus Bläser, editors, 37th International
           Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS 2020, March 10-13, 2020,
           Montpellier, France, volume 154 of LIPIcs, pages 39:1–39:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-
           Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.
[Zhu17]    Dmitriy Zhuk. A proof of CSP dichotomy conjecture. In Chris Umans, editor, 58th IEEE
           Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2017, Berkeley, CA, USA,
           October 15-17, 2017, pages 331–342, Berkeley, 2017. IEEE Computer Society.
[Zhu20]    Dmitriy Zhuk. A proof of the CSP dichotomy conjecture. Journal of the ACM, 67(5):30:1–
           30:78, 2020.




                                                 26
