                                                 On the LP-relaxation for Directed Steiner Tree with Relatively
                                                                       Integral Solution∗
                                                                                      Bundit Laekhanukit†

                                                                                        October 13, 2025
arXiv:2412.10744v3 [cs.DS] 10 Oct 2025




                                                                                             Abstract
                                                      The Directed Steiner Tree (DST) problem is defined on a directed graph G = (V, E), where
                                                  we are given a designated root vertex r and a set of k terminals K ⊆ V \ r. The goal is to find
                                                  a minimum-cost subgraph that provides directed r → t paths for all terminals t ∈ K.
                                                      The approximability of DST has long been a central open problem in network design.
                                                  While there exist polylogarithmic-approximation algorithms with quasi-polynomial running
                                                  times (Charikar et al. 1998; Grandoni, Laekhanukit, and Li 2019; Ghuge and Nagarajan 2020),
                                                  the best known polynomial-time approximation until now has remained at k ϵ , for any constant
                                                  ϵ > 0. Whether a polynomial-time algorithm achieving a polylogarithmic approximation exists
                                                  has remained unresolved.
                                                      In this paper, we present a flow-based LP-relaxation for DST that admits a polylogarithmic
                                                  integrality gap under the relative integral condition — there exists a fractional solution in
                                                  which each edge e either carries a zero flow (fet = 0) or uses its full capacity (fet = xe ), where fet
                                                  denotes the flow variable and xe denotes the indicator variable treated as capacities. This stands
                                                  in contrast to known lower bounds, as the standard flow-based relaxation is known to exhibit
                                                  a polynomial integrality gap even under relatively integral solutions. In fact, this relatively
                                                  integral property is shared by all the known integrality gap instances of DST [Halperin et al.,
                                                  SODA’07; Zosin-Khuller, SODA’02; Li-Laekhanukit, SODA’22].
                                                      We further provide a randomized polynomial-time algorithm that gives an O(log3 k)-approximation,
                                                  assuming access to a relatively integral fractional solution.


                                         1        Introduction
                                         In the Directed Steiner Tree (DST) problem, we are given a directed graph G = (V, E) with n = |V |
                                         vertices and nonnegative edge-costs c : E → R+
                                                                                      0 . We are also given a designated root vertex r ∈ V
                                         and a set of k terminals K ⊆ V \ r. The objective is to find a minimum-cost subgraph H ⊆ G
                                         that provides a directed path from the root r to every terminal t ∈ K. DST and its undirected
                                         counterpart are central problems in network design, with numerous practical applications such
                                         as communication network design, VLSI design automation [GMW97, She95, SW96, AMS08], in-
                                         formation retrieval [SXC+ 21, YSL+ 22], and phylogenetics [WMT12, BTN+ 09, LTL02, ABMS12].
                                         Over the decades, DST has been at the center of extensive study both theoretically and practically.
                                             ∗
                                              This paper serves as a rectification of [Lae24]: whereas [Lae24] claimed a polynomial-time polylogarithmic ap-
                                         proximation for the general case, this work proves it only for relatively integral fractional solutions.
                                            †
                                              The author is unofficially affiliated with Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand. E-mail: Lbundit@gmail.com


                                                                                                 1
    The Steiner Tree problem (both directed and undirected) is among the earliest known NP-
hard problems. Its decision version is listed as one of Karp’s 21 NP-complete problems [Kar72].
This intractability leaves theoretical computer scientists with no option but to seek approximation
algorithms.
    For the undirected Steiner tree problem, a factor-two approximation algorithm was discov-
ered in the late 1960s by Gilbert and Pollak [GP68], and the approximation ratio has steadily
improved. Currently, thanks to the state-of-the-art algorithm by Byrka, Grandoni, Rothvoß, and
Sanità [BGRS13], the approximation ratio for the undirected case is nearing ln(4) < 1.39.
    In stark contrast, the best-known polynomial-time approximation ratio for DST has remained
at k ϵ for every fixed ϵ > 0 since the 1990s from the work of Zelikovsky [Zel97] and Charikar et al.
[Zel97] and Charikar et al. [CCC+ 99].1 Evidence from integrality gaps [HKK+ 07, ZK02, LL24]
and hardness results [HK03] strongly suggests that DST is inherently more difficult. In fact, no
constant-factor approximation is known under plausible complexity assumptions — DST admits no
log2−ϵ n-approximation, for any ϵ > 0 unless NP ⊆ ZPTIME(npolylog(()n) ) [HK03]. Until recently,
no polynomial-time algorithm was known that could even achieve a sub-polynomial approximation
ratio.
    Yet, if we allow quasi-polynomial-time algorithms, the picture changes dramatically. Charikar et al.
[CCC+ 99] first showed that DST admits a polylogarithmic approximation ratio of O(log3 k) in
quasi-polynomial time. Two independent works by Grandoni, Laekhanukit, and Li [GLL23], and
by Ghuge and Nagarajan [GN22], further improved this approximation ratio to O(log2 k/ log log k),
but still with quasi-polynomial running times. This leaves a striking gap: While quasi-polynomial-
time algorithms achieve nearly optimal polylogarithmic approximations, no sub-polynomial approx-
imation is known in strictly polynomial time. This gap has remained a major open problem in the
area for nearly three decades.

Open Problem 1. Is there a polylogarithmic approximation algorithm for the Directed Steiner
Tree problem that runs in polynomial time? Is there even a polynomial-time sub-polylogarithmic
approximation algorithm for the problem?

    This paper takes a step toward resolving the major open problem in the approximability of DST.
We formulate a flow-based LP relaxation that has a polylogarithmic integrality gap, provided the
fractional solution is relatively integral — i.e., for every terminal t and edge e, the flow value fet
is either zero or equal to the capacity variable xe , where fet and xe denote the flow and indicator
(capacity) variables, respectively.
    More precisely, we design a randomized polynomial-time rounding algorithm that, given a frac-
tional solution (x, f ) from the strengthened LP satisfying the relatively integral property, returns
an integral solution whose cost is at most O(log2 k) times that of the fractional one. Since we
incur an additional O(log k) factor in the LP formulation itself, this yields an overall O(log3 k)-
approximation algorithm.
    The relatively integral property is, in fact, shared by all known integrality gap instances of
DST [HKK+ 07, ZK02, LL24]. This suggests that understanding whether such fractional solutions
admit a sub-polynomial integrality gap is a promising direction toward resolving the longstanding
open question.
  1
   Zelikovsky’s approximation scheme was originally developed for DST in directed acyclic graphs.   Later,
Charikar et al. [CCC+ 99] showed that it also applies to general graphs.




                                                   2
1.1   Our Result and Contribution
Our main contribution is a new LP relaxation for the Directed Steiner Tree problem that admits
a polylogarithmic approximation guarantee under the relatively integral condition. Specifically,
we show that any feasible fractional solution (x, f ) satisfying this condition can be rounded to an
integral solution with cost at most O(log2 k) times that of the fractional one.
    Since our Strengthened-LP incurs an additional O(log k) factor in the approximation ratio,
this yields an overall O(log3 k)-approximation. However, while the integrality gap proof is con-
structive, it does not directly yield a polynomial-time algorithm. To this end, we also provide
a randomized rounding algorithm that, given access to a relatively integral fractional solution,
outputs an O(log3 k)-approximate solution in expected polynomial time.

Theorem 1. There exists an LP relaxation for the Directed Steiner Tree problem such that any
feasible fractional solution satisfying the relatively integral property can be rounded to an integral
solution whose cost is at most O(log2 k) times that of the fractional one. Since the LP formulation
incurs an additional O(log k) loss in the approximation factor, this yields an overall O(log3 k)-
approximation.
    Moreover, there exists a randomized algorithm that, given access to a relatively integral fractional
solution, computes such an O(log3 k)-approximate solution in expected polynomial time. Therefore,
the existence of an LP relaxation that guarantees a relatively integral solution implies a polynomial-
time O(log3 k)-approximation algorithm for the Directed Steiner Tree problem.

    We remark that it is not necessary to explicitly enforce the relatively integral condition within
the LP formulation. Instead, it suffices to guarantee the existence of a decomposition of the frac-
tional solution that satisfies this condition to obtain a polynomial-time polylogarithmic approxi-
mation algorithm.
    The core of our approach is a novel LP formulation. We strengthen the standard flow-based
LP relaxation for DST by adding carefully designed constraints that enforce consistency between
capacity and flow variables. Leveraging these constraints, we decompose the fractional solution
into a tree-like structure amenable to rounding using techniques originally developed for the Group
Steiner Tree problem on trees. Crucially, unlike previous methods relying on LP/SDP hierarchies
or large enumerations, our decomposition and rounding algorithms run in polynomial time. By
reverse-engineering known integrality gap constructions [HKK+ 07], we demonstrate how to main-
tain the flow structure throughout the decomposition, yielding a polynomial-time polylogarithmic
approximation for DST whenever the fractional solution from the LP satisfies the relatively integral
property.

1.2   Related Work
The Steiner Tree problem and its variants lie at the heart of network design, encompassing a rich
family of problems with wide-ranging applications. Among these, two of the most fundamental
are the Undirected Steiner Tree problem and its directed counterpart — the Directed Steiner Tree
problem, which is the focus of this paper.
     For the Undirected Steiner Tree problem, approximation algorithms have a long history. The
first known approximation, a factor-two algorithm, was given by Gilbert and Pollak in 1968 [GP68].
Breaking through the factor-of-two barrier took decades: Zelikovsky’s algorithm [Zel93] achieved a
factor of 11/6, a key early improvement. Subsequent efforts have steadily lowered the approximation


                                                   3
ratio, culminating in the current state-of-the-art result by Byrka, Grandoni, Rothvoß, and Sanit’a
[BGRS13], which obtains an approximation ratio approaching ln(4) < 1.39. This progression
highlights significant advances on the undirected side.
    In contrast, the Directed Steiner Tree (DST) problem is substantially more challenging. The first
approximation algorithm achieving a ratio of k ϵ (for any ϵ > 0) was devised by Zelikovsky [Zel97]
for directed acyclic graphs. Charikar et al. [CCC+ 99] later extended this result to general directed
graphs and additionally introduced the first polylogarithmic approximation for DST, attaining an
O(log3 k)-approximation ratio but requiring quasi-polynomial time. 2 Subsequent works [Rot11,
FKK+ 14] also attained O(log3 k) approximations, still relying on quasi-polynomial running times.
    More recently, two independent breakthroughs by Grandoni, Laekhanukit, and Li [GLL23], as
well as Ghuge and Nagarajan [GN22], improved the approximation ratio to O(log2 k/ log log k),
yet these results still hinge on quasi-polynomial-time algorithms. Notably, [GLL23] showed that
this ratio is essentially the best possible
                                       S in the quasi-polynomial   regime, assuming the Projection
                                                         δ
Game Conjecture and that NP ⊊ δ>0 ZPTIME(2n ). Under the more standard assumption
NP ⊊ ZPTIME(npolylog(n) ), the hardness result by Halperin and Krauthgamer [HK03] establishes
that no log2−ϵ n-approximation for DST is possible for any constant ϵ > 0.
    A closely related special case of DST is the Group Steiner Tree (GST) problem, defined on
undirected graphs. In Group Steiner Tree, the goal is to ensure connectivity from a root to at least
one node in each of several specified groups (subsets) of vertices. Through a standard reduction,
any instance of Group Steiner Tree can be transformed into a DST instance with minimal overhead.
For Group Steiner Tree on trees, the seminal work of Garg, Konjevod, and Ravi [GKR00] achieved
an O(log2 k)-approximation. By applying probabilistic metric-tree embeddings [Bar98, FRT04],
their approach extends to yield an O(log3 k)-approximation for general undirected graphs. This
randomized LP-rounding algorithm was later derandomized by Charikar, Chekuri, Goel, and Guha
[CCGG98].
    On the negative side, Halperin et al. [HKK+ 07] established an Ω(log2 n/(log log n)2 ) integrality
gap for a standard LP-relaxation of Group Steiner Tree on a tree. Subsequently, Halperin and
Krauthgamer [HK03] proved that no log2−ϵ n-approximation is possible for any constant ϵ > 0,
unless NP ⊆ ZPTIME(npolylog(n) ). These hardness results closely parallel the complexity landscape
observed for the DST problem.
    High-connectivity generalizations of both DST and Group Steiner Tree problems have also
been studied, requiring λ edge-disjoint or vertex-disjoint paths from the root to each terminal or
group. For DST, nontrivial approximation results are known only for the special case λ = 2 (2-edge
connectivity), where Grandoni and Laekhanukit [GL17] obtained a quasi-polynomial-time polylog-
arithmic approximation. For higher connectivity requirements (λ ≥ 3), only special cases admit
nontrivial results [Lae16, CLWZ20, Nut24]. Liao, Chen, Laekhanukit, and Zhang [LCLZ22] showed
that the hardness of the λ-Connected DST problem grows exponentially in λ, even for constant
λ, indicating an inherent difficulty. More generally, the hardness is almost polynomial in n (see,
e.g., [CLNV14, Lae14, Man19]). For the Group Steiner Tree variant with λ-edge-connectivity,
polynomial-time polylogarithmic approximations exist for any value of λ, as shown by Chen,
Laekhanukit, Li, and Zhang [CLLZ22], setting it apart from the directed case. For additional
relevant and related results, see [GKR10a, KKN12, CGL15].
   2
     Charikar et al. originally claimed a ratio of O(log2 k) [CCC+ 99]. However, the correct ratio is O(log3 k) due to
a subtle issue in Zelikovsky’s height reduction lemma [Zel97], which was identified and corrected by Helvig, Robin,
and Zelikovsky in [HRZ01].



                                                          4
2     On the Complexity of Directed Steiner Tree
In this section, we provide further discussion on the open problem of whether DST admits a
polylogarithmic approximation algorithm that runs in polynomial time. The author discusses two
aspects of the complexity status of DST based on personal studies, which the author believes may
be useful for future research.

2.1   Integrality Gap and Approximation Hardness
Most previous results lean toward a negative answer to this question, particularly in terms of the in-
tegrality gap. Generally, many hardness-of-approximation results can be derived from lower bounds
on the integrality gap. For instance, the log2−ϵ k-hardness of approximation result for DST [HK03]
builds on an integrality gap lower bound of roughly the same ratio [HKK+ 07]. However, the recent
result showing a polynomial integrality gap for the standard flow-based relaxation [LL24] is unlikely
to lead directly to a hardness result. This is due to the basic structure of the constraints used in
the LP, as described informally below.

      Find capacities {xe }e∈E(G) that support
                                            P a unit flow from the root to each terminal
      t ∈ K, while minimizing the total cost e∈E(G) ce xe .

    These basic constraints naturally generalize to the high-connectivity version of the problem,
namely the λ-Edge-Connected Directed Steiner Tree (λ-EC-DST), which asks for a minimum-cost
subgraph that provides λ edge-disjoint paths from the root to every terminal. The corresponding
LP formulation for λ-EC-DST requires a flow of value at least λ to each terminal. Thus, any
feasible solution to the basic LP of λ-EC-DST is also feasible for the basic LP of DST. Conversely,
any feasible solution to the basic LP of DST in which every capacity satisfies xe ≤ 1/λ is feasible
for the basic LP of λ-EC-DST after scaling by a factor of λ — i.e., if the solution satisfies a scaling
property.
    This observation has an important implication: it weakly connects the integrality ratio of stan-
dard LPs for DST (both flow- and cut-based) to the hardness of approximation of λ-EC-DST.
Under quasi-NP-hardness assumptions, the approximation hardness of λ-EC-DST is known to be
nearly polynomial [CLNV14, Lae14, Man19, LCLZ22], and assuming the Sliding Scale Conjec-
ture [BGLR93], the hardness can be strengthened to a polynomial ratio. Based on this connection,
we propose the following conjecture:

Conjecture 1. Every LP relaxation for DST that satisfies the scaling property — i.e., feasibility
is preserved under scaling to the λ-EC-DST relaxation — admits a polylogarithmic integrality gap.

    Due to the above reasoning, existing integrality gap instances for DST are unlikely to yield
hardness results, as they involve extremely small capacities [ZK02, LL24], which inherently satisfy
the scaling property.
    Furthermore, one may observe that constraints derived by applying LP or SDP hierarchies to the
standard LPs for DST and λ-EC-DST are structurally similar. Therefore, the author conjectures
that the integrality gap of standard LP relaxations for DST — both cut-based and flow-based —
remains polynomial or nearly so, even after applying a constant number of rounds of LP or SDP
hierarchies.



                                                  5
    Indeed, as shown by Liao et al. [LCLZ22], the approximation hardness of λ-EC-DST grows
exponentially in λ. This suggests that at least logarithmic rounds of hierarchy are required to
significantly reduce the integrality gap of the standard LP relaxations for DST.

2.2   Polynomial vs Quasi-Polynomial Time Separation
This subsection discusses the potential separation between the computational power of polynomial-
time and quasi-polynomial-time approximation algorithms.
     One may naturally ask whether there exists a separation between polynomial-time and quasi-
polynomial-time algorithms in terms of approximation guarantees. The answer is ”Yes” — there
is a known hardness result that demonstrates such a separation.
     A notable example is the infamous Densest k-Subgraph (DkS) problem, where the input consists
of a graph G and an integer k ≥ 0, and the goal is to find an induced subgraph on at most k vertices
that maximizes density, defined as the number of edges per vertex.
     When the input graph admits perfect completeness — i.e., the optimal solution is guaranteed
to be a k-clique—the problem admits a quasi-polynomial-time approximation scheme (QPTAS).
Specifically, Feige and Seltser [FS97] presented a (1 + ϵ)-approximation algorithm that runs in time
             n
nO((1+log k )/ϵ) .
     In contrast, for polynomial-time algorithms, Manurangsi [Man17] showed that achieving an
n 1/(log log n)c -approximation, for some universal constant c > 0 independent of n, is unlikely under

the Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH). Furthermore, assuming the Gap-ETH conjecture, DkS
with perfect completeness does not admit any polynomial approximation in polynomial time —
i.e., there is no nf (ϵ) -approximation algorithm running in nO(1/ϵ) time, for any constant ϵ > 0.

2.3   Relation to Densest-k-Subgraph
Although no approximation-preserving reduction from DkS to DST is currently known, the prob-
lems are related through a maximization variant of 2-EC-DST, namely the Budgeted 2-Edge-
Connected Directed Steiner Tree (Budgeted-2-EC-DST) problem. In this variant, the input includes
a budget B ≥ 0, and the goal is to find a subgraph of total cost at most B that maximizes the
number of terminals t ∈ K that have two edge-disjoint paths from the root.
    The reduction from DkS to Budgeted-2-EC-DST is known only among a few experts. Thus, we
provide a brief description of the reduction below.
    Let I = (G, k) be an instance of DkS, where G is the input graph and k is the size bound for
the subgraph. We construct an instance I ′ = (G′ , B) of Budgeted-2-EC-DST as follows. The graph
G′ is a directed graph with three layers:

   • The first layer consists of a single root vertex r.

   • The second layer is a copy of the vertex set of G.

   • The third layer is a copy of the edge set of G.

We add directed edges of cost 1 from the root r to each vertex in the second layer. Then, for each
vertex v in the second layer and each edge vw ∈ E(G) incident to v, we add a directed edge of cost
0 from v to the corresponding edge-node in the third layer. Finally, the budget is set to B = k.



                                                  6
     There is a natural correspondence between any induced subgraph G[S] of G (for S ⊆ V (G))
and a subgraph H ′ ⊆ G′ . Specifically, a subset S maps to its copy S ′ in the second layer, while
each edge in G[S] corresponds to a vertex in the third layer, forming the terminal set K ′ . The
solution H ′ to the 2-EC-DST instance then consists of the edges from the root r to the vertices
in S ′ , together with the edges from S ′ to all vertices representing edges incident to S in G. The
total cost of H ′ is |S ′ | since only the edges from r to S ′ incur a cost. Moreover, a terminal t ∈ K ′
admits two edge-disjoint paths from r if and only if t corresponds to an edge whose endpoints both
lie in S. This gives the forward correspondence (from DkS to 2-EC-DST), and the converse (from
2-EC-DST to DkS) is straightforward.
     Consequently, the maximum number of edges induced by any subset of k vertices in G equals
the maximum number of terminals that can be reached by two edge-disjoint paths from the root
in the 2-EC-DST instance under budget k, and vice versa.
     We can choose k to be polynomial in |V (G)|, which is a feasible parameter in the hardness
construction of Manurangsi [Man17]. Since the number of terminals |K| is |E(G)| = O(|V (G)|2 ),
this implies that there is no no(1) -approximation algorithm for Budgeted-2EC-DST that runs in
polynomial time.
     In stark contrast, the minimization version of 2-EC-DST admits a polylogarithmic approxima-
tion in quasi-polynomial time, as shown by Grandoni and Laekhanukit [GL17].
     It is worth noting that the instance of Budgeted-2-EC-DST produced by the reduction has
imperfect completeness — i.e., in the YES case, the optimal solution can provide two-edge-disjoint
paths to at most k(k − 1) = |V (G)|c terminals, for some constant 0 < c < 2, while the total
number of terminals is Θ(|V (G)|2 ). Although the algorithm of Grandoni and Laekhanukit could
potentially be adapted to the maximization version, it relies on the assumption that an optimal
solution provides two-edge-disjoint paths to all the terminals. Therefore, the algorithm may not be
applicable to Budgeted-2-EC-DST instances with imperfect completeness.

2.4   Separation Between Maximization and Minimization
While the separation between the approximation power of polynomial-time and quasi-polynomial-
time algorithms is known in the literature — albeit only to a handful of experts — it is less well
known that there is also a separation between the maximization and minimization variants of
certain problems.
    Here, we focus on another problem related to 2-EC-DST, namely the Restricted 2-Edge-Connected
Group Steiner Tree problem (Restricted 2-EC-GST). The input consists of an undirected graph
G = (V, E), a root vertex r, and a collection of groups (i.e., subsets of vertices) U1 , . . . , Uk . The
goal is to find a minimum-cost subgraph H ⊆ G such that there are two edge-disjoint paths from
the root r to some vertex si ∈ Ui for every group Ui . Note that, in the standard variant of 2-
EC-GST, the two edge-disjoint paths can end at different vertices in each group Ui , whereas the
restricted variant requires the two paths to end at the same vertex in the group. This additional
requirement makes the problem strictly harder from an algorithmic perspective.
    Nevertheless, Gupta, Krishnaswamy, and Ravi [GKR10b] showed that Restricted 2-EC-GST
admits a polynomial-time polylogarithmic approximation.
    In contrast, the budgeted variant of Restricted 2-EC-GST does not admit a polylogarithmic
approximation, due to a reduction from DkS. The reduction is essentially the same as that from DkS
to 2-EC-DST, except that the resulting graph G′ is undirected. Furthermore, the DkS instance is
modified to have color classes X1 , . . . , Xk , with the additional constraint that only one vertex can be

                                                    7
selected from each class. We can also assume, implicitly as in Manurangsi’s construction [Man17],
that each Xj forms an independent set.
    The groups in the Restricted 2-EC-GST instance are then defined using these color classes: for
each pair i ̸= j, the group Ui,j consists of copies of edges connecting vertices in Xi to those in Xj .
As a result, we obtain an instance with k(k − 1) groups.
    In the Yes-case of the DkS instance (constructed in [Man17]), there exists a clique of size k, which
implies perfect completeness in the corresponding Restricted 2-EC-GST instance. This hardness
result shows that the budgeted variant does not admit any almost-polynomial approximation in
polynomial time, unless ETH is false.
    This demonstrates a strong separation between the approximability of the minimization and
maximization (budgeted) variants of 2-EC-GST under polynomial-time algorithms — a phenomenon
that is quite rare in approximation complexity.

2.5   Possible Research Directions
So far, much of the available evidence leans toward a negative answer to the open problem. However,
ruling out a polynomial-time polylogarithmic approximation for DST remains difficult. One key
obstacle lies in the relationship between the fractional solutions of DST and those of its harder
variant, λ-EC-DST, which complicates the use of integrality gap lower bounds to derive hardness
results.
    Although we know that certain variants of DST — particularly the budgeted or maximization
versions — do not admit polylogarithmic approximations in polynomial time (unless ETH is false),
the known separation between the minimization and maximization variants, as illustrated in the
case of Restricted 2-EC-GST, also renders this direction less promising.
    The author believes that the most viable path forward is to eliminate the known bad instances
from integrality gap constructions. These instances share a common structural property: the
optimal fractional solutions are relatively integral. Therefore, a crucial step toward progress —
whether in algorithm design or in constructing hardness gadgets — is to closely investigate this
property.
    In pursuit of a positive result, the author identifies several constraints that distinguish DST from
λ-EC-DST. These structural differences may offer useful insights and are summarized as follows:

   • In DST, the optimal solution can be assumed to be a directed binary tree. Hence, it suffices to
     enforce an out-degree of exactly two, which is not feasible in 2-EC-DST or higher-connectivity
     variants.

   • Under the assumption that the optimal solution is a directed binary tree, one may impose a
     density constraint: the total terminal flow carried by edges at level ℓ sums to exactly 2ℓ .

   • In any minimal solution to DST, every vertex except the root has in-degree exactly one. In
     contrast, in λ-EC-DST, internal vertices can have irregular in-degrees.

    The constraint in the last item is the key ingredient used in this paper to invalidate integrality
gap instances exhibiting the relatively integral property. The other two constraints, while poten-
tially valuable, have not yet been exploited and may offer promising directions for future work.




                                                   8
3    Overview of Our Approach
This section provides intuition and an informal overview of our algorithm. We delay formal defini-
tions and notations to Section 4; readers unfamiliar with the topic may wish to briefly go through
the preliminaries before returning here.

Simplifying the Instance. As the first step, we use a height-reduction technique due to Ze-
likovsky [Zel97] to simplify the input instance. This result shows that every solution to the DST
problem can be approximated by a directed binary tree of height O(log k) whose cost is within
O(log k) of the optimum. Thus, we may assume without loss of generality that the input graph
is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) with L = O(log k) layers. This layered structure is crucial for
formulating a strong LP relaxation.

Formulating a Strong LP. A natural LP-relaxation for DST assigns capacities xe to each edge
e ∈ E(G) and flow variables fet to send a unit r → t flow to every terminal t ∈ K; see Figure 2 and
the discussion in Section 5. Unfortunately, the standard flow-based LP for DST has an integrality
gap of at least Ω(n0.418 ) [LL24], making it too weak for achieving a polylogarithmic approximation
ratio.
    While applying Θ(L) rounds of LP or SDP hierarchies (such as Sherali-Adams, Lasserre, or
Lov’asz-Schrijver) would reduce the integrality gap to O(L log k) (i.e., O(log2 k) for L = O(log k))
as shown in [Rot11, FKK+ 14], the resulting LP would have size nΩ(L) and thus would not be
solvable in polynomial time when L = Ω(log n).
    Instead, we tackle the main source of difficulty directly: the inconsistency between flow and
capacity that arises when multiple terminals share the same edges. In any integral solution, each
vertex (except the root) has exactly one incoming edge, so each r → t path is unique. Thus,
if different terminals’ flows use the same edges, they must share a common prefix. However, in
a fractional solution, distinct terminals’ flows can merge or diverge arbitrarily, allowing multiple
paths that differ in their initial segments to share an edge, as illustrated in Figure 1.




               Figure 1: An example of flow inconsistency in a fractional solution.




                                                 9
     In Figure 1, we illustrate how multiple r → t flow paths can cause inconsistencies in a fractional
solution. Consider four terminals t1 , t2 , t3 , and t4 with corresponding flow paths p1 , p2 , p3 , and
p4 . The paths p1 and p2 initially share the same edge e1 before diverging onto edges e3 and e4 ,
respectively. Meanwhile, p3 and p4 share a different edge e2 before eventually merging into the same
edges e3 and e4 as p2 and p1 . In an integral solution, each vertex (except the root) has exactly one
incoming edge, ensuring a unique r → t path per terminal and preventing such complex merges and
divergences. However, a fractional solution allows different terminals to share edges in a manner
that cannot arise integrally. This issue is compounded if flow paths separate and then rejoin later,
making it much harder to enforce a tree-based structure without additional constraints.
     To prevent such inconsistencies, we introduce new variables and constraints that enforce a
property akin to degree-one connectivity, ensuring that if multiple terminals’ flows reach the same
edge, they do so in a structured, tree-like manner. Previous approaches [Rot11, FKK+ 14] rely on
Θ(L) rounds of hierarchies to ensure the unique path property, effectively controlling the entire
length-L path. However, this leads to a quasi-polynomial-size LP. Since we cannot afford such
blow-up, we only enforce capacity-flow consistency locally, on each pair of consecutive edges.
     More concretely, we add constraints of the form:
                                           X
                                                xuv→vw = xvw
                                             uv

    The constraints ensure that the capacity used to enter v from various predecessors u can only
“flow” into vw under separate sets of capacity variables xuv→vw . Similar constraints can be derived
from two rounds of the Sherali-Adams hierarchy, but those only guarantee inequalities rather than
equalities:
                                                 
                                    X                       X
                       (xvw ) ×          xuv ≤ 1 =⇒             xuv ≤ xvw
                                   uv∈δ in (v)             uv∈δ in (v)

    The equality constraints we introduce here are crucial, as the weaker inequalities would allow
decomposition into a tree-like structure but fail to ensure sufficient capacity to support a unit flow
for each terminal.

Decomposing the Fractional Solution into a Tree. With these strengthened constraints, we
show that the LP solution can be decomposed into a capacitated tree structure — referred to as
the decomposition tree. Initially, we only consider the integrality gap upper bound and allow the
decomposition tree to be of quasi-polynomial size.
    The decomposition is layered: we handle one layer at a time and form a probabilistic distribution
of possible “children” structures for the next layer. Ensuring coherence across layers is the main
challenge. By carefully analyzing these probabilities, we argue that the resulting decomposition
tree supports a fractional solution that resembles a Group Steiner Tree (GST) instance on a tree.
    The well-studied GST problem admits an O(log2 k) integrality gap on a tree instance [GKR00],
giving us a polylogarithmic integrality gap for our strengthened LP as well. Thus, we conclude
that our LP is significantly stronger than the standard flow-based relaxation.




                                                  10
Ensuring Feasibility and Controlling Error Accumulation. While the conceptual outline
is clear, ensuring the feasibility of the GST instance derived from our probabilistic decomposition is
intricate. Each layer introduces small multiplicative errors in capacities and flows. Even an (1 ± ϵ)
distortion per layer can accumulate into (1 ± ϵ)L distortion over L = O(log k) layers, potentially
growing polynomially in k.
     Our feasibility analysis is inspired by the work of Halperin et al. [HKK+ 07] and Halperin and
Krauthgamer [HK03], who built integrality gap constructions through recursive instances of Set
Cover (a special case of GST on a star). By “reverse-engineering” their proofs, we adapt their tech-
niques to analyze our randomized decomposition. The key difference is that we cannot control the
random instances of Set Cover as they could. Instead, we carefully choose a probability distribution
that aligns with our LP variables. Another subtlety is that we construct a pre-flow (not necessarily
feasible) and then argue that a feasible flow of the same value must exist. These refinements allow
us to bound error accumulation and maintain the desired polylogarithmic integrality gap.

From Integrality Gap to a Polynomial-Time Algorithm. Our analysis shows that for an
L-layer DAG with L = O(log k), the integrality gap of our strengthened LP is polylogarithmic.
However, the decomposition tree constructed in the proof may have quasi-polynomial size, which
does not immediately yield a polynomial-time algorithm.
    To overcome this, we interleave the decomposition and rounding steps on-the-fly. Our rounding
algorithm is based on the Garg-Konjevod-Ravi (GKR) algorithm for the GST problem on a tree. A
key insight, as discussed by Rothvoß [Rot11], is that although GKR might conceptually operate on a
large (even quasi-polynomial-size) tree, it only needs to query a polynomial number of LP variables.
This ensures that, despite the complexity of the underlying structure, the overall computation
remains polynomial in time.
    We prove that a similar phenomenon holds in our setting: by carefully interleaving the de-
composition and rounding steps, we ensure that only a polynomial number of recursive calls are
made. As a result, we obtain a randomized polynomial-time algorithm for DST that achieves a
polylogarithmic approximation ratio.
    Previous approaches [Rot11, FKK+ 14] relied on solving LPs or SDPs of quasi-polynomial size,
making polynomial-time computability unlikely. Our method, in contrast, directly encodes essential
structural properties into the LP and interleaves decomposition and rounding to overcome this com-
plexity barrier. This innovative approach leads to the first known polynomial-time polylogarithmic
approximation for DST.


4    Preliminaries
We use standard graph terminology. Let G be any directed graph, with vertex set V (G) and edge
set E(G). We usually denote an edge between vertices u, v ∈ V (G) by uv. However, at times we
will write (u, v) to clearly distinguish between u and v and emphasize the direction of the edge.
For any subset of vertices U ⊆ V (G) (or a single vertex), we define the set of incoming edges to U
and outgoing edges from U as
               in                                    out
              δG  (U ) = {vu ∈ E(G) : u ∈ U }   and δG   (U ) = {uv ∈ E(G) : u ∈ U }
                                                    in (U )| and outdeg (U ) = |δ out (U )|. When G is
The indegree and outdegree of U are indegG (U ) = |δG                  G         G
clear from the context, we omit the subscript and write V and E for V (G) and E(G), respectively.

                                                 11
   An arborescence is a directed graph analog of a tree, meaning that its underlying undirected
graph forms a tree. Formally, a directed graph H with a designated root vertex r ∈ V (H) is an
arborescence if it satisfies the following properties:

 (1) H is weakly connected.

 (2) Every vertex in H except the root r has indegree one.

 (3) There is a unique directed path connecting r to each vertex v ∈ V (H) \ {r} (or making r
     reachable from every v).

Arborescences come in two types: (1) out-arborescences, where all paths are directed away from
the root, and (2) in-arborescences, where all paths are directed toward the root. In this paper, we
consider only out-arborescences and will refer to such graphs simply as trees.
    A layered graph (or an L-layered graph) is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G whose vertex set
is partitioned into L disjoint subsets, called layers, V1 , V2 , . . . , VL . In a layered graph, every edge
connects a vertex in layer ℓ to a vertex in layer ℓ + 1 for i = 1, 2, . . . , L − 1. Formally, an L-layered
graph G is defined by

                                     ˙ 2 ∪˙ . . . ∪V
                          V (G) = V1 ∪V           ˙ L,
                          E(G) = E1 ∪E˙ 2 ∪˙ . . . ∪E
                                                   ˙ L−1 , where Ei ⊆ Vi × Vi+1 .

    We also partition the edges of G into E1 , E2 , . . . , EL−1 , where Eℓ consists of edges uv whose
head is in layer Vℓ and tail is in Vℓ+1 . A vertex v ∈ V (G) is said to be at level ℓ if v ∈ Vℓ , and an
edge uv ∈ E(G) is at level ℓ if uv ∈ Eℓ . For any vertex v or edge uv, we denote its level by Level(v).
    In a tree (out-arborescence) or a DAG, we define the height as the length of the longest path
from the root (or source vertex) to any leaf (or sink vertex). Specifically, the height of a tree is
the maximum number of edges on a path from the root to a leaf, while the height of a DAG is the
maximum number of edges on a path from any source to any sink vertex.

Problem Definitions:        We define the problems considered in this paper as follows:

   • Directed Steiner Tree (DST): Given a directed graph G with n vertices, m edges, and
     nonnegative edge costs ce , a root vertex r ∈ V (G), and a set of k terminals K ⊆ V (G) \ r,
     the goal is to find a minimum-cost subgraph H ⊆ G that contains a directed path from r to
     each terminal t ∈ K.

   • Group Steiner Tree (GST): Given an undirected graph G with n vertices, m edges, and
     nonnegative edge costs ce , a root vertex r ∈ V (G), and a collection of subsets G1 , . . . , Gk called
     groups, the goal is to find a minimum-cost subgraph H ⊆ G that contains a path from r to
     at least one vertex in each group Gi for i = 1, 2, . . . , k.

Pseudo-Flow, Pre-Flow and Feasible-Flow: Our discussion requires the notions of several
types of flows, which are relevant to the formulation of our LP and for our analysis. Readers already
familiar with these concepts may skip this part.
    A cut in a directed graph G is a partition of V (G) into two parts S and S̄ = V (G) \ S. We may
refer to a cut as (S, S̄) or simply S. For a cut S ⊆ V (G), its cut-set is the set of edges going from


                                                    12
S to S̄, i.e., δ out (S). An edge e ∈ E(G) belongs to a cut S if e ∈ δ out (S). A cut S separates vertices
s and t if s ∈ S and t ̸∈ S, and may be called an s → t-cut. By Menger’s theorem, there are λ
edge-disjoint s → t paths in G if and only if every s → t-cut S has at least λ edges. In particular,
to guarantee an s → t-path exists, we must have at least one edge crossing every s → t-cut (S, S̄).
     An s, t-flow network N is defined on a directed graph G with capacities xe on each edge
e ∈ E(G), where s, t ∈ V (G) are the source and sink, respectively. A pseudo-flow (or pseudo-
s, t-flow ) f is a function f : E(G) → R assigning each edge uv ∈ E(G) a real value fuv , subject to
the capacity constraint:
                                    fuv ≤ xuv for all edges uv ∈ E(G).
We often refer to a pseudo-flow by its values fe e∈E(G) . The value of a pseudo-flow on any cut
S ⊆ V (G) is the net-flow, defined as the total flow entering S minus the total flow leaving S:
                                     X               X
                                           fuv −            fvw .
                                      uv∈δ in (S)     vw∈δ out (S)

The value of a flow f on the network is the net-flow entering the sink t.
   A pre-flow (or pre-s, t-flow ) is a pseudo-s, t-flow where every vertex except the source s has
non-negative net-flow. A feasible s, t-flow is a pseudo-s, t-flow where every vertex except the source
s and the sink t has zero net-flow, i.e., it satisfies the flow-conservation constraint:
                     X                X
                           fuv =              fvw for all vertices v ∈ V (G) \ {s, t}.
                    uv∈δ in (v)     vw∈δ out (v)

   Throughout our discussion, all s, t-flows have the root vertex r as the common source, while
the sink can be any terminal t ∈ K. Thus, we will often refer to such a flow simply as a t-flow.

Concentration Bounds: Our analysis relies heavily on the well-known Chernoff-Hoeffding bounds
[Che52, Hoe63]. We use the versions commonly presented in modern literature, as found in the
textbook by Mitzenmacher and Upfal [MU17].

Lemma 2 (Chernoff-Hoeffding [Che52, Hoe63, MU17]). Let X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn be independent 0 − 1
random                           = 1] = ρi and Pr[Xi = 0] = 1 − ρi , for i = 1, 2, . . . , n. Let
     P variables such that Pr[Xi P
X = ni=1 Xi , and let µ = E[X] = ni=1 ρi . Then the following hold:
                                              −ϵ2
   • Upper Tail: Pr[X ≥ (1 + ϵ)µ] ≤ e 3 µ , for all 0 < ϵ ≤ 1.
                                              −ϵ2
   • Lower Tail: Pr[X ≤ (1 − ϵ)µ] ≤ e 2 µ , for all 0 < ϵ < 1.

4.1    Parameters and Settings of the Directed Steiner Tree Instance
Throughout the discussion, we assume that the input graph G is an L-layered directed graph with
L = ⌈log2 k⌉ + 1 layers. From now on, we focus on directed graphs and omit the word “directed”
for brevity. The number of vertices, edges, and terminals are denoted by n, m, and k, respectively.
    In general, we can assume that G is a layered graph with n layers. To see this, given any graph
G, create n copies of V (G) as V1 , V2 , . . . , Vn . For each edge uv ∈ E(G), join a copy u
                                                                                           e of u at level
ℓ to a copy ve of v at level ℓ + 1 by an edge with cost c(eu,ev) = cuv , for all ℓ = 1, 2, . . . , L − 1. In
addition, join a copy of u at level ℓ to another copy of u at level ℓ + 1 by a zero-cost edge. It is not

                                                    13
hard to see that this transformation preserves the optimal solution. We may further assume that
V1 = {r} and VL = K.
    However, for technical reasons, our algorithm requires L = O(log k) layers, while the trivial
transformation might result in L = n. Consider, for example, a case where the optimal solution is
a path of length n.
    Nevertheless, Zelikovsky [Zel97, HRZ01] showed that the metric closure of the input graph
contains a tree of height L, for L = 2, . . . , ⌈log2 k⌉ + 1, that preserves the cost of an optimal
solution within a factor of L · k 1/L .

Lemma 3 (Zelikovsky’s Height Reduction [Zel97, HRZ01]). Let T be any tree (out-arborescence)
with cost ce on each edge e ∈ E(T ) having a root r and k leaves. Then there exists a tree (out-
arborescence) T̂ of height ℓ, for L = 2, 3, . . . , ⌈log2 k⌉ + 1, in the metric closure M(T ) of T that
has r as a root, spans all the k leaves and has cost at most:

                                          cost(T̂ ) ≤ L2 k 1/L cost(T )

   It follows from the basic transformation mentioned above that the metric closure of G can be
transformed into an L-layered graph with L = ⌈log2 k⌉ + 1 layers, while preserving the cost of an
optimal solution within a factor of O(log k).


5    Formulating a Strong Linear Program
We begin by explaining how to formulate our LP. The standard flow-based LP-relaxation for DST
seeks a minimum-cost solution vector {xe }e∈E(G) that supports a unit r → t flow for every terminal
t ∈ K.
    In this standard flow-based LP-relaxation, we have two types of variables on an edge e ∈ E(G).

    • The variable xe indicates whether an edge e ∈ E(G) is chosen in the solution.

    • The variable fet is a flow variable indicating how much r → t flow is carried on edge e.

    A basic description of the standard flow-based LP-relaxation for DST is shown in Figure 2.

             X
     min             ce xe
            e∈E(G)

      s.t
            {xe }e∈E(G) supports a unit r → t-flow to every terminal t ∈ K
            {fet }e∈E(G) defines a unit r → t-flow                                        ∀t ∈ K
            0 ≤ fet ≤ xe ≤ 1                                                  ∀e ∈ E(G), ∀t ∈ K


                             Figure 2: Standard flow-based LP-relaxation for DST

    In our formulation, we strengthen the LP by adding constraints that ensure, for any edge vw,
the number of paths containing any two consecutive edges uv and vw is at most xvw (the number of

                                                       14
paths passing through vw). These are valid constraints because, in any minimal integral solution,
each vertex v except the root has exactly one incoming edge.
    More precisely, for every pair of consecutive edges uv, vw ∈ E(G) and every terminal t ∈ K, we
                                              t
introduce additional variables xuv→vw and fuv→vw    . We then impose the following constraints:
             X                                              X
                                                                  t        t
                   xuv→vw = xvw ,                                fuv→vw = fvw ,
              uv∈E(G)                                       uv∈E(G)
                                                              X
                          t                                            t        t
                         fuv→vw ≤ xuv→vw                              fuv→vw = fuv
                                                            vw∈E(G)
                                                                       t            t     t
                         xuv→vw ≤ min{xuv , xvw },                    fuv→vw ≤ min{fuv , fvw }

    Note that a similar constraint can be derived from two rounds of the Sherali-Adams hierarchy,
but it would not hold with equality.
    Let G = (V, E) be the input graph, r be the root vertex, K ⊆ V \ r be the set of terminals, and
let Eℓ , for ℓ = 1, 2, . . . , L with L = ⌈log2 k⌉+1, denote the set of edges at level ℓ. Our LP-relaxation
is shown in Figure 3.

               X
      min              ce xe
              e∈E(G)

        s.t
               X
                        xuv→vw = xvw                                                 ∀vw ∈ E(G)       (⋆)
              uv∈E(G)

          0 ≤ xuv→vw ≤ xuv                                                      ∀uv, vw ∈ E(G)
          0 ≤ xuv→vw ≤ xvw                                                      ∀uv, vw ∈ E(G)
            X
                  t        t
                 fuv→vw = fvw                                              ∀vw ∈ E(G), ∀t ∈ K
              uv∈E(G)
                X
                         t        t
                        fuv→vw = fuv                                        ∀uv ∈ E(G), ∀t ∈ K
              vw∈E(G)
               t        t
          0 ≤ fuv→vw ≤ fuv                                              ∀uv, vw ∈ E(G), ∀t ∈ K
                t         t
          0 ≤ fuv→vw  ≤ fvw                                             ∀uv, vw ∈ E(G), ∀t ∈ K
           t
          fvw  ≤ xvw                                                       ∀vw ∈ E(G), ∀t ∈ K
           t
          fuv→vw ≤ xuv→vw                                               ∀uv, vw ∈ E(G), ∀t ∈ K
             t
          {fvw }vw∈E(G) defines a unit r → t-flow.                                       ∀t ∈ K
             t                                            t
          {fvw }uv∈E(G) defines an r → t-flow with value fvw .                           ∀t ∈ K
          0 ≤ xe ≤ 1                                                                  ∀e ∈ E(G)


                       Figure 3: Strengthened LP-relaxation for Directed Steiner Tree




                                                     15
6     Bounding Integrality Gap
Before describing our algorithm, we first analyze an upper bound on the integrality gap of the
LP in Figure 3. The key idea is to show that any feasible fractional solution can be decomposed
into a capacitated tree T that supports a feasible flow of value close to one. More concretely,
we transform an optimal fractional solution of the DST LP into a corresponding LP solution for
the Group Steiner Tree (GST) problem on a tree. Applying the rounding algorithm of Garg,
Konjevod, and Ravi [GKR00] to this GST instance, we conclude that the integrality gap of our LP
is polylogarithmic in the number of terminals.
    A direct implementation of the decomposition, however, would produce a tree of quasi-polynomial
size, making it infeasible to run explicitly, even though our LP can be solved in polynomial time.
To achieve a polynomial running time, we interleave the rounding and decomposition steps so that
only a polynomial number of elements need to be processed. Additionally, we must carefully handle
the capacity distortion in the resulting tree since each original edge uv ∈ E(G) may appear multiple
times in the decomposition tree.
    Our upper bound analysis draws on insights from the lower bound construction of Halperin et al.
[HKK+ 07] for the GST problem on a tree. Their approach recursively composes an integrality gap
instance of the Set Cover problem to form a complex GST instance. In contrast, we essentially
apply a similar idea in reverse: by treating each level of the layered graph as a Set Cover instance,
we break down a given fractional DST solution into a simpler, tree-based structure that the GST
rounding algorithm can effectively handle.

6.1     Constructing the Decomposition Tree
We now describe a random process that constructs a tree T . Note that T is not a subgraph of the
original graph G and may be significantly larger. To avoid confusion, we will use the term nodes
when referring to vertices of T , while continuing to use vertex for those of G.
    The tree T is an out-arborescence whose root node corresponds to r, and whose leaves corre-
spond to the set of terminals K. Thus, the root and terminals of T match those in the original
DST instance.
    In Section 6.1.1, we outline the overall structure of the decomposition tree. Then, in Sec-
tion 6.1.2, we describe the random growth process that, starting from the root, recursively decom-
poses the fractional solution along each edge uv ∈ E(G) associated with each node in T . Next,
we detail the capacity and flow assignments in Section 6.1.3, and finally, we analyze the resulting
integrality gap in Section 6.2.

6.1.1    Structure of the Decomposition Tree
The decomposition tree T is an out-arborescence constructed from decomposing the fractional
solution of our LP. Its nodes come in two distinct types: edge-copy nodes and subset nodes. As we
grow this tree level by level, starting from a special root node, we maintain a layered structure to
mirror the complexity of the underlying layered graph G.

    • Height: The decomposition tree T has L̂ = 2L − 1 levels, where L is the number of layers in
      the original L-layered graph G. The levels of T are numbered from 1 through 2L − 1. Thus,
      each level in G roughly corresponds to two levels in T : one containing edge-copy nodes and
      one containing subset nodes.

                                                16
   • Root Node: At level 1, we have a special edge-copy node re associated with the root vertex
     r of G. We may think of r as arising from an auxiliary edge r′ r. We call this unique node r̂
     the root node of T .

   • Leaf Nodes: The leaves of T lie at level L̂, which is an odd level. Leaf nodes are “edge-copy
     nodes” corresponding to edges entering terminal vertices t ∈ K. Specifically, each leaf is
                  e for vt ∈ E(G) and t ∈ K. These leaves can be partitioned into groups Gt
     denoted by vt,
     based on their associated terminal t. Each Gt represents a group in a Group Steiner Tree
     instance on the decomposition tree T .

   • Odd-Level Nodes (Edge-Copy Nodes): At every odd level 1, 3, 5, . . . , 2L − 1, the nodes
     of T are edge-copy nodes. Each such node corresponds to an edge in G. We write u      fv to
     denote an edge-copy node associated with an original edge uv ∈ E(G). Since a single edge
     uv may appear multiple times as we branch out in the decomposition, we may have multiple
     copies labeled u
                    fv. Except at the leaves, each edge-copy node u
                                                                  fv at an odd level has exactly
     d children, and these children are subset nodes.

   • Even-Level Nodes (Subset Nodes): At every even level 2, 4, 6, . . . , 2L − 2, the nodes of
     T are subset nodes. Each subset node sjufv corresponds to a randomly chosen subset of edges
     from E(G) that are “children” of the edge uv. There are d such subsets for each edge-copy
     node. The subset nodes sjufv serve as probabilistic intermediaries, chosen independently at
     random, that refine the decomposition down to the next layer.

    In summary, T alternates levels of edge-copy nodes and subset nodes, starting with an edge-
copy node at the root and ending with edge-copy nodes at the leaves. Edge-copy nodes represent
edges of the original graph G, while subset nodes represent random subsets of edges, guiding the
decomposition through each layer. This alternating structure enables us to progressively “zoom
in” on the fractional solution, ultimately transforming it into a tree-structured instance for which
an existing technique — the Garg-Konjevod-Ravi rounding algorithm — is applicable.

6.1.2     Randomized Construction
The decomposition tree T is built using a randomized procedure applied to each edge-copy node
u
fv, proceeding level by level until terminal nodes are reached. We remark that both the first and
the last levels of T consist exclusively of edge-copy nodes.
    Given an edge-copy node u  fv, the randomized construction process operates as follows:

   • From u       fv to sjufv : If v is not a terminal vertex in K, then we independently generate d subsets
     s1ufv , s2ufv , . . . , sdufv . For each subset sujfv , we consider every outgoing edge vw ∈ E(G) (i.e., edges
     emanating from v). We include the edge-copy node vw                    f in subset sjufv with probability:
                                                           h          i x
                                                                           uv→vw
                                                     Pr vw   f ∈ sjufv =         .
                                                                            xuv

        This probability ensures that the selection of child edges in each subset aligns proportionally
        with their corresponding capacity xuv distributed to each xuv→vw in the LP solution.



                                                       17
                          Figure 4: An illustration of the Decomposition


   • From sjufv to vw:
                   f For each subset node sjufv , we create a child edge-copy node vw
                                                                                   f corresponding
                                                     j
     to edge vw ∈ E(G) only if vw                                    f becomes a child of sjufv if and
                                  f is included in sufv . Formally, vw
             f ∈ sjufv . That is,
     only if vw

                                     (sjufv , vw)          f ∈ sjufv .
                                              f ∈ E(T ) ⇐⇒ vw

     Importantly, observe that each subset sjufv contains at most one copy of any edge vw ∈ E(G).

    We may conceptualize the randomized construction as a form of fractional set packing, where
our goal is to fractionally pack a star (a height-1 tree) into a capacity determined by the LP
solution of the Strengthened LP. This perspective helps in understanding how the decomposition
aligns with the flow and capacity constraints imposed by the LP, ensuring that the resulting tree
structure accurately represents the fractional solution in expectation.
    An illustration of the decomposition process is provided in Figure 4.

Handling the Root Level: The randomized process described above generates a block of sub-
trees emanating from each edge-copy node u  fv. However, the first level of the input graph G consists
only of the root vertex r, which has no incoming edge. To uniformly apply the decomposition pro-
cess to all edge-copy nodes, including the root, we introduce auxiliary LP variables by treating the
root r ∈ V (G) as if it were an edge, and we add its copy re as the root of the decomposition tree
T . Specifically, we set the capacity xr = 1, representing the root’s total capacity, and for each
outgoing edge rv from r, we set xr→rv = xrv , where rv denotes an edge outgoing from the root
vertex r in G. Additionally, for each terminal t ∈ K, we set the flow frt = 1 to ensure that one unit
                                                 t
of flow is directed towards each terminal, and fr→rv      t to maintain flow consistency. That is,
                                                      = frv

              xr = 1, xr→rv = xrv    and   frt = 1, fr→rv
                                                     t       t
                                                          = frv for all terminals t ∈ K.

This setup ensures that the root vertex r correctly distributes flow and capacity to its outgoing
edges in accordance with the LP solution, and the edge-copy re can be seeded as the first node in
the construction.



                                                 18
Terminals in the Decomposition Tree: In the decomposition process, each terminal t ∈ K
is represented by a collection of edge-copy nodes within the decomposition tree T . Specifically, a
terminal t ∈ K is associated with all edge-copy nodes corresponding to edges directed into t in the
original graph G. Formally, the set of edge-copy nodes representing terminal t is defined as

                                   Gt := {vt
                                          e ∈ V (T ) : vt ∈ E(G)}.

Borrowing terminology from the Group Steiner Tree (GST) problem, each set Gt is referred to as a
group. Each group Gt encapsulates all potential connections to the terminal t ∈ K within the tree
structure and serves as the basis for defining a GST instance on the decomposition tree T .

6.1.3   Assigning Capacities and Flow to the Decomposition Tree
Now, we assign the capacities and flows to the edges of the decomposition tree T . The assignments
will be described for each block in the decomposition tree T consisting of an edge-copy node
fv ∈ V (T ), its children sujfv , and nodes vw
u                                           f ∈ sjufv .

Intuition Behind The Distribution: We briefly explain the intuition behind our choice of
distributions.
    Firstly, we treat xuv as the probability that an edge uv appears in an integral solution, and we
            t as the probability that an integral t-flow chooses to route through the edge uv. Thus,
interpret fuv
            t
the ratio fuv /xuv represents the conditional probability that the t-flow chooses to route through uv
given that uv is included in the integral solution.
    Viewing the fractional solution this way, xuv→vw /xuv can be seen as the probability that an
edge vw appears in the integral solution as a child of uv, given that uv is chosen. This forms the
basis of the distribution we employ. Consequently, the probability is

                                                                                            xuv→vw
   Pr[vw appears in an integral as a child of vw|uv appears in an integral solution] =
                                                                                              xuv
                              t
     Now, one may interpret fuv→vw /xuv→vw as the probability that an integral t-flow routes through
the edges uv and then vw. The key observation is that the flow variables fuv   t are not relatively
                                      t /x
integral with respect to xuv — i.e., fuv   uv < 1 is often the case. Therefore, we need to scale the
t-flow by a factor of xuv /fuv and multiply by the fraction of t-flow fˆuv
                            t                                           t routing through uv in the

decomposition tree. This yields the probability:

                                                                                   xuv xuv→vw
Pr[t-flow routes through uv → vw|uv and vw appear in an integral solution] = fˆuv
                                                                               t
                                                                                  · t ·
                                                                                   fuv   xuv

     These ideas form the basis of our capacity and flow assignments. The t-flow on the decomposi-
tion tree is maintained so that it is close to being integral relative to the capacities — specifically,
x̂ufv = fˆuf
           t whenever fˆt > 0.
            v           u
                        fv


Notation Simplification: To avoid confusion with the LP variables on the original graph G, we
use x̂α and fˆαt to denote the capacity and flow variables on an edge α ∈ E(T ) in the decomposition
tree. For convenience, since every node in a tree has a unique incoming edge, we may refer to an


                                                  19
edge (a, b) ∈ E(T ) simply by its head node b when it appears in a subscript. For example, x̂b and
fˆbt correspond to x̂(a,b) and fˆ(a,b)
                                 t     , respectively.


                                x̂(f
                                   uv,sj )
                                           ⇐⇒ x̂sj             fˆ(f
                                                                 t
                                                                  uv,sj )
                                                                          ⇐⇒ fˆstj
                                        uv
                                        f            uv
                                                     f                 uv
                                                                       f         uv
                                                                                 f

                                x̂(sj ,vw) ⇐⇒ x̂vw
                                                f              fˆ(s
                                                                 t
                                                                    j
                                                                      ,vw)
                                                                           ⇐⇒ fˆvw
                                                                                t
                                                                                f
                                   uv
                                       f
                                                                  uv
                                   f                              f
                                                                       f


                                                                           uv, sjufv , vw),
Capacity Assignments: First, we assign a capacity of d−(ℓ+1) to each path (f           f where
ℓ is the current level of node u
                               fv. Formally,
                                                          −(ℓ+1)
                                             x̂sj = x̂vw
                                                      f =d
                                              uv
                                              f



Defining Pseudo-Flow: Next, for each terminal t ∈ K, we define a pseudo-flow fˆt by pushing
the t-flow from a node u
                       fv of level ℓ to its descendant vw
                                                       f of level ℓ + 1.

   • Initialization: For each terminal t ∈ K, we initialize a pseudo-flow fˆt by pushing a flow of
     value fˆret = 1 to the root node re.

   • Selecting Recipient Node: For each level ℓ = 0, 1, . . . , L − 1, we propagate the pseudo-flow
     from each node u
                    fv at level ℓ to its descendants vwf at level ℓ + 1 as follows:
                     fv ∈ V (T ) at level ℓ with positive incoming pseudo-flow, i.e., fˆt = x̂ufv . For
     Consider a node u                                                                         u
                                                                                               fv
      each subset sujfv , we mark one child node vw
                                                 f ∈ sjufv with probability:
                             t
                      xuv fuv→vw      t
                                     fuv→vw                         t           t
                       t
                          ·        =                      (because fuv > 0 and fuv ∈ {0, xuv }).
                      fuv   xuv→vw   xuv→vw
                                                                                              t
      Observe that the above is a valid probability because the capacity constraint enforces fuv→vw ≤
      xuv→vw .

   • Propagating the Flow: If a node vw   f ∈ sjufv is marked, then we push a pseudo-flow of
     value x̂vw
             f =d                         uv, sjufv , vw).
                 −(ℓ+1) through the path (f           f Formally,
                                                              i x       t        t
                                                                  uv fuv→vw     fuv→vw
                        h
                                                          j
                      Pr fˆvw
                           t
                              = x̂vw u
                                     f v ∈ V (T ) ∧ vw
                                                    f  ∈ su v  =  t
                                                                     ·        =
                           f       f                       f     fuv   xuv→vw   xuv→vw

Remark: It is possible that no node in sjufv is marked. In such cases, the edge (f uv, sjufv ) carries no
t-flow. The probability of this event is
                                                   h                                       i
                                                                                          j
                                              X
               ˆt
          Pr fsj = 0 u  fv ∈ V (T ) = 1 −         Pr fˆvw
                                                        t
                                                          =  x̂vw u v ∈ V (T ) ∧ vw ∈  s
                                                        f       f f              f        u
                                                                                          fv
                 uv
                                                        j
                 f
                                                   vw∈s
                                                   f uv f




                                                          20
6.1.4    Alternative View of the Decomposition Tree
The decomposition tree T can be conceptualized as a path-splitting tree, which is a suffix tree
representing all possible paths in the layered graph G. Note, however, that our decomposition tree
allows subpaths of length ℓ to appear up to dℓ times within the tree. Consequently, an edge-copy
      f that is absent from a subset sjufv can be considered as having a capacity of x̂(f
node vw                                                                                    f = 0.
                                                                                        uv,vw)
    Path-splitting trees have been instrumental in developing algorithms for various variants of
the Directed Steiner Tree and Group Steiner Tree problems; see, for example, [NPS11, CEKP18,
CEGS11]. Additionally, the path-splitting tree is a key component in rounding fractional solutions
obtained from LP and SDP hierarchies [Rot11, FKK+ 14], as well as in addressing the 2-Edge-
Connected Directed Steiner Tree problem [GL17].

6.2     Analysis for the Integrality Gap
In this subsection, we analyze the integrality gap of the Straightened LP formulation for DST.
Throughout this analysis, we adhere strictly to the construction of the decomposition tree T as
described in Section 6.1.2 and the capacity and flow assignments detailed in Section 6.1.3.
    Our analysis is organized as follows. First, in Section 6.2.1, we introduce the necessary notations,
parameter settings, and prerequisites required for the subsequent discussion. Then, in Section 6.2.2,
we analyze the distortion on the capacity of edges when mapped to the decomposition tree. This
distortion analysis shows that the cost of the fractional solution on the decomposition tree deviates
by only a constant factor. The proofs also serve as a warm-up for the subsequent analysis. Next,
in Section 6.2.3, we analyze the feasibility of the flow assignments as described in Section 6.1.3.
    Following the distortion and flow feasibility analyses, in Section 6.2.4, we leverage the known
integrality gap of the Group Steiner Tree problem on a tree to argue that the integrality gap of the
fractional solutions on the decomposition tree is polylogarithmic.
    Finally, we combine the transformation steps to conclude the existence of a randomized polynomial-
time polylogarithmic approximation estimation algorithm for DST — an algorithm that estimates
the value of an optimal solution without providing the actual solution. The integrality gap result
is subsequently transformed into a polynomial-time approximation algorithm in Section 7.

6.2.1    Notation, Parameters and Prerequisite
Before proceeding to the analysis, we will define the notation, parameter settings, and prerequisites
that will be used throughout the discussion.

Prerequisite:    We assume the following prerequisite:

                              t
                       xuv , fuv ≥ 1/n2     and                  t
                                                       xuv→vw , fuv→vw ≥ 1/n4 .
     This assumption is valid because even after removing all edges with xe below n12 , the remaining
edges still support a t-flow of value at least 12 . More formally, after removing such edges, each cut
still has a capacity of at least
                                       1        n(n − 1) 1          1    1
                         1 − |E(G)| ·   2
                                          ≥1−            · 2 ≥1− = .
                                      n            2      n         2    2
Note that the first inequality holds because the graph G is directed acyclic, meaning that any pair
of vertices u, v can have at most one of the edges uv or vu.

                                                  21
    Although the prerequisite only ensures a t-flow of at least 1/2, we will assume a flow of value one
to simplify the discussion. Additionally, we assume throughout the discussion that the fractional
solution is relatively integral — i.e., each edge e ∈ E(G) carried t-flow value either fet = 0 or
fet = xe . In other words,
                                        fet > 0 =⇒ fet = xe .

Notation: Regarding the levels of nodes in the decomposition tree, we define the level of a node
fv ∈ V (T ) to be the level of its corresponding edge uv ∈ E(G), and we define the level of the root
u
node as level-0.
   The following notation will be used throughout the proofs:


Copy(uv) = the set of copies of an edge uv ∈ E(G) in the decomposition tree
Level(uv) = the level of an edge uv in the graph G
        Zuv = the number of copies of uv ∈ E(G) in the decomposition tree
            = |Copy(uv)|
Zufv→(vw) = the number of copies of vw ∈ E(G) created from a node u
                                                                  fv ∈ V (T )
             n             o
                 f ∈ sjufv
          = j : vw
        Qtuv = the number of copies of uv ∈ E(G) that has positive t-flow in the decomposition tree
                n                         o
             = u  fv ∈ Copy(uv)| fˆuf
                                    t
                                      v >0

Qtufv→(vw) = the number of copies of vw ∈ E(G) created from a node u
                                                                   fv ∈ V (T )
              n                      o
                  f ∈ sjufv ∧ fˆvw
           = j : vw             t
                                f >0




Parameter Settings:        We conclude by setting the parameters

                                       d = n7   and    δ = 1/4.

The choice of d ensures that 1/d is smaller than any LP variables (e.g., xuv , xuv→vw ) by a polynomial
factor. The constant δ is used in our probabilistic analysis. Its value is chosen to guarantee the
applicability of all necessary inequalities.

6.2.2     Analysis of Capacity Distortion
This subsection is devoted to analyzing the distortion of the capacity variables xuv as they appear
as multiple copies in the decomposition tree. The upper bound on the distortion provides an upper
limit on the blow-up of the cost of the fractional solution as it is mapped to the decomposition
tree, while the lower bound ensures that the connectivity requirements are met.
    However, the lower bound alone does not suffice to argue that the capacities on the decomposi-
tion tree support a flow of value close to one. Therefore, a more involved analysis using flow-based
arguments is necessary, which we postpone to Section 6.2.3. Here, we present the proofs of both
lower and upper bounds on distortion as a warm-up to the analysis of flow feasibility. Additionally,


                                                  22
the proof of the distortion upper bound serves as a precursor to the analysis of the running time
of the “Decompose-and-Round” algorithm discussed in Section 7.
    We will proceed at a slow pace to familiarize readers with the use of concentration bounds by
proving a simple lemma using Chernoff-Hoeffding bounds. Readers already acquainted with the
subject may choose to skip this part.

Lemma 4. Consider an edge uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ and its child vw ∈ E(G). Let δ = 1/4, and let
                                                                f in the decomposition tree T ,
Zufv→(vw) denote the number of copies of vw created from a copy vw
                 n            o
                           j
                      f ∈ svw
i.e., Zufv→(vw) = j : vw    f   . Then it holds that
       h                                    i                                         
   • Pr Zufv→(vw) ≤ 1 − 2ℓ+1
                          δ
                               · d · xuv→vw           − 12 ·   δ
                                                                        · d · xuv→vw
                                                                   
                                       xuv    ≤ exp            2ℓ               xuv
       h                                    i                                             
   • Pr Zufv→(vw) ≥ 1 + 2ℓ+1
                          δ
                               · d · xuv→vw           − 13 ·    δ
                                                                            · d · xuv→vw
                                                                       
                                       xuv    ≤ exp            2ℓ+1                 xuv

                                 fv of uv ∈ E(G) appears in the decomposition tree T , the number
In particular, given that a copy u
of copies vw
          f created from u fv is (1 ± δ/2ℓ+1 ) · d · xuv→vw
                                                       xuv  with probability at least 1 − exp(−n)).

                                                  f is added to a subset sjufv is
Proof. We recall that the probability that a copy vw
                                h                       i x
                                                            uv→vw
                              Pr vwf ∈ sjufv u
                                             fv ∈ V (T ) =        .
                                                             xuv
Thus, the expected number of copies of vw
                                       f created from u  fv is
                                          h                      i x
                                                                    uv→vw
                                            f ∈ sujfv u
                               X
                 E Zufv→(vw) =         Pr vw          fv ∈ V (T ) =       · d.
                                                                     xuv
                                        j=1,...,d

Plugging in ϵ = δ/2ℓ+1 to the Chernoff-Hoeffding bounds in Theorem 2, the desired inequalities
immediately follow.
    Moreover, from the prerequisite, we have d ≥ n7 , xuv→vw ≤ 1 and xuv≥1/n . Therefore, applying
the union bound, we conclude that the number of copies vw  f deviates from the expectation by a
               ℓ+1
factor (1 ± δ/2 ) with probability at most exp(−n).

Distortion Lower Bound: With the concentration bounds in place, we are now ready to prove
the distortion lower and upper bounds. Intuitively, we apply the concentration bounds similar to
those in Theorem 4. However, the number of copies of an edge vw at level ℓ + 1 depends on the
number of copies of its parent edges uv ∈ E(G). Therefore, we need to condition on the lower
bound provided by the previous level.

Lemma 5 (Distortion Lower Bound). Suppose all edges uv ∈ E(G) have xuv ≥ 1/n2 . Let δ = 1/4
and d ≥ n7 . Then it holds for all edges uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ, for ℓ = 0, 1, 2, . . . , L − 1, that
                                                                                      !
                             Y                                          ℓ
                                         δ      ℓ                 1   2     d
              Pr Zuv ≤            1 − i  · d xuv  ≤ exp − · δ ·                · xvw
                                        2                         5         4
                            i=1,...,ℓ


In particular, for d ≥ n7 , every edge uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ has at least (dℓ xuv )/2 copies in the
decomposition tree with high probability.

                                                    23
Proof. We prove the lemma by induction on ℓ. At the level 0, there is only the root r, which we
treat as a special edge. Thus, the statement holds immediately as the root has exactly one copy re
in the decomposition tree, implying
                                                    
                                       Y        δ
                                                   
                          Zr = 1 ≥          1 − i  · dℓ xr = d0 · 1 = 1.
                                                 2
                                       i=1,...,ℓ

   Assume inductively that, for some ℓ ≥ 1, the claim holds for all edges uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ. For
notational convenient, we define the threshold ϑuv for edges uv ∈ E(G) as
                                                        
                                          Y          δ
                                                        
                                ϑuv :=          1 − i  · dℓ xuv .
                                                     2
                                             i=1,...,ℓ

   Thus, we have from the induction hypothesis that
                           "         #                ℓ      !
                                                 1 2  d
                       Pr Zuv ≤ ϑuv ≤ exp − · δ ·         · xvw .
                                                 5    4

   The probability is negligible when d ≥ n7 and xuv ≥ 1/n2 . Specifically, the probability that
there exists an edge uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ having fewer than ϑuv copies is
           "                                          #                       ℓ         !
                                                                      1        d
        Pr ∃uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ such that Ẑuv ≤ ϑuv ≤ n2 · exp − · δ 2 ·          · xvw
                                                                      5        4
                                                                           ℓ       !
                                                                  1 2      d
                                                        ≤ exp − · δ ·          · xvw
                                                                  6        4

    It follows that, for ℓ ≥ 1, every edge uv at level ℓ has no less than ϑuv copies in the decomposition
tree with probability at least (1 − 1/n). Hence, it suffices to analyze the expected number of copies
of vw at level ℓ + 1 given that all its parents uv have at least ϑuv copies.




                                                         24
            "                            #                                                    
                                                                                   h          i
                                                                                     f ∈ sjufv 
                                                 X                       X
       E Zvw Zuv ≥ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G) ≥                      ϑuv ·                  Pr vw
                                               uv∈E(G)             j=1,2,...,d
                                                 X                    xuv→vw
                                                                               
                                             =             ϑuv · d ·
                                                                         xuv
                                               uv∈E(G)
                                                                                                     
                                                 X              Y           δ
                                                                                
                                                                                                x uv→vw 
                                             =                         1 − i  · dℓ xuv · d ·
                                                                             2                     xuv
                                               uv∈E(G)        i=1,...,ℓ
                                                                                                 
                                                 X              Y           δ
                                                                                
                                             =                         1 − i  · dℓ+1 · xuv→vw 
                                                                             2
                                               uv∈E(G)        i=1,...,ℓ
                                                                       
                                                   Y                
                                                                 δ  ℓ+1            X
                                             =             1− i          ·d    ·         xuv→vw
                                                                 2
                                                 i=1,...,ℓ                        uv∈E(G)
                                                                       
                                                   Y            δ
                                                                     
                                             =             1 − i  · dℓ+1 xvw
                                                                 2
                                                 i=1,...,ℓ

   The first inequality follows because we are given that the number ofPcopies of every edge uv ∈
E(G) is at least ϑuv . The last equality follows from the constraint        uv xuv→vw = xvw in the
Strengthened LP.
   It then follows by Chernoff-Hoeffding bounds (Theorem 2) that
                                                                                      
                                                   
                             δ        Y             δ
        Pr  Zvw ≤ 1 − ℓ+1 ·                   1 − i  · dℓ+1 · xvw Zuv ≥ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                           2                       2
                                    i=1,...,ℓ
                                                                                      
                                                         2     Y          
                                                1      δ                   δ
                                  ≤ exp − ·                 ·       1 − i  · dℓ+1 xvw 
                                                2    2ℓ+1                 2
                                                                         i=1,...,ℓ

    Next, we analyze the left-hand-side  of the inequality. We apply the fact that exp(−y) ≤ 1−y/2,
for y ∈ [0, 1.59] to the product i=1,...,ℓ 1 − 2δi . Then we have
                                 Q                

                                                                 
   Y          δ
                       Y       
                                     δ
                                                      X       δ
          1− i ≥            exp − i−1 = exp −                     ≥ exp(−2δ) = exp(−1/2) ≥ 1/2.
               2                   2                         2i−1
i=1,...,ℓ              i=1,...,ℓ                             j=1,...,ℓ

    Consequently, we have
             "                                               #                            2       !
                                                                                     dℓ+1 xvw
                                                                                  
                                                               1                      δ
                Pr Zvw ≤ ϑvw       Zuv ≥ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G) ≤ exp − ·                  ·
                                                               2             2ℓ+1        2
                                                                                ℓ+1       !
                                                                        1 2      d
                                                                 = exp − · δ ·        · xvw
                                                                        4        4



                                                        25
    As discussed, the probability that all edges uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ have no less than ϑuv copies
in the decomposition tree is at least 1 − 1/n. Thus, we have

       "            #       "                                           #
    Pr Zvw ≤ ϑvw ≤ Pr Zvw ≤ ϑvw ∧ Zuv ≥ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                            "                                       #       "                        #
                        = Pr Zvw ≤ ϑvw Zuv ≥ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G) · Pr Zuv ≥ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                                         ℓ+1       !      
                               1         d                 1
                        ≤ exp − · δ 2 ·        · xvw · 1 −
                               4         4                 n
                                         ℓ+1       !
                               1         d
                        ≤ exp − · δ 2 ·        · xvw
                               5         4

    This proves
          Q the first part of  the lemma. The second part of the lemma follows by applying the
                             δ
fact that    i=1,...,ℓ+1 1 − 2i   ≤ 1/2 to the multiplicative term in ϑvw , which gives us

                                                            ℓ+1       !
                                  dℓ+1 xvw
                                          
                                                    1 2     d
                         Pr Zvw ≤            ≤ exp − · δ ·        · xvw
                                     2              5       4

    Thus, for ℓ ≥ 1, xuv ≥ 1/n2 and d = n7 , it holds that Zvw ≤ (dℓ+1 xvw )/2 with probability at
most exp(−n). Since the graph G has at most n2 edges, it follows by the union bound that all
the edges vw ∈ E(G) have Zvw ≥ (dℓ+1 xvw )/2 copies in the decomposition tree with probability at
least 1 − 1/n, i.e., with high probability. This completes the proof of the lower bound.

Distortion Upper Bound: The proof of the distortion upper bound is almost identical to that
of the lower bound (Theorem 5) except that the concentration bound is applied to the upper tail.

Lemma 6 (Distortion Upper Bound). Suppose all edges uv ∈ E(G) have xuv ≥ 1/n2 , and let
δ = 1/4 and d ≥ n7 . Then it holds for all edges uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ, for ℓ = 0, 1, 2, . . . , L − 1, that
                                                                                 !
                             Y                                           ℓ
                                         δ                        1         d
              Pr Zuv ≥            1 + i  · dℓ xuv  ≤ exp − · δ 2 ·          xuv
                                        2                         2         4
                                i=1,...,ℓ


In particular, for d ≥ n7 , every edge uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ has at most 2 · (dℓ xuv ) copies in the
decomposition tree with high probability.

Proof. We prove the lemma by induction on ℓ. At the level 0, there is only the root r, which we
treat as a special edge. Thus, the statement holds immediately as the root has exactly one copy re
in the decomposition tree, implying
                                                    
                                       Y        δ
                                                   
                          Zr = 1 ≤          1 + i  · dℓ xr = d0 · 1 = 1.
                                                 2
                                            i=1,...,ℓ



                                                        26
   Assume inductively that, for some ℓ ≥ 1, the claim holds for all edges uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ. For
notational convenient, we define the threshold ϑuv for edges uv ∈ E(G) as
                                                        
                                          Y          δ
                                                        
                                ϑuv :=          1 + i  · dℓ xuv .
                                                     2
                                           i=1,...,ℓ

   Thus, we have from the induction hypothesis that
                           "          #                ℓ    !
                                                  1 2  d
                        Pr Zuv ≥ ϑuv ≤ exp − · δ ·         xuv .
                                                  2    4

   The probability is negligible when d ≥ n7 and xuv ≥ 1/n2 . Specifically, the probability that
there exists an edge uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ having more than ϑuv copies is
            "                                          #                     ℓ      !
                                                            2          1 2    d
         Pr ∃uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ such that Zuv ≥ ϑuv ≤ n · exp − · δ ·           xuv
                                                                       2      4
                                                                          ℓ     !
                                                                  1 2     d
                                                         ≤ exp − · δ ·        xuv
                                                                  3       4

    It follows that, for ℓ ≥ 1, every edge uv at level ℓ has no more than ϑuv copies in the decom-
position tree with probability at least (1 − 1/n). Hence, it suffices to analyze the expected number
of copies of vw at level ℓ + 1 given that all its parents uv have no more than ϑuv copies in the
decomposition tree.

        "                            #                                                    
                                                                              h          i
                                                                                f ∈ sjufv 
                                              X                  X
      E Zvw Zuv ≤ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G) ≤                     ϑuv                 Pr vw
                                           uv∈E(G)            j=1,2,...,d
                                                                           
                                              X                     xuv→vw
                                         =              ϑuv · d ·
                                                                      xuv
                                           uv∈E(G)
                                                                                                 
                                             X               Y           δ
                                                                             
                                                                                             xuv→vw 
                                         =                          1 + i · dℓ xuv  · d ·
                                                                          2                    xuv
                                           uv∈E(G)         i=1,...,ℓ
                                                                                             
                                             X               Y           δ
                                                                             
                                         =                          1 + i  · dℓ+1 · xuv→vw 
                                                                          2
                                           uv∈E(G)         i=1,...,ℓ
                                                                    
                                                                 
                                               Y              δ                 X
                                         =              1 + i  · dℓ+1 ·             xuv→vw
                                                              2
                                             i=1,...,ℓ                        uv∈E(G)
                                                                    
                                                                 
                                               Y              δ
                                         =              1 + i  · dℓ+1 xvw
                                                              2
                                              i=1,...,ℓ

    The first inequality follows because we are given that the number ofPcopies of every edge uv ∈
E(G) is at most ϑuv . The last equality follows from the constraint       uv xuv→vw = xvw in the
strengthened LP.

                                                       27
   It then follows by Chernoff-Hoeffding bounds (Theorem 2) that
                                                                                     
                                                  
                           δ         Y             δ
        Pr  Zvw ≥ 1 + ℓ+1 ·                  1 + i · dℓ+1  · xvw Zuv ≥ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                         2                        2
                                   i=1,...,ℓ
                                                                                     
                                                        2                
                                               1      δ         Y         δ
                                 ≤ exp − ·                 ·       1 + i  · dℓ+1 xvw 
                                               3    2ℓ+1                 2
                                                                 i=1,...,ℓ

    Next, we analyze the left-hand-side
                                      Q of the inequality.  We apply the fact that exp(y) ≥ 1 + y,
for all real number y, to the product i=1,...,ℓ 1 + 2δi . Then we have
                                                       

                                                              
           Y        δ
                             Y        
                                        δ               X δ
                1+ i ≤            exp       = exp              ≤ exp(2δ) = exp(1/2) ≤ 2.
                     2                  2i                  2i
       i=1,...,ℓ            i=1,...,ℓ                j=1,...,ℓ

   Consequently, we have
            "                                   #                                   2   !
                                                    1                        δ
           Pr Zvw ≥ ϑvw Zuv ≤ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G) ≤ exp − ·                · 2 · dℓ+1 xvw
                                                    3           2ℓ+1
                                                                   ℓ+1        !
                                                           2 2      d
                                                    = exp − · δ ·         · xvw
                                                           3        4

    As discussed, the probability that all edges uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ have no more than ϑuv copies
in the decomposition tree is at least 1 − 1/n. Thus, we have

      "            #       "                                             #
    Pr Zvw ≥ ϑvw ≤ Pr Zvw ≥ ϑvw ∧ Zuv ≤ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                           "                                         #           "            #
                       = Pr Zvw ≥ ϑvw Zuv ≤ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G) · Pr Zuv ≤ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                                        ℓ+1       !      
                              2         d                 1
                       ≤ exp − · δ 2 ·        · xvw · 1 −
                              3         4                 n
                                        ℓ+1       !
                              1         d
                       ≤ exp − · δ 2 ·        · xvw
                              2         4

    This proves
          Q the first part of  the lemma. The second part of the lemma follows by applying the
                             δ
fact that    i=1,...,ℓ+1 1 − 2i   ≤ 1/2 to the multiplicative term in ϑvw , which gives us
                                                                ℓ+1        !
                                    dℓ+1 xvw
                                            
                                                        1 2      d
                         Pr Zvw ≥              ≤ exp − · δ ·           · xvw
                                       2                2        4

   Thus, for ℓ ≥ 1, xuv ≥ 1/n2 and d = n7 , it holds that Zvw ≥ 2 · dℓ+1 xvw with probability at
most exp(−n). Since the graph G has at most n2 edges, it follows by the union bound that all the
edges vw ∈ E(G) have Zvw ≤ 2 · dℓ xuv copies in the decomposition tree with probability at least
1 − 1/n, i.e., with high probability. This completes the proof of the upper bound.

                                               28
Concluding Capacity Distortion Bounds:                The following is an immediate corollary of Theo-
rem 5 and Theorem 6.
Corollary 7 (Bounds on Capacity Distortion). It holds with high probability for every edge uv ∈
E(G) at level ℓ, for ℓ = 0, 1, . . . , L, that
                                xuv           X
                                       ≤        x̂ufv = Zuv · dℓ ≤ 2 · xuv
                                  2
                                       u
                                       fv∈Copy(uv)




6.2.3   Flow Feasibility Analysis
At first glance, the distortion lower bound established in Theorem 5 might suggest that the ca-
pacities on the decomposition tree are sufficient to guarantee the existence of a t-flow of value at
least half of the original flow for every terminal t ∈ K. However, the distortion lower bound only
provides guarantees on the mapping of an r → t-cut in the original graph G to the decomposition
tree T . It does not directly rule out the existence of an re → Gt -cut in T that has a sub-constant
value. Addressing this issue would lead to a complicated analysis.
      Therefore, instead of solely relying on the distortion lower bound, we directly show the existence
of an re → Gt-flow using a flow-based argument. Specifically, we show that the pseudo-t-flow
{fˆαt }α∈E(T ) , defined in Section 6.1.3 is a pre-t-flow of value at least 1/2. In other words, it satisfies
the following properties:

   • Capacity Constraints: For every edge α ∈ E(T ), the flow fˆαt does not exceed its assigned
     capacity x̂α .
   • Flow Conservation: At every node u     fv ∈ V (T ) (excluding leaves), the incoming flow is at
     least equal to the outgoing flow, ensuring no negative net-flow.
   • Flow Value Preservation: The total flow value from the root to each terminal’s group Gt
     in the decomposition tree is at least half of the original flow value ρt in the input graph G.

    More formally, given that a terminal t ∈ K receives a flow of value ρt in the input graph G, the
corresponding pseudo-t-flow fˆt in the decomposition tree T is a pre-t-flow with a flow value of at
least ρt /2.
Lemma 8. For any terminal t ∈ K, the pseudo-t-flow {fˆαt }α∈E(T ) defines a pre-t-flow on the
decomposition tree T . Moreover, with high probability, if the terminal t receives a t-flow of value ρt
in the input graph G, then the total flow received by its corresponding group Gt in the decomposition
tree is at least ρt /2.
    Consequently, the capacity assignments x̂ on the decomposition tree T support a feasible-t-flow
of value at least 1/2 from the root to every group Gt with high probability.
Proof. We prove the lemma by induction on the level ℓ of the decomposition tree, for ℓ = 0, 1, . . . , L.
More formally, we claim that the following invariants hold at any node ufv ∈ V (T ) at level ℓ and
for any terminal t ∈ K:
   • Non-Negative Net-Flow: For any node u           fvP∈ V (T ), the amount of t-flow entering u
                                                                                                fv is at
     least the sum of t-flow leaving it, i.e., fˆuf
                                                  t ≥
                                                   v    j=1,...,d
                                                                  ˆtj .
                                                                  f
                                                                   suv
                                                                    f



                                                     29
   • Capacity Constraint: For any edge α ∈ E(T ), the flow fˆαt does not exceed its capacity x̂α ,
     i.e., fˆαt ≤ x̂α .

   • Flow Value Preservation: For any original edge uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ, the probability that
                                                                                      Q               δ
                                                                                                          t
     the total t-flow across all its copies in the decomposition tree is less than      i=1,...,ℓ 1 − 2i
                                                                                                           fuv
     is at most                                                                  
                                                     Y            
                                       1     δ                     δ        t
                            exp − ·             ·           1 − i  fuv      · dℓ 
                                       2    2ℓ                     2
                                                      i=1,...,ℓ−1

    The first and second invariants are immediately satisfied by the flow assignment, while the third
invariant is established through induction on the level ℓ.

Non-negative Excess Flow: Consider any node u              fv at level ℓ. By construction, the t-flow
entering node ufv is either zero (fˆuf
                                     t = 0) or equal to its capacity (fˆt = x̂
                                      v                                 u
                                                                        fv    uf
                                                                                     −ℓ
                                                                                v = d ). In the former
case, no flow is sent out from ufv. In the latter case, node u fv distributes a t-flow of either zero or
  −(ℓ+1)                                                 j
d        to each of its d children (the subset nodes sufv ). Consequently, the total outgoing t-flow
from ufv is at most d · d−(ℓ+1) = d−ℓ , which does not exceed the incoming flow. Thus, the invariant
is automatically satisfied.

Capacity Constraints: The second invariant is maintained by the construction of the flow.
Specifically, for every edge α ∈ E(T ), the flow fˆαt is either set to its capacity x̂α during the flow
assignment or set to zero. Therefore, the capacity constraints are inherently satisfied.
    It remains to verify the third invariant regarding the flow value lower bound.

Flow Value Preservation: Fix a terminal t ∈ K, and consider any node u                fv ∈ V (T ), which can
be either a copy of an edge uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ ≥ 1 or the root node (i.e., u        fv = re). If u
                                                                                                   fv receives
no t-flow, then we are done. Thus, we assume that fˆuf       t > 0.
                                                               v
   We recall the construction of the t-flow. Given that the node u          fv receives a positive t-flow, we
                                                           j
push a t-flow of value x̂vw
                         f   to each child   node vw
                                                   f    ∈ s u
                                                            fv   with probability
        h                                  i      h                                         i
                                       j                                                j
    Pr fˆvw
          t
          f  = x̂vw
                  f fˆt
                      u
                      fv >  0 ∧ vw
                                f  ∈  sufv   = Pr   ˆ
                                                    f t
                                                     vw
                                                      f   =   x̂vw
                                                                 f  u
                                                                    fv ∈ V (T ) ∧ vw
                                                                                  f  ∈ s u
                                                                                         fv
                                                     t
                                              xuv fuv→vw
                                             =  t
                                                  ·
                                              fuv   xuv→vw
                                              f t
                                             = uv→vw (by relatively integral, i.e., fuv
                                                                                     t
                                                                                        ∈ {0, xuv }).
                                              xuv→vw
    Now we prove by induction on ℓ that, for any level ℓ = 0, 1, . . . , d and any edge uv ∈ E(G) at
level ℓ, the number of copies of u
                                 fv in the decomposition tree that carry positive t-flow is at least
                                        Y         δ
                                                     
                                               1 − i · dℓ fuv
                                                           t
                                                  2
                                          i=1,...,ℓ




                                                      30
with probability at least
                                                                                          
                                                                                                
                         1           δ        1                   Y              δ     ℓ t          1
               1 − exp − ·              · 1− ℓ ·                            1 − i · d fuv · 1 −
                         2           2ℓ      d                                  2                    n
                                                                i=1,...,ℓ−1
                                                                                            ℓ        !
                                                                                     1 2     d      t
                                                                       ≥ 1 − exp − · δ ·         · fuv
                                                                                     5       4

Base Case (ℓ = 0): At level ℓ = 0, there is only the root node re. By construction, the flow
assigned to the root is fˆret = x̂re = 1. Therefore, the number of copies with positive t-flow is 1, which
satisfies the base case as
                                      0        
                                     Y        δ
                                          1 − i · d0 frt = 1 · 1 · frt = frt .
                                              2
                                      i=1

Assuming frt = 1, the base case holds trivially.

Inductive Step: Assume inductively that the invariants hold for every edge uv ∈ E(G) at level
ℓ ≥ 0. For notational convenient, we define the threshold φtuv for edges uv ∈ E(G) and a terminal
t ∈ K as
                                          Y          δ
                                                        
                                   t
                                  φuv =          1 − i · dℓ fuvt
                                                     2
                                                    i=1,...,ℓ

   Now, consider any edge uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ, and its child edge vw ∈ E(G). Observe that, for
 t ≥ 1/n2 and d ≥ n7 , the probability that any edge uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ has less than φt copies
fuv                                                                                      uv
that receive positive t-flow is exponentially small. Thus, we deduce that, with probability at least
1 − 1/n, all the edges uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ has at least φtuv copies that receive positive t-flow. Thus,
it suffices to analyze the expected value of Qtvw given that the value Qtuv of any its parent uv is at
least φtuv .
    By linearity of expectation, we know that
                                                                                                 
       "                            #
                                                   X
    E Qtvw Qtuv ≥ φtuv ∀uv ∈ E(G) = E                         Qtufv→(vw) Qtuv ≥ φtuv ∀uv ∈ E(G) .
                                                                                                 
                                                        fv∈Copy(uv):fˆuv
                                                        u             t >0
                                                                      f


Hence, we first need to analyze the t-flow received by copies of vw
                                                                 f created from some node u
                                                                                          fv with
positive t-flow.

            h                    i  X   h              i
           E Qtufv→(vw) fˆuf
                           t
                             v >0 =   Pr fˆvw
                                           t     ˆt > 0
                                           f > 0 fu
                                                  fv
                                            j=1,...,d
                        h                                       i      h                 i
                                         j                   j                 j
                X
           =         Pr fˆvw
                          t
                          f  > 0 ∧ vw
                                   f  ∈ su
                                             ˆt > 0 ∧ vw
                                             f
                                          fv u fv     f  ∈ s u
                                                             fv   · Pr   vw
                                                                         f  ∈ su
                                                                                   ˆt > 0
                                                                                   f
                                                                                fv u fv
               j=1,...,d
                   t                                     t
                      fuv→vw          xuv→vw                fuv→vw
           =d·              · ·                     =d·
                  xuv→vw                xuv                   xuv
                f t
           = d · uv→vw
                     t
                                 (because fˆuf
                                             t           t          t
                                               v > 0 =⇒ fuv > 0 =⇒ fuv = xuv )
                    fuv

                                                                 31
                                fv of uv ∈ E(G), we have
    Summing over all the copies u
                                                                                         
      "                           #
                                                X
    E Qtvw Qtuv ≥ φtuv ∀uv ∈ E(G) = E                   Qtufv→(vw) Qtuv ≥ φtuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                                                                                         
                                                                 fv∈Copy(uv):fˆuv
                                                                 u             t >0
                                                                               f
                                                                                        "                   #
                                                             Y          δ
                                                                           
                                                        ≥           1 − i · dℓ fuv
                                                                                 t 
                                                                                      · E Qutfv→(vw) fˆuf
                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                          v >0
                                                                        2
                                                           i=1,...,ℓ
                                                                                   
                                                             Y                            ft
                                                                           
                                                                         δ
                                                        =           1 − i · dℓ fuv
                                                                                 t 
                                                                                      · d · uv→vw
                                                                                               t
                                                                        2                     fuv
                                                           i=1,...,ℓ
                                                                           
                                                             Y          δ
                                                                           
                                                        =           1 − i  · dℓ+1 · fuv→vw
                                                                                        t
                                                                        2
                                                               i=1,...,ℓ




    Applying Chernoff-Hoeffding bounds (Theorem 2), it follows that
                    "                                             #
                                      δ
                 Pr Qtvw ≤ 1 − ℓ+1 φtuv Qtuv ≥ φtuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                                    2
                                                                       
                                       2              
                            1       δ         Y        δ
                 ≤ exp − ·        ℓ+1
                                           ·    1 − i  · dℓ+1 · fˆuv→vw
                                                                      t   
                            2    2                     2
                                                                    i=1,...,ℓ

    Next, we analyze the left-hand-side  of the inequality. We apply the fact that exp(−y) ≤ 1−y/2,
for y ∈ [0, 1.59] to the product i=1,...,ℓ 1 − 2δi . Then we have
                                Q                 

                                       
  Y    δ
           Y    
                     δ
                                X   δ
     1− i ≥   exp − i−1 = exp −         ≥ exp(−2δ) = exp(−1/2) ≥ 1/2.
       2           2               2i−1
i=1,...,ℓ                     i=1,...,ℓ                                         j=1,...,ℓ

    This implies
                                                                                                                2           !
                                                                                                                dℓ+1 · fvw
                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                    
                                   δ                                                               1        δ
     Pr         Qtvw ≤       1−               φtuv   Qtuv ≥ φtuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)                 ≤ exp − ·         ·
                                  2ℓ+1                                                             2    2ℓ+1         2
                                                                                                           ℓ+1      !
                                                                                                   1 2      d      t
                                                                                            = exp − · δ ·        fvw
                                                                                                   4        4

    As discussed, the probability that all edges uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ have no less than φtuv copies




                                                                           32
that received positive t-flow is at least 1 − 1/n. Thus, we have
      "            #        "                                                #
   Pr Qtvw ≤ φtvw ≤ Pr Qtvw ≤ φtvw ∧ Qtuv ≥ φtuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                          "                                              #       "                       #
                     ≤ Pr Qtvw ≤ φtvw Qtuv ≥ φtuv ∀uv ∈ E(G) · Pr Qtuv ≤ φtuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                                      ℓ+1       !      
                            1         d                 1
                     ≤ exp − · δ 2 ·           t
                                            · fvw · 1 −
                            4         4                 n
                                      ℓ+1       !
                            1         d
                     ≤ exp − · δ 2 ·           t
                                            · fvw
                            5         4
                                  Q                        
                                                       δ
    Now, applying the fact that        i=1,...,ℓ+1 1 − 2i        ≤ 1/2 to the multiplicative term in φtvw , it
follows that                                                 ℓ+1       !
                                  ℓ+1 f t
                                         
                                 d     vw          1         d
                       Pr Qtvw ≤            ≤ exp − · δ 2 ·           t
                                                                   · fvw
                                    2              5         4
                       t ≥ 1/n2 and d = n7 , it holds that Qt ≥ (dℓ+1 f t )/2 with probability at
    Thus, for ℓ ≥ 1, fuv                                         vw         vw
least 1 − exp(−n). Since the graph G has at most n2 edges, it follows by the union bound that
every edge uv ∈ E(G) has Qtuv ≥ (dℓ+1 fvw  t )/2 copies with positive t-flow with probability at least

1 − 1/n, i.e., with high probability.
    By the flow assignment, each edge at level ℓ has t-flow of value either 0 or d−ℓ . Therefore, we
conclude that fˆt is a pre-t-flow with value at least
                                         X
                                              dL fut
                                                   t
                                                     /2 = ρt /2,
                                         ut∈EL

where ρt is the value of the t-flow sending from the root r to the terminal t ∈ K in the original
graph.
    As we may push the excess flow on each node back to the source, the existence of the pre-t-flow
ˆt
f of value 1/2 then implies that the capacities x̂ on the decomposition tree T is enough to support
a feasible t-flow from the root re to each group Gt with value at least 1/2, for every terminal t ∈ K.
This completes the proof of the flow value lower bound.

6.2.4   Bounding Integrality Gap via Group Steiner Tree Algorithm
We now argue using a Group Steiner Tree (GST) rounding algorithm by Garg, Konjevod, and Ravi
[GKR00] that the integrality gap of the group Steiner tree instance induced by the decomposition
is polylogarithmic.
    To construct the GST instance, we use the decomposition tree T as the input graph. We
designate re as the root of the tree and define each group Gt for t ∈ K as the set of edge-copy nodes
corresponding to edges entering the terminal t. Thus, Gt represents the group associated with a
terminal t in the GST instance.
    Next, we define the LP variables {x̂α }α ∈ E(T ) corresponding to the standard LP relaxation for
GST. According to Garg, Konjevod, and Ravi, given an LP solution {xe }e∈E(T ) for a tree instance


                                                    33
T of GST, their rounding algorithm produces an integral solution with an expected cost of at most
O(∆ log k) times the cost of the LP solution, where ∆ denotes the height of the tree T and k is
the number of terminals. Importantly, this guarantee depends only on the tree’s height and the
number of terminals, and is independent of the number of nodes in the tree.
    Furthermore, the Garg-Konjevod-Ravi rounding algorithm requires only that the fractional
solution {xe }e∈E(T ) supports a flow of constant value. It is not necessary to support a flow of
value one for every terminal. More formally, we state the following theorem derived from the later
interpretation and analysis of the Garg-Konjevod-Ravi rounding algorithm by Rothvoß [Rot11].

Lemma 9 (Garg-Konjevod-Ravi Rounding [GKR00, Rot11]). There exists a randomized polynomial-
time algorithm that, given a solution {xe }e∈E(T ) to the standard LP-relaxation of the Group Steiner
Tree problem on an input tree T of height ∆ with k groups, outputs a feasible integral solution T ′ ⊆ T
so that each edge e ∈ E(T ) appears in the tree T ′ with probability at most O(∆ log k).
    In other words, the integrality gap of the standard LP-relaxation of the group Steiner tree problem
is upper bounded by O(∆ log k).

    Consequently, we only need the fact that the decomposition tree has capacities that support
a t-flow of value at least a constant, say 1/2, for every terminal t ∈ K as shown in Theorem 8.
Furthermore, by Theorem 6, the cost of the fractional solution on the decomposition tree is at most
twice that of the fractional solution to the Strengthened LP in Figure 3.
    Therefore, we conclude that the integrality gap of the Strengthened LP is O(L log k), which is
O(log2 k) as we set L = O(log k).

Theorem 10 (Integrality Gap of Strengthened LP). The integrality gap of the Strengthened LP
in Figure 3 defined on an instance of the Directed Steiner Tree problem on an L-layered graph
with k terminals is at most O(L log k) whenever the fractional solution is relatively integral, i.e.,
fet ∈ {0, xe } for all edges e ∈ E(G) and all terminals t ∈ K.

    We recall that Zelikovsky’s Height Reduction lemma Theorem 3 allows us to reduce an arbitrary
instance of DST to an instance on a layered graph with L = O(log k) layers by paying a factor
O(log k). As our LP has polynomial size on the input graph and, thus, can be solved in polynomial
time, we therefore prove the existence of an O(log3 k)-estimation algorithm for DST that runs in
polynomial time whenever the optimal fractional solution from the Strengthened-LP is relatively
integral.

Theorem 11 (Polynomial Time Estimation Algorithm). Given a fractional solution from the
Strengthened LP in Figure 3 that is relatively integral, there exists a randomized algorithm that
estimates value of the optimal solution to the Directed Steiner Tree problem within a factor of
O(log3 k), where k is the number of terminals.


7    Polynomial Time Approximation Algorithm
In the previous section, we presented a decomposition algorithm that transforms a fractional so-
lution from the Strengthened LP (that is relatively integral) defined on an L-layered graph into
an LP solution of a standard flow-based LP corresponding to the Group Steiner Tree (GST) prob-
lem on a tree of size nΘ(L) . However, for an arbitrary input graph, transforming an instance into
an L-layered graph G incurs an approximation factor of O(L · n1/L ) (refer to Theorem 3). To

                                                 34
achieve a polylogarithmic approximation ratio, we require L to be Θ(log n). Consequently, while
the integrality gap upper bound proof is constructive, it does not directly yield a polynomial-time
polylogarithmic approximation algorithm.
    To circumvent this limitation, we apply the decomposition process iteratively, level-by-level,
interleaving with the rounding algorithm. This approach ensures that our algorithm operates in
polynomial time in expectation and produces a solution with a cost of at most O(log3 k), where k
is the number of terminals.

7.1   Decompose-and-Round Algorithm
Now, we describe our algorithm, which we refer to as Decompose-and-Round. Let E0 , E1 , . . . , EL
denote the sets of edges at levels 0, 1, 2, . . . , L in the graph G, respectively, where E0 = {r} and EL
consists of the edges entering terminals. Specifically, the root vertex r is treated as an auxiliary
edge with LP values defined as

                   xr = 1,
                   frt = 1 for all terminals t ∈ K,
               xr→rv = xrv for all child edges rv ∈ E(G) of r,
                t
               fr→rv = xrv for all terminals t ∈ K, for all child edges rv ∈ E(G) of r


    For each level ℓ = 0, 1, 2, . . . , L, we create an active set Aℓ containing copies of edges at level
ℓ. Initially, all active sets are empty except for A0 = re, which contains a copy of the root r. We
then iteratively create active sets Aℓ+1 from Aℓ for ℓ = 0, 1, . . . , L − 1, following these two steps:

   • Decomposition: For each copy u   fv ∈ Aℓ of an edge uv ∈ Eℓ , we create d subsets s1ufv , . . . , sdufv .
     We then add to sjufv a copy vw
                                 f of each child-edge vw ∈ E(G) with probability:
                                    h                   i x
                                                             uv→vw
                                      f ∈ sjufv u
                                  Pr vw         fv ∈ Aℓ =           .
                                                              xuv
      To emphasize the hierarchical structure of the decomposition, we will refer to each edge-copy
      vw
      f as a node.

   • Rounding: Next, we independently at random mark each subset sjvw with probability:
                                                                 1
                                       Pr sjuv is marked u
                                         
                                                         fv ∈ Aℓ = .
                                                                  d

      We then add all elements from the marked subsets sjufv to the active set Aℓ+1 . Then we
      continue our procedure to the level ℓ + 1.

   Upon completion of the decomposition and rounding steps for all levels, we construct the output
graph H by including all edges that have at least one active copy across all levels, i.e.,
                                                [
                                        H=            Aℓ .
                                                  ℓ=0,1,...,L



                                                     35
7.2   Main Algorithm
Our main algorithm begins by transforming the input directed graph into an L-layered graph with
L = ⌈log2 k⌉ + 1, where k denotes the number of terminals. This transformation, as shown in
Theorem 3, introduces an O(log k) multiplicative factor to the overall cost. We then solve the
Strengthened LP defined on the L-layered graph G.
    After the preparation, we repeatedly execute the Decompose-and-Round procedure q log2 k
times, for some sufficiently large constant q > 0 (for example, q = 100). The subgraphs generated
in each iteration are aggregated, and the union is returned as the final solution. This ensures that,
with high probability, that a directed path exists from the root vertex to every terminal, while
paying an approximation factor of O(log3 k) in expectation.
    The Decompose-and-Round procedure and the main algorithm are formally presented in Algo-
rithm 1 and Algorithm 2, respectively.

Algorithm 1 Decompose-and-Round(G, x)
Input: An L-layered graph G, and an LP solution {xuv , xuv→vw }uv,vw∈E(G) .
Output: A solution subgraph H ⊆ G.
 1: Set xr = 1 and xr→rv = xrv for all rv ∈ E(G).
 2: Initialize the subgraph H = (V (G), ∅).
 3: Initialize the active sets A0 := {e  r}, and Aℓ := ∅, for all ℓ = 1, 2, . . . , L.
 4: for ℓ = 0, 1, . . . , L do
 5:     for each copy u    fv ∈ Zℓ do
 6:         for j = 1, 2, . . . , d do
 7:             Create a subset sjufv .
 8:             for each edge vw ∈ E(G) do
 9:                  Independently at random add a copy vw   f to sjufv with probability
                                          h                  i x
                                                                    uv→vw
                                       Pr vwf ∈ sjufv u
                                                      fv ∈ Aℓ =             .
                                                                     xuv

10:            Mark sjd with probability
                                      h                       i 1
                                    Pr sjufv is marked u
                                                       fv ∈ Aℓ = .
                                                                d

11:            If sjufv is marked, add all its copies of edges to H.




                                                   36
Algorithm 2 Main Algorithm
Input: An input DST instance: a directed graph G, a root r, a terminal set K.
Output: A feasible solution Ĥ ⊆ G to the DST instance.
 1: Construct an L-layered graph Ĝ from an arbitrary directed graph G.
                                                 t , ft
 2: Compute an optimal solution {xuv , xuv→vw , fuv   uv→vw }uv,vw∈E(G),t∈K of LP in Figure 3.
                          2
 3: Set R := 100 log k.
 4: for i = 1, 2, . . . , R do
 5:    Compute Hi := Decompose-and-Run(Ĝ, {xuv , xuv→vw }uv,vw∈E(G) ).
                                        S
    return The solution subgraph Ĥ = i=1,...,R Hi .


7.3   Running Time and Cost Analysis
First, we show that, with high probability, the number of active copies of any edge uv ∈ E(G) at
level ℓ is at most O(d · xuv ). Consequently, the total number of active nodes across all levels is
bounded by O(d · |E(G)|). This implies that the algorithm runs in expected polynomial time.

Lemma 12. Consider any edge uv ∈ E(G) residing at level ℓ, for ℓ = 0, 1, . . . , L. Let Zuv denote
the number of active copies of uv during the run of the algorithm, i.e., the number of copies of uv
appearing in the active set Aℓ . Setting δ = 1/4, the following holds:
                                                    
                             Y           δ
                                                               
                                                                    1
                                                                           
                                                                            d
                                                                                     
                                                                       2
              Pr Zuv ≥             1 + i  · d · xuv  ≤ exp − · δ ·         · xuv
                                         2                          2       4
                            i=1,...,ℓ

Consequently, with high probability, every level ℓ has at most O(d · |Eℓ |) active nodes.

Proof. We proceed with proof by induction on ℓ, for ℓ = 0, 1, . . . , L. The claim is trivial for the
base case ℓ = 0 because we only have r as an active node in A0 .
   Assume inductively that, for some ℓ ≥ 1, the claim holds for all edges uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ. For
notational convenient, we define the threshold φuv for edges uv ∈ E(G) as
                                                        
                                          Y         δ
                                                       
                               φuv :=          1 + i  · d · xuv .
                                                     2
                                          i=1,...,ℓ

    Observe that the probability that there exists an edge uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ with Zuv > φuv is
exponentially low, i.e., at most exp(−n). Thus, we conclude that with probability at least 1 − 1/n,
all edges at level ℓ have Zuv ≤ φuv
    Now consider any edge vw ∈ E(G) at level ℓ + 1. It suffices to analyze the probability that the
number of active copies of vw is above the threshold φvw given that all its parents uv have at most
φuv copies in the decomposition tree.




                                                      37
      "                                           #
    E Zvw Zuv ≤ φuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                                            "                                #
           X                     X
    ≤                 φuv ·               Pr vw
                                              f is active u
                                                          fv was active 
        uv∈E(G)                j=1,...,d
                                            "                                            #
                                              f ∈ sujfv ∧ sjufv is marked u
           X                     X
    ≤                 φuv ·               Pr vw                          fv was active 
        uv∈E(G)                j=1,...,d
                                            "                         #         "                      #
                                              f ∈ sujfv u
                                                        fv was active · Pr sjufv is marked u
           X                     X
    ≤                 φuv ·               Pr vw                                           fv was active 
        uv∈E(G)                j=1,...,d
                                          
           X                   xuv→vw 1
    =              φuv · d ·           ·
                                 xuv     d
      uv∈E(G)
                                                         
        X               Y           δ
                                        
                                                     xuv→vw 
    =                          1 + i · d · xuv  ·
                                     2                 xuv
      uv∈E(G)         i=1,...,ℓ
                                                    
        X               Y           δ
                                        
    =                          1 + i · d · xuv→vw 
                                     2
      uv∈E(G)         i=1,...,ℓ
                               
                            
          Y              δ               X
    =              1+ i ·d·                 xuv→vw
                         2
        i=1,...,ℓ                     uv∈E(G)
                               
                            
          Y              δ
    =              1 + i  · d · xvw
                         2
           i=1,...,ℓ

The first inequality follows because we condition on the event that the numberPof copies of every
edge uv ∈ E(G) is at most ϑuv . The last equality follows from the constraint uv xuv→vw = xvw
in the Strengthened-LP.
    It then follows by Chernoff-Hoeffding bounds (Theorem 2) that
                                                                                      
                                                       
                               δ        Y              δ
           Pr Zvw ≥ 1 + ℓ+1 ·                   1 + i  · d · xvw Zuv ≥ ϑuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                             2                         2
                                      i=1,...,ℓ
                                                                                      
                                                          2               
                                                1       δ        Y         δ
                                  ≤ exp − ·                  ·       1 + i  · d · xvw 
                                                3     2ℓ+1                 2
                                                                              i=1,...,ℓ

    Next, we analyze the left-hand side
                                      Q of the inequality.  We apply the fact that exp(y) ≥ 1 + y,
for all real number y, to the product i=1,...,ℓ 1 + 2δi . Then, for δ = 1/4, we have
                                                       

                                                              
           Y        δ
                             Y        
                                        δ               X δ
                1+ i ≤            exp       = exp              ≤ exp(2δ) = exp(1/2) ≤ 2.
                     2                  2i                  2i
          i=1,...,ℓ                   i=1,...,ℓ                   j=1,...,ℓ


                                                             38
   Consequently, we have
                                                                             2       !
                                                          1               δ
            Pr [ Zvw ≥ φvw | Zuv ≤ φuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)] ≤ exp − ·              · 2 · d · xvw
                                                          3         2ℓ+1
                                                                       ℓ+1            !
                                                               2 2      1
                                                        = exp − · δ ·         · d · xvw
                                                               3        4

    As discussed, the probability that all edges uv ∈ E(G) at level ℓ have no more than ϑuv copies
in the decomposition tree is at least 1 − 1/n. Thus, we have

       "                                       #          "                                  #
    Pr Zvw ≥ φvw ∧ Zuv ≤ φuv ∀uv ∈ E(G) = Pr Zvw ≥ φvw Zuv ≤ φuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                                                            "                      #
                                                    · Pr Zuv ≤ φuv ∀uv ∈ E(G)
                                                                    ℓ+1           !      
                                                          2         1                     1
                                                   ≤ exp − · δ 2 ·        · d · xvw · 1 −
                                                          3         4                     n
                                                                    ℓ+1           !
                                                          1         1
                                                   ≤ exp − · δ 2 ·        · d · xvw
                                                          2         4

    This proves
          Q the first part of  the lemma. The second part of the lemma follows by applying the
                             δ
fact that    i=1,...,ℓ+1 1 − 2i   ≤ 1/2 to the multiplicative term in φvw , which gives us
                                                               
                                  d · xvw          1 2     d
                         Pr Zvw ≥           ≤ exp − · δ ·     · xvw
                                      2            2       4
     Thus, for ℓ ≥ 1, xuv ≥ 1/n2 and d = n7 , it holds that Zvw ≥ 2 · d· xvw with probability at most
exp(−n). Since the graph G has at most n2 edges, it follows by the union bound that all the edges
vw ∈ E(G) have Zvw ≤ 2 · dℓ xuv copies in the decomposition tree with probability at least 1 − 1/n,
i.e., with high probability. This completes the proof.

   The running time of our algorithm follows as a corollary of Theorem 12
Corollary 13 (The Running time of Decompose-and-Round). With high probability, the running
time of the algorithm Decompose-and-Round is polynomial on the size of the input graph.
Proof. The running time of the Decompose-and-Round algorithm is proportional to the total num-
ber of active nodes processed. From Theorem 12, with high probability, the number of active copies
for each edge uv ∈ E(G) at any level ℓ is O(d · xuv ). Therefore, the total number of active nodes
across all levels is
                                                              
                           X      X                   X
                     O              Zℓ  = O  d           |Eℓ | = O(d · |E|).
                        ℓ=0,1,...,L uv∈Eℓ               ℓ=0,1,...,L

Therefore, by setting d = poly(n), the algorithm runs in polynomial time on the size of input with
high probability.

                                                   39
   It also follows from Theorem 12 that the cost of the solution subgraph H produced by the
Decompose-and-Round algorithm is linear in the cost of the LP solution.

Corollary 14 (The Cost of Solution produced by Decompose-and-Round). The expectedP cost of the
solution subgraph H produced by the Decompose-and-Round algorithm is (1 + o(1)) · e∈E(G) ce xe .

Proof. Observe that each copy of an edge uv ∈ E(G) appears in a different subset sjα , where α
is a parent edge of uv. From Theorem 12, we assert that the expected number of copies of any
edge uv ∈ E(G) is at most (1 + o(1)) · d · xuv . Since each subset sjα is marked independently with
probability 1/d, it follows that the expected number of active copies of any edge uv is
                        "    #                          !               !
                                  1
                      E Zuv ≤ ·         1 + o(1) · d · xuv = 1 + o(1) · xuv
                                  d

Since each active copy of an edge uv contributes a cost of cuv to the solution subgraph H, the
expected total cost of H is
                      "      #               "    #             !
                                  X                                X
                   E cost(H) =         ce · E Zuv = 1 + o(1)             ce xe
                                   e∈E(G)                             e∈E(G)




7.4   Feasibility Analysis
In this subsection, we analyze the probability that the solution subgraph H produced by the
Decompose-and-Round algorithm successfully connects the root vertex to each terminal t ∈ K.
    To conduct the reachability analysis, we model the algorithm as a Markov process, where edge
selections occur iteratively across the levels of the decomposition tree. A direct analysis of this
process involves examining the decision tree induced by the random process.
    Fundamentally, our algorithm is a compact description of running the Garg-Konjevod-Ravi
(GKR) algorithm on the decomposition tree described in Section 6.1. Thus, it suffices to map the
workings of our algorithm to those of the GKR rounding algorithm. Consequently, the analysis
can be derived directly from the existing results [GKR00, Rot11] known for the GKR rounding
algorithm.
    To be formal, the GKR algorithm operates as follows: Given a tree T̂ and an LP solution x̂,
the algorithm initially marks edges incident to the root with probability x̂α . For each subsequent
edge α in the tree, the algorithm marks α with probability x x̂α , where parent(α) represents
                                                                 parent(α)
the (unique) parent edge of α. Edges are included in the solution subgraph H if and only if all of
their ancestor edges up to the root are marked.
    The GKR rounding algorithm can be re-formulated as a Markov process that proceeds level by
level. For each selected edge α, each of its child edges β is independently selected with probability
xβ
xα . This random process aligns closely with the Decompose-and-Round algorithm, allowing us to
interpret and analyze our approach within the framework devised for the GKR rounding technique.




                                                 40
Garg-Konjevod-Ravi Rounding (Re-interpretation): The input to the GKR rounding pro-
cedure consists of a tree T̂ with height L̂ and an LP solution x̂ that supports a flow of at least
a constant, say 1/2, from the root to every terminal t ∈ K. The Garg-Konjevod-Ravi algorithm
works as follows:
    Starting from level ℓ = 0, i.e., the root level, the algorithm adds to an active set A0 an auxiliary
edge re. Next, the algorithm iteratively constructs active sets Aℓ+1 from active sets Aℓ for ℓ =
0, 1, . . . , L̂ − 1. For each edge α ∈ Aℓ , the algorithm adds its child edge β ∈ E(T̂ ) to Aℓ+1 with
probability
                                                                     x̂β
                                      Pr [β is active|α is active] =
                                                                     x̂α
The pseudocode of Garg-Konjevod-Ravi rounding is given in Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3 Garg-Konjevod-Ravi Rounding(T̂ , x̂):
 1: Initialize A0 = {r̂}.
 2: for ℓ = 1, 2, . . . , L̂ − 1 do
 3:     for each edge α ∈ Aℓ do
 4:         Add to Aℓ+1 , child edges β ∈ E(T̂ ) of α, each with probability:

                                                                        x̂β
                                       Pr [β is active|α is active] =
                                                                        x̂α
                                             S
    return The solution subgraph H =             ℓ=1,...,L̂ Aℓ .


  Next, we show that the distributions that the Decompose-and-Round algorithm and the Garg-
Konjevod-Ravi algorithm select edges of G are the same.

Lemma 15 (Identical Distributions). The probability that the Decompose-and-Round and Garg-
Konjevod-Ravi algorithms select edges are statistical equivalent.

Proof. Consider the decomposition tree T̂ as described in Section 6.1. There are two types of edges
                               uv, sjufv ) and (ii) edges of the form (sjufv , vw).
in T̂ : (i) edges of the form (f                                               f
    For edges of type (i), the value of x̂(f         fv) is equal to 1/d times the LP value of its parent
                                               uv,sj u
edge. Under the GKR rounding algorithm, (f         uv, sj u
                                                          fv) is marked as active with probability 1/d. This
aligns with the Decompose-and-Round algorithm, where each subset sjufv is marked with probability
1/d.
    For edges of type (ii), the value of x̂(sj ufv,vw)
                                                    f is equal to the LP value of its parent edge. Under
the GKR rounding algorithm (sj u      fv, vw)
                                           f is marked as active with probability one. This aligns with
the Decompose-and-Round algorithm, where all copies u            fv in the selected subset sujfv are determin-
istically marked as active.
    Therefore, the edge selection probabilities in the Decompose-and-Round algorithm precisely
mirror those of the GKR rounding algorithm when applied to the decomposition tree T̂ . In other
words, they are statistically equivalent.

   Consequently, we deduce from Theorem 8 the probability that the solution subgraph H connects
the root vertex r to each terminal t ∈ K.



                                                         41
Corollary 16 (Reachability Probability). Consider the solution subgraph H constructed by running
the Decompose-and-Round algorithm. Then the probability that H contains a directed path from the
root vertex r to any terminal t ∈ K is at least
                                                             1
                                   Pr[H has r → t-path] ≥
                                                            2L
Proof. First, we argue using Theorem 15 that the Decompose-and-Round procedure behaves identi-
cally to the GKR rounding algorithm running on the decomposition tree T̂ . Then from Theorem 8,
we know that the decomposition tree T̂ supports an r → t flow of value at least 1/2 for every
terminal t ∈ K with high probability. This implies the capacities on the decomposition tree meets
the prerequisite of Theorem 15. Consequently, as the input to Decompose-and-Round algorithm is
an L layered — thus, inducing a decomposition tree of height 2L − 1 — the Garg-Konjevod-Ravi
algorithm guarantees that each terminal t ∈ K is connected to the root vertex r with probability
          1
at least 2L .

7.5   Combining Everything Together
In this subsection, we summarize the previously discussed components to conclude that the main
algorithm runs in polynomial time and achieves an approximation ratio of O(log3 k) for the Directed
Steiner Tree problem.

Polynomial Running Time: Firstly, the main algorithm invokes the Decompose-and-Round
algorithm O(log2 k) times. By Theorem 13, each procedural call runs in polynomial time on the
input size with high probability (at least 1 − 1/n). Consequently, the overall running time of the
main algorithm remains polynomial with high probability.

Approximation Ratio: Secondly, we analyze the expected cost of the solution subgraph Ĥ
produced by the main algorithm. The expected cost is bounded by O(log3 k) · OPT, where OPT
denotes the cost of the optimal solution to the directed Steiner tree problem.
   This bound arises from two primary factors:

   • Height Reduction: The initial step involves transforming an arbitrary directed graph into
     an L-layered graph G. This transformation incurs an O(log k) factor in the cost, as shown
     by Theorem 3.

   • Repeated Runs of Decompose-and-Round: Each run of the Decompose-and-Round
                                                                            
                                                                P
     algorithm produces a subgraph H with an expected cost of O   e∈E(G) e e . Since the
                                                                        c x
      main algorithm performs O(log2 k) such rounds and takes the union of their outputs, this
      incurs an additional O(log2 k) factor in the expected cost.

Summary: Therefore, our main algorithms runs in polynomial time with high probability and
outputs a solution with expected cost O(log3 k) times the optimum, thus proving Theorem 1.




                                                42
8    Conclusion and Discussion
We presented a novel LP formulation for the Directed Steiner Tree (DST) problem together with
a randomized rounding algorithm. Given access to a feasible fractional solution satisfying the
relatively integral property, our algorithm produces an integral solution of cost at most O(log2 k)
times that of the LP solution. Since the LP formulation itself incurs an additional O(log k) factor,
this yields an overall O(log3 k)-approximation. Crucially, the relatively integral property — while
key to our algorithm — is also shared by all known integrality gap instances for DST, suggesting that
such constructions can be systematically addressed. This observation strengthens the possibility
that DST might indeed admit a polylogarithmic approximation in polynomial time.
    Although it seems unlikely that the LP can be forced to produce a relatively integral solution
directly, such solutions may be obtainable via decomposition. Achieving this, however, may require
more sophisticated tools, such as configuration LPs or multiple rounds of LP/SDP hierarchies.
    At the same time, the possibility of a negative answer remains open. There may exist inherent
computational barriers preventing a polynomial-time polylogarithmic approximation for DST. Such
a barrier would establish a genuine separation between the power of polynomial-time and quasi-
polynomial-time algorithms, placing DST alongside the Densest-k-Subgraph problem in terms of
approximability complexity. Although connections between Densest-k-Subgraph and two-edge-
connected variants of DST are known, establishing a direct link to DST itself remains elusive.
    In summary, both algorithmic and hardness perspectives remain open, and resolving the ap-
proximability of DST continues to stand as one of the most compelling challenges in network design.


References
[ABMS12] Pranjal Awasthi, Avrim Blum, Jamie Morgenstern, and Or Sheffet. Additive approx-
         imation for near-perfect phylogeny construction. In Anupam Gupta, Klaus Jansen,
         José D. P. Rolim, and Rocco A. Servedio, editors, Approximation, Randomization, and
         Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques - 15th International Work-
         shop, APPROX 2012, and 16th International Workshop, RANDOM 2012, Cambridge,
         MA, USA, August 15-17, 2012. Proceedings, volume 7408 of Lecture Notes in Computer
         Science, pages 25–36. Springer, 2012.

[AMS08]    Charles J. Alpert, Dinesh P. Mehta, and Sachin S. Sapatnekar. Handbook of Algorithms
           for Physical Design Automation. Auerbach Publications, USA, 1st edition, 2008.

[Bar98]    Yair Bartal. On approximating arbitrary metrices by tree metrics. In Proceedings of the
           Thirtieth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’98, page 161–168,
           New York, NY, USA, 1998. Association for Computing Machinery.

[BGLR93] M. Bellare, S. Goldwasser, C. Lund, and A. Russell. Efficient probabilistically checkable
         proofs and applications to approximations. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual
         ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’93, page 294–304, New York, NY,
         USA, 1993. Association for Computing Machinery.

[BGRS13] Jaroslaw Byrka, Fabrizio Grandoni, Thomas Rothvoß, and Laura Sanità. Steiner tree
         approximation via iterative randomized rounding. J. ACM, 60(1), February 2013. Pre-
         liminary version in STOC 2010.

                                                 43
[BTN+ 09] M. Brazil, D. A. Thomas, B. K. Nielsen, P. Winter, C. Wulff-Nilsen, and M. Zachariasen.
          A novel approach to phylogenetic trees: d-dimensional geometric steiner trees. Netw.,
          53(2):104–111, March 2009.

[CCC+ 99] Moses Charikar, Chandra Chekuri, To-yat Cheung, Zuo Dai, Ashish Goel, Sudipto
          Guha, and Ming Li. Approximation algorithms for directed Steiner problems. J. Algo-
          rithms, 33(1):73–91, October 1999. Preliminary version in SODA ’98.

[CCGG98] Moses Charikar, Chandra Chekuri, Ashish Goel, and Sudipto Guha. Rounding via
         trees: deterministic approximation algorithms for group steiner trees and k-median. In
         Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC
         ’98, page 114–123, New York, NY, USA, 1998. Association for Computing Machinery.

[CEGS11] Chandra Chekuri, Guy Even, Anupam Gupta, and Danny Segev. Set connectivity
         problems in undirected graphs and the directed steiner network problem. ACM Trans.
         Algorithms, 7(2):18:1–18:17, 2011. Preliminary in SODA’08.

[CEKP18] Deeparnab Chakrabarty, Alina Ene, Ravishankar Krishnaswamy, and Debmalya Pani-
         grahi. Online buy-at-bulk network design. SIAM J. Comput., 47(4):1505–1528, 2018.
         Preliminary in FOCS’15.

[CGL15]    Parinya Chalermsook, Fabrizio Grandoni, and Bundit Laekhanukit. On survivable set
           connectivity. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
           Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’15, page 25–36, USA, 2015. Society for Industrial and
           Applied Mathematics.

[Che52]    Herman Chernoff. A Measure of Asymptotic Efficiency for Tests of a Hypothesis Based
           on the sum of Observations. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 23(4):493 – 507,
           1952.

[CLLZ22] Qingyun Chen, Bundit Laekhanukit, Chao Liao, and Yuhao Zhang. Survivable net-
         work design revisited: Group-connectivity. In 2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on
         Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 278–289, 2022.

[CLNV14] Joseph Cheriyan, Bundit Laekhanukit, Guyslain Naves, and Adrian Vetta. Approximat-
         ing rooted steiner networks. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 11(2), October 2014. Preliminary
         version in SODA 2012.

[CLWZ20] Chun-Hsiang Chan, Bundit Laekhanukit, Hao-Ting Wei, and Yuhao Zhang. Polylog-
         arithmic Approximation Algorithm for k-Connected Directed Steiner Tree on Quasi-
         Bipartite Graphs. In Jaroslaw Byrka and Raghu Meka, editors, Approximation,
         Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques (AP-
         PROX/RANDOM 2020), volume 176 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informat-
         ics (LIPIcs), pages 63:1–63:20, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2020. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-
         Zentrum für Informatik.

[FKK+ 14] Zachary Friggstad, Jochen Könemann, Young Kun-Ko, Anand Louis, Mohammad
          Shadravan, and Madhur Tulsiani. Linear programming hierarchies suffice for directed



                                               44
          Steiner tree. In Jon Lee and Jens Vygen, editors, Integer Programming and Combinato-
          rial Optimization - 17th International Conference, IPCO 2014, Bonn, Germany, June
          23-25, 2014. Proceedings, volume 8494 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
          285–296. Springer, 2014.

[FRT04]   Jittat Fakcharoenphol, Satish Rao, and Kunal Talwar. A tight bound on approximating
          arbitrary metrics by tree metrics. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 69(3):485–497, November 2004.

[FS97]    Uriel Feige and Michael Seltser. On the densest k-subgraph problem. Technical Report
          CS97-16, Weizmann Institution of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 1997.

[GKR00]   Naveen Garg, Goran Konjevod, and R. Ravi. A polylogarithmic approximation algo-
          rithm for the group Steiner tree problem. J. Algorithms, 37(1):66–84, 2000. Preliminary
          version in SODA ’98.

[GKR10a] Anupam Gupta, Ravishankar Krishnaswamy, and R. Ravi. Tree embeddings for two-
         edge-connected network design. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual ACM-SIAM
         Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’10, page 1521–1538, USA, 2010. Society for
         Industrial and Applied Mathematics.

[GKR10b] Anupam Gupta, Ravishankar Krishnaswamy, and R. Ravi. Tree embeddings for two-
         edge-connected network design. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual ACM-SIAM
         Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’10, page 1521–1538, USA, 2010. Society for
         Industrial and Applied Mathematics.

[GL17]    Fabrizio Grandoni and Bundit Laekhanukit. Surviving in directed graphs: a quasi-
          polynomial-time polylogarithmic approximation for two-connected directed steiner tree.
          In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing,
          STOC 2017, page 420–428, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing
          Machinery.

[GLL23]   Fabrizio Grandoni, Bundit Laekhanukit, and Shi Li. o(log2 k/ log log k)-approximation
          algorithm for directed Steiner tree: A tight quasi-polynomial time algorithm. SIAM J.
          Comput., 52(2):STOC19–298–STOC19–322, 2023. Preliminary version in STOC 2019.

[GMW97] M. Grötschel, A. Martin, and R. Weismantel. The steiner tree packing problem in vlsi
        design. Math. Program., 78(2):265–281, August 1997.

[GN22]    Rohan Ghuge and Viswanath Nagarajan. Quasi-polynomial algorithms for submodular
          tree orienteering and directed network design problems. Math. Oper. Res., 47(2):1612–
          1630, 2022. Preliminary version in SODA 2020.

[GP68]    E. N. Gilbert and H. O. Pollak. Steiner minimal trees. SIAM J. Appl. Math., 16(1):1–29,
          January 1968.

[HK03]    Eran Halperin and Robert Krauthgamer. Polylogarithmic inapproximability. In Pro-
          ceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC
          ’03, page 585–594, New York, NY, USA, 2003. Association for Computing Machinery.



                                              45
[HKK+ 07] Eran Halperin, Guy Kortsarz, Robert Krauthgamer, Aravind Srinivasan, and Nan
          Wang. Integrality ratio for group steiner trees and directed steiner trees. SIAM Journal
          on Computing, 36(5):1494–1511, 2007. Preliminary version in SODA ’03.

[Hoe63]    Wassily Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables.
           Journal of the American Statistical Association, 58(301):13–30, 1963.

[HRZ01]    Christopher S. Helvig, Gabriel Robins, and Alexander Zelikovsky. An improved approx-
           imation scheme for the group Steiner problem. Networks, 37(1):8–20, 2001.

[Kar72]    Richard M. Karp. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In Raymond E. Miller,
           James W. Thatcher, and Jean D. Bohlinger, editors, Complexity of Computer Computa-
           tions: Proceedings of a symposium on the Complexity of Computer Computations, held
           March 20–22, 1972, at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights,
           New York, and sponsored by the Office of Naval Research, Mathematics Program, IBM
           World Trade Corporation, and the IBM Research Mathematical Sciences Department,
           pages 85–103, Boston, MA, 1972. Springer US.

[KKN12]    Rohit Khandekar, Guy Kortsarz, and Zeev Nutov. Approximating fault-tolerant group-
           steiner problems. Theor. Comput. Sci., 416:55–64, January 2012. Preliminary version
           in FSTTCS’09.

[Lae14]    Bundit Laekhanukit. Parameters of two-prover-one-round game and the hardness of
           connectivity problems. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM-SIAM Sym-
           posium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’14, page 1626–1643, USA, 2014. Society for
           Industrial and Applied Mathematics.

[Lae16]    Bundit Laekhanukit. Approximating Directed Steiner Problems via Tree Embedding. In
           Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Michael Mitzenmacher, Yuval Rabani, and Davide Sangiorgi,
           editors, 43rd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming
           (ICALP 2016), volume 55 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs),
           pages 74:1–74:13, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2016. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für
           Informatik.

[Lae24]    Bundit Laekhanukit. Breaking the barrier: A polynomial-time polylogarithmic approx-
           imation for directed steiner tree, 2024.

[LCLZ22] Chao Liao, Qingyun Chen, Bundit Laekhanukit, and Yuhao Zhang. Almost Tight
         Approximation Hardness for Single-Source Directed k-Edge-Connectivity. In Mikolaj
         Bojańczyk, Emanuela Merelli, and David P. Woodruff, editors, 49th International Col-
         loquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2022), volume 229 of
         Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 89:1–89:17, Dagstuhl,
         Germany, 2022. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.

[LL24]     Shi Li and Bundit Laekhanukit. Polynomial integrality gap of flow lp for directed steiner
           tree. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 21(1), November 2024. Preliminary version in SODA
           2022.




                                                46
[LTL02]   Chin Lung Lu, Chuan Yi Tang, and Richard Chia-Tung Lee. The full steiner tree
          problem in phylogeny. In Oscar H. Ibarra and Louxin Zhang, editors, Computing and
          Combinatorics, pages 107–116, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2002. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

[Man17]   Pasin Manurangsi. Almost-polynomial ratio eth-hardness of approximating densest k-
          subgraph. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
          of Computing, STOC 2017, page 954–961, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for
          Computing Machinery.

[Man19]   Pasin Manurangsi. A note on degree vs gap of min-rep label cover and improved inap-
          proximability for connectivity problems. Inf. Process. Lett., 145(C):24–29, May 2019.

[MU17]    Michael Mitzenmacher and Eli Upfal. Probability and Computing: Randomization and
          Probabilistic Techniques in Algorithms and Data Analysis. Cambridge University Press,
          USA, 2nd edition, 2017.

[NPS11]   Joseph Naor, Debmalya Panigrahi, and Mohit Singh. Online node-weighted steiner
          tree and related problems. In Rafail Ostrovsky, editor, IEEE 52nd Annual Symposium
          on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2011, Palm Springs, CA, USA, October
          22-25, 2011, pages 210–219. IEEE Computer Society, 2011.

[Nut24]   Zeev Nutov. On rooted k-connectivity problems in quasi-bipartite digraphs. Operations
          Research Forum, 5(1):10, 2024. Preliminary version in CSR 2021.

[Rot11]   Thomas Rothvoß.      Directed Steiner tree and the Lasserre hierarchy.        CoRR,
          abs/1111.5473, 2011.

[She95]   Naveed A. Sherwani. Algorithms for VLSI Physical Design Automation. Kluwer Aca-
          demic Publishers, USA, 2nd edition, 1995.

[SW96]    Majid Sarrafzadeh and C. K. Wong. An Introduction to VLSI Physical Design. McGraw-
          Hill Higher Education, 1st edition, 1996.

[SXC+ 21] Yahui Sun, Xiaokui Xiao, Bin Cui, Saman Halgamuge, Theodoros Lappas, and Jun
          Luo. Finding group steiner trees in graphs with both vertex and edge weights. Proc.
          VLDB Endow., 14(7):1137–1149, March 2021.

[WMT12] J. F. Weng, I. Mareels, and D. A. Thomas. Probability steiner trees and maximum
        parsimony in phylogenetic analysis. Journal of Mathematical Biology, 64(7):1225–1251,
        2012.

[YSL+ 22] Shuang Yang, Yahui Sun, Jiesong Liu, Xiaokui Xiao, Rong-Hua Li, and Zhewei Wei.
          Approximating probabilistic group steiner trees in graphs. Proc. VLDB Endow.,
          16(2):343–355, October 2022.

[Zel93]   A. Z. Zelikovsky. An 11/6-approximation algorithm for the network steiner problem.
          Algorithmica, 9(5):463–470, 1993.

[Zel97]   Alexander Zelikovsky. A series of approximation algorithms for the acyclic directed
          Steiner tree problem. Algorithmica, 18(1):99–110, 1997.

                                             47
[ZK02]   Leonid Zosin and Samir Khuller. On directed Steiner trees. In David Eppstein, editor,
         Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
         January 6-8, 2002, San Francisco, CA, USA, pages 59–63. ACM/SIAM, 2002.




                                            48
