                                         Locality in online, dynamic, sequential, and
                                         distributed graph algorithms

                                         Amirreza Akbari · amirreza.akbari@aalto.fi · Aalto University
                                         Navid Eslami · navid.eslami@aalto.fi · Aalto University
                                         Henrik Lievonen · henrik.lievonen@aalto.fi · Aalto University
                                         Darya Melnyk · darya.melnyk@aalto.fi · Aalto University
arXiv:2109.06593v4 [cs.DS] 12 Nov 2022




                                         Joona Särkijärvi · joona.sarkijarvi@aalto.fi · Aalto University
                                         Jukka Suomela · jukka.suomela@aalto.fi · Aalto University



                                         Abstract. In this work, we give a unifying view of locality in four settings: distributed algorithms,
                                         sequential greedy algorithms, dynamic algorithms, and online algorithms.
                                             We introduce a new model of computing, called the online-LOCAL model: the adversary reveals
                                         the nodes of the input graph one by one, in the same way as in classical online algorithms, but
                                         for each new node we get to see its radius-T neighborhood before choosing the output. Instead of
                                         looking ahead in time, we have the power of looking around in space.
                                             We compare the online-LOCAL model with three other models: the LOCAL model of distributed
                                         computing, where each node produces its output based on its radius-T neighborhood, its sequential
                                         counterpart SLOCAL, and the dynamic-LOCAL model, where changes in the dynamic input graph
                                         only influence the radius-T neighborhood of the point of change.
                                             The SLOCAL and dynamic-LOCAL models are sandwiched between the LOCAL and online-
                                         LOCAL models, with LOCAL being the weakest and online-LOCAL the strongest model. In
                                         general, all four models are distinct, but we study in particular locally checkable labeling problems
                                         (LCLs), which is a family of graph problems extensively studied in the context of distributed graph
                                         algorithms.
                                             We prove that for LCL problems in paths, cycles, and rooted trees, all four models are roughly
                                         equivalent: the locality of any LCL problem falls in the same broad class—O(log∗ n), Θ(log n), or
                                         nΘ(1) —in all four models. In particular, this result enables one to generalize prior lower-bound results
                                         from the LOCAL model to all four models, and it also allows one to simulate e.g. dynamic-LOCAL
                                         algorithms efficiently in the LOCAL model.
                                             We also show that this equivalence does not hold in two-dimensional grids or general bipartite
                                         graphs. We provide an online-LOCAL algorithm with locality O(log n) for the 3-coloring problem
                                         in bipartite graphs—this is a problem with locality Ω(n1/2 ) in the LOCAL model and Ω(n1/10 ) in
                                         the SLOCAL model.
                                                SLOCAL
                                                distributed,
                              (
                                                 sequential                  (

         LOCAL                                                                         online-
        distributed,                                                                   LOCAL
                                                               *
          parallel                                                                    centralized
                                                *
                          (                                                      (
                                                                                         (


                                  dynamic-                     dynamic-              online graph
                                  LOCAL±             (
                                                               LOCAL                  algorithms
                                  centralized                  centralized            centralized

                                   Figure 1: The landscape of models.


1     Introduction
In online graph algorithms, the adversary reveals the graph one node at a time, and the algorithm
has to respond by labeling the node based on what it has seen so far. For example, in online graph
coloring, we need to pick a color for the node that was revealed, in such a way that the end result is
a proper coloring of the graph.
    Usually, when the adversary reveals a node v, the algorithm gets to see only the edges incident
to of v. In this work, we consider a more general setting: the algorithm gets to see the radius-T
neighborhood of v, i.e., it can look around further in the input graph. For T = 0, this model
corresponds to the typical online model. For T = n, on the other hand, it is clear that any graph
problem (in connected graphs) is solvable in this setting. The key question is what value of T is
sufficient for a given graph problem. Put otherwise, what is the locality of a given online problem?
    It turns out that this question is very closely connected to questions studied in the context
of distributed graph algorithms, and we can identify problem classes in which the online setting
coincides with the distributed setting. However, we will also see surprising differences: the prime
example will be the problem of 3-coloring bipartite graphs, which is a fundamentally global problem
in the distributed setting, while we show that we can do much better in the online setting.

1.1   Contribution 1: landscape of models
In Section 2, we define the new model of online algorithms with lookaround, which we call online-
LOCAL, and we also recall the definitions of three models familiar from the fields of distributed
and dynamic graph algorithms:

    • The LOCAL model [39, 46]: the nodes are processed simultaneously in parallel; each node
      looks at its radius-T neighborhood and picks its own output.

    • The SLOCAL model [27]: the nodes are processed sequentially in an adversarial order; each
      node in its turn looks at its radius-T neighborhood and picks its own output (note that
      here the output of a node may depend on the outputs of other nodes that were previously
      processed).



                                                      1
                                         LOCAL               SLOCAL         dynamic-        online-
                                                                            LOCAL           LOCAL
   LCLs in paths and cycles              O(log∗ n)       ⇔   O(1)       ⇔   O(1)       ⇔    O(1)
                                         Θ(n)            ⇔   Θ(n)       ⇔   Θ(n)       ⇔    Θ(n)
   LCLs in rooted regular trees          O(log∗ n)       ⇔   O(1)       ⇔   O(1)       ⇔    O(1)
                                         Θ(log n)        ⇔   Θ(log n)   ⇔   Θ(log n)   ⇔    Θ(log n)
                                         nΘ(1)           ⇔   nΘ(1)      ⇔   nΘ(1)      ⇔    nΘ(1)

Table 1: In all four models, LCL problems have got the same locality classes in paths, cycles, and rooted
trees. Here nΘ(1) refers to locality Θ(nα ) for some constant α > 0. See Section 5 for more details.


   • The dynamic-LOCAL model: the adversary constructs the graph by adding nodes and edges
     one by one; after each modification, the algorithm can only update the solution within the
     radius-T neighborhood of the point of change. While this is not one of the standard models,
     there is a number of papers [3, 10, 12, 23, 30, 36, 45] that implicitly make use of this model.
     We will also occasionally consider the dynamic-LOCAL± model, in which we can have both
     additions and deletions.
In Section 3, we show that we can sandwich SLOCAL and both versions of dynamic-LOCAL between
LOCAL and online-LOCAL, as shown in Figure 1. In particular, this implies that if we can prove
that LOCAL and online-LOCAL are equally expressive for some family of graph problems, we
immediately get the same result also for SLOCAL and dynamic-LOCAL. This is indeed what we
will achieve in our next contribution.

1.2   Contribution 2: collapse for LCLs in rooted regular trees
A lot of focus in the study of distributed graph algorithms and the LOCAL model has been on
understanding locally checkable labeling problems (in brief, LCLs) [4–6, 8, 15, 17, 18, 20, 44]. These
are problems where feasible solutions are defined with local constraints—a solution is feasible if it
looks good in all constant-radius neighborhoods (see Definition 5.1). Coloring graphs of maximum
degree ∆ with k colors (for some constants of ∆ and k) is an example of an LCL problem.
     In Section 5, we study LCL problems in paths, cycles, and rooted regular trees, and we show that
all four models are approximately equally strong in these settings:
                    LOCAL ≈ SLOCAL ≈ dynamic-LOCAL ≈ online-LOCAL .                                    (1)
For example, we show that if the locality of an LCL problem in rooted trees is nΘ(1) in the LOCAL
model, it is also nΘ(1) in the dynamic-LOCAL, SLOCAL, and online-LOCAL models. Refer to
Table 1 for the full classification.
    By previous work, we know that LCL complexities in paths, cycles, and rooted regular trees are
decidable in the LOCAL model [4, 8, 20]. Our equivalence result allows us to extend this decidability
to the SLOCAL, dynamic-LOCAL, and online-LOCAL models. For example, there is an algorithm
that gets as input the description of an LCL problem in rooted trees and produces as output in
which of the classes of Table 1 it is, for any of the four models.

1.3   Contribution 3: 3-coloring bipartite graphs in online-LOCAL
Given the equivalence results for LCLs in paths, cycles, and rooted regular trees, it would be
tempting to conjecture that the models are approximately equal for LCLs in any graph class. In

                                                     2
                        colors   competitive     LOCAL         SLOCAL        online-      references
                                 ratio                                       LOCAL
      Rooted trees      2        1               Θ(n)          Θ(n)          Θ(n)         trivial
      and paths         3        1.5             Θ(log∗ n)     O(1)          O(1)         [21, 39]
                        4        2               Θ(log∗ n)     O(1)          O(1)         [21, 39]
                        ...
      Grids             2        1               Θ(n1/2 )      Θ(n1/2 )      Θ(n1/2 )     trivial
                        3        1.5             Θ(n1/2 )      Ω(n1/10 )     O(log n)     Section 4, [15]
                        4        2               Θ(log∗ n)     O(1)          O(1)         [15]
                        5        2.5             Θ(log∗ n)     O(1)          0            [15]
                        ...

Table 2: The locality of the vertex coloring problem in distributed vs.√online√settings, for two graph families:
rooted trees and paths (with n nodes) and 2-dimensional grids (with n × n nodes). See Sections 4 and 5
and Appendix C for more details.


Section 4, we show that this is not the case: we provide an exponential separation between the
SLOCAL and online-LOCAL models for the problem of 3-coloring bipartite graphs. By prior work
it is known that in the LOCAL model, the locality of 3-coloring is Ω(n1/2 ) in two-dimensional grids
[15], which are a special case of bipartite graphs; using this result we can derive a lower bound of
Ω(n1/10 ) also for the SLOCAL model (see Appendix C). In Section 4, we prove the following:

Theorem 1.1. There is an online-LOCAL algorithm that finds a 3-coloring in bipartite graphs with
locality O(log n).

    That is, in bipartite graphs, there is an LCL problem that requires locality nΩ(1) in the LOCAL
and SLOCAL models and is solvable with locality O(log n) in the online-LOCAL model.
    The algorithm that we will present for coloring bipartite graph is also interesting from the
perspective of competitive analysis of online algorithms. With locality O(log n), the online-LOCAL
algorithm can compute a 3-coloring. Since bipartite graphs are 2-colorable, this gives us a 1.5-
competitive online-LOCAL algorithm. On the other hand, it has been shown that any online
algorithm for coloring bipartite graphs is at least Ω(log n)-competitive [11], with a matching
algorithm presented in [40]. This result shows how much the competitive ratio of an algorithm can
be improved by increasing the view of each node.

1.4     Contribution 4: locality of online coloring
As a corollary of our work, together with results on distributed graph coloring from prior work
[15, 21, 39], we have now a near-complete understanding of the locality of graph coloring in paths,
cycles, rooted trees, and grids in both distributed and online settings. Table 2 summarizes our key
results. For the proofs of the localities in the online-LOCAL model, see Sections 4 and 5.

1.5     Motivation
Before we discuss the key technical ideas, we will briefly explain the practical motivation for the
study of online-LOCAL and dynamic-LOCAL models. As a running example, consider the challenge
of providing public services (e.g. local schools) in a rapidly growing city. The future is unknown,
depending on future political decisions, yet the residents will need services every day.

                                                       3
    The offline solution would result in a city-wide redesign of e.g. the entire school network every
time the city plan is revised; this is not only costly but also disruptive. On the other hand, a strict
online solution without any consideration of the future would commit to a solution that is far from
optimal. The models that we study in this work capture the essence of two natural strategies for
coping with such a situation:

   • Redesign the public service network only in the local neighborhoods in which there are new
     developments. This corresponds to the dynamic-LOCAL model, and the locality parameter T
     captures cost the redesign cost and the disruption it causes.

   • Wait until new developments in a neighborhood are completed before providing permanent
     public services in the area. This corresponds to the online-LOCAL model, and locality T
     captures the inconvenience of the residents (e.g., distance to the nearest school).

These two models make it possible to formally explore trade-offs between the quality of the solution
in the long term vs. the inconvenience of those living close to the areas where the city is changing.
In these kinds of scenarios the key challenge is not related to the computational cost of finding an
optimal solution (which is traditionally considered in the context of dynamic graph algorithms) but
to the quality of the solution (which is typically the focus in online algorithms). The key constraint is
not the availability of information on the current state of the world (which is traditionally considered
in distributed graph algorithms), but the cost of changing the solution.

1.6   Techniques and key ideas
For the equivalence (1) in paths and cycles (Section 5.1), we first make use of pumping-style
arguments that were introduced by Chang and Pettie [18] in the context of distributed algorithms.
We show that such ideas can be used to also analyze locality in the context of online algorithms: we
start by showing that we can “speed up” (or “further localize”) online-LOCAL algorithms with a
sublinear locality to online-LOCAL algorithms with a constant locality in paths and cycles. Then,
once we have reached constant locality in the online-LOCAL model, we show how to turn it into a
LOCAL-model algorithm with locality O(log∗ n). In this part, the key insight is that we cannot
directly simulate online-LOCAL in LOCAL. Instead, we can use an online-LOCAL algorithm with
a constant locality to find a canonical labeling for each possible input-labeled fragment, and use
this information to design a LOCAL-model algorithm. The main trick is that we first present only
disconnected path fragments to an online-LOCAL algorithm, and force it to commit to some output
labeling in each fragment without knowing how the fragments are connected to each other.
    In the case of rooted regular trees (Section 5.2), we face the same fundamental challenge: we
cannot directly simulate black-box online-LOCAL algorithms in the LOCAL model. Instead, we will
need to look at the combinatorial properties of a given LCL problem Π. We proceed in two steps:
(1) Assume that the locality of Π is nΘ(1) in the LOCAL model; we need to show that the locality is
nΘ(1) also in the online-LOCAL model. Using the result of [8], high LOCAL-model locality implies
that the structure of Π has to have certain “inflexibilities”, and we use this property to present a
strategy that the adversary can use to force any online-LOCAL algorithm with locality no(1) to fail.
(2) Assume that we have an online-LOCAL algorithm A for Π with locality o(log n); we need to
show that the locality is O(log∗ n) in the LOCAL model. Here we design a family of inputs and a
strategy of the adversary that forces algorithm A to construct a “certificate” (in the sense of [8])
that shows that Π is efficiently solvable in the LOCAL model.
    For 3-coloring bipartite graphs in online-LOCAL (Section 4), we make use of the following ideas.
We maintain a collection of graph fragments such that each of the fragments has got a boundary


                                                   4
that is properly 2-colored. Each such fragment has got one of two possible parities (let us call them
here “odd” and “even”) with respect to the underlying bipartition. We do not know the global
parity of a given graph fragment until we have seen almost the entire graph. Nevertheless, it is
possible to merge two fragments and maintain the invariant: if two fragments A and B have parities
that are not compatible with each other, we can surround either A or B with a barrier that uses
the third color, and thus change parities. Now we can merge A and B into one fragment that has
got a properly 2-colored boundary. The key observation here is that we can make a choice between
surrounding A vs. B, and if we always pick the one with the smallest number of nested barriers, we
will never need to use more than a logarithmic number of nested barriers. It turns out that this
is enough to ensure that seeing up to distance O(log n) suffices to color any node chosen by the
adversary.

1.7    Open questions
Our work gives rise to a number of open questions. First, we can take a more fine-grained view of
the results in Tables 1 and 2:
    1. Is there any problem in rooted trees with locality Θ(nα ) in the online-LOCAL model and
       locality Θ(nβ ) in the LOCAL model, for some α < β?

    2. Is it possible to find a 3-coloring in 2-dimensional graphs in the dynamic-LOCAL model with
       locality O(log n)?

    3. Is it possible to find a 3-coloring in bipartite graphs in the online-LOCAL model with locality
       o(log n)?
Perhaps even more interesting is what happens if we consider unrooted trees instead of rooted trees.
In unrooted trees we can separate randomized and deterministic versions of the LOCAL model [19],
and SLOCAL is strong enough to derandomize randomized LOCAL-model algorithms [28]; hence
the key question is:
    4. Does randomized-LOCAL ≈ SLOCAL ≈ dynamic-LOCAL ≈ online-LOCAL hold for LCL
       problems in unrooted trees?
Finally, our work shows a trade-off between the competitive ratio and the locality of coloring: With
locality O(log n), one can achieve O(1)-coloring of a bipartite graph, and to achieve locality 0, one
needs to use Ω(log n) colors. This raises the following question:
    5. What tradeoffs exist between the locality and number of colors needed to color a (bipartite)
       graph in the online-LOCAL model?


2     Definitions and related work
Throughout this work, graphs are simple, undirected, and finite, unless otherwise stated. We write
G = (V, E) for a graph G with the set of nodes V and the set of edges E, and we use n to denote
the number of nodes in the graph. For a node v and a natural number T , we will use B(v, T ) to
denote the set of all nodes in the radius-T neighborhood of node v. For a set of nodes U , we write
G[U ] for the subgraph of G induced by U . By radius-T neighborhood of v we refer to the induced
subgraph G[B(v, T )], together with possible input and output labelings.
    We will use the following notation for graph problems. We write G for the family of graphs, Σ
for the set of input labels, and Γ for the set of output labels. For a graph G = (V, E), we write

                                                  5
I : V → Σ for the input labeling and L : V → Γ for the output labeling. We consider here node
labelings, but edge labelings can be defined in an analogous manner. A graph problem Π associates
with each possible input (G, I) a set of feasible solutions L; this assignment must be invariant under
graph isomorphism.

Locality. In what follows, we will define five models of computing: LOCAL, SLOCAL, two versions
of dynamic-LOCAL, and online-LOCAL. In all of these models, an algorithm is characterized by a
locality T (a.k.a. locality radius, local horizon, time complexity, or round complexity, depending on
the context). In general, T can be a function of n. We will assume that the algorithm knows the
value of n.
    In each of these models M, we say that algorithm A solves problem Π if for each possible input
(G, I) and for each possible adversarial choice, the labeling L produced by A is a feasible solution.
We say that problem Π has locality T in model M if T is the pointwise smallest function such that
there exists an M-model algorithm A that solves Π with locality at most T .

LOCAL model. In the LOCAL model of distributed computing [39, 46], the adversary labels
the nodes with unique identifiers from {1, 2, . . . , poly(n)}. In a LOCAL model algorithm, each node
in parallel chooses its local output based on its radius-T neighborhood (the output may depend on
the graph structure, input labels, and the unique identifiers).
    Naor and Stockmeyer [44] initiated the study of the locality of LCL problems (see Definition 5.1)
in the LOCAL model. Today, LCL problems are well classified with respect to their locality for the
special cases of paths [4, 6, 15, 20, 44], grids [15], directed and undirected trees [5, 6, 8, 17, 18] as
well as general graphs [15, 44], with only a few unknown gaps [8].

SLOCAL model. In the SLOCAL model [27], we have got adversarial unique identifiers similar
to the LOCAL model, but the nodes are processed sequentially with respect to an adversarial input
sequence σ = v1 , v2 , v3 , . . . , vn . Each node v is equipped with an unbounded local memory; initially,
all local memories are empty. When a node v is processed, it can query the local memories of the
nodes in its radius-T neighborhood, and based on this information, it has to decide what is its own
final output and what to store in its own local memory.
     The SLOCAL model has been used as a tool to e.g. better understand the role of randomness in
the LOCAL model [27, 28]. It is also well-known that SLOCAL is strictly stronger than LOCAL.
For example, it is trivial to find a maximal independent set greedily in the SLOCAL model, while
this is a nontrivial problem in the general case in the LOCAL model [7, 38]. There are many LCL
problems with LOCAL-locality Θ(log∗ n) [21, 39], and all of them have SLOCAL-locality O(1).
There are also LCL problems (e.g. the so-called sinkless orientation problem), where the locality in
the (deterministic) LOCAL model is Θ(log n), while the locality in the (deterministic) SLOCAL
model is Θ(log log n) [19, 28].

Dynamic-LOCAL model. To our knowledge, there is no standard definition or name for what
we call dynamic-LOCAL here; however, the idea has appeared implicitly in a wide range of work.
For example, many efficient dynamic algorithms for graph problems such as vertex or edge coloring,
maximal independent set, and maximal matching also satisfy the property that the solution is only
modified in the (immediate) local neighborhood of a point of change [3, 10, 12, 23, 30, 36, 45], and
hence all of them fall in the class dynamic-LOCAL.
    We use the following definition for dynamic-LOCAL: Computation starts with an empty graph
G0 . In step i, the adversary constructs a supergraph Gi of Gi−1 such that Gi and Gi−1 differ in only


                                                    6
one edge or one node; let Ci denote the set of nodes v in Gi with Gi [B(v, T )] 6= Gi−1 [B(v, T )], i.e.,
nodes that are within distance at most T from the point of change. In each step, the algorithm has
to produce a feasible labeling Li for problem Π in graph Gi , and the labeling can only be modified
in the local neighborhood of a point of change, i.e., Li (v) = Li−1 (v) for all v ∈
                                                                                  / Ci .
    Note that we defined the dynamic-LOCAL model for the incremental case, where nodes and
edges are only added. If we do not require that Gi is a supergraph of Gi−1 , we arrive at what we
call the dynamic-LOCAL± model with both additions and deletions.

Online graph algorithms. In online graph algorithms, nodes are processed sequentially with
respect to an adversarial input sequence σ = v1 , v2 , . . . , vn . Let σi = v1 , v2 , . . . , vi denote the first
i nodes of the sequence, and let Gi = G[{v1 , v2 , . . . , vi }] be the subgraph induced by these nodes.
When the adversary presents a node vi , the algorithm has to label vi based on σi and Gi .
    Online algorithms on graphs have been studied for many problems such as matching [37] and
independent set [32], but closest to our work is the extensive literature on online graph coloring
[1, 11, 31, 33, 35, 40, 50]. There is also prior work that has considered various ways to strengthen
the notion of online algorithms; the performance of online algorithms can be improved by letting the
algorithm know the input graph [22, 34], by giving it an advice string [13, 16, 24] with knowledge
about the request sequence, or allowing the algorithm to delay decisions [25]. The online-LOCAL
model can be interpreted as online graph algorithms with spatial advice, and it can also be interpreted
as a model where the online algorithm can delay its decision for node v until it has seen the whole
neighborhood around v (this interpretation is equivalent to the definition we give next).

Online-LOCAL model. We define the online-LOCAL model as follows. The nodes are processed
sequentially with respect to an adversarial input sequence
                                                        S σ = v1 , v2 , .. . , vn . Let σi = v1 , v2 , . . . , vi
denote the first i nodes of the sequence, and let Gi = G ij=1 B(vj , T ) be the subgraph induced by
the radius-T neighborhoods of these nodes. When the adversary presents a node vi , the algorithm
has to label vi based on σi and Gi .
    Observe that any online graph algorithm is an online-LOCAL algorithm with locality 0. Further
note that in the online-LOCAL model, unique identifiers would not give any additional information.
This is because the nodes can always be numbered with respect to the point in time when the
algorithm first sees the them in some Gi .
    Yet another way to interpret the online-LOCAL model is that it is an extension of the SLOCAL
model, where the algorithm is equipped with unbounded global memory where it can store arbitrary
information on what has been revealed so far. When they introduced the SLOCAL model, Ghaffari,
Kuhn, and Maus [27] mentioned the possibility of such an extension but pointed out that it would
make the model “too powerful”, as just one bit of global memory would already make it possible
to solve e.g. leader election (and this observation already shows that the online-LOCAL model
is indeed strictly stronger than the SLOCAL model). In our work we will see that even though
online-LOCAL can trivially solve e.g. leader election thanks to the global memory, it is not that
easy to exploit this extra power in the context of LCL problems. Indeed, online-LOCAL turns out
to be as weak as SLOCAL when we look at LCL problems in paths, cycles, and rooted trees.

Local computation algorithms. We do not discuss local computation algorithms (LCAs) [2,
26, 41, 42, 48, 48] in this work in more detail, but we briefly point out a direct connection between
the online-LOCAL model and LCAs. It is known that for a broad family of graph problems (that
includes LCLs), we can w.l.o.g. assume that whenever the adversary queries a node v, the LCA will
make probes to learn a connected subgraph around node v [29]. For such problems, an online-LOCAL


                                                        7
algorithm with locality T is at least as strong as an LCA that makes T probes per query: an LCA
can learn some subgraph of the radius-T neighborhood of v and, depending on the size of the state
space, remember some part of that, while in the online-LOCAL model we can learn the entire
radius-T neighborhood of v and remember all of that. We will leave a more detailed exploration of
the distinction between distance (how far to see) and volume (how much to see), in the spirit of e.g.
[43, 47], for future work.


3    Landscape of models
As an introduction to the models, we will first check that all relations in Figure 1 indeed hold. In
each case, we are interested in asymptotic equivalence: for example, when we claim that A ( B, the
interpretation is that locality T in model A implies locality O(T ) in model B, but the converse is not
true. Note that the relation between the online-LOCAL problems and the online graph algorithms
has already been discussed in Sections 1 and 2.

Inclusions.    Let us first argue that the subset relations in Figure 1 hold. These cases are trivial:

    • Any LOCAL algorithm can be simulated in the SLOCAL model, and any SLOCAL algorithm
      can be simulated in the online-LOCAL model (this is easiest to see if one interprets online-
      LOCAL as an extension of SLOCAL with the global memory).

    • Any dynamic-LOCAL± algorithm can be directly used in the dynamic-LOCAL model (an
      algorithm that supports both additions and deletions can handle additions).

These are a bit more interesting cases:

    • To simulate a LOCAL algorithm A in the dynamic-LOCAL± model, we can simply recompute
      the entire output with A after each change. If the locality of A is T , then the output of A
      only changes within distance T from a point of change.

    • To simulate a dynamic-LOCAL algorithm A in the online-LOCAL model, we proceed as
      follows. When the adversary reveals a node v, we feed v along with the new nodes in its
      radius-O(T ) neighborhood to A edge by edge. Now there will not be any further changes
      within distance T from v, and hence A will not change the label L(v) of v any more. Hence
      the online-LOCAL algorithm can also label v with L(v).

Separations. To prove the separations of Figure 1, we make use of the classic distributed graph
problem of 3-coloring paths, as well as the following problems that are constructed to highlight the
differences between the models:

    • Weak reconstruction: in each connected component C there has to be at least one node v such
      that its label L(v) is an encoding of a graph isomorphic to C.

    • Cycle detection: for each cycle at least one node of the cycle has to correctly report that it is
      part of a cycle (more precisely, each node that outputs ‘yes’ has to be part of at least one
      cycle, and for each cycle there has to be at least one node that outputs ‘yes’).

    • Component-wise leader election: in each connected component exactly one node has to be
      marked as the leader.



                                                   8
      Problem                             LOCAL           SLOCAL    dynamic-     dynamic-    online-
                                                                    LOCAL±       LOCAL       LOCAL
      3-coloring paths                    Ω(log∗ n)       O(1)      O(1)         O(1)        O(1)
      weak reconstruction                 Ω(n)            Ω(n)      O(1)         O(1)        O(1)
      cycle detection                     Ω(n)            Ω(n)      Ω(n)         O(1)        O(1)
      component-wise leader election      Ω(n)            Ω(n)      Ω(n)         Ω(n)        O(1)
      nested orientation                  ω(1)            O(1)      ω(1)         ω(1)        O(1)

    Table 3: Problems that we use to separate the models, and the bounds that we show for their locality.


     • Nested orientation: find an acyclic orientation of the edges and label each node recursively
       with its own identifier, the identifiers of its neighbors, and the labels of its in-neighbors (see
       Definition B.1 for the precise definition).

We can prove the bounds shown in Table 3 for the locality of these problems in the five models; see
Appendices A and B for the details. Now each separation in Figure 1 follows from one of the rows
of Table 3.


4      3-coloring bipartite graphs in the online-LOCAL model
We will next present our Contribution 3: we design an algorithm for 3-coloring bipartite graphs
in the online-LOCAL model. This section will also serve as an introduction into the algorithmic
techniques that work in this model. Equipped with this understanding, we will then in Section 5
start to develop more technical tools that we will need for our Contribution 2.
    The 3-coloring algorithm shows the advantage of allowing online algorithms to look around:
while the best online coloring algorithm on bipartite graphs is Θ(log n)-competitive, our algorithm
in the online-LOCAL model achieves a competitive ratio of 1.5. Moreover, this algorithm provides
an exponential separation between the SLOCAL and online-LOCAL models for a natural LCL
problem.
    Note that an optimal solution would be to color a bipartite graph with 2 colors. In all models
that we consider here, we know it is not possible to solve 2-coloring with locality o(n), the worst
case being a path with n nodes. We will show that allowing an online-LOCAL algorithm to use
only one extra color makes it possible to find a valid coloring with locality O(log n):

Theorem 1.1. There is an online-LOCAL algorithm that finds a 3-coloring in bipartite graphs with
locality O(log n).

    In Section 4.1, we will introduce the 3-coloring algorithm, and we will use the special case of
grids in order to visualize it. Later, in Section 4.3, we will discuss the implications of our algorithm
for coloring grids.

4.1     Algorithm for 3-coloring bipartite graphs
Algorithm overview. The high-level idea of our online-LOCAL algorithm is to color the presented
nodes of the graph with 2 colors until we see two areas where the 2-colorings are not compatible.
In essence, when the adversary presents a node far from any other node we have seen, we blindly
start constructing a 2-coloring. When the adversary presents nodes in the neighborhood of already
colored nodes, we simply expand the 2-colored “blob”. We keep expanding such properly 2-colored

                                                      9
blobs until, eventually, two blobs with incompatible 2-colorings meet (i.e., blobs that have different
parities). Then, we will use the third color in order to create a barrier around one of the blobs,
effectively flipping its parity. Our algorithm thereby makes use of the knowledge of previously
queried neighborhoods that is given to us by the online-LOCAL model: the algorithm is committing
to colors for nodes in the revealed subgraphs before they are queried.

Algorithm in detail. At the beginning, no nodes are revealed to the algorithm, and we therefore
say that all nodes are unseen. We will refer to connected components of the subgraph Gi of G as
groups. With each of these groups, we associate a border count, which is a natural number that is
initially 0. We will use colors 0 and 1 for the 2-coloring, reserving color 2 as the barrier color. Each
time the adversary points at a node vi , we get to see the radius-T neighborhood B(vi , T ) of this
node. Now consider different types of nodes in B(vi , T + 1). There are three different cases that we
need to address (we will visualize them in Figures 2 to 4 using grids as an example):

   1. All nodes in B(vi , T + 1) are unseen. In this case, the nodes in B(vi , T ) form a new connected
      component, i.e. a new group. This group has a border count of 0. We will color vi with 0,
      thus fixing the parity for this group (see Figure 2).

   2. We have already seen some nodes in B(vi , T + 1), but all of them belong to the same group. In
      this case, we have been shown an area next to an existing group. If vi was already committed
      to a color, we will use that color. Otherwise, we will color vi according to the 2-coloring of the
      group. All nodes in B(vi , T ) are now considered to be in this group (see Figure 3).

   3. There are nodes in B(vi , T + 1) that belong to different groups. In this case, we will have
      to join groups. Here, we will only define the join of two groups A and B; if there are more
      groups, this join can be applied iteratively.
      If A and B have different parities (i.e., the 2-colorings at their boundaries are not compatible),
      we will take the group with the smaller border count and use a layer of nodes of color 2 to
      create a barrier that changes its parity, and then we increase its border count; see Algorithm 1
      for the details. Then, we will join the groups, that are now compatible, and set the border
      count of the newly created group to the maximum of the border counts of A and B.
      By merging all groups in the local neighborhood of vi , we eventually end up in a situation
      where vi only sees nodes in a single group, and we are in a scenario similar to case 2 above:
      nodes in the local neighborhood of vi also join the newly created group, and if vi has not
      already committed to a color, we will color it according to the 2-coloring of this group (see
      Figure 4).


4.2   Algorithm analysis
In order to show correctness of the presented algorithm, we will first prove that this process creates
a valid 3-coloring provided that all our commitments remain within the visible area, that is, inside
subgraph Gi . Next, we will show that by choosing T (n) = O(log n), all our commitments will indeed
remain inside the visible area. Together, these parts prove Theorem 1.1.

Validity of the 3-coloring. We will first prove that our algorithm will always continue a valid
3-coloring, as long as we do not have to make commitments to unseen nodes. We will consider all
three cases of the algorithm individually.


                                                  10
                           x                                               x




Figure 2: 3-coloring algorithm, case 1/3. The adversary presents node x. Here node x is in the middle of an
unseen region (shaded). It will create a new group (white) and we will fix the color of node x arbitrarily.




                                   y                                             y
                  A

Figure 3: 3-coloring algorithm, case 2/3. The adversary presents node y. Some nodes in the local neighborhood
of y are already part of a group (white), and hence y joins this group. We will fix the color of node y so that
it is consistent with the coloring of the group.




                               B
                                       z                                             z


                       C
Figure 4: 3-coloring algorithm, case 3/3. The adversary presents node z. Some nodes in the local neighborhood
of z belong to two different groups, B and C. Hence we merge the groups. As they had incompatible parities,
we add a new border around one of the groups, in this case C, as both groups had the same number of
borders around them and we can choose arbitrarily. Nodes in the local neighborhood of z join the group, and
z is colored in a way compatible with the coloring of the newly created group.



                                                      11
 Algorithm 1: join groups(A, B)
   Input: Groups A, B
   Output: Group X
 1 if A and B have different parities then
 2     Let S be the group with the smaller border count. If they are equal, S = A;
 3     For all nodes of color 0 in S, commit all uncolored neighbors to color 1;
 4     For all nodes of color 1 in S, commit all uncolored neighbors to color 2;
 5     For all nodes of color 2 in S, commit all uncolored neighbors to color 0;
 6     Increase border count of S by 1.
 7 end
 8 Set all nodes in groups A, B to be in group X;
 9 Set the border count for X to be the maximum of border counts for A, B and S;
10 return X



  1. All nodes in B(vi , T + 1) are unseen. In this case, we will color vi with 0. As all neighboring
     nodes were unseen, they have not committed to any color, and thus this case will cause no
     errors.
  2. We have already seen some nodes in B(vi , T + 1), but all of them belong to the same group. In
     this case, we would either use the committed color or the parity of the group. As previously
     committed colors do not cause errors, and the group has consistent parity, this case cannot
     cause any errors.
  3. There are nodes in B(vi , T + 1) that belong to different groups. In this case, we want to join
     groups without breaking the coloring. If the two groups had the same parity, clearly, no errors
     can be caused by continuing the 2-coloring. The interesting case is when the two groups had
     different parities. Then, we need to show that the new commitments made by Algorithm 1 do
     not create any errors.
     Let S be the group with the smaller border count. By examining Algorithm 1, we can see
     that all colored nodes that have uncolored neighbors are either of color 0 or color 1: only in
     line 4, nodes can be colored with color 2, and all of those nodes’ neighbors are then colored in
     line 5. Thus, in order for an error to occur, there either needs to be two nodes of colors 0
     and 1 that have uncolored neighbors and different parities in S, or the algorithm commits
     to a color of a node that it has not yet seen. This could cause an error, as two groups could
     commit a single node to two different colors.
     As for the first case, we assume that all nodes in S that have uncolored neighbors also have
     consistent parity. This trivially holds for a group that has border count 0, as all colored nodes
     in it have the same parity. From the assumption, it follows that all nodes colored with 1
     in line 3 have the same parity, so they cannot create an error. After this, all colored nodes
     with uncolored neighbors in the group have the same parity, and are colored with 1. Thus all
     nodes colored with 2 in line 4 also have the same parity, as do the nodes colored with 0 in
     line 5. As these are the only lines where nodes are colored, this procedure cannot create any
     errors. It also ensures that, after the procedure, the only colored nodes in the group that have
     uncolored neighbors are the nodes colored in line 5, which have the same parity. Therefore,
     our assumption holds for all groups. Those nodes also have a parity different from the nodes
     in S that had uncolored neighbors before this procedure, so in essence, we have flipped the
     parity of group S to match the parity of the other group.

                                                 12
      As for the second case, this can be avoided by choosing a large enough T , so that all
      commitments remain within the visible area of Gi . Next, we will discuss how to choose such
      a T.

Locality of the 3-coloring algorithm. In this part, we need to prove that by choosing locality
T (n) = 3dlog2 ne = O(log n), no nodes outside the visible area of Gi need to be committed.
    We first make the observation that a group with border count b contains at least 2b nodes; this
is a simple induction:

   b = 0: A newly created group contains at least 1 node.

   b > 0: Consider the cases in which Algorithm 1 returns a group X with border count b. One
          possibility is that A or B already had border count b, and hence by assumption it already
          contained at least 2b nodes. The only other possibility is that both A and B had border
          count exactly b − 1, they had different parities, one of the border counts was increased,
          and hence X has now got a border count of b. But, in this case, both A and B contained
          at least 2b−1 nodes each.

Hence the border count is bounded by b ≤ log2 n in a graph with n nodes.
    We will next consider the maximum distance between a node that the adversary has pointed at
and a node with a committed color. Note that the only place where the algorithm commits a color
to a node that the adversary has not revealed yet is when building a border around a group. There
are three steps (lines 3 to 5) where the algorithm commits to the color of a neighbor of a committed
node, and thus effectively extends the distance by at most one in each step. Therefore, if the border
count is b, we will in the worst case commit the colors within distance 3b from a node that was
selected by the adversary.
    As we have b ≤ log2 n, a locality of 3dlog2 ne ≥ 3b suffices to ensure that all of our commitments
are safely within the visible region. This concludes the proof of Theorem 1.1.

4.3   Locality of vertex coloring in grids
In this section, we give an overview of the locality of coloring in the LOCAL, SLOCAL and online-
LOCAL models in two-dimensional grid graphs with n = a × b nodes. A two-dimensional grid G is
the Cartesian product of a path with a nodes and a path with b nodes.

2-coloring in grids is non-local. A grid graph can be colored with 2 colors, but 2-coloring is
an inherently global problem; in all models that we consider here we know that it is impossible to
solve this problem with locality o(n). To see this, observe that we can have a grid with dimensions
n × 1, that is, a path. For a path, it is easy to verify that by coloring just one node, we define
the colors of all other nodes along the path. Therefore, 2-coloring a path and consequently a grid
requires locality Ω(n).

5-coloring in grids is trivially local. Looking at the other extreme, 5-coloring is trivial, as
one can construct such a coloring greedily (note that in a grid all nodes have degree at most 4
and can therefore always choose a “free” color). The locality of 5-coloring is therefore 0 in the
online-LOCAL, 1 in the SLOCAL, and O(log∗ n) in the LOCAL model.




                                                 13
4-coloring in grids is also local. It turns out that 4-coloring is also doable with locality
O(log∗ n) in the LOCAL model [9, 15]. These algorithms can be translated into a constant-locality
algorithm in online-LOCAL and SLOCAL models.
    This problem is also a good illustration of the power of the online-LOCAL model. A small
constant locality is sufficient for online-LOCAL to solve a natural graph problem, while the problem
is not solvable in the usual online graph algorithms setting.

3-coloring separates the models. So far, we have covered coloring with 2 colors and coloring
with at least 4 colors, and in each of these cases we have gotten approximately the same locality
in the online-LOCAL and LOCAL models. However, 3-coloring turns out to be a much more
interesting problem.
                                                                      √   √                      √
    By prior work [15], it is known that the locality of 3-coloring in n × n grids is at least Ω( n)
in the LOCAL model. The aforementioned paper considered the case of toroidal grid graphs, but the
same argument can be applied for non-toroidal grids (in essence, if you could color locally anywhere
in the middle of a non-toroidal grid, you could also apply the same algorithm to color a toroidal
grid). We can easily extend this result to show a polynomial lower bound for 3-coloring grids in the
SLOCAL model:

Theorem 4.1. There is no SLOCAL algorithm that finds a 3-coloring in 2-dimensional grids with
locality o(n1/10 ).

    To prove the result, we show that we can simulate SLOCAL algorithms sufficiently efficiently
in the LOCAL model. We use the standard technique of first precomputing a distance-o(n1/10 )
coloring, and then using the colors as a schedule for applying the SLOCAL algorithm. Such a
                                                                                     √
simulation can be done efficiently and would lead to a LOCAL algorithm running in o( n) time,
which is a contradiction. In Appendix C, we present a full proof of the lower bound.
    As grids are bipartite graphs, Theorem 1.1 gives the following corollary:

Corollary 4.2. There is an online-LOCAL algorithm that finds a 3-coloring in 2-dimensional grids
with locality O(log n).

In other words, the problem of 3-coloring in grids already gives an exponential separation between
the SLOCAL and online-LOCAL models. We have summarized the known locality bounds in
Table 2.


5    LCL problems in paths, cycles, rooted regular trees
We just showed that the online-LOCAL model is much more powerful than LOCAL and SLOCAL
for an LCL on bipartite graphs and grids. In this section, we will discuss what happens when we
restrict our attention to LCL problems in paths, cycles, and trees. We will start by defining LCL
problems more formally.
    We say that Π is a locally verifiable problem with verification radius r if the following holds:
there is a collection of labeled local neighborhoods T such that L is a feasible solution for input
(G, I) if and only if for all nodes v, the radius-r neighborhood of v in (G, I, L) is in T . Informally, a
solution is feasible if it looks good in all radius-r neighborhoods.

Definition 5.1 (Locally checkable labeling [44]). A locally verifiable problem Π is a locally checkable
labeling (LCL) problem if the set of the input labels Σ is finite, the set of the output labels Γ is
finite, and there is a natural number ∆ such that maximum degree of any graph G ∈ G is at most ∆.


                                                   14
Note that in LCL problems, T is also finite since there are only finitely many possible non-isomorphic
labeled local neighborhoods.
    It turns out that in the case of paths, cycles, and rooted regular trees, the LOCAL, SLOCAL,
dynamic-LOCAL, and online-LOCAL models are all approximately equally expressive for LCL
problems. In particular, all classification and decidability results related to LCLs in paths, cycles,
and rooted regular trees in the LOCAL model [4, 8, 20] directly apply also in the online-LOCAL
model and both versions of the dynamic-LOCAL model.
    We are first going to show that the LOCAL and online-LOCAL models are equivalent in the
case of paths and cycles, even when the LCL problems can have inputs. We will then prove that
the models are equivalent also in the more general case of rooted regular trees, but in this case we
do not consider the possibility of having input labels.
    Formally, we will prove the following theorem for cycles and paths:

Theorem 5.2. Let Π be an LCL problem in paths or cycles (possibly with inputs). If the locality of
Π is T in the online-LOCAL model, then its locality is O(T + log∗ n) in the LOCAL model.

   For the case of rooted trees, we will prove the following two theorems:

Theorem 5.3. Let Π be an LCL problem in rooted regular trees (without inputs). Problem Π has
locality nΩ(1) in the LOCAL model if and only if it has locality nΩ(1) in the online-LOCAL model.

Theorem 5.4. Let Π be an LCL problem in rooted regular trees (without inputs). Problem Π has
locality Ω(log n) in the LOCAL model if and only if it has locality Ω(log n) in the online-LOCAL
model.

    These two theorems show that all LCL problems in rooted regular trees belong to one of the
known complexity classes O(log∗ n), Θ(log n) and nΩ(1) in all of the models we study. In what
follows, we will introduce the high-level ideas of the proofs of these theorems. For full proofs, we
refer the reader to Appendices D and E.

5.1   Cycles and paths
We will prove Theorem 5.2 by first showing that any LCL problem in cycles and paths has either
locality O(1) or Ω(n) in the online-LOCAL model. Next, we will show that if a problem is solvable
with locality O(1) in the online-LOCAL model, then it is also solvable in locality O(log∗ n) in the
LOCAL model. These steps are described by the following two lemmas:

Lemma 5.5. Let Π be an LCL problem in paths or cycles (possibly with inputs), and let A be
an online-LOCAL algorithm solving Π with locality o(n). Then, there exists an online-LOCAL
algorithm A0 solving Π with locality O(1).

    The high-level idea of the proof of Lemma 5.5 is to construct a large virtual graph P 0 such that
when the original algorithm runs on the virtual graph P 0 , the labeling produced by the algorithm
is locally compatible with the labeling in the original graph P . We ensure this by applying a
pumping-lemma-style argument on the LCL problem. The proof uses similar ideas as the ones
presented by Chang and Pettie [18].

Lemma 5.6. Let Π be an LCL problem in paths or cycles (possibly with inputs), and let A be an
online-LOCAL algorithm solving Π with locality O(1). Then, there exists a LOCAL algorithm A0
solving Π with locality O(log∗ n).



                                                 15
    The high-level idea of the proof of Lemma 5.6 is to use the constant locality online-LOCAL
algorithm to construct a canonical output labeling for each possible neighborhood of input labels.
The fast LOCAL algorithm can then use these canonical labelings in disjoint neighborhoods of the
real graph, and the construction of the canonical labelings ensures that the labeling also extends to
the path segments between these neighborhoods.
    The full proofs of these lemmas can be found in Appendix D. In order to prove Theorem 5.2, it
is sufficient to combine these lemmas with the fact that the possible localities on paths and cycles
in the LOCAL model are O(1), Θ(log∗ n) and Θ(n).

5.2   Rooted regular trees
We prove the equivalence of the LOCAL and the online-LOCAL models in two parts. We start
out with Theorem 5.3 and show that if an LCL problem requires locality nΩ(1) in the LOCAL
model, then for every locality-no(1) online-LOCAL algorithm we can construct an input instance
which the algorithm must fail to solve. To prove Theorem 5.4, we show that a locality-o(log n)
online-LOCAL algorithm for solving an LCL problem implies that there exists a locality-O(log∗ n)
LOCAL algorithm for solving that same problem. In the following, we will outline the proofs of
both theorems, the full proofs can be found in Appendix E. Before considering the full proof, we
advise the reader to look at the example in Appendix E.2, where we show that the 2.5-coloring
                            √
problem requires locality Ω( n) in the online-LOCAL model.

Proof outline of Theorem 5.3. Our proof is based on the fact that any LCL problem requiring
locality nΩ(1) in the LOCAL model has a specific structure. In particular, the problem can be
decomposed into a sequence of path-inflexible labels and the corresponding sequence of more and
more restricted problems [8]. Informally, a label is path-inflexible if two nodes having that label
can exist only at specific distances apart from each other. For example, when 2-coloring a graph,
two nodes having label 1 can exist only at even distances from each other. The problems in the
path-inflexible decomposition are formed by removing the path-inflexible labels from the previous
problem in the sequence until an empty problem is reached.
    This decomposition of the problem into restricted problems with path-inflexible labels allows us
to construct an input graph for any locality-no(1) online-LOCAL algorithm. In particular, we force
the algorithm to commit labels in disjoint fragments of the graph. Any label that the algorithm
uses must be a path-inflexible label in some problem of the sequence of restricted problems. By
combining two fragments containing labels that are path-inflexible in the same problem, we can
ensure that the algorithm cannot solve that problem in the resulting graph. Hence the algorithm
must use a label from a problem earlier in the sequence. At some point, the algorithm must use
labels that are path-inflexible in the original problem. At that point, we can combine two fragments
having path-inflexible labels in the original problem in such a way that no valid labeling for the
original problem exists, and hence the algorithm must fail to solve the problem on the resulting
graph.

Proof outline of Theorem 5.4. Here, we show that a locality-o(log n) online-LOCAL algorithm
solving an LCL problem implies that there exists a certificate for O(log∗ n) solvability for that
problem. It is known that the existence of such a certificate for a problem implies that there exists
a locality-O(log∗ n) LOCAL algorithm for solving the problem [8].
    Informally, the certificate for O(log∗ n) solvability for LCL problem Π with label set Γ and arity
δ consists of a subset ΓT = {γ1 , . . . , γt } of labels Γ, and two sequences of correctly labeled complete
δ-ary trees T 1 and T 2 . The leaves of each tree in the sequence T 1 (resp. T 2 ) are labeled in the



                                                    16
same way using only labels from set ΓT . For every label of set ΓT , there exists a tree in both of the
sequences having a root labeled with that label.
    We can use the online-LOCAL algorithm to construct such a certificate. We do this by
constructing exponentially many deep complete δ-ary trees and using the algorithm to label nodes
in the middle of those trees. We then glue these trees together in various ways. When the trees are
glued together, we use the online-LOCAL algorithm to label the rest of the nodes to form one tree
of the sequence. We repeat this procedure until all trees of both sequences have been constructed.


Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Alkida Balliu, Sameep Dahal, Chetan Gupta, Fabian Kuhn, Dennis Olivetti,
Jan Studený, and Jara Uitto for useful discussions. We would also like to thank the anonymous
reviewers for the very helpful feedback they have provided for previous versions of this work. This
work was supported in part by the Academy of Finland, Grant 333837.


References
 [1] Susanne Albers and Sebastian Schraink. Tight bounds for online coloring of basic graph classes.
     Algorithmica, 83(1):337–360, 2021. doi:10.1007/s00453-020-00759-7.

 [2] Noga Alon, Ronitt Rubinfeld, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Space-efficient local computation
     algorithms. In Proc. 23rd Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA
     2012), pages 1132–1139. SIAM, 2012. doi:10.1137/1.9781611973099.89.

 [3] Sepehr Assadi, Krzysztof Onak, Baruch Schieber, and Shay Solomon. Fully dynamic maximal
     independent set with sublinear update time. In Proc. 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium
     on Theory of Computing (STOC 2018), page 815–826, 2018. doi:10.1145/3188745.3188922.

 [4] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Yi-Jun Chang, Dennis Olivetti, Mikaël Rabie, and Jukka
     Suomela. The distributed complexity of locally checkable problems on paths is decidable. In
     Proc. 38th ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC 2019), pages
     262–271. ACM Press, 2019. doi:10.1145/3293611.3331606.

 [5] Alkida Balliu, Juho Hirvonen, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela. Hardness of min-
     imal symmetry breaking in distributed computing. In Proc. 38th ACM Symposium on
     Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC 2019), pages 369–378. ACM Press, 2019.
     doi:10.1145/3293611.3331605.

 [6] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Yuval Efron, Juho Hirvonen, Yannic Maus, Dennis Olivetti,
     and Jukka Suomela. Classification of distributed binary labeling problems. In Proc. 34th
     International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC 2020), pages 17:1–17:17. Schloss
     Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.DISC.2020.17.

 [7] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Juho Hirvonen, Dennis Olivetti, Mikaël Rabie, and Jukka
     Suomela. Lower bounds for maximal matchings and maximal independent sets. Journal of the
     ACM, 68(5), 2021. doi:10.1145/3461458.

 [8] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Dennis Olivetti, Jan Studený, Jukka Suomela, and Aleksandr
     Tereshchenko. Locally checkable problems in rooted trees. In Proc. 40th ACM Symposium


                                                  17
    on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC 2021), pages 263–272. ACM Press, 2021.
    doi:10.1145/3465084.3467934.

 [9] Alkida Balliu, Juho Hirvonen, Darya Melnyk, Dennis Olivetti, Joel Rybicki, and Jukka
     Suomela. Local mending. In Proc. 29th International Colloquium on Structural Information
     and Communication Complexity (SIROCCO 2022). Springer, 2022.

[10] Leonid Barenboim and Tzalik Maimon. Fully dynamic graph algorithms inspired by distributed
     computing: Deterministic maximal matching and edge coloring in sublinear update-time. ACM
     Journal of Experimental Algorithmics, 24, 2019.

[11] Dwight R. Bean. Effective coloration. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 41(2):469–480, 1976.
     doi:10.2307/2272247.

[12] Sayan Bhattacharya, Deeparnab Chakrabarty, Monika Henzinger, and Danupon Nanongkai.
     Dynamic algorithms for graph coloring. In Proc. 29th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
     Discrete Algorithms (SODA 2018), pages 1–20. SIAM, 2018. doi:10.1137/1.9781611975031.1.

[13] Maria Paola Bianchi, Hans-Joachim Böckenhauer, Juraj Hromkovič, and Lucia Keller. Online
     coloring of bipartite graphs with and without advice. In Computing and Combinatorics, pages
     519–530, 2012. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-32241-9 44.

[14] Béla Bollobás. Extremal graph theory, chapter 3. Courier Corporation, 2004.

[15] Sebastian Brandt, Juho Hirvonen, Janne H. Korhonen, Tuomo Lempiäinen, Patric R. J.
     Östergård, Christopher Purcell, Joel Rybicki, Jukka Suomela, and Przemyslaw Uznański. LCL
     problems on grids. In Proc. 36th ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing
     (PODC 2017), pages 101–110. ACM Press, 2017. doi:10.1145/3087801.3087833.

[16] Elisabet Burjons, Juraj Hromkovič, Xavier Muñoz, and Walter Unger. Online graph coloring
     with advice and randomized adversary. In Proc. 42nd International Conference on Current
     Trends in Theory and Practice of Computer Science (SOFSEM 2016), pages 229–240. Springer,
     2016. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-49192-8 19.

[17] Yi-Jun Chang. The complexity landscape of distributed locally checkable problems on trees. In
     Proc. 34th International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC 2020). Schloss Dagstuhl-
     Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.DISC.2020.18.

[18] Yi-Jun Chang and Seth Pettie. A Time Hierarchy Theorem for the LOCAL Model. SIAM
     Journal on Computing, 48(1):33–69, 2019. doi:10.1137/17M1157957.

[19] Yi-Jun Chang, Tsvi Kopelowitz, and Seth Pettie. An Exponential Separation between Ran-
     domized and Deterministic Complexity in the LOCAL Model. In Proc. 57th IEEE Sym-
     posium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS 2016), pages 615–624. IEEE, 2016.
     doi:10.1109/FOCS.2016.72.

[20] Yi-Jun Chang, Jan Studený, and Jukka Suomela. Distributed graph problems through an
     automata-theoretic lens. In Proc. 28th International Colloquium on Structural Information and
     Communication Complexity (SIROCCO 2021), pages 31–49. Springer, 2021. doi:10.1007/978-3-
     030-79527-6 3.

[21] Richard Cole and Uzi Vishkin. Deterministic coin tossing with applications to optimal parallel
     list ranking. Information and Control, 70(1):32–53, 1986. doi:10.1016/S0019-9958(86)80023-7.

                                                18
[22] Stefan Dobrev, Rastislav Královič, and Richard Královič. Independent set with advice: The
     impact of graph knowledge. In Proc. 10th Workshop on Approximation and Online Algorithms
     (WAOA 2012). Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-38016-7 2.

[23] Yuhao Du and Hengjie Zhang. Improved algorithms for fully dynamic maximal independent
     set, 2018.

[24] Yuval Emek, Pierre Fraigniaud, Amos Korman, and Adi Rosén. Online computation with
     advice. In Proc. 36th edition of the International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and
     Programming (ICALP 2009), pages 427–438. Springer, 2009. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-02927-1 36.

[25] Yuval Emek, Shay Kutten, and Roger Wattenhofer. Online matching: Haste makes waste! In
     Proc. 48th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2016), pages 333–344,
     2016. doi:10.1145/2897518.2897557.

[26] Guy Even, Moti Medina, and Dana Ron. Deterministic stateless centralized local algorithms
     for bounded degree graphs. In Proc. 22nd European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA 2014),
     pages 394–405. Springer, 2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-44777-2 33.

[27] Mohsen Ghaffari, Fabian Kuhn, and Yannic Maus. On the complexity of local distributed
     graph problems. In Proc. 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing
     (STOC 2017), pages 784–797. ACM Press, 2017. doi:10.1145/3055399.3055471.

[28] Mohsen Ghaffari, David G. Harris, and Fabian Kuhn. On derandomizing local distributed
     algorithms. In Proc. 59th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
     (FOCS 2018), pages 662–673. IEEE, 2018. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2018.00069.

[29] Mika Göös, Juho Hirvonen, Reut Levi, Moti Medina, and Jukka Suomela. Non-local probes do
     not help with many graph problems. In Proc. 30th International Symposium on Distributed
     Computing (DISC 2016). Springer, 2016. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-53426-7 15.

[30] Manoj Gupta and Shahbaz Khan. Simple dynamic algorithms for maximal independent set
     and other problems, 2018.

[31] András Gyárfás and Jenő Lehel. On-line and first fit colorings of graphs. Journal of Graph
     Theory, 12(2):217–227, 1988. doi:h10.1002/jgt.3190120212.

[32] Magnús M. Halldórsson, Kazuo Iwama, Shuichi Miyazaki, and Shiro Taketomi. Online in-
     dependent sets. Theoretical Computer Science, 289(2):953—-962, 2002. doi:10.1016/S0304-
     3975(01)00411-X.

[33] Magnús M. Halldórsson. Parallel and on-line graph coloring. Journal of Algorithms, 23(2):
     265–280, 1997. doi:10.1006/jagm.1996.0836.

[34] Magnús M. Halldórsson. Online coloring known graphs. Electronic Journal of Combinatorics,
     7, 2000. doi:10.37236/1485.

[35] Magnús M. Halldórsson and Mario Szegedy. Lower bounds for on-line graph coloring. Theoretical
     Computer Science, 130(1):163–174, 1994. doi:10.1016/0304-3975(94)90157-0.

[36] Zoran Ivković and Errol L. Lloyd. Fully dynamic maintenance of vertex cover. In Proc.
     19th International Workshop on Graph-Theoretic Concepts in Computer Science (WG 1993).
     Springer, 1994.

                                                19
[37] Richard M. Karp, Umesh V. Vazirani, and Vijay V. Vazirani. An optimal algorithm for on-line
     bipartite matching. In Proc. 22nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC
     1990), pages 352–358, 1990. doi:10.1145/100216.100262.

[38] Fabian Kuhn, Thomas Moscibroda, and Roger Wattenhofer. Local computation: Lower and
     upper bounds. Journal of the ACM, 63(2):1–44, 2016. doi:10.1145/2742012.

[39] Nathan Linial. Locality in distributed graph algorithms. SIAM Journal on Computing, 21(1):
     193–201, 1992. doi:10.1137/0221015.

[40] László Lovász, Michael Saks, and W.T. Trotter. An on-line graph coloring algorithm with
     sublinear performance ratio. Discrete Mathematics, 75(1):319–325, 1989. doi:10.1016/0012-
     365X(89)90096-4.

[41] Yishay Mansour and Shai Vardi. A local computation approximation scheme to maximum match-
     ing. In Proc. 16th International Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial
     Optimization Problems (APPROX 2013) and 17th International Workshop on Randomization
     and Computation (RANDOM 2013), pages 260–273. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-
     40328-6 19.

[42] Yishay Mansour, Aviad Rubinstein, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Converting online algorithms to
     local computation algorithms. In Proc. 39th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages
     and Programming (ICALP 2012), pages 653–664. Springer, 2012. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-31594-
     7 55.

[43] Darya Melnyk, Jukka Suomela, and Neven Villani. Mending partial solutions with few changes.
     In Proc. 25th International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems (OPODIS 2022),
     Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs). Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum
     für Informatik, 2022.

[44] Moni Naor and Larry Stockmeyer. What can be computed locally?            SIAM Journal on
     Computing, 24(6):1259–1277, 1995. doi:10.1137/S0097539793254571.

[45] Ofer Neiman and Shay Solomon. Simple deterministic algorithms for fully dynamic maximal
     matching. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 12(1), 2015. doi:10.1145/2700206.

[46] David Peleg.     Distributed Computing:    A Locality-Sensitive Approach.      SIAM, 2000.
     doi:10.1137/1.9780898719772.

[47] Will Rosenbaum and Jukka Suomela. Seeing far vs. seeing wide: volume complexity of local
     graph problems. In Proc. 39th ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing
     (PODC 2020), pages 89–98. ACM Press, 2020. doi:10.1145/3382734.3405721.

[48] Ronitt Rubinfeld, Gil Tamir, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Fast local computation algorithms. In
     Proc. 2nd Symposium on Innovations in Computer Science (ICS 2011), pages 223–238, 2011.

[49] Jeffrey Shallit. The Frobenius problem and its generalizations. In Proc. 12th International
     Conference on Developments in Language Theory (DLT 2008), pages 72–83. Springer, 2008.
     doi:10.1007/978-3-540-85780-8 5.

[50] Sundar Vishwanathan. Randomized online graph coloring. Journal of Algorithms, 13(4):
     657–669, 1992. doi:10.1016/0196-6774(92)90061-G.


                                               20
A     Simple separations
We show the upper and lower bounds for the first four rows of Table 3 here; the final row is left for
Appendix B.

3-coloring paths. This problem is easy to solve greedily in SLOCAL and maintain greedily in
dynamic-LOCAL± with locality O(1). However, the locality of this problem in the LOCAL model
is known to be Ω(log∗ n) [39].

Weak reconstruction. Recall that in this problem at least one node has to correctly output the
structure of its own connected component.
    In the dynamic-LOCAL± model we can solve it with locality O(1): after each change, let the
nodes located next to the point of change report the current structure of their own connected
components.
    In the SLOCAL model this cannot be solved with locality o(n). To see this, assume that an
o(n)-locality SLOCAL algorithm A exists, and fix a sufficiently large n. Let S = {S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk } be
a family of non-isomorphic graphs with n/6 nodes each; we assume that in each graph Si there is a
unique root node that we can distinguish (e.g., the only node with degree 2). We can choose k  n.

                                                            …


                                       S1     S2     S3     …   Sk

Now for each 1 ≤ i < j ≤ k let Gi,j be a graph that consists of Si and Sj such that their root nodes
are connected with a path P of length 2n/3. We split P in three parts: head (n/6 nodes closest to
Si ), tail (n/6 nodes closest to Sj ), and middle (the remaining n/3 nodes far from Si and Sj ).


                       G 1,3:

                                S1    head         middle        tail   S3

Now we consider what happens when we present the middle part to A first, then the head and Si ,
and finally the tail and Sj . Each node v outputs some label L(v); if A works correctly, one of the
labels encodes a graph isomorphic to Gi,j . Let M be the set of labels produced by the middle part,
let Hi be the set of labels produced by the nodes in the head and Si , and let Tj be the set of labels
produced by the nodes in the tail and Sj . The key observation is that set M is independent of i
and j, set Hi only depends on i, and set Tj only depends on j. This is because A produces the
same output if we present the middle part first, then the tail and Sj , and only after that the head
and Si . Furthermore,
                   S we knowS    that |M | ≤ n/3, |Hi | ≤ n/3, and |Tj | ≤ n/3.
    Let X = M ∪ i Hi ∪ j Tj be the union of all labels that A may produce in the graph family
Gi,j for the processing order described above. We have |X| ≤ (1 + k + k) · n/3  k 2 . As there are k 2
nonisomorphic graphs Gi,j , there has to exist a pair (i, j) such that no label in X is an encoding of
Gi,j . Hence if we apply A to Gi,j with the above processing order, none of the nodes will correctly
output the structure of Gi,j .




                                                    21
Cycle detection. Recall that in this problem for each cycle at least one node of the cycle has to
correctly report that it is part of a cycle.
     In the dynamic-LOCAL we can solve it with constant locality: the first node that encounters a
closed cycle reports it.
     In the dynamic-LOCAL± model the problem cannot be solved with locality o(n). To see this,
first construct a long cycle; at least one node v will report that it is part of a cycle. Then break the
cycle by deleting an edge that is far from v; node v cannot respond to this change, and will hence
still incorrectly report that it is part of a cycle.
     In the SLOCAL model the problem cannot be solved with locality o(n), either. To see this,
first consider a long cycle C, and split the cycle in four parts of the same length: C1 , C2 , C3 , C4
(numbered in the positive direction along the cycle). Consider the following two processing orders:
(i) C1 , C3 , C2 , C4 and (ii) C1 , C3 , C4 , C2 . Note that both orders will result in exactly the same output.
Furthermore, at least one node has to report that it is part of a cycle. Thus we can always find a
processing order in which a node in one of the first three parts reports that it is part of a cycle. But
then we can leave out an edge in the fourth part to derive a contradiction (the algorithm claims
that there is a cycle while we have a path).

Component-wise leader election. Recall that in this problem in each connected component
exactly one node has to be marked as the leader.
    In the online-LOCAL model we can solve this problem with constant locality: the algorithm can
see the last node of a connected component and assign this node to be a leader.
    In the dynamic-LOCAL model this problem cannot be solved with locality o(n): start with two
components with large diameters, both of which have leaders, and then connect the components
with an edge that is far from the leaders. At least one of the leaders would need to be removed, but
both of them are far from the point of change.
    In the SLOCAL model this problem cannot be solved with locality o(n), either. To see this,
consider two long paths, P and Q. Split P in three parts of the same length: P1 , P2 , P3 (numbered
in this order along the path). Consider these two processing orders: (i) P2 , P1 , P3 and (ii) P2 , P3 , P1 .
Note that both orders will result in exactly the same output. Furthermore, exactly one node has to
be elected as the leader. Hence in one of these processing orders, the algorithm will commit to a
leader that is located within the first two parts, before seeing the final part. Similarly in Q we can
find a processing order in which the algorithm commits to a leader early. Therefore we can add an
edge between P and Q in parts that the algorithm has not seen yet. We have a contradiction: the
algorithm marked are at least two nodes as leaders in one component.


B     Nested orientation
In this section, we show that the dynamic-LOCAL model cannot simulate the SLOCAL model. We
do this by defining nested orientation and showing that finding it is trivial in the SLOCAL model
with constant locality, but impossible in the dynamic-LOCAL model with constant locality.
    We start by defining the nested orientation:

Definition B.1 (Nested orientation). Let G = (V, E) be a simple undirected graph, and let
f : V → {1, 2, . . . , poly(|V |)} be a mapping of the nodes to unique identifiers. A nested orientation
(O, h) of G consists of an acyclic orientation O of the edges E and a nesting h of nodes V . For a
node v ∈ V , we set h(v) = (f (v), F (v), H(v)), where f (v) is the unique identifier of v,
                                                
                                         F (v) = f (u) : {v, u} ∈ E

                                                      22
is the set of unique identifiers of all neighbors of v, and
                                               
                                       H(v) = h(u) : (u, v) ∈ O
is the set of outputs of all in-neighbors of v according to orientation O.
    Note that a nested orientation exists for any graph G, and the orientation can be trivially found
in the SLOCAL model with locality T = 1: When a node v is processed, it is sufficient to orient all
undirected adjacent edges away from v, and to inspect the identifiers and outputs of all neighbors
of v to compute F (v) and H(v), respectively.
    We start by proving that the length of the nestings of a constant-locality dynamic-LOCAL
algorithm is bounded. More formally, we prove the following lemma:
Lemma B.2. Let A be a dynamic-LOCAL algorithm that finds a nested orientation with constant
locality T , and let G be a graph with a girth of at least 2T + 2. Let O be the orientation produced by
A when run on graph G. Then orientation O does not induce a directed walk of length T + 1 in G.
Proof. Assume for contradiction that orientation O induces a walk P = v1 v2 . . . vT +1 vT +2 of length
T + 1 in graph G. In particular, this implies that the nesting h(vT +2 ) is dependent on the output
of v1 .
    We can modify the graph G by introducing a new node x and connecting it to v1 by an edge. We
then show this change to algorithm A. This means that the algorithm needs to change the output
of node v1 to include the identifier of its new neighbor. This implies that also the output of vT +2
needs to be changed as it is dependent on the output of v1 . Since the girth of G is at least 2T + 2
(path P is the shortest path between v1 and vT +2 ), node vT +2 does not belong to the radius-T
neighborhood of the change. This is a contradiction.
    We are now ready to show that finding a nested orientation is not possible with constant
locality in the dynamic-LOCAL model, and therefore it separates the SLOCAL model from the
dynamic-LOCAL model:
Theorem B.3. Finding a nested orientation in the dynamic-LOCAL model requires locality ω(1).
Proof. Assume for contradiction that there exists a dynamic-LOCAL algorithm A that finds a
nested orientation with locality T = O(1). Let G = (V, E) be a graph with chromatic number and
girth of at least 2T ; such graphs are know to exist [14]. We will show that running algorithm A on
G produces a coloring with much fewer colors than 2T , which would contradict our assumption.
    We start by executing algorithm A on graph G in an arbitrary order to produce an orientation O
and a nesting h. Let D be the directed graph counterpart of G where all edges have been oriented
according to O; by definition of O, graph D is acyclic. This implies that some nodes of D are sinks
with only incoming edges. We will use these sinks to recursively partition the nodes of D, and
therefore also G, into L independent sets C1 , C2 , . . . , CL as follows:
                        D1 = D,
                        Ci = sink nodes of Di                        ∀i ≥ [1, L],
                      Di+1 = Di [VDi \ Ci ]                          ∀i ≥ [1, L],
where DL+1 is the empty graph. See Figure 5 for an illustration of this process. Note that each set
Ci is indeed an independent set of nodes. This is because two adjacent nodes cannot simultaneously
be sinks since the edge between them is oriented towards one of the nodes. Note also that the
longest walk in Di+1 is one edge shorter than in Di . This, together with Lemma B.2, implies that
L ≤ T . This is however a contradiction as the independent sets C1 , C2 , . . . , CL induce a coloring
with L ≤ T colors for G, but the chromatic number of G is at least 2T by assumption.


                                                  23
                                                                        C1


                                                                        C2


                                                                        C3




                                                   .....
                                                                       CL-1


                                                                       CL


Figure 5: Visualization of partitioning the nodes of D into L independent sets in the proof of Theorem B.3.
The arrows represent orientation O of nodes. Note that after we remove nodes of set C1 , that is the sinks in
the original directed graph D, then the nodes in set C2 become sinks, and so on, until CL contains all the
rest of the nodes.


C     Hardness of 3-coloring in SLOCAL
In this section, we prove the following theorem:
Theorem 4.1. There is no SLOCAL algorithm that finds a 3-coloring in 2-dimensional grids with
locality o(n1/10 ).
Proof. Suppose there is an SLOCAL algorithm A with locality T (n) = o(n1/10 ). We design a
LOCAL algorithm A0 that uses A to solve the same problem with locality T 0 (n) = o(n1/2 ), which is
known to be impossible [15].
    Algorithm A0 proceeds as follows. Let k > 2T (n) + 1. Let G0 be the kth power of the input
graph G, i.e., nodes within distance k in the input graph are neighbors in G0 . Now the maximum
degree of G0 is d = O(k 2 ). Let c = d2 . We then use the graph coloring algorithm by Linial [39] to
find a proper c-coloring of G0 ; this results in a distance-k coloring of G. Then we simply proceed by
color classes: we first apply A in parallel to all nodes of color 1, then to all nodes of color 2, etc. As
nodes in one color class are sufficiently far from each other, from the perspective of the output of A
it does not matter in which order we process these nodes.
    This way A0 has simulated A. The locality that we need for the coloring phase is O(d log∗ n) =
o(n1/2 ), and the locality of the final phase is O(dc) = o(n1/2 ).

Corollary C.1. There is no SLOCAL algorithm that finds a 3-coloring in bipartite graphs with
locality o(n1/10 ).


D     LCL problems in paths and cycles
In this section, we prove the following theorem:

                                                     24
Theorem 5.2. Let Π be an LCL problem in paths or cycles (possibly with inputs). If the locality of
Π is T in the online-LOCAL model, then its locality is O(T + log∗ n) in the LOCAL model.

    We will prove this theorem by first showing that any LCL problem in cycles and paths has either
locality O(1) or Ω(n) in the online-LOCAL model. Next, we will show that problems that require
locality Ω(n) in the online-LOCAL model are exactly the same problems that require locality Ω(n)
in the LOCAL model. In particular, we will be proving the following two lemmas:

Lemma 5.5. Let Π be an LCL problem in paths or cycles (possibly with inputs), and let A be
an online-LOCAL algorithm solving Π with locality o(n). Then, there exists an online-LOCAL
algorithm A0 solving Π with locality O(1).

Lemma 5.6. Let Π be an LCL problem in paths or cycles (possibly with inputs), and let A be an
online-LOCAL algorithm solving Π with locality O(1). Then, there exists a LOCAL algorithm A0
solving Π with locality O(log∗ n).

   In order to prove Theorem 5.2, it is sufficient to combine these lemmas with the fact that the
possible localities on paths and cycles in the LOCAL model are O(1), Θ(log∗ n) and Θ(n).

D.1     From sublinear-locality to constant-locality in online-LOCAL
The high-level idea of the proof of Lemma 5.5 is to construct a large virtual graph P 0 such that
when the original algorithm runs on the virtual graph P 0 , the labeling produced by the algorithm
is locally compatible with the labeling in the original graph P . We ensure this by applying a
pumping-lemma-style argument on the LCL problem. The proof uses similar ideas as the ones
presented by Chang and Pettie [18].
    We will start by defining a tripartition of vertices of a path, and use it to define an equivalence
relation for path segments. Recall that we use r to denote the verification radius of the LCL
problem Π.

Definition D.1 (tripartition [18]). Let S be a path segment, and let s and t be the endpoints of S.
A tripartition of vertices ξ(S, {s, t}) = (D1 , D2 , D3 ) is defined as
                                                     [
       D1 = B(s, r − 1) ∪ B(t, r − 1), D2 =              B(v, r) \ D1 , D3 = V (S) \ (D1 ∪ D2 ).
                                                      v∈D1

Definition D.2 (equivalence). Let S and S 0 be path segments, and let s, t, s0 and t0 be the endpoints
of the segments, respectively. Let ξ(S, {s, t}) = (D1 , D2 , D3 ) and ξ(S 0 , {s0 , t0 }) = (D10 , D20 , D30 ). We
define that S and S 0 are equivalent, denoted by S ∼ ?
                                                        S 0 , if the following two statements hold:

   1. The graphs induced by D1 ∪ D2 and D10 ∪ D20 are isomorphic, including the input. Moreover,
      the isomorphism maps s and t in S to s0 and t0 in S 0 , respectively.

   2. Let L be an output labeling on the graph induced by D1 ∪ D2 , and let L0 be the corresponding
      output labeling on the graph induced by D10 ∪ D20 . Then L is extendable to a valid labeling
      for the whole segment S exactly when L0 is extendable to a valid labeling for the whole
      segment S 0 .

We write Class(S) for the equivalence class containing all path segments S 0 such that S 0 ∼
                                                                                           ?
                                                                                             S.




                                                       25
    Observe that the equivalence class of a path segment S depends only on the input labeling in the
radius-(2r − 1) neighborhood of its endpoints, and on the set of possible output label combinations
in the same regions. As there are only finitely many different input and output labelings for the
radius-(2r − 1) neighborhood, there are only finitely many different classes of path segments. In
particular, there are only finitely many classes which contain only finitely many elements. Hence
there exists a natural number α such that for every path segment S with |S| ≥ α, the class Class(S)
is infinite. This implies that for every sufficiently long path segment S, there exists another longer
path segment S 0 that is equivalent to S with respect to the relation ∼.?


    One important property of the class of a path segment is that we can replace any path segment
with another segment from the same class of path segments without affecting the labeling of the
rest of the path. The following lemma formalizes this idea:

Lemma D.3. Let P be a path, possibly with inputs, let S be a path segment of P , and let L be a valid
output labeling of P . Let S 0 be another path segment such that Class(S) = Class(S 0 ), i.e. S ∼      ?
                                                                                                         S0,
and let P 0 be a copy of P , where segment S is replaced with the segment S 0 . Then, there exists a
valid labeling L0 of P 0 such that L(v) = L0 (v 0 ) for each pair of corresponding nodes v ∈ V (P ) \ V (S),
v 0 ∈ V (P 0 ) \ V (S 0 ).

Proof. Let s and t be the endpoints of S, and let s0 and t0 be the endpoints of S 0 . Let ξ(S, {s, t}) =
(D1 , D2 , D3 ) and ξ(S 0 , {s0 , t0 }) = (D10 , D20 , D30 ) be tripartitions of S and S 0 , respectively. We can
now construct L0 as follows: For each v ∈ V (P ) \ D3 and the corresponding v 0 ∈ V (P 0 ) \ D30 , set
L0 (v 0 ) = L(v). Since S ∼  ?
                                S 0 , there must exist a valid labeling for the nodes in D30 since L is valid
for V (S) ⊇ D3 .
    The labeling L0 must be locally valid for every v 0 ∈ V (P 0 )\(D20 ∪D30 ) as B(v 0 , r) ⊆ V (P 0 )∪D10 ∪D20 ,
and therefore the neighborhood looks identical to that of the corresponding node in P . By definition
of S ∼   ?
           S 0 and the fact that L is valid for the whole path segment S, the labeling L0 must also be
valid for every v 0 ∈ D20 ∪ D30 .

    To simplify the description of the algorithm, we make use of the following observation:

Observation D.4 (composition). Online-LOCAL algorithms A and B with localities T1 and T2
can be composed into an online-LOCAL algorithm B ◦ A with locality T1 + T2 .

    We will also make use of the ruling sets:

Definition D.5 (ruling sets). An (α, β)-ruling set R of a graph G is a subset of V (G) such that
for every vi , vj ∈ R, vi 6= vj it holds that dist(vi , vj ) ≥ α, and for every v ∈ V (G) \ R there exists at
least one node u ∈ R such that dist(v, u) ≤ β.

    We are now ready to prove Lemma 5.5:

Proof of Lemma 5.5. Let Π be an LCL problem in paths or cycles with checking-radius r, let P be
a path or a cycle with n nodes, and let A be an online-LOCAL algorithm solving Π with locality
T (n) = o(n). Let α be a natural number larger than the length of the longest path belonging to a
finite class. We can now construct A0 solving Π with locality 6α.
    Algorithm A0 proceeds in three phases (which we can compose using Observation D.4):

   1. In the first phase, the algorithm constructs a (α, α)-ruling set R of path P . This can be done
      with locality α using the following simple algorithm: Whenever the adversary points at a node
      v, check whether any node in B(v, α) already belongs to R. If not, append v to R. Otherwise,
      v is already ruled by another node of R.

                                                       26
                                ,                                          ,
                               S1                                         S2




                                         T(N)

                                                                                       ,
                                                                                      P
                     u1                         v     u                          u2
                                                             2r                       P
                                    S1                               S2

Figure 6: Visualization of step 2 in the proof of Lemma 5.5. The adversary has pointed at node v, which is
in the radius-2r neighborhood of a node u in the ruling set R. Algorithm A0 finds the neighboring nodes u1
and u2 in R, and the corresponding path segments S1 and S2 . The algorithm then replaces the segments
with longer segments S10 and S20 from the same class of segments to construct a larger graph P 0 . Finally,
algorithm A0 runs the original algorithm A on the extended path P 0 to get the label for node v. Note that
by the construction of P 0 , algorithm A does not see further than half of S10 and S20 .


   2. In the second phase, the algorithm constructs a larger virtual path P 0 with N nodes and
      simulates algorithm A on P 0 in specific neighborhoods. Let N be such that
                                                    2n
                                                       T (N )  N.
                                                    α
      Such an N always exists as T (N ) = o(N ). The construction of P 0 ensures that the labeling
      produced on the specific neighborhoods of P 0 are also valid in the corresponding neighborhoods
      of P in such a way that the labeling is extendable for the whole path P . Moreover, the
      construction ensures that the simulation can be done with constant locality.
      Virtual path P 0 can be constructed with the help of the (α, α)-ruling set R with locality 3α as
      follows: Whenever the adversary points at a node v, check whether it belongs to the radius-2r
      neighborhood of a node u in R. If this is the case, find at most two other nodes u1 and u2
      belonging to R in the radius-2α neighborhood of u. The only case where there can be less
      than two nodes in this neighborhood is when the neighborhood contains an endpoint of path
      P . In that case, let the corresponding node ui be the endpoint. Let S1 be the path segment
      between u and u1 , and let S2 be the path segment between u and u2 .
      By the construction of R, the lengths of S1 and S2 are in the range [α, 2α], unless an endpoint
      is reached. For each Si , such that |Si | ≥ α, we know that Class(Si ) is infinite. Hence there
      exists some Si0 of length at least N/α that satisfies Class(Si ) = Class(Si0 ). Otherwise we set
      Si0 = Si . We construct P 0 by adding node u and the connections between u and S10 and S20
      if such connections exist. Let v 0 be the node corresponding to node v in P 0 . Algorithm A0
      uses A to find the label for v 0 on P 0 and then uses the same label for v. By the construction
      of P 0 , algorithm A never sees further than segments S10 and S20 . Since the labeling is locally
      consistent on P 0 , the produced labeling is also locally consistent on P . Figure 6 visualizes this
      construction.


                                                      27
   3. With the labels around the nodes of R fixed, algorithm A0 needs to fix the labeling for the
      rest of the nodes of P . By the assumption that A solves the LCL problem Π, the partial
      labeling in the radius-(2r − 1) neighborhoods of the endpoints of Si0 in the previous step is
      extendable to the whole path segment Si0 . Lemma D.3 implies that the same labeling near
      endpoints is also extendable for the whole path segment Si . For each node v that is not inside
      the radius-2r neighborhood of a node in R, algorithm A0 finds the corresponding path segment
      Si with locality 2α and finds a valid label by brute force.

D.2     From constant-locality in online-LOCAL to log-star-locality in LOCAL
Now that we have shown that sublinear-locality online-LOCAL algorithms can be sped up to
constant-locality algorithms, it remains to prove that constant locality online-LOCAL algorithms
can be used to construct efficient LOCAL algorithms. The high-level idea of the proof of Lemma 5.6
is to use the constant locality online-LOCAL algorithm to construct a canonical output labeling for
each possible neighborhood of input labels. The fast LOCAL algorithm can then use these canonical
labelings in disjoint neighborhoods of the real graph, and the construction of the canonical labelings
ensures that the labeling extends also to the path segments between these neighborhoods.

Proof of Lemma 5.6. Let Π be an LCL problem with constant checking-radius r, and let A be an
online-LOCAL algorithm solving Π with constant locality T . Let β = T + r + 1.
     We first construct an input-labeled path P that, informally, consists of a sufficiently many copies
of all possible input neighborhoods. At this point, P is merely a collection of disjoint path fragments;
we will only later decide how the fragments are connected to each other to form a complete path.
     To construct P , we first fix a sufficiently large set of center nodes ν = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vk }. Each
center node is in the middle of its own path fragment of length 2β + 1. Hence when we finally put
the path fragments together, we will satisfy B(vi , β) ∩ B(vj , β) = ∅ for each i 6= j.
     We choose the input labels of P such that for every possible radius-β neighborhood of inputs ι,
there exists some subset of center nodes M ⊆ ν for which the following holds: |M | = |Γ|2r+1 + 1
and I(B(v, β)) = ι for each v ∈ M . As there are only finitely many distinct input neighborhoods ι,
the size of P can be bounded by a constant.
     We will next execute A on every node in the radius-r neighborhood of the center nodes ν in
some arbitrary order and then stop. Note that at this point P is under-specified, but nevertheless,
the execution of A at the center nodes is well-defined, as we have already fixed the structure of P
in the local neighborhoods of the center nodes. The key idea is that we force A to commit early to
some outputs around the center nodes, and if A indeed works correctly for any path, then these
outputs must be compatible with any concrete realization of P , no matter how we connect the
center nodes to each other. In particular, A must be able to fill the gaps between the center nodes.
     We define function f : Σ2β+1
                               Π    → Γ2r+1
                                        Π     to be a mapping from radius-β neighborhoods of input
labels to radius-r neighborhoods of output labels such that there are at least two center nodes vi
and vj in P with f (B(vi , β)) = f (B(vj , β)). Such nodes exist for every neighborhood of inputs
by the pigeon hole principle as there are only |ΓΠ |2r+1 possible output neighborhoods but there
are |ΓΠ |2r+1 + 1 copies of each input neighborhood by construction. The intuition here is that
f (ι) is the canonical way to label neighborhood ι, and we can extract such a canonical labeling by
simulating A.
     Using the function f , we can now construct a locality-O(log∗ n) LOCAL algorithm A0 for solving
Π as follows:

   1. Algorithm A0 constructs a distance-2β coloring of the path or cycle; this can be done with
      locality O(log∗ n) [21]. The algorithm then uses this coloring to construct a (2β, 2β)-ruling

                                                     28
      set R0 of the input graph by using the above-constructed coloring as a schedule for the simple
      greedy algorithm; this can be done with constant locality. The algorithm then prunes the
      nodes that are at distance less than β from the endpoint of the path from set R0 to get a set
      R. Note that after the pruning, set R is still a (2β, 5β)-ruling set of the input path or cycle.

    2. Algorithm A0 uses f to label the radius-r neighborhood of each node v ∈ R by f (B(v, β));
       this can be done with locality β + r. Note that by the construction of R, each pair of nodes in
       R is at least at a distance of 2β from each other. Thus, the radius-β neighborhoods of the
       nodes are disjoint.

    3. The unlabeled nodes now reside in disjoint segments of length at most 5β, sandwiched between
       radius-r neighborhoods of nodes of R (or the endpoints of the path). Algorithm A0 can then
       use A to construct a locally valid output labeling for each disjoint segment in parallel as
       follows:
      Let ui and uj be nodes of R marking the endpoints of the segment. Run A on the virtual path
      P like in the construction of function f . Identify node ui (resp. uj ) with a node vi ∈ V (P )
      (resp. vj ∈ V (P )) such that the radius-β neighborhoods of inputs are the same. Connect the
      neighborhoods of vi and vj with new nodes on P such that the path ui        uj is isomorphic to
      the path vi    vj . Algorithm A0 can now resume the execution of A, and present the unlabeled
      nodes of path vi      vj to A in some order to see how A would construct a valid labeling for
      this segment of the path. Since the labeling is locally valid on vi vj in path P , it must also
      be locally valid on ui     uj in the original graph.
      We emphasize that the experiment of modifying P and resuming the execution of A there is
      fully localized; all nodes along the path can do a similar thought experiment independently of
      each other.

Composing all of the phases, we see that the locality of the LOCAL algorithm A0 is O(log∗ n).


E     LCL problems in rooted trees
In this section, we prove the following theorems:

Theorem 5.3. Let Π be an LCL problem in rooted regular trees (without inputs). Problem Π has
locality nΩ(1) in the LOCAL model if and only if it has locality nΩ(1) in the online-LOCAL model.

Theorem 5.4. Let Π be an LCL problem in rooted regular trees (without inputs). Problem Π has
locality Ω(log n) in the LOCAL model if and only if it has locality Ω(log n) in the online-LOCAL
model.

   We restrict our attention to LCL problems in rooted trees without inputs. We also restrict the
family of graphs to be regular rooted trees. If the trees were not regular, the degrees of nodes could
be used to encode input labels. More formally, we use the following definition for LCL problems in
rooted trees:

Definition E.1 (LCL problem in rooted trees [8]). An LCL problem Π is a triple (δ, Γ, C) where:

    • δ is the number of allowed children,
    • Γ is a finite set of (output) labels,
    • C is a set of tuples of size δ + 1 from Γδ+1 called allowed configurations.


                                                  29
Each allowed configuration (a : b1 b2 . . . bδ ) ∈ C states that a node with label a is allowed to have
children with labels b1 , b2 , . . . bδ in some order.
    In Appendix E.1, we define path-flexibility for labels of LCL problems that we need for proving
nΩ(1) lower bounds. We then introduce the 2.5-coloring problem in Appendix E.2 as an example of
                                    √
an LCL problem requiring locality Ω( n) in the LOCAL model, and show that it does so also in the
online-LOCAL model. In Appendix E.3, we generalize this technique for all LCL problems requiring
locality nΩ(1) in the LOCAL model. In Appendix E.4, we prove Theorem 5.4 by showing how a
locality-o(log n) online-LOCAL algorithm can be used to construct a locality-O(log∗ n) LOCAL
algorithm.

E.1     LCL problems as automata: path-forms and path-flexibility
The concept of path-flexibility is based on previous work on LCL problems on paths and cycles [20].
Even though we are interested in rooted trees, we can still use results on directed paths by defining
path-form for LCL problems. The path-form of an LCL problem can be seen as a relaxation of the
original problem: Instead of requiring all children to have a compatible combination of labels, the
path-form relaxes this condition by requiring that every child individually needs to have a valid
label regardless of which labels its siblings have.
Definition E.2 (path-form [8]). Let Π = (δ, Γ, C) be an LCL problem in rooted trees. The
path-form of Π is an LCL problem Πpath = (1, Γ, C 0 ) on directed paths. A configuration (a : b)
belongs to C 0 if and only if there exists a configuration (a : b1 , b2 , . . . , bδ ) in C with b = bi for some i.
   Path-flexibility of label γ in problem Π is defined using an automaton M(Π) associated with
the path-form Πpath of problem Π. The intuition with the automaton is that a sequence of labels
on a directed path is valid for a problem Πpath exactly when there exists a sequence of transitions
in M(Π) visiting the states corresponding to the labels in the same order.
Definition E.3 (automaton associated with path-form [20]). Let Π = (δ, Γ, C) be an LCL problem,
and let Πpath = (1, Γ, C 0 ) be its path-form. The automaton M(Π) associated with the path-form
Πpath is a non-deterministic unary semiautomaton. The set of states is Γ, and the automaton has a
transition a → b if the configuration (a : b) exists in C 0 .
    Flexibility is a property of a state of an automaton, and is directly related to path-flexibility of
a label. The intuition with path-flexibility is that, if a label is path-flexible, then it can be used
to label far-away nodes on a path without knowing the exact distance between the nodes. If, on
the other hand, a state is path-inflexible, then the labels can exists only at certain distances from
each other. For example, consider the problem of 2-coloring a path with labels 1 and 2. Two nodes
having label 1 can appear on a correctly colored path only if their distance is even, otherwise the
path must be ill-colored. Therefore, the label 1 is path-inflexible.
Definition E.4 (flexible state [15]). Let γ be a state of the automaton M(Π). The state γ is
flexible if there exists a constant K such that for every d ≥ K, there exists a walk γ γ in M(Π)
with length d.
Definition E.5 (path-flexibility [8]). Let Π be an LCL problem, and let γ be one of its labels. The
label γ is called path-flexible if the state γ is flexible in the automaton M(Π). Otherwise, the label
is called path-inflexible.
    Path-flexibility can also be generalized for multiple labels. The intuition is the same as with
individual path-flexible labels: Nodes having labels from a path-inflexible pair can reside only at
certain distances apart from each other.

                                                       30
Definition E.6 (path-flexible pair). Let Π be an LCL problem, and let (γ1 , γ2 ) be a pair of labels
of Π. The pair is path-flexible if there exists a constant K such that for every d ≥ K, there exists
walks γ1   γ2 and γ2      γ1 of length d in the automaton M(Π).

   Path-flexibility of a pair is directly connected to path-flexibility of the individual labels that it
consists of, as formalized in the following lemma:

Lemma E.7. Let Π be an LCL problem. A label pair (γ1 , γ2 ) is path-flexible if and only if both γ1
and γ2 belong to the same strongly connected component of M(Π) and are separately path-flexible.

Proof. It is easy to see that if the labels belong to the same strongly connected component and
both are path-flexible, then also the pair is path-flexible. The other direction is almost as easy: If
the label pair is path-flexible, then there exists path-flexible walks from γ1 to γ2 , and vice versa.
Hence the labels must belong to the same strongly connected component. The labels must also be
path-flexible as we can combine two walks in opposite directions to get a walk of an arbitrary length
from both labels to themselves.

    If a pair of labels is path-inflexible, then it is easy to find a way to combine two fragments
containing those labels such that no labeling exists for the resulting graph. This happens when the
distance between the labeled nodes is such that the corresponding walk does not exist in M(Π).
This is formalized in the following lemma.

Lemma E.8. Let (γ1 , γ2 ) be a path-inflexible pair in M(Π). Then, for every pair p1 , p2 ∈ N, not
all of the following walks can exist in M(Π):

  (i) a walk γ1    γ2 of length p1 ,
 (ii) a walk γ1    γ2 of length p1 + 1,
(iii) a walk γ2    γ1 of length p2 , and
(iv) a walk γ2     γ1 of length p2 + 1.

Proof. Assume for contradiction that all of the walks existed. Then the claim is that there exists
some K such that for every d ≥ K there exists walks γ1     γ2 and γ2  γ1 of length exactly d, and
therefore (γ1 , γ2 ) is a path-flexible pair.
   Such walks can be constructed. Consider the following walks from γ1 back to γ1 :

 W1 Walk along (i) to go from γ1 to γ2 , and then take walk (iii) to go back to γ1 .
 W2 Walk along (i) to go from γ1 to γ2 , and then take walk (iv) to go back to γ1 .

The walk W1 has a length of p1 + p2 , and W2 has a length of p1 + p2 + 1. Combining the walks W1
and W2 repeatedly makes it possible to construct a walk from γ1 back to itself for any length of at
least K 0 = (p1 + p2 )(p1 + p2 − 1) [49].
    A similar construction can be used to construct a self-walk from γ2 back to itself for any
length of at least K 0 . Combining these with walks (i) and (iii), it is possible to construct walks
γ1    γ2 and γ2     γ1 for any length d of at least K = K 0 + max(p1 , p2 ). Hence the pair (γ1 , γ2 ) is
path-flexible.
                            √
E.2    2.5-coloring takes Ω( n) in online-LOCAL
                                                                         √
In this section, we will present an LCL problem that requires locality Ω( n) in the online-LOCAL
model. The problem is called 2.5-coloring and was first introduced by Chang and Pettie [18].



                                                   31
                               A                 B
                                                                A                B

                                        X

                                                                         X
                               1                 2

Figure 7: The automaton associated with the path-form of problem Π2.5 on the left, and the automaton
associated with the path from of Π02.5 on the right. On the left, the states A, B and X are path-flexible as there
exists walks from them to back themselves for all lengths of at least 4. The states 1 and 2 are path-inflexible
as only self walks with even length are possible. On the right, all states A, B and X are path-inflexible. States
A and B have only even-length self walks. The state X has no self walks.


    Informally, the 2.5-coloring problem requires 2-coloring the tree near the root with labels A
and B, and near the leaves with 1 and 2. The different 2-colored parts can be combined using an
intermediate label X.
    Formally, the 2.5-coloring problem Π2.5 is defined as follows:
Definition E.9 (2.5-coloring problem Π2.5 ). Problem Π2.5 has five labels: A, B, X, 1, and 2. Nodes
with label A can have any combination of children labeled with B and X. Similarly nodes with label
B can have any combination of children labeled with A and X. Nodes with label X need to have at
least one child with label 1, and the other child can have any label other than X. Nodes with label 1
need to have two children labeled with 2, and nodes with label 2 need to have two children labeled
with 1.
    The reason for naming this problem 2.5-coloring is that any valid 2-coloring is also a valid
2.5-coloring, and a valid 2.5-coloring can be transformed into a valid 3-coloring by mapping A 7→ 1
and B 7→ 2. Hence the 2.5-coloring problem is at least as hard as the 3-coloring problem, but at
most as hard as the 2-coloring problem.
    By analyzing the problem description of Π2.5 , and the automaton associated with its path-form
shown in Figure 7, the following observation can be made:
Observation E.10. The labels 1 and 2 are path-inflexible in problem Π2.5 . This is because any
path between two nodes labeled with labels 1 and 2 must form a valid 2-coloring. Denote the set of
path-inflexible labels by Γ1 = {1, 2}.
    Problem Π2.5 can be restricted by removing these labels from the set of possible labels. This
gives the following restricted problem Π02.5 :
Definition E.11 (restricted 2.5-coloring problem Π02.5 ). Problem Π02.5 has three labels: A, B, and X.
Nodes with label A can have any combination of children labeled with B and X. Similarly, nodes
with label B can have any combination of children labeled with A and X. Nodes with label X cannot
have any children.
   By analyzing the problem description of Π02.5 , and the automaton associated with its path-form
shown in Figure 7, we arrive at the following observation:
Observation E.12. All labels A, B and X are path-inflexible in problem Π02.5 . This is because the
label X cannot be used to label any internal nodes of the tree, and hence this is (almost) a regular
2-coloring problem with labels A and B. Denote the set of inflexible labels by Γ2 = {A, B, X}.

                                                       32
     The lower-bound construction for 2.5-coloring relies on the fact that an algorithm solving Π2.5
cannot use labels 1 and 2 to label two nodes without seeing how the nodes are connected to each
other. Otherwise the adversary could alter the length of the path connecting the nodes such that
the labeling cannot be completed. This is because labels 1 and 2 are path-inflexible, as noted in
Observation E.10.
     Nevertheless any sufficiently local algorithm can be forced to use labels 1 and 2 in far-away
parts of the graph using the following trick: Show the algorithm two fragments of the graph such
that the algorithm does not know how they are connected. Based on the previous observation, the
algorithm must use labels A, B and X to label the shown nodes.
     By Observation E.12, labels A, B and X are path-inflexible in the restricted 2.5-coloring problem
Π02.5 . Hence the adversary can connect the fragments in such a way that there exists no valid labeling
for the path connecting the two fragments that satisfies the restricted problem Π02.5 . Therefore, the
algorithm must use labels 1 and 2 somewhere along the connecting path. The construction can be
repeated to create another node with label 1 or 2. By being careful with the construction, it can be
ensured that the algorithm has not seen how the two nodes having labels 1 and 2 are connected to
each other. Hence the adversary can force the distance between them to be such that there exists
no valid labeling for Π2.5 for the resulting tree.
     Informally, the components that are shown to the algorithm are formed in the following way:
Let P be a directed path with x nodes from t to s, and let c be the middlemost node on the path.
Collectively call the nodes on path P layer-2 nodes, and call node t the connector node. Identify
each node along path P as the root of another path of x + 1 nodes, and call the newly-created nodes
layer-1 nodes. As the last step, add one child node to each layer-1 node. Call these added nodes
layer-0 nodes. We call the tree formed in this way T2x . Figure 8 shows an example of tree T25 .
     We can now prove the lower bound for the 2.5-coloring problem. The proof is based on a
simulation of an online-LOCAL algorithm A which supposedly solves the 2.5-coloring problem with
           √
locality o( n). We simulate algorithm A on disjoint graph fragments, and only after the algorithm
has committed the labels for some nodes, we decide how the fragments are connected to each other.
In the following, we will show how we can use the commitments of the algorithm to construct an
input instance for which the algorithm must fail. We will also illustrate a concrete example of the
construction for an algorithm with locality T (n) = 1 with parameter x = 5.
     Assume for contradiction that there existed an online-LOCAL algorithm A solving problem Π2.5
                         √
with locality T (n) = o( n). We can now construct a failing instance GA as follows:
   1. Construct 4 copies of tree T2x , namely G1 , G2 , G3 , G4 , with sufficiently large constant x 
      2T (n), where n is the size of the graph. This is possible because each copy of tree T2x has
      x + 2x2 nodes, and hence the whole graph has 4x + 8x2 < 16x2 nodes. By assumption, the
                            √
      locality is T (n) = o( n), and hence there exists some x such that x  2T (16x2 ) holds.
   2. Reveal the center nodes on the core paths of the trees Gi to algorithm A. The algorithm must
      commit to some labels for these nodes without seeing the roots or the connector nodes of
      the trees. This means that the algorithm does not know how the trees Gi are connected to
      each other. This is because x is larger than the diameter of the view that is revealed to the
      algorithm. Figure 9 visualizes an example of this situation.
   3. Consider now the following cases. In each one of them, we can force algorithm A to fail to
      produce a valid labeling:
       (i) Algorithm A labels at least two of the center nodes of the trees with labels from set Γ1 .
           Let v1 and v2 be two distinct center nodes labeled with labels γ1 , γ2 ∈ Γ1 , respectively.
           Without loss of generality, we may assume that nodes v1 and v2 are the center nodes of

                                                  33
                                                                                                s




                                                                 c




                                  t




Figure 8: An example of a layered tree T25 . The darkest nodes belong to layer 2, the lighter nodes belong to
layer 1, and the white leaf nodes belong to layer 0. Node s is the root, node t is the connector, and node c is
the middlemost node on the core path.




                                                      34
                                     1                                                X




                                     A                                                B




Figure 9: Trees G1 , G2 , G3 and G4 . The algorithm has labeled the center nodes on the core paths with 1, X,
A and B. The neighborhoods the algorithm has seen are visualized by thicker lines around nodes.




                                                     35
     trees G1 and G2 . By Observation E.10, the labels γ1 and γ2 are path-inflexible in Π2.5 ,
     and hence the pair (γ1 , γ2 ) is a path-inflexible pair by Lemma E.8.
     Consider two different ways of combining the trees G1 and G2 : The root of tree G2 can
     be identified with the connector node of G1 , or, alternatively, the root of tree G2 can
     be made a child of the connector node. Figure 10 visualizes both of these cases. In the
     former case the length of the path between v1 and v2 is p and in the latter it is p + 1. As
     p and p + 1 have different parity, only one of the walks γ1      γ2 of length p and p + 1
     can exist in M(Π2.5 ). We can choose the option for which the walk of that length does
     not exist. This implies that there is no way to label the path between v1 and v2 such
     that the labeling would be valid according to the 2.5-coloring problem Π2.5 . Hence the
     algorithm must fail.
(ii) Algorithm A labels all center nodes of the trees with labels from set Γ2 .
     In this case, two trees with labels from set Γ2 can be combined into one tree with a label
     from set Γ1 . By repeating this for both pairs of trees, we can construct two trees with
     labels from set Γ1 such that the algorithm has not seen how the trees are connected. A
     contradiction can then be derived using the construction from case (i) on these trees.
     To see how to construct a tree with a label from set Γ1 , consider two of the trees Gi , say
     G1 and G2 . The corresponding center nodes are v1 and v2 , and their labels are γ1 and
     γ2 , respectively. By Observation E.12, labels γ1 and γ2 are path-inflexible in Π02.5 . Using
     a similar construction as in case (i), we can construct a tree in which algorithm A cannot
     solve the restricted problem Π02.5 . In particular, algorithm A must fail to solve Π02.5 on
     the path connecting v1 and v2 .
     However, algorithm A is not actually trying to solve Π02.5 but Π2.5 , and hence it can
     also use labels from set Γ1 to label some of the revealed nodes. By revealing the nodes
     between v1 and v2 , as well as their children, to algorithm A, we can force the algorithm
     to use a label from set Γ1 for some revealed node v without showing the root of the tree
     to the algorithm. Moreover, revealing node v does not let the algorithm see the whole
     subtree rooted at v. In particular, the node at the end of a path consisting of only layer-1
     nodes is not shown to the algorithm. Therefore, we can use that node to connect the
     tree to another tree.
     Note that this is the case where the structure of the trees Gi comes into play. The layered
     tree structure ensures that when node v is revealed to the algorithm, the algorithm has
     not seen all layer-1 nodes in the subtree rooted at v. This is because the algorithm has
     locality T (n), but the length of the path consisting of layer-1 nodes has length x  2T (n).
     The layered tree structure is also needed for proving the general result in Appendix E.3.
     Figure 11 shows an example of how two trees can be connected to force the algorithm to
     use a label from set Γ1 .
(iii) Algorithm A labels exactly one of the center nodes of the trees with label from set Γ1 , and
      the rest of the center nodes from set Γ2 .
      In this case, two of the trees whose center nodes have been labeled with labels from set
      Γ2 can be combined like in case (ii) to produce a tree with a label from set Γ1 . To force
      the algorithm to fail, this resulted tree can then be combined with the original tree whose
      center node is from set Γ1 , just like in case (i). See Figure 12 for an example.

This is an exhaustive list of all cases. As we can force algorithm A to fail to produce a valid
labeling in all cases, the assumption that such an algorithm can exist must be false. The


                                            36
                          1
                                                                     1




                                                                                       1
                                                 1




Figure 10: Example for case (i). Two ways to connect trees with labels from set Γ1 ; in this example, the
algorithm has decided to label both center nodes with label 1. Note that in this visualization the chain of
layer-1 nodes has been made shorter to draw attention to layer 2; in reality there are more layer-1 and layer-0
nodes. On the left, the root of the lower tree has been made a child of the connector node of the upper tree,
while on the right they have been identified as one node. The distance between labeled nodes is 5 in the left
tree and 4 in the right tree. Because the distance between nodes labeled with 1 must be even, the labeling on
the left tree cannot be completed.




                                                      37
                                                      A

                                                           B

                                                           X   A

                                                               X   X

                                                                   1   B




                                                  t




Figure 11: Example for case (ii). We have connected trees G3 and G4 , having labels A and B, in such a way
that the connecting path cannot be labeled according to the restricted problem Π02.5 . The algorithm has
labeled the nodes on the connecting path, and the children of those nodes. Because there is no valid labeling
according to the restricted problem Π02.5 , the algorithm had to use a label from set Γ1 to label at least one
node. In this case, the algorithm has decided to use label 1. The node labeled with 1 is node v from the text,
and the node marked with t is the connector node in the subtree rooted at v.




                                                      38
                                                      A

                                                           B

                                                           X   A

                                                               X   X

                                                                   1   B

                                                               2   2

                                                           1   1

                                                      2    2

                                                  !   1

                                             1

                                             2    2

                                                  1   1




Figure 12: Example for case (iii). In this case, we first combined trees G3 and G4 to get a node with label 1.
We then made tree G1 a child of the connector node of the newly-formed tree. The algorithm has tried to
label all nodes on the path connecting the two labeled parts, but as there exists no valid labeling for the
path, the algorithm has failed to label the node marked with !.




                                                      39
                                                                               √
      only assumption made about algorithm A is that it has locality T (n) = o( n), and hence the
                                                        √
      2.5-coloring problem Π2.5 must require locality Ω( n).

   In the next section, we will generalize the techniques presented in this example to all LCL
problems.

E.3     Equivalence in the super-logarithmic region
It is known that problems requiring locality nΩ(1) in the LOCAL model have a very specific
structure [8]. In particular, such problems can be decomposed into hierarchical sequences of
restricted problems by repeatedly removing path-inflexible labels from the problem. More formally:

Definition E.13 (path-inflexible decomposition). Let Π be an LCL problem. The path-inflexible de-
composition consists of a sequence of problems (Π0 , Π1 , . . . , Πk ) and a sequence of labels (Γ1 , Γ2 , . . . , Γk ).
The sequences are defined as follows:

   1. Π0 = Π.
   2. For every i ∈ [1, k], let Γi be the set of path-inflexible labels in Πi−1 .
   3. For every i ∈ [1, k], let Πi be the restriction of Π to label set Γ \ (Γ1 ∪ Γ2 ∪ · · · ∪ Γi ).
   4. Problem Πk is either an empty problem, or all of its labels are path-flexible.

    Note that every problem in the sequence (Π0 , Π1 , . . . , Πk ) is a restriction of the previous one. In
particular, a solution to problem Πi is a valid solution also to any problem Πj with j ≤ i.
    It is known that if all labels of an LCL problem are path-flexible, then the LCL problem can be
solved with locality O(log n) in the LOCAL model [8]. This holds also for the case where Π itself
has path-inflexible labels, but it has a restriction with only path-flexible labels. In particular, if such
restriction exists, then the last problem in its path-inflexible decomposition is such a restriction.
    From now onwards, we are only interested in the case where the last problem Πk in the path-
inflexible decomposition (Π0 , . . . , Πk ) is an empty problem. We will show that in that case, the
original problem requires locality Ω(n1/k ) to be solved in the online-LOCAL model. This lower
bound also applies for the LOCAL model.
    The hierarchical structure of a problem is really useful when proving the Ω(n1/k ) lower bound.
In fact, we use matching k-layer trees to construct a counter example for any locality-o(n1/k )
online-LOCAL algorithm. A layered tree Tkx with k layers and path length x can be constructed as
follows:

   1. If k = 0, then T0x is a single node. The node belongs to layer 0.

   2. Otherwise construct a directed path (v1 , v2 , . . . , vx ) with x nodes. This path is called the core
      path of Tkx . For each node vi , identify its children with the roots of δ − 1 copies of Tk−1x . The
                                                                  x
      nodes vi belong to layer k. Node vx is the root of Tk , and node v1 is its connector node.

This layered structure is very useful. In particular, for almost every node v, there exists a node
belonging to a lower layer in the subtree rooted at v that is far away from v. This happens even
though the size of the tree is only polynomial. We formalize these observations in the following:

Observation E.14. For every node v in Tkx belonging to layer i ≥ 2, there exists a layer-(i − 1)
node u in the subtree rooted at v such that the distance between v and u is at least x.

Observation E.15. Let Tkx be a layered tree. The tree consists of O(xk ) nodes.

    We can now use the path-inflexible decomposition and layered trees to prove Theorem 5.3.

                                                         40
Proof of Theorem 5.3. Let Π = (δ, Γ, C) be an LCL problem, and let (Π0 , Π1 , . . . , Πk ) and (Γ1 , . . . , Γk )
be its path-inflexible decomposition. If problem Πk is non-empty, then problem Π can be solved with
locality O(log n) in the LOCAL model [8], and therefore also in the online-LOCAL model. Hence
we will assume that Πk is an empty problem. Assume also that there existed an online-LOCAL
algorithm A solving Π with locality T (n) = o(n1/k ), where k is the number of non-empty problems
in the path-inflexible decomposition of Π.
    We will construct a rooted tree GA on which algorithm A fails. We start by constructing many
copies of Tkx for sufficiently large x. Then we use algorithm A to label one layer-k node on each of
the trees. Finally we combine the trees together in a way which ensures that no valid labeling exists
for whole tree, given the existing labels. This proves that no such algorithm A can exist.
    More formally, the construction works as follows:

   1. Construct 2k+1 copies of layered tree Tkx , with a sufficiently large parameter x  2T (n). Such
      large parameter x exists, because each tree Tkx contains only O(xk ) nodes, and by assumption
      T (n) = o(n1/k ).

   2. Use algorithm A to label the middlemost nodes on the core paths of every tree. Because the
      parameter x has been chosen to be large enough, algorithm A does not see the ends of the
      core path.

   3. Divide the trees into collections C1 , . . . , Ck based on the labels the algorithm has produced. If
      the algorithm used label γ from set Γi to label the node in tree G, put tree G into collection Ci .
      There are four properties which hold for every tree G in collection Ci :

       (a) There exists a node v in the tree G such that the label of v belongs to set Γi ,
       (b) the algorithm has not committed a label for any node whose layer is less than i,
       (c) the algorithm has not seen the root nor the connector node of G, and
       (d) the layer of the connector node is at least i.

      All these properties hold trivially for the initial trees.

   4. Iteratively combine two trees from collection Ci into one tree that can be added to collection Cj
      for some j < i.
      The combination of trees proceeds as follows: Consider two trees A and B from collection Ci .
      By the construction of Ci , there exist nodes vA and vB in A and B, respectively, such that the
      labels of nodes vA and vB belong to set Γi . Moreover, the layers of vA and vB are at least i.
      There are four different ways in which trees A and B can be combined:

       (a) identify the root of B with the connector node of A,
       (b) identify the root of A with the connector node of B,
       (c) make the root of B a child of the connector node of A, or
       (d) make the root of A a child of the connector node of B.

      Note that we could choose any one of these combinations without the algorithm knowing
      which one we chose. This is because the algorithm has not seen the roots or the connector
      nodes of either of the trees A and B, and therefore we can change the structure of the trees in
      those neighborhoods freely.
      Among these four combinations, choose one for which there exists no valid labeling for problem
      Πi−1 . Such tree must exist by Lemma E.8. In particular, no valid labeling exists for the


                                                      41
      nodes and their children on the path connecting vA and vB . Call the resulting tree R. Any
      attempt to label the nodes and their children on the path between vA and vB in R according
      to problem Πi−1 must fail.
      We now use algorithm A to label all the nodes, and their children, on the path between vA
      and vB in R. Note that each of these nodes belongs to a layer whose index is at least i − 1. By
      the choice of R, the algorithm cannot label all nodes using only labels present in problem Πi−1 .
      Hence there must exist a node v on the path between vA and vB such that it and its children
      do not form a valid configuration in problem Πi−1 . This is possible only if either v or at least
      one of its children has label γ ∈ Γj for some j < i. Denote that node by v 0 .
      By Observation E.14, there exists a layer-j node u in the subtree rooted at v such that the
      distance between v and u is at least x. Hence the distance between v 0 and u is at least
      x − 1 > T (n). This means that the algorithm has not seen node u yet. Make node u the
      connector node of tree R.
      It is easy to check that tree R constructed in this way fulfills all properties of a tree of collection
      Cj , as described in step 3. We can therefore remove trees A and B from collection Ci and add
      tree R to collection Cj . We repeat this step until collection C1 contains at least two trees, at
      which point we move to the next step and force the algorithm to fail.

   5. In this last step, we force algorithm A to fail. We do this by taking two trees A and B from
      collection C1 . By construction of collection C1 , there exist nodes vA and vB on trees A and B
      with labels γA and γB from set Γ1 , respectively. Recall that set Γ1 is the set of path-inflexible
      labels in problem Π0 = Π, and hence the label pair (γA , γB ) is a path-inflexible pair of Π.
      We combine the trees A and B in a similar way as in the previous step to get the tree R. This
      time, there does not exist a valid labeling for the original problem Π in R. This is the tree
      GA we aimed to construct. In particular, algorithm A must fail to produce a valid labeling
      for tree GA .
   As a final remark, the number of trees constructed in step 1 is large enough such that, no matter
what labels the algorithm uses, we can always construct two trees for collection C1 .

E.4    Equivalence in the sub-logarithmic region
We conclude this section by proving Theorem 5.4. We prove the theorem by showing that the
existence of a locality-o(log n) online-LOCAL algorithm for solving the LCL problem Π implies
that there exists a certificate for O(log∗ n) solvability for Π. This in turn implies that problem Π is
solvable with locality O(log∗ n) in the LOCAL model [8].
Definition E.16 (certificate for O(log∗ n) solvability [8]). Let Π = (δ, Γ, C) be an LCL problem.
A certificate for O(log∗ n) solvability of Π consists of labels ΓT = {γ1 , . . . , γt } ⊆ Γ, a depth pair
(d1 , d2 ) and a pair sequences T 1 and T 2 of t labeled trees such that
   1. The depths d1 and d2 are coprime.

   2. Each tree of T 1 (resp. T 2 ) is a complete δ-ary tree of depth d1 ≥ 1 (resp. d2 ≥ 1).

   3. Each tree is labeled by labels from Γ correctly according to problem Π.

   4. Let T̄i1 (resp. T̄i2 ) be the tree obtained by starting from Ti1 (resp. Ti2 ) and removing the labels
      of all non-leaf nodes. It must hold that all trees T̄i1 (resp. T̄i2 ) are isomorphic, preserving the
      labeling. All the labels of the leaves of T̄i1 (resp. T̄i2 ) must be from set ΓT .

                                                     42
   5. The root of tree Ti1 (resp. Ti2 ) is labeled with label γi .

   In the proof, we will construct a large set of complete δ-ary trees and label the nodes that are in
the middle of the tree. We call these nodes the middle nodes.

Definition E.17 (middle nodes). Let G be a complete δ-ary tree with depth 2d. The middle nodes
of G are the nodes of G that are at distance d from the root and the leaves of G.

   We are now ready construct a certificate.

Proof of Theorem 5.4. Let Π = (δ, Γ, C) be an LCL problem, and let A be an online-LOCAL
algorithm solving Π with locality T (n) = o(log n).
    We use algorithm A to construct a certificate for O(log∗ n) solvability as follows:

   1. Let n be large enough to satisfy (δ T (n)+2 + |Γ|)(δ 2T (n)+3 − 1)  n. Construct δ T (n)+2 + |Γ|
      complete δ-ary trees with depth 2T (n) + 2. Each one of the tree has δ 2T (n)+3 − 1 nodes.

   2. Use algorithm A to label the middle nodes of each tree. Because the depth of each tree is
      larger than the visibility diameter of the algorithm, the algorithm does not see the roots or
      the leaves of the trees. Let ΓT = {γ1 , . . . , γt } the set of labels the algorithm used to label
      these nodes.

   3. Divide the trees into two sets L and U. Set U is the minimal set such that for every label of
      ΓT , there exists a tree with that label in U. Note that the size of set U is at most |Γ|, and
      hence the size of L is at least δ T (n)+2 . Order the trees in set L in a consistent order.

   4. We can now use the sets U and L to construct the individual trees Ti1 and Ti2 .
      Consider each γi in ΓT one by one. Find a tree U from set U having a node u labeled with γi ;
      by the construction of U, such a tree must exist. Consider the subtree of U rooted at u, and
      denote that tree by Uu . Tree Uu has δ T (n)+1 leaves. Identify those leaves with the roots of the
      first δ T (n)+1 trees of L.
      Now the root of subtree Uu has label γi , and the nodes at depth 2T (n) + 2 have also been
      labeled with labels from set ΓT . We can use algorithm A to label all the nodes in between.
      As the result, we get that the depth-(2T (n) + 2) subtree of Uu is a complete labeled tree with
      depth 2T (n) + 2; let it be Ti1 .
      We can construct the trees Ti2 in an analogous way. The only difference is that instead of
      identifying the roots of the first δ T (n)+1 trees of L with the leaves of the subtree Uu , we make
      the first δ T (n)+2 trees of L the children of those leaves. Again, we use algorithm A to label
      the nodes in between. This time we get a depth-(2T (n) + 3) labeled tree as Ti2 .
      It is easy to verify that the sequence of trees T 1 and T 2 actually form a valid certificate for
      O(log∗ n) solvability for problem Π. In particular, the depths 2T (n) + 2 and 2T (n) + 3 of the
      trees are coprime, the leaves of each tree in both sets are labeled similarly using labels from
      set ΓT , and for every label of set ΓT , there exists a tree in both sets having root labeled with
      that label.

    The fact that the existence of a locality-o(log n) online-LOCAL algorithm implies the existence of
a certificate for O(log∗ n) solvability is sufficient to prove the theorem. In particular, if no certificate
existed, we know that the locality of the problem in the online-LOCAL model must be Ω(log n).



                                                    43
