                                                    Quantum state isomorphism problems for groups
                                            Alexandru Gheorghiu1 , Dale Jacobs2 , Saeed Mehraban2 , and Arsalan Motamedi3
                                                                                           1
                                                                                          IBM Research
                                                                                       2
                                                                                        Tufts University
                                                                                    3
                                                                                      University of Waterloo
arXiv:2605.12615v1 [quant-ph] 12 May 2026




                                                                                               Abstract
                                                  We study the computational complexity of quantum state isomorphism problems under group
                                              actions: given two quantum circuits that prepare pure or mixed states, decide whether the two
                                              states are related by a group action. This can be seen as a quantum state version of the Hidden Shift
                                              Problem, in much the same way that the State Hidden Subgroup Problem, introduced in [BGW25],
                                              is a quantum version of the ordinary Hidden Subgroup Problem.
                                                  We prove several results for this computational problem:
                                                 • For the pure-state version, we show that the problem is BQP-hard for all nontrivial groups,
                                                   and contained in QCMA ∩ QCSZK. When the quantum state is given as a polynomial
                                                   stabilizer-rank state, we obtain an upper bound of NP ∩ SZK. We further obtain refined
                                                   results for specific groups of interest: for abelian groups we show that the problem reduces to
                                                   the state hidden subgroup problem over the generalized dihedral group; for the Clifford group,
                                                   the problem is at least as hard as Graph Isomorphism under polynomial-time reductions; for
                                                   the Pauli group it is BQP-complete.
                                                 • For the mixed-state version, for nontrivial, finite and efficiently representable groups, the
                                                   problem is QSZK-complete.
                                                 • We also study a variant of this problem over an infinite group, in particular, the bosonic linear
                                                   optical unitaries. We show that in the setting where the classical description of the quantum
                                                   state is given in a suitable wave function representation known as the stellar representation,
                                                   the problem is at least as hard as Graph Isomorphism, and is contained in NP ∩ SZK.
                                              Prior to our work, state isomorphism problems had only been studied for the symmetric
                                              group [LG17]. As a consequence of our results, we resolve an open question posed in [HEC25]
                                              about the existence of a quantum algorithm for the abelian state hidden subgroup problem on
                                              mixed states. We show that this problem is QSZK-hard in the worst case, thereby ruling out an
                                              efficient quantum algorithm unless QSZK = BQP.




                                                                                                  1
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                           3
  1.1 Model and summary of the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3
  1.2 Towards applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
  1.3 Discussion, related work and open questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      8

2 Technical overview                                                                                     10

3 Preliminaries and Notation                                                                            15
  3.1 Basic definitions and tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
  3.2 Problems and complexity classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
  3.3 Classical shadows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
  3.4 Background on continuous variable formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

4 Pure State Group Isomorphism Problems                                                             18
  4.1 QCSZK Containment of Pure State Group Isomorphism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
  4.2 Pure State Group Isomorphism is BQP-hard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
  4.3 Pure State Group Isomorphism Reduces to StateHSP for Abelian Groups . . . . . . . . 20
  4.4 Pure State Pauli Isomorphism Problem is BQP-complete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
  4.5 Pure State Clifford Isomorphism Problem is GI-hard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
  4.6 Pure State Clifford Isomorphism Problem with Polynomial Stabilizer Rank States . . . 29
      4.6.1 SZK containment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
      4.6.2 Graph Isomorphism-hardness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

5 Mixed State Group Isomorphism Problems                                                          34
  5.1 QSZK containment of Mixed State Group Isomorphism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
  5.2 Mixed State Group Isomorphism Problem is QSZK-hard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
  5.3 Mixed StateHSP is QSZK-hard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

6 Bosonic Group Isomorphism Problems                                                                  39
  6.1 Graph Isomorphism lower bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
  6.2 SZK upper bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43




                                                    2
1     Introduction
Isomorphism problems, such as group and graph isomorphism, are central to classifying mathematical
structures up to symmetry. In classical complexity theory, they form an important class of NP-
intermediate problems which have significant applications such as pattern/shape matching, network
comparison, or symmetry classification, and admit statistical zero-knowledge proofs but seem to have
no classical or quantum polynomial-time algorithms.
    Recently, [LG17] initiated the study of a quantum state isomorphism problem for the symmetric
group: given two quantum states, decide whether they are equivalent up to a permutation of the
physical locations of the qubits. They showed that detecting isomorphism under qubit permutations
is at least as hard as Graph Isomorphism, and lies within the class of problems admitting a quantum
statistical zero-knowledge protocol (QSZK), for pure states. Several questions, however, remained
open, including whether the quantum communication in the QSZK protocol can be made classical, and
establishing upper bounds for the mixed-state version of the problem.
    In this work, we generalize this line of research to state isomorphism problems over arbitrary groups.
We show that mixed-state isomorphism over finite groups is QSZK-complete, thereby establishing it
as a natural complete problem for this class alongside canonical problems such as quantum state
distinguishability [Wat02a]. We further eliminate the aforementioned need for quantum communication
in the QSZK protocol for pure states from [LG17], thereby showing that the pure-state version of the
problem is contained in QCSZK for all nontrivial, efficiently representable groups. For the same types
of groups, we also show that the problem is BQP-hard. We further investigate specific group families:
for the Clifford group, we prove hardness via a reduction from the Graph Isomorphism problem, while
for the Pauli group, we show that the problem is BQP-complete, thereby capturing the full power of
polynomial-time quantum computation.
    Our results also establish a connection between state isomorphism problems and the recent
StateHSP framework introduced in [BGW25], which studies the task of identifying a hidden subgroup
that stabilizes a given quantum state. As a consequence, we address an open question of [HEC25] by
showing that the StateHSP framework is unlikely to extend to mixed states. Specifically, we prove
that the mixed StateHSP problem is QSZK-hard, thereby ruling out efficient quantum algorithms
for the mixed-state version of the problem, assuming QSZK ̸= BQP. Furthermore, we observe that
the state isomorphism problem for groups is in fact the quantum analog of the Hidden Shift Prob-
lem [FIM+ 14; VHI06; CV05]. In other words, just as StateHSP is a quantum state version of HSP,
in which the task is to find a hidden subgroup that stabilizes a quantum state, we find that state
isomorphism is a quantum state version of the Hidden Shift Problem [FIM+ 14], in which one wishes
to find a “shift,” given by the action of a group element, that maps one quantum state to another.
Using this observation, we show that the pure state isomorphism problem for abelian groups reduces
to StateHSP for the generalized dihedral group.
    Finally, we initiate the study of a bosonic variant of the problem, considering the isomorphism
of infinite-dimensional quantum states under Gaussian transformations, corresponding to an infinite
non-compact group (see [WPG+ 12; FOP05] for a review of Gaussian quantum information). We show
that for succinctly represented families of bosonic states, this problem is at least as hard as Graph
Isomorphism. This complements the results of [MROL14; PGMG23]. In addition, we obtain an NP
and an SZK upper bound.

1.1     Model and summary of the results
We define various state group isomorphism problems as variations of the following problem:

Definition 1.1 (Pure State Group Isomorphism Problem; (α, β)-PSGI[G]). For a finite group G with
efficient unitary representation R : G → U (2n ), the input consists of two quantum circuits C1 and
C2 specifying states |ψ1 ⟩ = C1 |0n ⟩ and |ψ2 ⟩ = C2 |0n ⟩ . The goal is to decide which of the following
statements is true (promised that one of them is true):
    • There exists g ∈ G such that Re(⟨ψ1 | R(g) |ψ2 ⟩) ≥ β,

    • For all g ∈ G, | ⟨ψ1 | R(g) |ψ2 ⟩ | ≤ α.




                                                    3
    One might wonder why we chose the particular completeness condition that Re(⟨ψ1 | R(g) |ψ2 ⟩) ≥ β,
which may seem at first unnatural compared to either (1) |ψ1 ⟩ = R(g) |ψ2 ⟩, or (2) |⟨ψ1 | R(g) |ψ2 ⟩| ≥ β.
We find the former promise (1) too strong, as it does not allow for any error and consequently breaks
the BQP-hardness proof of Theorem 4.2. In the latter case (2), the definition ignores global phases,
which breaks the reduction from PSGI to StateHSP given in Theorem 4.3. Our choice can be thought
of as a generalization of equality which permits some error but does not allow arbitrary global phases.
We remark that our lower bounds on PSGI also apply for (2) and our upper bounds on PSGI also
apply for (1).
    Essentially, the problem asks whether the output state of one circuit (when acting on |0n ⟩) can be
mapped to the output state of the other circuit with an element from the group G, or whether the
states are far from each other under the action of any group element. Alternatively, we can view the
task as testing whether a quantum state is close to or far from the orbit of another quantum state
under the action of the group G. Note that in this definition, quantum states are succinctly represented
using the circuits that prepare them. We also consider a variant of this definition in which states are
specified by a polynomial rank stabilizer decomposition (see Section 4.6 for a concrete definition). It
should also be noted that the group is not provided as input but is part of the problem description.
In other words, the problem is defined relative to a specific group. Throughout the paper, we will
consider specific versions of this problem for groups of interest, such as the Pauli and Clifford groups,
respectively.
    As previously mentioned, this problem can be seen as a quantum state analog of the Hidden Shift
Problem [FIM+ 14; VHI06; CV05]. In the decision version of that problem, one is given access to two
functions f : ZN → S and g : ZN → S and promised that either there exists a shift s ∈ ZN such that
f (x) = g(x + s) for all x ∈ ZN , or the functions are far from being related by a hidden shift.1 We can
see how the state isomorphism problem is a natural extension of this. In particular, there is a simple
reduction from the Hidden Shift Problem to PSGI[ZN ]. Given f and g, we construct the states
                                1 X                              1 X
                       |ψf ⟩ = √          |x⟩ |f (x)⟩   |ψg ⟩ = √         |x⟩ |g(x)⟩ .
                                 N x∈ZN                           N x∈ZN

We observe that if f and g are related by the hidden shift, s, then
                                            1 X
                                   |ψf ⟩ = √        |x⟩ |g(x + s)⟩ ,
                                             N x∈ZN

and so R(s) |ψf ⟩ = |ψg ⟩ , where R(s) is the unitary representation of the cyclic shift by s on the first
register, i.e. R(s) |x⟩ |y⟩ = |x + s⟩ |y⟩ .2 Conversely, if f and g are far from being related by a hidden
shift, the corresponding states |ψf ⟩ and |ψg ⟩ will be far from each other under the action of any element
in ZN . PSGI is, of course, a more general problem, as it allows for arbitrary (efficiently preparable)
states and arbitrary (efficiently representable) group actions.
    We also note that PSGI is trivially contained in QCMA, since in the case where the states are
related by a group element, g, the witness is simply a classical description of g. A quantum verifier
could then test the overlap condition by preparing the associated states, applying R(g) to one of them,
and then performing a SWAP test.
    Our first result is that
Theorem 1.2 (The Complexity of PSGI). The following upper and lower bounds hold for PSGI[G]:
   • Upper bounds: Let G be any efficiently represented finite group. Then (α, β)-PSGI[G] is
                                                           1
     contained in QCSZK for some constant α and β = 1 −         . Moreover, for abelian G, (α, β)-
                                                        poly(n)
     PSGI[G] reduces to an approximate version of StateHSP[G ⋉ Z2 ] (see Section 4.3).
   • Lower bounds: For any efficiently represented nontrivial finite group G, (α, β)-PSGI[G] is
     BQP-hard, even when α = o(1) and β = 1 − exp(−n). When G is chosen to be the n-qubit
     Clifford group, Cn , (α, β)-PSGI[Cn ] is at least as hard as graph isomorphism (GI) for constant α
     and β. The GI-hardness remains even if the quantum states are succinctly represented as linear
     combinations of stabilizer states (see Section 4.6 for more details).
   1 Far here means that the Hamming distance between the truth tables of f (x) and g(x + s) is large for all non-zero

s ∈ ZN .
   2 All additions are assumed to be modulo N .




                                                          4
The QCSZK upper bound statement is restated and proved in Section 4.1, while the reduction to
StateHSP for abelian groups is shown in Section 4.3. For restatements and proofs of the lower
bounds, see Section 4.2 Section 4.5 and Section 4.6.
    Previously, lower and upper bounds for PSGI had only been considered for the symmetric group.
Specifically, it was shown in [LG17] that PSGI[Sn ] is GI-hard and contained in QSZK ∩ QCMA.
    Next, we fully classify the complexity of PSGI[G] for the Pauli group G = Pn by proving that it
is equivalent to BQP.
Theorem 1.3 (The complexity of pure state Pauli isomorphism). PSGI[Pn ] is BQP-complete.
This result is proved in Section 4.4.
    From the perspective of viewing PSGI as a generalization of the Hidden Shift Problem, this is
perhaps at first surprising, as there’s no known version of that problem that’s BQP-complete. In fact,
there is also no known version of the Hidden Subgroup Problem that is BQP-complete. On the other
hand, it is perhaps less surprising, given that the input to the problem consists of arbitrary quantum
circuits that can encode BQP-hard instances. Indeed, we note that the problem is BQP-hard for all
non-trivial efficiently representable groups. However, the BQP upper bound in this case follows directly
from the properties of the Pauli group and does not hold, as far as we can tell, for other groups of
interest, such as Clifford, permutation, or even cyclic groups. The fact that the states are pure is also
an essential feature that influences the problem’s complexity.
    Next, we are naturally   motivated to consider a version of the state isomorphism problem for mixed
                    n
states. Let D C2 be the space of n-qubit density matrices. In a slight notational abuse,           we will
                                                                                        √ √ 
denote the square root fidelity between two mixed states ρ and σ as F (ρ, σ) = Tr | ρ σ| . We use
the square-root fidelity because it is more convenient for our proofs. Our results also hold for standard
fidelity with the appropriate conversions.
Definition 1.4 ((α, β)-Mixed State Group Isomorphism Problem; (α, β)-MSGI[G]). Let G be a finite
group with an efficient unitary representation R : G → U (2n ), and let 0 ≤ α < β ≤ 1. Given
                                                                                                 n
the description of two quantum circuits C1 and C2 outputting mixed states ρ1 and ρ2 ∈ D C2 ,
respectively, the problem is to decide which of the following statements holds (promised that one of
them does):
   • There exists g ∈ G such that F (ρ1 , R(g)ρ2 R(g)† ) ≥ β.
   • For all g ∈ G, it is the case that F (ρ1 , R(g)ρ2 R(g)† ) ≤ α
We show
Theorem 1.5 (Informal; The complexity of mixed state group isomorphism). Let G be any non-
trivial efficiently representable finite group, and let R be a unitary representation of G such that
         | Tr(R(g))|
maxg̸=I               = µ < 1. Then (α, β)−MSGI[G] is QSZK-complete under randomized reductions
              2n
               1 µ
for any α > + and β > α.
               2    2
For a proof of this statement, see Section 5. This result shows that for mixed states, and many choices
of α and β, the group structure does not affect the problem’s complexity—it remains QSZK-complete
for all nontrivial groups!
    Let us also comment briefly on the trace condition in this statement. The trace condition has a
natural interpretation. For a unitary U ∈ U (d), we have | Tr(U )| ≤ d, with equality if and only if
U = eiθ I is a global phase times the identity. Therefore,
                                                  | Tr(R(g))|
                                          max                 <1
                                           g̸=I        d
is equivalent to requiring that no nonidentity element of G is represented by a global phase. Equiva-
lently, the induced homomorphism
                                       G → P U (d) := U (d)/U (1)
is faithful. This is the relevant notion for mixed states, since mixed states transform by conjugation:
                                            ρ 7→ R(g)ρR(g)† .


                                                      5
If R(g) = eiθ I, then this action is trivial on every density matrix. Thus such a group element is
invisible to the mixed-state isomorphism problem. The trace condition rules out this degeneracy.
Moreover, it is always possible to find representations that satisfy this condition. For instance, the
left-regular representation has µ = 0, since every nonidentity group element is represented as a traceless
permutation matrix.

Extending to infinite-dimensional settings: The previous results were concerned with finite-
dimensional systems and finite groups. We also initiate the study of the problem for infinite-dimensional
systems and groups, specifically continuous variable bosonic systems with Gaussian unitaries as the
group.
    Bosonic quantum states live in an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space, corresponding to quantum
states of n harmonic oscillator modes. This space is spanned by the Fock basis {|n1 , . . . , nm ⟩ : ni ∈ N},
where ni denotes the number of excitations (photons) in mode i. Due to the infinite number of degrees
of freedom, it is useful to adopt a canonical representation that captures physically relevant states. One
such representation is the stellar representation [CMG20; CM22], in which a quantum state is described
by a holomorphic function that is square-integrable with respect to aP   Gaussian measure. More specif-
ically, the multimode stellar representation of a bosonic state |ψ⟩ = j1 ,...,jn ≥0 ψj1 ,...,jn |j1 , . . . , jn ⟩ is
the holomorphic function Fψ : Cm → C defined by:
                                                                         ψ
                                                                        √ j1 ,...,jn z1j1 . . . znjn .
                                                             X
                                Fψ (z1 , . . . , zn ) :=
                                                           j1 ,...,jn
                                                                         j1 ! . . . jn !

The function Fψ is entire and square-integrable with respect to the Gaussian measure
                                     Z
                                  1                       2

                                   m
                                           |Fψ (z)|2 e−∥z∥ d2m z = 1,
                                 π    z∈Cm

which, via the Hadamard-Weierstrass factorization theorem, ensures that any such state can be written
as
                          Fψ (z1 , . . . , zn ) = P (z1 , . . . , zn ) G(z1 , . . . , zn ),
where P : Cn → C is a polynomial and G : Cn → C is a Gaussian function. The degree of P is called
the stellar rank of the state. When G ≡ 1, then the quantum state is called a core state. A core
bosonic state with rank r has a finite r particle cut-off (i.e., consists of at most r physical particles at
any branch of the superposition). The Hilbert space of core states with r bosons over n modes has
dimension n+r−1r    = nO(r) . For r = O(1), these states are efficiently representable.
    Given the stellar representation of two quantum states, it is known that if they are within the
same Gaussian orbit of each other, then they have the same stellar rank. We can furthermore ask
“given two quantum states with the same stellar rank, are they necessarily within a Gaussian orbit of
each other?” If we compute the core state for both states and we find them to be the same, we are
certain that the states are within the Gaussian orbits of each other. If, however, they correspond to
different-looking core states with the same degrees, then they may still be related to each other via
a linear optical transformation. This motivates us to define the isomorphism problem for core states
under linear optical transformations.
    We use On to denote the set of passive linear optical unitaries on n bosonic modes, i.e., unitaries
generated by Hamiltonians quadratic in the canonical operators that preserve total photon number.
Equivalently, U ∈ On if its action on annihilation operators is linear:
                                                     n
                                                     X
                                        U † ai U =           Vij aj ,          V ∈ U(n).
                                                     j=1


Here ai and a†i denote the annihilation and creation operators for mode i, which respectively remove
and add a single excitation and satisfy the canonical commutation relations [ai , a†j ] = δij . Equivalently,
the action of a linear optical network is specified by a unitary element    Pn V ∈ U(n) which maps the stellar
function F (z1 , . . . , zn ) to F ((V z)1 , . . . , (V z)n ) where (V z)j = k=1 Vjk zk .
   This defines a homomorphism R from U(n) to On , and the induced action on Fock space gives a
unitary representation of U(n) that is unique up to a global phase. In this sense, On is projectively
isomorphic to U(n).


                                                                  6
Definition 1.6 ((α, β; r)-Pure State Linear Optical Isomorphism Problem). Given two core states
|c1 ⟩ , |c2 ⟩ over n modes with r ≥ 0 photons, represented as their core state polynomials, and precision
parameters (α, β), then (α, β; r)-PSGI∗ [On ] is the problem of deciding which one of the following two
statements hold:
   • There exists a linear optical unitary U ∈ U(n) such that Re (⟨c2 | R(U ) |c1 ⟩) ≥ β.
   • For all U ∈ U(n) we have |⟨c2 | R(U ) |c1 ⟩| ≤ α.
Here, the superscript ∗ is used to denote a succinct representation of quantum states using core state
polynomials.
    We are interested in understanding how the computational complexity of the above problem de-
pends on r. [MROL14] showed that the isomorphism problem with r = 2 photons is efficiently solvable.
We show that the problem over three photons becomes at least as hard as Graph Isomorphism. We
further show that the general problem is contained in SZK ∩ NP for certain parameter choices.
                                                                                                1
Theorem 1.7 (Informal; The complexity of linear optical isomorphism). For any β > α ≥ 1 − 96n     5
                              ∗                                                         poly(n)
we have that (α, β; 3)-PSGI [On ] is hard for Graph Isomorphism, and for any β − α ≥ 1/2        the
problem is contained in NP. In addition, for any constant α < 1 and β = 1 − O( n1r ) the problem
(α, β; r)-PSGI∗ [On ] is contained in SZK.

1.2    Towards applications
There are many situations in physics and computer science in which the physically or operationally
relevant objects are not the quantum states themselves, but equivalence classes of states under a
symmetry group.3 The state isomorphism problem under a group action, which we also view as a
quantum state hidden shift problem, provides a natural decision problem for determining whether two
states represent the same information modulo such symmetries. Based on this insight, we highlight
several instances in which the state isomorphism problem can be identified and discuss potential
applications.

Logical information and Pauli frames in quantum error-correcting codes In quantum error
correction, physical states encode logical information only up to the action of operators that act
trivially on the code space. A quantum code is degenerate if distinct physical errors act identically
on the encoded logical information. For stabilizer codes, degeneracy is equivalent to the existence of
stabilizer Pauli elements with weight smaller than that of the code distance. Given two physical states
and a description of the stabilizer group, one may ask whether they correspond to the same logical
state. We can view this as an instance of the state isomorphism problem under Pauli group actions.
    Moreover, in many fault-tolerant architectures Pauli corrections are not physically applied but
instead tracked classically as a so-called Pauli frame. The physical state of the system is then only
defined up to an unknown Pauli operator. One could envision applications of Pauli group isomorphism
problem to certifying the output of fault-tolerant gadgets modulo propagated Pauli corrections, or,
comparing experimental states to ideal targets up to tracked corrections.

Testing quantum states up to symmetry transformations While in quantum state tomography
one aims to reconstruct a quantum state from measurement data, in many scenarios the relevant object
is a state up to a symmetry transformation, such as a local basis change or gauge invariance.
    An example is that of determining whether two states exhibit the same entanglement structure.
In other words, we say that two quantum states belong to the same entanglement class if they are
related by local basis changes. This naturally leads to a formulation of the group state isomorphism
problem for the group SU(2)⊗n . Entanglement equivalence can also be defined with respect to LOCC
operations, leading to a more complex group structure. Another example is determining whether
two quantum states possess the same non-stabilizer (“magic”) structure, which can be viewed as an
instance of Clifford state isomorphism.
    Condensed matter physics also has a natural equivalence class of states, namely topological phase.
Two states are said to be in the same topological phase if there exists a simple transformation mapping
  3 Indeed, quantum states themselves are defined as equivalence classes of complex vectors.




                                                          7
one to the other, such as a low-depth quantum circuit [CGW10]. One could also try to relate this to
the group state isomorphism problem, however low-depth quantum circuits do not form a group. We
however note that the group structure is not essential in several of the lower bounds established in
this paper. In those cases, we merely require that the valid isomorphisms do not form a t-design (see
Section 4.2). This is somewhat reminiscent of the result in [SHH25] which characterizes the complexity
of detecting topological order. Their proof relies on the set of operations forming a t-design, which is
similar to our use of t-designs. See also item 5 in open questions Section 1.3. One can also consider a
restricted version of topological phase in which the low-depth circuits do form a group, in which case
it should be possible to assess its complexity through the state isomorphism framework.

Cryptographic transformations as group actions Many quantum cryptographic primitives can
be viewed as applying a group action to a quantum state. For example, the quantum one-time pad
applies a random Pauli operator to encrypt a state.
   Given a plaintext state and a purported ciphertext, one may ask whether the ciphertext lies in
the orbit of the plaintext under the allowed key group. This reduces to a state isomorphism prob-
lem. More generally, state isomorphism captures whether two states are related by a valid secret-key
transformation, providing a natural abstraction for reasoning about the correctness of cryptographic
transformations.

Dynamical orbits under Hamiltonian evolution Unitary time evolution induces a group action
on quantum states. Given a Hamiltonian H, one may consider the orbit {e−iHt |ψ⟩ : t ∈ R} of an initial
state. The problem of determining whether two states lie in the same orbit is a state isomorphism
problem under this dynamical action.
    When the evolution has finite order, this reduces to a hidden-shift-type problem over a finite group.
More generally, it addresses whether two states are related by time evolution under a fixed Hamiltonian.
This connects state isomorphism to problems in quantum algorithms, dynamical complexity, and the
study of long-time behavior of quantum systems.

1.3    Discussion, related work and open questions
In this work, we initiated the study of quantum state isomorphism problems for general groups. As
mentioned, this can be viewed as an extension of [LG17], which considered isomorphism problems
only with respect to the permutation group. It can also be viewed as studying quantum analogs of
well-known classical isomorphism problems, such as graph isomorphism, graph automorphism, group
isomorphism, and group automorphism, all of which are NP-intermediate. From this perspective,
classical group isomorphism corresponds to group-state isomorphism, which can be viewed as a state
version of the hidden shift problem [VHI06]. Similarly, the classical group automorphism problem can
be mapped to the group-state automorphism problem and can be interpreted as a state-level analog
of the hidden subgroup problem. Given the variations in complexity of these problems, depending on
whether states are pure or mixed, on how they are represented, and on the properties of the underlying
groups, developing a better understanding of these problems is an important goal for future research.
    We end this section with a number of open questions:
  1. The recent work of [BGW25], which introduced the quantum state hidden subgroup problem,
     used it to design quantum protocols for tasks related to understanding the entanglement struc-
     ture of quantum states, such as identifying a hidden cut in a pure state. A natural open question
     arising from our work is finding applications of quantum algorithms for state isomorphism prob-
     lems. For example, we wonder whether the techniques developed here can be used to characterize
     or learn the entanglement structure of quantum states, analogous to [BGW25].
  2. Another question is whether we can provide a more complete characterization of the pure-state
     group isomorphism problem. We’ve shown that this problem lies between BQP and QCSZK ∩
     QCMA, and that, for certain groups, such as the Clifford group, it is also at least as hard as
     graph isomorphism. It is desirable to find tighter lower and upper bounds. Can we improve the
     upper bound to BQPGI for specific groups like the Clifford group?
  3. For mixed state isomorphism, can we improve the tolerance to error parameters, particularly
     completeness, by improving from β = 1 − 1/poly to a constant? This would be desirable because


                                                   8
     many natural QSZK-complete problems remain QSZK-complete even with constant completeness
     and soundness parameters, and so one might expect the same to be true for MSGI.
  4. Many of the results in this work address finite groups. It is natural to study more general
     groups with infinitely many elements. The bosonic isomorphism problem takes a step in this
     direction by establishing lower and upper bounds on Gaussian isomorphism problems between
     states. However, many other tools need to be developed to address these problems for bosonic
     Hilbert spaces and infinite groups in general.
  5. The isomorphism problem we studied is for “groups.” One may wonder how much group structure
     is actually needed for the main results of this paper. In particular, would we retrieve similar
     complexity results if we define isomorphism problems with respect to a set of operations? The
     BQP lower bounds are likely independent of the group structure, since the BQP-hardness is
     encoded in the circuits given as input. However most of the upper bounds do make use of the
     group structure. This is true for the BQP containment for the Pauli group as well as the QCSZK
     and QSZK upper bounds for pure and mixed states, respectively. The QCMA upper bound, on the
     other hand, does not require group structure, merely that the isomorphism can be represented
     and applied efficiently. It would be interesting to understand to what extent group structure
     affects the complexity landscape of these isomorphism problems.
  6. Can we use the hardness of group state isomorphism problems discussed in this paper to establish
     no-go theorems for learning families of quantum states? For instance, [IWD+ 25] shows that
     Gaussian orbits of single-photon sources are efficiently learnable. They give a characterization
     in terms of families of states that are fully specified by their (up to) fourth moments. Can we
     use the lower bounds developed in this work to establish no-go theorems for learning states that
     require greater than 4 moments to be fully specified? More generally, what do isomorphism
     problems tell us about the hardness of learning states that arise in the context of certain groups?
  7. [MROL14] argues that to test if two states are related by a Gaussian, it is enough to check
     several invariants. We know that GI can be embedded as an instance of a Gaussian group state
     isomorphism. Is it possible to use this to come up with an efficient quantum algorithm for the
     graph isomorphism problem?
  8. Can we solve linear optical equivalence between the outputs of two CV circuits in QCSZK? In
     [CGM+ 25] it was shown that CV circuits with polynomial energy (and under a mild condition
     about the gate set) can be simulated in BQP. Then, it would be plausible to assume a QCSZK
     upper bound here. However, using the simulation technique of [CGM+ 25] we need a cutoff
     M = O(1/ε2 ) to achieve precision ε, and following the proof of Theorem 4.1, we realize that the
     prover needs an ε′ -net for the linear optical gates. As the ε′ -net for energy-constrained diamond-
                                                ′           2 ′
     norm of energy M requires N = eO(M/ε ) = eO(1/(ε ε )) many elements, in YES cases, we need
                O(log N )
     (1 − O(ε))           = o(1), which is impossible to satisfy given the scaling of N . We ask whether
     this limitation is fundamental, i.e., the bosonic problem is harder, or it can be circumvented by
     a different proof technique.

Acknowledgements
SM and DJ are grateful to the National Science Foundation (NSF CCF-2013062) for supporting this
project. We are also grateful to several people for insightful discussions. AG thanks Adam Bouland
and William Kretschmer for early discussions on the complexity of state isomorphism problems and
Zhi Li for useful comments regarding fidelity bounds. DJ thanks Jackson Morris and Lorenzo Leone for
helpful discussions. SM and AM thank Ulysse Chabaud and Michael Joseph for insightful discussions
on bosonic isomorphism problems. The authors are also grateful to the Simons Institute, where some
of this work took place.

AI Statement
We used Claude Opus 4.6 to aid us in the proof of Claim 5.1. Specifically, Claude made us aware of
the Rotfel’d inequality from [Rot69] which was instrumental in proving the claim. We have also used
ChatGPT and Google Gemini for general checking, simplifying and rewriting of certain proofs and


                                                   9
specifically to aid in deriving the proof of Lemma 6.3. ChatGPT was also used to brainstorm ideas in
Section 1.2. All claims, proofs, and references involving AI have been verified by the authors.


2     Technical overview
In this section, we outline the proofs of the main results.

Pure State Group Isomorphism is in QCSZK
We’ll start with containment in QCSZK for the pure state version of the state isomorphism problem.4
For detailed proofs, see Section 4.1.
   Let us first informally define QCSZK. The complexity class QCSZK (quantum classical statistically
zero knowledge) is the set of decision problems solvable by an interactive protocol between a quantum
polynomial-time verifier and a computationally unbounded prover such that
    • The communication between the prover and the verifier is entirely classical,

    • The verifier learns only whether the answer to the decision problem is YES or NO, without
      learning anything more about the solution. This is the zero-knowledge condition.
We now give an overview of the upper bound in Theorem 1.2. To build some intuition, we recap the
proof from [LG17] showing the containment of state isomorphism with respect to the permutation
group (PSGI[Sn ]) in QSZK, which is the same as QCSZK, except the communication between the
prover and the verifier is allowed to be quantum. It is easier to explain this containment for the
complement of the problem, as both QSZK and QCSZK are closed under complement. In other words,
given as input circuits C1 and C2 and denoting |ψ1 ⟩ = C1 |0n ⟩ , |ψ2 ⟩ = C2 |0n ⟩ , one should answer
YES if R(g) |ψ1 ⟩ is far from |ψ2 ⟩ , for all g ∈ G, and answer NO if there exists g ∈ G such that
|ψ2 ⟩ = R(g) |ψ1 ⟩ .
    The protocol works as follows. The verifier will pick j ∈ {1, 2} uniformly at random, as well as a
random group element g ∈ G. It will then prepare N = poly(n) copies of the state R(g) |ψj ⟩ and send
them to the prover. The prover must decide whether the copies correspond to |ψ1 ⟩ or |ψ2 ⟩, i.e., to
output the value of j that the verifier used. If the states do not lie in the same orbit with respect to
the group G, then the copies of R(g) |ψj ⟩ will be distinguishable and the prover will answer correctly
with an overwhelmingly high probability. On the other hand, if the states can be mapped to one
another under the action of some group element, the prover will be unable to correctly determine
j with probability greater than 1/2. Moreover, in the YES case, the verifier learns only that the
states are distinguishable (and therefore not related by a group element), and nothing else; hence, the
protocol is zero-knowledge.
    To prove containment in QCSZK, the only difference with respect to the above protocol is that
the verifier will send a classical shadow of R(g) |ψj ⟩ , instead of sending the state itself [HKP20]. It is
known that for all pure states that are preparable by polynomial-size quantum circuits, there exists
an efficient procedure to construct the classical shadow [Aar18; MY22]. One such procedure is for
the verifier to sample random Clifford circuits, apply them to the state R(g) |ψj ⟩, and then measure
the output. With overwhelming probability, these measurement outcomes will be unique to the state
R(g) |ψj ⟩ and therefore the prover is able to identify this state.5 The protocol then proceeds exactly
as in the QSZK case, with the prover correctly outputting j in the YES case and failing to do so
with probability greater than 1/2 in the NO case. The main reason the communication can be made
classical is the existence of an efficient classical shadow procedure for pure states. For mixed states,
however, the number of shadows required for fidelity estimation grows with the effective rank, and so
this procedure only works for states that are pure or close to pure.
   4 As mentioned in the previous section, containment in QCMA is immediate by observing that the classical witness is

a circuit representation of the group element which maps between the two states.
   5 Note that the procedure for identifying the state will, in general, not be efficient and require exponential time.

However, this is not an issue since the prover is assumed to be computationally unbounded.




                                                          10
Pure State Group Isomorphism is BQP-hard
Next, we prove that PSGI[G] is BQP-hard for all nontrivial groups. For details, see Section 4.2.
Consider a quantum circuit6 Cx which solves an arbitrary BQP decision problem on input x. Without
loss of generality, we can assume Cx is in such a way that Cx |0n ⟩ ≈ϵ |0n ⟩ if x is a YES instance
and Cx |0n ⟩ ≈ϵ |1n ⟩ if x is a NO instance. Through standard amplification arguments, we can take
ϵ = 2−O(n) , so that the circuit output in the two cases is negligibly close to either |0n ⟩ or |1n ⟩,
respectively. In fact, without loss of generality we can take Cx to perform the mappings Cx |0n ⟩ ≈ϵ |0n ⟩
if x is a YES instance and Cx |0n ⟩ ≈ϵ |ϕ⟩ if x is a NO instance, where |ϕ⟩ is any efficiently preparable
state with negligible fidelity to |0n ⟩. Now, taking |ϕ⟩ to be some state which is far from R(g) |0n ⟩
for all g, we have that if x is a YES instance then I |0n ⟩ and Cx |0n ⟩ are isomorphic, and if x is a
NO instance then they are far from isomorphic. To complete the proof, we need to specify how |ϕ⟩ is
constructed explicitly. For certain groups, such as Paulis or Cliffords, we can simply take |ϕ⟩ = |T n ⟩ ,
with |T ⟩ = √12 (|0⟩ + eiπ/4 |1⟩), as no Pauli or Clifford operation can map |0n ⟩ to an n-fold product
of magic states (even approximately). In general, however, we can take |ϕ⟩ to be a t-design state,
where t = ω(log |G|). For instance, we can construct |ϕ⟩ as the output of a random quantum circuit
of depth poly(log |G|). It can then be shown that, with overwhelming probability, no group element
in G (under the unitary representation) can map |0n ⟩ to |ϕ⟩ . The one caveat of this result is that
it makes the reduction randomized, rather than deterministic. It is unclear whether, for every finite
group, there exists an efficient deterministic procedure for selecting an appropriate |ϕ⟩ state. We leave
the resolution of this as an open question.

Pure State Pauli Isomorphism is in BQP
Next, we examine the complexity of PSGI[G] for specific groups of interest.
    Despite the lower bound of BQP for all nontrivial groups, we find that the problem can exhibit
different complexities depending on the group of interest. Specifically, for the Pauli group, we show
that the problem is contained in BQP, and therefore is BQP-complete (Theorem 1.3; see Section 4.4
for more details).
    Given descriptions of the circuits C1 and C2 , preparing |ψ1 ⟩ and |ψ2 ⟩ starting from |0n ⟩, let us
assume we are in the YES case of the problem. This means that there exists P ∈ Pn such that
P |ψ1 ⟩ = |ψ2 ⟩ .7 Our first observation is that P is an involution up to a ± phase. That is to say,
P 2 = ±I. We can therefore get an exact involution by taking two copies of P, i.e. (P ⊗ P )2 =
I ⊗ I. We know that P ⊗ P (|ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ |ψ1 ⟩) = |ψ2 ⟩ ⊗ |ψ2 ⟩ and the involution property also gives us that
P ⊗ P (|ψ2 ⟩ ⊗ |ψ2 ⟩) = |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ |ψ1 ⟩.
    Next, consider the state
                                            1        ⊗2          ⊗2
                                                                     
                                     |Ψ⟩ = √ |0⟩ |ψ1 ⟩ + |1⟩ |ψ2 ⟩     ,
                                             2
which is efficiently preparable given descriptions of the circuits C1 and C2 . By the involution property
of P ⊗P, this state is stabilized by X ⊗P ⊗P. We thus obtain an instance of StateHSP with the hidden
subgroup being generated by X ⊗ P ⊗ P, for all P such that P |ψ1 ⟩ = |ψ2 ⟩ . As shown in [BGW25],
StateHSP can be solved efficiently whenever the underlying HSP problem is efficiently solvable. In
this case, it is known that HSP for the Pauli group is quantumly efficiently solvable, despite the fact
that the Pauli group is not abelian [KR08]. A more explicit way to see why this is the case is to first
observe that the group comprised of two copies of each Pauli operator is an abelian group. This is
because, for any Pauli operators P, Q ∈ Pn , it is the case that either P Q = +QP or P Q = −QP . But
this means that P ⊗2 Q⊗2 = Q⊗2 P ⊗2 . Hence, the StateHSP instance we have to solve is with respect
to an abelian group (the two-copy Pauli group). We can then find a generating set for the hidden
subgroup by performing weak Fourier sampling on many copies of |Ψ⟩ . One can then test whether the
stabilizer group was found by sampling a random element, Q⊗2 , from it and performing a SWAP test
               ⊗2                ⊗2
between |ψ1 ⟩ and Q⊗2 |ψ2 ⟩ , respectively. In the YES case, the outlined approach succeeds, and
   6 We are using a simplified presentation here. The more precise statement is to consider a uniformly generated family

of quantum circuits for each input size.
   7 Strictly speaking, we have that P |ψ ⟩ ≈ |ψ ⟩ , where ≈ denotes the fact that the real overlap of the states is
                                           1       2
negligibly close to 1, as per Definition 1.1. For ease of presentation we will assume here that the mapping is exact,
though essentially the same argument will also hold for the approximate case, when the approximation error is negligibly
small. See Section 4.4.



                                                          11
we conclude that the states are isomorphic. In the NO case, it can be shown that the SWAP test fails
with high probability, thereby concluding that the states are not isomorphic. This shows the BQP
containment of PSGI[Pn ].
    As mentioned, the proof crucially relies on the fact that we can “abelianize” the Pauli group so as
to reduce to a version of StateHSP that is efficiently solvable quantumly. We remark that this is yet
another example of the relationship between state isomorphism problems and the state hidden shift
problem. In particular, the BQP containment of PSGI[Pn ] is related to the fact that the hidden shift
problem over Zn2 reduces to the hidden subgroup problem over Zn+1  2  .8
    For other groups, however, it is not always clear that one can perform this “abelianization” trick.
Indeed, when considering the Clifford group, this seems unlikely to be the case because it contains
the permutation group as a subgroup. This means that one would have to solve an instance of HSP
or StateHSP with respect to the permutation group and this is not known to be efficient. This
doesn’t immediately rule out an efficient quantum algorithm for PSGI[Cn ], as there could be some
other approach towards solving the problem that doesn’t reduce to an instance of StateHSP. We
next argue that this is unlikely to be the case, unless there is a polynomial-time quantum algorithm
for the Graph Isomorphism problem.

Reduction from Graph Isomorphism to Pure State Clifford Isomorphism
Our next result shows that Graph Isomorphism for a graph with n vertices reduces to PSGI[Cn+1 ]
(Theorem 1.3; see Section 4.5 for more details). The proof is similar to the proof that Graph Isomor-
phism reduces to PSGI[Sn ] (Sn is the symmetric group) given in [LG17]. Their proof follows from
observing that two graphs G1 and G2 are isomorphic if and only if their graph states |G1 ⟩ and |G2 ⟩
are isomorphic up to permuting qubits. Since graph states are stabilizer states, this approach doesn’t
immediately apply to the Clifford group, since the two states are always related by a Clifford operator,
regardless of whether the graphs are isomorphic. To remedy this, we instead construct the states
                                                  1
                                         |ψ1 ⟩ = √ (|R⟩ |Rn ⟩ + |R− ⟩ |G1 ⟩)
                                                   2
                                                                                                                  (1)
                                                  1
                                         |ψ2 ⟩ = √ (|R⟩ |Rn ⟩ + |R− ⟩ |G2 ⟩) ,
                                                   2

where |R⟩ = √12 (|0⟩+eπi/8 |1⟩) and |R− ⟩ = √12 (|0⟩−eπi/8 |1⟩). Essentially, the |Rn ⟩ component enforces
that any Clifford unitary approximately mapping |ψ1 ⟩ to |ψ2 ⟩ must be a permutation, thereby reducing
the Clifford isomorphism problem to the isomorphism problem over the symmetric group. The reason
for using |Rn ⟩ over the seemingly more natural choice |T n ⟩, for the magic state |T ⟩ = √12 (|0⟩+eiπ/4 |1⟩),
is because |T ⟩ is a Clifford eigenstate and this would allow non-permutation Cliffords to map between
the states. Note also that we used |R⟩ and |R− ⟩ for controlled qubits. The reason for not using |0⟩
and |1⟩ is to avoid pathological instances of controlled operations that leave the graph state invariant
and act as identity on the Rn state, on the |1⟩ branch.
    In more detail, the choice of states |ψ1 ⟩ and |ψ2 ⟩ allows us to perform the reduction as follows.
When the graphs are isomorphic, there exists a qubit permutation unitary (which implements the
graph isomorphism) that maps |ψ1 ⟩ to |ψ2 ⟩ . This permutation has the effect of mapping |G1 ⟩ to |G2 ⟩
while leaving the symmetric |Rn ⟩ component unchanged. When the graphs are not isomorphic, we
must show that no Clifford operation can map one to the other, even approximately. Suppose, for the
sake of contradiction, that such a Clifford existed. We denote it as D ∈ Cn+1 , and have that

                                               | ⟨ψ2 | D |ψ1 ⟩ | > 0.99999.

Expanding out the left-hand side, we have
                      1
| ⟨ψ1 | D |ψ2 ⟩ | =     | ⟨R− | ⟨G1 | D |R− ⟩ |G2 ⟩+⟨R− | ⟨G1 | D |R⟩ |Rn ⟩+⟨R| ⟨Rn | D |R− ⟩ |G2 ⟩+⟨R| ⟨Rn | D |R⟩ |Rn ⟩ |.
                      2
Now note that for any Clifford, D, the middle two terms will be negligible, since no Clifford can map
a stabilizer state to an n-fold product of magic states with better than 2−O(n) fidelity. This means
   8 As a consequence of this observation, any group which admits an efficient algorithm for the hidden shift problem

also has an efficient algorithm for the related isomorphism problem.


                                                           12
that in order to achieve | ⟨ψ2 | D |ψ1 ⟩ | > 0.99999, it must be that | ⟨R− | ⟨G1 | D |R− ⟩ |G2 ⟩ | ≈ 1 and
| ⟨R| ⟨Rn | D |R⟩ |Rn ⟩ | ≈ 1. We show in Lemma 4.7 that | ⟨R| ⟨Rn | D |R⟩ |Rn ⟩ | ≈ 1 implies that D must
act as a permutation on the register with the n magic states. However, since G1 and G2 are not
isomorphic, if D acts as a permutation then | ⟨R− | ⟨G1 | D |R− ⟩ |G2 ⟩ | ̸≈ 1. In other words, it is not
possible for a Clifford D to simultaneously map one graph state to the other, with high fidelity, and
approximately stabilize a product of magic states. This provides the desired contradiction, concluding
the proof and showing that the ability to decide PSGI[Cn ] allows one to solve Graph Isomorphism.

Mixed State Group Isomorphism is QSZK-complete
Next, we prove that the mixed state isomorphism problem is QSZK-complete for any nontrivial finite
group G (Theorem 1.5; see Section 5 for more details).
    We start with containment in QSZK. The QSZK protocol for mixed state group isomorphism is
almost exactly the same as the pure state protocol, where the verifier chooses either ψ1 or ψ2 (which
this time are mixed states), applies a random group element, and sends copies of the result to the
prover. To prove that this is indeed a valid protocol, we must show that the resulting mixtures over
states are indistinguishable if ψ1 and ψ2 are isomorphic under the group action, and distinguishable if
they are not. The former follows from noting that if there is an h ∈ G such that R(h)ψ1 R(h)† = ψ2 ,
then
         1 X                        1 X                               1 X
                (R(g)ψ2 R(g)† ) =        (R(g)R(h)ψ1 R(h)† R(g)† ) =         (R(gh)ψ1 R(hg)†).
        |G|                        |G|                               |G|
            g∈G                             g∈G                                         g∈G

As the sum ranges over all elements in G, this is identical to
                                        1 X
                                               (R(g)ψ1 R(g)† ).
                                       |G|
                                                    g∈G

Hence, the mixtures of ψ1 and ψ2 averaged over all group elements will be statistically identical.
    We now show that if no group element relates ψ1 and ψ2 , then the states the prover receives will be
distinguishable. Specifically, we will assume that for all g ∈ G, it is the case that F (ψ1 , R(g)ψ2 R(g)† ) ≤
α, for some constant α > 0. The goal is then to prove that the resulting k-twirled states will have large
trace distance for sufficiently large k. By k-twirled, we mean the following states
                          1 X                                   1 X
                  ψ1′ =          (R(g)ψ1 R(g)† )⊗k ,    ψ2′ =            (R(g)ψ2 R(g)† )⊗k .
                         |G|                                   |G|
                                g∈G                                          g∈G

By making use of a trace inequality due to Rotfel’d               [Rot69], we are able to show that if
F (ψ1 , R(g)ψ2 R(g)† ) ≤ α, for all g ∈ G, then F (ψ1 , |G|
                                                         1                   †
                                                            P
                                                              g∈G R(g)ψ2 R(g) ) ≤ α|G|. In some sense, this
is like a union bound for fidelities. The formal statement is Claim 5.1. Applying this to the k-twirled
states and using the fact that F (ρ⊗k , σ ⊗k ) = F k (ρ, σ), we find that
                                                  F (ψ1′ , ψ2′ ) ≤ αk |G|.
Since α is a constant, it suffices to take k = ω(log |G|) in order to have that F (ψ1′ , ψ2′ ) = negl(n),
where negl(n) denotes a negligible function in n9 . This means that the states are distinguishable, and
so the prover will be able to correctly reply with whether the states it received resulted from copies
of ψ1 or ψ2 , respectively. As in the pure-state case, the protocol is zero-knowledge, and thus we have
containment in QSZK.
    To show QSZK-hardness, we reduce from the canonical QSZK-complete problem Quantum State
Distinguishability (QSD) [Wat02b], which asks whether two mixed states are close or far in trace
distance. The idea is similar to the reduction from Graph Isomorphism to Pure-State Clifford Isomor-
phism, in which we use a linear combination of states to enforce that the isomorphism must take a
particular form. In particular, we enforce that the only valid isomorphism is the identity. Concretely,
if σ1 and σ2 are the inputs to the QSD instance, we take the states
                                                       1     1
                                                   ρ1 =  σ1 + ψ
                                                       2     2
                                                       1     1
                                                   ρ2 = σ2 + ψ,
                                                       2     2
  9 We say that a function f (n) is negligible, if for any polynomial p(n), it is the case that lim
                                                                                                      n→∞ f (n)p(n) = 0.



                                                            13
to be the inputs to the isomorphism problem, where ψ is far from the any state in the orbit of σ1 or
σ2 , and ψ is far from invariant under any non-identity group action. Thus, if σ1 and σ2 are close in
trace distance, ρ1 and ρ2 will remain close under the identity element. But if σ1 , σ2 are far, there is
no group element that will simultaneously map σ1 to σ2 and ψ to ψ. Furthermore, there is no group
element that will map either σ1 or σ2 to ψ. Thus, ρ1 and ρ2 are not isomorphic. To obtain such a
ψ, we can simply use the output of an approximate state t-design, which will satisfy the requirement
for the reduction with high probability. Also note that, given circuits that prepare σ1 and σ2 , we can
construct efficient circuits that prepare ρ1 and ρ2 , respectively.
     As with the BQP-hardness of PSGI proof, we remark that this particular reduction is randomized,
but for a fixed group we can make it deterministic by replacing ψ with two fixed pure states ψ1 , ψ2 which
are far from invariant under any non-identity group action, and occupy distinct orbits. If σ1 , σ2 are
mixed, these states will never have high overlap with either σ1 or σ2 , and if σ1 , σ2 are pure, they cannot
share the same orbit with both ψ1 and ψ2 . However, choosing such states ψ1 , ψ2 deterministically will
depend on the group. For example, for the Clifford group, we can choose two magic states which
occupy different orbits, such as |Rn ⟩⟨Rn | and Rn/2 ⟩|0n/2 Rn/2 |⟨0n/2 , where |R⟩ = √12 (|0⟩ + eiπ/8 |1⟩)
is a non-stabilizer state (which is also not a Clifford eigenstate).

Mixed StateHSP is QSZK-hard for some abelian groups
As a corollary of our proof that mixed state group isomorphism is QSZK-hard, we obtain that a mixed
state version of the StateHSP problem from [BGW25] is QSZK-hard for any abelian group that contains
an involution, as well as for the Pauli group. Since many abelian groups do contain an involution,
this rules out the possibility of extending the abelian StateHSP framework to mixed states in general,
unless QSZK = BQP. This resolves an open question from [HEC25], though as this is a worst-case
result, it leaves open the possibility of an efficient algorithm for specific instances.
    The reduction from the aforementioned Quantum State Distinguishability problem to Mixed-
StateHSP is as follows, where σ1 , σ2 are the inputs to the QSD instance. Let h ∈ G be a group element
of order 2, and let |v1 ⟩ , |v2 ⟩ be orthonormal vectors such that R(h) |v1 ⟩ = |v2 ⟩ and R(h) |v2 ⟩ = |v1 ⟩.
We call these the label vectors. We take as input to the mixed StateHSP instance the state
                                        1                  1
                                   ρ=     |v1 ⟩⟨v1 | ⊗ σ1 + |v2 ⟩⟨v2 | ⊗ σ2 ,
                                        2                  2
which is efficiently preparable. Now, we define the representation R′ as

                                               R′ (g) = R(g) ⊗ I,

where R(g) acts on the label register. Note that if σ1 , σ2 are close in trace distance, then ρ and
R′ (h)ρR′ (h)† will be close in trace distance as well. But if σ1 , σ2 are far in trace distance, then ρ and
R′ (h)ρR′ (h)† will also be far in trace distance. Thus, if MixedStateHSP returns a hidden subgroup
H, it suffices to check whether h ∈ H. This is exactly the subgroup membership problem, which is
known to be efficient for finite abelian groups [MC87]. Thus, if we can solve MixedStateHSP, we can
check whether σ1 and σ2 are close or far in trace distance, thereby solving a QSZK-hard problem. See
Section 5.3 for more details.

Reduction from Graph Isomorphism to Linear Optical Isomorphism and the
SZK upper bound
Transitioning to bosonic systems and following a method similar to that used for the reduction of
Graph Isomorphism (GI) to Pure State Clifford Isomorphism, we prove a GI-hardness result for the
Pure State Linear Optical Isomorphism problem (Theorem 1.7; see Section 6 for more details). Let
A(1) and A(2) represent the adjacency matrices of two graphs G1 , G2 . We consider the following two
states
                                          X         X (1)
                                  |ψ1 ⟩ ∝   |3i ⟩ +   Aij |1i 1j ⟩ ,
                                                i             ij
                                                                     (2)
                                               X              X
                                     |ψ2 ⟩ ∝        |3i ⟩ +        Aij |1i 1j ⟩ ,
                                                i             ij



                                                        14
where

|3i ⟩ := |0, 0, · · · ,       3
                             |{z}     , · · · , 0⟩,   and   |1i 1j ⟩ := |0, · · · 0,       1
                                                                                          |{z}     , 0, · · · , 0,       1
                                                                                                                        |{z}         , 0 · · · , 0⟩.
                          i-th location                                                i-th location                 j-th location

In other words, the state |3i ⟩ corresponds to having three photons in mode i (and no photons elsewhere),
while |1i 1j ⟩ corresponds to having one photon inPmode i and one photon in mode j (with no other
photons elsewhere). Note that if we were to use ij Aij |1i 1j ⟩ alone, the two states would have been
isomorphic if and only if the spectra of the two adjacency
                                                     P          matrices were the same, and this is indeed
not equivalent to GI. However, the addition of i |3i ⟩ resolves this issue. The reason is tied to the
fundamental fact that for any p ̸= 1, 2, the only linear transformations that preserve ℓp norm are
permutation matrices (up to a diagonal phase operator). We use this fact for p = 3, together with
a natural connection between bosonic     P states and complex polynomial functions, to conclude that any
linear optical map that transforms i |3i ⟩ to itself, must be a permutation (up to a diagonal phase
operator). This would enforce the two states |ψ1 ⟩ , |ψ2 ⟩ to be isomorphic if and only if the two adjacency
matrices can be mapped into one another via conjugation by a permutation, i.e., the GI problem.
    To show that the problem remains hard for GI even in the approximate settings, we show that if
there is a linear optical unitary that makes the overlap of the two states larger than 1 − 1/(96n5 ), then
there exists a permutation that makes the overlap equal to 1. In order to show this, we first prove that
any linear map that approximately preserves ℓ3 norm is almost a permutation (up to a diagonal phase
matrix). We then use the fact that if the overlap between two adjacency matrices exceeds a threshold,
they must be equal. We obtain soundness by contraposition of the previous statement.
    Finally, in order to get an SZK upper bound, we reduce the problem to the Statistical Difference
problem in the following way: since the Hilbert space of n photons restricted to r photons has dimension
nO(r) , we can send classical descriptions of these states. Hence, for the problem with input states
|ψ1 ⟩ , |ψ2 ⟩, the verifier picks one of the states uniformly at random, applies a random linear optical
unitary onto it, and adds some small amount of noise. The description of this state is then sent to the
prover. If the two states |ψ1 ⟩ and |ψ2 ⟩ are approximately related by a linear optical element, then the
random vectors we generate have a small total variation distance, and vice versa.


3      Preliminaries and Notation
3.1      Basic definitions and tools
We use Ω(·), O(·), ω(·), o(·) to hide universal constants. We follow standard notation for quantum
states, unitaries, channels, measurement operators, and Hilbert spaces as in [NC10]. We use D(ρ, σ) =
                                                                                √ √ 
1/2 Tr |ρ − σ| to denote the trace distance between ρ and σ and F (ρ, σ) = Tr | ρ σ| for the square
root fidelity of two mixed states, ρ and σ.
    Letting X, Y, Z denote the single-qubit Pauli matrices, the n-qubit Pauli group is

                              Pn := {ω P1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Pn : ω ∈ {±1, ±i}, Pj ∈ {I, X, Y, Z}} .

The n-qubit Clifford group is the normalizer of the Pauli group in the unitary group:

                                Cn := U ∈ U (2n ) : U Pn U † = Pn .
                                      


Equivalently, U ∈ Cn if and only if U P U † ∈ Pn for every P ∈ Pn .

3.2      Problems and complexity classes
We use the standard definitions for complexity classes like BQP, NP, SZK, QCSZK, QSZK, QCMA
which can be found, for instance, in [AKG05]. Note that the definition of QCSZK is given in [LG17]
implicitly.
    We will need the following definitions for state hidden subgroup problems and quantum state
distinguishability.




                                                                   15
Definition 3.1 ((α, β)-MixedStateHSP). Let G be a finite group with a unitary representation R :
G → U (d). Let H < G be a hidden subgroup of G. The goal is to find H given a classical description
of a quantum circuit Q preparing a mixed state ρ promised that:

                                        ∀U ∈ H, D(U ρU † , ρ) ≤ α,
                                           / H, D(U ρU † , ρ) ≥ β.
                                        ∀U ∈

Definition 3.2 ((α, β)-Quantum State Distinguishability). Given classical descriptions of quantum
circuits Q0 , Q1 preparing mixed states ρ0 , ρ1 , accept if
                                             1
                                               ∥ρ0 − ρ1 ∥1 ≥ β
                                             2
and reject if
                                            1
                                              ∥ρ0 − ρ1 ∥1 ≤ α,
                                            2
promised that one is the case.
Theorem 3.3 ([Wat02b]). For any 0 ≤ α < β ≤ 1 such that α < β 2 the (α, β)-Quantum State
Distinguishability problem is complete for the complexity class QSZK.

3.3    Classical shadows
We require the following fundamental result from [HKP20] on the prediction of many properties of a
quantum state from a few measurements. For an unknown quantum state ρ, a single classical shadow
sample is obtained by drawing a random unitary U (from a unitary ensemble such as the Clifford
group), measuring U ρU † in the computational basis to obtain an outcome b, and then constructing
the estimator
                                      ρ̂ = M−1 U † |b⟩⟨b|U ,
                                                          

where M−1 is a known linear map depending on the unitary ensemble.
Theorem 3.4 (Classical Shadows for Fidelity Estimation [HKP20]). Let ε, δ ∈ (0, 1), and let
|ϕ1 ⟩ , . . . , |ϕM ⟩ be pure states on a d-dimensional Hilbert space. Let |ψ⟩ be an unknown pure state.
Then there is a randomized measurement procedure using global Clifford classical shadows such that
                                                                
                                                       log(M/δ)
                                              N =O
                                                           ε2

independent copies of ρ suffice to estimate each overlap |⟨ψ | ϕi ⟩|2 within additive error ε with proba-
bility at least 1 − δ over the randomness of the chosen measurements and their outcomes.
   One might wonder if the theorem above could be generalized to estimating fidelities between ρ and
density matrices σj . The above theorem can be generalized to an efficient estimator for linear functions
such as Tr(ρσj ). However, fidelity is a nonlinear function. As a matter of fact, estimating the fidelity
between two mixed states specified by their generating circuit is, in general, hard for QSZK [GP22].

3.4    Background on continuous variable formalism
We briefly recall the continuous-variable formalism relevant for the bosonic isomorphism problems
considered in this work. An n-mode bosonic system is described by the Hilbert space

                                              Hn = ℓ2 (Nn ),                                         (2)

with Fock basis {|m⟩ : m = (m1 , . . . , mn ) ∈ Nn }, where
                                                   n
                                                  Y   (a†i )mi
                                          |m⟩ =        √       |0⟩ .                                 (3)
                                                  i=1
                                                          mi !




                                                     16
The creation and annihilation operators satisfy the canonical commutation relations
                                 [ai , a†j ] = δij ,        [ai , aj ] = [a†i , a†j ] = 0,              (4)

and the total photon-number operator is N = i=1 a†i ai . In particular, the number operator at site i is
                                                       Pn
                                                                                                    √
defined by Ni = a†i ai√
                      . We also have the position and momentum operators defined as X = (a + a† )/ 2
and P = (a − a† )/(i 2).
    A convenient description of pure bosonic states is given by the Segal–Bargmann (or stellar) repre-
sentation. For
                                                  X
                                          |ψ⟩ =       ψm |m⟩ ,                                      (5)
                                                       m∈Nn

its stellar function is the holomorphic function
                                                 X      zm
                Fψ (z) = exp |z|2 /2 ⟨z∗ | ψ⟩ =                z = (z1 , . . . , zn ) ∈ Cn ,
                                    
                                                     ψm √ ,                                      (6)
                                                m∈Nn
                                                         m!
               Qn                   Qn
where zm := i=1 zimi and m! := i=1 mi !. In this representation, creation and annihilation operators
act as multiplication and differentiation,
                                          a†i ↔ ×zi ,                ai ↔ ∂zi .                         (7)
   A pure state |ψ⟩ is said to have finite stellar rank r if its stellar function can be written as
                                               Fψ (z) = P (z) G(z),                                     (8)
where P is a polynomial of total degree r and G is a Gaussian holomorphic function. The case r = 0
corresponds exactly to Gaussian states. Equivalently, any finite-stellar-rank state may be written as
                                                   |ψ⟩ = UG |c⟩ ,                                       (9)
where UG is a Gaussian unitary and |c⟩ is a core state, namely a state with finite support in the Fock
basis. Thus, if |c⟩ has support only on basis states with total photon number at most r, then its
stellar function is simply a polynomial of degree at most r. This makes the core states the natural
finite-dimensional representatives of Gaussian equivalence classes. We note that for a core state, the
stellar function is merely a polynomial, i.e.,
                                                   Fc (z) = P (z).                                     (10)
    Gaussian unitaries are the unitaries generated by Hamiltonians that are at most quadratic in the
operators ai , a†i . Equivalently, they are exactly the unitaries that map Gaussian states to Gaussian
states. On mode operators, they act by Bogoliubov transformations, i.e.,
                                                n                  
                                           †
                                                    Xij aj + Yij a†j + αi ,
                                               X
                                    VG ai VG =                                                    (11)
                                                   j=1

for suitable matrices X, Y and displacement vector α. The subclass of passive or linear optical Gaussian
unitaries consists of the number-preserving quadratic evolutions, generated by Hamiltonians of the form
                                                         n
                                                                 hij a†i aj ,
                                                         X
                                                H=                                                     (12)
                                                         i,j=1

for a Hermitian matrix (hij )ij . These are precisely the linear optical unitaries. They act on the creation
operators by a unitary mixing of modes,
                                                   n
                                   V a†i V † =           Uji a†j ,
                                                   X
                                                                          U ∈ U (n),                   (13)
                                                   j=1

and therefore induce a unitary linear change of variables on the associated stellar polynomial. In
particular, if |c⟩ = Pc (a† ) |0⟩ is a core state, then V |c⟩ is again a core state whose polynomial is
obtained from Pc by the substitution z 7→ U z. For a group element U ∈ U(n), we use the notation
R(U ) = V ∈ On to denote its corresponding unitary on the Hilbert space of n modes. This is exactly
the notion of equivalence underlying the linear optical isomorphism problem studied in this work. We
refer to [CMG20; Cha21; CM22; Ser23] for a more elaborate discussion on these topics.


                                                            17
Equivalent reformulations When studying the problem of the isomorphism of core states un-
der linear optical transformations, we are essentially asking whether for two polynomials P1 , P2 ∈
C[z1 , · · · , zn ] there exists a unitary U √ ∈ U(n) such that P1 (z) is close to P2 (U z), in a space where
monomials are orthogonal and zk = k!.
    We highlight that this problem can also be viewed as an isomorphism over qudits with large d
(i.e., polynomial). In particular, deciding whether two n-mode bosonic core states of stellar rank r
are isomorphic under a linear optical transformation is equivalent to asking whether two symmetric
states over (Cn )⊗r are isomorphic under the product unitary group. In other words, imagine we
are given |ψ1 ⟩ , |ψ2 ⟩ ∈ Symm ((Cn )⊗r ). The question is, whether there exists U ∈ U(n) such that
|ψ1 ⟩ ≈ U ⊗r |ψ2 ⟩. This connection was observed in [MROL14]. We can make this connection more
rigorous with the following map: For any Fock state |k⟩ ∈ ℓ2 (Nn ), with |k| = r, define the r-qudit
state with d = n as
                                        r
                                          r! n,r  ⊗k1 ⊗k2              ⊗k
                                                                           
                               |sk ⟩ :=      Psym |1⟩    |2⟩   · · · |n⟩ n ∈ ∨r Cn ,                     (14)
                                          k!
        n,r
where Psym   is the projection into the symmetric subspace of (Cn )⊗r (denoted by ∨r Cn following the
                                              q
                                                 r!
notation of [Har13]). Note that the prefactor k!    is to ensure that |sk ⟩ is normalized.
   Using this notation, we highlight an elementary fact connecting the two problems.
Fact 3.5. For Fock states |k⟩ and |j⟩ with |j| = |k| = r, it is the case that

                                        ⟨k| R(U ) |j⟩ = ⟨sk | U ⊗r |sj ⟩ ,                              (15)

for any U ∈ U(n) and its corresponding linear optical unitary R(U ).


4     Pure State Group Isomorphism Problems
In this section, we address the complexity of PSGI for various groups, which had previously been
studied only for subgroups of the symmetric group under the representation that permutes qubits
[LG17]. In Section 4.1 we prove that all PSGI Problems are in QCSZK. In Section 4.5 we prove that
the Pure State Clifford Isomorphism Problem is at least as hard as Graph Isomorphism. In Section 4.4
we show that the Pure State Pauli Isomorphism Problem is BQP-complete.

4.1     QCSZK Containment of Pure State Group Isomorphism
In this section, we prove that the Pure State Group Isomorphism Problem is in QCSZK. The main
insight is that the quantum messages in the QSZK protocol given in [LG17] can be replaced by classical
shadows. We now restate the theorem that we will prove in this section.
Theorem 4.1 (Restatement of the upper bound in Theorem 1.2). Let G be any efficiently represented
finite group. Then (α, β)-PSGI[G] with constant α and β = 1 − 1/ω(log |G|) is in QCSZK.
Proof. We will describe a QCSZK protocol for the non-isomorphism problem. One round of the protocol
is as follows, where (V) denotes the Verifier and (P) denotes the Prover. The prover and verifier will
repeat the protocol to amplify soundness. The zero-knowledge property follows from standard gap
amplification arguments.
    Let |ψ1 ⟩ and |ψ2 ⟩ be the input states, that is, |ψ1 ⟩ = C1 |0n ⟩ and |ψ2 ⟩ = C2 |0n ⟩. The QCSZK
protocol is as follows:

    1. (V) Pick j ∈ {1, 2} uniformly at random, and pick a uniformly random group element g.
    2. (V) Prepare N = Θ(log |G|) classical shadows for the state |ψ ′ ⟩ = R(g) |ψj ⟩. Send the description
       of the classical shadows to (P).

    3. (P) Send j ′ ∈ {1, 2} to (V).
    4. (V) Accept if and only if j ′ = j.



                                                       18
    Now, let’s consider the probability that Prover (P) can determine the correct value of j ′ . To do
this, we can examine the total variation distance between the distributions of classical shadows from
step (2). Let D1 and D2 be the distributions of classical shadows for j = 1 and j = 2, respectively.
Furthermore let ρ1 and ρ2 be the pre-measurement states:
                                               1 X                       ⊗N
                            ρ1 = E(|ψ1 ⟩) =        R(g) |ψ1 ⟩⟨ψ1 | R(g)†
                                              |G|
                                                  g∈G

and
                                               1 X                       ⊗N
                            ρ2 = E(|ψ2 ⟩) =        R(g) |ψ2 ⟩⟨ψ2 | R(g)†
                                              |G|
                                                  g∈G

   Let’s consider a NO instance of the non-isomorphism problem, that is, there exists g ∈ G such that

                                          Re(⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩) ≥ β,

and consequently
                                           | ⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩ | ≥ β.
First, note that E is the G-twirling channel, and therefore

                                      ρ2 = E(|ψ2 ⟩) = E(R(h) |ψ2 ⟩).

Now, since fidelity is multiplicative under the tensor product, and by the monotonicity of fidelity,

                                              F (ρ1 , ρ2 ) ≥ β N .

Thus, the trace distance, and therefore TV distance on measurement outcomes, is bounded by
                                                      p
                                        T (ρ1 , ρ2 ) ≤ 1 − β 2N .
                                                      1
Therefore, since N = Θ(log |G|), and β = 1 −                 ,
                                                  ω(log |G|)

                                              T (ρ1 , ρ2 ) ≤ o(1),

and thus the probability that the Prover can distinguish j = 1 from j = 2 is negligible.
   Now, let’s consider a YES instance, that is, for all a ∈ G,

                                           | ⟨ψ1 | R(a) |ψ2 ⟩ | ≤ α.

Prover receives N copies of |ψ ′ ⟩= R(g)
                                      |ψj ⟩. By the guarantee of the classical shadows procedure
                                   |G|
(Theorem 3.4), when N = Ω(log       γ    /ε2 ) where ε = 1 − α, Prover can estimate the quantity

                                | ⟨ψ1 | R(a) |ψ ′ ⟩ | = | ⟨ψ1 | R(a)R(g) |ψj ⟩ |

for all a ∈ G with probability ≥ 1 − γ. If j = 1, then there exists a ∈ G, namely a = g −1 , such that

                                         | ⟨ψ1 | R(a)R(g) |ψj ⟩ | = 1,

and if j = 2, then for all a,
                                         | ⟨ψ1 | R(a)R(g) |ψj ⟩ | ≤ α.


   Thus, Prover succeeds in learning j with probability ≥ 1 − γ.




                                                      19
4.2    Pure State Group Isomorphism is BQP-hard
In this section, we show that PSGI[G] is BQP-hard for all nontrivial groups. We will reduce from the
BQP-complete problem of deciding whether a quantum circuit Q accepts or rejects on input |0n ⟩. In
particular, it is a folklore result that given a classical description of a quantum circuit Q, it is BQP-hard
to decide whether
                                            Re(⟨0n | Q |0n ⟩) ≥ 1 − ε
or
                                          Re(⟨ϕ| Q |0n ⟩) ≥ 1 − ε,
where |ϕ⟩ is any efficiently preparable state with |⟨ϕ|0n ⟩| < ε. Furthermore, the problem remains
BQP-hard for ε = exp(−n).
   We now prove the theorem.
Theorem 4.2 (Restatement of the BQP-hardness in Theorem 1.2). (α, β)-PSGI[G] is BQP-hard for
all nontrivial finite groups G under randomized reductions, even when α = o(1), β > 1 − exp(−n).
Proof. We reduce from the BQP-complete problem of deciding whether a quantum circuit Q accepts
or rejects, as specified above. In particular, we take Q′ such that if Q rejects then

                                     Re(⟨0n | Q′ |0n ⟩) ≥ 1 − exp(−n)

and if Q accepts then
                                      Re(⟨ϕ| Q′ |0n ⟩) ≥ 1 − exp(−n),
where |ϕ⟩ satisfies
                                        max |⟨ϕ| R(g) |0n ⟩| ≤ o(1).
                                        g∈G

We define our PSGI[G] instance as

                                               |ψ1 ⟩ = Q′ |0n ⟩
                                               |ψ2 ⟩ = |ϕ⟩ .

Clearly, if Q accepts, then we have a YES instance of PSGI[G], and if Q rejects, then we have a NO
instance. Finally, it remains to show how to choose |ϕ⟩. Fortunately, we can take |ϕ⟩ to be the output
of an approximate state t-design by Claim 5.4.
    Note that the above reduction uses a randomized reduction to sample the circuit preparing the
state |ϕ⟩, but for many fixed groups, one can choose |ϕ⟩ deterministically.

4.3    Pure State Group Isomorphism Reduces to StateHSP for Abelian
       Groups
In this section, we show that for abelian G, PSGI[G] reduces to StateHSP over the generalized dihedral
group G ⋉ Z2 . Importantly, this means that there is an efficient quantum algorithm for PSGI[G] for
groups such that the hidden subgroup problem over G⋉Z2 admits an efficient quantum algorithm. Our
reduction follows similar ideas as the reduction from the hidden shift problem to the hidden subgroup
problem [FIM+ 14], but generalized to work for the state versions.
    Note that elements of G ⋉ Z2 are described by tuples (g, a) where g ∈ G, a ∈ Z2 , and the group
operation is given by

                                    (g, a)(h, b) = (g + (−1)a h, a + b).

Formally, we show the following.
Theorem 4.3. Let G be a finite abelian group with an efficient unitary representation R : G → U (2n ).
Then (α, 1)-PSGI[G] reduces to StateHSP over the generalized dihedral group G ⋊ Z2 .




                                                     20
Proof. Given an instance of PSGI[G] with states |ψ1 ⟩ , |ψ2 ⟩, define
                                             1
                                      |Ψ⟩ = √ (|0⟩ |ψ1 ⟩ + |1⟩ |ψ2 ⟩) .
                                              2
Let Γ = G ⋊ Z2 , with group law
                                     (g, a)(h, b) = (g + (−1)a h, a + b),
where addition in the second register is modulo 2. Define a representation R′ : Γ → U (2n+1 ) by
                    R′ (g, 0) = |0⟩⟨0| ⊗ R(g) + |1⟩⟨1| ⊗ R(−g),           R′ (0, 1) = X ⊗ I,
and
                                        R′ (g, a) = R′ (g, 0)R′ (0, a).
This is a representation because
                                      R′ (g, 0)R′ (h, 0) = R′ (g + h, 0),
and
                                 R′ (0, a)R′ (h, 0) = R′ ((−1)a h, 0)R′ (0, a).
Hence
                                 R′ (g, a)R′ (h, b) = R′ (g + (−1)a h, a + b).
Let us also comment on the efficiency of computing R′ . We can see that as long as R is efficiently com-
putable (which is true by fiat), R′ should also be efficiently computable, aside from the computation
of −g from g, i.e. the problem of inverting a group element. Whenever we are given an explicit pre-
sentation of G that includes the identity element, we can compute −g efficiently by simply subtracting
g from it. In general, however, it may be necessary to compute the order of g with respect to G. As
G is abelian, this can always be done in quantum polynomial-time. Therefore, our reduction will be
entirely classical whenever group inverses can be efficiently computable classically and otherwise the
reduction is quantum.
    Next, let
                            H = StabR′ (|Ψ⟩) = {x ∈ Γ : R′ (x) |Ψ⟩ = |Ψ⟩}.
We claim that H contains an element of the form (h, 1) if and only if the original PSGI instance is a
YES instance.
  For any h ∈ G, we have
                                            1
                        ⟨Ψ| R′ (h, 1) |Ψ⟩ =   (⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩ + ⟨ψ2 | R(−h) |ψ1 ⟩)
                                            2
                                          = Re (⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩) .
Therefore, if (h, 1) ∈ H, then
                                          Re (⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩) = 1.
Since both states are normalized, this implies
                                              R(h) |ψ2 ⟩ = |ψ1 ⟩ ,
so the PSGI instance is a YES instance.
    Conversely, if the PSGI instance has perfect completeness, then there exists h ∈ G such that
                                              R(h) |ψ2 ⟩ = |ψ1 ⟩ .
Equivalently, R(−h) |ψ1 ⟩ = |ψ2 ⟩. Thus
                                                           1
                         R′ (h, 1) |Ψ⟩ = R′ (h, 0)(X ⊗ I) √ (|0⟩ |ψ1 ⟩ + |1⟩ |ψ2 ⟩)
                                                            2
                                          1
                                       = √ (|0⟩ R(h) |ψ2 ⟩ + |1⟩ R(−h) |ψ1 ⟩)
                                           2
                                          1
                                       = √ (|0⟩ |ψ1 ⟩ + |1⟩ |ψ2 ⟩)
                                           2
                                       = |Ψ⟩ .

                                                      21
 Hence (h, 1) ∈ H.
    Therefore, after solving StateHSP over Γ, it suffices to check whether the returned subgroup has
 an element with second component 1. If the subgroup is given by generators, this is equivalent to
 checking whether at least one generator has second component 1, since the projection Γ → Z2 is a
 group homomorphism.
    Importantly, there are several common groups which admit efficient algorithms for StateHSP over
 G⋉Z2 , such as Zn2 and the abelianization of the Pauli group. For a more thorough treatment of groups
 that admit efficient HSP algorithms, see [FIM+ 14], and for algorithms for the StateHSP problem,
 see [HEC25]. Our reduction also implies that one can solve PSGI[G] in subexponential time for
 groups whose corresponding StateHSP instance can be solved by Kuperberg’s algorithm [Kup05].
 In particular, this yields a subexponential time quantum algorithm for PSGI[ZN ] as it reduces to
 StateHSP over the dihedral group, ZN ⋉ Z2 .
    We can also “robustify” this statement to allow for imperfect PSGI completeness and soundness.
 Formally, we show the following.
 Theorem 4.4 (Robust reduction from PSGI to approximate StateHSP). Let G be a finite abelian
 group with an efficient unitary representation R : G → U (2n ), and let α < 1 be a constant. Let
 m = m(n) be polynomially bounded.
    Suppose an instance of PSGI[G] is promised to satisfy one of the following:
(YES) There exists h ∈ G such that

                                        Re (⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩) ≥ β = 1 − ε.

 (NO) For every h ∈ G,
                                                 |⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩| ≤ α.

    Then there is an efficient reduction to an approximate StateHSP instance over the generalized
 dihedral group G ⋊ Z2 such that:
    • in the YES case, there exists an element (h, 1) ∈ G ⋊ Z2 that stabilizes the resulting state up to
      overlap at least
                                          β m = (1 − ε)m ≥ 1 − mε;

    • in the NO case, every element (h, 1) ∈ G ⋊ Z2 has overlap at most

                                                          αm .

     More generally, if ε ≤ 1/q(n) and m(n)/q(n) ≤ 1/p(n) for some polynomial p, then the resulting
 instance has completeness at least 1−1/p(n) and soundness αm . Choosing m = ω(log n) gives negligible
 soundness.
 Proof. Using the same notation as in Theorem 4.3, we will consider m copies of the state |Ψ⟩ and an
 m-fold product of the representation R′ .
                                            ⊗m          ′
                               |Φ⟩ := |Ψ⟩        ,     Rm (g, a) := R′ (g, a)⊗m .

 This is still an efficient representation of Γ, since m is polynomially bounded.
    For every h ∈ G, we have
                                              1
                         ⟨Ψ| R′ (h, 1) |Ψ⟩ =    (⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩ + ⟨ψ2 | R(−h) |ψ1 ⟩)
                                              2
                                            = Re (⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩) .

 Therefore,
                                    ′                                      m
                               ⟨Φ| Rm (h, 1) |Φ⟩ = (⟨Ψ| R′ (h, 1) |Ψ⟩)
                                                                               m
                                                     = (Re (⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩)) .
    In the YES case, there exists h ∈ G such that

                                       Re (⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩) ≥ 1 − ε.


                                                        22
Hence
                                          ′
                                     ⟨Φ| Rm (h, 1) |Φ⟩ ≥ (1 − ε)m .
By Bernoulli’s inequality,
                                            (1 − ε)m ≥ 1 − mε.
Thus the odd element (h, 1) approximately stabilizes |Φ⟩ with overlap at least 1 − mε.
  In the NO case, for every h ∈ G,
                                       |⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩| ≤ α.
Therefore, for every odd element (h, 1),
                                    ′                                                    m
                              |⟨Φ| Rm (h, 1) |Φ⟩| = |Re (⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩)|
                                                                                m
                                                      ≤ |⟨ψ1 | R(h) |ψ2 ⟩|
                                                           m
                                                      ≤α .

Since α < 1 is constant, αm = negl(n) whenever m = ω(log n).
   Hence the reduction maps PSGI[G] with completeness error ε and constant soundness α to an
approximate StateHSP instance over G ⋊ Z2 with odd-element completeness at least (1 − ε)m and
odd-element soundness at most αm .
    We end this section by noting that this approximate StateHSP instance is in general efficiently
solvable quantumly whenever the ordinary StateHSP instance is efficiently solvable quantumly. This
is because, to find (h, 1) one can perform weak Fourier sampling as in ordinary StateHSP. Provided
ε is sufficiently small, this procedure will result in a linear system which can be solved in order to
recover (h, 1). Essentially, we can think of 1 − ε as the probability that each equation is correct and
as long as ε is small enough, the entire system will have only correct equations with high probability.
We illustrate this in the next section for the specific case of the Pauli group.

4.4     Pure State Pauli Isomorphism Problem is BQP-complete
The results of the previous two sections allow us to show that PSGI for the n-qubit Pauli group is
BQP-complete. Formally, we have that
Theorem 4.5 (Restatement of Theorem 1.3). Let α < 1 be a constant and let β = 1 − o(1/(n log2 n)).
Then (α, β)-PSGI[Pn ] is BQP-complete.

Proof. BQP-hardness follows immediately from Theorem 4.2. In fact, for the Pauli group the reduction
from any problem in BQP can be made deterministic by picking the |ϕ⟩ state in Theorem 4.2 to be,
for instance, |ϕ⟩ = |T n ⟩ . This is sufficient, since for every Pauli P ∈ Pn it is the case that

                                           | ⟨ϕ| P |0n ⟩ | = negl(n).

    To show containment in BQP, we will use the reduction to approximate StateHSP given by The-
orem 4.4. At first glance, it might seem like we cannot make use of that result since the Pauli group
is not abelian. However, note that in order to solve PSGI for the Pauli group, it suffices to be able to
solve it for the two-copy Pauli group. We define the latter as

                                       Pn2 = {P ⊗ P : P ∈ Pn }.

Observe that Pn2 is abelian, since for any Pauli operators P, Q ∈ Pn , it is the case that either P Q =
+QP or P Q = −QP . But this means that P ⊗2 Q⊗2 = Q⊗2 P ⊗2 .
  Let ε := 1 − β, and define
                                                 ⊗2                             ⊗2
                                 |ϕ1 ⟩ := |ψ1 ⟩       ,        |ϕ2 ⟩ := |ψ2 ⟩        .

We first reduce the original Pauli isomorphism instance to an instance over Pn2 . Suppose we are in the
YES case, so that there exists P ∈ Pn such that

                                           Re (⟨ψ1 | P |ψ2 ⟩) ≥ β.


                                                          23
Let a := ⟨ψ1 | P |ψ2 ⟩. Then, for Q := P ⊗ P ∈ Pn2 ,

                                                  ⟨ϕ1 | Q |ϕ2 ⟩ = a2 .

Since |a| ≤ 1 and Re(a) ≥ β, we have

                                             Re(a2 ) = 2 Re(a)2 − |a|2
                                                      ≥ 2β 2 − 1.

Thus the two-copy instance has completeness at least

                                                    β2 := 2β 2 − 1.

In particular, since β = 1 − ε, then

                                            β2 = 1 − 4ε + 2ε2 ≥ 1 − 4ε.

   Conversely, in the NO case, for every P ∈ Pn ,

                                                  |⟨ψ1 | P |ψ2 ⟩| ≤ α.

Therefore, for every Q = P ⊗ P ∈ Pn2 ,
                                                                          2
                                        |⟨ϕ1 | Q |ϕ2 ⟩| = |⟨ψ1 | P |ψ2 ⟩| ≤ α2 .

Hence the two-copy instance has soundness at most

                                                    α2 := α2 < 1.

   We now apply Theorem 4.4 to the abelian group Pn2 . Let

                                                    m := ⌈log2 n⌉.

The reduction produces the state
                                                 1
                                          |Ψ⟩ = √ (|0⟩ |ϕ1 ⟩ + |1⟩ |ϕ2 ⟩) ,
                                                  2
and then takes
                                                                 ⊗m
                                                    |Φ⟩ := |Ψ⟩        .
The relevant group is
                                                    Γ := Pn2 ⋉ Z2 .
Since every element of Pn2 has order 2, the inversion action of Z2 on Pn2 is trivial, and hence Γ is an
elementary abelian 2-group. In particular,10

                                                      Γ∼
                                                       = Z2n+2
                                                          2    .

Let ρ denote the representation of Γ produced by the reduction, and let

                                                  ρm (x) := ρ(x)⊗m

be the corresponding representation on |Φ⟩.
   By the robust reduction, for every Q ∈ Pn2 ,
                                                                                 m
                                     ⟨Φ| ρm (Q, 1) |Φ⟩ = (Re (⟨ϕ1 | Q |ϕ2 ⟩)) .

Therefore, in the YES case there exists an odd element (Q, 1) ∈ Γ such that

                                ⟨Φ| ρm (Q, 1) |Φ⟩ ≥ β2m ≥ (1 − 4ε)m ≥ 1 − 4mε,
 10 Essentially, we’re using the symplectic representation of the Paulis plus an additional sign bit.




                                                           24
where the last inequality follows from Bernoulli’s inequality. In the NO case, every odd element
(Q, 1) ∈ Γ satisfies
                                   |⟨Φ| ρm (Q, 1) |Φ⟩| ≤ α2m = α2m .
Since α < 1 is constant and m = ⌈log2 n⌉, we have

                                                  α2m = negl(n).

   It remains to explain how to solve this approximate StateHSP instance in quantum polynomial
time. Since Γ ∼= Z2n+2
                   2   , its quantum Fourier transform is just the Hadamard transform over O(n)
qubits. We use the standard Fourier sampling procedure for StateHSP: prepare
                                                  1 X
                                                 p        |x⟩ |Φ⟩ ,
                                                  |Γ| x∈Γ

apply the controlled unitary ρm (x), apply the quantum Fourier transform over Γ to the first register,
and measure the first register. This produces a character χ ∈ Γ.  b
   For x ∈ Γ, define
                                        f (x) := ⟨Φ| ρm (x) |Φ⟩ .
Since Γ is an elementary abelian 2-group, each ρm (x) is a Hermitian involution, and hence f (x) ∈
[−1, 1]. Standard Fourier sampling gives

                                                             1 + f (x)
                                          Pr[χ(x) = 1] =               .
                                                                2
Repeat the Fourier sampling procedure

                                               T := C log |Γ| = O(n)

times, for a sufficiently large constant C, obtaining characters χ1 , . . . , χT . Let

                               L := {x ∈ Γ : χi (x) = 1 for all i = 1, . . . , T }.

Since Γ ∼
        = Z2n+2
           2    , the set L is a linear subspace and can be computed by Gaussian elimination over F2 .
   In the YES case, let k = (Q, 1) be an odd element satisfying

                                                 f (k) ≥ 1 − 4mε.

Then one Fourier sample satisfies χ(k) = 1 with probability at least 1 − 2mε. Hence

                                           Pr[k ∈ L] ≥ 1 − 2T mε.

Thus, provided
                                                   T mε = o(1),
the true odd approximate stabilizer k survives all the Fourier samples with high probability. Since
T = O(n) and m = ⌈log2 n⌉, it suffices to assume, for example, that
                                                         
                                                     1
                                          ε=o               .
                                                 n log2 n
    Moreover, any odd element x with f (x) ≤ 2/3 survives one Fourier sample with probability at most
5/6. By a union bound over all odd elements of Γ, and by choosing the constant C in T = C log |Γ|
sufficiently large, with high probability no odd element x satisfying f (x) ≤ 2/3 remains in L. Therefore,
in the YES case, with high probability L contains an odd element, and every odd element in L has
overlap greater than 2/3.
    In the NO case, every odd element x ∈ Γ satisfies

                                           |f (x)| ≤ α2m = negl(n).

In particular, for all sufficiently large n,
                                                   f (x) ≤ 1/10.


                                                        25
Hence any fixed odd element survives all T Fourier samples with probability at most
                                                    T
                                            1 + 1/10
                                                        .
                                                2
Again by a union bound over all odd elements, and by choosing C sufficiently large, with high proba-
bility no odd element remains in L.
    The algorithm is therefore as follows. After computing L, check whether L contains an element
whose Z2 component is 1. This can be done by Gaussian elimination. If no such element exists, reject.
If such an odd element x exists, estimate
                                         f (x) = ⟨Φ| ρm (x) |Φ⟩
to constant additive accuracy using the Hadamard test, and accept if the estimate is at least 1/2.
    In the YES case, with high probability the algorithm finds an odd element x ∈ L with f (x) > 2/3,
and the Hadamard test accepts. In the NO case, every odd element has |f (x)| ≤ α2m = negl(n), so the
Hadamard test rejects except with small probability. Thus the containment algorithm has bounded
error and runs in quantum polynomial time.
    This proves that (α, β)-PSGI[Pn ] is in BQP for constant α < 1 and β = 1 − ε satisfying ε =
o(1/(n log2 n)). In particular, this holds whenever β ≥ 1 − 1/nc for any constant c > 1. Together with
the BQP-hardness shown above, this proves BQP-completeness in this parameter regime.


4.5    Pure State Clifford Isomorphism Problem is GI-hard
In this section, we prove that the Pure State Clifford Isomorphism Problem is at least as hard as Graph
Isomorphism (GI).
Theorem 4.6 (Restatement of GI hardness in Theorem 1.2). Graph Isomorphism on n-vertex graphs
reduces to (0.99999, 1)-PSGI[Cn+1 ].
    Our goal is to prove that Graph Isomorphism reduces to the Pure State Clifford Isomorphism
Problem. Let G1 , G2 be two graphs. The main idea of our reduction is to construct the following
states:
                                             1             1
                                    |ψ1 ⟩ = √ |R⟩ |Rn ⟩ + √ |R− ⟩ |G1 ⟩
                                              2             2
                                             1       n     1
                                    |ψ2 ⟩ = √ |R⟩ |R ⟩ + √ |R− ⟩ |G2 ⟩
                                              2             2
                                                                            1               
where |G1 ⟩ , |G2 ⟩ are the graph states for G1 , G2 , respectively, |R⟩ = √ |0⟩ + eπi/8 |1⟩ , |R− ⟩ =
                                                                             2
 1          πi/8
                             n        ⊗n
√ |0⟩ − e        |1⟩ , and |R ⟩ = |R⟩ . Now if G1 and G2 are isomorphic, then the states are exactly
  2
related by a permutation on qubits, which is an element of the Clifford group. So it remains to show
that if Re(⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩) ≥ β for some Clifford C, then C must be a permutation on qubits. We proceed
by the following lemma. For convenience we denote the first qubit as the control and the remaining
qubits as the target.
Lemma 4.7. Let C ∈ Cn be a Clifford unitary on n qubits. If
                                                        2
                                        |⟨Rn | C |Rn ⟩| ≥ 0.9999
where |R⟩ = √12 (|0⟩ + eiπ/8 |1⟩), then C is a permutation on qubits.
Proof. Let P ∈ Pn be a Pauli string. By Hölder’s inequality and the Fuchs-van de Graaf inequality,
               ⟨Rn | P |Rn ⟩ − ⟨Rn | C † P C |Rn ⟩ = Tr P (|Rn ⟩⟨Rn | − C |Rn ⟩⟨Rn | C † )
                                                                                          

                                                 ≤ |Rn ⟩⟨Rn | − C |Rn ⟩⟨Rn | C † 1 ∥P ∥∞
                                                    q                                             (16)
                                                                        2
                                                 ≤ 2 1 − |⟨Rn | C |Rn ⟩|
                                                    √
                                                 ≤ 2 1 − 0.9999 = 0.02


                                                   26
   Let Xi be the X operator on the i-th qubit. Evaluating the expectation value yields ⟨Rn | Xi |Rn ⟩ =
cos(π/8) ≈ 0.9238. By the reverse triangle inequality and the fact that ⟨Rn | C † P C |Rn ⟩ is real-valued,
                              cos(π/8) − 0.02 ≤ ⟨Rn | C † Xi C |Rn ⟩ ≤ cos(π/8) + 0.02.                      (17)

    Let P ′ = C † Xi C. Since C is Clifford, P ′ ∈ Pn . The inequality requires ⟨Rn | P ′ |Rn ⟩ ≥ 0.9038. It
is easy to check that expectation value of any Pauli string P ′ on |Rn ⟩ is
                                                      ′                   |P ′ |X                  |P ′ |Y
                            ⟨Rn | P ′ |Rn ⟩ = s · (0)|P |Z · (cos(π/8))             · (sin(π/8))
where s ∈ {1, −1}. Since 0.9038 > 0, we require s = 1 and |P ′ |Z = 0. Evaluating the possible
configurations for |P ′ |X + |P ′ |Y ≥ 1:
         • If |P ′ |X = 1 and |P ′ |Y = 0, the expectation value is cos(π/8) ≈ 0.9238.
         • If |P ′ |X = 2 and |P ′ |Y = 0, the expectation value is cos2 (π/8) ≈ 0.8535.
      Since 0.8535 < 0.9038, any configuration with weight greater than 1 or containing Y operators
strictly decreases the expectation value below the lower bound. Thus, |P ′ |X = 1, |P ′ |Y = 0, and
|P ′ |Z = 0. This implies P ′ = Xπ(i) for some index π(i).
      Next, consider Yi , where ⟨Rn | Yi |Rn ⟩ = sin(π/8) ≈ 0.3826. Let Q′ = C † Yi C. Applying the trace
distance bound yields
                             sin(π/8) − 0.02 ≤ ⟨Rn | Q′ |Rn ⟩ ≤ sin(π/8) + 0.02
    This requires ⟨Rn | Q′ |Rn ⟩ ≥ 0.3626. Since 0.3626 > 0, Q′ has a positive phase (s = 1) and
|Q |Z = 0. Because conjugating by Cliffords preserves commutation relations, C † Xi C and C † Yi C
     ′

must anticommute:
                                Xi Yi = −Yi Xi =⇒ Xπ(i) Q′ = −Q′ Xπ(i)
    For Q′ to anticommute with Xπ(i) while containing no Z operators, Q′ must contain a Y operator
at index π(i). Therefore, Q′ = Yπ(i) ⊗ XA , where XA is a tensor product of X operators on a subset
of indices A not containing π(i). The expectation value of Q′ is sin(π/8)(cos(π/8))|A| .
    If |A| ≥ 1, the maximum expectation value is sin(π/8) cos(π/8) ≈ 0.3535. Since 0.3535 < 0.3626,
we must have |A| = 0. Thus, C † Yi C = Yπ(i) .
    Finally, consider Zi :
                      C † Zi C = C † (−iXi Yi )C = −i(C † Xi C)(C † Yi C) = −iXπ(i) Yπ(i) = Zπ(i)
    Since C acts on all single-qubit Paulis by permuting their indices according to π, it acts on all basis
states over the register by permuting their indices. Therefore, C is a permutation on qubits.
         Now, we will continue with the reduction.
Claim 4.8. Let C ∈ Cn+1 be an (n + 1)-qubit Clifford unitary and let
                                                  1            1
                                         |ψ1 ⟩ = √ |R, Rn ⟩ + √ |R− , G1 ⟩
                                                   2            2
                                                  1     n      1
                                         |ψ2 ⟩ = √ |R, R ⟩ + √ |R− , G2 ⟩ .
                                                   2            2
If
                                                |⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩| ≥ 0.99999,
then for n ≥ n0 , for a sufficiently large constant n0 , we have that
                                                                 2
                                            |⟨R, Rn | C |R, Rn ⟩| ≥ 0.9999.
Proof.
     0.99999 ≤ |⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩|
               1
             ≤ |(⟨R, Rn | C |R, Rn ⟩ + ⟨R− , G1 | C |R− , G2 ⟩ + ⟨R, Rn | C |R− , G2 ⟩ + ⟨R− , G1 | C |R, Rn ⟩)|
               2
               1
             ≤ (|⟨R, Rn | C |R, Rn ⟩| + 1 + 2s)
               2


                                                            27
where s = exp(−n) is the maximum fidelity of |R, Rn ⟩ with any stabilizer rank 2 state, since
|R− , G1 ⟩ , |R− , G2 ⟩ have stabilizer rank 2. Thus,

                                   |⟨R, Rn | C |R, Rn ⟩| ≥ 2 × 0.99999 − 1 − 2s.

Since s = o(1),
                                                               2
                                          |⟨R, Rn | C |R, Rn ⟩| ≥ 0.9999.


   Now, combining Claim 4.8 and Lemma 4.7, we see that if there exists a Clifford unitary C such
that
                                  |⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩| ≥ 0.99999,
then C must be a permutation.
   We need one more claim, that C must leave the control qubit invariant.
Claim 4.9. Let C be a permutation on n + 1 qubits and let
                                                1            1
                                       |ψ1 ⟩ = √ |R, Rn ⟩ + √ |R− , G1 ⟩
                                                 2            2
                                                1     n      1
                                       |ψ2 ⟩ = √ |R, R ⟩ + √ |R− , G2 ⟩ .
                                                 2            2
If
                                              |⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩| ≥ 0.99999,
then C must leave the first qubit invariant.
Proof. We proceed similarly to the proof of Claim 4.8,

     0.99999 ≤ |⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩|
               1
             ≤ |(⟨R, Rn | C |R, Rn ⟩ + ⟨R− , G1 | C |R− , G2 ⟩ + ⟨R, Rn | C |R− , G2 ⟩ + ⟨R− , G1 | C |R, Rn ⟩)|
               2
               1
             ≤ (|⟨R− , G1 | C |R− , G2 ⟩| + 1 + 2s),
               2
where s = exp(−n). Thus,
                                          |⟨R− , G1 | C |R− , G2 ⟩| ≥ 0.9999
Now suppose for the sake of contradiction that C maps the first qubit to position j ̸= 1. Let I ⊗
|R− ⟩⟨R− |j be the projector onto |R− ⟩⟨R− | on the j-qubit. Then we have

                         |⟨R− , G1 | C |R− , G2 ⟩| = |⟨R− , G1 | (I ⊗ |R− ⟩⟨R− |)C |R− , G2 ⟩|
                                                     p
                                                   ≤ ⟨R− , G1 | (I ⊗ |R− ⟩⟨R− |) |R− , G1 ⟩
                                                 ≤ ⟨G1 | (I ⊗ |R− ⟩⟨R− |j ) |G1 ⟩
                                                                           
                                                 ≤ ⟨R− | Tr\j (|G1 ⟩⟨G1 |) |R− ⟩ .

Now since |G1 ⟩ is a stabilizer state the reduced density matrix Tr\j (|G1 ⟩⟨G1 |) is either a pure stabilizer
state, or the maximally mixed state I/2. In either case, we obtain our contradiction, since |R− ⟩ has
stabilizer fidelity less than 0.9999. Thus, C must leave the first qubit invariant.

    Finally, we can put it all together. Recall we already have one direction, i.e. if G1 ∼
                                                                                          = G2 , then there
exists a Clifford unitary C such that

                                           |⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩| = 1 ≥ 0.99999.

So it remains to prove the other direction.




                                                          28
Claim 4.10. Let
                                              1            1
                                     |ψ1 ⟩ = √ |R, Rn ⟩ + √ |R− , G1 ⟩
                                               2            2
                                              1            1
                                     |ψ2 ⟩ = √ |R, Rn ⟩ + √ |R− , G2 ⟩ ,
                                               2            2
where |G1 ⟩ , |G2 ⟩ are graph states for G1 , G2 , respectively. If there exists a Clifford unitary C such that

                                            |⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩| ≥ 0.99999,

then G1 ∼
        = G2 .
Proof. Suppose there exists a Clifford unitary C ∈ Cn+1 such that

                                            |⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩| ≥ 0.99999.

By Lemma 4.7 and Claim 4.9, C must be a permutation on qubits which leaves the control qubit
invariant. Therefore
                            1              1                1             1
                 C |ψ2 ⟩ = √ C |R, Rn ⟩ + √ C |R− , G2 ⟩ = √ |R⟩ |Rn ⟩ + √ |R− ⟩ |G′2 ⟩ ,
                             2              2                2             2
where G′2 is some graph state. Now
                                                1
                     0.99999 ≤ |⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩| ≤  |(⟨R, Rn |R, Rn ⟩ + ⟨R− , G1 |R− , G′2 ⟩|
                                                2
                                                1 1
                                               ≤ + | ⟨G1 |G′2 ⟩ |.
                                                2 2
Thus,
                                             |⟨G1 |G′2 ⟩| ≥ 0.99999.
Now, since |G1 ⟩ , |G′2 ⟩ are stabilizer states with |⟨G1 |G′2 ⟩| > √12 , it must be the case that |G1 ⟩ = |G′2 ⟩,
and thus, G1 = G′2 . Finally, since G1 = G′2 ∼   = G2 , we have G1 ∼   = G2 .

4.6     Pure State Clifford Isomorphism Problem with Polynomial Stabilizer
        Rank States
In this section, we define a fully classical version of the Pure State Clifford Isomorphism Problem
by restricting to polynomial stabilizer rank states, which can be efficiently described and simulated
classically. We show that this problem is in SZK, but remains GI-hard.

4.6.1    SZK containment
In this section, we present a statistical zero-knowledge protocol for the explicit Clifford nonisomor-
phism problem when states are given as linear combinations of polynomially many stabilizer states.
Importantly, we will use the classical shadows procedure as part of the protocol.
Theorem 4.11. When states are given as a linear combination of polynomially many stabilizer states,
the Pure State Clifford Isomorphism Problem is in SZK when β = 1 and α < 1 is a constant.
Proof. We will describe an SZK protocol for the non-isomorphism problem. One round of the protocol
is as follows, where (V) denotes Verifier and (P) denotes Prover. The prover and verifier will repeat
the protocol to amplify soundness. Let |ψ0 ⟩ , |ψ1 ⟩ be the input states given as a linear combination of
poly(n) stabilizer states.
   1. (V) Pick j ∈ {0, 1} uniformly at random, and pick a uniformly random Clifford D ∈ Cn .
                                
   2. (V) Prepare N = O(log γε  M
                                 2  ) classical shadows for the state |ψ ′ ⟩ = D |ψi ⟩, where M is twice
      the number of Clifford unitaries on n qubits. Send the description of the classical shadows to
      (P).


                                                       29
   3. (P) Send j ′ ∈ {0, 1} to (V).
   4. (V) Accept if and only if j ′ = j.
    First we will prove that if for all Clifford unitaries C ∈ Cn , | ⟨ψ0 | C |ψ1 ⟩ | < α, then Verifier accepts
with probability at least (1 − γ)2 .
    Using the classical shadows, the Prover estimates all fidelities in the Clifford orbit of |ψ0 ⟩ and |ψ1 ⟩
within additive error ε with probability at least (1 − γ)2 . For ε < (1 − α)/2, Prover sends the correct
bit, i.e. j ′ = j.
    Now, we will show that if there exists a Clifford unitary C such that |ψ0 ⟩ = C |ψ1 ⟩, then Verifier
accepts with probability at most 1/2.
    Let D0 and D1 be the distributions of |ψ ′ ⟩ when j = 0 and j = 1, respectively. For j = 0, D0 is
uniformly random over the set
                                             {C |ψ0 ⟩ s.t. C ∈ Cn }
and for j = 1, D1 is uniformly random over the set
                                            {C |ψ1 ⟩ s.t. C ∈ Cn }.
Since |ψ0 ⟩ = D |ψ1 ⟩,
                {C |ψ0 ⟩ s.t. C ∈ Cn } = {CD |ψ1 ⟩ s.t. C ∈ Cn } = {C |ψ1 ⟩ s.t. C ∈ Cn }.
Thus, D0 = D1 . Finally, since step (2) is the same regardless of j, the distribution of Verifier’s message
to Prover is the same regardless of j.
    Last, we will show that the protocol is zero-knowledge. To simulate Prover’s messages for a YES
instance, that is, when |ψ0 ⟩ and |ψ1 ⟩ are not isomorphic, Verifier sends the correct bit with probability
(1 − γ)2 .

4.6.2   Graph Isomorphism-hardness
In this section, we show that the isomorphism problem remains GI-hard even for polynomial stabilizer
rank states.
    We follow a similar recipe as in Section 4.5, but with a slight modification. Let G1 , G2 be two
graphs. We construct the following states:
                                           |ψ1 ⟩ = a |M ⟩ + b1 |G1 ⟩
                                           |ψ2 ⟩ = a |M ⟩ + b2 |G2 ⟩ ,
                                                                                                 1
where |G1 ⟩ , |G2 ⟩ are the graph states for G1 , G2 , respectively and a = 1 − Θ(n122 ) , b1 , b2 =
                                                                                              Θ(n11 )
are chosen such that |ψ1 ⟩ , |ψ2 ⟩ are normalized quantum states. We define |M ⟩ over n qubits as the
normalized symmetric superposition of all basis states containing exactly two |R⟩ states and n − 2
computational zero states. Then
                                                 X
                                      |M ⟩ = cn       |Ri Rj 0 . . . 0⟩ ,
                                                 1≤i<j≤n
             1
where cn = Θ(n 2 ) is a normalization constant (note that the elements of the sum are not orthogonal).

Because |R⟩ has stabilizer rank 2, |M ⟩ is a linear combination of n2 stabilizer-rank-4 states and
                                                                        

therefore has stabilizer rank at most 2n(n − 1).
   To prove the theorem we will need some claims and lemmas.
Claim 4.12. Let C be a Clifford unitary such that C † Zi C = Zπ(i) for all i ∈ [n] and some permutation
π ∈ Sn . Then C = Uπ D where Uπ is the permutation on qubits specified by π and D is a diagonal
Clifford unitary.
Proof. Let D = Uπ† C. Then for all i ∈ [n],
                                           D† Zi D = C † (Uπ Zi Uπ† )C
                                                   = C † Zπ−1 (i) C
                                                   = Zi .
         †
Since, D Zi D = Zi for all i, D commutes with all Zi and therefore D is diagonal.


                                                       30
Claim 4.13. Let |ek ⟩ = 0k−1 10n−k−1 ∈ (C2 )⊗n be the computational basis state with a one at the
k-th coordinate of the tensor product and zeros elsewhere. Then
                                                                    1
                                                 |⟨ek |M ⟩| =           .
                                                                   Θ(n)

Proof. Let |Ri,j ⟩ = |Ri Rj 0 . . . 0⟩. For any such state with k ∈  / {i, j}, ⟨ek |Ri,j ⟩ = 0, and for any such
state with k ∈ {i, j},
                                                             eπi/8
                                               ⟨ek |Ri,j ⟩ =       .
                                                               2
There are Θ(n) such choices of {i, j} such that k ∈ {i, j}. Thus

                                                                  eπi/8   eπi/8
                                      ⟨ek |M ⟩ = cn Θ(n)                =       ,
                                                                    2     Θ(n)
so
                                                                    1
                                                 |⟨ek |M ⟩| =           .
                                                                   Θ(n)


Claim 4.14. Let |ek,ℓ ⟩ ∈ (C2 )⊗n denote the computational basis state whose bit string has 1’s in
positions k and ℓ, and 0’s elsewhere, where k ̸= ℓ. Then
                                                                     1
                                               |⟨ek,ℓ |M ⟩| =             .
                                                                   Θ(n2 )

Proof. Let |Ri,j ⟩ = |Ri Rj 0 . . . 0⟩. For any such state with k ∈   / {i, j}, ⟨ek |Ri,j ⟩ = 0, and for any such
state with k, ℓ ∈ {i, j},
                                                              eπi/4
                                              ⟨ek,l |Ri,j ⟩ =       .
                                                                2
There is one such choice of {i, j} such that k, ℓ ∈ {i, j}. Thus

                                                              eπi/4   eπi/4
                                        ⟨ek,ℓ |M ⟩ = cn             =        ,
                                                                2     Θ(n2 )
so
                                                                     1
                                               |⟨ek,ℓ |M ⟩| =             .
                                                                   Θ(n2 )


Claim 4.15. For every n-qubit Pauli string P that contains at least one X or Y , we have
                                                        
                                                        1
                                     |⟨M | P |M ⟩| = O     .
                                                        n

                   P                                          |ψ⟩
Proof. Let |ψ⟩ =       1≤j<k≤n |Rj Rk 0 . . . 0⟩, then |M ⟩ = ∥ψ∥ and

                                                                  ⟨Ψ| P |Ψ⟩
                                            ⟨M | P |M ⟩ =                   .
                                                                    ∥Ψ∥2

Expanding the numerator,
                                            X
                              ⟨ψ| P |ψ⟩ =            ⟨Ri1 Rj1 0 . . . 0| P |Ri2 Rj2 0 . . . 0⟩ .
                                            i1 <j1
                                            i2 <j2

Choose a site a such that Pa ∈ {X, Y }. If

                                                a∈
                                                 / {i1 , j1 , i2 , j2 },


                                                             31
then the local contribution at site a is
                                               ⟨0| Pa |0⟩ = 0.
Hence a summand can be nonzero only if a ∈ {i1 , j1 , i2 , j2 }. There are only O(n3 ) such choices of
(i1 , j1 , i2 , j2 ), and each summand has absolute value at most 1. Therefore

                                           | ⟨ψ| P |ψ⟩ | = O(n3 ).

On the other hand,
                                           ∥ψ∥2 = 1/c2n = Θ(n4 ).
Thus                                                         3   
                                            | ⟨ψ| P |ψ⟩ |    n     1
                            |⟨M | P |M ⟩| =         2
                                                          =O 4 =O     .
                                                ∥ψ∥          n     n


Lemma 4.16. Let C ∈ Cn be a Clifford unitary on n qubits. If
                                                                   1
                                     Re(⟨M | C |M ⟩) ≥ 1 −               ,
                                                                 Θ(n11 )
then C is a permutation on qubits.
                                                                                   1              1
Proof. First note that |⟨M | C |M ⟩| ≥ Re(⟨M | C |M ⟩) and furthermore that (1−      11
                                                                                        )2 = 1−         .
                                                                               Θ(n )            Θ(n11 )
Let P ∈ Pn be a Pauli string. By Hölder’s inequality and the Fuchs-van de Graaf inequality,

                 ⟨M | P |M ⟩ − ⟨M | C † P C |M ⟩ = Tr P (|M ⟩⟨M | − C |M ⟩⟨M | C † )
                                                                                   

                                                   ≤ |M ⟩⟨M | − C |M ⟩⟨M | C † 1 ∥P ∥∞
                                                      q
                                                                         2                             (18)
                                                   ≤ 2 1 − |⟨M | C |M ⟩|
                                                      s
                                                          1        1
                                                   ≤2           < 5,
                                                        Θ(n11 )    n

for large enough n.
                                                                                                      1
    Let Zi be the Z operator on the i-th qubit. Its expectation value on |M ⟩ is ⟨M | Zi |M ⟩ = 1 − Θ(n 2) .
       ′    †                            ′
Let P = C Zi C. Since C is Clifford, P ∈ Pn . By reverse triangle inequality,
                                  1     1                         1     1
                           1−         −   ≤ ⟨M | P ′ |M ⟩ ≤ 1 −       +   .
                                Θ(n2 ) n5                       Θ(n2 ) n5
For large enough n, the lower bound forces P ′ to contain no X or Y operators; see Claim 4.15 below.
Furthermore, it is easy to verify that if P ′ contains more than one Z operator, the bound will be
violated. Thus P ′ = Zπ(i) for some index π(i), meaning C † Zi C = Zπ(i) .
    Now, by Claim 4.12, C = Uπ D where Uπ is a permutation on qubits and D is a diagonal Clifford.
So

                        Re(⟨M | C |M ⟩) = Re(⟨M | Uπ D |M ⟩) = Re(⟨M | D |M ⟩),

since |M ⟩ is invariant under permuting qubits. Furthermore, since D is a diagonal Clifford,

                                             D |x⟩ = f (x) |x⟩ ,

where f is a quadratic phase polynomial which takes values in {1, i, −1, −i} and is uniquely specified
by its action on the Hamming weight 1 and 2 strings. We will show that f (x) = 1 for all x. Suppose
for the sake of contradiction f (x) ̸= 1 for some |x| ∈ {1, 2}. Then

                                                                 2             1
                              Re(⟨M | D |M ⟩) ≤ 1 − |⟨M |x⟩| ≤ 1 −                  ,
                                                                             Θ(n4 )
by Claim 4.13 and Claim 4.14. But this contradicts our assumption. Thus, D = I is the identity, and
so C = Uπ .


                                                     32
     We now proceed with the reduction.
Claim 4.17. Let C ∈ Cn be a Clifford unitary and let

                                           |ψ1 ⟩ = a |M ⟩ + b1 |G1 ⟩
                                           |ψ2 ⟩ = a |M ⟩ + b2 |G2 ⟩ ,

where |G1 ⟩ and |G2 ⟩ are graph states and a, b1 , b2 are real such that a = 1 − Θ(n122 ) , b1 = Θ(n111 ) ,
b2 = Θ(n111 ) , and |ψ1 ⟩ and |ψ2 ⟩ are valid quantum states. If

                                                                   1
                                       Re(⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩) ≥ 1 −           ,
                                                                 Ω(n22 )

then
                                                                   1
                                       Re(⟨M | C |M ⟩) ≥ 1 −
                                                                 Ω(n11 )
for large enough n.
Proof. By the triangle inequality on the expanded inner product,
       1
1−           ≤ Re(⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩) = Re(a2 ⟨M | C |M ⟩ + b1 b2 ⟨G1 | C |G2 ⟩ + ab2 ⟨M | C |G2 ⟩ + ab1 ⟨G1 | C |M ⟩))
     Ω(n22 )
                                 ≤ a2 Re(⟨M | C |M ⟩) + 3b,

where b = max{b1 , b2 } = Θ(n111 ) . Rearranging yields

                                                    1     1          1
                          Re(⟨M | C |M ⟩) ≥ 1 −      22
                                                        −   11
                                                               =1−         ,
                                                  Ω(n ) Θ(n )      Ω(n11 )

as desired.
   Combining Claim 4.17 and Lemma 4.16, if there exists a Clifford unitary C ∈ Cn such that
Re(⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩) ≥ 1 − Ω(n122 ) , then C must be a permutation.

Claim 4.18. Let a, b1 , b2 be defined as in Claim 4.17. Then

                                              1 − a2
                                                     ≥ 1 − o(1).
                                               b1 b2

Proof. First, we can see that a2 +b21 ≈ 1 and a2 +b22 ≈ 1 by showing that |M ⟩ and |G⟩ are approximately
orthogonal for any graph state |G⟩. In particular, since any graph state is equally supported on all
                                                                                                    2
2n computational basis states and |M ⟩ is supported on Θ(n2 ) computational basis states, |⟨M |G⟩| is
exponentially small in n. Thus,

                                              a2 + b21 = 1 + ε1 ,
                                              a2 + b22 = 1 + ε2 ,

where |ε1 | ≤ exp(−n) and |ε2 | ≤ exp(−n). WLOG let b1 ≥ b2 . Now

                                  1 − a2   1 − a2  b2 − ε1
                                         ≥    2   = 1 2    = 1 − o(1),
                                   b1 b2     b1       b1

as desired.
Claim 4.19. Let |ψ1 ⟩ , |ψ2 ⟩ be defined as above. If there exists a Clifford unitary C such that
                                                                   1
                                       Re(⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩) ≥ 1 −           ,
                                                                 Ω(n23 )

then G1 ∼
        = G2 .

                                                      33
Proof. By Lemma 4.16 and Claim 4.17, C is a permutation on qubits. Therefore,

                             C |ψ2 ⟩ = aC |M ⟩ + b2 C |G2 ⟩ = a |M ⟩ + b2 |G′2 ⟩ ,

where |G′2 ⟩ = C |G2 ⟩ is the graph state for some graph G′2 . Expanding yields
                1
         1−           ≤ |⟨ψ1 | C |ψ2 ⟩| = a2 ⟨M |M ⟩ + b1 b2 ⟨G1 |G′2 ⟩ + ab2 ⟨M |G′2 ⟩ + ab1 ⟨G1 |M ⟩
              Ω(n23 )
                                       ≤ a2 + b1 b2 |⟨G1 |G′2 ⟩| + (ab2 + ab1 )s,

where s is the maximum fidelity of |M ⟩ with any graph state. Since graph states are equally sup-
                                                                           1
ported on all 2n computational basis states and |M ⟩ has support at most        on any basis state
                                                                         Θ(n2 )
(Claim 4.13,Claim 4.14), s = exp(−n). Rearranging and dropping the s terms yields
                                                                      
                                                1          1
                               |⟨G1 |G′2 ⟩| ≥         1−         − a 2
                                              b1 b2      Ω(n23 )
                                              1 − a2     1
                                            ≥         −
                                               b1 b2    Ω(n)
                                            ≥ 1 − o(1),
                                              1
where we used the fact that b1 b2 =                and Claim 4.18. Finally, because |G1 ⟩ and |G′2 ⟩ are
                                           Θ(n22 )
stabilizer states with |⟨G1 |G′2 ⟩| ≥ 1 − o(1), we have |G1 ⟩ = |G′2 ⟩ and so G1 = G′2 . Since G1 = G′2 and
G′2 ∼
    = G2 , we have G1 ∼ = G2 , as desired.


5      Mixed State Group Isomorphism Problems
In this section, we study the complexity of Mixed State Group Isomorphism Problems. [LG17] showed
that for the symmetric group, this problem is QSZK-hard, but left open whether one can prove tight
upper bounds for this problem. We show that not only is this problem QSZK-complete, in fact the
Mixed State Group Isomorphism Problem is QSZK-complete for all finite groups.

5.1    QSZK containment of Mixed State Group Isomorphism
In this section, we prove that Mixed State Group Isomorphism is in QSZK. We will reduce to the
well-known QSZK-complete problem Quantum State Distinguishability [Wat02b].
   We will also use the following claim.
Claim 5.1. Let ρ, σ be two density matrices, and let S be a set of unitaries such that

                                      ∀U, V ∈ S, F (V ρV † , U σU † ) ≤ ε.

Furthermore let E be the twirling channel for S. That is,
                                                      1 X
                                            E(ρ) =        U ρU † .
                                                     |S|
                                                         U ∈S

Then

                                              F (E(ρ), E(σ)) ≤ ε|S|.

Proof. First note the following fact due to Rotfel’d [Rot69]. Let A and B be PSD square matrices.
Then
                                      √             √         √
                                    Tr A + B ≤ Tr A + Tr B.

Now, recall the definition of the fidelity:
                                                         p
                                         F (ρ, σ) = Tr       ρ1/2 σρ1/2 .


                                                       34
Let ρj = Uj ρUj† , where Uj is the j-th element of S for some fixed ordering, and similarly let σℓ = Uℓ σUℓ† .
Then
                                                       1 X
                                             E(ρ) =          ρj ,
                                                      |S| j
                                                             1 X
                                                 E(σ) =          σℓ .
                                                            |S|
                                                                 ℓ

Now
                                             s
                                                      1 X 1/2 1 X            1 X 1/2
                     F (E(ρ), E(σ)) = Tr        (          ρj ) (     σℓ )(       ρj )
                                                     |S| j        |S|       |S| j
                                                                         ℓ
                                             s
                                             1 X 1 X 1/2                  1 X 1/2
                                     = Tr          (         ρj ) σℓ (          ρj )
                                            |S|      |S| j               |S| j
                                                ℓ
                                                   s
                                         1 X             1 X 1/2             1 X 1/2
                                     ≤p         Tr (            ρj ) σℓ (          ρj )
                                         |S| ℓ         |S| j                |S| j
                                                   s
                                         1 X            1/2 1
                                                                 X         1/2                           (19)
                                     =p         Tr σℓ (              ρj )σℓ
                                         |S| ℓ              |S|   j
                                                   s
                                         1   X         1   X     1/2     1/2
                                     =p         Tr            σ ρj σℓ
                                         |S| ℓ        |S| j ℓ
                                        1 X
                                                q
                                                     1/2    1/2
                                     ≤        Tr σℓ ρj σℓ
                                       |S|
                                               ℓ,j

                                     ≤|S| max F (ρj , σl ),
                                               j,l

where we used the linearity of matrix multiplication, the above trace inequality, and the symmetry of
fidelity in its inputs.
Theorem 5.2 (Restatement of the upper bound in Theorem 1.5). Let G be any nontrivial finite group,
let α < 1 be a constant, and β ≥ 1 − 1/ω(log |G|). Then (α, β) − MSGI[G] is in QSZK.
Proof. For convenience, we prove the theorem for the complement problem, Mixed State Group Noniso-
morphism, which suffices because QSZK is closed under complement. We reduce to the QSZK-complete
problem Quantum State Distinguishability (QSD) [Wat02b]. The reduction is as follows: Let ρ and σ
be the input states to the Mixed State Group Nonisomorphism problem. We define the inputs to the
QSD instance as
                                                 1 X
                                       ρ′ =          (R(g)ρR(g)† )⊗k ,
                                                |G|
                                                      g∈G

                                         ′  1 X
                                       σ =      (R(g)σR(g)† )⊗k ,
                                           |G|
                                                      g∈G

where k ≥ ω(log |G|) and k(1−β) ≤ 1/20. Let’s first consider as input to the reduction a YES instance
of Mixed State Clifford Nonisomorphism. We are given circuits describing n-qubit states ρ, σ such that
for all g ∈ G,

                                              F (ρ, R(g)σR(g)† ) ≤ α.

Applying Claim 5.1 with states ρ⊗k , σ ⊗k and S = {R(g)⊗k | g ∈ G} yields

                                             F (ρ′ , σ ′ ) ≤ αk |G| ≤ o(1).

We also used the fact that F (ρ⊗k , σ ⊗k ) = F (ρ, σ)k . Importantly, the states ρ′ and σ ′ are efficiently
preparable by sampling a random group element and applying it to k copies of ρ and σ, respectively.


                                                            35
Now, since the fidelity is negligible, by the Fuchs-van de Graaf inequalities, the trace distance is
exponentially close to 1:
                                         1 ′
                                           ∥ρ − σ ′ ∥1 ≥ 1 − o(1).
                                         2
   Now, let’s consider a NO instance of Mixed State Nonisomorphism, where we are given ρ, σ such
that for some h ∈ G,

                                         F (ρ, R(h)σR(h)† ) ≥ β.

Let E be the k-twirling channel for G, that is
                                                 1 X
                                  E(ρ⊗k ) =          (R(g)ρR(g)† )⊗k .
                                                |G|
                                                   g∈G

Then

                              F (ρ′ , σ ′ ) =F (E(ρ⊗k ), E(σ ⊗k ))
                                         =F (E(ρ⊗k ), E((R(h)σR(h)† )⊗k ))
                                         ≥F (ρ⊗k , (R(h)σR(h)† )⊗k )
                                         =F (ρ, R(h)σR(h)† )k
                                         =β k
                                         ≥1 − k(1 − β)
                                         ≥0.95,

where we used multiplicativity and monotonicity of fidelity, Bernoulli’s inequality, and our assumption
                1
that k(1 − β) ≤    . Applying Fuchs-van de Graaf once more yields
                20
                                             1 ′
                                               ∥ρ − σ ′ ∥1 ≤ 1/3.
                                             2
Thus, our reduction maps YES instances of Mixed State Nonisomorphism to YES instances of QSD,
and NO instances of Mixed State Nonisomorphism to NO instances of QSD.

5.2    Mixed State Group Isomorphism Problem is QSZK-hard
In this section, we prove that the Mixed State Group Isomorphism Problem is QSZK-hard over any
finite group G.
    We will also use the following facts:
Theorem 5.3 (Efficient construction of approximate state t-designs [BHH16]). Local random circuits
of depth poly(n, t, log 1ε ) form ε-approximate t-designs.
   We will also use the following claims:
Claim 5.4 (Fidelity concentration inequality for approximate state t-designs). Let ρ be a fixed n-qubit
mixed quantum state. Let G be a group. Let |ψ⟩ be a pure state drawn from an ε-approximate state
t-design where t = ω(max{log |G|, n}) and ε ≤ 21nt . Then with probability 1 − o(1),

                                       max F (ρ, R(g) |ψ⟩) ≤ o(1).
                                       g∈G

Proof. Applying Markov’s inequality and the moment method, we get
                                           √
                  Pr [F (ρ, R(g) |ψ⟩)2 ≥ 1/ d] = Pr [F (ρ, R(g) |ψ⟩)2t ≥ 1/dt/2 ]
                  |ψ⟩∼µ                                  |ψ⟩∼µ

                                                     ≤ dt/2 E[F (ρ, R(g) |ψ⟩)2t ]
                                                         dt/2            2
                                                     ≤        + εdt/2 ≤ t/2 ,
                                                          dt           d


                                                      36
where d = 2n . We also used the fact that µ is an approximate 2t design and a standard bound on the
moments of the fidelity for Haar random states. Since t ≥ ω(log |G|), and by a union bound over all
group elements,
                                                      √               |G|
                         Pr [max F (ρ, R(g) |ψ⟩)2 ≥ 1/ d] ≤                    = o(1),
                        |ψ⟩∼µ g∈G                                  2ω(log |G|)
and we are done.
Claim 5.5. Let S be a set of unitaries corresponding to the image of a group G under a representation
R. Let |ψ⟩ be a pure state drawn from an ε-approximate state t-design where t = ω(max{log |G|, n})
and ε ≤ 21nt . Then with probability 1 − o(1),
                                                                       
                                                            | Tr(R(g))|
                        max F (R(g) |ψ⟩ , |ψ⟩) ≤ max                      + o(1).
                       g∈G\{I}                   g∈G\{I}         2n
Proof. For all g ∈ G, define the complex random variable Xg = ⟨ψ|R(g)|ψ⟩ = Tr(R(g) |ψ⟩⟨ψ|). Since
|ψ⟩ is drawn from a t-design with t ≥ 1, its first moment is given by the Haar measure:
                                                                    
                                   E|ψ⟩ [Xg ] = Tr R(g)E|ψ⟩ [|ψ⟩⟨ψ|]
                                                           
                                                          I
                                              = Tr R(g) n
                                                         2
                                                Tr(R(g))
                                              =          .
                                                    2n
Consequently, the absolute value of the expectation is:
                                                         | Tr(R(g))|
                                        |E|ψ⟩ [Xg ]| =               .
                                                              2n
By concentration of measure for ε-approximate t-designs (see for example Claim 5.4 or [Mel24]), Xg
                                                                                                1
deviates from its mean under the Haar measure by more than some o(1) with probability at most dΩ(t) .
Thus by a union bound, with high probability, the maximum deviation over the group is bounded by

                                      max |Xg − E|ψ⟩ [Xg ]| ≤ o(1).
                                    g∈G\{I}

Next we apply the triangle inequality |Xg | ≤ |E|ψ⟩ [Xg ]| + |Xg − E|ψ⟩ [Xg ]| to obtain, with high proba-
bility:                                                                  
                                                              | Tr(R(g))|
                       max F (R(g) |ψ⟩ , |ψ⟩) ≤ max                         + o(1).
                      g∈G\{I}                     g∈G\{I}          2n


   We now prove the theorem.
Theorem 5.6 (Formal restatement of the lower bound in Theorem 1.5). Let G be a finite group with
                                                                                | Tr(R(g))|
log |G| ≤ poly(n), and let R be a unitary representation of G such that maxg̸=I             = µ < 1.
                                                                                     2n
                                                                              1 µ
Then (α, β)-MSGI[G] is QSZK-hard under randomized reductions for any α > + and β > α.
                                                                              2    2
Proof. We will proceed by reducing from (α′ , β ′ )-Quantum State Distinguishability, which importantly
remains QSZK-hard even for α′ = exp(−n), β ′ = 1 − exp(−n). Given states ρ, σ, we define the inputs
to the Mixed State Group Isomorphism instance as
                                              1   1
                                          σ0 = ρ + |ψ⟩⟨ψ|
                                              2   2
                                              1   1
                                          σ1 = σ + |ψ⟩⟨ψ| ,
                                              2   2
where |ψ⟩ is drawn from an ε-approximate t-design where t = ω(max{log |G|, n}) and ε ≤ 21nt . Impor-
tantly, preparing the descriptions of the states is efficient since sampling random circuits according to
(Theorem 5.3) is efficient.


                                                    37
   Now, suppose ρ, σ corresponds to a NO instance of (α′ , β ′ )-QSD. Taking the isomorphism to be
the identity, h = I, we have
                                                   
                         1    1          1    1                  1
                           ρ + |ψ⟩⟨ψ| −    σ + |ψ⟩⟨ψ|       = ∥ρ − σ∥1 ≤ α′ .
                         2    2          2    2           1      2
Thus, by the Fuchs-van de Graaf inequalities,

                                         F (σ0 , σ1 ) ≥ 1 − α′ = 1 − o(1).
    On the other hand, suppose ρ, σ corresponds to a YES instance of (α′ , β ′ )-QSD. Let’s analyze the
fidelity under an arbitrary unitary U ∈ G with U ̸= I. Using the Rotfel’d trace inequality and by
Claim 5.4 and Claim 5.5, with probability 1 − o(1),
                     1                1                      1                     1
 F (U σ0 U † , σ1 ) ≤ F (U ρU † , σ) + F (U ρU † , |ψ⟩⟨ψ|) + F (U |ψ⟩⟨ψ| U † , σ) + F (U |ψ⟩⟨ψ| U † , |ψ⟩⟨ψ|)
                     2                2                      2                     2
                     1                1
                    ≤ F (U ρU † , σ) + F (U |ψ⟩⟨ψ| U † , |ψ⟩⟨ψ|) + o(1)
                     2                2
                     1 µ
                    ≤ + + o(1).
                     2   2
On the other hand, for U = I we have
                                  1                           1                     1
                 F (σ0 , σ1 ) ≤     F (ρ, σ) + F (ρ, |ψ⟩⟨ψ|) + F (|ψ⟩⟨ψ| , |ψ⟩⟨ψ|) ≤ + o(1).
                                  2                           2                     2


                                                   | Tr(R(g))|
    One might ask whether the condition maxg∈G                 = µ < 1 is natural, as well as whether it
                                                        2n
is necessary. Importantly, one can choose pathological low-dimensional representations for which the
condition is not satisfied, such as the one-dimensional representation of a cyclic group embedded in a
single diagonal entry of a larger unitary. However, we note that for natural representations appearing
in the literature [BGW25; HEC25], the trace condition is met.

5.3    Mixed StateHSP is QSZK-hard
Here we prove that the mixed state version of StateHSP is QSZK-hard for some abelian groups. In
particular, finding a hidden subgroup that stabilizes a mixed state is hard when the group G contains
an element of order 2. Importantly, this captures groups for which the pure StateHSP problems are in
BQP, such as the group and representation of Zn2 given in [BGW25]. The QSZK-hardness also holds for
the decision problem, which asks whether the hidden subgroup is trivial. We now present the theorem.
Theorem 5.7. Let G be a finite abelian group such that there exists an element g ∈ G with order 2.
Then Mixed StateHSP over G is QSZK-hard.
Proof. We reduce from (α, β)-Quantum State Distinguishability. Importantly QSD remains QSZK-
hard even when α = 1/ exp(n) and β = 1 − 1/ exp(n).
    Let σ1 , σ2 be the input states to the QSD instance. Let h ∈ G be a group element of order 2, and
let |v1 ⟩ , |v2 ⟩ be orthonormal vectors such that R(h) |v1 ⟩ = |v2 ⟩ and R(h) |v2 ⟩ = |v1 ⟩. We call these the
label vectors. Importantly, such vectors exist because R(h)2 = I implies that R(h) is Hermitian with
eigenvalues ±1, and therefore has orthonormal eigenvectors |h+ ⟩ , |h− ⟩. Thus, we can take
                                                     1
                                            |v1 ⟩ = √ (|h+ ⟩ + |h− ⟩)
                                                      2
                                                     1
                                            |v2 ⟩ = √ (|h+ ⟩ − |h− ⟩)
                                                      2
to satisfy
                                                   1
                                     R(h) |v1 ⟩ = √ (|h+ ⟩ − |h− ⟩) = |v2 ⟩
                                                    2
                                                   1
                                     R(h) |v2 ⟩ = √ (|h+ ⟩ + |h− ⟩) = |v1 ⟩ .
                                                    2


                                                        38
    We take as input to the mixed StateHSP instance the state
                                       1                  1
                                  ρ=     |v1 ⟩⟨v1 | ⊗ σ1 + |v2 ⟩⟨v2 | ⊗ σ2 ,
                                       2                  2
which is efficiently preparable. We define the representation R′ as

                                            R′ (g) = R(g) ⊗ I,

where R(g) acts on the label register.
   Now, note that

                              1                  1                 1                 1
       ρ − R(h)ρR(h)† 1 =       |v1 ⟩⟨v1 | ⊗ σ1 + |v2 ⟩⟨v2 | ⊗ σ2 − |v2 ⟩⟨v2 | ⊗ σ1 − |v1 ⟩⟨v1 | ⊗ σ2
                              2                  2                 2                 2                1
                            1                               1
                          = ∥|v1 ⟩⟨v1 | ⊗ (σ1 − σ2 )∥1 + ∥|v2 ⟩⟨v2 | ⊗ (σ1 − σ2 )∥1
                            2                               2
                          = ∥σ1 − σ2 ∥1 .

Thus, ρ is (1 − 1/ exp(n))-stabilized by R(h) if and only if σ1 , σ2 are exponentially close in trace
distance. Therefore, it suffices to check whether h is in the hidden subgroup H of ρ. Fortunately,
this is an instance of the group membership problem, which is efficient for abelian groups [MC87].
Thus, if we can solve mixed StateHSP, we can determine whether σ1 and σ2 are close or far in trace
distance.


6     Bosonic Group Isomorphism Problems
We define a bosonic version of the state isomorphism problem, based on Gaussian and linear optical
quantum elements. Formally, we define
Definition 6.1 ((α, β; r)-Pure State Linear Optical Isomorphism Problem). Given two core states
|c1 ⟩ , |c2 ⟩ over n modes with r = O(1) photons, and precision parameters (α, β) the problem of (α, β; r)-
PSGI[On ] is to decide which one of the following statements holds:
    • There exists a linear optical unitary V ∈ On such that Re (⟨c2 | V |c1 ⟩) ≥ β.
    • For all V ∈ On we have |⟨c2 | V |c1 ⟩| ≤ α.

    Below we show a Graph Isomorphism lower bound for this problem, with r = 3.

6.1    Graph Isomorphism lower bound
                                                                                  1
Theorem 6.2 (Formal restatement of the lower bound in Theorem 1.7). Let α ≥ 1 − 96n 5 and β > α.

Then

                                       GI ≤P (α, β; 3)-PSGI[On ],                                         (20)

   The idea of the proof is as follows: We encode an undirected graph G = (V, E) into a bosonic state
with three photons with the following polynomial
                                              X        X
                                     FG (z) =    zi3 +   Aij zi zj .                             (21)
                                                    i        i<j

For two graphs G1 , G2 , one can show there exists a unitary U ∈ U(n) such P that FG1 (z) = FG2 (U z) if
and only if G1 and G2 are isomorphic. The reason is that the cubic term i zi3 enforces the unitary U
to be a permutation up to phases. This is the same observation that the only linear transformations
that preserve ℓp norm are permutations for any p ̸= 1, 2. This was also pointed out by Aaronson in
[Aar04]. Below is a quick proof of this fact for the sake of completeness.




                                                        39
Lemma 6.3. Let
                                                                       X
                                                             f (z) =         zi3 .                          (22)
                                                                         i

Then, for any unitary T such that f (T z) = f (z), we have that
                                                                 T = PD                                     (23)
for some phase diagonal matrix D = diag(eiϕ1 , · · · , eiϕn ) and some permutation matrix P .
Proof. Let g(z) = f (T z), and consider the Hessian matrices of g and f . We have
                                 ∂2
                                        
                    ∇2 f =             f      = 6 diag(z1 , · · · , zn ),
                               ∂zi ∂zj     ij
                                                   !                                                        (24)
                                X
                       2
                    ∇ g=6            Tki Tkj (T z)k = 6 T t diag ((T z)1 , · · · , (T z)n ) T.
                                         k

Imposing f = g gives
                                                                                                  
                                    z1       ···    0                  (T z)1        ···      0
                                            ..            t
                                                         =T                        ..               T,
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                            (25)
                                               .                                       .
                                    0        ···    zn                   0           ···    (T z)n
for all z ∈ Cn . Note that this equation tells us that
                                                                                      
                                           (T z)1 · · ·                          0
                                        t
                                      T            ..                                 T
                                                                                       
                                                                                                            (26)
                                                       .
                                                             0     ···       (T z)n
is diagonal for all z ∈ C . Since T is invertible, we have that T z covers all of Cn . This yields that
                            n

T t ΛT is diagonal for all diagonal matrices Λ. In other words, for all λi ∈ C and any i ̸= j we have:
                                            X
                                                λk Tik Tjk = 0.                                     (27)
                                                             k

Choosing (λk )k to be non-zero only at some k we get
                                                    Tik Tjk = 0          ∀j ̸= i, ∀k                        (28)
This yields that T has at most one non-zero entry in each column. Therefore, we can write it as
                                                                 T = PD                                     (29)
for D being the elements in each column, and P being a permutation matrix (which essentially specifies
the non-zero entry in every column). Finally, we get that D must be only phases due to the unitarity
of T .
   We now proceed to the proof of Theorem 6.2.
Proof of Theorem 6.2. We consider the encoding presented in Eq. (21) with the following normalization
                                       1 X 3          1 X
                           PG (z) = √         zi + p           Aij zi zj .                       (30)
                                       12n i          2|E| i<j

First, note that if the two graphs are isomorphic, then the equivalence between the states holds trivially.
We need to prove the other direction: that if the overlap exceeds 1 − O( n15 ), then the two graphs are
isomorphic. Without loss of generality, we assume that the given graphs have the same number of
edges. If this condition is not satisfied, we can simply reject (e.g., map to the isomorphism of |0⟩ and
|1⟩).
    We first show that if the overlap is larger than 1 − ε = 1 − O( n15 ), then from the cubic part’s
transformation we get ∥U − P D∥ ≤ ε for some diagonal phase matrix D and some permutation P .
Then, using the fact that the distance between any two distinct binary matrices is at least 1, we show
that the transformation U must be a permutation. The following lemma establishes a bound between
U and some P D.


                                                                   40
                                                                                   √ 
                                                                                  3− 5
Lemma 6.4. Let U be an n × n unitary. For any 0 < δ < n1                            2   ≈ 0.38/n, we have that if
                                                         
                                           1         1
                                          √ C(U z)| √ C(z) ≥ 1 − δ,                                                 (31)
                                           6n        6n
then
                                                                    √
                                               ∥U − P D∥ ≤              3nδ                                         (32)

for some diagonal phase matrix D and some permutation P .
Proof. Let z′ = U z. Hence, zi′ = j Uij zj . Then
                                 P

                                                                    2
                                          ⟨zk3 |zi′ 3 ⟩ = Uik
                                                           3
                                                              zk3           3
                                                                        = 6Uik .                                    (33)

As a result, we get
                                                                          n
                                       1                  1 X 3
                                         ⟨C(U z)| C(z)⟩ =    Uik .                                                  (34)
                                      6n                  n
                                                                         i,k=1

From the bound on the inner product, we obtain
                                            !
           1X         3  1X X             3     1X               X           1X
   1−δ ≤        |Uik | ≤           |Uik |     ≤     max |Uik | ·   |Uik |2 =     max |Uik |,                        (35)
           n             n i                    n i k                        n i k
                i,k                   k                                              k

where the last equality follows from the fact that each column of U has a unit norm. Let ki :=
arg maxk |Uik |. We show that if nδ ≤ 0.39, then there does not exist a pair i ̸= j with ki = kj . To do
so, let u = mini maxk |Uik |. From (35) we have that
                                              1X               n−1 u
                                 1−δ ≤            max |Uik | ≤    + ,                                               (36)
                                              n i k             n  n

which concludes

                                                     u ≥ 1 − nδ.                                                    (37)

Now, by contradiction, assume there exist i ̸= j such that ki = kj . Let ui and uk denote the i-th
and k-th columns of U . Letting k = ki = kj , for ℓ ∈ {i, j} we can write uℓ = uℓk ek + rℓ such that
rℓ† ek = 0. As each column of U has unit norm, we get that
                                  2
                             ∥rℓ ∥ ≤ 1 − |uℓk |2 ≤ 2nδ − n2 δ 2 , for ℓ = i, j.                                     (38)

where the last inequality is due to (37). However, due to orthogonality of ui and uj we also have

                                           0 = u†i uj = uik ujk + ri† rj                                            (39)

which implies

                             |uik ujk | = |ri† rj | ≤ ∥ri ∥ · ∥rj ∥ ≤ 2nδ − n2 δ 2 .                                (40)

However, we also have u2 ≤ |uik ujk | which combined with (37) and (40) gives

                                              1 − nδ ≤ 2nδ − n2 δ 2 .                                               (41)
                                √                                                 √
This is violated for all nδ < 3−2 5 ≈ 0.38. Therefore, we conclude that if nδ ≤ 3−2 5 , then all (ki )ni=1
must be distinct.
  Then, we can now define T to be the matrix that has only the following non-zero entries
                                                              Uiki
                                                   Tiki =            .                                              (42)
                                                             |Uiki |


                                                           41
Since ki are all distinct, we get that T is of the form T = P D. In the rest of the proof, we show that
∥U − T ∥ satisfies the mentioned bound. Note that
               2
                    X                   X                                      X
      ∥U − T ∥ =        |Uik − Tik |2 =   (1 − |Uiki |2 ) + (1 − |Uiki |)2 ≤ 3   1 − |Uiki | ≤ 3nδ (43)
                        ik                     i                                       i

where the second to last inequality follows from inequalities (1 − x) ≤ 1 − x and 1 − x2 ≤ 2(1 − x)
                                                                                  2

that hold for all 0 ≤ x ≤ 1.
   Going back to the original problem, we note that
                                                    1                    1
                         ⟨PG (z)|PG (U z)⟩ =           ⟨C(z)|C(U z)⟩ +      ⟨QG (z)|QG (U z)⟩.        (44)
                                                   12n                 2|E|
Therefore, |⟨PG (z)|PG (U z)⟩| ≥ 1 − ε implies that
                         1                                         1
                           ⟨C(z)|C(U z)⟩ ≥ 1 − 2ε,          and       |⟨QG (z)|QG (U z)⟩| ≥ 1 − 2ε.   (45)
                        6n                                        |E|
For any ε ≤ 0.19/n, from Lemma 6.4 we obtain that there exists a diagonal phase matrix D and a
permutation matrix P such that
                                                 √
                                    ∥U − P D∥ ≤ 6nε.                                      (46)

Furthermore, we note that
                                    1                         1
                                                                 tr A1 U t A2 U .
                                                                               
                                       ⟨QG1 (z)|QG2 (U z)⟩ =                                          (47)
                                  2|E|                       |E|
By using the second bound in (45) we obtain
                                                           1
                                                              tr A1 U t A2 U .
                                                                            
                                           1 − 2ε ≤                                                   (48)
                                                         2|E|
Also, letting ∆ := U − P D we have (46) we have
              1
                  tr A1 U t A2 U
                                 
1 − 2ε ≤
           2|E|
              1                            1                         1                       1
                 |tr A1 DP t A2 P D | +       tr A1 ∆t A2 P D +         tr A1 DP t A2 ∆ +       tr A1 ∆t A2 ∆
                                                                                                           
       ≤
           2|E|                          2|E|                      2|E|                    2|E|
       (i)    1                           √
                  tr A1 DP t A2 P D + 2 6nε + 6nε
                                    
       ≤
            2|E|
       (ii)    1                      √
                  tr A1 P t A2 P + 2 6nε + 6nε
                                 
        ≤
             2|E|
                                                                                                     (49)
                                                                                      √
where (i) is using |tr(A1 ∆t A2 P D)| ≤ ∥A1 ∥∥A2 ∥∥∆∥∥P D∥ together with ∥∆∥ ≤ 6nε from (46) and
                                                          2
also together with the fact that ∥P D∥ = 1 and ∥Ai ∥ = 2|E|. Finally, in (ii) we have used the fact
that |tr(B)| ≤ tr((|B|ij )ij ), or in other words, taking entry-wise absolute value can only increase the
                                                        1
absolute value of the trace.11 Lastly, plugging ε = 96n    5 into (49) we get


                                             1                       1
                                                tr A1 P t A2 P ≥ 1 − 2 .
                                                              
                                                                                                      (50)
                                           2|E|                     n
We now use a final auxiliary lemma to complete our proof.
Lemma 6.5. Let A and B be adjacency matrices over a graph of size n, and both having |E| edges. If
                                                     1               1
                                                        tr(AB) ≥ 1 − 2                                (51)
                                                   2|E|             n
then A = B.
 11 We are also using   tr(AP t AP ) = tr(AP t AP ).


                                                             42
Proof. Note that
                                                X
                                     tr(AB) =           Aij Bij ≤ 2|E| − 1                              (52)
                                                   ij

if A ̸= B. Therefore, if
                                           1                 1
                                              tr(AB) > 1 −      ,                                       (53)
                                         2|E|              2|E|
then A = B. As |E| < n2 /2, we conclude that the condition in the statement of the lemma ensures
equality of the graphs.
                                 1
    This shows that if β > 1 − 96n 5 , then the two graphs are isomorphic. The contrapositive of this
                               ∼
                               ̸ G2 then the overlap must be smaller than 1 − 96n
statement concludes that if G1 =                                                 1
                                                                                   5.


   Next, we establish an upper bound for this problem.

6.2    SZK upper bound
We reduce this problem to the Statistical Difference (StatDist), an SZK-complete problem [SV03],
and hence, prove containment in SZK.
Theorem 6.6 (Formal restatement of the upper bound in Theorem 1.7). (α, β; r)-PSGI[On ] is con-
tained in SZK for α < 1 a constant and β = 1 − O( n1r ), where n is the number of modes and r is the
number of photons.
Proof. We show a reduction to the StatDist problem. Note that the states we have at hand live in
the subspace of the Fock space with r photons. This is a Hilbert space of dimension d = n+r−1
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                      r     ,
which is polynomially large as r = O(1). Hence, we can classically write down these states. In what
follows, we use this fact and produce random vectors in this Hilbert space. We show that if the two
states are close up to a linear optical element, then the random vectors that we produce from the two
input states are close in total-variation distance. Similarly, we show that if the two states are not close,
the randomly generated vectors have far distributions.
    Below is a concrete description of how to get the desired sampler from a given core state: Given a
core state |c⟩ (with stellar polynomial Pc ), define sampler Sc that:
   1. Takes a random unitary U from the Haar measure on U(n), and calculates the state |cU ⟩ :=
      R(U ) |c⟩.
   2. Samples a random vector |η⟩ from a µ approximation to the Gaussian distribution ∼ NC (0, σ 2 I)
                                          n+r−1
                                                  r
      in a Hilbert space of dimension d =   r    ≤n .
   3. Outputs |cU ⟩ + |η⟩.
   In what follows, we use T (·, ·) to denote the total variation distance between two random variables.
We use the following fact, which we then use to show that the addition of the Gaussian random noise
helps making the two distributions close in YES cases (intuitively, if the orbits are close, then the
random Gaussian noise would make them indistinguishable).
Lemma 6.7. Let X, Y be two random Gaussian vectors of variance σ 2 I, and mean vectors u, v. We
have
                                                   ∥u − v∥
                                           T (X, Y ) ≤     .                                            (54)
                                                      2σ
Proof. The proof follows by the fact that the KL-divergence between X, Y is given by
                                                                    2
                                                             ∥u − v∥
                                         DKL (X∥Y ) =                .                                  (55)
                                                               2σ 2
Then, via Pinsker’s inequality we get
                                               r
                                                   1              ∥u − v∥
                                 T (X, Y ) ≤         DKL (X∥Y ) =         .                             (56)
                                                   2                2σ



                                                        43
    Note that Lemma 6.7 also implies that if X = Y + e for some random e with ∥e∥ ≤ δ (almost
surely) then we have T (X∥Y ) ≤ δ/2σ, due to the convexity of the total variation distance. As a result,
we have that the total variation distance between the µ, ν-approximate sampler and the exact sampler
is bounded by (rν + µ)/2σ. Hence, choosing ν = µ/r = o(σ 2 )12 , we can analyze the problem as if we
had sampled from the exact random distributions we desire. The approximate sampling would have
only slight effect of o(1) on the total variation distances we calculate.
    We claim that
Lemma 6.8. If inf G∈On ∥|c1 ⟩ − G |c2 ⟩∥ ≤ a, then
                                                                   2a
                                                 T (S1 , S2 ) ≤       .                                 (57)
                                                                   σ
   We then show a converse
Lemma 6.9. If inf G∈O ∥|c1 ⟩ − G |c2 ⟩∥ ≥ b, then
                                                                   2
                                                  T (S1 , S2 ) ≥     ,                                  (58)
                                                                   3
                    b
                          
assuming σ = Θ     nr/2
                              .
   Therefore, for any a such that a = O(b/nr/2 ) we get inclusion in SZK. All that is left to do is to
prove the above lemmas.
Proof of Lemma 6.8. Let Xi be the output of Si (for i = 1, 2). Also, let Xi,U denote Xi conditioned on
having sampled unitary U in step 1 of the sampling procedure. It is the case that Xi,V is a Gaussian
vector drawn from NC (|ci,U ⟩ , σ 2 I). Let W ∈ U(n) be the unitary such that

                                               ∥|c1 ⟩ − GW |c2 ⟩∥ ≤ a.                                  (59)

Then, consider the pair (X1,U , X2,U W ). We have that

                                           ∥|c1,U ⟩ − |c2,U W ⟩∥ ≤ a.                                   (60)

This means that X1,U and X2,U W are two random Gaussian vectors with covariance matrix σ 2 I, and
with vectors of means that are a-close. Using Lemma 6.7, we get that the total-variation distance
between the distributions of X1,U and X2,U W is bounded by
                                                                           a
                                      T (P (X1,U ), P (X2,U W )) ≤           .                          (61)
                                                                          2σ
Mixing the distributions of X1,U and X2,U W over random choices of U can only decrease the total-
variation distance (due to convexity of total-variation distance). Finally, since U ∼ Haar(U(n)),
implies U W is also Haar random, we get that X1,U and X2,U W randomized over U , become X1 and
X2 , respectively, which completes the proof.
Proof of Lemma 6.9. Let us denote the set of all possible |ci,U ⟩ vectors by Vi . It is the case that

                                                  inf           ∥x − y∥ ≥ b.                            (62)
                                       |x⟩,|y⟩:|x⟩∈V1 ,|y⟩∈V2


Now, define the region of distance b/2 from V1 by
                                                            
                                                           b
                                  Z := |z⟩ : inf ∥x − z∥ ≤     .                                        (63)
                                              |x⟩∈V1       2
                                                                           √
Since a Gaussian’s norm with covariance σId is highly concentrated around σ d, we get that with the
choice of σ = Θ( √bnr ) we are guaranteed

                                                Pr(∥η∥ ≤ b/2) = p,                                      (64)
 12 As we show below, we have σ = Θ(1/nr/2 )




                                                         44
for some p = Θ(1), where |η⟩ ∼ NC (0, σ 2 I). As a result, we get that

                                 Pr(X1 ∈ Z) = Pr(∥η∥ ≤ b/2) = p,
                                                                                                    (65)
                                 Pr(X2 ∈ Z) ≤ Pr(∥η∥ ≥ b/2) = 1 − p.

As a result, we obtain that

                                          T (S1 , S2 ) ≥ 2p − 1.                                    (66)

Setting p = 5/6 gives the desired result. Finally, converting from the trace norm to fidelity, we get the
desired result.

   Lastly, we highlight that the Verifier must use finite-precision representations. However, with
polynomially many bits of precision, we can ensure the total-variation distances change by at most
o(1).
                                                              1
   Finally, we note that an NP upper bound for any β − α ≥ 2poly(n) is straightforward, as the prover
can send the unitary U that corresponds to the passive map that approximately maps one state into
another.


References
[Aar04]      S. Aaronson. “Is quantum mechanics an island in theoryspace?” In: arXiv preprint quant-
             ph/0401062 (2004).
[Aar18]      S. Aaronson. “Shadow tomography of quantum states”. In: Proceedings of the 50th annual
             ACM SIGACT symposium on theory of computing. 2018, pp. 325–338.
[AKG05]      S. Aaronson, G. Kuperberg, and C. Granade. The complexity zoo. 2005. url: https :
             //complexityzoo.net/Complexity_Zoo.
[BGW25]      A. Bouland, T. Giurgică-Tiron, and J. Wright. “The state hidden subgroup problem and
             an efficient algorithm for locating unentanglement”. In: Proceedings of the 57th Annual
             ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. 2025, pp. 463–470.
[BHH16]      F. G. Brandao, A. W. Harrow, and M. Horodecki. “Local random quantum circuits are
             approximate polynomial-designs”. In: Communications in Mathematical Physics 346.2
             (2016), pp. 397–434.
[CGM+ 25]    U. Chabaud, S. Gharibian, S. Mehraban, A. Motamedi, H. R. Naeij, D. Rudolph,
             and D. Sambrani. “Energy, bosons and computational complexity”. In: arXiv preprint
             arXiv:2510.08545 (2025).
[CGW10]      X. Chen, Z.-C. Gu, and X.-G. Wen. “Local unitary transformation, long-range quantum
             entanglement, wave function renormalization, and topological order”. In: Physical review
             b 82.15 (2010), p. 155138.
[Cha21]      U. Chabaud. “Continuous variable quantum advantages and applications in quantum
             optics”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.05227 (2021).
[CM22]       U. Chabaud and S. Mehraban. “Holomorphic representation of quantum computations”.
             In: Quantum 6 (2022), p. 831.
[CMG20]      U. Chabaud, D. Markham, and F. Grosshans. “Stellar representation of non-Gaussian
             quantum states”. In: Physical Review Letters 124.6 (2020), p. 063605.
[CV05]       A. M. Childs and W. Van Dam. “Quantum algorithm for a generalized hidden shift
             problem”. In: arXiv preprint quant-ph/0507190 (2005).
[FIM+ 14]    K. Friedl, G. Ivanyos, F. Magniez, M. Santha, and P. Sen. “Hidden translation and trans-
             lating coset in quantum computing”. In: SIAM Journal on Computing 43.1 (2014), pp. 1–
             24.
[FOP05]      A. Ferraro, S. Olivares, and M. G. Paris. “Gaussian states in continuous variable quantum
             information”. In: arXiv preprint quant-ph/0503237 (2005).


                                                   45
[GP22]      A. Gilyén and A. Poremba. “Improved quantum algorithms for fidelity estimation”. In:
            arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15993 (2022).
[Har13]     A. W. Harrow. “The church of the symmetric subspace”. In: arXiv preprint
            arXiv:1308.6595 (2013).
[HEC25]     M. Hinsche, J. Eisert, and J. Carrasco. “The abelian state hidden subgroup problem:
            Learning stabilizer groups and beyond”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15770 (2025).
[HKP20]     H.-Y. Huang, R. Kueng, and J. Preskill. “Predicting many properties of a quantum system
            from very few measurements”. In: Nature Physics 16.10 (2020), pp. 1050–1057.
[IWD+ 25]   J. T. Iosue, Y.-X. Wang, I. Datta, S. Ghosh, C. Oh, B. Fefferman, and A. V. Gor-
            shkov. “Higher moment theory and learnability of bosonic states”. In: arXiv preprint
            arXiv:2510.01610 (2025).
[KR08]      H. Krovi and M. Rötteler. “An efficient quantum algorithm for the hidden subgroup
            problem over Weyl-Heisenberg groups”. In: Mathematical Methods in Computer Science:
            Essays in Memory of Thomas Beth. Springer, 2008, pp. 70–88.
[Kup05]     G. Kuperberg. “A subexponential-time quantum algorithm for the dihedral hidden sub-
            group problem”. In: SIAM Journal on Computing 35.1 (2005), pp. 170–188.
[LG17]      J. Lockhart and C. E. G. Guillén. “Quantum state isomorphism”. In: arXiv preprint
            arXiv:1709.09622 (2017).
[MC87]      P. McKenzie and S. A. Cook. “The parallel complexity of abelian permutation group
            problems”. In: SIAM Journal on Computing 16.5 (1987), pp. 880–909.
[Mel24]     A. A. Mele. “Introduction to Haar measure tools in quantum information: A beginner’s
            tutorial”. In: Quantum 8 (2024), p. 1340.
[MROL14]    P. Migdal, J. Rodrı́guez-Laguna, M. Oszmaniec, and M. Lewenstein. “Multiphoton states
            related via linear optics”. In: Physical Review A 89.6 (2014), p. 062329.
[MY22]      T. Morimae and T. Yamakawa. “One-wayness in quantum cryptography”. In: arXiv
            preprint arXiv:2210.03394 (2022).
[NC10]      M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang. Quantum computation and quantum information. Cam-
            bridge university press, 2010.
[PGMG23]    P. V. Parellada, V. G. i Garcia, J. J. Moyano-Fernández, and J. C. Garcia-Escartin. “No-
            go theorems for photon state transformations in quantum linear optics”. In: Results in
            Physics 54 (2023), p. 107108.
[Rot69]     S. Y. Rotfel’d. “The singular numbers of the sum of completely continuous operators”.
            In: Spectral Theory. Springer, 1969, pp. 73–78.
[Ser23]     A. Serafini. Quantum continuous variables: a primer of theoretical methods. CRC press,
            2023.
[SHH25]     T. Schuster, J. Haferkamp, and H.-Y. Huang. “Random unitaries in extremely low depth”.
            In: Science 389.6755 (2025), pp. 92–96.
[SV03]      A. Sahai and S. Vadhan. “A complete problem for statistical zero knowledge”. In: Journal
            of the ACM (JACM) 50.2 (2003), pp. 196–249.
[VHI06]     W. Van Dam, S. Hallgren, and L. Ip. “Quantum algorithms for some hidden shift prob-
            lems”. In: SIAM Journal on Computing 36.3 (2006), pp. 763–778.
[Wat02a]    J. Watrous. “Limits on the power of quantum statistical zero-knowledge”. In: The 43rd
            Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 2002. Proceedings. IEEE.
            2002, pp. 459–468.
[Wat02b]    J. Watrous. “Quantum statistical zero-knowledge”. In: arXiv preprint quant-ph/0202111
            (2002).
[WPG+ 12]   C. Weedbrook, S. Pirandola, R. Garcı́a-Patrón, N. J. Cerf, T. C. Ralph, J. H. Shapiro, and
            S. Lloyd. “Gaussian quantum information”. In: Reviews of modern physics 84.2 (2012),
            pp. 621–669.



                                                 46
