Volume 9, Issue 6, June 2019




Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes (Dagstuhl Seminar 19231)
  Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        1
Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How (Dagstuhl Seminar 19232)
  Audrey Girouard, Andrew L. Kun, Anne Roudat, and Orit Shaer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 26
25 Years of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform (Dagstuhl Seminar 19241)
   Travis Gagie, Giovanni Manzini, Gonzalo Navarro, and Jens Stoye . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  55
Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases (Dagstuhl Seminar
19261)
   C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space (Dagstuhl Seminar 19262)
   Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman       95
Graph Colouring: from Structure to Algorithms (Dagstuhl Seminar 19271)
   Maria Chudnovsky, Daniel Paulusma, and Oliver Schaudt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Real VR – Importing the Real World into Immersive VR and Optimizing the Perceptual
Experience of Head-Mounted Displays (Dagstuhl Seminar 19272)
   Marcus A. Magnor and Alexander Sorkine-Hornung . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143




  D a g s t u h l R e p or t s , Vo l . 9 , I s s u e 6                                  ISSN 2192-5283
ISSN 2192-5283

Published online and open access by                    Aims and Scope
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik      The periodical Dagstuhl Reports documents the
GmbH, Dagstuhl Publishing, Saarbrücken/Wadern,         program and the results of Dagstuhl Seminars and
Germany. Online available at                           Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshops.
http://www.dagstuhl.de/dagpub/2192-5283                In principal, for each Dagstuhl Seminar or Dagstuhl
                                                       Perspectives Workshop a report is published that
Publication date                                       contains the following:
February, 2020                                             an executive summary of the seminar program
                                                           and the fundamental results,
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche         an overview of the talks given during the seminar
Nationalbibliothek                                          (summarized as talk abstracts), and
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publica-         summaries from working groups (if applicable).
tion in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; detailed
bibliographic data are available in the Internet at This basic framework can be extended by suitable
http://dnb.d-nb.de.                                     contributions that are related to the program of the
                                                        seminar, e. g. summaries from panel discussions or
License                                                 open problem sessions.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 DE license (CC BY 3.0 DE).              Editorial Board
                 In brief, this license authorizes each     Gilles Barthe
                 and everybody to share (to copy,          Bernd Becker
distribute and transmit) the work under the follow-
                                                           Daniel Cremers
ing conditions, without impairing or restricting the
authors’ moral rights:                                     Stephan Diehl
    Attribution: The work must be attributed to its        Reiner Hähnle
    authors.                                               Lynda Hardman

The copyright is retained by the corresponding au-         Oliver Kohlbacher
thors.                                                     Bernhard Mitschang
                                                           Bernhard Nebel
                                                           Albrecht Schmidt
                                                           Wolfgang Schröder-Preikschat
                                                           Raimund Seidel (Editor-in-Chief )
                                                           Emanuel Thomé
                                                           Heike Wehrheim
                                                           Verena Wolf
                                                           Martina Zitterbart

                                                       Editorial Office
                                                       Michael Wagner(Managing Editor)
                                                       Jutka Gasiorowski (Editorial Assistance)
                                                       Dagmar Glaser (Editorial Assistance)
                                                       Thomas Schillo (Technical Assistance)
                                                       Contact
                                                       Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik
                                                       Dagstuhl Reports, Editorial Office
                                                       Oktavie-Allee, 66687 Wadern, Germany
                                                       reports@dagstuhl.de
Digital Object Identifier: 10.4230/DagRep.9.6.i        http://www.dagstuhl.de/dagrep
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 19231

Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes
Edited by
Adam Shostack1 , Matthew Smith2 , Sam Weber3 , and
Mary Ellen Zurko4

1    Seattle, US, adam@shostack.org
2    Universität Bonn and Fraunhofer FKIE, DE, smith@cs.uni-bonn.de
3    Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US, smweber@andrew.cmu.edu
4    MIT Lincoln Laboratory – Lexington, US, mez@alum.mit.edu


      Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 19231 “Empirical
Evaluation of Secure Development Processes”. It includes a discussion of the motivation and
overall seminar organization, the abstracts of the talks and a report of each working group.
Seminar June 2–7, 2019 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/19231
2012 ACM Subject Classification Security and privacy → Software security engineering, Human-
   centered computing, Software and its engineering → Software development process manage-
   ment, Software and its engineering → Designing software, Security and privacy → Systems
   security
Keywords and phrases security, security engineering, secure development lifecycle, empirical
   software engineering, empirical security engineering
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.9.6.1
Edited in cooperation with Daniel Votipka



 1      Executive Summary
Adam Shostack
Matthew Smith
Sam Weber
Mary Ellen Zurko
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko


The problem of how to design and build secure systems has been long-standing. For example,
as early as 1978 Bisbey and Hollingworth[6] complained that there was no method of
determining what an appropriate level of security for a system actually was. In the early
years various design principles, architectures and methodologies were proposed: in 1972
Anderson[5] described the “reference monitor” concept, in 1974 Saltzer[7] described the
“Principle of least privilege”, and in 1985 the US Department of Defense issued the Trusted
Computer System Evaluation Criteria[8].
    Since then, although much progress has been made in software engineering, cyberse-
curity and industrial practices, much of the fundamental scientific foundations have not
been addressed – there is little empirical data to quantify the effects that these principles,
architectures and methodologies have on the resulting systems.
    This situation leaves developers and industry in a rather undesirable situation. The
lack of this data makes it difficult for organizations to effectively choose practices that will
            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 9, Issue 6, pp. 1–25
Editors: Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
2   19231 – Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes


    cost-effectively reduce security vulnerabilities in a given system and help development teams
    achieve their security objectives. There has been much work creating security development
    lifecycles, such as the Building Security In Maturity Model[1], Microsoft Security Development
    LifeCycle[3] OWASP[4] and ISECOM[2] and these incorporate a long series of recommended
    practices on requirements analysis, architectural threat analysis, and hostile code review. It
    is agreed that these efforts are, in fact, beneficial. However, without answers as to why they
    are beneficial, and how much, it is extremely difficult for organizations to rationally improve
    these processes, or to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of any specific technique.
         The ultimate goal of this seminar was to create a community for empirical science in
    software engineering for secure systems. This is particularly important in this nascent of
    research in this domain stage since there is no venue in which researchers meet and exchange.
    Currently single pieces of work are published at a wide variety of venues such as IEEE S&P,
    IEEE EuroS&P, ACM CCS, USENIX Security, SOUPS, SIGCHI, ICSE, USEC, EuroUSEC,
    and many more. The idea was that bringing together all researchers working separately and
    creating an active exchange will greatly benefit the community.
         Naturally, community-building is a long-term activity – we can initiate it at a Dagstuhl
    seminar, but it will require continuous activity. Our more immediate goals were to develop a
    manifesto for the community elucidating the need for research in this area, and to provide
    actionable and concrete guidance on how to overcome the obstacles that have hindered
    progress.
         One aspect of this was information gathering on how to conduct academic research which is
    able to be transitioned and consumed by developers. We felt that all too frequently developer
    needs aren’t fully understood by academics, and that developers underestimate the relevance
    of academic results. Our information gathering will help foster mutual understanding between
    these two groups and we specifically looked for ways to build bridges between them.
         A second obstacle which we aimed to address is how to produce sufficiently convincing
    empirical research at a foundational level as well as in the specific application areas. Currently
    there is no consensus on what are ecologically valid studies and there are sporadic debates on
    the merits of the different approaches. This seminar included a direct and focused exchange
    of experience and facilitated the creation of much needed guidelines for researchers. In
    accordance with our bridge building, we also looked at what developers find convincing, and
    how that aligns with research requirements.



    Seminar Format
    Our seminar brought together thirty-three participants from industry, government and both
    the security and software engineering academic communities. Before the seminar started we
    provided participants with the opportunity to share background readings amongst themselves.
        We began our seminar with level-setting and foundational talks from industrial, software
    engineering and security participants aimed to foster a common level of understanding of the
    differing perspectives of the various communities.
        Following this the seminar was very dynamic: during each session we broke into break-out
    groups whose topics were dynamically generated by the participants. The general mandate for
    each group was to tackle an aspect of the general problem and be actionable and concrete: we
    wished to avoid vague discussions of the difficulties involved with studying secure development
    but instead focus on how to improve our understanding and knowledge. After each session
    we met again as a group and summarized each group’s progress.
Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko                                           3


    At the conclusion of the seminar we brought together all the participants in a general
discussion about further activities. In all, a total of eighteen further activities, ranging from
papers to research guideline documents, were proposed and organized by the participants.
References
1    Building security in maturity model. http://www.bsimm.com/.
2    Isecom. http://www.isecom.org.
3    Microsoft security development lifecycle.               https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/
     securityengineering/sdl/.
4    Owasp. https://www.owasp.org.
5    Anderson, J. P. Computer Security Technology Planning Study, Volume II. Tech. Rep.
     ESD-TR-73-51, 1972.
6    Bisbey, R., and Hollingworth, D. Protection analysis: Final report. Information
     Sciences Institute, University of Southern California: Marina Del Rey, CA, USA, Technical
     Report ISI/SR-78-13 (1978).
7    Saltzer, J. Protection and the control of information sharing in Multics. Communications
     of the ACM 17, 7 (1974), 388–402.
8    United States Department of Defense. Trusted computer system evaluation criteria
     ( orange book ).




                                                                                                    19231
4   19231 – Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes


     2       Table of Contents
    Executive Summary
      Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko . . . . . . . .                     1

    Overview of Talks
         Experience with the Microsoft Security Development Lifecycle
         Steven B. Lipner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5
         Security in Modern Software Development
         Olgierd Pieczul . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
         Software Engineers are People Too: Applying Human Centered Approaches to
         Improve Software Development for Security
         Brad A. Myers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     6
         A Series of Experiments on Software Design Patterns
         Walter Tichy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
         Empiricism in Software Engineering and Secure Systems
         Laurie Williams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
         “Usable Security” approaches to Empiricism for Secure Software Development
         Matthew Smith, Sascha Fahl, and Michelle L. Mazurek . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           9
         How the usable security community does developer studies: Field-ish studies with
         Build It, Break It, Fix It
         Michelle L. Mazurek . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9

    Working groups
         Building Code Breakout
         Adam Shostack and Carl Landwher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         Ecological validity and study design for empirical secure development studies
         Michelle L. Mazurek and Daniel Votipka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
         Clever Recruitment Techniques: How to Design Studies that get Enough of the
         Right Kind of Participants
         Tobias Fiebig, Michael Coblenz, and Fabio Massacci . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          17
         API Usability Heuristics
         Matthew Smith and Joseph Hallett . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
         Software Security Metrics
         Eric Bodden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
         Methods For Empirical Studies of SDLs
         Sam Weber, Adam J. Aviv, Michael Coblenz, Tamara Denning, Shamal Faily, Mike
         Lake, Steven B. Lipner, Michelle L. Mazurek, Xinming (Simon) Ou, Olgierd Pieczul,
         and Charles Weir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
         Publication or reviewing guidelines; Establishing a baseline for evidence of science
         in security
         Laurie Williams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

    Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko                                                  5


 3      Overview of Talks
3.1     Experience with the Microsoft Security Development Lifecycle
Steven B. Lipner (SAFECode – Seattle, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Steven B. Lipner
Main reference Michael Howard, Steve Lipner: “The Security Development Lifecycle”, Microsoft Press, 2006
          URL https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/microsoft_press/2016/04/19/free-ebook-the-security-
               development-lifecycle/


Between 2002 and 2004, Microsoft made a major commitment to software security, first
executing a series of “security pushes” on major products and then introducing the Security
Development Lifecycle (SDL), a mandatory process for improving products’ resistance to
attack. After the introduction of the SDL in 2004, the process requirements were updated
periodically in response to new classes of attacks and new techniques for improving product
security. This presentation summarizes the philosophy and practicalities underlying the SDL
and the ways it has evolved, and outlines some of the ways that the effectiveness of the SDL
and similar processes can be measured.



3.2     Security in Modern Software Development
Olgierd Pieczul (IBM – Dublin, IE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Olgierd Pieczul


Recent shifts in software engineering make the traditional view of software security obsol-
ete. Secure development practices rely on several aspects of software engineering such as
development process, tools and languages, developer skillset and work environment which all
are rapidly changing. We observe security practices lagging behind and slowing down the
transformation while increasing cost and reducing overall security.
    Today’s software delivery cycle can be as short as days or even hours. However, the
security quality and compliance processes, reviews, testing and sign offs have been designed
for long waterfall-style cycles. Similarly, while applications are being developed as small,
independent microservices, security practices operate at a scale of system as a whole. These
tasks tend to be labor intensive, managed, executed and reviewed manually and long to
perform. This results in slowing down the delivery and reducing security assurance to
rudimentary, checkbox-style level only.
    This presentation covers the aspects of modern software development that have major
impacts on security. We also identify and describe key areas of development that need
to be considered, or much more significant considered, by security research, in particular:
development process, software stack, team structure, developer skills and training and code
reuse.




                                                                                                           19231
6   19231 – Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes


    3.3     Software Engineers are People Too: Applying Human Centered
            Approaches to Improve Software Development for Security
    Brad A. Myers (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US)
          License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                   © Brad A. Myers
    Main reference Brad A. Myers, Andrew J. Ko, Thomas D. LaToza, YoungSeok Yoon: “Programmers Are Users
                   Too: Human-Centered Methods for Improving Programming Tools”, IEEE Computer, Vol. 49(7),
                   pp. 44–52, 2016.
              URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MC.2016.200


    Software engineers might think that human-computer interaction (HCI) is all about improving
    the interfaces for their target users through user studies. However, software engineers are
    people too, and they use a wide variety of technologies, from programming languages to search
    engines to integrated development environments (IDEs). And the field of HCI has developed
    a wide variety of human-centered methods, beyond lab user studies, which have been proven
    effective for answering many different kinds of questions. In this talk, I will use examples from
    my own and other’s research relevant to security to show how HCI methods can be successfully
    used to improve the technologies used in the software development process. For example,
    “Contextual Inquiry” (CI) is a field study method that identifies actual issues encountered
    during work, which can guide research and development of tools that will address real
    problems. We have used CIs to identify nearly 100 different questions that developers report
    they find difficult to answer, which inspired novel tools for reverse-engineering unfamiliar
    code and for debugging. We used the HCI techniques of Paper Prototyping and Iterative
    Usability Evaluations to improve our programming tools. Through the techniques of Formal
    User Studies, we have validated our designs, and quantified the potential improvements.
    Current work is directed at improving the usability of APIs, using user-centered methods
    to create a more secure Blockchain programming language, addressing the needs of data
    analysts who do exploratory programming, helping programmers organize information found
    on the web, and helping end-user programmers augment what intelligent agents can do on
    smartphones.
    References
    1    Brad A. Myers, Andrew J. Ko, Thomas D. LaToza, and YoungSeok Yoon. Programmers Are
         Users Too: Human-Centered Methods for Improving Programming Tools. IEEE Computer,
         Special issue on UI Design, 49, issue 7, July, 2016, pp. 44-52



    3.4     A Series of Experiments on Software Design Patterns
    Walter Tichy (KIT – Karlsruher Institut für Technologie, DE))
          License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                   © Walter Tichy
    Main reference Lutz Prechelt, Barbara Unger, Walter F. Tichy, Peter Brössler, Lawrence G. Votta: “A Controlled
                   Experiment in Maintenance Comparing Design Patterns to Simpler Solutions”, IEEE Trans.
                   Software Eng., Vol. 27(12), pp. 1134–1144, 2001.
              URL https://doi.org/10.1109/32.988711


    Software Design Patterns are proven solutions for software design problems. They are claimed
    to improve software quality, programmer productivity, and communication among developers,
    among others. A series of three experiments tests these claims.
Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko                                      7


    The first experiment checks whether the presence or absence of design pattern document-
ation makes a difference [1]. Subjects received programs which contained design patterns
and were asked to perform maintenance tasks on them. The experiment group received a few
lines (20-30) of extra documentation pointing out the design patterns. Results indicate that
documenting design patterns speeds up maintenance tasks that involve those patterns, or
reduces defects. This experiment has been repeated using a different programming language
with consistent results.
    The second experiment compares maintenance tasks on programs with and without design
patterns [2]. Four programs were implemented in two versions each: One with patterns and
one in a modular fashion without design patterns. The results show that not all patterns are
equally effective. Some speed up pattern-relevant maintenance tasks, some have no effect,
and some require extra time. The complexity of the patterns seems to play an important
role. This experiment has been replicated yielding similar results.
    The third experiment tests whether programmers communicate more effectively with
shared knowledge of design patterns [3]. Pairs of programmers were audio and video recorded
when discussing maintenance tasks. The recordings were analyzed and the contributions of
each participant were counted. The results clearly show that with shared pattern knowledge,
a more balanced communication results, where balanced means that team members contribute
equally to the discussion.
    These three experiments (and their replications) support and complement each other and
confirm the hypothesized positive effects of design patterns.
    (The experimental techniques employed might also be of interest. Double counter-
balancing helps neutralize sequencing effects. Communication lines as a measure of effective
communication might be interesting in other contexts.)
References
1    Lutz Prechelt, Barbara Unger-Lamprecht, Michael Philippsen, and Walter F. Tichy. Two
     Controlled Experiments Assessing the Usefulness of Design Pattern Documentation in Pro-
     gram Maintenance. IEEE Trans. On Software Engineering, 28(6), June 2002, 595-606.
2    Lutz Prechelt, Barbara Unger, Walter F. Tichy, Peter Brössler and Lawrence G. Votta. A
     Controlled Experiment in Maintenance Comparing Design Patterns to Simpler Solutions.
     IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 27(12), 1134-1144, 2001.
3    Barbara Unger, Walter F. Tichy. Do Design Patterns Improve Communication? An Exper-
     iment with Pair Design. May 2000, in WESS 2000. http://ps.ipd.kit.edu/176_766.php.



3.5    Empiricism in Software Engineering and Secure Systems
Laurie Williams (North Carolina State University – Raleigh, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Laurie Williams


The science of software engineering and the science of security can be advanced through the
use of sound research methodologies while conducting empirical studies. With the use of
sound methodologies, the evidence produced by a study is more credible, convincing, and
substantiated and can be built upon by future researchers. As a result, the research results
have more impact on other researchers and on practitioners. Additionally, meta-analysis and
theory/law building is enabled when the research results are thoroughly reported.




                                                                                               19231
8   19231 – Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes


        Over the last twenty or more years, empirical software engineering researchers have
    conducted explicit efforts to mature the use of sound methodologies by creating guidelines
    and examples that bring established research practices into the context of software engineering.
    These guidelines include books and journal papers. Additionally, communities have come
    together with the goal of advancing software engineering research methods, including Dagstuhl
    seminars (Seminars 06262 and 10122), the International Software Engineering Research
    Network (ISERN), and the Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM)
    conference. Over time, the top software engineering conference began to insist on the use
    of sound research methods which raised the bar for the community. A comparison of the
    research and validation methods in accepted papers in the 2002 International Conference on
    Software Engineering (ICSE) [1] and the 2016 ICSE demonstrated that the 2016 papers [2, 3]
    were more likely (3% versus 19%) to be an empirical reports which were more likely (0%
    versus 30%) to be accepted when compared with the 2002 papers. Additionally, the 2016
    papers were more likely to have a formal evaluation (5% versus 35%) while papers that used
    example as their evaluation or to have no evaluation (20% and 7%, respectively, in 2002)
    were essentially non-existent in 2016.
        Empiricism in emerging in security research. To establish a baseline, Carver et al. [4, 5]
    analyzed the evidence of science papers in the top security conferences, ACM Computer and
    Communications Security (CCS) and IEEE Security and Privacy. Their main motivation was
    to assess whether the papers reported information necessary for three key pillars of scientific
    research: replication, meta-analysis, and theory building. They examined the papers for
    completeness such that other researches would be enabled to understand, replicate, and build
    upon the results but looking for: research objectives, subject/case selection, the description
    of the data collection procedures, the description of the data analysis procedure, and the
    threats to validity. They found that 80% of the papers did not provide clearly-defined and
    labeled research objectives to define the goals, questions, and/or hypotheses of the research.
    Additionally, 70% had no discussion of the threats to validity or limitations of the work such
    that future researchers can make design choices to address these threats and limitations
    and to contextualize meta-analysis. These results indicate a need for the security research
    community to go through the type of maturation in empirical research that the software
    engineering community has gone through, including publishing guidelines in books and
    journal and the establishment of a community to drive this maturation.
    References
    1    M. Shaw, Writing Good Software Engineering Research Papers Proceedings of 25th Inter-
         national Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’03), pp. 726-736, 2003.
    2    C. Theisen, M. Dunaiski, L. Williams and W. Visser, Writing Good Software Engineering
         Research Papers: Revisited 2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software
         Engineering Companion (ICSE-C), Buenos Aires, 2017, pp. 402-402.
    3    C. Theisen, M. Dunaiski, L. Williams and W. Visser, Software Engineering Research at the
         International Conference on Software Engineering in 2016 SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes,
         Vol. 42, No. 4, pp. 1-7. Buenos Aires, 2017, pp. 402-402.
    4    Morgan Burcham, Mahran Al-Zyoud, Jeffrey C. Carver, Mohammed Alsaleh, Hongying Du,
         Fida Gilani, Jun Jiang, Akond Rahman, özgür Kafalı, Ehab Al-Shaer, and Laurie Williams.
         Characterizing scientific reporting in security literature: An analysis of ACM CCS and
         IEEE S&P papers In Proceedings of the Hot Topics in Science of Security: Symposium
         and Bootcamp, HoTSoS, pages 13–23, New York, NY, USA, 2017. ACM.
    5    Jeffrey C. Carver, Morgan Burcham, Sedef Akinli Kocak, Ayse Bener, Michael Felderer,
         Matthias Gander, Jason King, Jouni Markkula, Markku Oivo, Clemens Sauerwein, and
Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko                                                      9


      Laurie Williams. Establishing a baseline for measuring advancement in the science of se-
      curity: An analysis of the 2015 IEEE Security & Privacy proceedings In Proceedings of the
      Symposium and Bootcamp on the Science of Security, HotSos ’16, pages 38–51, New York,
      NY, USA, 2016. ACM.



3.6     “Usable Security” approaches to Empiricism for Secure Software
        Development
Matthew Smith (Universität Bonn and Fraunhofer FKIE, DE), Sascha Fahl (Leibniz Uni-
versität Hannover, DE), and Michelle L. Mazurek (University of Maryland – College Park,
US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Matthew Smith, Sascha Fahl, and Michelle L. Mazurek


Usability problems are a major cause of many of today’s IT-security incidents. Security
systems are often too complicated, time-consuming, and error prone. For more than a
decade researchers in the domain of usable security (USEC) have attempted to combat
these problems by conducting interdisciplinary research focusing on the root causes of the
problems and on the creation of usable security mechanisms. While major improvements have
been made, to date USEC research has focused almost entirely on the non-expert end-user.
However, many of the most catastrophic security incidents were not caused by end-users, but
by developers. Heartbleed and Shellshock were both caused by single developers yet had
global consequences. Fundamentally, every software vulnerability and misconfigured system
is caused by developers making mistakes, but very little research has been done into the
underlying causalities and possible mitigation strategies. In this talk we will explore the
need for empiricism for secure software development in several application areas, including
TLS, passwords, malware analysis and vulnerability analysis.



3.7     How the usable security community does developer studies:
        Field-ish studies with Build It, Break It, Fix It
Michelle L. Mazurek (University of Maryland – College Park, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Michelle L. Mazurek
 Joint work of Andrew Ruef, Michael Hicks, James Parker, Dave Levin, Michelle L. Mazurek, Piotr Mardziel
Main reference Andrew Ruef, Michael W. Hicks, James Parker, Dave Levin, Michelle L. Mazurek, Piotr Mardziel:
               “Build It, Break It, Fix It: Contesting Secure Development”, in Proc. of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
               Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Vienna, Austria, October 24-28, 2016,
               pp. 690–703, ACM, 2016.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978382


Lab studies, field measurements, and field studies all contribute valuable knowledge to our
understanding of secure development, but they also all have important drawbacks in terms
of internal and external validity. The Build It, Break It, Fix It competition represents a new
point in this tradeoff space. Teams compete over several weeks to build software according to
a spec, gaining points for functionality and performance, then compete to break each others’
software, causing the vulnerable team to lose points. The competition provides insight into
how and why certain vulnerabilities arise, providing more control than a field study but more
ecological validity than a smaller-scope lab study.




                                                                                                               19231
10   19231 – Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes


      4       Working groups
     4.1      Building Code Breakout
     Adam Shostack and Carl Landwher
             License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Adam Shostack and Carl Landwher
      Joint work of Adam Shostack, Carl Landwehr, Florian Alt, Michael Coblenz, Serge Egelman, Shamal Faily,
                    Joseph Hallett, Trent Jaeger, Mike Lake, Steve Lipner, Fabio Massacci, Simon Ou, Olgierd Pieczul,
                    Riccardo Scandariato, Laurens Sion, Laurie Williams, Sam Weber


     Building codes for physical structures have been developed over centuries to address societies’
     needs for buildings that are safe for their occupants and can stand up to customary natural
     threats – rain, wind, fire, earthquakes – for the areas in which they are built. Although
     such codes are diverse, they generally call for an initial approval by a local authority of the
     design and specification of the proposed structure, use of approved materials and methods
     in its construction, inspections to be carried out by trained third-party inspectors during
     construction, and a final approval for occupancy before the building can be occupied.
         The construction and deployment of software systems, with few exceptions, is not subject
     to these kinds of third-party inspections and approvals. It has been proposed that the kinds
     of mechanisms found in the building code model might help achieve better security in the
     software systems deployed in, for example, medical devices, power grids, and “Internet-of-
     Things” devices.
         The group considered what limits the building code metaphor might have in relation to
     software systems, what hypotheses about this approach might be developed and subjected
     to empirical evaluation, and what a roadmap might look like that would lead to the appro-
     priate development and use of building codes for software systems with security and safety
     responsibilities.

     4.1.1      Limits to the Metaphor
     The discussion revealed many ways in which building codes for physical structures might
     reasonably be applied to software structures with security and safety responsibilities. The
     blueprint for a building specifies a structural design and plan for implementation and must
     be approved by a local authority before construction can proceed. Documents capturing
     system and software requirements and design have a similar role in software construction,
     though often implementation may proceed based on knowingly incomplete specifications
     and designs. Changes in the software requirements and design as construction proceeds are
     common in software, but they also occur in building construction.
         Building codes normally require sequenced inspections of aspects of the building during
     construction: footings and foundations must be inspected before floors and walls are raised;
     plumbing and heating systems must be inspected before the walls are closed up and this work
     is hidden, and so on. Finally, when construction is complete a final inspection is required
     before the local authority certifies that the building can be occupied. As software systems
     are built there are often code reviews, unit and subsystem tests, and finally system testing
     before the software is released. In some environments, an authority may required to issue a
     final approval to operate before the system is made available to its users.
         The metaphor was found to be limited in that software has no physical manifestation
     beyond the bits representing the programs, software can be replicated nearly without cost,
     and it can be transported easily around the globe. Buildings of course have substantial
     mass and are not easy to alter, move, or replicate. Physical structures change, but much
Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko                                         11


more slowly than software, much of which is subject to continual updates. Inspectors of
physical structures require some training typically measured in weeks or months; inspectors
of software generally require years of training.
    The group’s conclusion was that despite the limitations, the building code metaphor
seems to apply well to software with security responsibilities.

4.1.2   Hypotheses to Test / Questions to be Answered
The discussion on generating hypotheses to test opened by considering some characteristics
desired of a proposed building code. As a principle, the building code should result in secure
code and not in evidence to be consumed by the code inspector. Whatever evidence has to
be tied to the code and the close the better. It was observed that the Common Criteria
scheme has led to development of required documentation after the fact. These documents
are then reviewed without reference to the actual underlying software, resulting in relatively
low assurance of security at relatively high cost. Future building codes for software should
avoid this trap.
    The Windows Logo program, which enables developers of Windows applications to display
the Windows logo only if their software passes certain automated tests, and the Apple Store
program, which only accepts applications that pass both automated tests and some human
review, were discussed and found to be within the category of software building codes.
    In the context of an imagined building code for software with security responsibilities:
1. Would an inspector be required to exercise judgement, or could inspection be effectively
    automated?
2. What type of specification would be sufficient as the basis for effective enforcement (e.g.,
   would a set of use cases or “user stories” be adequate? Would a data flow diagram
    specification suffice?
3. Does increasing the number of acceptance criteria incentivize better designs?
4. Will implementing an SDL reduce errors in implementations?
5. Will having a developing and applying a building code be better than doing nothing at
    all?

4.1.3   Working Notes and Ideas to Develop
1. Examples – Are the Apple store and Windows Logo “building codes”? What about the
   UK’s DMCS IoT standard?
2. Principle: The building code should result in secure code and not in evidence to be
   consumed by the code inspector. Whatever evidence has to be tied to the code and
   activities intended to deliver products, and the closer the better. (Contrast: work done
   solely to satisfy the building inspector.)
3. Experiments on the building code: at every iteration a product developed to meet the
   code should be distinguishable from a product that has not been produced accordingly.
   Eventually we should be able to demonstrate that software systems built to the code
   were not just distinguishable, but better than without a building code.
4. Introduction of new technology for which verification is not applicable could be tested in
   unregulated area first and then moved to regulated areas when tools becomes available.
   Also, what happens when “the laws of physics” change?
5. Scalability of “testin” wrt the cost of the testing (e.g. CE label). Do we know if the
   types of “testing” experiments that we can run are linear or with exponentially decreasing
   returns? So that if you achieve a threshold that would enough because the next level




                                                                                                  19231
12   19231 – Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes


        would cost you exponentially more (in either time or costs) while only delivering minor
        increasing quality.
     6. Domain and time applicability Should a code commit to a building code version at
        production time and stick to it or must comply with the latest version at delivery time?
        What about “capricious” rules? What about late-breaking changes to the laws of physics?
        Building codes don’t need to deal with those.
        We should distinguish between the “experiments” on the final product and “experiments”
        on the production process

     4.1.4      Building Code Components
     Building codes vary widely around the world, but in this subsection we describe a typical
     code for physical structures, which has aspects that occur at multiple phases of construction.
         Before a building is even planned, separate goals are defined for structural integrity, fire
     safety, plumbing, drainage, electrical, HVAC and ADA compliance. Building codes constrain
     both a new building’s specification and its design. After a building is designed, permitting is
     done with the municipality with paper copies of the documents being filed and sometimes a
     physical examination of the site is done. At each phase of physical construction (foundation
     laying, framing, etc) on-site inspections are done. When completed, a certificate of occupancy
     needs to be obtained, which also involves a separate inspection. Additionally, in order to
     maintain compliance with the building code, additional inspections are required over time to
     ensure that elevators, major appliances and such-like continue to be safe.



     4.2      Ecological validity and study design for empirical secure
              development studies
     Michelle L. Mazurek (University of Maryland – College Park, US) and Daniel Votipka
     (University of Maryland – College Park, US)
             License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Michelle L. Mazurek and Daniel Votipka
      Joint work of Michelle L. Mazurek, Daniel Votipka, Tamara Denning, Heather Richter Lipford, Adam Aviv,
                    Tobias Fiebig, Mathew Smith, Brendan Murphy, Michael Coblenz, Eric Bodden, Sascha Fahl, Mary
                    Ellen Zurko, Walter F. Tichy, Walter, Brad Myers, Charles Weir


     The design of a study is critical to producing correct results and the secure development
     researcher faces several unique and difficult challenges when attempting to choose the right
     design. For example, most development tasks are performed over weeks of collaborative work,
     making it difficult to even simulate ecologically valid conditions in a controlled lab setting.
     Also, security is typically a secondary focus in real-life settings, requiring further complication
     of the study design to avoid unrealistic behaviors. Further, measuring correct behaviors
     with respect to security is difficult as it generally requires proving the absence of any errors.
     Developer experience can also vary widely across many dimensions including programming
     ability, development workflow and security knowledge, reducing the generalizability of results
     without a broad sample of participants.
         Fields such as software engineering [4] and usable security [5] offer recommendations
     for study design to resolve some of these issues. Other recent work has focused on specific
     challenges of secure development measurement, i.e., whether remote participants produce
     similar results as local participants; on the differences between using students, GitHub users,
     freelancers, and corporate developers [1, 2, 3]; and the effect of varying incentive structures [3].
Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko                                          13


Unfortunately, little general guidance specific to secure development study design currently
exists for newer researchers, and several specific questions still remain open. Therefore, there
is a need both for outlining best practices for study design based on work in other fields, and
also investigating open questions specific to secure development tasks. As a first step toward
addressing these issues, this working group focused on three specific tasks:
    Define a set of generic guidelines for new researchers and highlight security-specific
    examples of their application.
    Identify methodological issues requiring further research
    Identify a set of possible metrics for measuring aspects of secure development

4.2.1   Design Guidelines
The first group identified an initial set of generic guidelines useful to empirical research
broadly, along with secure-development-specific examples for each. We list these guidelines
and examples here.

1. Leverage well-established study-design practices from other fields

   Many of the decisions faced when designing a empirical evaluation of secure development
   are not unique to this domain of research. Other fields such as software engineering,
   human-computer interaction, psychology, sociology, and anthropology have established
   best practices that address many of these issues. For example, the Guide to Advanced
   Empirical Software Engineering offers best practices for topics such as survey design,
   statistical analysis, and research ethics. Researchers should consider these best practices
   for decisions that are not specific to secure development research.

2. Use pilot studies to hone in on the research objective and be willing to iterate on the
   study design

   The initial study design is rarely perfect. The research team typically does not have
   the necessary domain knowledge to predict how participants will interpret survey ques-
   tions, task descriptions or interface element or how they will respond during the study.
   Therefore, it’s important that all studies begin with a pilot where participants can share
   their impressions of the study to ensure the design actually meets the stated research
   objectives or whether new objectives should be sought. Similarly, as the study is being
   carried out, the researchers should monitor data collected and be open to making updates
   to the design if it becomes evident that changes are necessary.

3. Consider the metrics appropriate for the study methodology and desired outcomes

   One of the most important considerations when designing any study is in determining
   what data to collect. This includes what data to collect about the participant themselves
   and study-specific data, e.g., interactions with a tool or survey responses. Significant care
   should be taken to ensure that both the variables under study along with any potentially
   confounding effects are measured as precisely as possible. This is particularly difficult in
   security where correct development solutions require the absence of errors. Therefore,
   the researcher must consider designs that limit the scope of possible correct solutions,
   making analysis more manageable.




                                                                                                   19231
14   19231 – Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes


     4. Consider the level of expertise of participants

        Because developers can vary drastically with respect to their secure-development expertise,
        it is important that the research team consider whether and how these variations will
        affect the study. For example, when A/B testing a tool to support vulnerability discovery,
        the researcher should consider the participants’ security expertise. Because developers
        with more expertise are more likely to find a vulnerability irrespective of the tool being
        tested, their expertise should be measured and considered as a covariate during analysis.
        Alternatively, the participants could be provided with additional training at the start of
        the experiment to ensure all participants begin on equal footing.

     5. Create a context for the experiment that appropriately prompts participants

        Participants’ behaviors are typically context-dependent. This is especially true for security
        and privacy decisions [6]. Thus, the context in which participants are surveyed or observed
        should be selected to best fit the experiment’s goals. For example, a researcher whose
        goal is to measure the impact of a new penetration testing tool at improving vulnerability
        discovery could run the study as part of a Capture-the-Flag exercise, where participants
        are instructed to exploit a series of programs, encouraging participants to think like an
        attacker.

     6. Consider how and when to use deception to hide the true purpose of your study

        In some cases, informing participants of the true nature of a study could bias them to
        behave differently than they would in a similar real-life scenario. For example, participants
        may be unwilling or ashamed to admit they do not consider security. However, the use of
        deception significantly complicates the study design and in general, the research should
        strive to be as transparent with participants a possible (as discussed in the next guideline).
        Thus, researchers should balance these needs by considering when deception is necessary
        to maintain the study’s integrity.

     7. Consider ethics in the design of the study

        It is morally imperative that experiments on human subjects be performed ethically.
        Therefore, it is important that the researcher consider potential ethical dilemmas during
        the study’s design. For example, studies of habituation to compiler security warnings could
        cause developers to be more likely to ignore these types of problems in their normal work.
        Researchers should consider these possible side effects and design mitigations against them.
        The principles of the Belmont Report–Respect for Persons, Beneficence, and Justice–and
        the Menlo Report, which builds on the Belmont report focusing on information and
        communications technologies, provide useful guidelines for ethical considerations.

     4.2.1.1   Future work
     Future work will look at refining this list and providing further specific design examples for
     secure development studies. We will look at collecting these guidelines both from seminar
     participants and the broader community into an online living document. This document
     could provide a useful reference point for researchers new to the field.
Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko                                        15


   Table 1 Open questions for secure software development study methodology.

                                                                             Amount
 Question                                                                Currently Known

 How much specification or documentation should be provided for each           #
 task? Should unit tests be provided?

 How much prompting for the importance of security should be provided?         G
                                                                               #

 How much time should be provided to complete the task? A fixed time           #
 budget or unlimited time?

 Task complexity and fidelity to real-world tasks:
        Reading code vs. writing code                                          #
        Real-world code vs. contrived experimental code                        #
        From-scratch development vs. editing pre-written code                  #

 Should participants receive feedback and then get a second chance to          G
                                                                               #
 improve their code?



4.2.2   Studying Methodology
The second group considered open questions with regard to study design for secure develop-
ment. The goal was to brainstorm empirical studies that could shed light on how to make
appropriate study-design choices in secure-development studies.
   Table 1 reviews the open questions the group considered. For each question, the group
characterized what is currently known about this question: a significant amount ( ), some
 #), or little to none (#).
(G
   Further discussion on the general idea of how to think about task instructions and fidelity
suggested several potential concrete studies:
   What does real-world tasking in industry look like (interview study)

   Comparing writing secure code to fixing insecure code

   Adding irrelevant details to the task specification to increase cognitive load

   Comparing different amounts of security framing and/or role-playing, to similar tasks
   without context

   Comparing convincing deception, unconvincing deception, and no deception

   Comparing starting from scratch to adding new features, with different size additions

   Comparing results when task code is written on paper, with a text editor, with an IDE,
   and with a debugger

   Comparing requiring participants to use a standard development setup to allowing them
   to use their own preferred setup

   Repeating any of the above studies across a variety of security contexts (e.g., not just
   cryptography)




                                                                                                 19231
16   19231 – Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes




     4.2.3   Metrics for Studying Secure Development
     The final group explored features of developers and the organizations they belong to that
     might be useful in future work. Such features could be measured as outcome variables, or
     used as covariates in study design. For each identified feature, the group sought to identify
     existing metrics used to measure these features. This brainstorming exercise highlighted
     several metrics that could be adopted by secure development researchers. For example,
     this included measurements for general security awareness (Human Aspects of Information
     Security Questionnaire (HAIS-Q) [11]), security behavior (Security Behavior Intention Scale
     (SeBIS) [7]), and developer personality (Five-Factor Personality Inventory [12], Consideration
     for Future Consequences (CFC) [10], Need for Cognition (NFC) [9], Domain-Specific Risk-
     Taking scale (DoSpeRT) [8]). The group also suggested further investigation of psychology,
     sociology, and anthropology literature to identify metrics for features such as emotional
     state, frustration towards security, and organizational culture. Finally, the group identified
     some features that have historically only been measured using simple, Likert-scale self-report
     questions. This included expertise in development and security. Some work has attempted
     to use knowledge assessments to gauge these expertise levels, but these tests tend to be
     cumbersome, and there is no clear evidence of their validity for measuring expertise beyond
     the specific questions asked. Future work should consider more efficient alternatives.
     References
      1 Yasemin Acar, Christian Stransky, Dominik Wermke, Michelle L. Mazurek, and Sascha
          Fahl. Security Developer Studies with GitHub Users: Exploring a Convenience Sample. In
          Proceedings of the 13th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS), pages 81—95,
          2017.
      2 Alena Naiakshina, Anastasia Danilova, Christian Tiefenau, and Matthew Smith Deception
          Task Design in Developer Password Studies: Exploring a Student Sample. In Proceedings
          of the 14th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS), pages 297—313, 2018.
      3 Alena Naiakshina, Anastasia Danilova, Eva, Gerlitz, Emanuel von Zezschwitz, and Matthew
          Smith. “If You Want, I Can Store the Encrypted Password”: A Password-Storage Field
          Study with Freelance Developers. In Proceedings of the 37th Conference on Human Factors
          in Computing Systems (CHI), pages 140—152, 2019.
      4 Forrest Shull, Janice Singer, and Dag I.K. Sjøberg. Guide to Advanced Empirical Software
          Engineering. Springer-Verlag, 2007.
      5 Stuart Schechter.           Common Pitfalls in Writing about Security and Pri-
          vacy Human Subjects Experiments,              and How to Avoid Them.                    ht-
          tps://cups.cs.cmu.edu/soups/2010/howtosoups.pdf, 2010.
      6 Helen Nissenbaum. Privacy as Contextual Integrity. Washington Law Review, pages 119–
          157, 2004.
      7 Serge Egelman and Eyal Peer. Scaling the Security Wall: Developing a Security Behavior
          Intentions Scale (SeBIS). In Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on Human Factors in
          Computing Systems (CHI), pages 2873–2882, 2015.
      8 Ann-Renee Blais and Elke U. Weber. A Domain-Specific Risk-Taking (DoSpeRT) Scale for
          Adult Populations. Judgement and Decision Making, vol. 1, no. 1, pages 33–47, 2006.
      9 John T. Cacioppo, Richard E. Petty, and Chuan Feng Kao. The Efficient Assessment of
          Need for Cognition. Journal of Personality Assessment, vol. 48, no. 3, pages 306–307, 2010.
     10 Jeff Joireman, Monte J. Shaffer, Daniel Ballet, and Alan Strathman. Promotion Orientation
          Explains Why Future-Oriented People Exercise and Eat Healthy: Evidence From the Two-
Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko                                                        17


      Factor Consideration of Future Consequences-14 Scale. Personality and Social Psychology
      Bulletin, vol. 38, no. 10, pages 1272–1287, 2012.
11    Kathryn Parsons, Dragana Calic, Malcolm Pattinson, Marcus Butavicius, Agata McCor-
      mac, and Tara Zwaans. The Human Aspects of Information Security Questionnaire (HAIS-
      Q): Two further validation studies. Computer & Security, vol. 66, pages 40–51, 2017.
12    Paul Costa and Robert R. McCrae. Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI-R) and
      NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI): Professional Manual. Psychological Assessment
      Resources, 1992.



4.3      Clever Recruitment Techniques: How to Design Studies that get
         Enough of the Right Kind of Participants
Tobias Fiebig (TU Delft, NL), Michael Coblenz (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh,
US), and Fabio Massacci (University of Trento, IT)
        License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Tobias Fiebig, Michael Coblenz, and Fabio Massacci
 Joint work of Luigi Lo Iacono, Sascha Fahl, Michael Coblenz, Tobias Fiebig, Adam J. Aviv, Florian Alt, Tamara
               Denning, Daniel Votipka, Michelle Mazurek, Fabio Massacci


4.3.1      Introduction
Recruiting participants for studies among professionals is a serious obstacle for studies on
programmers’ security behavior and practices. In the past, researchers from the usable
security community tried to use mass mailing campaigns to app developers [1], community
driven approaches [2], and recruiting among students [3]. In this workshop, we investigated
recruitment techniques and incentives for professionals, and found that they are tied to the
underlying research questions and design of studies on developers’ security behavior.

4.3.2      Key-Insights and Research Objectives
The key-insights of our workshop are:
   The right way to recruit depends on the research question of a study, which determines
   the population we want to draw from, and thereby the channel and incentives we can use
   for recruitment.
   Our knowledge of developer types (as well as other involved stakeholders) is limited.
   Hence, future qualitative study should work towards a taxonomy of stakeholders and
   programmer types in software development.
   Our knowledge of existing recruitment channels and incentive models is mostly incidental.
  As such, a structured literature study should enable a more informed view on what worked
   in the past.
   With the currently unclear situation, extensive pre-testing is essential for finding the right
   combination of recruitment methods and target population. a future study should aim
   at validating selected combinations of methods and target groups for common research
   question types.

4.3.3      Common Research Question Structures
First, we explored common research question setups, to explore the context of studies on
secure software development. We identified four distinct research question setups:




                                                                                                                 19231
18   19231 – Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes


     1. How does a certain artifact/organizational structure/training X promote or not promote
        better secure outcomes Y ?
     2. What are the incentives/barriers X to improving security in a particular operational
        condition Y ?
     3. What are the challenges/problems faced by population X, and how can they be identi-
        fied/mitigated/denied?
     We make two observations based on these general research questions: (i) While we selected
     general descriptions, in practice instanciations of these question may have a substantial
     conceptual overlap, and, (ii) The setup of the research question may already determine the
     population we have to select our sample from.

     4.3.4   Population Types and Roles
     Next, we attempted to categories the types and roles involved in producing software.

        Managers
        Programmers as users
        Testers
        Security teams
        Designers
        Domain experts
        Tool creators
        Users
        Programmers as creators
        Architects/Requirements engineer
        Code reviewers
        Hackers
        Attackers

         We note that we do not have enough validated insights into the roles commonly involved
     in software development. The above list is tentatively based on an in-group brainstorming.
     While, technically, these types and roles can be derived from descriptive literature of the
     software development process, this does not necessarily reflect how these are set-up in practice.
     Hence, we suggest further qualitative studies, combined with literature research, to identify
     types and roles, and validate them in practice.

     4.3.5   Incentives
     Next, we discussed incentives for study participation. Even though our research could be
     better informed by, e.g., Motivational Theory from psychology and social science, we note
     that the field of software development usually changes frequently. Hence, insights from other
     fields, especially if they are older, may not transfer directly. Incentive methods we discussed
     are:
         Cash: Either as a flat-payment, a bonus for completion, a raffle, per-hour, as a prize,
         or as additional staff time (if mandated by leadership). A bonus for good performance
         might mitigate boredom during the study.
         Fame, i.e., by combining the survey with a leader board. Competing with others in
         general (Vanity/Victory).
         Enabling a rare experiences and/or Fun for participants, e.g., driving in a race car,
         joining a key-note, etc.
Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko                                        19


   The prospect of helping others.
   Helping ones’ own organization / Oneself.
   Building better (own) system.
   An opportunity for networking, social gains, and competence gains, i.e., by obtaining
   new technical skills or exposure to potential interesting technology.
   Distraction from ones work.
   Obtaining Credits (students).
   Learning best practices for (own) studies.
We note that some of these incentives may indeed be rather expensive. Others, especially
unique experiences, may be more readily available to academic researchers than expected.
For example, several universities have student teams operating FormulaE or Forzza race cars.

4.3.6   Recruitment Channels
Finally, we discussed recruitment channels.

   Community engagement: For example, in-person participation at hacking events, present
   at industry conferences, using twitter/slack with hashtag #organization, retweeted by
   the organization. These are difficult to scale and not necessarily sustainable.
   Going to professional events focusing on recruitment: This can be supported by snow-
   balling at conference (with quick ways, recording the conversation), by having a booth, or
   by giving a talk at conference, asking the audience to participate. Furthermore, it might
   be possible to integrate the survey in the talk, e.g., by using mentimeter (mentimeter.com)
   with live display during the presentation.
   Top-down contact within industry/professional organizations: Letting industry organ-
   izations contact their members might be more incentivizing to professionals. This is
   especially relevant for questionnaires that should be answered by managers. In general,
   involving management first seems to provide reasonable results.
   Class projects with optional participation to the study: This primarily leverages ongoing
   classes, but one might also use mailing lists for previous courses and advertising through
   other classes. A participant notes that lots of people give interest but do not follow up
   on this.
   Recruit students locally: For example with tear-off strips, and strategically placed, e.g.,
   in start-up hubs, or via local mailing list (academic organization) and flyers.
   Crawling public information: For example, crawling and contacting Github users and
   Google play (App authors).
   Hiring: Via platforms like Mechanical turk and other freelancer platforms.
   Building a panel of people interested for future studies: This can be combined by combining
   going to conference, and asking participants if they are interested in future studies, and
   getting a bunch of people to keep up with the panel.
   Engaging Local companies: For example, by integrating them in thesis/internship pro-
   grams, and directly recruiting CTOs/CIOs for interviews.
   Release an application and wait until people actually use it.
   Offering Trainings: This uses “hands-on” as an exercise, building on a within subject
   design.
   Go where people are waiting: If a significant wait time is involved, people might seek
   some distraction. The entrance queues at developer conferences might be handy here.
   Facebook Ads: These adds usually cost a few hundred dollars, and the standard answer
   rate is around 3%; Completion of the survey may be optional.




                                                                                                 19231
20   19231 – Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes


        Send personal invitations: Mass mails have a specific “smell” to them, which might
        disincentivize participation. Making them less standardized might induce a sense of
        personal engagement, leading to higher conversion.

     4.3.7      Summary and Further Work
     In summary, we find that pre-test and continuous evaluations are necessary for each ex-
     perimental design. This should be an iterative process with several pre-tests. For further
     work, we suggest to test what incentives work with which populations for which recruitment
     techniques. In general, this will not be possible for an exhaustive list. Hence, this study
     should be informed by the most common research questions and their relevant populations.
     The study should build on motivation theory from psychology and social science. Similarly,
     we have to build a taxonomy of populations, i.e., types of developers and other involved stake-
     holders. This may be further informed by systematizing knowledge on which combinations
     of populations, recruitment methods and incentives prove successful in the literature.
     References
     1    Yasemin Acar, Michael Backes, Sascha Fahl, Doowon Kim, Michelle L Mazurek, and Chris-
          tian Stransky. You get where you’re looking for: The impact of information sources on
          code security. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (Oakland),
          pages 289–305, 2016.
     2    Constanze Dietrich, Katharina Krombholz, Kevin Borgolte, and Tobias Fiebig. Invest-
          igating System Operators’ Perspective on Security Misconfigurations. In Proceedings of
          the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), pages
          1272–1289, 2018.
     3    Katharina Krombholz, Wilfried Mayer, Martin Schmiedecker, and Edgar Weippl. “I Have
          No Idea What I’m Doing”-On the Usability of Deploying HTTPS. In Proceedings of the
          USENIX Security Symposium (UseSec), pages 1339–1356, 2017.



     4.4      API Usability Heuristics
     Matthew Smith (Universität Bonn and Fraunhofer FKIE, DE) and Joseph Hallett (University
     of Bristol, GB)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Matthew Smith and Joseph Hallett


     Security API heuristics can give some metrics about what security problems reside in code.
     The term has slightly different meanings to different communities however, but generally
     security principles or heuristics are smaller, more general rules independent of technology,
     whereas security guidelines are larger and more specific, and security standards have been
     agreed upon by a larger community. It is also not entirely clear what a security API is, as
     the term can include not just cryptographic and security related code but also APIs where
     the security aspects are less obvious; for instance REST APIs and file access dialogues, and
     data structures.
        There are many different problems we might hope a security API heuristic might be
     able to detect. Problems include issues with mental models or naming conventions where a
     developer’s assumptions lead them to believe that APIs disallow (or allow) certain behaviour,
     such as the ability to access local files from a URL interface; issues with adversarially
     controlled input where a developer mistakenly believes that an input will always be sanitised.
Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko                                                  21


Issues with documentation are common where documentation is missing or wrong; as well
as issues with canonicalization, redundancy, immutability and call order. Even if an API is
correct at one time, updates to library APIs can lead to functions and patterns becoming
deprecated and needing updates, and building and linking a library is something many
developers struggle with.
    Security heuristics, such as Green and Smith’s rules for a good crypto API suggest
principles to help fix these problems but how might we evaluate their effectiveness? A/B
testing is hard to use as the sheer number of parameters can lead to unreasonably large
numbers of participants and tests being performed. Instead other approaches such as
qualitative evaluation of heuristics against APIs, checking known API problems against
proposed heuristics, and analysing change logs to see how APIs were adapted in response to
a usability problem may provide better results.
    Future work will look at collecting API heuristics and guidelines into an online resource,
that would also collect new proposals for heuristics and the results of studies using the
heuristics. Other work will look at running experiments to see whether students produce
more secure APIs when given heuristics than without them. Finally if a study shows that a
significant number of people fail to use an API correctly because of a usability issue, then we
ought to be able to report and track this issue–perhaps a new usability CVE database might
be a sensible way forward.



4.5    Software Security Metrics
Eric Bodden (Universität Paderborn, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Eric Bodden
 Joint work of Eric Bodden, Michael Coblenz, Tamara Denning, Shamal Faily, Joseph Hallett, Mike Lake,
               Riccardo Scandariato, Reinhard Schwarz, Adam Shostack, Laurens Sion, Charles Weir, Laurie
               Williams


How do we know that a system is really secure? Currently, a common notion seems to be
that a software is secure if it is free of vulnerabilities. But given that definition, it is now
clear to practitioners that no software is secure, as some vulnerabilities will always be present
– be it on the architectural level, in the coding or through the execution environment. In
this working group we therefore discussed that metrics for software security should take
into account that one should assume breach, i.e., a secure system must be able to withstand
attacks despite known or unknown vulnerabilities. This is somewhat akin to the established
notion of resilience, which in the past has been mostly associated with safety, not security
properties. Security, if defined that way, is not a binary property but instead is a value on a
gradual scale: a system can be more secure than another, but it probably cannot be secure
per se. While this might sound disappointing, it very much reflects reality.
    There are different stakeholders with respect to which such metrics could be established.
Software architects and decision makers in software engineering would probably appreciate
structural metrics over software artifacts that correlate well with security. Such metrics
could include the fraction of security code, i.e., code that implements security features, of the
overall application code. Another metric would be how many issues (of a given category)
were found in a (potentially tool-assisted) code inspection of some given subsystems. This
metric could then be weighted depending on the nature of this subsystem.
    Some other–potentially more promising–metrics can be defined from an attacker per-
spective. With respect to the assume-breach paradigm, an interesting metric is “How many



                                                                                                           19231
22   19231 – Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes


     vulnerabilities in combination does an attacker need to exploit to fully own the system (and
     how hard are these to exploit)?” For many current system, this number will be one! In
     fact, participants in the breakout group hypothesized that every software system has an
     “Achilles heel” in the sense that there is a single line of code in the system that if disabled or
     modified all security is off. If this is true then secure systems must do everything in their
     power to protect such subsystems. Other attack-centric metrics include measuring an “attack
     surface” by tracking taint flows from inputs to security-critical components. With respect to
     long-term security, it is interesting to measure how easily a potentially or likely vulnerable
     component (say, a complex parser) could be hardened or replaced.
         With these metrics as with all others it is currently an interesting and open research
     questions of how well they correlate with a sensible notion of security. It thus seems that the
     community would need to establish...

     1. an agreed-upon, well-defined and measurable notion of security
     2. a set of well-defined metrics with clear descriptions that metrics yield reproducible results
     3. a number of empirical studies that seek to correlate these metrics (2) with the notion of
        security from (1)
     Those metrics that correlate best could then yield effective software security metrics.



     4.6    Methods For Empirical Studies of SDLs
     Sam Weber (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US), Adam J. Aviv (U.S. Naval
     Academy – Annapolis, US), Michael Coblenz (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US),
     Tamara Denning (University of Utah – Salt Lake City, US), Shamal Faily (Bournemouth
     University, UK), Mike Lake (CISCO Systems – Research Triangle Park, US), Steven B.
     Lipner (SAFECode – Seattle, US), Michelle L. Mazurek (University of Maryland – College
     Park, US), Xinming (Simon) Ou (University of South Florida – Tampa, US), Olgierd Pieczul
     (IBM Research – Dublin, IE), Charles Weir (Lancaster University, UK)
           License      Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Sam Weber, Adam J. Aviv, Michael Coblenz, Tamara Denning, Shamal Faily, Mike Lake,
                     Steven B. Lipner, Michelle L. Mazurek, Xinming (Simon) Ou, Olgierd Pieczul, and Charles Weir


     In this breakout group we discussed appropriate methodologies for empirically studying
     secure development processes. It would be ideal if we, as a community, could produce a
     guide to researchers on what techniques and methodologies to use in order to empirically
     evaluate competing processes for secure development.
         Unfortunately, the current state of the art falls far short of where we need to be in order
     to produce such a guide. Even such apparently easy process changes, like removing a static
     analysis from the acceptance tests, turn out in practice to be surprisingly subjective and
     highly context-dependent. Other changes are harder to evaluate: if we see more defects, are
     we creating more or are we better at detecting them? It was clear to the group that effective
     research methodologies was itself a non-trivial research topic.
         In order to make a more concrete process, we discussed both hypotheses about secure
     development that the community maintains, but would like more concrete evidence for, and
     what the important outstanding research questions are. We then did a deep-dive on one of
     them (threat-modeling).
         Things that the community believes are true, but which could use empirical evidence,
     include:
Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko                                           23


  threat-modeling is very important,
  vulnerabilities and vulnerability mitigation tasks are distinct from each other and need
  to be tracked as such in the bug tracking system, and
  securing third-party code/libraries is critically important.
Outstanding research questions (many of which are related to the above) include:
  the costs and benefits of security-related choices like the use of type-safe languages,
  the impact of various software architectures on security,
  what are the key advantages of threat modeling? Finding real threats, supporting
  communication, focusing thinking, allowing non-security-experts to have input into the
  process?
  When deciding whether or not to incorporate third-party code, what due-diligence
  processes are effective?
  how do processes like penetration testing affect company security culture, and how to
  distinguish the effects of community culture from specific processes?

   In our threat-modeling deep-dive, we realized that there were a myriad of desirable
properties of a threat modeling methodology, such as being low-cost, or easy to use by
non-security experts. There are also many possible desirable properties of a threat model,
such as identifying only feasible attacks, or enabling estimating of the cost of exploitation.
A number of experimental methods for evaluating different threat modeling methodologies
were brought up, including

   Obtaining a “gold standard” for a given scenario and comparing the results produced by
   each method,
   Ethnographic methods, where real-world teams are observed,
   Leverage the training process of companies that are bringing in external threat-modeling
   trainers and
   Conducting internal analyses, where an organization collects threat-modeling artifacts
   and then later reviews them versus vulnerabilities that were found or missed. As the
   actual threat model is likely to be sensitive, it probably cannot be released, but the
   comparison should be able to be disclosed.

   The group agreed that none of these methods were “better” than the others, but rather
that all of them obtain different views of threat modeling. By using disparate techniques a
more complete picture can be formed. Although time prevented us from doing similarly deep
dives on other problems, the group felt that this was probably a general observation: given
the nature of cybersecurity, using a variety of techniques will be almost certainly required
to give a complete picture of the benefits and drawbacks of any particular development
methodology.



4.7    Publication or reviewing guidelines; Establishing a baseline for
       evidence of science in security
Laurie Williams (North Carolina State University – Raleigh, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Laurie Williams


To build a science, researchers need to document scientific evidence of their work so that future
researchers can support or evolve the hypotheses and theories documented in published
reports and papers. Carver et al. analyzed papers that appeared in two top security


                                                                                                    19231
24   19231 – Empirical Evaluation of Secure Development Processes


     conferences, ACM Computer and Communications Security (CCS) and IEEE Security and
     Privacy (S&P) [1, 2]. Their main motivation was to assess whether the papers reported
     information necessary for three key pillars of scientific research: replication, meta-analysis,
     and theory building. To perform this work, Carver’s team utilized a rubric with which they
     analyzed the papers: http://carver.cs.ua.edu/Studies/SecurityReview/Rubric.html. The
     group discussion revolved around looking at the components of this rubric and discussed
     the benefits of providing rubrics to enable researchers to publish papers that contain the
     scientific evidence others can build upon.
     References
     1    Morgan Burcham, Mahran Al-Zyoud, Jeffrey C. Carver, Mohammed Alsaleh, Hongying Du,
          Fida Gi- lani, Jun Jiang, Akond Rahman, özgür Kafalı, Ehab Al-Shaer, and Laurie Williams.
          Characterizing scientific reporting in security literature: An analysis of ACM CCS and
          IEEE S&P papers In Proceedings of the Hot Topics in Science of Security: Symposium
          and Bootcamp, HoTSoS, pages 13–23, New York, NY, USA, 2017. ACM.
     2    Jeffrey C. Carver, Morgan Burcham, Sedef Akinli Kocak, Ayse Bener, Michael Felderer,
          Matthias Gander, Jason King, Jouni Markkula, Markku Oivo, Clemens Sauerwein, and
          Laurie Williams. Establishing a baseline for measuring advancement in the science of se-
          curity: An analysis of the 2015 IEEE Security & Privacy proceedings In Proceedings of the
          Symposium and Bootcamp on the Science of Security, HotSos ’16, pages 38–51, New York,
          NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
Adam Shostack, Matthew Smith, Sam Weber, and Mary Ellen Zurko                                              25


        Participants
 Florian Alt                        Mike Lake                        Riccardo Scandariato
Universität der Bundeswehr –      CISCO Systems – Research         Chalmers and University of
München, DE                       Triangle Park, US                Gothenburg, SE
  Adam J. Aviv                      Carl E. Landwehr                 Reinhard Schwarz
U.S. Naval Academy –              George Washington University –   Fraunhofer IESE –
Annapolis, US                     Washington, US                   Kaiserslautern, DE
 Eric Bodden                        Steven B. Lipner                 Adam Shostack
Universität Paderborn, DE         SAFECode – Seattle, US           Seattle, US
                                   Luigi Lo Iacono                   Laurens Sion
  Michael Coblenz                                                  KU Leuven, BE
Carnegie Mellon University –      FH Köln, DE
Pittsburgh, US                     Fabio Massacci                    Matthew Smith
                                  University of Trento, IT         Universität Bonn and Fraunhofer
  Tamara Denning                                                   FKIE, DE
University of Utah –                Michelle Mazurek
                                                                     Walter F. Tichy
Salt Lake City, US                University of Maryland –
                                                                   KIT – Karlsruher Institut für
                                  College Park, US
  Serge Egelman                                                    Technologie, DE
ICSI – Berkeley, US                 Brendan Murphy                   Daniel Votipka
                                  Microsoft Research –             University of Maryland –
  Sascha Fahl                     Cambridge, GB
Leibniz Universität                                                College Park, US
Hannover, DE                        Brad A. Myers                    Sam Weber
                                  Carnegie Mellon University –     Carnegie Mellon University –
  Shamal Faily                    Pittsburgh, US
Bournemouth University, GB                                         Pittsburgh, US
                                    Xinming (Simon) Ou               Charles Weir
 Tobias Fiebig                    University of South Florida –    Lancaster University, GB
TU Delft, NL                      Tampa, US
                                                                     Laurie Williams
 Joseph Hallett                     Olgierd Pieczul                North Carolina State University –
University of Bristol, GB         IBM Research – Dublin, IE        Raleigh, US
  Trent Jaeger                      Heather Richter Lipford          Mary Ellen Zurko
Pennsylvania State University –   University of North Carolina –   MIT Lincoln Laboratory –
University Park, US               Charlotte, US                    Lexington, US




                                                                                                       19231
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 19232

Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How
Edited by
Audrey Girouard1 , Andrew L. Kun2 , Anne Roudaut3 , and
Orit Shaer4

1    Carleton University – Ottawa, CA, audrey.girouard@carleton.ca
2    University of New Hampshire – Durham, US, andrew.kun@unh.edu
3    University of Bristol, GB, roudauta@gmail.com
4    Wellesley College, US, oshaer@wellesley.edu


      Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 19232 “Ubiquitous
Computing Education: Why, What, and How”. The workshop gathered 26 faculty members and
one undergraduate student to discuss the current state of ubiquitous computing education, and
how the training and education in this domain should evolve. We provide the motivation for the
seminar and an overview of the activities. The outputs of the seminar include laying out the
challenges of teaching ubicomp (WHY), proposing a ubicomp curriculum based on various types
of students (WHAT) and innovating active learning methods for ubicomp (HOW).
Seminar June 2–7, 2019 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/19232
2012 ACM Subject Classification Human-centered computing → Ubiquitous and mobile com-
   puting, Social and professional topics → Computing education
Keywords and phrases active learning, computing education research, education, human com-
   puter interaction, ubiquitous computing
Digital Object Identifier 10.3830/DagRep.9.6.26



 1      Executive Summary
Audrey Girouard (Carleton University – Ottawa, CA)
Andrew L. Kun (University of New Hampshire – Durham, US)
Anne Roudaut (University of Bristol, GB)
Orit Shaer (Wellesley College, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer


This document summarizes the insights gathered during the seminar. We first provide an
overview of the motivation for this seminar before presenting an overview of the activities
that occurred during these five days. We then provide a series of outputs that we gathered
in addition to the list of abstract provided on the website.



1. Motivation
Interactive systems are becoming increasingly complex and diversified, often comprised of
multiple interconnected devices, with many different functionalities. They are slowly merging
within our everyday objects. Such systems are becoming ubiquitous. Ubiquitous computing,
or ubicomp, is a multidisciplinary field of study that explores the design and implementation
            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 9, Issue 6, pp. 26–54
Editors: Audrey Girouard, Andrew L. Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                                27


of such embedded, networked computing systems. Due to the novel aspect of the technologies
involved and the multidisciplinary nature of skills needed to design such systems, teaching
and training new innovators in this field are not well addressed through traditional programs
and instruction. Consequently, it is important to ask several questions about the training and
education needed to help students become valuable members and leaders of ubicomp teams.
Three central questions about ubiquitous computing education emerge: why, what and how,
with the goal of enhancing ubicomp education through interdisciplinary perspectives:
    WHY is training in ubicomp needed? Is it enough to train experts in narrow domains
    (e.g. those who can create low-power embedded circuits, or those who can make usable
    applications), and then bring them together in teams that will tackle ubicomp problems?
    Or do we need specialized training that targets ubicomp in addition to domain expertise?
    There is broad consensus that we do need specialized training, but often this argument is
    based on intuition and anecdotal evidence. We approach this question by first asking:
    what are the grand challenges that we expect our students to tackle in the world (e.g.
    privacy, sustainability) by inventing and developing ubicomp solutions? Next, we ask:
    who can better address the challenges: teams of domain experts, or teams where at least
    some team members have specialized ubicomp education? Answers to these questions will
    clearly identify problems that might exist with current ubicomp educational approaches.
    WHAT should constitute training in ubicomp? Once we identify the grand challenges,
    we need to ask further questions. What are the values, knowledge, and skills we should
    train students in ubicomp? What are the topics that should be covered? How do these
    depend on the background of students or their degree program? Answers to these types
    of questions will allow us to set goals for ubicomp education.
    HOW should we teach and engage a diverse body of students? Once we identify specific
    goals for ubicomp education, we need to ask ourselves how those goals can be achieved.
    How does the unique nature of ubicomp challenge the current pedagogical approaches?
    How can we create new pedagogical approaches for teaching and training in ubiquitous
    computing? Answers to these types of questions will help create the appropriate tools to
    reach our ubicomp education goals.




2. Overview of the activities
Our goal was to create a community to support new forms of teaching, training, and learning
in ubiquitous computing. Our activities were centered on our main questions:
    Day 1, we explored the WHO and WHY. Each participant presented briefly their research
    and current teaching, and highlighted what they see are the main challenges for teaching
    ubicomp in the morning. We then brainstormed and discussed why is is important to
    rethink the way we teach ubicomp material and what are the grand challenges associated
    to this change.
    Day 2, we explored the WHAT. In groups, we defined the curriculum for Ubicomp
    education for different types of students, different degree levels, as well as identified what
    are the learning goals. One discussion that came up relating to the limits of Ubicomp
    material, specifically how complex it currently is to define what is ubicomp.
    Day 3, we explored the HOW, and particularly brainstormed about the challenges related
    to ubiquitous education. Participants generated a list of their current active learning
    methods or tools and exchanged them in a speed dating fashion with each other.




                                                                                                     19232
28   19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How




        Figure 1 Grand challenges of teaching Ubicomp (from a motivation point of view).



        Day 4, we explored further the HOW. In groups, we developed and experienced new
        active learning pedagogies on ubiquitous computing topics. We also discussed pedagogies
        for academic ubicomp programs.
        Day 5, we wrapped up the seminar and plan for concrete actions for the future, in
        particular, ideas for the next Dagstuhl seminar.



     3. The challenges of teaching Ubicomp (WHY)
     Figure 1 illustrates the grand challenges of teaching Ubicomp from a motivation point of view.
     We have identified several themes including (1) who is the audience in terms of diversity,
     motivation, population; and how (2) these aspects particularly impact their engagement
     and what methods can we use to better engage with students. We also talked about the
     difficulty that Ubicomp brings in terms of being a multi-disciplinary field and we highlight
     the fact that it is difficult to choose (3) which topics should be covered and which ones should
     not be covered in a particular case. What are the boundaries of Ubicomp? In fact, our
     discussions highlighted that there is not a clear (4) definition of Ubicomp. We talked about
     (5) issues with the high workload of both teaching and learning about ubicomp, and how
     research-led teaching could alleviate some of these issues. We discussed (6) scale issues, i.e.
     how to teach to a large number of students (and provide feedback) when it seems that certain
     aspects of Ubicomp teaching (e.g. workshop activities) can only be taught to smaller groups.
     We pointed out the issues of (7) space and that Ubicomp teaching is based on traditional
     classroom but also new types of spaces such as workshops, hackerspaces, and maker spaces.
     Furthermore, we discussed other media types such as (8) online lectures. We also discussed
     more general topics such as (9) the impact of ubicomp (e.g. on business and industry) and
     the future of universities and how this relates to ubicomp education.
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                             29


4. The Ubicomp curriculum (WHAT)
Table 1 illustrates the topics central to Ubicomp Education brainstormed during the seminar.
We split the participants (including the organizers) in four groups designing curriculum
(standalone lecture or program) for different students (undergraduate UG or postgraduate
PG) and technical (Computer Science) or non-technical (Interdisciplinary) background). We
wish for this document (that we also plan to put onto our online web platform) to be used
as guidelines for teachers in order to provide a better and unified Ubicomp curriculum across
different institutions and countries.



5. Existing active learning methods for Ubicomp (HOW)
Figure 2 illustrates the grand challenges of teaching Ubicomp from a method’s point of
view. This was the result of a brainstorming with participants following the curriculum
creation. We found that (1) managing the workload was a theme recurring again (as we
also mentioned it in the initial brainstorming in Figure 1). We noted that one difficulty of
teaching Ubicomp was (2) the lack of differentiation with other CS, HCI or Design teaching
material. We also though this could create issue in (3) attacking certain types of students and
that possibly, depending on the demographic, different terminology (Ubicomp, Interactive
Systems, Interaction Design etc.) might be used. We raised issues in (4) evaluation and
assessment potentially raised by (5) the interdisciplinarity of the community which makes
it hard to assess student but also to teach so diverse material. We discussed issue in (6)
engaging with students and enforcing skill acquisition (surface vs. deep learning). Finally we
also add other issues such as (7) scaling of students, (8) project styles, (9) reaching to real
end-users, (10) having input from industry and the (11) format of the lecture (e.g. online).
We finally discussed about the issues raised by (12) admin and physical resources.
    To build on participants’ past and current experience regarding education, we also asked
them to share both memorable experiences as well as active learning methods. For the
former, we wanted to gather memorable educational moments, anecdotes that stayed with
participants long after, as means to both remember the impact that we have on others, as
well as get inspiration when designing new activities or methods.
    We finally asked participants to share three teaching active learning exercises or methods,
ones they currently use in their teaching materials, or ones they experienced in the past.
They shared their methods, in a one on one, speed-networking format. In two minutes, they
explained one of their ideas to another participant. After the speed-dating, participants
placed their basic descriptions on a board and voted for the ones that seemed relevant to
their courses. This activity sparked interest for material sharing among participants and
ideas on how everyone could implement some of the approaches in their own contexts.



6. Innovative active learning methods for Ubicomp (HOW)
The next main activity focused on generating new educational material that may be difficult
to generate, or missing, from a current curriculum. Participants formed six groups, they
selected a topic, and investigated new active learning methods as well as initial teaching
material related to the topic. The specific topics for each group were selected from topics
and challenges highlighted earlier in the seminar. Next, groups formed pairs of groups, and




                                                                                                  19232
                                                                Table 1 Ubicomp Curriculum by themes, topics and types of students.
                                                             Theme              Topic                                Course                 Course          Course                   Course          Course                        Program               Program
                                                                                                                     UG Interdisciplinary   UG Technical    PG Interdisciplinary     PG Technical    PG Architecture               PG Technical          UG Interdisciplinary
                                                             Introduction       Visions of ubicomp                   x                      x               x                        x               x                             x                     x
                                                                                Ubicomp Fundamentals                 x                      x               x                        x               x                             x
                                                                                History of computing                 x                      x                                        x               condensed                                           x
                                                                                Interfaces                           x                      x               x                                        x
                                                             Tech               Hardware skills                      basic                  x               x (prior knowledge,      x               basic                         x (prior knowledge,   x
                                                                                                                                                            class, or bootcamp)                                                    class, or bootcamp)
19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How




                                                                                Software skills                      basic                  pre requisite   x (prior knowledge,      x               basic                         x (prior knowledge,   x
                                                                                                                                                            class, or bootcamp)                                                    class, or bootcamp)
                                                                                Fabrication techniques               basic                  x                                        x               basic since prior knowledge   x
                                                                                Interaction techniques, modalities   basic                  x                                        x               overview                      x
                                                                                Electronics                          x                      x               x                        x
                                                                                Sensors                              x                      x               x
                                                                                Actuators                            x                      x               x
                                                                                Location tracking                                           x               x
                                                                                IoT                                                         x               x                                                                      x
                                                                                Signal processing                                                                                    x               use toolkits                  elective
                                                                                Network                              basic                  x               x                                                                      x                     x
                                                                                Activity recognition                                                                                 x
                                                                                Communication protocols                                                                              x
                                                                                System building                                             x                                        x
                                                                                Infrastructures                                                                                      x
                                                                                Appliance design                                            elective                                 x
                                                                                Displays                                                                                                                                           elective
                                                                                Content Awareness                                                           x
                                                                                Testing, certification, ISO                                                                          x                                             x
                                                             Methods / Design   User Centered Design (UCD)                                  x               possibly pre-requisite   x
                                                                                Sketching + design                   x                      x               x                                                                                            x
                                                                                Prototying Methods                   x                      x               x                        x                                                                   x
                                                                                Evaluation                                                  x               x                        x               x                             x                     x
                                                                                Inclusive/accessible design                                                 elective                 elective                                      elective              elective
                                                                                Statistics                                                                                           pre-requisite                                 x                     x
                                                             Specific domains   AI/ML                                basic                  optional        optional                                                               elective
                                                                                Human Augmentation                   basic                  optional        optional
                                                                                Data Science/Analytics                                                      optional                 x                                             elective
                                                                                Robotics                                                                                                                                           elective
                                                                                Sustainability                                                                                                       x                                                   x
                                                                                Autonomous systems                                          advanced
                                                                                Entrepreneurship                                                            elective                                                                                     elective
                                                             Implications       Ethical considerations               x                      x               x                        pre-requisite   x                             x                     x
                                                                                Security                             x                      x               x                        pre-requisite   x                             x                     x
                                                                                Privacy                              x                      x               x                        pre-requisite   x                             x                     x
                                                             Communication      Demonstration of product                                    x               x                        x               x                             x                     x
                                                                                Writing/describing product                                  x               x                        x               x                             x                     x
30
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                           31




    Figure 2 Grand challenges of teaching Ubicomp (from a method point of view). A star
corresponds to a challenge specific to Ubicomp while other are general to teaching.



each group tested their content and methods on other group and received feedback, before
iterating on their design. Finally, teams presented a summary of their new materials to the
group (Table 2).
    From the discussions following up the presentation we also noted some actions to do:
    Create a repository or playlist (youtube) or videos that can be used within the community
    and define what is Ubicomp.
    Ask participants to upload a 2 minutes video of their definition of Ubicomp that can be
    used in class to show the variety of what people think is Ubicomp.



7. Future Steps
Although this seminar addressed many questions the organisers had originally highlighted, it
also opened new exciting directions to explore and new challenges. To start addressing them
we identified the main following avenues for future work and future events:
    Follow-up Dagstuhl seminar on writing a textbook
    Follow-up Dagstuhl seminar focussing on the industrial side, e.g. what skills do students
    need for the society we will built in 5/10/20/50 years?
    Using the website to keep the community alive as well as the access to material, and also
    create a video channel to create a repository of ubicom examples.
    We also have discussed about 3-4 follow up papers to be written among participants and
    organizers.




                                                                                                19232
                                                                Table 2 Innovative content and activities for Ubicomp education.
                                                             Topic                  Content                                                                                                            Activities
                                                             What is Ubicomp
                                                             (Ellen, Jakub, Mi-       Multi-media video presenting Ubicomp and that the whole community can use + show examples of real life              Make them watch videos and read paper and write a definition of Ubicom (plus sketch)
                                                             chael)                   Ubicomp (or fictional like on movie)                                                                                Definition of terminology (e.g. Cliff notes or cheatsheet)
                                                                                      Have a good and bad example of Ubicomp repository video                                                             Give examples of categories of things that can disappear (e.g. task, physical computer) and ask students how
                                                                                      They showed a video of the construction worker in traditional set up and new (with new digital tool)                would you make it disappear.
                                                                                      Introduce key concepts (e.g. calm technology, Weiser, disappearing computer etc.)                                   Repository of video or youtube playlist?
                                                                                      ILO: identify concepts in showed example / explain the example using appropriate terminology
                                                                                      What is Ubicomp “ let’s people define HCI. It is too big to propose a definition because the edges are so
19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How




                                                                                      blurry. But this is may be not a bad thing (although students may ask us what it is).
                                                                                      What is ubicomp? May be it is about designing interconnected devices while removing the stress of having
                                                                                      so many devices to deal with (from a user point of view)
                                                             Electronics (Tim,
                                                             Brygg, Thomas)           Use three examples (“schools” ) of building new Ubicomp devices using simple electronics and use these
                                                                                      examples all along the course.
                                                                                      Three layers of increasing complexity to focus on are sensing, actuating, computing.
                                                                                      Having a 30 minutes version of this as well.
                                                             Electronic (Nicolai,
                                                             Jessica, Jeremy, An-     110 minute lecture about sensors part of a more general course on physical computing                                Before class: they get material and they assemble and glue together a sensors (plus papers material). They
                                                             drea, Simon              Here focus is on hardware so code is not the focus and is prepared (download and pre-assemble circuit).             will end up with different sensors
                                                                                      Basic of resistors (sensing as a variation of resistance)                                                           Motivating by showing famous consumer devices and show how it is inside and this is “simple”
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Show what’s inside a resistor
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Find out about the mapping between the sensing value we are getting and the actual response (e.g. acrylic
                                                                                                                                                                                                          overlays to change the light coming to a sensor)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Collect all broken device and identify things inside.
                                                             Interfaces (Anke,
                                                             Michal,    Sylvain,      Design space to describe the dimension of interacting with Ubicomp. Show example of Ubicomp visions and             Activity 1 “understanding possible ubicomp interfaces: gave existing material and let students place them in
                                                             Donald)                  show where they are in the design space.                                                                            the design space” (the mock up activity show this may be a good activity).
                                                                                      It may be good to show old video trying to predict the future to show what things are changing, may be why          Activity 2 “Desining with ghosts” (Donald use it already). This is kind of a wizard of oz design where two
                                                                                      defining Ubicomp is hard. Are they future of the past?                                                              students are ghosts and actuated things around and the user is blindfolded. The ghost help them through
                                                                                                                                                                                                          the world by actuating things around.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Bank of videos example
                                                             Research methods
                                                             (Caitlin, Miriam,        For interdisciplinary class (45 min)                                                                                Give hypothesis example, .e.g “the time of the day will improve your grade” . Ask “Is your hypothesis
                                                             Vicky)                   ILO: identifying research question, making a hypothesis, identifying variables, operational definition and          falsifiable” ?
                                                                                      study design.                                                                                                       Activity around what is measured in terms of the dependant variable and how to make sure the measurement
                                                                                                                                                                                                          fits with the hypothesis.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Watch a short video, come up with a question “does self driving cars cause more accidents” .
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Giving example of wrong design or wrong set up and make them find why and where are the problems.
                                                             Implication (Aure-
                                                             lien, Eva, Ruzanna)      Use integrated approach to talk about the implication during the entire course rather than in a single lecture      Use case studies to discuss impact of technology or architecture choices on impact topics (from the diagram)
                                                                                      Topics as dimensions to discuss within a diagram they proposed (see Radar diagram in the reading list)              as well as other factors.
                                                                                      Show the “what our smart devices know about you” (TED talk)                                                         Exercise with critical review of certain system can be done.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Repository of use case examples (e.g. Amazon dash video, google glass, autonomous cars, Alexa etc.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          “Common thread” with a visual so students know when the implication is discussed during an entire program.
32
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                       33


8. Reading list
We collected a reading list that addresses the why, what, and how of ubicomp education,
designed for educators.

   Pervasive Computing Education, Audrey Girouard, Andrew L. Kun, Anne Roudaut, Orit
   Shaer, and Andrew L. Kun, IEEE Pervasive Computing, Oct, 2018.
   Teaching Pervasive Computing in Liberal Arts Colleges, Orit Shaer, and Evan M. Peck
   IEEE Pervasive Computing, Jul, 2018.
   The Fuzzy and the Techie: Why the Liberal Arts Will Rule the Digital World, Scott
   Hartley
   Fixing Tech’s Ethics Problem Starts in the Classroom, Stephanie Wykstra, The Nation.
   The Pervasive, Embedded, and Mobile Computing Curriculum – Preparing Computer
   Science Students for the Technology of the Future, Jakob Bardram, 2012
   Bridging the Gap Between Teaching and Research: A Case Study for Engineering &
   Applied Science, Anne Roudaut, Higher Education Pedagogies 2019
   Krumm, J. (Ed.) Ubiquitous computing fundamentals. CRC Press, 2010 (fairly outdated
   by now)
   Rowland et al. Designing Connected Products. O’Reilly 2015 (on Design of IoT products,
   with a broad range of topics ranging from networking aspects, architecture to product
   design)
   Landay, J. A., & Borriello, G. (2003). Design patterns for ubiquitous computing. Com-
   puter, 36 (8), 93-95.
   Electronics books from “Make” .
   The radar diagram https://scottwhyoung.com/teaching/information-ethics-privacy-spring-
   2018/




                                                                                            19232
34   19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How


      2      Table of Contents
     Executive Summary
       Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer . . . . . . . . . . . 26

     Overview of Talks
          Reflections from Michael Beigl on ubicomp education
          Michael Beigl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
          Design patterns for Ubicomp?
          Andrea Bianchi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
          Teaching Ubicomp in different countries and for different students
          Anke Brock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
          Reflections from Jessica Cauchard on ubicomp education
          Jessica Cauchard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
          Interactive Socio-Technical Systems (or what’s next for Ubicomp)
          Ruzanna Chitchyan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
          Situating UbiComp Education within or distinct from HCI?
          Jeremy Cooperstock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
          Creating Magic– reflections on ubiquitous computing
          Ellen Yi-Luen Do . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
          Reflections on the need to discuss ubiquitous computing education
          Audrey Girouard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
          Reflections from Eva Hornecker on ubicomp education
          Eva Hornecker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    41
          Integrating Ubicomp in undergraduate education
          Miriam Konkel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    41
          Ubicomp as a vehicle for teaching students to generate new knowledge
          Andrew Kun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
          Is Ubicomp here?
          Sylvain Malacria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
          From Weiser to Now: The Search for Ubicomp
          Nicolai Marquardt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
          What is Ubicomp?: A Student’s Perspective
          Amanda McLeod . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      44
          Reflections from Donald McMillan on ubicomp education
          Donald McMillan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
          Reflections from Tim Merritt on ubicomp education
          Timothy Merritt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
          Ubiquitous computing: Accepting a fuzzy field
          Caitlin Mills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
          Reflections from Simon Perrault on ubicomp education
          Simon Perrault . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                                 35


   Leveraging the multidisciplinary aspects of Ubicomp
   Thomas Pietrzak . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     47
   Reflections from Michal Rinott on ubicomp education
   Michal Rinott . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47
   Reflections from Anne Roudaut on ubicomp education
   Anne Roudaut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
   Strong Disciplinary Skills are Key – Ubicomp Teaching is then the Multidisciplinary
   and Practical Application of these Skills in Context of a Realistic Problem
   Albrecht Schmidt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
   Reflections from Oliver Schneider on ubicomp education
   Oliver Schneider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
   Reflections from Orit Shaer on ubicomp education
   Orit Shaer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
   Scoping Ubicomp for interdisciplinary students
   Jakub Sypniewski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    51
   Reflections from Aurélien Tabard on ubicomp education
   Aurélien Tabard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   51
   Reflections from Brygg Ullmer on ubicomp education
   Brygg Ullmer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
   Reflections from Vicky Zeamer on ubicomp education
   Vicky Zeamer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54




                                                                                                      19232
36   19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How


      3     Overview of Talks
     3.1    Reflections from Michael Beigl on ubicomp education
     Michael Beigl (KIT – Karlsruher Institut für Technologie, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Michael Beigl


     The reflection on what Ubicomp is has taken much of discussion about teaching Ubicomp:
        how much should it include knowledge from other CS and non-CS areas. Is Ubicomp just
        all of computing (I don’t think so)
        in general, does Ubicomp really exist as a topic separate from the rest of CS? (I think so)
        what is the focus, e.g. focusing on systems that are of low (perceived) complexity (calm
        computing, etc.)? (I think: yes: the core of Ubicomp is about methods (design) and
        technology to make computers calm and stay in the background)
        Is the Smartphone a legitimate Ubicomp device? (I think yes, but..) What is the difference
        to Mobile Computing, IoT, etc.? ? (concept vs. technology centered)
        is Ubicomp a subset of HCI? (I don’t think so, as e.g. all of tech is missing)
        should there be a development of Ubicomp towards modern times (data-centricity, more
        complexity)? (yes, but how?)

        I see this as positive, as a debate helps shaping an area. And it is always good to reflect
     on the basics.



     3.2    Design patterns for Ubicomp?
     Andrea Bianchi (KAIST – Daejeon, KR)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Andrea Bianchi


     This seminar had the ambitious objective to try to understand the role of Ubiquitous
     computing in contemporary society and current educational curricula around the world.
     We started by trying to define what is Ubicomp, and how it differs from HCI education or
     other multidisciplinary programs. Furthermore, we attempted to define a list of topics that
     span under the umbrella of Ubicomp. One of the common elements that were highlighted
     is the fact that Ubicomp does not require the direct attention of users, but it works in the
     periphery and background (“calm technology”). We further elaborated on this point, and we
     all seem to agree that it is not a matter of technology, but a matter of user’s consciousness
     and overall context. For example, mobile devices such as smartphones, despite requiring the
     users’ full attention and engagement when used, can also be seen as Ubicomp devices because
     the usage is transient. For example, using a mobile device to check the time or as an alarm
     clock are examples of short burst of transient activities that should not be read as isolated
     independent actions, but in a broader context. Under this light, Ubiquitous computing is
     not technology driven, but rather depends on the users’ consciousness about the activity at
     hand (i.e. a “background” task when contextualized in light of the “broader” task at hand).
         The second half of the seminar is mainly focused on trying to determine the means
     (HOW) and ultimate motivations (WHY) for teaching Ubicomp in universities. Participants
     highlighted that the multidisciplinary and generalist competencies usually required in current
     Ubicomp classes might not be enough for real world products (where instead specialized
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                            37


multidisciplinary teams work together). Furthermore, we can also assume that many of these
competences will become more common places for future generations, or might even disappear.
The question hence becomes again WHAT type of knowledge Ubicomp can additionally
provide to a CS or Design curriculum, or, in other words, what general knowledge will
remain in the students considering that specific technologies might become obsolete or
common knowledge over time. One of the suggestions that seems to be shared among many
participants was that perhaps Ubicomp educators should attempt to distill domain specific
knowledge using design-patterns. As many professional fields such as software engineering,
interface design and security, attempt to transfer knowledge by building unit-blocks of
knowledge in the shape of patterns, so perhaps Ubicomp education will require the same
level of abstraction – patterns that go beyond technology, but are specific enough that can
be implemented using the current available tools and technology. I personally think that
defying these patterns will be next big challenge of the field.



3.3    Teaching Ubicomp in different countries and for different students
Anke Brock (ENAC – Toulouse, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Anke Brock


We were lucky to have participants from many different countries and universities across the
world in our Dagstuhl seminar 19232. One interesting observation was then how teaching
environments and situations vary across these different countries and institutions. This may
impact the number of hours which could be attributed to a new Ubicomp course or program,
the availability of hackerspaces and hardware, or the background of students (e.g. their prior
training). A new Ubicomp course or program would need to be adapted to all these factors.
In our working group, we first worked on designing a new Ubicomp course for computer
science students, which could be integrated into an existing program (for instance in my case
the Master for HCI in Toulouse, France, http://www.masterihm.fr/). Since we aimed at
technical students, we expected students to meet certain prerequisites (e.g. programming
skills, software development methods, statistics). Our course would then encompass lectures
and exercises on topics such as concepts of ubicomp; methods; sensing, data & communication;
hardware; interaction techniques; and system. We identified skills and knowledge that should
be taught in parallel in general HCI or CS lectures (e.g. user-centred design). We agreed that
current students would enter a Ubicomp course without necessarily having knowledge on
electronics (e.g. Arduino), but that it might become prerequisite knowledge for students in
10 years from now (similar to the increase of CS teaching in high schools which we currently
observe). An interesting exercise was to adapt this course to a different student population.
In our case we discussed how such a lecture could be adapted for architecture students who
would be interested in learning ubicomp for the design of smartphones. Such type of students
would look at ubicomp from a different perspective than CS or HCI students: rather than
learning how to build systems from scratch, they would be interested in learning how to make
use of existing systems and toolkits. As a consequence, the focus of the lectures would shift
from a technical perspective to a more applied perspective. On the other hand, topics such as
sustainability would gain more importance, since architects are already trained in considering
aspects such as energy consumption in the design of spaces. To sum up, the design of a
Ubicomp class or program needs to be adapted to the specificities of each university. However,
this Dagstuhl seminar hopefully lays the foundations which will help us implement such a
course or program at our own institutions.


                                                                                                 19232
38   19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How


     3.4    Reflections from Jessica Cauchard on ubicomp education
     Jessica Cauchard (Ben Gurion University – Beer Sheva, IL)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Jessica Cauchard


     While the discussions started around what and how to teach Ubiquitous Computing, we
     realized that we couldn’t fully define how Ubiquitous Computing differs from Human-
     Computer Interaction education. In addition, we believe that within the next decade or so,
     Ubiquitous Computing will become the norm in terms of computing. As such, what are
     the skills required and how large is the scope of university education in the field? One of
     the discussion topics was around whether data science should be part of Ubicomp teaching
     curriculum or not. We also wondered how the background of students will change within the
     next 5,10 and 20 years and how early their education in the field will start.
         Following these discussions, we started establishing curriculums for both undergraduate
     and graduate programs in Ubiquitous Computing. The programs we focused on were targeted
     for both technical or multidisciplinary students. We found that the programs that were
     designed by the different groups ended up with many similarities, all including a large
     range of topics from software and hardware engineering to design and creative skills. The
     undergraduate programs had a focus on practical skills and industry placements while
     graduate programs had an emphasis on research skills and research methods. We also had
     discussions around institutional support and constraints for courses, such as budget for class
     equipment. When designing classes, most classes comprised active learning activities for
     students to engage with the content and better understand the concepts.



     3.5    Interactive Socio-Technical Systems (or what’s next for Ubicomp)
     Ruzanna Chitchyan (University of Bristol, GB)
           License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Ruzanna Chitchyan
             URL https://energysystems.blogs.bristol.ac.uk/author/r-chitchyan/


     Can a single curriculum can deliver teaching and training for all knowledge and skills necessary
     to deliver the newly emerging generation of Ubicomp systems? Let’s consider that that
     to get driverless cars (as an example system) to “disappear into the fabric of everyday”
     (that is to become ubiquitous) we need to draw on skills and knowledge in: mechanical,
     electrical, electronics, and software engineering, networking and telecommunications, as well
     as, ergonomics, aerodynamics, product design, HCI, psychology, cultural context, regulations
     and laws, to name a few (not even mentioning aerospace related issues for getting the GPS
     systems in place).
         It is then difficult to see how a single curriculum for a Ubicomp systems can be arrived
     at. Neither do we try to get only Ubicomp graduates to work on driverless car systems today.
     In practice, when developing and deploying such ubiquitous solutions, teams of specialists
     collaborate to draw in the required skills and knowledge.
         Then maybe we could agree that Future-Focused Ubicomp Curriculum does not
     limit itself to Hardware and Software Prototyping, Programming and Networking, and Cre-
     ativity modules, but is taught as a programme where specialists in Software Engineering,
     Networking, Electrical Engineering, HCI, Human Anthropology, Psychology, Business, Law,
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                              39


and other disciplines textbfwork in teams to build large, complex, situated, usable systems
that become the infrastructure of tomorrow. In other words, the learning to build Ubicomp
(or to be more precise, Interactive Socio-Technical Systems) is not accomplished through
graduating from a specific degree, but by “graduating” through working on collaborative
interdisciplinary projects with focus on interaction of human (both individual and societal)
and technical aspects. In other words, I suggest that such projects should form the “heart” of
the curriculum on Ubicomp/ Interactive Socio-Technical Systems, while the specific curricula
would continue to deliver HCI, Communications, Software Engineering, Law, Phycology and
other similar modules, depending on the flavour of the courses provided.



3.6    Situating UbiComp Education within or distinct from HCI?
Jeremy Cooperstock (McGill University – Montreal, CA)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Jeremy Cooperstock


Ubiquitous computing education faces a hurdle of differentiating itself from that of general
HCI education, and perhaps more importantly, demonstrating its relevance and importance
to society at large. Despite the clear definition of Ubicomp as provided almost thirty years
ago by Weiser, there is no clear consensus as to what topics fit and which do not, within
a course or program that is not primarily overlapping with HCI. As a result, despite a
high degree of agreement on topics of relevance, as put forward by the various workshop
participants, it remains uncertain as to how this subject will compete with established HCI
programs. Whether this implies that usability concerns for handheld computing (and its
future incarnations) will remain dominant over the design of calm and “invisible” technology,
in particular, in the teaching of future generations of students, remains to be seen.



3.7    Creating Magic– reflections on ubiquitous computing
Ellen Yi-Luen Do (University of Colorado – Boulder, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Ellen Yi-Luen Do


Do you ever wonder what would the future be like? What kind of technologies would people
use in their everyday lives? What kind of the reality of ubiquitous computing would be
achieved in the 21st century? Instead of singing the cute song “Que Sera, Sera. Whatever
will be, will be. The future’s not ours to see”, we are fortunate to have Alan Kay’s suggestion
that “The best way to predict the future is to invent it.” It’s so nice to be able to invent the
future we will live in! Then, what kind of future shall we be inventing? How do we prepare
our young generations to engage in meaningful and useful ubiquitous computing?
    Weiser’s vision for ubiquitous computing is about calm technology, in which the technology
disappears into the world we live in and become peripheral, and put us at home. This
week’s Dagstuhl Seminar 19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How
created a unique opportunity for a community of scholars and professionals gather together
to brainstorm and exchange ideas about ubicomp education and the type of curriculum that
would be needed for inventors and designers of future interactive systems.




                                                                                                   19232
40   19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How


         With various breakout sessions in thematic topics, we asked questions about what is
     Ubiquitous Computing, and whether it’s useful or even necessary to still use the term, or
     should the term of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) be the defining domain? How, then,
     do we differentiate these with the fields of information and the study, creation and analysis
     of media? Shall we instead use the term interactive systems? There is no one easy answer.
     We will just have to evolve the field. Of course each name comes with its own promises
     and baggage, as well as the persuasive powers to attract different kind of audiences. I am
     delighted with the active discussions and the questioning about ubicomp education, and
     pleased with the enthusiasm. Meanwhile, let’s not forget the suggestion from the futurist,
     inventor, and science fiction writer Arthur Clark that “Any sufficiently advanced technology
     is indistinguishable from magic.” In our design of the curriculum we certainly would like to
     empower students with technical competency, but also the creative spark and the power of
     play in creating magic!



     3.8    Reflections on the need to discuss ubiquitous computing education
     Audrey Girouard (Carleton University – Ottawa, CA)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Audrey Girouard


     The ubiquitous computing seminar offered attendees an opportunity to apply their research
     expertise to improve the delivery of the topic to undergraduate and graduate students. This
     was a fairly unique opportunity: education is usually discussed internally within institutions,
     but rarely globally, other than in specialized conferences. Yet, education is at the core
     centre of our mission as researchers and faculty members. Teaching students the right topic
     using appropriate and engaging active learning methods can be challenging. This seminar
     stem from the organizers’ interest to learn from their colleagues’ various perspectives and
     experiences, to create a large community of teachers that can learn from one another. The
     seminar grew to become a place to discuss the vision of teaching ubiquitous computing,
     establishing the general topics to teach a well-rounded class, as well as proposing how to put
     that in action.
         The seminar reflected on vision of teaching in the 5 to 20-year horizon, as well as design
     new curriculum based on how the field and teaching methodologies are evolving. A core
     challenge that emerged rapidly and recurring throughout is the difficulty of defining what is
     ubiquitous computing, what exactly it englobes, what are the salient examples that define it.
     Very few of the 28 participants teach a class explicitly named ubiquitous computing, though
     many have related topics, or include it as a topic instead of a focus. Another interesting
     observation was the necessity to distinguish general teaching and learning-related discussions
     to those that are ubiquitous computing specific. Ubicomp focused challenges included the
     necessary to differentiation between ubicomp and other related topics (e.g. general HCI),
     physical resources (lab space, hardware budget, etc.), and interdisciplinarity in the topic.
     Engaging though general topics included teaching workload, student recruitment and student
     engagement in classrooms.
         Overall, this was a fruitful and engaging seminar with discussion and materials. It will
     lead me to update my teaching materials shortly and improve the delivery of ubiquitous
     computing to my students.
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                              41


3.9     Reflections from Eva Hornecker on ubicomp education
Eva Hornecker (Bauhaus-Universität Weimar, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Eva Hornecker


There was a lot of comments on what’s the difference between HCI and Ubicomp. For
me, the UbiComp we are discussing here (which is the more HCI’ish section of UbiComp)
is a subset of HCI, a specialization, with some overlap to the more technical areas. It is
specialized in terms of the types of technologies involved, as these have some form of sensing
technology (often also acting back on the world), and interact with or relate with the outside
world and objects (unlike general apps, which might just live on a phone – and even if
used in a mobile situation, might not interact with the outside world). So this requires an
understanding of the technology and its embedding in the world, and what follows from this.
Many of the challenges with teaching we discuss appear to be of a more general nature for
HCI and applied topics, still it is good to have an opportunity to discuss these. Devising
a curriculum for UbiComp was interesting, in particular thinking about what a full degree
could or should involve. The collection of teaching materials that was prepared on Thursday
will be incredibly useful, and even though I’m already teaching Ubicomp, there are a lot of
new ideas, in particular for interactive elements and activities for some of the Ubicomp core
topics.
    One of the reasons I like teaching UbiComp is that it lends itself to a holistic, systemic
approach, which discusses applications as well as societal and ethical concerns (that partially
may be specific to UbiComp, but should be considered in a technical degree education anyway).
In UbiComp teaching, we need to discuss technology, hardware/sensors, system architectures,
discuss applications, etc., and here discussions of impact (ethics, ecology, privacy) can be
integrated easily ad hoc. This holistic approach also makes the class accessible and interesting
both for more technical students and for students with a more human science or design
interest.



3.10      Integrating Ubicomp in undergraduate education
Miriam Konkel (Clemson University, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Miriam Konkel


In the context of a workshop discussing Ubicomp in Education, we discovered that participants
have different conceptions of the nature of Ubicomp. From the early 1990s context, there are
well-known descriptions by Weiser. However, as some pragmatic understandings of ubiquitous
computing are now deeply woven throughout our daily lives, it raises the question of broader
present-day definitions and academic implications. We also realized the prospective value
in characterizing the boundaries between Human Computer Interaction and Ubicomp. For
example, is Ubicomp a part of Human Computer Interaction, or are they two separate
disciplines with considerable overlap? We are aware that our student population is diverse.
We see the need for transdisciplinary programs as well as technology-centered programs.
Our group focused on program development for undergraduate students who are pursuing
an interdisciplinary Ubicomp minor. Our focus group itself was interdisciplinary with
domain experts ranging from computer science/engineering, design, and psychology. For




                                                                                                   19232
42   19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How


     an interdisciplinary program, we anticipate a similar spectrum of students. Students might
     receive training an Ubicomp overview course that covers the past, present, and future of
     Ubicomp. In this course students would also be introduced to ethics and the need to consider
     inclusiveness for the development and design of prototypes. These topics will be woven
     throughout other courses. We anticipate that students will be able to choose from a subset
     of courses ranging from programming, computer engineering, psychology, research methods,
     statistics, and object design.



     3.11      Ubicomp as a vehicle for teaching students to generate new
               knowledge
     Andrew Kun (University of New Hampshire – Durham, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Andrew Kun


     Having designed and taught two different ubicomp courses, I’m very interested in looking
     ahead to the next decade or more, and asking: what is the future of ubicomp education? This
     is the reason I was excited to co-organize Dagstuhl workshop 19232 “Ubiquitous Computing
     Education: Why, What, and How.”
         I believe that one central issue for ubicomp education is to help train students to
     successfully generate new knowledge. Ubicomp is a field that is advancing quickly, and many
     of the specific tools of generating new knowledge become obsolete quickly [1]. For example,
     the programming tools, and the tools for creating hardware change rapidly. Students need
     to keep up with this change in order to be successful in their future workplaces. However,
     the need to keep students up-to-date on the specific tools of the trade should not prevent us,
     educators, from also training them in the general tools of generating new knowledge. The
     general tools are described by Karl Popper’s model of conjecture and refutation, in which
     scientific theories are built through proposing hypotheses which are subsequently empirically
     tested and either supported or refuted. Steven Pinker describes these general tools in terms
     of Bayesian reasoning: certain hypotheses are given a baseline probability based on prior
     knowledge, and this probability is adjusted based on empirical tests. Importantly, these
     skills are not only useful in scientific research in academia. As the recent work of Eric Ries
     demonstrates, these general tools are also critically important for productive research and
     development in industry.
         Fortunately. Ubicomp education presents educators with an excellent opportunity to
     train students in both the specific, and the general tools of generating new knowledge. This
     is because very often ubicomp education focuses on creating artifacts. This process requires
     specific tools – students need to know how to program the latest gadgets, and how to use
     the latest hardware prototyping tools. However, students also need to create experiments in
     which they test their creations and assess their viability in different situations. Educators
     should seize these opportunities and help students gain an appreciation for, as well as training
     in, generating research problems, hypotheses, and approaches for testing hypotheses.
     References
     1    Girouard, A., Kun, A. L., Roudaut, A., and Shaer, O. Girouard, A., Kun, A. L., Roudaut,
          A., & Shaer, O. Pervasive Computing Education. IEEE Pervasive Computing, 17(4), 9-12,
          (2018).
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                              43


2      Kun, A. L. Kun, A. L. Reader and Teacher: Fourteen Books that can Inspire Teaching in
       Pervasive Computing (and Beyond). IEEE Pervasive Computing, 18(2), (2019).



3.12      Is Ubicomp here?
Sylvain Malacria (INRIA Lille, FR)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Sylvain Malacria


Mark Weiser, the father of ubiquitous computing, predicted in 1999 a future where everything
will be able to sense human input and augment its appearance with digital information:
essentially computation will be fully embedded into all aspects of the real world and the
transition between the physical and the virtual would become seamless for the user. Today
is becoming this future, with the spread of interconnected devices not only in our pockets
(smartphones, smartwatches, etc.) but also in our environment (smart buildings, connected
bus stops). Interestingly enough, the fact that ubiquitous computing has become so “real”
has also made the notion of ubiquitous computer itself less “clear”, in terms of which notions
it encompasses and how they should be transferred.
    During this seminar, several participants agreed that ubiquitous computing is a rich
interdisciplinary domain, hard to define, and whom boundaries are hard to identify. It has
been clear, however, that designing ubicomp systems requires a variety of skills usually
instructed in various disciplines. After discussing what the typical student in ubicomp will be
in 5,10 and 20 years, this seminar tried to define typical programs and courses for teaching
ubicomp for both technical or interdisciplinary groups of students.



3.13      From Weiser to Now: The Search for Ubicomp
Nicolai Marquardt (University College London, GB)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Nicolai Marquardt


Many inspiring conversations during the seminar brought up critical aspects to consider
when putting together a possible ubicomp curriculum. First, it is difficult to clearly outline
the scope and boundaries of what ubicomp includes. Individual definitions of what ubicomp
is was quite diverse across all participants. Overlap and distinction to other technical HCI
courses/modules is important to best position the strengths of a ubicomp focused course.
Second, we might need to better understand the future career paths of the students, as
their jobs in industry will likely not be framed around ubicomp and the particular ubicomp
use cases, but cover broader areas across CS, automation and autonomous and networked
systems (which is different to many other CS specialisations, such as AI/Machine Learning
or Financial Computing, where career trajectories are more obvious). Third, it was discussed
that we need a better differentiation between the fundamental principles vs. the applied
ubicomp teaching. For example, what techniques and approaches can we teach our students
that are still relevant in 10 or 20 years. Technologies, programming languages and tools we
use today are outdated very quickly, and so the question is what are the skills and techniques
that last. Related to this, it was mentioned to possibly consider creating collections of design
patterns focusing on the ubicomp context. Last, we probably need to revisit Weiser’s vision




                                                                                                   19232
44   19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How


     of ubiquitous computing (with all its qualities of calm computing, peripheral interaction,
     foreground/background interaction, situated in people’s environments, and so on) and ask
     how much of that vision and definition of what ubicomp is still applies, should be changed,
     refined or broadened.



     3.14      What is Ubicomp?: A Student’s Perspective
     Amanda McLeod (Carleton University – Ottawa, CA)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Amanda McLeod


     We started off the 19232 seminar with the “Why?” of ubiquitous computation. I immediately
     began seeing similarities with the current Information Technology (IT) and Human Computer
     Interaction (HCI) terminology and curriculum that have, and are currently being taught to
     me in the Interactive Multimedia and Design program at Carleton University. On the second
     day of the seminar, we explored the “What?”, as in what would be taught in a new Ubiquitous
     computational education curriculum? Teams explored different themes and created course
     outlines in which we would need to cover multiple topics in order to confidently say a student
     has been educated in Ubicomp, whoever, all this exercise did for me was strongly establishing
     the parallel between current educational topics that have previously been seen in my past
     and present courses, for example, ethics, hardware, software, prototyping, statistics, and
     many more.
         Following multiple discussions with the seminar participants, it appeared as though the
     established definition of ubicomp continued to blur. Multiple perspectives shaped the name
     to be about a higher complexity item. As discussions went on, the narrative of ubicomp
     education rapidly formed a Venn diagram with the HCI world. Both poles of the diagram
     overlapped greatly in terms of curriculum presentation and thoughts on what the curriculum
     should become. These repeating curriculum terms posed the questions of “What is ubicomp?
     What is it not?”, “what is HCI? What is it not?”. Do both of these terms occupy two
     completely separate worlds or do they morph into one under the same umbrella?
         Additionally, while developing curriculums and methods of delivery, a great portion of
     the participants shared ways in which they capture their audience’s attention. This made
     me realize that for the past 3 years of my undergrad, I’ve been the subject of teachers
     tactics that attempted to get me more involved in class learning and discussions. During this
     same conversation, the subject of teaching evaluations were brought to the attention of the
     participants and their major impact on teachers opportunity for promotion as well as salary.
     This made me reflect on the existing teaching evaluations and how they are presented to the
     students and how some questions are quite frankly irrelevant to how well the professor taught
     the class. “Did the teacher speak loudly and clearly?”, “Did they end class promptly and on
     time?”. These existing teaching evaluation questions prompted me to question why we don’t
     cater these questions to specific classes in the same way we cater class content to particular
     classes. For example, if we question a student on if they believe they were sufficiently taught
     about specific learning outcomes from the course outlines, we would be able to sufficiently
     evaluate a teacher.
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                               45


3.15      Reflections from Donald McMillan on ubicomp education
Donald McMillan (Stockholm University, SE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Donald McMillan


One discussion on the future of Ubicomp education that resonated was on the future
students, their needs, and their abilities. As any technology spreads throughout society, it is
appropriated, used, disassembled, and taught by and to a much wider audience than the
technical experts, which sparked its creation. As Ubicomp makes its way through transport,
architecture, and into K-12 education as part of the infrastructural facilities we can expect it
to follow this trajectory (seen, for example, in web technology) of being taught as something
to use, then as something to understand, and finally as something to manipulate and create
(with or through). This pushes the underlying goal of teaching ubiquitous computing from the
practical, technical aspects to more theoretical, abstract, and universally applicable principles
– ones that encompass design, ethics, societal impact, as well as technology. This comes hand
in hand with the technology we are talking about following the students into this future
classroom (in whatever form it will take), and through their lives. This will necessarily change
the ability and understanding of the students. In a manner akin to smartphones providing
communication and search functionality being taken advantage of in current educational
contexts, in the future the trace data from a host of ubicomp systems, possible social and
cognitive enhancements, and access to the outputs of these in an interconnected and social
manner provide a fascinating glimpse of a possible future of education not only of Ubiquitous
Computing, but through and of Ubiquitous Computing.



3.16      Reflections from Tim Merritt on ubicomp education
Timothy Merritt (Aalborg University, DK)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Timothy Merritt


Ubiquitous Computing is a topic that is defined in various ways from researchers, artists,
and practitioners from diverse perspectives. It became apparent to me that many agree that
Weiser’s 1991 paper,“The Computer for the 21st Century”, is a good starting point and a
way to open the discussion, yet from there, current examples and aims of related research
differ dramatically. From a technical perspective, challenges arise when we try to define
what is within scope and out of scope for Ubicomp. Is the disappearing computer the main
intersection about which most agree?
    Weiser discusses location and scale as crucial to the future of ubiquitous computing and
paints a picture of a world free from common struggles. Actuated desks mean we no longer
misplace papers in the office, deeply connected texts such as physical maps and electronic
information, etc. While this vision is optimistic, there are, of course, implementation issues
and ethical issues of connecting and actuating the physical world. Further, how should we
teach for those who might research or work in related practice? Trends in hardware becoming
cheaper, smaller, and easier to program has made “making” more accessible to many more
people. Similarly, software is easier to create active environments utilizing toolkits and
high-level languages.




                                                                                                    19232
46   19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How


         Almost 30 years after Weiser’s seminal paper, there are some good examples of connected
     devices and seamless interactions, yet so many experiences with technology are problematic.
     Voice assistants are often awkward and require abrupt command and terse speech. This
     makes the technology conspicuous, yet in a very negative way. Aside from these clumsy speech
     interactions that disrupt social situations, they currently provide very limited opportunities
     for end-user programming and customization. The calm and smooth world is still elusive.
     Another technology that we find in everyday life, the smartphone has become pervasive
     and helpful in so many ways, but when we consider ways in which it fits into our social
     experience, it too is clumsy and problematic–this multi-purpose device has become almost a
     wearable companion device, ready at every moment to be helpful in so many ways, wayfinding,
     controlling home lighting, buying things, banking, socializing, almost everything is controlled
     through the small screen. Is the mobile phone the cursor for interacting in the world? Will
     we break free from the small screen and find more embedded displays woven into the physical
     world? Is the text and information provided on the small screen akin to Weiser’s example
     of the wrapper on a piece of candy? Ubiquitous computing might contribute to many of
     the concrete challenges faced in world–some of the envisioned smart environments and calm
     computing experiences have come to fruition and so many remain unsolved. When teaching
     ubiquitous computing, I hope we can inspire future generations to be creative, innovative,
     and at the same time, ethically responsible as we involve users to engage with these challenges
     and design the future together.



     3.17      Ubiquitous computing: Accepting a fuzzy field
     Caitlin Mills (University of New Hampshire – Durham, GB)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Caitlin Mills


     One of the key issues that came up this week was the definition, validity, and purpose of
     ubicomp as a field. I was left wondering, however, if the definition aspect is necessarily
     the most important question to tackle at this point. From a philosophical perspective on
     scientific fields, it is expected that fields will have ‘fuzzy’ edges, and the very fact that we are
     organized around a central theme here argues for ubicomp as a valid scientific field (Casavall
     & Fang, 2015). This perspective further holds that the social aspect of the field is of utmost
     importance; current (self-organized) members of the field shape what questions should be
     pursued, what are the appropriate methods, what are the ethical standards, and perhaps
     most importantly, who will join the field in the future? These questions seem particularly
     important in the context of education since self-identified ubicomp members will undoubtedly
     impact the future of the field through the classroom.
         Through breakout groups, we have identified the core areas that should be part of ubicomp
     curriculums, and basic interdisciplinary skills that students would be expected to have. We
     also discussed potential pathways for how such curriculums/courses may be adaptable based
     on prior knowledge and expertise. Finally, a substantial time was devoted to addressing
     topics related to ethics (appropriate methods), diversity, and inclusivity within a ubicomp
     education– important issues for the future of ubicomp membership.
     References
     1    Casadevall, A., & Fang, F. C. Field science—the nature and utility of scientific fields.(2015).
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                             47


3.18      Reflections from Simon Perrault on ubicomp education
Simon Perrault (Singapore University of Technology and Design, SG)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Simon Perrault


During the seminar, we found out that we could not exactly agree on the definition of what
ubiquitous computing is. As pointed out by a participant, it was sometimes easier for us to
identify something that is not UbiComp or not part of UbiComp. Another emerging thought
was that UbiComp and Computing would simply become near-synonyms in the near-future.
After discussing modules/programs design, all the participants seemed to reach a consensus
on the following notions being part of a successful UbiComp training: hardware and software
prototyping, networking, HCI. We also identified related topics that would be relevant to be
part of a UbiComp teaching, such as machine learning, data science. UbiComp teaching, by
nature, ends up being rather multidisciplinary, and with some changes of focus, could be
a suitable topic to teach in many different majors (CS, Engineering, Design, Architecture,
Social Sciences and even Business or Law).



3.19      Leveraging the multidisciplinary aspects of Ubicomp
Thomas Pietrzak (INRIA Lille, FR)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Thomas Pietrzak


One of the many challenges in teaching, studying and conducting research in Ubicomp is
the multidisciplinary approach it requires. Similarly to HCI, it requires a broad range of
skills that makes it challenging, but also exciting. Most of the participants have a computer
science or engineering background. However we also have to teach topics related to design,
psychology, mathematics, physics, and so forth. Putting together a curriculum or even a
course is a challenge. Firstly because of the long list of topics that have to be covered. But
also due to the diversity of students previous knowledge and experience. We designed a
curriculum and course that can be adapted to students background (tech or not), and level
(undergraduate, graduate). We believe these efforts will contribute to the promotion of
Ubicomp, and raise awareness about it among students, and the society in general.



3.20      Reflections from Michal Rinott on ubicomp education
Michal Rinott (SHENKAR – Engineering. Design. Art – Ramat-Gan, IL)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Michal Rinott


The workshop is a good opportunity to understand the perspectives of different participants
on Ubicomp, be it a more system-centered outlook or rather human-centered one; an extreme
(“in Ubicomp all interfaces disappear”) or a broader perspective on ubicomp interactions. It
seems that the lack of a specific and definitive definition is a necessity for maintaining the
breadth and wealth of the topic, especially in the context of the workshop. However when
planning specific learning experiences there emerges a need for more specificity. Another
interesting issue concerns the best conditions for teaching and learning Ubicomp. Specifically,
how do we create a physical space that is optimized for learning and research? How does


                                                                                                  19232
48   19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How


     this relate to the ability to scale teaching and learning beyond the people that can work
     together in a hands-on session? The hybrid learning model of non-synchronous learning of
     certain materials, coupled with co-located opportunities for group work and interdisciplinary
     collaboration seems promising. The space in this case should contain tools and methods for
     supporting this type of meeting. It should answer both specific ubi-comp needs (sketching,
     prototyping, implementing) and more general tools for collaboration (dynamic structures for
     group learning, presentation, exhibition). An opportunity arises for the space to implement
     a ubicomp protocol and, through data and interfaces, provide insights about collaboration
     within it, and tools to improve learning and functioning within it. The topic of hybrid
     learning spaces and data is being explored recently by colleagues of mine, for example in this
     workshop, see open CFP!



     3.21      Reflections from Anne Roudaut on ubicomp education
     Anne Roudaut (University of Bristol, GB)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Anne Roudaut


     The goal of the seminar was to rethink the form of current ubicomp teaching and the role of
     universities in education in 5/10/20 years. A very insightful idea was to change the current
     traditional form of courses to a more modular one where students can “pick and choose”
     modules depending on their existing skills and based on what they want to major in (and
     consequently shape their future career). This could be done through some kind of visual
     infographics representing pathways that students took. In parallel pathways that industries
     need could be assessed every few years to better understand what are the skills needed
     and help the students choose their pathways. Doing so would require tackling some new
     challenges such as timetabling but also the need to access skills of students entering the
     program (and how to avoid students taking the “easier” modules). Such model would also be
     competing with online courses that are rather following this modular approach (e.g. Khan
     academy) without necessarily producing accredited diploma.



     3.22      Strong Disciplinary Skills are Key – Ubicomp Teaching is then the
               Multidisciplinary and Practical Application of these Skills in
               Context of a Realistic Problem
     Albrecht Schmidt (LMU München, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Albrecht Schmidt


     The vision of ubiquitous computing has inspired a generation of computer scientists to make
     computing part of everyday life. At the time Mark Weiser [1] wrote about the computer for
     the 21st century desktop was dominant and the vision of networked computers everywhere
     was still far out. As technologies have progressed, we have seen that networked mobile
     computing has become ubiquitous and is an essential part in everyday life. Sensing and
     actuation in the infrastructure as well as in devices is common and people constantly used
     networked services that. However when we think of a parking garage that has sensing to
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                                49


keep track of which parking spaces are occupied and make this online accessible, when the
navigation service adapts to sensor information from cars, and when the tools are recording
their use automatically in a database we do not talk about ubiquitous computing. Once the
technology is woven into the fabric of everyday life, we consider it normal and rely on it.
We are currently at a point where hardware cost is becoming a minor factor in comparison
to the cost as of software development, system deployment and maintenance. A wireless
computer (e.g. ESP8266) is available in 2019 for less than 2€. The limiting factor is our
ability to create meaningful systems and applications that have utility and the challenges
are all along the life cycle [3]. One further key aspect is how to design the interaction with
ubiquitous systems [2] where there is little systematic understanding. Can we improve our
ability to creating ubicomp systems through teaching? What will people need to know in
order to envision, design, prototype, create, deploy, and study ubiquitous computing systems
and applications? At this point I think the field of ubiquitous computing is so wide that
it is hard to imagine to set-up a course on ubicomp. I think the best approach is to teach
solid foundations in one subject (like computer science) and only add a high-level course
on the concept and visions of ubiquitous computing (e.g. a seminar). Additionally having
students doing practical projects in ubicomp will help to apply knowledge and deepen it in
the field. The serious learning of how to create ubicomp applications will be hands-on in
multidisciplinary teams based on strong disciplinary skills.
References
1    Weiser, Mark. Weiser, Mark. The Computer for the 21 st Century.. Scientific american
     265.3 (1991): 94-105.
2    Schmidt, Albrecht, et al. Schmidt, Albrecht, et al. Interacting with 21st-century computers..
     IEEE Pervasive Computing 11.1 (2011): 22-31.
3    Broy, Manfred, and Albrecht Schmidt. Broy, Manfred, and Albrecht Schmidt. Challenges
     in engineering cyber-physical systems..Computer 47.2 (2014): 70-72.



3.23      Reflections from Oliver Schneider on ubicomp education
Oliver Schneider (University of Waterloo, CA)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Oliver Schneider


We continue to struggle with a definition of what Ubicomp education should contain. I have
tried to answer three questions to help with that.
    What is Ubicomp? → Physical interactive systems, but that doesn’t help us define its
scope. Physical interactive systems require sensing and a response, either to the user or
other stakeholders. It overlaps with Human-Computer Interaction (people and interactive
systems). Because these systems are physical, the field involves hardware; because these
systems are computational, they involve software; because it involves interacting with people,
human-facing fields are involved.
    How can we teach it? → Education is difficult because it is interdisciplinary and involves
physical systems. Since Ubicomp involves hardware, software, and people, it necessitates
different disciplines working together. Educators need to position students’ needs within
each of these subtopics, and bring them together in a high-level framework. Although
education continues to scale through online methods, we still need physical infrastructure
for prototyping. Educators will need to decide what students can learn online and what
they need to learn in-person. Ubicomp requires physical systems and expertise in multiple
disciplines.


                                                                                                     19232
50   19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How


        What might help us define Ubicomp education? → Don’t ask what Ubicomp is, but
     rather what it is not. Ubicomp is not app design; it is not VR headsets; it is not pure
     automation; it is not a more precise machine learning classifier. I think that looking at the
     complementary set will be more fruitful for positioning and defining the field.



     3.24      Reflections from Orit Shaer on ubicomp education
     Orit Shaer (Wellesley College, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Orit Shaer


     The notion of ubicomp has inspired my research and teaching throughout my career –
     offering the promise of augmenting our everyday environment through the integration of
     interconnected computational devices. At the core of ubicomp is the idea that technology
     becomes invisible and accessible anytime and anywhere. Yet, invisible technology, has visible
     impacts on individuals, communities, and society. While ubicomp presents opportunities for
     improving our work and wellbeing, it has potential for misuse, in particular, compromising
     people’s privacy and security.
         How do we engage students in considering both the promise and challenges of ubicomp?
     How do we prepare them to become ethical citizens and leaders in an era of ubiquitous
     computing and rapidly increasing automation? What are the core conceptual and technical
     skills required for training students to become ethical ubicomp innovators and developers?
     What methods are effective for teaching complex and interdisciplinary topics to different
     audiences? The goal of this seminar was to address these questions through systematic
     investigation of the Why, What, and How of ubicomp education.
         The seminar provided valuable and rare opportunity for interaction and exchange of
     ideas about teaching with colleagues who are experts in the field. While we often meet to
     discuss our research, it is rare for us to engage in deep and prolonged discussions about
     teaching, yet we are all educators in addition to researchers. Through small group discussions
     and hands-on activities, we questioned the definition of ubicomp, examined the purpose
     and challenges of ubicomp educations, debated the essential content of ubicomp courses
     for different audiences, exchanged and develop new methods for effective (and engaging)
     teaching.
         Following the seminar, I feel inspired and motivated to reflect on my own teaching, rethink
     the concepts and ways that I teach, and engage with my students in new ways. The outcomes
     of the seminar, which include a living curriculum document, reading list, shared educational
     activities, will be extremely helpful in this process. I also believe that the connections and
     network of committed ubicomp educators that we formed here has a critical role in shaping
     how we train the next generation of ubicomp innovators and leaders.
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                            51


3.25      Scoping Ubicomp for interdisciplinary students
Jakub Sypniewski (Universität Salzburg, AT)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Jakub Sypniewski


Designing an Ubicomp curriculum brings up a number of connected topics, not only connected
with the educational side of things, but also the scope and definition of what Ubiquitous
Computing is. One thing that the majority seem to agree on is that Ubicomp requires
cross-disciplinary knowledge for both teachers and practitioners. This realisation connects to
the already mentioned scope, especially when looking at different student profiles in Ubicomp
courses or programs, meaning how technical the curriculum has to be to provide the students
with enough understanding or skills related with the computing part of Ubicomp, and how
much of the design or concept related to Social Science should be taught not to alienate
technically oriented students? The possible way of addressing this challenge would be to
gauge students’ skills and interests at the beginning of the course or program and adjust
the depth to which the topics will be taught. The assessment of students and adjustment of
the curriculum might increase workload for the faculty, but is crucial for avoiding teaching
unnecessary or out of scope topics.



3.26      Reflections from Aurélien Tabard on ubicomp education
Aurélien Tabard (Université de Lyon, FR)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Aurélien Tabard


From developing as an academic research area over more than two decades, Ubicomp vision
has made its way into the fabric of our everyday lives. Embedded and inexpensive devices are
now spread and networked throughout our environment, from wearables to smart buildings,
libraries, hospitals, or urban infrastructures. One could argue that in a way, similar to
AI, Ubicomp is defined by a vision rather than a set of principles, and as principles and
technologies mature and become broadly adopted, they are not considered as Ubicomp
anymore.
    Designing and developing Ubicomp systems requires to bring in a variety of skills that
have been traditionally mastered by various displicines. The precise blend of skills involved
is what makes Ubicomp unique. And the challenge lies as much in the mastery as in the
way they are articulated. Broadly speaking, this means introducing sensing and embedded
systems specialists to HCI and design, and designers to electronics but also networking and
computing systems.
    In terms of design approach and practice, I find teaching Ubicomp because 1. It pushes
to go beyond the notion of supporting a user accomplishing a task, to consider blending
more deeply into existing human activities. 2. It pushes to think of systems at another scale
than users or collaborative groups, e.g. designing for bodies, places or cities.
    Because of the various skills involved. Educators can hardly expect a mastery or even an
awareness of the basic . Ubicomp education should be tuned to the skills of students.
    A great outcome of the seminar would be a consolidated list of small-units that could be
assembled in a variety of ways, as well as write-ups and reflections on existing curricula and
teaching practices:




                                                                                                 19232
52   19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How


        A Pervasive course outline with resources from the ITU of Copenhagen:
     https://blog.itu.dk/SPCT-F2012/
     http://www.bardram.net/wp-content/papercite-data/pdf/bardram-ieaward2012.pdf
        Two sources of inspiration from nearby domains: https://wot.pubpub.org/
        Interaction Design: https://medium.com/ixda/education-summit/home
        Visualization: http://vgl.cs.usfca.edu/pdvw/2017/http://vgl.cs.usfca.edu/pdvw/2016/



     3.27      Reflections from Brygg Ullmer on ubicomp education
     Brygg Ullmer (Clemson University, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Brygg Ullmer


     While perhaps unsurprising, but simultaneously interesting and at times illuminating, has
     been discussion concern the “ubiquitous computing” term, implications of its use in the
     context of our respect academic institutional environments, etc. For example, several noted
     that in the 3-minute presentations on day 1, relatively few (perhaps 5 or fewer) of the 28
     participants explicitly framed their work in terms of ubiquitous computing. Several times
     in day 2, participants described naming implications including (e.g.) gender engagement.
     As one specific example, among several sister institutions, it was noted “interactive product
     design” attracted a more balanced gender dynamic than “interactive product development.”
         For some participants, one gathered that the particular scoping and components of terms
     like “ubiquitous computing” are quite consequential. For many others, it seemed a wide
     variety of descriptive terms – often engaging particularities of individual institutions, and
     their orientations toward engineering, art, design, liberal arts, etc. – might often inflect both
     local resonance and use. A sister bridging term that several referenced is “interactive systems;”
     or perhaps as an extension, ISDE (interactive systems design and engineering & evaluation,
     per multiple communities “overloading” individual letters of acronyms). One related exercise
     might be an (e.g.) 5xN mapping for some of the overarching themes discussed in some
     breakouts on day two – e.g. people, technology, objects, methods, business – and strong,
     weak, or non-engagement with Ubicomp (early 90s), Ubicomp (present-future), Pervasive,
     ISDE, CHI, TEI, and others.



     3.28      Reflections from Vicky Zeamer on ubicomp education
     Vicky Zeamer (Hubspot – Cambridge, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Vicky Zeamer


     Why is the training and education of students in UbiComp important for industry, not
     just academia? Much time at this seminar was spent debating what was even considered
     ubiquitous computing. Without a clear spotlight on the definition and why it’s important,
     industry does not have a clear incentive to put resources into UbiComp education. This
     seminar has illustrated not only the cross-interests we have as researchers and designers
     related to humans and technologies, but also the lack of consensus of what it really means in
     practice to live and work within a world with computers being “ubiquitous.”
Audrey Girouard, Andrew Kun, Anne Roudaut, and Orit Shaer                                            53


   As confused as we are by the implications for education related to UbiComp, imagine
how our students and junior colleagues must feel about their own preparation and paths? I
have always felt, as a student going through a pre-designed curriculum, that these programs
were out of touch with the realities of real world contexts and problems. This disconnect
between education and industry careers is often by design— academia is for exploring
unknown frontiers and being free of the friction that real world implementations often impose.
However, as professionals (either academics or practitioners) within the realm of human-
technology interaction, we have a moral responsibility to prepare a majority of students to
tackle the world’s issues, primarily via industry.
   At the end, I believe that we need to, as a group of experts, is to establish the fact that
we are preparing students to be ethical leaders, builders, and users of ubiquitous computing
outside of academic research environments. While this may seem like a straightforward
sentiment, what I am stressing is that we must understand that a majority of students will
not end up in positions like their own professors. With that in mind, how do we teach
students who will shape our future world and make it a better place via UbiComp?




                                                                                                 19232
54   19232 – Ubiquitous Computing Education: Why, What, and How


            Participants
       Michael Beigl                    Miriam Konkel                   Thomas Pietrzak
     KIT – Karlsruher Institut für    Clemson University, US          INRIA Lille, FR
     Technologie, DE                   Andrew Kun                       Michal Rinott
       Andrea Bianchi                 University of New Hampshire –   SHENKAR – Engineering.
     KAIST – Daejeon, KR              Durham, US                      Design. Art – Ramat-Gan, IL
       Anke Brock                       Sylvain Malacria               Anne Roudaut
     ENAC – Toulouse, FR              INRIA Lille, FR                 University of Bristol, GB
       Jessica Cauchard                Nicolai Marquardt
     Ben Gurion University –                                           Albrecht Schmidt
                                      University College London, GB   LMU München, DE
     Beer Sheva, IL
                                        Amanda McLeod                  Oliver Schneider
       Ruzanna Chitchyan
                                      Carleton University –           University of Waterloo, CA
     University of Bristol, GB
                                      Ottawa, CA
       Jeremy Cooperstock                                              Orit Shaer
     McGill University –                Donald McMillan               Wellesley College, US
     Montreal, CA                     Stockholm University, SE
                                                                       Jakub Sypniewski
       Ellen Yi-Luen Do                 Timothy Merritt               Universität Salzburg, AT
     University of Colorado –         Aalborg University, DK
     Boulder, US                                                       Aurélien Tabard
                                       Caitlin Mills
                                                                      Université de Lyon, FR
       Audrey Girouard                University of New Hampshire –
     Carleton University –            Durham, GB                        Brygg Ullmer
     Ottawa, CA                         Simon Perrault                Clemson University, US
       Eva Hornecker                  Singapore University of          Vicky Zeamer
     Bauhaus-Universität Weimar, DE   Technology and Design, SG       Hubspot – Cambridge, US
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 19241

25 Years of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform
Edited by
Travis Gagie1 , Giovanni Manzini2 , Gonzalo Navarro3 , and
Jens Stoye4

1    Dalhousie University – Halifax, CA, travis.gagie@dal.ca
2    University of Eastern Piedmont – Alessandria, IT, giovanni.manzini@uniupo.it
3    University of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL, gnavarro@dcc.uchile.cl
4    Universität Bielefeld, DE, jens.stoye@uni-bielefeld.de


      Abstract
Dagstuhl Seminar 19241 (“25 Years of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform”) took place from June
10th to 14th, 2019, and was attended by 45 people from 13 countries and the three fields of
Algorithms and Data Structures, Bioinformatics, and Combinatorics on Words. There were four
talks and a panel session for each field. Feedback was generally positive and we are confident
the seminar fostered interdisciplinary connections and will eventually result in noteworthy joint
publications.
Seminar June 10–14, 2019 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/19241
2012 ACM Subject Classification Applied computing → Bioinformatics, Applied computing
   → Computational genomics, Applied computing → Molecular sequence analysis, Applied
   computing → Genomics, Mathematics of computing → Combinatorics on words, Theory of
   computation → Data compression, Theory of computation → Pattern matching, Theory of
   computation → Sorting and searching
Keywords and phrases Bioinformatics, Burrows-Wheeler Transform, Combinatorics on Words,
   Data Compression, Data Structures, Indexing, Sequence Alignment
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.9.6.55



 1      Executive Summary
Travis Gagie
Giovanni Manzini
Gonzalo Navarro
Jens Stoye
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Travis Gagie, Giovanni Manzini, Gonzalo Navarro, and Jens Stoye


Dagstuhl Seminar 19241 marked the 25th anniversary of the publication of the Burrows-
Wheeler Transform (BWT), which has had a huge impact on the fields of data compression,
combinatorics on words, compact data structures, and bioinformatics. The 10th anniversary
in 2004 was marked by a workshop at the DIMACS Center at Rutgers (http://archive.dimacs.
rutgers.edu/Workshops/BWT) organized by Paolo Ferragina, Giovanni and S. Muthukrishnan,
and it is exciting to see how far we have come. In the past 15 years, interest in the BWT has
shifted from data compression to compact data structures and bioinformatics, particularly
indexing for DNA read alignment, but seven of the 33 participants of that workshop (including
Giovanni) also attended this seminar. Unfortunately, Professor Gørtz fell ill at the last
minute and emailed us on June 11th to say she couldn’t attend, but everyone else on the
             Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
             under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
25 Years of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 9, Issue 6, pp. 55–68
Editors: Travis Gagie, Giovanni Manzini, Gonzalo Navarro, and Jens Stoye
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
56   19241 – 25 Years of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform




         Figure 1 Gonzalo with
     his birthday cake (featuring
     a BWT).                        Figure 2 Jens reviewing some points raised during the seminar.


     final list of invitees was present for at least some of the seminar (although not everyone made
     it into the photo). In total there were 45 people (listed at the end of this report) from 13
     countries, including ten women, six junior researchers and two researchers from industry.
     By happy coincidence, the seminar started the day after Gonzalo’s 50th birthday, so we
     were able to celebrate that as well. We thank Professor Sadakane for the photos shown in
     Figures 1 and 2.
         The schedule, shown in Figure 3, featured an introduction, 12 talks, three panel sessions
     and a closing. The talks were all timely and reflected the active and dynamic research being
     carried out on the BWT:
         Giovanni’s introduction was a more in-depth version of his invited talk from DCC ’19;
         Veli Mäkinen surveyed pan-genomic indexing, including work published in BMC Genomics
         last year;
         Richard Durbin surveyed results based on the positional BWT, published in Bioinformatics
         in 2014;
         Jouni Sirén presented work included in a Nature Biotechnology article last year;
         Christina Boucher surveyed compact data structures for de Bruijn graphs, including work
         from an ISMB/ECCB 2019 paper;
         Gonzalo Navarro reviewed BWT-based indexes, including work from a SODA ’18 paper;
         Sandip Sinha presented work from a STOC ’19 paper;
         Dominik Kempa presented work from another STOC ’19 paper;
         Sharma Thankachan presented work from an ESA ’19 paper;
         Nicola Prezza presented work from a STOC ’18 paper;
         Marinella Sciortino gave a version of her invited lecture for IWOCA ’19 a month later;
         Giovanna Rosone presented results about two extensions of the BWT, including work
         from a WABI ’18 paper, now published in Algorithms for Molecular Biology;
         Dominik Köppl presented work from a CPM ’19 paper.
     We later received all the abstracts but one.
Travis Gagie, Giovanni Manzini, Gonzalo Navarro, and Jens Stoye                                                               57




                      MONDAY           TUESDAY            WEDNESDAY     THURSDAY               FRIDAY
          07:30                       BREAKFAST           BREAKFAST     BREAKFAST        BREAKFAST
          09:00                          INTRO            ALG TALK 1    CoW TALK 1
          09:45                        BIO TALK 1         ALG TALK 2    CoW TALK 2
                                                                                              WORK...
          10:30                        BIO TALK 2         ALG TALK 3    CoW TALK 3
          11:15                        BIO TALK 3         ALG TALK 4    CoW TALK 4
          12:15                          LUNCH
                                                            LUNCH            LUNCH             LUNCH
          13:45
                                       BIO TALK 4
          14:00
                                                          ALG PANEL     CoW PANEL
          14:30
                                       BIO PANEL
          15:00                                             WORK!        CLOSING
          15:30           CAKE            CAKE               CAKE             CAKE
          16:00           WORK?          WORK              WORK!!         WORK!!!
          18:00    DINNER (buffet)       DINNER            DINNER         DINNER
          20:00      CHEESE?            CHEESE             CHEESE         CHEESE


      INTRO        Giovanni                                            BIO PANEL        ALG PANEL       CoW PANEL
      BIO TALK 1   Veli              (Pan-genomic) alignment           Ben              Ian             Gabriele
      BIO TALK 2   Richard           PBWT                              Gene             Inge (chair)    Hideo
      BIO TALK 3   Jouni             GBWT                              Knut             Johannes        Jackie
      BIO TALK 4   Christina         de Bruijn graphs                  Kunsoo           Rahul           Pawel
      ALG TALK 1   Gonzalo           r-index                           Paola            Roberto         Sabrina (chair)
      ALG TALK 2   Sandip            Local decodability                Richard          Simon G         Tomasz
      ALG TALK 3   Dominik           BWT construction                  Tony (chair)                     Zsuzsa
      ALG TALK 4   Sharma            Wheeler graphs
      CoW TALK 1   Nicola            String attractors                 Jens chairs BIO talks
      CoW TALK 2   Marinella         Combinatorial properties          Giovanni chairs ALG talks
      CoW TALK 3   Giovanna          eBWT / BWT similarity             Travis chairs CoW talks
      CoW TALK 4   Dominik           Bijective BWT
      CLOSING      Jens


    Figure 3 The original seminar schedule. Inge Li Gørtz was unable to attend and so Tatiana
Starikovskaya chaired the Algorithms and Data Structures panel. The talks and panel on Bioinform-
atics were held on the first day and those on Algorithms and Data Structures on the second day to
accommodate participants’ schedules.




                                                                                                                          19241
58   19241 – 25 Years of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform


      2       Table of Contents
     Executive Summary
       Travis Gagie, Giovanni Manzini, Gonzalo Navarro, and Jens Stoye . . . . . . . . . 55

     Overview of Talks
          25 Years of Burrows-Wheeler Transform: A review
          Giovanni Manzini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
          Scaling pan-genomic alignment using founders
          Veli Mäkinen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
          Genome Graphs and BWT-based Data Structures
          Jouni Sirén . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
          BWT Meets the de Bruijn Graph: Results and Challenges
          Christina Boucher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     61
          Text Indexing with the BWT
          Gonzalo Navarro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     61
          Local Decodability of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform
          Sandip Sinha . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    61
          BWT Construction: History, Techniques, State of the Art, Open Problems
          Dominik Kempa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
          On the Hardness and Inapproximability of Recognizing Wheeler Graphs
          Sharma V. Thankachan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
          String Attractors
          Nicola Prezza, Travis Gagie, Dominik Kempa, and Gonzalo Navarro . . . . . . . .               64
          Combinatorial Properties of BWT
          Marinella Sciortino . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   64
          BWT / eBWT similarity
          Giovanna Rosone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
          Searching Patterns in the Bijective BWT
          Dominik Köppl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65

     Motivation (from proposal) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66

     Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66

     Open Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          67

     Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Travis Gagie, Giovanni Manzini, Gonzalo Navarro, and Jens Stoye                                                      59


 3      Overview of Talks
Apart from the talks below, there were impromptu presentations by Jackie Daykin on
“Order-based Burrows-Wheeler Transforms”, by Enno Ohlebusch on “An improved encoding
of genetic variation in a Burrows-Wheeler transform”, by Kunsoo Park on “Comparing Pan-
Genomic Indexes”. Slides from all of these and introductory slides from the Combinatorics
on Words panel (submitted by Sabrina Mantaci) are available on the materials page.



3.1     25 Years of Burrows-Wheeler Transform: A review
Giovanni Manzini (University of Eastern Piedmont – Alessandria, IT)
      License      Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Giovanni Manzini
 Joint work of Giovanni Manzini, Paolo Ferragina, Travis Gagie, Raffaele Giancarlo, Marinella Sciortino, Jouni
               Sirén
Main reference Travis Gagie, Giovanni Manzini, Jouni Sirén: “Wheeler graphs: A framework for BWT-based data
               structures”, Theor. Comput. Sci., Vol. 698, pp. 67–78, 2017.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2017.06.016


To establish a common ground, in this introductory talk we review the main properties of
the BWT with respect to data compression and text indexing.
    The “Block sorting data compression algorithm” by Mike Burrows and David Wheeler [1]
was based on a data transformation, now called the BWT, designed “to make redundancy in
the input more accessible”. While this is obvious at the intuitive level, it took ten years to
formalize this notion in terms of empirical entropy. In [2] it was proven that the Burrows-
Wheeler transform can be seen as a “compression booster”, that is a tool for transforming
any order-0 encoder into a much more effective order-k encoder, and that this result holds
simultaneously for every k > 0.
    Starting from the year 2000, several researchers [3, 5, 6] observed that, because of the
relationship between the BWT and the Suffix Array, the former can be used as a sort of full
text index, possibly compressed if one takes advantage of the “boosting” properties of the
BWT. Over the years, these ideas have been extended to design compressed data structures
to index other discrete structures such as trees, graphs, automata, alignments, and so on.
    We introduced the notion of Wheeler Graph that generalizes the BWT and provides a
unified view of many of these extensions [4]. We show that pattern matching problems inside
many of these discrete structures can be modeled using Nondeterministic Finite Automata
which have the additional property of being Wheeler Graphs. We also show that we can
compactly represent and navigate Wheeler Graphs using the well-known and highly optimized
rank and select operations on linear arrays. Although not every BWT-related data structure
fits in our framework, we believe our unifying view can help researchers develop new BWT
variants and new indexing data structures.
References
1    M. Burrows, D. Wheeler, A block-sorting lossless data compression algorithm, Tech. Rep.
     124, Digital Equipment Corporation (1994).
2    P. Ferragina, R. Giancarlo, G. Manzini, M. Sciortino, Boosting textual compression in
     optimal linear time, J. ACM 52 (2005) 688–713.
3    P. Ferragina, G. Manzini, Opportunistic data structures with applications, in: Proc. 41st
     IEEE Symp. on Found. of Computer Science, 2000, pp. 390–398.




                                                                                                                 19241
60   19241 – 25 Years of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform


     4     T. Gagie, G. Manzini, J. Sirén, Wheeler graphs: A framework for BWT-based data struc-
           tures, Theor. Comput. Sci. 698 (2017) 67–78.
     5     R. Grossi, J. S. Vitter, Compressed suffix arrays and suffix trees with applications to
           text indexing and string matching, in: Proc. of the 32nd ACM Symposium on Theory of
           Computing, 2000, pp. 397–406.
     6     V. Mäkinen, Compact suffix array, in: Proc. of the 11th Symposium on Combinatorial
           Pattern Matching, Springer-Verlag LNCS n. 1848, 2000, pp. 305–319.



     3.2     Scaling pan-genomic alignment using founders
     Veli Mäkinen (University of Helsinki, FI)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Veli Mäkinen


     The talk covers the PanVC framework for pan-genomic variant calling through multiple
     reference indexing for read alignment [1], as well as a lossy compression of multiple references
     into founders [2], which makes the whole framework scalable.
     References
     1    D. Valenzuela, Tuukka Norri, Niko Välimäki, Esa Pitkänen and Veli Mäkinen. Towards
          pan-genome read alignment to improve variation calling. BMC Genomics, Vol. 19, No. 87,
          2018.
     2    T. Norri, B. Cazaux, D. Kosolobov and V. Mäkinen. Linear time minimum segmentation
          enables scalable founder reconstruction. Algorithms for Molecular Biology, Vol. 14, No. 12,
          2019.



     3.3     Genome Graphs and BWT-based Data Structures
     Jouni Sirén (University of California – Santa Cruz, US)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Jouni Sirén
      Joint work of Jouni Sirén, Erik Garrison, Adam M. Novak, Benedict Paten, Richard Durbin
     Main reference Jouni Sirén, Erik Garrison, Adam M. Novak, Benedict Paten, Richard Durbin: “Haplotype-aware
                    graph indexes”, in Proc. of the 18th International Workshop on Algorithms in Bioinformatics,
                    WABI 2018, August 20-22, 2018, Helsinki, Finland, LIPIcs, Vol. 113, pp. 4:1–4:13, Schloss Dagstuhl
                    – Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2018.
               URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.WABI.2018.4


     A reference sequence may represent a new dataset poorly if the sequenced individual diverges
     substantially at some location. Mapping reads to such a reference can introduce reference
     bias into the subsequent analysis. Genome graphs help to avoid the bias by including genetic
     variation in the reference. Although each path in the graph is a potential haplotype, most
     paths are unlikely recombinations of true haplotypes.
         In this talk, I will show how we can use BWT-based methods to index genome graphs.
     We transform the graph into an equivalent Wheeler graph, or approximate it with Wheeler
     graphs when the equivalent Wheeler graph is too large or does not exist. I will also introduce
     the GBWT as a fast and space-efficient way of storing large collections of haplotypes as
     paths over the genome graph.
Travis Gagie, Giovanni Manzini, Gonzalo Navarro, and Jens Stoye                                                       61


3.4     BWT Meets the de Bruijn Graph: Results and Challenges
Christina Boucher (University of Florida – Gainesville, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Christina Boucher


The money and time needed to sequence a genome have decreased remarkably in the past
decade. With this decrease has come an increase in the number and rate at which sequence
data is collected for public sequencing projects. This led to the existence of GenomeTrakr,
which is a large public effort to use genome sequencing for surveillance and detection of
outbreaks of foodborne illnesses. This effort includes over 50,000 samples, spanning several
species available through this initiative, a number that continues to rise as datasets are
continually added. Unfortunately, analysis of this dataset has been limited due to its size.
In this talk, I will describe our method for constructing the colored de Bruijn graph for
large datasets that is based on partitioning the data into smaller datasets, building the
colored de Bruijn graph using a FM-index based representation, and succinctly merging
these representations to build a single graph. Finally, I will show its capability of building a
colored de Bruijn graph for 16,000 strains from GenomeTrakr in a manner that allows it to
be updated. Lastly, I conclude by outlining some opportunities for further study in this area.



3.5     Text Indexing with the BWT
Gonzalo Navarro (University of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL)
      License      Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Gonzalo Navarro
Main reference Paolo Ferragina, Giovanni Manzini: “Opportunistic Data Structures with Applications”, in Proc.
               of the 41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2000, 12-14 November
               2000, Redondo Beach, California, USA, pp. 390–398, IEEE Computer Society, 2000.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.2000.892127


The talk covers the history and functioning of the FM-index, since its first version (Ferragina
and Manzini, 2000) to the latest one (Gagie, Navarro, and Prezza, 2018) aimed at repetitive
datasets.



3.6     Local Decodability of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform
Sandip Sinha (Columbia University – New York, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Sandip Sinha
 Joint work of Sandip Sinha, Omri Weinstein
Main reference Sandip Sinha, Omri Weinstein: “Local decodability of the Burrows-Wheeler transform”, in Proc. of
               the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2019, Phoenix, AZ,
               USA, June 23-26, 2019., pp. 744–755, ACM, 2019.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3313276.3316317


The Burrows-Wheeler Transform (BWT) is among the most influential discoveries in text
compression and DNA storage. It is a reversible preprocessing step that rearranges an
n-letter string into runs of identical characters (by exploiting context regularities), resulting
in highly compressible strings, and is the basis of the bzip compression program. Alas, the
decoding process of BWT is inherently sequential and requires Ω(n) time even to retrieve a
single character.



                                                                                                                  19241
62   19241 – 25 Years of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform


         We study the succinct data structure problem of locally decoding short substrings of
     a given text under its compressed BWT, i.e., with small additive redundancy r over the
     Move-To-Front (bzip) compression. The celebrated BWT-based      √     FM-index (FOCS ’00), as
     well as other related literature, yield a trade-off of r = Õ(n/ t) bits, when a single character
     is to be decoded in O(t) time. We give a near-quadratic improvement r = Õ(n lg(t)/t). As a
     by-product, we obtain an exponential (in t) improvement on the redundancy of the FM-index
     for counting pattern-matches on compressed text. In the interesting regime where the text
     compresses to o(n) (say, n/polylg(n)) bits, these results provide an exp(t) overall space
     reduction. For the local decoding problem of BWT, we also prove an Ω(n/t2 ) cell-probe
     lower bound for “symmetric” data structures.
         We achieve our main result by designing a compressed partial-sums (Rank) data structure
     over BWT. The key component is a locally-decodable Move-to-Front (MTF) code: with
     only O(1) extra bits per block of length nΩ(1) , the decoding time of a single character can
     be decreased from Ω(n) to O(lg n). This result is of independent interest in algorithmic
     information theory.



     3.7     BWT Construction: History, Techniques, State of the Art, Open
             Problems
     Dominik Kempa (University of Warwick – Coventry, GB)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Dominik Kempa
      Joint work of Dominik Kempa, Tomasz Kociumaka
     Main reference Dominik Kempa, Tomasz Kociumaka: “String synchronizing sets: sublinear-time BWT
                    construction and optimal LCE data structure”, in Proc. of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT
                    Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2019, Phoenix, AZ, USA, June 23-26, 2019.,
                    pp. 756–767, ACM, 2019.
               URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3313276.3316368


     Burrows-Wheeler transform (BWT) is an invertible text transformation that, given a text T
     of length n, permutes its symbols according to the lexicographic order of suffixes of T . BWT
     is one of the most heavily studied algorithms in data compression with numerous applications
     in indexing, sequence analysis, and bioinformatics. Its construction is a bottleneck in many
     scenarios, and settling the complexity of this task is one of the most important unsolved
     problems in sequence analysis that has remained open for 25 years. In this talk, I will review
     the recent progress made for the problem of BWT construction [1, 2] as well as summarize
     the existing algorithms and outline the main challenges lying ahead.
     References
     1    Dominik Kempa and Tomasz Kociumaka. String Synchronizing Sets: Sublinear-Time BWT
          Construction and Optimal LCE Data Structure. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM
          SIGACT Symposium on the Theory of Computing (STOC), 2019, ACM.
     2    Dominik Kempa. Optimal Construction of Compressed Indexes for Highly Repetitive Texts.
          In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA),
          2019, SIAM.
Travis Gagie, Giovanni Manzini, Gonzalo Navarro, and Jens Stoye                                                 63


3.8     On the Hardness and Inapproximability of Recognizing Wheeler
        Graphs
Sharma V. Thankachan (University of Central Florida – Orlando, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Sharma V. Thankachan
 Joint work of Daniel Gibney, Sharma V. Thankachan
Main reference Daniel Gibney, Sharma V. Thankachan: “On the Hardness and Inapproximability of Recognizing
               Wheeler Graphs”, in Proc. of the 27th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms, ESA 2019,
               September 9-11, 2019, Munich/Garching, Germany., pp. 51:1–51:16, 2019.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2019.51


In recent years several compressed indexes based on variants of the Burrows-Wheeler trans-
formation have been introduced. Some of these are used to index structures far more complex
than a single string, as was originally done with the FM-index [Ferragina and Manzini, J.
ACM 2005]. As such, there has been an increasing effort to better understand under which
conditions such an indexing scheme is possible. This has led to the introduction of Wheeler
graphs [Gagie et al., Theor. Comput. Sci., 2017]. Gagie et al. showed that de Bruijn
graphs, generalized compressed suffix arrays, and several other BWT related structures
can be represented as Wheeler graphs, and that Wheeler graphs can be indexed in a way
which is space efficient. Hence, being able to recognize whether a given graph is a Wheeler
graph, or being able to approximate a given graph by a Wheeler graph, could have numerous
applications in indexing. Here we resolve the open question of whether there exists an efficient
algorithm for recognizing if a given graph is a Wheeler graph. We present:
    The problem of recognizing whether a given graph G = (V, E) is a Wheeler graph is
NP-complete for any edge label alphabet of size σ ≥ 2, even when G is a DAG. This holds
even on a restricted, subset of graphs called d-NFA’s for d ≥ 5. This is in contrast to recent
results demonstrating the problem can be solved in polynomial time for d-NFA’s where d ≤ 2.
We also show the recognition problem can be solved in linear time for σ = 1;
    There exists an 2e log σ+O(n+e) time exact algorithm where n = |V | and e = |E|. This
algorithm relies on graph isomorphism being computable in strictly sub-exponential time;
    We define an optimization variant of the problem called Wheeler Graph Violation,
abbreviated WGV, where the aim is to remove the minimum number of edges in order to
obtain a Wheeler graph. We show WGV is APX-hard, even when G is a DAG, implying
there exists a constant C ≥ 1 for which there is no C-approximation algorithm (unless P =
NP). Also, conditioned on the Unique Games Conjecture, for all C ≥ 1, it is NP-hard to find
a C-approximation;
    We define the Wheeler Subgraph problem, abbreviated WS, where the aim is to find the
largest subgraph which is a Wheeler Graph (the dual of the WGV). In contrast to WGV, we
prove that the WS problem is in APX for σ = O(1);
    The above findings suggest that most problems under this theme are computationally
difficult. However, we identify a class of graphs for which the recognition problem is
polynomial time solvable, raising the open question of which parameters determine this
problem’s difficulty.




                                                                                                            19241
64   19241 – 25 Years of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform


     3.9     String Attractors
     Nicola Prezza (University of Pisa, IT), Travis Gagie (Universidad Diego Portales, CL),
     Dominik Kempa (University of Warwick – Coventry, GB), and Gonzalo Navarro (University
     of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Nicola Prezza, Travis Gagie, Dominik Kempa, and Gonzalo Navarro
     Main reference Dominik Kempa, Nicola Prezza: “At the roots of dictionary compression: string attractors”, in
                    Proc. of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2018, Los
                    Angeles, CA, USA, June 25-29, 2018, pp. 827–840, ACM, 2018.
               URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3188745.3188814


     In this talk I show connections between the Burrows-Wheeler transform and popular com-
     pressors such as LZ77 and grammars. The first connection is that these compressors can be
     interpreted as approximation algorithms for computing a new combinatorial object: the string
     attractor [1]. A string attractor is a subset of the text’s positions such that each distinct text
     substring has at least one occurrence crossing at least one element in the set. It turns out
     that most dictionary compressors induce string attractors whose cardinalities are bounded
     by their outputs’ sizes, and that one can build a dictionary-compressed representation from
     a string attractor. It follows that these new objects allow one to prove new relations between
     the sizes of dictionary compressors, and to design universal compressed data structures. The
     second connection is through bidirectional parsings. A bidirectional parse is a generalization
     of LZ77 where phrases’ sources are not forced to precede their destination. I will show that
     the BWT induces a bidirectional parse with r phrases, where r is the number of equal-letter
     runs in the BWT. Unlike LZ77, this parse enjoys new fascinating properties that allow one
     to build an optimal-time index on top of it [2].
     References
     1    Dominik Kempa and Nicola Prezza At the Roots of Dictionary Compression: String At-
          tractors. Proceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Com-
          puting, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2018.
     2    Travis Gagie, Gonzalo Navarro, and Nicola Prezza Optimal-time Text Indexing in BWT-
          runs Bounded Space. Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
          Discrete Algorithms, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, 2018.



     3.10      Combinatorial Properties of BWT
     Marinella Sciortino (University of Palermo, IT)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Marinella Sciortino


     Although the BWT has been introduced in Data Compression, over the years it has found
     many applications in several different contexts. The outstanding versatility and efficacy
     of the BWT is based on some mathematical and combinatorial properties, i.e. its efficient
     reversibility and the “clustering effect” on the output. In this talk such properties are
     explored, highlighting the connections with well-known objects in Combinatorics of words,
     such as Lyndon words and Sturmian words. Furthermore, studying how the number of
     equal-letter runs varies after the BWT is applied, allows us to characterize infinite families of
     words based on the clustering effect produced by BWT. In such cases these characterizations
     are connected to still-open mathematical conjectures. Finally, some variants of the BWT
Travis Gagie, Giovanni Manzini, Gonzalo Navarro, and Jens Stoye                                                           65


are described. The first one, denoted eBWT, is defined on multisets of strings and allows to
establish a bijection between the multiset of conjugacy classes of strings and all the strings
on a given alphabet, with interesting theoretical and applicative implications. The second
variant, denoted ABWT, uses a different order (called alternating order) to sort the cyclic
rotations of a string. It is interesting to note that the ABWT preserves many combinatorial
and mathematical properties of the BWT and it can be used as a compressed index in the
same way as the BWT.



3.11      BWT / eBWT similarity
Giovanna Rosone (University of Pisa, IT)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Giovanna Rosone
 Joint work of Giovanna Rosone, Veronica Guerrini, Sabrina Mantaci, Marinella Sciortino, Antonio Restivo
Main reference Sabrina Mantaci, Antonio Restivo, Giovanna Rosone, Marinella Sciortino: “A New Combinatorial
               Approach to Sequence Comparison”, Theory Comput. Syst., Vol. 42(3), pp. 411–429, 2008.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s00224-007-9078-6


Sequence comparison has become a very essential tool in modern molecular biology. In fact,
in biomolecular sequences high similarity usually implies significant functional or structural
similarity. Traditional approaches use techniques that are based on sequence alignment able
to measure character level differences. Here, we describe some similarity measures, alignment-
free, based on the Burrows-Wheeler transform with several application in bioinformatics,
such as the metagenomic problem.



3.12      Searching Patterns in the Bijective BWT
Dominik Köppl (Kyushu University – Fukuoka, JP)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Dominik Köppl
 Joint work of Hideo Bannai, Juha Kärkkäinen, Dominik Köppl, Marcin Piatkowski
Main reference Hideo Bannai, Juha Kärkkäinen, Dominik Köppl, Marcin Piatkowski: “Indexing the Bijective
               BWT”, in Proc. of the 30th Annual Symposium on Combinatorial Pattern Matching, CPM 2019,
               June 18-20, 2019, Pisa, Italy., LIPIcs, Vol. 128, pp. 17:1–17:14, Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum
               fuer Informatik, 2019.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.CPM.2019.17


We present an index data structure for the bijective Burrows-Wheeler transform [1]. The
index data structure is based on the FM index [2]. Like the FM index, it reports the suffix
array interval of all pattern occurrences by means of backward searches.
References
1    Joseph Yossi Gil and David Allen Scott. A bijective string sorting transform. ArXiv
     1201.3077, 2012. arXiv:1201.3077.
2    Paolo Ferragina and Giovanni Manzini. Opportunistic data structures with applications.
     In Proc. FOCS, pages 390–398, 2000.




                                                                                                                      19241
66   19241 – 25 Years of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform


      4     Motivation (from proposal)
     When it was introduced in a technical report in May 1994, no one could have foreseen the
     impact the Burrows-Wheeler Transform (BWT) would have far beyond the field of data
     compression for which it was originally intended. Of course it first made a significant impact
     on compression, both in theory and in practice (e.g., as the basis for bzip2). New horizons
     opened up in 2000 with the introduction of the FM-index, a compressed suffix array based
     on the BWT. Among other applications, in the next decade FM-indexes became the heart
     of the DNA aligners such as Bowtie, BWA and SOAP 2 that helped pave the way for the
     genomics revolution.
         Generalizations of BWT to labelled trees, de Bruijn graphs, automata, haplotype sequences
     and genomic reference graphs have kept the exchange of ideas lively between researchers
     in algorithms and data structures, bioinformatics, combinatorics on words and information
     retrieval. Burrows and Wheeler’s original technical report is still cited hundreds of times
     every year, subsequent papers are cited thousands of times, and new results about or using
     the BWT appear in the top conferences and journals.
         By now, 25 years since its publication, probably no one person knows all the results
     that have been proven about the BWT, but we hope the expertise gathered together at this
     Dagstuhl Seminar will make progress on the following topics, among others:
         FM-indexes for genomic databases: FM-indexes shine for indexing one or a few
     genomes, but they have not scaled well to indexing the genomic databases that have resulted
     from high-throughput sequencing technologies. An important problem has been that the
     suffix array samples used to locate occurrences of patterns must be fairly large or locating
     becomes very slow. Very recently, a way was discovered to greatly compress also the suffix
     array sample for repetitive texts, opening the door to indexing thousands of genomes. We
     expect this seminar will lead to a fuller understanding of this advance and how it can be
     applied in practice. Another challenge has been beating run-length compression of genomic
     databases’ BWTs, by identifying additional structure.
         More generalizations of the BWT: Many BWT researchers have heard of the gen-
     eralizations to trees and graphs mentioned above, but it seems few except specialists in
     algorithms and data structures know about its recent extension to indexed parameterized and
     order-preserving pattern matching, few except specialists in combinatorics on words know
     about the alternating BWT, and few except bioinformaticians know about the positional
     BWT – but each of these may have applications in the other areas. Also, a partially unifying
     framework has recently been proposed, but there are still many open problems.
         New challenges in bioinformatics: Papers on the BWT are published in many venues
     and no single conference brings together all the experts from algorithms and data structures,
     combinatorics on words, and theoretical and applied bioinformatics. This disconnect between
     the areas hurts us all because it prevents knowledge being shared efficiently. The BWT has
     recently been applied to some surprising bioinformatics problems, such as building ancestral
     recombination graphs and optical read mapping, and we expect other possibilities will emerge
     from interdisciplinary discussions.



      5     Feedback
     All of the 19 respondents to the survey said they would definitely attend another Dagstuhl
     seminar (5, from 1 to 5) and the median rating of the scientific quality was 10 out of 11. One
     person was neutral about the seminar inspiring new ideas for work, research or teaching; four
Travis Gagie, Giovanni Manzini, Gonzalo Navarro, and Jens Stoye                                       67


agreed it did; and 13 agreed completely (and we do not know what the last person thought).
Four people were neutral about it inspiring joint projects or publications; nine agreed it did;
and six agreed completely. Two people disagreed that it led to insights from neighbouring
fields; two were neutral; nine agreed; and five agreed completely. One person disagreed that
it identified new research directions; four people were neutral; seven people agreed; and seven
people agreed completely. The responses to the other questions were similar. The comments
were generally positive, with people liking the mix of fields; the organization of the panels
could have been improved, although they still offered some valuable insights and stimulated
promising discussions.



 6     Open Problems
Several general open problems were posed – e.g., generalizing the BWT to even more data
types, merging BWTs of other data types (and, most generally, Wheeler graphs), improving
the compression of BWT-based indexes for DNA readsets, applying current theory to practice
– and some specific ones. Sharma Thankachan posed the problem of determining the degree
of non-determinism that makes Wheeler graph recognition hard: it is currently known to
take polytime when each node has at most two outgoing edges labelled with the same
character, and it is NP-complete when nodes can have five outgoing edges labelled with the
same character. Jackie Daykin asked about enhancing BWT performance with alphabet
reordering (an issue about which Sharma now has preliminary results). Dominik Köppl
posted a one-page description of an open problem (“Can we compute the Bijective BWT in
linear time?”) to the materials page.




                                                                                                  19241
68   19241 – 25 Years of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform


            Participants
        Jarno Alanko                     Tomohiro I                        Enno Ohlebusch
     University of Helsinki, FI        Kyushu Institute of Technology –   Universität Ulm, DE
        Hideo Bannai                   Fukuoka, JP                          Kunsoo Park
     Kyushu University –                 Juha Kärkkäinen                  Seoul National University, KR
     Fukuoka, JP                       University of Helsinki, FI          Nicola Prezza
        Paola Bonizzoni                  Dominik Kempa                    University of Pisa, IT
     University of Milan-Bicocca, IT   University of Warwick –
                                                                           Knut Reinert
        Christina Boucher              Coventry, GB
                                                                          FU Berlin, DE
     University of Florida –             Tomasz Kociumaka
     Gainesville, US                                                       Giovanna Rosone
                                       Bar-Ilan University –
                                                                          University of Pisa, IT
        Marilia Braga                  Ramat Gan, IL
     Universität Bielefeld, DE           Dominik Köppl                     Kunihiko Sadakane
                                       Kyushu University –                University of Tokyo, JP
        Anthony J. Cox
     Illumina – Saffron Walden, GB     Fukuoka, JP                         Leena Salmela
                                         Ben Langmead                     University of Helsinki, FI
        Fabio Cunial
     MPI – Dresden, DE                 Johns Hopkins University –          Marinella Sciortino
        Jackie Daykin                  Baltimore, US                      University of Palermo, IT
     Aberystwyth University, GB          Zsuzsanna Liptak                   Rahul Shah
        Richard Durbin                 University of Verona, IT           Louisiana State University –
     University of Cambridge, GB         Veli Mäkinen                     Baton Rouge, US
        Gabriele Fici                  University of Helsinki, FI           Sandip Sinha
     University of Palermo, IT           Sabrina Mantaci                  Columbia University –
                                       University of Palermo, IT          New York, US
        Johannes Fischer
     TU Dortmund, DE                     Giovanni Manzini                   Jouni Sirén
        Travis Gagie                   University of Eastern Piedmont –   University of California –
     Universidad Diego Portales, CL    Alessandria, IT                    Santa Cruz, US
        Pawel Gawrychowski               Ian Munro                         Tatiana Starikovskaya
     University of Wroclaw, PL         University of Waterloo, CA         ENS – Paris, FR
        Simon Gog                        Gene Myers                        Jens Stoye
     eBay Inc – San Jose, US           MPI – Dresden, DE                  Universität Bielefeld, DE
        Roberto Grossi                   Gonzalo Navarro                    Sharma V. Thankachan
     University of Pisa, IT            University of Chile –              University of Central Florida –
        Wing-Kai Hon                   Santiago de Chile, CL              Orlando, US
     National Tsing Hua University –     Yakov Nekrich                     Rossano Venturini
     Hsinchu, TW                       University of Waterloo, CA         University of Pisa, IT
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 19261

Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and
Databases
Edited by
C. Mohan1 , Beng Chin Ooi2 , and Gottfried Vossen3

1    IBM Almaden Center – San Jose, US, cmohan@us.ibm.com
2    National University of Singapore, SG, ooibc@comp.nus.edu.sg
3    Universität Münster, DE, vossen@wi.uni-muenster.de


      Abstract
This seminar report contains the motivation, abstracts, and findings of Dagstuhl Seminar 19261
Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases which took place in late
June 2019. It brought together a very good mix of people from academia and industry as well
as from databases and related areas for which blockchain is a current topic and who are either
users or developers in that field.
Seminar June 23–28, 2019 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/19261
2012 ACM Subject Classification Information systems → Data management systems
Keywords and phrases Distributed database, blockchain, permissioned
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.9.6.69



 1      Executive Summary
C. Mohan
Beng Chin Ooi
Gottfried Vossen
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen


The topic of blockchains, and in particular that of permissioned blockchains, has rapidly
gained interest in both the industrial and the research communities in recent years. It
particularly pertains to situations where trust among several parties that are about to do
business together is difficult to establish (e.g., due to organizational, financial, or timing
reasons) or impossible to establish at all. A blockchain is a decentralized, distributed ledger
that consists of immutable blocks containing transactions that can be accessed by any party,
and that provides trust via replication over all nodes and an agreed-upon execution order of
the transactions. Of particular interest are permissioned blockchains in which the associated
parties are known and authenticated, yet still do not fully trust each other.
    Many applications have shown interest in the concept of blockchains, since the situation
just described applies to many real-world scenarios, including (global) supply chains, the
Internet of Things, connected cars, manufacturing, banking, and healthcare. As a consequence,
a number of players in the IT industry work on a development of the technology, and several
consortia have been formed to advance the technology across industries, among them
Hyperledger and R3. Moreover, a number of companies have released Blockchain-as-a-Service
(BaaS) platforms, including IBM, Oracle, Amazon, Baidu, and Alibaba.


            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 9, Issue 6, pp.
69–94
Editors: C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
70   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


         The technology has many links into the database community; however, the situation is
     basically like it was in the database area many years ago, when only a few systems had been
     released but users were on their own to figure out how to use them effectively. As the seminar
     has shown, many interesting issues remain to be solved, and there is a wide variety of aspects
     and research issues currently under investigation. Of these, the following were discussed:
         Blockchain scalability w.r.t. transaction throughput, one of the main roadblocks to
         business adoption
         Transaction ordering and endorsement, consensus of transaction commit
         Adjustments to the Proof of Work (PoW) consensus mechanism, other optimizations to
         consensus algorithms (e.g., Byzantine consensus) in the presence of transaction failures
         and in light of scalability
         Block validation
         Languages for smart-contract specification (e.g., Sandcastle SQL and Solidity)
         Amendments to Hyperledger Fabric, such as channels
         Cross-chain swaps using hashed timelocks
         Energy efficiency of blockchain applications

     In addition, several participants reported on various working applications of blockchain
     technology.
C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen                                                               71


 2       Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69

Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73

Topic Areas Discussed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          74
     State of Public and Private Blockchains: Myths and Reality
     C. Mohan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    74
     Introduction to Hyperledger
     Hart Montgomery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     74
     Usages of Blockchain Technologies for Data Stores
     Bernhard Mitschang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
     Privacy, Confidentiality, Cryptography, and Security Modelling in Permissioned
     Blockchains
     Hart Montgomery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
     A Hybrid Blockchain Architecture for Enhancing Privacy and Accountability
     Murat Kantarcioglu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    77
     Sandcastle: a SQL Ethereum Smart Contract Language
     Shahan Khatchadourian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       77
     Blockchained Event Store
     Dennis Przytarski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
     ExpoDB Fabric: Efficient Transaction Processing in Byzantine Fault Tolerant
     Environments
     Mohammad Sadoghi Hamedani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
     CUB, a Consensus Unit-based Storage Scheme for Blockchain System
     Lei Chen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
     Beyond Consensus in Permissioned Ledgers: Experiences in Using BFT Replication
     on DLTs
     Alysson Neves Bessani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     81
     Red Belly Blockchain: Byzantine Consensus Is Back but Is It the Same?
     Vincent Gramoli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   81
     Enhancing Performance, Scalability, and Confidentiality of Permissioned Blockchains
     Divyakant Agrawal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
     Hyperledger Fabric’s Read-Set Conflicts and Conflict-Free Replicated Datatypes
     Hans-Arno Jacobsen and Pezhman Nasirifard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
     FastFabric: Scaling Hyperledger Fabric to 20,000 Transactions per Second
     Srinivasan Keshav . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
     Blockchains and Distributed Databases, a Twin Study
     PingCheng Ruan and Beng Chin Ooi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          84
     Optical Chips
     Yong Tang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   84




                                                                                                        19261
72   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


        Minimizing Transaction Failures in Permissioned Blockchains
        Jeeta Ann Chacko and Hans-Arno Jacobsen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
        Blockchain Goes Green? A Time Energy Performance Study of Blockchain on Low
        Power Systems
        Dumitrel Loghin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
        Blockchain and New Economies
        Feida Zhu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
        Blockchain-based Cross-Site Genomic Dataset Access Audit
        Li Xiong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87
        Leveraging Decentralized, Secure and Governed Exchange of Confidential Informa-
        tion with Permissioned Blockchain
        Gabriela Ruberg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    87
        Blockchain Empowered Drug Development Financing
        Yong Tang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
        Turning a Vehicle Into an Economic Platform
        Michael Huth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
        Distributed Blockchain Systems across Distributed Data Centers
        Dilip Krishnaswamy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
        Atomic Cross Chain Swaps
        Eric Lo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
        Blockchain Analytics
        Murat Kantarcioglu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
        Blockchain and Open Source Governance
        Juho Lindman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     91

     Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
        General Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
        More Blockchain Analytics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
        Virtual Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
        Areas for Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93

     Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    94
C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen                                                           73


 3     Motivation
A new era is emerging in the world of distributed computing with the growing popularity
of blockchains. Traditionally, the Internet allows to exchange only data or information
directly between two parties or users; a transaction, say, involving the purchase of an item
requires a third party which can be trusted. Third parties often come in the form of a
digital marketplace, a bank, or a trusted intermediary. Blockchains can eliminate third
parties, since they are characterized by transparency, i.e., the blockchain content is visible
to each participant, and being append-only, which is crucial for updating a blockchain.
Conceptually, a blockchain is a decentralized and distributed digital ledger that consists of
records representing transactions; since these records are tied to their history using hash
values no existing record can be altered retroactively. The only kind of update allowed is
to extend a given blockchain by additional records, which, assuming that the majority of
participants does not pursue a dishonest intention, results in a stable view on transactions
(which implies that not every party or node maintaining the blockchain needs to trust
everybody else). The participants can verify and audit transactions, which results in a
trustable workflow where participants’ uncertainty regarding data security is marginal. The
use of a blockchain also eliminates infinite reproducibility of digital assets; it confirms that
each unit of value was transferred only once.
    By storing data across its network, the blockchain eliminates the risks that come with
data being held centrally, yet opens up for an application of distributed technology that
was previously developed in other contexts. Blockchains come in two flavors: An open,
permissionless, or public, blockchain network does not require any guarding against bad
actors, and no access control is needed; anybody can join and leave. Hence applications can
be added to the network without the approval or trust of others, using the blockchain as a
transport layer. Permissioned (private) blockchains are emerging as open source protocols
where openness and collaboration are encouraged among authenticated participants. They
can hence restrict who can participate in the consensus processes as well as who can transact.
    From a database point of view, a blockchain can be considered as a log of ordered
transactions, since nodes keep replicas of the data and agree on an execution order of
the transactions. A key property is the assumption that nodes behave in an arbitrary or
Byzantine fashion. By being able to tolerate Byzantine failure by design, a blockchain
offers stronger security than a database system. Although enterprise-grade database systems
support applications like security trading and settlement, asset and finance management, or
banking and insurance, blockchain technology has the potential to disrupt the status quo since
they incur lower costs of infrastructure and human labor. In particular the immutability and
transparency of a blockchain reduce human error as well as the need for manual intervention
due to conflicting data.
    While there is currently no standard in the blockchain space, all the ongoing efforts involve
some combination of database, transaction, encryption, consensus and other distributed
systems technologies. Some of the application areas in which blockchain pilots are being
carried out are: smart contracts, supply chain management, know your customer, derivatives
processing and provenance management. The seminar has surveyed some of the ongoing
blockchain projects with respect to their architectures in general and their approaches to
some specific technical areas. Its focus has been on how the functionality of traditional and
modern data stores are being utilized or not utilized in different blockchain projects.




                                                                                                    19261
74   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


      4     Topic Areas Discussed
     This section lists the abstracts of talks given, ordered by the topic areas to which they belong.



     Goals and Current State-of-the-Art of Blockchain Technology and
     Systems
     4.1    State of Public and Private Blockchains: Myths and Reality
     C. Mohan (IBM Almaden Center – San Jose, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © C. Mohan


     It has been a decade since the concept of blockchain was invented as the underlying core
     data structure of the permissionless or public Bitcoin cryptocurrency network. Since then,
     several cryptocurrencies, tokens and ICOs have emerged. After much speculation and hype,
     a significant number of them have become problematic or worthless! The public blockchain
     system Ethereum emerged by generalizing the use of blockchains to manage any kind of
     asset, be it physical or purely digital, with the introduction of Smart Contracts. Over the
     years, numerous myths have developed with respect to the purported utility and the need for
     public blockchains. The adoption and adaptation of blockchains and smart contracts for use
     in the permissioned or private environments is what I consider to be useful and of practical
     consequence. Hence, the technical aspects of only private blockchains will be the focus of
     my talk. Along the way, I will bust many myths associated with public blockchains. I will
     also compare traditional database techniques with blockchain systems’ features and identify
     desirable future research topics.
     References
     1    C. Mohan. State of Public and Private Blockchains: Myths and Reality. Proc. ACM
          SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, Amsterdam, July 2019.
          http://bit.ly/sigBcP
     2    C. Mohan. Permissioned/Private Blockchains and Databases. http://bit.ly/CMbcDB



     4.2    Introduction to Hyperledger
     Hart Montgomery (Fujitsu Labs of America Inc. – Sunnyvale, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Hart Montgomery


     In this talk, I introduced Hyperledger, explained its structure and governance, and showed
     how to participate and contribute. Hyperledger is a “greenhouse” under the Linux foundation
     for permissioned blockchains. It is currently the largest and most popular permissioned
     blockchain project.
C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen                                                          75


4.3    Usages of Blockchain Technologies for Data Stores
Bernhard Mitschang (Universität Stuttgart, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Bernhard Mitschang


Currently, blockchain technologies are seen as the foundation of a new business world: it will
change the way the economy runs and thus will change the way we act and work, all triggered
by means of some new ways to organize the relevant application data, e.g., in the areas of
supply chain, health, and event storage. Blockchain technologies and systems are still in
constant change and development. Hence, it is difficult to exactly define its ingredients and
properties of the underlying technologies.
   After having identified these technologies and associated characteristics (like transparency,
provenance, fault tolerance, immutability, and authenticity), it is important to isolate and
separate them into components that are subsequently used to enhance existing data stores
as needed. Important questions that arise in this context are:
   How do certain Blockchain technologies and applications match?
   How to identify and separate Blockchain technologies?
   How to “append/integrate” Blockchain technologies to/with existing data stores?



Cryptography and Blockchain
4.4    Privacy, Confidentiality, Cryptography, and Security Modelling in
       Permissioned Blockchains
Hart Montgomery (Fujitsu Labs of America Inc. – Sunnyvale, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Hart Montgomery


Achieving desired privacy and confidentiality properties on a blockchain can be quite difficult.
This is especially true on permissioned blockchains, where it may be more difficult to hide
or anonymize identities than on a public blockchain. In this talk, I explained some of the
challenges that are commonly faced when attempting to achieve privacy and confidentiality
on permissioned blockchains and how to go about using existing tools to achieve these
properties.
    One of the most important things when designing secure permissioned blockchains is
the need for security modelling. Many people today pick cryptographic tools, apply them
to blockchains, and then try to analyze the security properties that they get (if they even
do that). This isn’t a good idea for many reasons, but, in particular, it often means that
blockchains do not provide the security guarantees that people want on a blockchain. For
instance, even if transactions on the blockchain are encrypted or hashed, it could be the case
that traffic analysis completely reveals the participants in a transaction or even information
about the contents of transactions [5]. Intuitively, one might expect encryption might prevent
such leakage, but it turns out that other “side channel” information on the blockchain nullifies
some of the security properties of encryption.
    Another very important discussion point was the notion of privacy and anonymity, and
the fact that the two aren’t equivalent. Many blockchain practitioners (both of the public
blockchain and permissioned blockchain kind) frequently equate the two, and many disastrous




                                                                                                   19261
76   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


     consequences can happen from this. As an example, I showed my credit card history from
     a week last year, which, if extended further, would easily deanonymize me. Solving this
     issue on a blockchain is a difficult task, and blockchain builders may not want to provide
     perfect privacy to their users (in some cases, functionality even demands imperfect privacy,
     like when KYC regulations apply). However, blockchain implementers certainly need to take
     into account privacy (and anonymity) into their security models when building blockchains.
          We next discussed cryptographic tools that can be useful for obtaining various privacy
     and confidentiality properties in blockchain. The first topic was threshold signatures, which
     allow a cryptographic signing key to be split into n different shares such that any t out of the
     n shares are required to create a valid signature (and any t – 1 shares cannot “do anything”)
     [1]. We went through the security game of threshold signatures in detail, which illustrated
     how one should look at a security game for a blockchain. We also briefly defined functional
     encryption [3] and explained why it would be very useful for a blockchain.
          The next technique discussed was “channels.” Channels, developed in Hyperledger Fabric
     [2], are a tool intended to enable private transactions on blockchains. The idea is that each
     channel acts as a private “sub-blockchain” for a limited number of participants, and that
     people without permission do not have visibility into what is going on inside the channel.
     While channels are a useful tool, they have not quite reached their full potential, so if they
     are to be used to achieve strong privacy requirements, more development on top of them is
     generally required.
          The final technique we discussed was trusted execution environments (TEEs). Although
     they have been much maligned recently in terms of their security properties [4], TEEs such as
     Intel’s SGX offer many potential benefits for secure and private blockchains. It is possible to
     essentially run blockchain nodes inside TEEs such that (assuming the TEEs are secure), even
     the blockchain node hosts cannot see what the blockchain is doing. TEEs could potentially
     give us very strong privacy and confidentiality options on blockchain if they can, in fact, be
     built securely.
          The talk ended with many questions. Overall, the goal was to expose what was mostly
     an audience of researchers focused on databases to some of the privacy, security, and
     confidentiality challenges present on blockchain today.
     References
     1    Boldyreva, Alexandra: Threshold signatures, multisignatures and blind signatures based
          on the gap-Diffie-Hellman-group signature scheme; International Workshop on Public Key
          Cryptography. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003.
     2    Androulaki, Elli, et al: Hyperledger fabric: a distributed operating system for permissioned
          blockchains; Proceedings of the Thirteenth EuroSys Conference. ACM, 2018.
     3    Boneh, Dan, Amit Sahai, and Brent Waters: Functional encryption: Definitions and chal-
          lenges; Theory of Cryptography Conference. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.
     4    Kocher, Paul, et al.: Spectre attacks: Exploiting speculative execution; arXiv preprint
          arXiv:1801.01203 (2018).
     5    Murdoch, Steven J., and George Danezis: Low-cost traffic analysis of Tor; 2005 IEEE
          Symposium on Security and Privacy (S & P’05). IEEE, 2005.
C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen                                                         77


4.5    A Hybrid Blockchain Architecture for Enhancing Privacy and
       Accountability
Murat Kantarcioglu (University of Texas – Dallas, US)
      License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Murat Kantarcioglu
 Joint work of Murat Kantarcioglu, Harsh Desai, Lalana Kagal


Unfortunately, existing public blockchains and smart contracts deployed on them may
disclose sensitive information. Although there is some ongoing work that leverage advanced
cryptography to address some of these sensitive information leakage issues, they require
significant changes to existing and popular blockchains such as Ethereum and are usually
computationally expensive. On the other hand, private blockchains have been proposed
to allow more efficient and privacy-preserving data sharing among pre-approved group of
nodes/participants. Although private blockchains address some of the privacy challenges by
allowing sensitive data to be only seen by the select group of participants, they do not allow
public accountability of transactions since transactions are approved by known set of users,
and cannot be accessed publicly. Given these observations, one natural question that arise is,
can we leverage both public and private blockchain infrastructures to enable efficient, privacy
enhancing and accountable applications ? In this talk, we try to address this challenge in
the context of digital auctions.
    Mainly, we discuss a novel hybrid blockchain architecture [1] that combines private and
public blockchains to allow sensitive bids to be opened on a private blockchain so that
only the auctioneer can learn the bids, and no one else. At the same time, we leverage
public blockchains to make the auction winner announcement, and payments accountable
[2]. Furthermore, using smart contracts deployed on public blockchain, we show how to
incentivize truthful behavior among the auction participants. Our extensive empirical results
show that this architecture is more efficient in terms of run time and monetary cost compared
to pure public blockchain based auction implementations.
References
1    Harsh Bimal Desai, Murat Kantarcioglu, and Lalana Kagal. A hybrid blockchain archi-
     tecture for privacy-enabled and accountable auctions. In The 2019 IEEE International
     Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain-2019), 2019.
2    Aravind Ramachandran and Murat Kantarcioglu. Smartprovenance: A distributed, block-
     chain based dataprovenance system. In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM Conference on Data
     and Application Security and Privacy, CODASPY 2018, Tempe, AZ, USA, March 19-21,
     2018, pages 35–42, 2018.



Data Models
4.6    Sandcastle: a SQL Ethereum Smart Contract Language
Shahan Khatchadourian (ConsenSys – Toronto, CA)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Shahan Khatchadourian


Enterprises rely on data management frameworks in order to serve their customer. However,
enterprises face challenges when integrating blockchains with existing enterprise stacks in a
way that makes it easy to query, understand, and transact across systems. Challenges arise




                                                                                                  19261
78   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


     due to the complex composition of database and blockchain paradigms. As well, developers
     face the challenge of writing smart contracts in a low-level language like Solidity, with a need
     to understand concepts like decentralization, smart contracts, consensus and identity. This
     leads to developers building adhoc, incongruent solutions at application or protocol layers.
         We propose Sandcastle, a SQL Ethereum smart contract language that integrates enter-
     prise data management. Sandcastle works on all Ethereum blockchains (without modification
     or configuration), including public, private, permissioned, and permissionless networks. We
     showcase Sandcastle’s relational features such as aggregation, triggers, functions, indexes,
     and row-based semantics in finance, electronic medical records, and governance use cases.
     We give architectural details, including the translation of Sandcastle SQL to Solidity. The
     Sandcastle roadmap includes optimization in performance, cost, and security. Sandcastle
     aims to help traditional enterprises build scalable, data-oriented blockchain platforms that
     span databases, Ethereum 1.0, and Ethereum 2.0 stacks and networks.



     4.7    Blockchained Event Store
     Dennis Przytarski (Universität Stuttgart, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Dennis Przytarski


     Consider different scenarios such as transportation/trucking and supply chain integrity. All
     these scenarios have one commonality: different parties generate events that need to be
     shared among themselves in an immutable and tamper-resistant manner. Because the stored
     events are used for forecasts, reports, or further process optimizations, powerful querying
     capabilities both on current and historical states are needed.
         In general, the blockchain technology is suitable for these scenarios because it offers data
     immutability and tamper-resistance. For typical blockchain systems that assume transferable
     assets (i.e., transfer ownership of an object from one person to another person), the key-value
     data model and a simple query engine to answer queries such as “is a particular transaction
     included in a particular block” are sufficient enough.
         As soon as either the data model or the query requirements increase, this basic blockchain
     setup does not suffice anymore. Instead, powerful query and data model capabilities are
     needed with immutability and tamper-resistance guaranteed. Therefore, I propose using
     triples (entity, attribute, value) as simple but powerful and flexible data model.
         I am currently working on embedding the triple data model into a blockchain architecture
     with a powerful query engine. This will lead to an immutable, shared, tamper-resistant, and
     queryable data store for events. I am currently facing the following challenges: Data Model:
         How are changes to the data model done?
         How is the data in the triple data model (tamper-resistant) stored?
     Query Language and Processing:
         How could the query language look like when there is a history to query?
         How to process a query on immutable data in the triple data model?
C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen                                                           79


Consensus Protocols and Blockchain
4.8    ExpoDB Fabric: Efficient Transaction Processing in Byzantine
       Fault Tolerant Environments
Mohammad Sadoghi Hamedani (University of California – Davis, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Mohammad Sadoghi Hamedani


The byzantine fault-tolerance model, studied in ExpoDB Fabric [6, 4, 5, 3, 2, 1], captures a
wide-range of failures–common in real-world scenarios–such as ones due to malicious attacks
and arbitrary software/hardware errors. We propose Blockplane [2], a middleware that
enables making existing benign systems tolerate byzantine failures. This is done by making
the existing system use Blockplane for durability and as a communication infrastructure.
Blockplane proposes the following: (1) A middleware and communication infrastructure to
make an entire benign protocol byzantine fault-tolerant, (2) Ahierarchical locality-aware
design to minimize the number of wide-area messages, (3) A separation of fault-tolerance
concerns to enable designs with higher performance.
    We further investigate a protocol-agnostic approach to improve the design of primary-
backup consensus protocols. At the core of our approach is a novel wait-free design of
running several instances of the underlying consensus protocol in parallel [3]. To yield
a high-performance parallelized design, we present coordination-free techniques to order
operations across parallel instances, deal with instance failures, and assign clients to specific
instances. Consequently, the design we present is able to reduce the load on individual
instances and primaries, while also reducing the adverse effects of any malicious replicas. Our
design is fine-tuned such that the instances coordinated by non-faulty replicas are wait-free:
they can continuously make consensus decisions, independent of the behavior of any other
instances.
    We further develop DeltaBFT, a novel consensus protocol in which all algorithms necessary
for normal-case operation only require linear communication costs, even if replicas fail [5].
At the center of our design is the delayed-replication algorithm, an algorithm we propose
to reliably broadcast consensus decisions made by some non-faulty replicas to all replicas
without any coordination and with low communication cost for all replicas involved. The
delayed-replication algorithm is supported by our partial consensus algorithm, which uses
threshold signatures to efficiently make consensus decisions.
    The development of fault-tolerant distributed systems that can tolerate Byzantine behavior
has traditionally been focused on consensus protocols, which support fully-replicated designs.
For the development of more sophisticated high-performance Byzantine distributed systems,
more specialized fault-tolerant communication primitives are necessary. As a result, we
identify an essential communication primitive and study it in depth. In specifics, we formalize
the cluster-sending problem [4], the problem of sending a message from one Byzantine
cluster to another Byzantine cluster in a reliable manner. We not only formalize this
fundamental problem, but also establish lower bounds on the complexity of this problem
under crash failures and Byzantine failures. Furthermore, we develop practical cluster-sending
protocols that meet these lower bounds and, hence, have optimal complexity. As such, our
work provides a strong foundation for the further exploration of novel designs that address
challenges encountered in fault-tolerant distributed systems.




                                                                                                    19261
80   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


     References
     1    S. Gupta and M. Sadoghi. Blockchain Transaction Processing. 2018.
     2    F. Nawab and M. Sadoghi. Blockplane: A global-scale byzantizing middleware. In 2019
          IEEE 35th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), pages 124–135, April
          2019.
     3    S. Gupta, J. Hellings, and M. Sadoghi. Brief Announcement: revisiting consensus pro-
          tocols through wait-free parallelization. In 33rd International Symposium on Distributed
          Computing (DISC 2019).
     4    J. Hellings, and M. Sadoghi. The fault-tolerant cluster-sending problem. In 33rd Interna-
          tional Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC 2019).
     5    J. Hellings, and M. Sadoghi. Brief Announcement: Byzantine fault-tolerant consensus with
          almost linear communication complexity. In CoRR. 2019.
     6    M. Sadoghi, S. Blanas. Transaction Processing on Modern Hardware. In Synthesis Lectures
          on Data Management, Morgan & Claypool Publishers 2019.



     4.9     CUB, a Consensus Unit-based Storage Scheme for Blockchain
             System
     Lei Chen (HKUST – Kowloon, HK)
           License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Lei Chen
      Joint work of Zihuan Xu, and Siyuan Han
     Main reference Zihuan Xu, Siyuan Han, Lei Chen: “CUB, a Consensus Unit-Based Storage Scheme for Blockchain
                    System”, in Proc. of the 34th IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering, ICDE 2018,
                    Paris, France, April 16-19, 2018, pp. 173–184, IEEE Computer Society, 2018.
               URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE.2018.00025


     Recently, Blockchain becomes a hot research topic due to the success of Blockchain in many
     applications, such as cryptocurrency, smart contract, digital assets, distributed cloud storage
     and so on. The power of Blockchain is that it can achieve the consensus of an ordered set of
     transactions among nodes which do not trust each other, even with the existence of malicious
     nodes. However, compared to traditional databases, the current Blockchain technology still
     cannot handle a massive number of transactions, which is caused by many factors, such as
     the consensus protocol, structure of the blocks and storage challenge. Among them, the high
     storage requirement is a key factor that prevents the wide usage of Blockchain on various
     devices such as mobile phones or low-end PCs.
         In this talk, I will discuss a novel concept called Consensus Unit (CU), which organizes
     different nodes into one unit and lets them to store at least one copy of Blockchain data
     in the system together. Based on this idea, the Blocks Assignment Optimization (BAO)
     problem is defined to determine the optimal assignment of blocks such that the storage space
     is fully used and the query cost is minimized. The problem is NP-hard. Thus, three efficient
     heuristic algorithms are presented to solve the static assignment problem. Furthermore, the
     dynamic scenarios are discussed when new blocks arrive or nodes join or depart from the
     CU. At the end of this talk, I will highlight some future research directions on Block chain
     systems.
C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen                                                         81


4.10      Beyond Consensus in Permissioned Ledgers: Experiences in Using
          BFT Replication on DLTs
Alysson Neves Bessani (University of Lisbon, PT)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Alysson Neves Bessani


Permissioned Blockchains such as Hyperledger Fabric and R3 Corda rely on modular
consensus-as-a-service components for ordering transactions. In this talk I explained how
these components can be implemented using “traditional” consensus protocols (such as
PBFT) and argued that such protocols are only the first step in building a robust and
efficient service for these blockchains. I also showed how the required features were imple-
mented in BFT-SMART, a replication library used for implementing Byzantine-resilient
consensus-as-a-service components for both Fabric and Corda.



4.11      Red Belly Blockchain: Byzantine Consensus Is Back but Is It the
          Same?
Vincent Gramoli (The University of Sydney, AU)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Vincent Gramoli


Byzantine Consensus was proposed in the early 80’s for multiple machines to reach agreement
on a unique value. A practical solution, called PBFT, used a leader for implementing a
network file system in a local area network in 1999. Today, with the advent of Blockchain,
various companies are now trying to avoid double spending by having a large number of
machines reach an agreement upon a block at any given index of the blockchain. Most
companies take off-the-shelf leader-based Byzantine consensus protocols, inspired by PBFT,
to solve this old consensus problem.
    The issue is that the Blockchain Consensus is different from this classic Byzantine
Consensus problem because the number of machines that should agree is large. Our recent
design of the Democratic Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerant (DBFT) consensus algorithm
solves a variant of the Byzantine Consensus problem that allows to scale by leveraging the
cryptographic primitive of the blockchain to decide whether a proposal is valid. It contrasts
with off-the-shelf solutions in that it is fully decentralised and does not rely on a leader to
avoid bottlenecks.
    The blockchain we built using DBFT, called Red Belly Blockchain, is a community
blockchain whose set of consensus participants changes over time. Red Belly Blockchain uses
the ECDSA public-key cryptosystem, it verifies all cryptographically signed transactions in
an efficient way to avoid CPU wastage, it involves all participants to collaboratively solves
this Blockchain Consensus instead of relying on a leader bottleneck. It resolves conflicts
between transactions, never forks and is provably starvation-free. Our experiments show
that Red Belly scales to 1000 replicas spread across 4 different continents with an average
latency of 3 seconds and its peak throughput exceeds 660,000 TPS.




                                                                                                  19261
82   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


     Performance
     4.12      Enhancing Performance, Scalability, and Confidentiality of
               Permissioned Blockchains
     Divyakant Agrawal (University of California – Santa Barbara, US)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Divyakant Agrawal
      Joint work of Divyakant Agrawal, Mohammad Java Amiri, Amr El Abbadi


     Blockchains have unique features, such as transparency, provenance, fault tolerance, and
     authenticity, which appeal to a wide range of distributed applications, e.g., supply chain
     management and healthcare. However blockchain systems suffer from performance, scalability,
     and confidentiality limitations.
         Existing blockchains mostly utilize an order-execute architecture where nodes agree
     on a total order of the blocks of transactions using a consensus protocol and then the
     transactions are executed in the same order on all nodes sequentially. The sequential
     execution of transactions on all nodes, however, reduces the blockchain performance in
     terms of throughput and latency. While Hyperledger Fabric increases the performance of
     blockchains by switching the order of the execution and ordering phases and executing the
     transactions in parallel, it performs poorly on workloads with high-contention, i.e., many
     conflicting transactions in a block, due to its high abort rate. To address this problem, we
     introduce a permissioned blockchain system ParBlockchain [1]. ParBlockchain is mainly
     introduced to support distributed applications processing workloads with some degree of
     contention. ParBlockchain consists of orderers and agent nodes. Orderers establish agreement
     on the order of the transactions of different applications, construct the blocks of transactions,
     and generate a dependency graph for the transactions within a block. A dependency graph
     enables higher concurrency by allowing the parallel execution of non-conflicting transactions.
     The agents of each application are then responsible for executing the transactions of that
     application following the generated dependency graph.
         Scalability is one of the main roadblocks to business adoption of blockchain systems.
     Despite recent intensive research on using sharding techniques to enhance the scalability of
     blockchain systems, existing solutions do not efficiently address cross-shard transactions. We
     introduce a permissioned blockchain system, SharPer [2], that enhances the scalability of
     blockchain systems by clustering (partitioning) the nodes and assigning different data shards
     to different clusters. SharPer supports both intra-shard and cross-shard transactions and
     processes intra-shard transactions of different clusters as well as cross-shard transactions
     with no overlapping clusters simultaneously. In SharPer, the blockchain ledger is formed as
     a directed acyclic graph where each cluster maintains only a view of the ledger. SharPer
     also incorporates a protocol to establish consensus on the order of cross-shard transactions
     among only the involved clusters.
         Many distributed applications need to collaborate with each other following service level
     agreements to provide different services. Distributed applications are often designed and
     implemented in different blockchain systems. In this case, inter-application collaboration could
     be performed as an atomic cross-chain swap, however, such an operation could negatively affect
     the performance of the blockchain. Furthermore, while collaboration between applications,
     e.g., cross-application transactions, should be visible to all applications, the internal data of
     each application, e.g, internal transactions, might be confidential. To support both internal
     and cross-application transactions of collaborating distributed applications, a permissioned
     blockchain system, CAPER [3], is introduced. In CAPER, the blockchain ledger is formed
C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen                                                                 83


as a directed acyclic graph where each application accesses and maintains only its own view
of the ledger including its internal and all cross-application transactions. CAPER also
introduces three consensus protocols to globally order cross-application transactions between
applications.
References
1    Mohammad Javad Amiri, Divyakant Agrawal, and Amr El Abbadi. ParBlockchain: Lever-
     aging Transaction Parallelism in Permissioned Blockchain Systems. In Proceedings of the
     39th IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS’19), pp.
     1337-1347, Dallas, 2019.
2    Mohammad Javad Amiri, Divyakant Agrawal, and Amr El Abbadi. On Sharding Per-
     missioned Blockchains. In Proceedings of the Second IEEE International Conference on
     Blockchain, pp. 282-285, Atlanta, 2019.
3    Mohammad Javad Amiri, Divyakant Agrawal, and Amr El Abbadi. CAPER: A Cross-
     Application Permissioned Blockchain. The 45th International Conference on Very Large
     Data Bases (VLDB’19), PVLDB 12(11), pp. 1385-1398, Los Angeles, 2019.



4.13      Hyperledger Fabric’s Read-Set Conflicts and Conflict-Free
          Replicated Datatypes
Hans-Arno Jacobsen (TUM, DE & Univ. Toronto, CA) and Pezhman Nasirifard (TU
München, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Hans-Arno Jacobsen and Pezhman Nasirifard


Permissioned blockchains such as Hyperledger Fabric provide a robust ecosystem for devel-
oping enterprise and production-grade decentralized applications. However, the additional
latency between the execution and committing the transactions, due to Fabric’s adapted
transaction lifecycle, is a potential scalability bottleneck. This latency can increase the prob-
ability of the occurrence of conflicting transactions, leading to the failure of a high number
of transactions, which increases the application development complexity and decreases the
Fabric’s throughput and availability. We study an approach for integrating Conflict-Free
Replicated Datatypes (CRDTs) to Hyperledger Fabric, to understand how CRDTs can
improve the Fabric’s availability and scalability. CRDTs are abstract data types that can
resolve conflicts automatically in the presence of concurrent updates without coordination.



4.14      FastFabric: Scaling Hyperledger Fabric to 20,000 Transactions
          per Second
Srinivasan Keshav (University of Waterloo, CA)
       License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Srinivasan Keshav
 Joint work of Christian Gorenflo, Stephen Lee, Lukasz Golab, Srinivasan Keshav
Main reference Christian Gorenflo, Stephen Lee, Lukasz Golab, Srinivasan Keshav: “FastFabric: Scaling
               Hyperledger Fabric to 20, 000 Transactions per Second”, CoRR, Vol. abs/1901.00910, 2019.
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.00910


Blockchain technologies are expected to make a significant impact on a variety of industries.
However, one issue holding them back is their limited transaction throughput, especially
compared to modern enterprise database systems. We have re-architected Hyperledger


                                                                                                          19261
84   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


     Fabric to increase transaction throughput to 20,000 transactions per second. We focus on
     performance bottlenecks beyond consensus, proposing architectural changes that reduce
     computation and I/O overhead during transaction ordering and validation. Notably, our
     optimizations are fully plug-and-play and do not require any changes to Hyperledger Fabric.



     4.15      Blockchains and Distributed Databases, a Twin Study
     PingCheng Ruan (National University of Singapore, SG) and Beng Chin Ooi (National
     University of Singapore, SG)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © PingCheng Ruan and Beng Chin Ooi


     Since the rise of Bitcoin, the public are stirring tremendous hype on its underlying blockchain
     technology. Over the years, the scope of blockchains has long been limited to cryptocurrency.
     Since the introduction of the smart contract, blockchains start to support general transactional
     workload, as RDBMs do. Further considering about their distributed nature, a proliferation
     of literature start to draw a parallel between blockchains and distributed databases. However,
     they mainly focus on their distinct properties to applications, but fail to identify their
     common technical aspects.
          In this paper, we perform a joint study on blockchains and distributed databases and
     show that both are a twin of distributed transactional systems, with the former focusing
     on security while the latter on efficiency. On this common basis, we abstract out four
     technical aspects, replication, sharding, transaction management and storage, to lay out
     our comparison. Throughout, we show how the security–efficiency trade-off implicate their
     design goals and architectural choices. Next, we conduct an extensive performance study on
     two blockchains, QUORUM and FABRIC, with three distributed databases, Cockroach DB,
     TiDB and etcd. Our results indicate that even though the performance of blockchain is still
     far behind distributed databases, blockchains may still outperform them in some specific
     transactional workloads.



     4.16      Optical Chips
     Yong Tang (Univ. of Electronic Science &Technology – Chengdu, CN)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Yong Tang


     The current hardware solutions for PoW are CMOS based ASIC chips, which are slow and
     energy-consuming. Considering that the CMOS has met the limits of physics, it’s hard to
     further improve speed. Moreover, it’s hard to avoid energy wasting. In this talk, I introduce
     a design of an optical chip for PoW computations. Most of the PoW can be implemented
     using optical components. It’s promising and attractive to do PoW with optical chips which
     might save energy and enjoy high speed. The possibility of doing PoW with innovative
     solutions such as optical chips might lead to reconsiderations of PoW and the design of
     cryptocurrencies.
C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen                                                            85


4.17      Minimizing Transaction Failures in Permissioned Blockchains
Jeeta Ann Chacko (TU München, DE) and Hans-Arno Jacobsen (TUM, DE & Univ. Toronto,
CA)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Jeeta Ann Chacko and Hans-Arno Jacobsen


Permissioned blockchains have generally two models, namely the order-execute model and
the execute-order-validate model. The order-execute model orders the incoming transactions
based on a consensus algorithm and then executes the transactions on every peer in the block-
chain network. Quorom, Tendermint and Ripple are examples of permissioned blockchains
that follow this model. Hyperledger Fabric, on the other hand, uses the execute-order-validate
model. Here the transactions are initially executed on specific peers known as endorsers which
endorse these transactions. Endorsed transactions are then ordered based on a distributed
consensus algorithm. The ordered transactions are then validated and committed by every
peer. Both the permissioned blockchain models can be compared to database systems in
certain aspects. The distributed consensus algorithms used to order the transactions are used
also in replicated databases to reach consensus. Also, the order-execute-validate model is
similar to the optimistic concurrency control model which has been used in various database
systems. Given these parallels, it is a fruitful research direction to integrate existing database
optimization strategies to improve permissioned blockchains. Our research goal is to minimize
the transaction failures in permissioned blockchains. We are currently focusing on the Hyper-
ledger Fabric implementation. The main types of of transaction failures in Hyperledger Fabric
is MVCC read conflicts (inter block and intra block), phantom reads and endorsement failures.
The first research area we are exploring is to use transaction reordering to reduce the number
of transaction abortions. Transaction reordering is a well-known database optimization
technique for databases that use optimistic concurrency control. We first create a conflict
graph to find the transaction dependencies, then the minimum feedback vertex set is detected
and finally the transactions are topologically sorted to minimize transaction abortion. A
similar approach has been successfully used in [1] with good results. Our work differs from
[1] in one aspect. We used an exact algorithm that has an exponential complexity to detect
the minimum feedback vertex set. This resulted in high latency during the ordering phase
resulting in more inter block MVCC read conflicts. Therefore, we were not able to show
total reduction of transaction failures even though the intra block MVCC read conflicts were
reduced. Currently our focus in on early commit of independent transactions and immediate
re-endorsement of dependent transactions to counter the latency in the ordering phase.
References
1    Ankur Sharma, Felix Martin Schuhknecht, Divya Agrawal, and Jens Dittrich. Blurring
     the Lines between Blockchains and Database Systems: the Case of Hyperledger Fabric. In
     Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD ’19).
     ACM, New York, NY, USA, 105-122.




                                                                                                     19261
86   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


     4.18      Blockchain Goes Green? A Time Energy Performance Study of
               Blockchain on Low Power Systems
     Dumitrel Loghin (National University of Singapore, SG)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Dumitrel Loghin


     Permissionless blockchains are well-known to be energy inefficient, mainly because of their
     compute-intensive Proof-of-Work consensus protocols. On the other hand, the energy profile
     of permissioned blockchains is less studied. With the increasing performance of low-power,
     wimpy devices based on ARM or x86/64 CPUs, our goal is to analyze their time-energy
     performance when running blockchain applications, in comparison with traditional, brawny
     servers. In this work, we select three wimpy systems with power profiles in the range 5-25W,
     namely, (i) an Intel NUC with Intel Core i3 CPU, (ii) a Jetson TX2 with 64-bit ARM CPU
     and (iii) a Raspberry Pi 3 with 32-bit ARM software stack. We run BLOCKBENCH on three
     blockchains, namely, Hyperledger Fabric v0.6, Ethereum and Parity, in a private, permissioned
     setup. We show that low-end wimpy nodes, such as Raspberry Pi 3, are struggling to run
     full-fledged blockchains due to their small memory size and low I/O bandwidth. However,
     higher-performance wimpy nodes, such as Jetson TX2, achieve around 80% and 30% of the
     throughput of Xeon servers for Parity and Hyperledger, respectively, while using 18x and
     23x less energy.



     Applications
     4.19      Blockchain and New Economies
     Feida Zhu (SMU – Singapore, SG)
            License  Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                  © Feida Zhu
              URL https://symphonyprotocol.com/


     Despite its most successful and well-known application for cryptocurrencies, it is our belief
     that the true power of blockchain technology is to unleash the great potential of a whole class
     of virtual assets, whose value are long known but not yet well established. Such assets include
     data, influence, social network, credit, to name a few. As an example, I will demonstrate in
     this talk how blockchain technology can be used to establish individual data as an emerging
     asset class to solve the bottleneck in today’s data-driven economy. We will examine the key
     issues we face today from both the perspectives of the businesses and the individual users,
     and explore how blockchain-based platform could provide both the “trust” and “incentive”
     necessary to foster a self-growing data ecosystem. We introduce “Symphony Protocol”,
     which is a blockchain-based protocol to create an ecosystem that unlocks personal data for
     democratized and personalized intelligence, with privacy by design.
C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen                                                                         87


4.20      Blockchain-based Cross-Site Genomic Dataset Access Audit
Li Xiong (Emory University – Atlanta, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Li Xiong


Genomic data have been collected by different institutions and companies and need to be
shared for broader use. In a cross-site genomic data sharing system, a secure and transparent
access control audit module plays an essential role in ensuring the accountability. The
goal of the iDASH competition 2018 first track is to develop blockchain-based ledgering
solutions to log and query the user activities of accessing genomic datasets across multiple
sites. We designed a Multichain-based log system which can provide a light-weight and
widely compatible module for existing blockchain platforms. The submitted solution won the
third place of the competition. Our method introduces an on-chain indexing data structure
which can be easily adapted to any blockchains that use key-value database as their local
storage.



4.21      Leveraging Decentralized, Secure and Governed Exchange of
          Confidential Information with Permissioned Blockchain
Gabriela Ruberg (Banco Central do Brasil – Rio de Janeiro, BR)
       License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Gabriela Ruberg
 Joint work of Gabriela Ruberg, Marcus Vinicius Cursino, Jose Deodoro, Rafael Sarres, Aristides Cavalcante-Neto


The impressive popularity of blockchain applications, such as Bitcoin, has fostered the
emergence of a variety of software tools to develop decentralized P2P systems. This has
opened up the way for several new possibilities to explore blockchain technology beyond
cryptocurrencies and financial services. In particular, permissioned blockchain networks
(that is, when participants are identified and previously authorized) allow benefiting from
relevant blockchain properties, especially tamper-proof data and non-repudiation, with better
performance.
    Sharing confidential data among autonomous entities in a secure and governed envir-
onment remains a challenge that can benefit from this new blockchain perspective. In
practice, canonical solutions involving either centralized databases or traditional information
integration are not sufficient nor sustainable. They usually require significant up-front efforts
and cannot easily support updates with new datasets and views. Also, they present long
time-to-data (namely, the time for new information to be available), require frequent (and
expensive!) data transfers and lack trustful data governance. In many cases, choosing
trusted third parties is not trivial. Moreover, recent regulation on data protection has further
highlighted the disadvantages of siloed-data solutions.
    This problem is relevant, for instance, in the context of public agencies and regulators,
which need to frequently exchange protected data in order to perform due diligence processes
and to provide integrated public services.
    To tackle these issues, at the Central Bank of Brazil we developed a blockchain platform,
called PIER, to enable entities to share, integrate and exchange sensitive data in a flexible,
secure and governed environment. The PIER platform runs a permissioned blockchain
network where participant nodes can easily discover and publish datasets from off-chain




                                                                                                                  19261
88   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


     data sources, and then share metadata on the available datasets using Open API standards.
     Moreover, PIER nodes can create request models, which are views defined on the available
     datasets, possibly joining them.
         PIER nodes rely on a powerful and agile oracle (namely, a component of the blockchain
     system that can read data stored externally), called Olinda, to create data services based
     on the OData protocol. Nonetheless, PIER nodes can recognize and import any dataset
     description that is Open-API compliant, as well as they can access any data service that
     supports the corresponding dataset RESTful API. By running configurable smart contracts,
     PIER nodes execute request models to retrieve data, and register all data requests (that is,
     the executions of the request models) in the distributed ledger, along with their responses.
         In summary, in the PIER platform, blockchain ledgers are used to store: a decentralized
     catalog of datasets and request models; and an audit trail of all the data requests. Each
     participant is concerned only with the maintenance of its datasets and request models, which
     are automatically combined by the platform to compose the full catalog in the ledger. The
     PIER platform uses both public and private ledgers to enable flexible privacy control of the
     shared information. It explores the concept of dataspaces [1], such that the PIER platform
     provides information integration in a pay-as-you-go approach.
         We developed the PIER platform using the JPMorgan Quorum software, and we are
     running a pilot in production since September of 2018 with the Brazilian financial regulators
     to support due diligence in authorization processes.
         Currently, we are investigating further developments in the PIER platform, such as
     integrating off-chain credentials and datasets versioning in the decentralized catalog. Also,
     we are interested in exploring natural language processing and machine learning to classify
     and match datasets and their embedded data entities, as well as to automatically generate
     request models from datasets based on high-level user specifications.
     References
     1    Michael J. Franklin, Alon Halevy and David Maier. From databases to dataspaces: a new
          abstraction for information management. SIGMOD Record, vol. 34, n. 4, pp. 27-33, 2005.



     4.22      Blockchain Empowered Drug Development Financing
     Yong Tang (Univ. of Electronic Science & Technology – Chengdu, CN)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Yong Tang


     The drug developments are very risky business with very high failure rates and require
     massive investment. The procedure can last for near ten years before a successful drug
     is finally approved by FDA. The high risk makes the drug developers and investors less
     interested to invest in the early stages. To encourage investors to fund the underinvested
     stages requires innovative business model and platforms. In this talk, I’d like to introduce a
     blockchain empowered megafund for drug development financing. Using a blockchain-based
     special purpose vehicle (SPV), we get all stakeholders involved in drug development such as
     developers, SPV, regulators, institutional investors, retail investors, credit rating agencies,
     credit enhancers onto a platform. The data are shared, and the procedures are executed
     as smart contracts. All parties can enjoy better data sharing and enhanced services. More
     importantly, expensive management costs can be saved to allow better investment returns.
C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen                                                                         89


4.23      Turning a Vehicle Into an Economic Platform
Michael Huth (Imperial College London, GB)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Michael Huth
 Joint work of Kwok Cheung, Michael Huth, Laurence Kirk, Leif-Nissen Lundbæk, Rodolphe Marques, Jan
               Petsche
Main reference Kwok Cheung, Michael Huth, Laurence Kirk, Leif-Nissen Lundbæk, Rodolphe Marques, Jan
               Petsche: “Owner-Centric Sharing of Physical Resources, Data, and Data-Driven Insights in Digital
               Ecosystems”, in Proc. of the 24th ACM Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies,
               SACMAT 2019, Toronto, ON, Canada, June 03-06, 2019, pp. 73–81, 2019.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3322431.3326326


Consumer expectations and fierce market competition have led to margins becoming increas-
ingly thinner for manufacturers of consumer and commercial vehicles. These actors realize
now more than ever, that the value of their goods no longer rests on the basic functions
they provide, but rather on the types and qualities of user experiences they can offer: extra
horse-power on demand, ability to share usage, selling data streams to third parties – to
name a few.
    Increasingly, manufacturers are exploring ways to capture this value by turning a vehicle
into a mini-economic platform that facilitates value exchange. Usage of that platform must
be controlled so that value creation and consumption are neither impeded, nor corrupted,
for the tenants that interact on it.
    Our R & D in policy-based access control, distributed ledger technology, and embedded
systems has led to the development of FROST Technology for fully programmable sharing
ecosystems and flexible usage control on a vehicle’s compute systems. FROST can thus
provide consumers with novel, on-demand services whilst enabling manufacturers to tap into
additional revenue streams.



4.24      Distributed Blockchain Systems across Distributed Data Centers
Dilip Krishnaswamy (Reliance Jio Infocomm Ltd., IN)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Dilip Krishnaswamy


Emerging 5G and future networks will be realized leveraging programmable infrastructure
that utilizes VMs and containers across hierarchical / distributed data centers. For transaction
processing in such distributed deployments, distributed blockchain systems will need to be
supported with consideration for data communication latency and bandwidth availability
across these data centers. It would be interesting if a distributed blockchain system can
be designed with lazy decoupling of blockchain ledgers that has a transaction throughput
performance (tps) closer to a performance that is achievable in a local data center, while
meeting the end-to-end latency constraint requirements across the distributed data centers
over which the blockchain system is deployed. In particular, as edge data centers get deployed
to provide support for latency sensitive applications (such as video streaming, Virtual and
Augmented Reality applications, healthcare services, data privacy related services, financial
applications, retail services, telecommunications services, etc.) at the edge of the network,
transaction data will be produced at the edge where such transaction data will need closure
in short time scales. Therefore a distributed producer-consumer blockchain framework with
a scalable microservices-based approach is suggested in [1], where a producer blockchain
sub-network commits transaction data locally, and then eventually commits the data to



                                                                                                                  19261
90   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


     subscribing consumer remote ledgers with additional latency. Thus remote ledgers are only
     eventually consistent in such cases. For applications that are not latency-constrained, one
     can continue processing blockchain transaction data over a wider-area-network with reduced
     throughput. In general, based on the latency and throughput constraints that need to be
     met, one can choose to utilize such edge distributed ledger systems that synchronize lazily
     with remote blockchain ledgers, if desired.
     References
     1    D. Krishnaswamy at al, “A Microservices-based Virtualized Blockchain Framework for
          Emerging 5G Data Networks”, IEEE Global Communications Conference (Globecom) 2019,
          Hawaii, December 2019.



     4.25      Atomic Cross Chain Swaps
     Eric Lo (The Chinese University of Hong Kong, HK)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Eric Lo
      Joint work of Eric Lo, Ziliang Lai, Lucian Ng, Sherman Chow, Yongyun Zhao


     Since the birth of Bitcoins, thousand of new blockchains emerges. Allowing exchanges of
     digital currency and goods between blockchains helps users to enjoy benefits from different
     blockchains and improves the liquidity. To this end, we need a mechanism where multiple
     untrusted parties can exchange assets on different blockchains in an all-or-nothing manner,
     i.e., atomic cross-chain swaps. However, reaching consensus across different blockchains
     is challenging. Two outstanding issues are how to ensure all the blockchains 1) agree on
     swapping on not and 2) faithfully execute the swap protocol.
          A native and common approach is running an exchange center to provide such service.
     However, such an approach violates the decentralized nature of blockchains since it places
     trust in the service provider. A common solution is to use smart contracts to escrow assets.
     Combining with hashed timelocks, a party holding a secret can decide swapping assets or
     not. However, hashed timelocks require synchronous clocks on different blockchains, which is
     missing in most blockchains. In this seminar, I introduced several solutions to attack this
     problem.
     Collaborators: Lucien Ng, Sherman Chow, Yongjun Zhao, ZiLiang Lai



     4.26      Blockchain Analytics
     Murat Kantarcioglu (University of Texas – Dallas, US)
            License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                    © Murat Kantarcioglu
      Joint work of Murat Kantarcioglu, Yulia Gel, Cuneyt Akcora
     Main reference Cuneyt Gurcan Akcora, Yitao Li, Yulia R. Gel, Murat Kantarcioglu: “BitcoinHeist: Topological
                    Data Analysis for Ransomware Detection on the Bitcoin Blockchain”, CoRR, Vol. abs/1906.07852,
                    2019.
               URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.07852


     In this talk, we give an overview of the blockchain data analytics [3] where transactions
     recorded on blockchains such as Bitcoin can be represented as a heterogeneous graph [2]
     and then different graph patterns named chainlets [1] can be mined for predicting crypto-
     currency prices [1] to detecting ransomware activities [4]. In addition, we briefly discuss why
C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen                                                       91


some of the existing graph analytics techniques could not be directly applied for blockchain
transaction graphs.
References
1    Cuneyt Gurcan Akcora, Asim Kumer Dey, Yulia R. Gel, and Murat Kantarcioglu. Fore-
     casting bitcoin price with graph chainlets. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data
     Mining – 22nd Pacific-Asia Conference, PAKDD 2018, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, June
     3-6, 2018, Proceedings, Part III, pages 765–776, 2018.
2    Cuneyt Gurcan Akcora, Yulia R. Gel, and Murat Kantarcioglu. Blockchain: A graph
     primer. CoRR, abs/1708.08749, 2017.
3    Cuneyt Gurcan Akcora, Murat Kantarcioglu, and Yulia R. Gel. Blockchain data analytics.
     In IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, ICDM 2018, Singapore, November
     17-20, 2018, page 6, 2018.
4    Cuneyt Gurcan Akcora, Yitao Li, Yulia R. Gel, and Murat Kantarcioglu. Bitcoinheist:
     Topological data analysis for ransomware detection on the bitcoin blockchain. CoRR,
     abs/1906.07852, 2019.



4.27      Blockchain and Open Source Governance
Juho Lindman (University of Gothenburg, SE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Juho Lindman


Early public blockchain cryptocurrency projects (such as Bitcoin and Ethereum) are licensed
under open source licenses and governed openly in developer communities using governance
mechanisms, practices and tools inherited from the open source world. Early governance
ideals of these blockchain projects followed closely the governance of OSS such as Linux
operating system or Apache Web Server. In my research I am investigating whether earlier
open source software (OSS) research can help us to explain blockchain-related phenomena.
OSS research offers several insights that may be reusable in Blockchain context regarding
how to solve different kinds of tension between voluntary (developer) communities and
profit-seeking commercial companies. The openness of artifact is obviously an interesting
point of departure, but more critical questions may be related to guaranteeing the incentives
of the different actors and matching divergent interests and misaligned incentives. The
re-emergence of governance foundations and forks – splits of the development community
– also raise questions where OSS may provide some analytical tools to raise the analytical
clarity.




                                                                                                19261
92   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


      5      Findings
     5.1     General Conclusions
     Blockchain technology has many connections to database technology, yet the current situation
     is comparable to that in which the database field was in the 1980s: There were some
     commercial systems already, but users had to figure out for themselves how they could
     efficiently and effectively be used. As the seminar has shown, a number of important
     questions still have to be answered for blockchains, including but not limited to the following

          Blockchain scalability and performance w.r.t. transaction throughput is one of the
          core hurdles enroute to a wider application of blockchains. While commercial systems,
          e.g., those run by credit card companies, meanwhile achieve a throughput of 25,000+
          transactions per second, blockchain systems can currently offer 15 to 20 transactions
          per second, due to their high verification effort. As a consequence, participants of a
          permissioned blockchain have to wait a long time for a transaction commit and hence for
          progress in the execution of a smart contract.
          Further development of the Proof of Work (PoW) consensus mechanism as well as
          other optimizations of finding consensus in the presence of transaction failures and w.r.t.
          scalability. Establishing consensus is of central importance since participants have to
          reach an agreement on the execution order of running transactions; this has to be identical
          for every party. The challenge here lies in the fact that while the (potentially large)
          participants in a Permissioned Blockchain are known, there is not necessarily trust among
          them, and some nodes may even be faulty (i.e., Byzantine errors have to be tolerated).
          However, blockchains do not always assume a complete lack of trust of actions among the
          participants, and so some do not get built on Byzantine-tolerating protocols.
          Languages for the specification of smart contracts are needed for an integration of
          blockchains into an existing enterprise IT. In addition, it is currently necessary for
          developers of smart contracts to use languages like Solidity which are low-level.

         There is a lot of differences among the way words and terms are used, and what assump-
     tions are made by the players in this field. Also, there is a wide variation in what aspects
     people are focused on: improving the performance of the protocols, integration with other
     data and computational platforms, understanding the security and fault-tolerance properties,
     applications, organizational aspects of managing the platforms, etc. It is also interesting to
     note that even when a trusted party does exist, there could be organizational constraints
     (budgets, mandates etc.) that lead to adopting a blockchain as a good architecture in practice.



     5.2     More Blockchain Analytics
     We saw that blockchains are used to manage both physical and digital assets, e.g., in finance,
     shipping, or energy (where I work a lot). Blockchains have both strengths and weaknesses,
     most notably performance, compared to other technologies for managing distributed data
     and transactions, e.g., database systems. It is thus interesting to investigate the optimal
     technology mix for certain types of analytics applications. Specifically, it is very interesting
     to be able to analyze the large amounts of data on blockchains. Research questions include
     the following:
        How can blockchains be optimally combined with (existing) database and analytics
        technology for different types of analytical workloads?
C. Mohan, Beng Chin Ooi, and Gottfried Vossen                                                           93


   How can data in blockchains be analyzed in powerful and scalable ways, like for data in
   normal databases?
   Which new, specific types of analyses are needed for blockchain data?



5.3    Virtual Assets
Blockchain technology can be used to establish a whole class of virtual assets, such as
individual data, by providing both the “trust” and “incentive” necessary to foster a self-
growing value ecosystem. In particular, one can explore more on using blockchain to solve
the bottleneck in today’s data-driven economy – how we initiate and push along “Symphony
Protocol” to create an ecosystem that unlocks personal data for democratized and personalized
intelligence, with privacy by design. The domain presents a wealth of interesting research
questions, such as data pricing and trading.



5.4    Areas for Future Work
Among the activities for future work in the area of (permissioned) blockchains, participants
of the seminar suggested the following:
    Foundation of an Academic Research Special Interest Group: The goal of this group
    is to be a forum for academic researchers in Hyperledger. We want researchers that
    are interested in Hyperledger or Hyperledger-related topics to be able to interact and
    collaborate on problems. This might take the form of presentations, discussions, or
    collaborative working sessions. We also will incorporate bidirectional communication
    with developers and engineers.
    Writing of a “Blockchain Manifesto” which helps clarifying the terminology used in this
    area and sorts out as well as organizes the main directions of development by which the
    field is characterized. Several participants have expressed their interest in contributing to
    such an endeavor.

Acknowledgements We want to thank the Dagstuhl staff for providing an environment
that truly encourages scientific exchange and discussions and that cares for the guests in an
unmatched way.




                                                                                                    19261
94   19261 – Distributed Computing with Permissioned Blockchains and Databases


             Participants
       Divyakant Agrawal                 Srinivasan Keshav                 Beng Chin Ooi
     University of California –         University of Waterloo, CA       National University of
     Santa Barbara, US                    Shahan Khatchadourian          Singapore, SG
       Alysson Neves Bessani            Toronto, US                        Torben Bach Pedersen
     University of Lisbon, PT                                            Aalborg University, DK
                                          Dilip Krishnaswamy
       Jeeta Ann Chacko                 Reliance Jio Infocomm Ltd., IN
     TU München, DE                                                       Dennis Przytarski
                                         Juho Lindman                    Universität Stuttgart, DE
       Lei Chen
                                        University of Gothenburg, SE
     HKUST – Kowloon, HK                                                   PingCheng Ruan
       Mariano P. Consens                 Eric Lo                        National University of
     University of Toronto, CA          The Chinese University of        Singapore, SG
                                        Hong Kong, HK
       Tien Tuan Anh Dinh                                                  Gabriela Ruberg
     Singapore University of              Alexander Löser                Banco Central do Brasil –
     Technology and Design, SG          Beuth Hochschule für Technik –   Rio de Janeiro, BR
                                        Berlin, DE
       Alan Fekete                                                         Mohammad Sadoghi
     The University of Sydney, AU         Dumitrel Loghin                Hamedani
       Michael J. Franklin              National University of           University of California –
     University of Chicago, US          Singapore, SG                    Davis, US
       Vincent Gramoli                   Bernhard Mitschang
                                                                           Yong Tang
     The University of Sydney, AU       Universität Stuttgart, DE
                                                                         Univ. of Electronic Science &
       Krishna P. Gummadi                 C. Mohan                       Technology – Chengdu, CN
     MPI-SWS – Saarbrücken, DE          IBM Almaden Center –
                                        San Jose, US                      Gottfried Vossen
       Michael Huth                                                      Universität Münster, DE
     Imperial College London, GB          Hart Montgomery
       Hans-Arno Jacobsen               Fujitsu Labs of America Inc. –    Li Xiong
     TUM, DE & Univ. Toronto, CA        Sunnyvale, US                    Emory University – Atlanta, US
       Murat Kantarcioglu                Pezhman Nasirifard                Feida Zhu
     University of Texas – Dallas, US   TU München, DE                   SMU – Singapore, SG
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 19262

Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through
Space
Edited by
Alyssa A. Goodman1 , Charles D. Hansen2 , Daniel Weiskopf3 , and
Anders Ynnerman4

1    Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, US, agoodman@cfa.harvard.edu
2    University of Utah – Salt Lake City, US, hansen@cs.utah.edu
3    Universität Stuttgart, DE, daniel.weiskopf@visus.uni-stuttgart.de
4    Linköping University, SE, anders.ynnerman@liu.se


      Abstract
This report documents the program and outcomes of the Dagstuhl Seminar 19262 “Astrographics:
Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space”. The seminar consisted of introductory talks,
which are presented first in this documents, followed by discussions in break-out groups whose
results were reported back to all participants after each break-out session.
Seminar June 23–26, 2019 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/19262
2012 ACM Subject Classification Applied computing → Astronomy, Human-centered comput-
   ing → Visualization, Human-centered computing → Visualization toolkits
Keywords and phrases astronomy, data visualization, immersive environments, planetariums,
   space exploration
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.9.6.95
Edited in cooperation with Alexander Bock



 1      Executive Summary
Alexander Bock (Linköping University, SE & University of Utah, US)
Alyssa A. Goodman (Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, US)
Charles D. Hansen (University of Utah – Salt Lake City, US)
Daniel Weiskopf (Universität Stuttgart, DE)
Anders Ynnerman (Linköping University, SE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Alexander Bock, Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders
                Ynnerman


For the majority of human existence, the visual language has been successfully used to
communicate complex ideas that span across borders of knowledge, experience, age, gender,
culture, and time. These aspects also make it an effective form of expressing workflows
in scientific data analysis as well as the communication of scientific discoveries to broad
audiences. The Dagstuhl Seminar 19262 brought together researchers from computer science,
content producers, learning and communication experts, and domain experts from astronomy
and astrophysics to define the emerging field of interactive visualization of space exploration
and astronomy, referred to as Astrographics. This seminar played an important role in
the ongoing process of removing the clear division between using visualization to enable
scientific discoveries by subject-matter experts (exploratory visualization) and using visual

            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 9, Issue 6, pp. 95–124
Editors: Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
96   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


     representations to explain and communicate the results of such exploratory science to a
     greater, general audience (explanatory visualization). Designing the available visualization
     tools to serve both roles at the same time increases the overlap between these two aspects
     of visualization and allows scientists to better explain their findings and, at the same time,
     enables the general public to use similar tools for their own, guided, discovery and actively
     participate in the scientific process. The field of astronomy and astrophysics has been at
     the forefront of this process since the beginning as it is a primary example of a domain in
     which exploratory and explanatory visualizations have served important but distinct roles.
     For this reason, astrographics was chosen as the domain in which to explore the challenges
     and opportunities that arise when combining exploratory and explanatory techniques. The
     bulk of work in this seminar occurred in focussed break-out sessions that reported their
     findings back to the group and opened up the topics for joint discussions. Topics of these
     break-out sessions included discussions on better integration of software tools, improvements
     of analysis tools, preparing astrographics software packages to improve the quality of public
     presentations, the ability of sharing presentations both in spatially distant locations as well
     as saving them for later playback. Finally, there was a working group to work on a decadal
     white paper for astronomy [1].
     References
     1    Jacqueline K. Faherty, Mark SubbaRao, Ryan Wyatt, Anders Ynnerman, Neil deGrasse
          Tyson, Aaron Geller, Maria Weber, Philip Rosenfield, Wolfgang Steffen, Gabriel Stoeckle,
          Daniel Weiskopf, Marcus Magnor, Peter K. G. Williams, Brian Abbott, Lucia Marchetti,
          Thomas Jarrrett, Jonathan Fay, Joshua Peek, Or Graur, Patrick Durrell, Derek Homeier,
          Heather Preston, Thomas Müller, Johanna M Vos, David Brown, Paige Giorla Godfrey,
          Emily Rice, Daniella Bardalez Gagliuffi, Alexander Bock. IDEAS: Immersive Dome Exper-
          iences for Accelerating Science. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05383, 2019
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                                 97


 2      Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Alexander Bock, Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and
  Anders Ynnerman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95

Overview of Talks
     Developing Tools for Increased Access to Astrophysics in OpenSpace
     Brian Abbott . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
     Astrographics: Introduction of NAOJ and OAO / IAU
     Hidehiko Agata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
     Introductory Presentation – Linköping University
     Emil Axelsson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
     Bringing together professional astronomy and EPO visualization software tools
     Thomas Boch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
     OpenSpace – Visualizing the universe
     Alexander Bock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
     David Brown
     Dave Brown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
     Exploring the Galaxy Using Virtual Reality
     Melvyn Davies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
     Planetariums as a Research Tool
     Carter Emmart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
     Introductory Presentation – American Museum of Natural History
     Jackie Faherty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
     CosmoScout VR: Interactivity and Immersion for Space Data Exploration and
     Mission Planning
     Andreas Gerndt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
     Astrographics, Exploranation, and Dagstuhl
     Alyssa A. Goodman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
     Plenary Astrographics Presentation
     Charles D. Hansen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
     Tom Kwasnitschka
     Tom Kwasnitschka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
     OpenSpace Amplification for VR and Other Disciplines
     David H. Laidlaw . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
     Marcus Magnor
     Marcus A. Magnor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
     Thomas Müller
     Thomas Müller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
     Josh Peek
     Joshua Eli Goldston Peek . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109




                                                                                                       19262
98   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


       Lucian Pleasea
       Lucian Plesea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
       Sebastian Ratzenböck
       Sebastian Ratzenböck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
       Thomas Robitaille
       Thomas P. Robitaille . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
       Introductory Presentations
       Filip Sadlo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
       Wolfgang Steffen
       Wolfgang Steffen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
       Introductory Presentation – Planetarium of the Natural History Museum Vienna
       Gabriel Stöckle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
       Data to Dome
       Mark Subbarao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
       Interactive planetarium visualization
       Edwin A. Valentijn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
       Visualization, Relativity, and Astrographics
       Daniel Weiskopf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
       Astrographics in Context
       Ryan Wyatt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
       Exploranation – A New Science Communication Paradigm
       Anders Ynnerman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115

     Break-out Groups
       Domecasting + Authoring Tools
       Alexander Bock, Brian Abbott, Charles D. Hansen, and Wolfgang Steffen . . . . . . 116
       Quo vadis Astrovisualization software?
       Alexander Bock, Tom Kwasnitschka, David H. Laidlaw, and Thomas Müller . . . . 117
       Towards Augmented Reality Astronomy Research in the mid 2020s
       Melvyn Davies, Dave Brown, Alyssa A. Goodman, and Joshua Eli Goldston Peek . 118
       Decadal White Paper: Immersive Dome Experiences for Accelerating Science
       Jackie Faherty, Brian Abbott, Alexander Bock, Dave Brown, David H. Laidlaw,
       Marcus A. Magnor, Thomas Müller, Joshua Eli Goldston Peek, Wolfgang Steffen,
       Gabriel Stöckle, Mark Subbarao, Daniel Weiskopf, Ryan Wyatt, and Anders Ynnerman119
       Presentation & Authoring
       Jackie Faherty, Brian Abbott, Hidehiko Agata, Alexander Bock, Dave Brown, Charles
       D. Hansen, Tom Kwasnitschka, Wolfgang Steffen, Gabriel Stöckle, Mark Subbarao,
       Ryan Wyatt, and Anders Ynnerman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
       Software Integration
       Alyssa A. Goodman, Emil Axelsson, Thomas Boch, Carter Emmart, Andreas Gerndt,
       David H. Laidlaw, Thomas Müller, Thomas P. Robitaille, and Edwin A. Valentijn 120
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                               99


   How do we, planetaria, get better together and share / stream content?
   Edwin A. Valentijn, Carter Emmart, Jackie Faherty, Mark Subbarao, and Ryan
   Wyatt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
   Support for Analysis Tools
   Anders Ynnerman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
   Virtual Presenters
   Anders Ynnerman and Carter Emmart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124




                                                                                                     19262
100   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


       3     Overview of Talks
      3.1    Developing Tools for Increased Access to Astrophysics in
             OpenSpace
      Brian Abbott (AMNH – New York, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Brian Abbott


      I attended the AstroGraphics meeting in order to discuss the various ways in which we can
      advance OpenSpace for all types of users. Developing and disseminating astrophysics data
      within OpenSpace is the overarching goal, for researchers and the public alike, and I wish to
      discuss the methods to achieve these goals. The result of these advancements will open up
      access to scientists, who will explore their data in new, insightful ways, and to the public,
      who will be inspired by their immersion in the universe and enhance their interest in STEM
      fields.

      Presentation Tools
      Methods of creating so called Show Kits that include information for training purposes as
      well as for use in production and storytelling is a large part of opening access to power
      users. Kits that include flightpaths, documentation, annotationed flights embedded within
      interactive timelines and overlaid in a video version of the content, and an audio component
      will serve to provide tools for production and live programming, but will also be critical for
      training presenters.

      Showlettes
      Show Kits can be composed of individual showlettes, which are bite-sized stories that contain
      a beginning, middle, and end, but are confined to one action of concept. For example,
      exploring the Apollo 11 landing site may be one showlette. Or, the radio sphere with the
      exoplanets may be one showlette. These showlettes could be combined to form longer shows
      that take on a broader narrative. Showlettes could be tied together by their beginning and
      end points, or perhaps these points are adjustable. Some OpenSpace development would be
      required to make this possible.

      Authoring Tools
      Authoring Tools are an immediate need for OpenSpace in order to increase access for power
      users and data holders. The goal is to transform OpenSpace from “under-the-hood,” script-
      based access to more of a “plug-and-play” model, where the user does not need to know or
      interact with the underlying scripting language. A data questionnaire could be developed to
      accommodate the import process and generate the underlying scripts on the fly. Tools such
      as these will cater to all levels of groups who wish to go beyond the distributed offerings of
      OpenSpace and build their own datasets, and will lower the bar for researchers and power
      users to use openSpace to interact with their own data and develop stories around those
      data.
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                           101


Domecasting Network
In order to build a more cohesive community, we want to develop a streaming network so
that users are aware of streaming and domecasting events and can plan for them. Building
a domecasting network will allow high-end scientific data to reach audiences all over the
world. And, such a network will foster more communication between users and enhance the
resources available for everyone.



3.2    Astrographics: Introduction of NAOJ and OAO / IAU
Hidehiko Agata (NAOJ – Tokyo, JP)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Hidehiko Agata


Introduction of 4D2U project: Our universe encompasses all of space and time. The most
immense cosmic structures – galaxies gathered into clusters and superclusters – dominate the
universe everywhere we look. Astronomers constantly work to understand these structures
bit by bit. The Four- Dimensional Digital Universe (4D2U) project is an outgrowth of their
search for cosmic understanding. The project’s goal is to visualize astronomical data in a
way that helps watchers feel as if they are witnessing the unfolding of our universe. “Four
dimensions” refer to the three dimensions of space and the one dimension of time embedded in
their data. "Digital" refers to computer graphics visualizations of digital data. The resulting
acronym is “4D2U”, and it is also astronomy’s way of saying “4D to you”. The 4D2U is a
long-term project by the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan (NAOJ). We plan
to continue improvements in our visualization data library and further development of new
visualization platforms, including domed and portable theaters. We hope you’ll have the
opportunity to experience 4D2U. The project hosts public showings every two months at the
NAOJ headquarters in Mitaka, Japan.
https://4d2u.nao.ac.jp/english/index.html
https://4d2u.nao.ac.jp/html/program/mitaka/index_E.html
    Introduction of OAO/IAU: The IAU Office for Astronomy Outreach (OAO) is IAU’s hub
for coordinating its public outreach activities around the world. The OAO coordinates and
and supports worldwide efforts to enhance public knowledge, appreciation and education of
astronomy and related sciences. The OAO promotes public awareness of the IAU activities
and coordinate and manage the IAU international outreach campaigns. The OAO maintain
and coordinate the IAU network of National Outreach Coordinators (NOC), who will be
responsible for the implementation of the proposed IAU outreach initiatives at national level
and for maintaining the relationship with the national communities of amateur astronomers.
The OAO act as the central information hub for disseminating IAU related public outreach
activities around the world, as a facilitator for best practices, providing guidance and
delivering regular information about ongoing activities in astronomy communication.
https://www.iau.org/public/
https://www.iau-100.org/




                                                                                                  19262
102   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


      3.3    Introductory Presentation – Linköping University
      Emil Axelsson (Linköping University, SE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Emil Axelsson


      I am a Research Engineer at Linköping University and one of the software developers of the
      OpenSpace software. Me and my colleagues have long had the vision of building a tool that
      can be equally helpful for public science communication as it is for scientific visualization
      and visual data analysis. While some of these visions have been turned into reality over the
      years, the aspect of using our virtual reality representation of the universe as a science tool
      have been one of the more fuzzy ones. After this Dagstuhl seminar, I no longer feel that this
      goal is fuzzy: Instead, it is clear that there are several of us who share this vision, and that
      our ideas are coming together into a new way of using astronomy tools and visualization
      software together to analyze data and communicate science.
          When I arrived to this Dagstuhl seminar, I was excited about the opportunity to discuss
      connecting OpenSpace to analysis tools used by astronomers. It was amazing to meet the
      brains behind prominent astronomy software packages, such as Glue, Astropy, and Aladin. I
      was thrilled by how we shared this common vision and were able to sit together for a few
      hours and create a first proof of concept of how we link our tools together. I’m very excited
      to continue working together with the people I’ve met here, to create new ways to visualize
      astronomy data for science and communication!



      3.4    Bringing together professional astronomy and EPO visualization
             software tools
      Thomas Boch (Université de Strasbourg – Strasbourg, FR)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Thomas Boch


      I am a research engineer at CDS (Centre de Donnés astronomiques de Strasbourg) since 2002.
      My activities for 17 years have involved the development of software tools and systems to
      enable efficient access to the reference data we host at CDS, through Virtual Observatory . In
      the last decade and with the advent of large astronomical surveys like Gaia or Pan-STARRS,
      the Big Data has become another dimension to take into account. We have developed a
      multi-resolution approach to this challenge, supported by the HiPS (Hierarchical Progressive
      Surveys) format, which has gained traction as more than 600 astronomical surveys (mostly
      images) are available as HiPS collections (as of June 2019).
          While developing the Aladin applications, I was also attracted by the nice aesthetics
      presented by the planetarium softwares. This seminar has been a great opportunity for me
      to learn about up to date tools and techniques used for education and public outreach in
      domes and planetariums. I have been particularly impressed and inspired by the potential of
      OpenUniverse, especially for the exploration of planetary surfaces.
          During the break-out sessions, I created a prototype connecting Aladin Lite to OpenSpace,
      as a proof of concept. This has showed some interesting potential and interest. More generally,
      collaboration between the professional astronomy visualisation and the EPO/planetarium
      communities is of mutual benefit and I feel very grateful for having the opportunity to
      participate in this seminar and make useful connections with people I hope to work with in
      the future.
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                             103


3.5    OpenSpace – Visualizing the universe
Alexander Bock (Linköping University, SE & University of Utah, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Alexander Bock


I presented an overview of the OpenSpace platform that aims to provide an astrovisualization
toolkit to visualize the entire universe. These visualizations cover a large range of datasets as
well as scales, ranging from millimeter sized rocks on Mars all the way out to the edge of the
observable universe. The software is catered to serve three distinct target audiences: The
public can be reached both through the use of presentations as well as self-directed discovery
in exhibition spaces. A second target audience is visualization researchers that can use a
common software framework to conduct novel research. A third target audience are domain
scientists that can use the same software to conduct their own research as is used for public
presentations, for example planetarium domes. I presented a selection of previous works that
have already been published or shown to the public. Many of the presented examples were
the result of Master thesis works, of which I exemplified three in the initial presentation.
These examples covered the flyby of the New Horizons spacecraft at Pluto in 2015, volumetric
rendering of Coronal Mass Ejections from the Sun, all the way to representations of the
traffic on the NASA Deep Space Network. Concluding the talk, I showed institutions that
already make use of OpenSpace in public programming and provide food for through on how
we can continue the development of astrographics tools to increase their reach, particularly
in the case of interaction techniques.



3.6    David Brown
Dave Brown (Microsoft Research – Redmond, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Dave Brown


My research interests focus around data visualization in plan and mixed reality, using devices
large and small, and with an emphasis on storytelling. I have also long had an interest in
astrographics, having met Curtis Wong through a project I was working on to visualize
the solar system and its surroundings on table-top form factor devices. I subsequently
worked for Curtis at Microsoft Research, and got to know other members of the team behind
WorldWideTelecsope, and key visionaries in this area such as Alyssa Goodman. This Dagstuhl
was a perfect intersection between my current research in data-driven storytelling and desire
to do more with astronomical data. It gave me both an opportunity to share some of my
work with the other participants, and for me to learn from experts in the astrographics and
full-dome experiences domain. After so many interesting discussions and much brainstorming
with the other attendees, I am convinced that full-dome data-exploration and storytelling
is an un-tapped opportunity for any data-driven research and communication, and that it
overlaps with my current research in exploring how collaboration and mixed reality can
benefit data visualization. This Dagstuhl was therefore an unprecedented opportunity for
me to forge new networks with people with similar interests but who worked in fields that I
would not otherwise have had the opportunity to meet. I am looking forward to future work
with these new-found colleagues.




                                                                                                    19262
104   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


      3.7    Exploring the Galaxy Using Virtual Reality
      Melvyn Davies (Lund Observatory, SE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Melvyn Davies


      I am a dynamic theoretical astrophysicist who studies the evolution of exotic objects (planetary
      systems, black holes and explosive events) in crowded places. How does one explore the rich
      diversity of stellar systems? This is an enormous visualisation challenge. In particular in
      Lund we are exploring how one can use Virtual Reality to explore rich stellar data sets. Using
      Unity we are learning how to interact with point cloud data: the positions and velocities
      of an ensemble of stars where each point also possess other attributes such as stellar age
      and chemical abundance. Our goal is to employ this technology for scientific discovery
      with observational data from the ESA Gaia astrometric mission together with outputs of
      computer simulations of galaxy formation. During the seminar, we discussed a broad range of
      important issues concerning the use of Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality. The diversity
      of the knowledge present was enormously helpful in understanding the future prospects and
      a way forward.



      3.8    Planetariums as a Research Tool
      Carter Emmart (AMNH – New York, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Carter Emmart


      For twenty years I have been with the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH)
      helping to craft public demonstration of our state of knowledge about the universe using data
      visualization. The planetarium as a hemispherical projected image of the night sky with its
      attendant motions, movements of celestial objects, simulated views from different latitudes
      and times across the precession cycle has from the start been accurate science visualization,
      portrayed two dimensionally. Research trends in immersive data visualization explored in the
      last two decades of the twentieth century became possible to display in planetarium domes
      at the turn of the Millennium when AMNH renovated the Hayden Planetarium, recasting
      its presentations from the tradition of Sky Shows toward new programming termed Space
      Shows using data visualization to portray the universe accurately in three dimensions. In
      both cases of the traditional 2D and modern 3D display capabilities of the planetarium,
      the primary purpose has been to service public understanding through informal education.
      Planetariums have been on the receiving end of science as an effective demonstration tool.
      While modern capability of 3D interactive display affords data exploration, aspirations of
      using planetariums as scientific tools of discovery have to date remained a noble vision. The
      June, 2019 Dagstuhl Astrographics seminar afforded a very unique, narrow time window
      for a potent mix of talent across the field that forged an exploration of data flow using
      open tools (OpenSpace, Glue, CDS Aladin) bridging scientific investigation directly into
      planetarium display with its capacity for audiences numbering in the hundreds. I raised a
      question at the conclusion of Astrographics if what we were seeing was useful to the scientists
      represented in the meeting, and their resounding response was yes is was. Going forward,
      this new beginning will develop this trend further which holds great potential for the field of
      data visualization supporting scientific investigation in planetariums worldwide.
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                            105


3.9     Introductory Presentation – American Museum of Natural History
Jackie Faherty (AMNH – New York, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Jackie Faherty


I am a senior scientist and senior education manager jointly in the departments of Astrophysics
and Education at the American Museum of Natural History. Scientifically I am interested in
exploring questions of the tail end of the star formation process. I am specifically focused
on studying the fundamental properties of low mass stars, brown dwarfs, and exoplanets.
My research is greatly influenced by big data surveys such as ESA’s Gaia observatory. In
addition I have found that large astronomical data sets are best investigated scientifically
using visualization tools as an aid. This has brought me to the Astrographics workshop as I
am in constant search of software packages that will help with interpreting scientific content.
As I work in the planetarium world, I am exposed constantly to visualization tools for the
purpose of education – reaching the general public. I see an important collision in today’s
technologically advanced world between the scientific agenda of researchers in the era of big
data and the sophisticated tools being used today to educate and inspire the general public.



3.10      CosmoScout VR: Interactivity and Immersion for Space Data
          Exploration and Mission Planning
Andreas Gerndt (DLR – Braunschweig, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Andreas Gerndt


Although the German Aerospace Center (DLR) is not directly addressing astrophysics, many
institutes of DLR are on earth system modeling, planetary research, atmospheric research,
space mission planning, space operation, on-orbit-servicing, space situational awareness,
air-borne observation, and sensor-data related applications. The observation and simulation
data can become extremely large. Additionally, heterogeneous data exploitation requires
software solutions which are distributed, scalable, and reliable. On the Dagstuhl seminar, I
could give in insight into DLR’s manifold space activities and the interactive data exploitation
software we have been developing. Already 10 years ago, the DLR Institute of Simulation
and Software Technology realized the need to process the huge High-Resolution Stereo
Camera (HRSC) dataset on a global scale on a sphere in virtual environments. HRSC
is a DLR camera sensor on the Mars Express orbiter capturing stripes of the surface of
Mars with extraordinarily precise specification of slopes. An accurate data exploration
requires a distortion free mapping also on the poles and appropriate tools for measuring,
annotation, and navigation. To close gaps between stripes, arbitrary sensor datasets can
be merged on the fly to one data product. Virtual reality devices have been integrated to
sense the height-field for accurate measurements and to deform the terrain interactively for
reconstructing 3D fault displacements. Autonomous crater detection based moon lander
required simulators with physical-based Moon rendering. And for Earth observation data, the
interactive terrain renderer has been extended with approaches for atmospheric volumetric
and time-depended data visualization. Climate research datasets exceeds Peta-bytes of data,
so that the framework has been extended to remote high-performance post-processing on
supercomputers. And finally, space mission planning demanded the visualization of the whole




                                                                                                   19262
106   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


      solar system with accurate time-dependent trajectory specifications based on SPICE kernels.
      High-resolution star maps allow space system simulators which rely on star trackers. On-orbit
      servicing simulation of spacecraft requires photo-realistic rendering of the scenario in space.
      All these features are now available in the open-source software framework CosmoScout
      VR. It works as a stand-alone application. With its plug-in concept, it additionally enables
      the extension of arbitrary functionalities. But as it comes as a set of libraries, tailored
      applications for specific purpose can be implemented as well. With the basic VR software
      layer, it always scales from single laptop application to CAVE-like immersive multi-projection
      systems. And finally, it is platform independent and supports Windows and Linux operating
      systems. Thus, CosmoScout VR is available for all who are interested in a holistic solution
      to explore the solar system in 3D and time. Its approaches can clearly contribute to the
      astrophysics community. It was great to meet all the people at Dagstuhl to discuss their
      requirements in visualizing astrophysical data and to figure out opportunities of interactive
      exploration.



      3.11      Astrographics, Exploranation, and Dagstuhl
      Alyssa A. Goodman (Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Alyssa A. Goodman


      For the first many years of my professional career, I was lonely living at the intersection
      of astrophysics and data visualization. Even when I attended my first “astro-visualization”
      meeting back at KICP in Chicago in 2005, I felt like an outsider, as I was not part of the
      planetarium community where most research scientists (like me) felt “visualization” and
      “visual communication” belonged. At that Chicago meeting, I presented my group’s first
      attempts to use Medical Imaging software on Astronomy data, under the “Astronomical
      Medicine” project at Harvard’s Initiative in Innovative Computing. At the same meeting,
      Curtis Wong presented his ideas about how to create what ultimately became WorldWide
      Telescope (WWT, worldwidtelescope.org) , which I was later honored to help Curtis and
      Jonathan Fay create.
          By now, over a decade past the release of WWT, my collaborators and I have created the
      open-source glue visualization environment (glueviz.org), which lets users “glue” together
      data sets, visualizations, and software tools, including WWT. Interest in, and usage of, glue
      from all quarters of astronomy and the broader scientific world is on the rise, which thrills
      me. My colleagues in Astronomy have, over just the past five years or so, rapidly come
      to hunger for visualization tools and innovations, thanks to the advent of ever-larger and
      more complex data sets, as well as more sophisticated statistical approaches, all of which
      essentially require visualization to understand.
          Here at Dagstuhl, I witnessed a transformation. Before the meeting, WWT was the only
      full-featured “sky browser” available in glue via its plug-in architecture. But now, after just
      2 days of discussion and hacking, the research and planetarium communities in astronomy
      have come together to link up their “exploratory” and “explanatory” tools into amazing
      “exploranation” mash-ups that will transform how the public experiences real data, and how
      and where researchers view their data. For example, as a result of our extensive discussions
      and real-time hacking/collaboration, Aladin (a European program widely used in Astronomy
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                              107


research), as well as glue, can now both communicate with OpenSpace (an immersive 3D
data-driven visualization environment used in the planetarium community). My astronomy
colleagues and I have already–just in the last day of the Dagstuhl meeting–begun to use
these newly-linked tools to explore and discover new, 4D-spacetime, relationships between
stars and gas in the Milky Way.
    Back-and-forth travel from “exploration” to “explanation” in visualization holds tremend-
ous promise for both professionals and the wider public’s understanding of science, and this
first Astrographics Dagstuhl Seminar will stand out in the future as key to enabling this
two-way travel!



3.12      Plenary Astrographics Presentation
Charles D. Hansen (University of Utah – Salt Lake City, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Charles D. Hansen


I am a faculty member of the Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute at the University of
Utah. One of the primary application foci of the SCI Institute has continued to be biomedicine;
however, SCI Institute researchers also address challenging computational problems in a
variety of application domains, including materials, manufacturing, defense, and energy. SCI
Institute research interests generally fall into the areas of scientific visualization, scientific
computing and numerics, image processing and analysis, and scientific software environments.
SCI Institute researchers also apply many of the above computational techniques within their
own particular scientific and engineering subspecialties, such as fluid dynamics, biomechanics,
electrophysiology, bioelectric fields, parallel computing, inverse problems, and neuroimaging.
A particular hallmark of SCI Institute research is the development of innovative and robust
software packages, including the SCIRun scientific problem-solving environment, Seg3D,
ImageVis3D, VisTrails, ViSUS, Cleaver, and map3d. All these packages are broadly available
to the scientific community under open-source licensing and are supported by web pages,
documentation, and user groups.
    My research area is in scientific visualization. Volume visualization has been one of the
areas where I have made contributions. Bring better illumination models to bring out more
structure in 3D data, providing multi-dimensional transfer functions to better examine data
and methods for large-scale rendering and analysis. I have incorporated research results into
large-scale software projects. One such project is FluoRender. FluoRender is an interactive
rendering tool for confocal microscopy data visualization. It combines the rendering of
multi-channel volume data and polygon mesh data, where the properties of each dataset can
be adjusted independently and quickly. The tool is designed especially for neurobiologists,
allowing them to better visualize confocal data from fluorescently-stained brains, but it is
also useful for other biological samples.
    In Astrographics, I have made contributions from methods to visualize galaxy formation in
collaboration with Elena D’Onghia (UWisc/Harvard) to methods for visualization of magnetic
pole reversal with Ben Brown (UWisc). For the future of Astrographics, the combination of
techniques, methods, and tools to aid in the exploration and explanation of scientific data is
important. I participate in the OpenSpace project which brings NASA mission, astronomy
data, and astrophysics data to the public through planetarium presentations.




                                                                                                     19262
108   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


      3.13      Tom Kwasnitschka
      Tom Kwasnitschka (GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, DE)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Tom Kwasnitschka


      As a marine geologist, my research focuses on the exploration of oceanic volcanism down
      to extreme depths of several kilometres. Since most of such research is carried out using
      remotely operated diving robots, we heavily rely on remote sensing, manipulation and
      powerful visualization tools to build situational awareness of abyssal environments.
          My work aims to reflect the entire value-added chain of the scientific process. Formulating
      research questions based in physical volcanology, I entertain projects for the design and
      construction of deep ocean cameras and optical sensing equipment such as LED lighting. My
      processing method of choice is photogrammetry because the high-resolution, color re-creation
      of underwater outcrops caters to the first-person based interpretation schemes of classic
      field geology. In order to do so, the photogrammetric models need to be adequately viewed
      and manipulated in spatially immersive environments, which my group designs, builds and
      operates. We focus on domes, drawing from the developments in the planetarium field
      throughout the last 15 years, as domes have a number of advantages when it comes to
      mult-viewer situations.
          With a background in the planetarium business, my ties to astrovisualization are explained.
      I believe that even localized visualizations should be nested in the global perspective of a
      virtual globe, and that such a virtual globe is naturally part of a system that also simulates
      the proximal and distal cosmic phenomena. Therefore, I try to lobby for a broadening of
      scope and capabilities of astrovisualization software packages such as the ones used for domes
      and planetariums, especially towards the accomodation of earth science based data sets.
      This must also come with a refinement of tools to allow manipulation and agile interaction
      with the data behind a simulation, since exploratory visualization should always offer a
      quantitative, added value to the scientific process. Thus, and lastly, it is important to install
      measures to quantify the (hopefully positive) impact of visualization efforts to sustain and
      broaden its acceptance.



      3.14      OpenSpace Amplification for VR and Other Disciplines
      David H. Laidlaw (Brown University – Providence, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © David H. Laidlaw


      My research interests are in supporting scientific research with visualization and computation.
      I study efficacy of visualization methods and devices, with a recent focus on virtual reality
      displays. In this meeting I would like to explore how to make astrographics tools like
      OpenSpace work on more visualization devices. I am also interested in how ocean and bay
      science on earth might be supported by astrographics tools and how new data types (eg,
      lidar and ocean/bay sampling) might be incorporated.
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                            109


3.15      Marcus Magnor
Marcus A. Magnor (TU Braunschweig, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Marcus A. Magnor


Humans have been fascinated by astrophysical phenomena since prehistoric times. But
while the measurement and image acquisition devices have evolved enormously by now,
many restrictions still apply when trying to estimate the three-dimensional structure of
extraterrestrial objects. The most notable limitation is our confined vantage point, disallowing
us to observe distant objects from different points of view. In an interdisciplinary German-
Mexican research project with Wolfgang Steffen, partially funded by German DFG and
Mexican CONACyT, we evaluated different approaches for the reconstruction of plausible
three-dimensional models of planetary nebulae. The team was comprised of astrophysicists
working on planetary nebula morphology and computer scientists working in the field of
constrained reconstruction and physically correct rendering of astrophysical objects.



3.16      Thomas Müller
Thomas Müller (Haus der Astronomie – Heidelberg, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Thomas Müller


The main task of the Haus der Astronomie is public outreach for the Max Planck Institute for
Astronomy and public outreach of astronomy in general. We offer regular series of lectures,
guided tours, workshops, teacher training and a lot more. My research interests cover
relativistic visualization and any other kind of visualization in astronomy and astrophysics.
My daily work is to help MPIA scientists in any questions of visualization, develop standalone
exploratory and explanatory visualization applications for scientists, public outreach, and
our in-house planetarium.



3.17      Josh Peek
Joshua Eli Goldston Peek (Space Telescope Science Inst. – Baltimore, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Joshua Eli Goldston Peek


As an data-oriented astronomer working on diffuse structures in the universe, my world is
ruled by a number of principles. Firstly, collaboration. Since the data I use is not dominated
by a single data collection mode, but rather comes from radio, optical, simulation, space,
ground, IFU, spectral, etc sources, I often work closely with experts to achieve data synergy.
Each data set has its own quirks limits and biases. Secondly, dimensionality. As derived
from the first, each data set provides incredibly high dimensional data, and combined the
dimensionality is incredible. Lastly, the visual. The structures we explore are not always
entirely encapsulated by points, but rather are extended and cannot be simply shown in
scatter plots.
    All of these things drive me toward astrographic analyses; using advanced visualization
tools to explore complex overlapping data sets and exploring them with colleagues.



                                                                                                   19262
110   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


      3.18      Lucian Pleasea
      Lucian Plesea (ESRI – Redlands, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Lucian Plesea


      I have a long history of working with remote sensing imagery and data, initially for NASA
      and later for Esri, with the main goal of making such data available to the public at large.
      Visualization such data properly is very important, the volume and scale of the available
      datasets only make this visualization more challenging. It is only natural that planetariums
      are some of the best venues for astro-graphics, and I have been collaborating with NASA and
      AMNH to achieve a seamless and rapid infusion of planetary imagery data into planetarium
      visualization. The OpenSpace software is a remarkable advance in the astro-graphics field,
      the features and capabilities already exceed many commercial alternatives. Since it is open
      source and has relatively modest minimum hardware requirements, it is widely available
      to anyone interested. This positive impression of OpenSpace was widely shared by the
      workshop participants. Since I am also a member of the OpenSpace project advisory board,
      it was great to see how well received the OpenSpace development effort is. The workshop at
      Dagstuhl represented a great opportunity for me to meet with specialists working directly
      in the astro-graphics field, and to better understand the current state of the art, with its
      challenges and limitations. As a result of the workshop, I have a list of new action items I
      set for myself, and new motivation to continue to be an active contributor to astro-graphics.



      3.19      Sebastian Ratzenböck
      Sebastian Ratzenböck (Universität Wien, AT)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Sebastian Ratzenböck


      I am a PhD student at the data science platform at the University of Vienna focussing
      on extracting physical knowledge from the Gaia data set by employing machine learning
      methods. In a quest to better understand the structure formation of the milky way I am
      currently tailoring clustering algorithms to more robustly extract open clusters. For me
      data visualisation and data analysis, such as the clustering process, share a common basis
      as both tools are trying to make sense of the great unknown hidden in the data which
      essentially consists of numbers stored somewhere on hard drives. This notion of discovery
      and making sense of the data is now becoming more and more relevant as the astronomy
      community is facing massive amounts of data from survey like Gaia or Pan-STARRS1.
      Moreover, especially in astronomy where the search for structure involves the position space
      the focus on visualisation is a crucial part of the analysis and eventually telling the story
      behind the findings.
          This seminar has been a first chance for me to get immersed into the joint field of
      astronomy and visualization and to meet the people on the forefront of that community.
      People here have in just two days managed to join softwares which further progresses
      and facilitates the ability to do exploratory data analysis. Furthermore, we discussed the
      fundamental structure of the data analysis pipeline from data discovery, data accessibility,
      transparent analysis especially regarding VIS tools and eventually novel analysis techniques
      such as Machine Learning in the context of Astrographics.
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                            111


3.20      Thomas Robitaille
Thomas P. Robitaille (Aperio Software – Leeds, GB)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Thomas P. Robitaille


I am a scientific software developer working on a variety of open source projects related to
visualization and astrographics. One of my key interests is making it possible for researchers
to have access to tools for interactive data analysis, and in particular using different tools
together seamlessly. At this workshop, I learned about a variety of advanced visualization
tools being developed, and decided to work on developing a proof-of-concept of how to use the
OpenSpace application with the glue data visualization software. This will allow researchers
to carry out advanced data analysis, linking datasets together, and exploring interesting
subsets of data while also being able to visualize these data and subsets in realistic rendering
of the universe.



3.21      Introductory Presentations
Filip Sadlo (Universität Heidelberg, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Filip Sadlo


My research interests in astrophysical visualization range from the early Universe to planet
formation. I would like to employ topological techniques to analyze the structure of the early
Universe and planet formation, with a particular focus on its multi-scale nature. Besides
the growing range of scales, I see challenges for future astrophysical visualization research
in merging and completing heterogeneous data and a tighter coupling of the visualization
concepts to the governing physical laws.



3.22      Wolfgang Steffen
Wolfgang Steffen (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico – México, MX)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Wolfgang Steffen


Volume rendering of astronomical nebulae in interactive dome software is still underdeveloped
with all the rest. We have built software (Shape) that allows to generate volumetric 3-D
models, but integrated them into presentation software has been a problem in various ways:
rendering quality, size limits and opacity rendering whenever there are non-volumetric objects
present, too. Solutions to these problems and finding data format standards would be
extremely helpful once hardware will become common place that is able to support high
resolution volumetric models.




                                                                                                   19262
112   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


      3.23      Introductory Presentation – Planetarium of the Natural History
                Museum Vienna
      Gabriel Stöckle (Naturhistorisches Museum Wien, AT)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Gabriel Stöckle


      I am responsible for the digital planetarium in the Natural History Museum Vienna. The
      museum is one of the largest and most important natural history museums in the world with
      a unique collection. The planetariums purpose is to be an addition to the museum and to
      visualize and explain nature. We are not really doing scientific visualization yet but work
      rather as a planetarium with live presentations and fulldome cinema. Now with modern
      visualization techniques, I think a planetarium can become a tool to visualize scientific data
      interactively. We have Open Space installed and running (with support from the Gene
      Payne from the Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute in Utah) and hope to implement
      modern visualisation technologies in the dome.
          My personal background is that I was working for the Astronomisches Rechen-Institut
      in Heidelberg, Germany promoting Virtual Observatory Tools and Grid Computing before
      I became responsible for the planetarium. Now with Open Space I found an open source
      software to visualize astronomical data on the dome, tested and installed it our dome and
      therefore was invited to come to Dagstuhl. My hope was to improve it into an tool to present
      interactively data on the dome.
          Here in Dagstuhl, I met amazing people and we made great advances in visualizing
      astronomical data with the help of the developers of glue (Thomas Robitaille) and aladin
      (Thomas Boch). They were able to connect the Open Space Software with glue. They were
      able to select subsamples of data interactively and visualize these subsamples interactively in
      open space, which means also on the dome. I hope that this interactive data selection and
      presentation technique can also become a tool for researchers in the dome.
          Next to this I could learn a lot about presentation techniques listening to the presentation
      of Carter Emmart from the American Natural History Museum in New York. I learned a lot
      and will use his presentation of the moon and mars as an inspiration for our own liveshows.
      References
      1    F. Bonnarel, P. Fernique, O. Bienaymé, D. Egret, F. Genova, M. Louys, F. Ochsenbein, M.
           Wenger and J. G. Bartlett. The ALADIN interactive sky atlas. Astron. Astrophys. Suppl.
           Ser, 143(1):33–40, 2000
      2    T. Boch, P. Fernique. Aladin Lite: Embed your Sky in the Browser. Astronomical Data
           Analysis Software and Systems . 485:277, 2014



      3.24      Data to Dome
      Mark Subbarao (Adler Planetarium – Chicago, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Mark Subbarao


      I am interested in exploring the potential of digital planetariums and research grade visualiz-
      ation facilities. The term Data to Dome refers to a strategy to simplify and streamline the
      process of going from scientific discovery to planetarium visualization and presentation. This
      strategy included the development of new data and interoperability standards and well as
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                                113


the professional development of planetarium staff. We also hope to realize the power of the
modern planetarium as a research grade visualization facility by introducing the capabilities
in the software to go beyond presentation and enable interrogation of the data. With these
new capabilities we have large collaborative data exploration and discovery facilities that
have already been built and paid for in almost every major city of the world.



3.25      Interactive planetarium visualization
Edwin A. Valentijn (University of Groningen, NL)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Edwin A. Valentijn


We had extensive exchanges with the planetariums which are involved in interactive visualiz-
ation and who are keen on bringing in new content on a very regular basis – also in relation
to the Data-to-Dome initiative. Further progress of Data-to-Dome heavily depends on the
involvement of the planetarium display system providers, Focus was a.o. on bringing current
research into planetariums and to lower the threshold for researchers to present their work
in a planetarium environment. A splinter session was organized with so called power users,
Adler-Chicago, Morrison-San Francisco, Hayden – New York, Heidelberg, Norrköping, and
DOTliveplanetarium–Groningen discussing common interests. In this context, the OpenSpace
project was perceived as an important and promising way forward and new collaborations
have been initiated. Real time streaming of 360 degree live content towards the planetariums
was also discussed, but there was not a strong interest. Dotliveplanetarium is building a
platform for this. In short, the workshop helped very much to settle new international
relations and collaborations and helped to identify common interests. Some follow-up work
visits have been planned.
    In the seminar highlights we note: “We initiated to set up new collaborative IPS working
groups for trans-national collaborations and exchange of data and content” Edwin Valentijn,
Mark SubbaRao “We perceived a new and enthusiastic community dedicated to enhance
planetarium visualisation for modern research, knowledge dissemination and outreach.”



3.26      Visualization, Relativity, and Astrographics
Daniel Weiskopf (Universität Stuttgart, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Daniel Weiskopf


My background is in visualization in general and covers a wide range of topics in scientific
visualization, information visualization, and visual analytics. In particular, I am interested
in the application of visualization related to astronomy and astrophysics. One example is
visualization for special relativity [1, 4] and general relativity [5]. These kinds of visualization
can be used for public outreach by incorporating concepts of explanatory and illustrative
visualization, for example, for museum exhibitions [2]. Also, immersive virtual environments
played a big role for such applications early on, as demonstrated for a virtual “flight
simulator” for special relativity [3]. Another example of previous work in astrographics
includes the reconstruction and rendering of nebulae, relying on efficient rendering methods
and reconstruction schemes [6].



                                                                                                       19262
114   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


          For future research, I am interested in further integrating astrographics and advanced
      visualization: How can astrographics benefit from recent developments in visualization
      research? And how will the special requirements of astrographics influence visualization?
      In particular, I see the need for further research on combining explanation and exploration
      in visualization, which directly links to questions related to methods for data-oriented
      storytelling. What are design principles and data-transformation methods that support
      storytelling? What are the differences between storytelling in astrographics and other
      application domains?
          I also see a productive link between astrographics and other areas of visualization in the
      form of immersion: The recent trend toward immersive analytics brings 3D representations
      and immersion into the focus of visualization research [7]. How do these new approaches
      relate to already established ways of presenting visualizations in immersive planetarium
      environments? How can immersive analytics be used in astrographics?
      References
      1    Daniel Weiskopf. A Survey of Visualization Methods for Special Relativity. Scientific Visu-
           alization: Advanced Concepts, Dagstuhl Follow-Ups, Schloss Dagstuhl, p. 289–302, 2010
      2    Daniel Weiskopf, Marc Borchers, Thomas Ertl, Martin Falk, Oliver Fechtig, Regine Frank,
           Frank Grave, Andreas King, Ute Kraus, Thomas Müller, Hans-Peter Nollert, Isabel Rica
           Mendez, Hanns Ruder, Tobias Schafhitzel, Sonja Schär, Corvin Zahn, Michael Zatloukal.
           Explanatory and Illustrative Visualization of Special and General Relativity. IEEE Trans-
           actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(4):522–534, 2006
      3    Daniel Weiskopf. An Immersive Virtual Environment for Special Relativity. Proceedings of
           the International Conference in Central Europe on Computer Graphics, Visualization and
           Computer Vision (WSCG). p. 337–344, 2000
      4    Daniel Weiskopf, Ute Kraus, Hanns Ruder. Searchlight and Doppler effects in the visualiz-
           ation of special relativity: a corrected derivation of the transformation of radiance. ACM
           Transactions on Graphics. 18(3):278–292, 1999
      5    Daniel Weiskopf. Four-dimensional non-linear ray tracing as a visualization tool for gravit-
           ational physics. Proceedings of the IEEE Visualization 2000 Conference, p. 445–448, 2000
      6    Stephan Wenger, Marco Ament, Stefan Guthe, Dirk A. Lorenz, Andreas M. Tillmann,
           Daniel Weiskopf, Marcus A. Magnor. Visualization of Astronomical Nebulae via Distributed
           Multi-GPU Compressed Sensing Tomography. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
           Computer Graphics. 18(12):2188–2197, 2012
      7    Kim Marriott, Falk Schreiber, Tim Dwyer, Karsten Klein, Nathalie Henry Riche, Takayuki
           Itoh, Wolfgang Stuerzlinger, Bruce H. Thomas. Immersive Analytics. Springer, 2018.



      3.27      Astrographics in Context
      Ryan Wyatt (California Academy of Sciences – San Francisco, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Ryan Wyatt


      All visualizations require interpretation, and my interest as an astronomer turned educator
      center on leveraging visualizations for outreach to broad audiences. I am fundamentally a
      user of astrographics software, not a developer, so I want to consider how software can best
      enable educators to share visually compelling and scientifically accurate visualizations—and
      how these tools can support astronomical discovery.
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                             115


    I have several core interests in astrographics. First, the community must recognize the
need to develop and refine presentation tools in astrographics software: particularly allowing
for smooth transitions in scale (the ability to “fly” through data is key to providing continuity
and context) and adjustability in terms of visual representations (essential for fine-tuning
representations that will be accessible and comprehensible to a wide range of consumers).
Second, our software needs to provide interpretive layers—both for educators and for our
audiences—along the lines of the metadata enabled by the Astronomy Visualization Metadata
(AVM) standard. Third, we need to make experiences interactive for our audiences, and
although my primary interest is in mediated or guided experiences, it is also worth considering
a broader definition that emphasizes agency on the part of novice users, although there are
many attendant challenges—especially in terms of the scaffolding required for audiences
to make sense of visualizations. Lastly, I am interested in ensuring that the wide range of
tools (especially covering both research and education) remain extensible, compatible, and
interoperable.
    Dagstuhl Seminar 19262, “Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through
Space,” gave several of us the opportunity to consider how tools developed for educational
use—specifically in planetarium domes—could support research. The resulting white paper,
IDEAS: Immersive Dome Experiences for Accelerating Science, was submitted to the As-
tro2020 Decadal Survey on Astronomy and Astrophysics. As noted in the paper’s abstract,
“Planetariums can and should be used for the advancement of scientific research. [...] We
propose a transformative model whereby scientists become the audience and explorers in
planetariums, utilizing software for their own investigative purposes.”



3.28      Exploranation – A New Science Communication Paradigm
Anders Ynnerman (Linköping University, SE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Anders Ynnerman


The rapid development of computer hardware for visualization, together with new and
improved methods and software, enables interactive exploration of complex and large-scale
data on commodity graphics processing units (GPUs). Scientific data is also to an increasing
degree published as “Open Data”. These three trends together make it possible to let visitors
to public venues, such as science centers and museums, themselves become explorers of
scientific data using the same tools, methods, data and even hardware that researchers are
using in scientific exploration. This change of use of visualization in public spaces from the
traditional explanatory visualization to an exploratory approach has been referred to as
“Exploranation”, a euphemism encapsulating the confluence of explanation and exploration.
    Exploranation, however, is in need of further research as challenges appear when interactive
visualization is used in science communication. For installations enabling free exploration
intuitive and robust interaction are key features. It is also important to address issues arising
in non-linear storytelling. If there are specific learning goals expressed, non-invasive guidance
has to be used to ensure that goals are reached and this without disturbing the notion of
free exploration.
    In the case of live facilitated presentations using interactive data exploration many of
these challenges also appear. In addition, the role and importance of the facilitator needs to
be further researched in the context of performativity and the expression and transfer of tacit




                                                                                                    19262
116   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


      knowledge. An important aspect of live presentations is also the navigation and piloting. To
      enable a facilitator/presenter to both navigate and present, high level tools combining story
      telling with navigation and data processing need to be developed.



       4     Break-out Groups
      4.1    Domecasting + Authoring Tools
      Alexander Bock (Linköping University, SE & University of Utah, US), Brian Abbott (AMNH –
      New York, US), Charles D. Hansen (University of Utah – Salt Lake City, US), and Wolfgang
      Steffen (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico – México, MX)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Alexander Bock, Brian Abbott, Charles D. Hansen, and Wolfgang Steffen


      This breakout session focussed around the use of astrovisualization tools in the context of
      domecasting, and how to create authoring tools such that novice users are able to quickly
      generate new content that can be shared with a wide audience. Domecasting in this context
      refers to the ability to connect multiple instances of a software together and replicate the
      input from one master computer to connected clients. This technique can, for example be
      used to share a live presentation given by a subject-matter expert in a specific location and
      share both audio and visual results with multiple other locations that are located in other
      places around the globe. This method relies on the ability for each client installation to run
      the visualization tool locally such that images can be generated which are optimal for the
      geometry of the facility. This is necessary as the connected geometries might vary greatly,
      from flat screens, to virtual reality headsets, and planetariums, making a custom solution
      for each installation an essential requirement. While discussing the technical details of the
      currently implemented solution of open-source software in this area, it was determined that
      each vendor/provider uses a closed system that are currently unable to interoperate. This
      lead to the discussion to create a common format that can be used to allow domecasting
      between different astrovisualization software vendors and provide a common interface that
      new software can integrate. While this method does not ensure that all vendors will provide
      the same functionality, it is the first step in ensuring that these features can be implemented
      in the future. A substantial part of this discussion was also devoted to the concept of
      recording and authoring flight paths, i.e. the path of the virtual camera in both space and
      time through the visualization. Representations of these flight paths might be standardized
      to the extent that they can be shared between different vendors. Furthermore, participants
      voiced their wish for improving the current state of these flight paths to make it possible to
      add additional information to these flight paths that is shown to a potential presented in a
      public environment, informing them about potential topics that might be discussed while
      automatically following a set camera movements. This thread of sparked a lengthy discussion
      on a concept called “Showkits” which were physical materials and props prepared by the
      American Museum of Natural History many years ago that could be sent to school teachers
      and other museums to support their efforts while giving a live presentation. Annotated flight
      paths that also include additional media would be moving this concept to the modern age
      and would make it possible to disseminate the didactics on how to give live presentations to
      a larger audience, and would also provide the ability to create a central location to share
      these showkits to train new pilots or have people self-train based on these materials. The
      end result of this part of the discussion was defining terminology for future work surrounding
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                            117


this concept. A modern “Showkit” is a directed graph of “showlets” which can be navigated
by the user at their own pace. A “showlet” is a collection of assets including media resources,
such as audio transcripts of a subject-matter expert, videos to be included in the presentation,
and presenter notes for the pilot of the presentation. The connection between different
“showlets” would occur through the use of either pre-recorded or dynamically generated flight
paths. A similarly lively discussion occurred around the topic of authoring tools that would
provide a larger amount of people with the possibility to create new content that can be
shared with a large number of planetariums. First and foremost on the agenda was the topic
of interoperability between different vendors. A perfect content authoring tool would export
the resulting content in a format that can be easily converted between different vendors
such that content only needs to be generated once and can be reused by any vendor. A long
in-depth discussion followed on the merits of providing different complexities of authoring
tools, one for the casual user that does not provide as many detailed options, all the way
to the expert user who can include specialized code for rendering new datasets, which can
then be shared with other users. Returning the discussion to the showlets, it was determined
that it would be most beneficial to have different tools to be able to create individual assets,
then combining different assets into showlets using a separate application and then finally
integrating different showlets into entire shows or showkits using yet another application.
Using this three-stage process it would be possible to specialize each tool for its intended
purpose and optimize it for its niche.



4.2    Quo vadis Astrovisualization software?
Alexander Bock (Linköping University, SE & University of Utah, US), Tom Kwasnitschka
(GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, DE), David H. Laidlaw (Brown
University – Providence, US), and Thomas Müller (Haus der Astronomie – Heidelberg, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Alexander Bock, Tom Kwasnitschka, David H. Laidlaw, and Thomas Müller


This break-out session investigated where different publicly available astrovisualization
software should go and focus their efforts on to be effective tools at communicating astronomy
and astrophysics research. These discussions were not each explored in detail, but it was
rather designed as a more general brainstorming sessions. The first large component of
desired features included support for GIS (Geographic information system) algorithms that
would make it possible for users to import their own specialized data. One aspect of this
is having the ability for scientists to add custom data loaders for their own specialized
formats to shorten the path between exporting data from specialized analysis tools into
the visualization frameworks. These also include supporting new rendering primitives,
such as raster images, polygons, and geolocators, but also reducing the friction to import
other external data sources, such as georeferenced images in common data formats, such
as GeoTIFF. Desired operations for these GIS datasets are mostly related to measuring;
being able to measure height information, the value of individual pixels, and other tools to
verify the visualization. A concrete example for these tools are the ocean/bay science, where
information for most of the Earth’s ocean surface is available and has not yet been utilized
for visualization purposes or public outreach. Another wish for astrovisualization tools is the
increased support for more virtual reality devices. These include virtual reality headsets, both
commercially available headsets as well as research devices, but also CAVE environments.




                                                                                                   19262
118   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


      Both directions require further research before they can be used in regular programming for
      a wider audience as, for example, guided navigation techniques have to be further developed
      first. Another type of large data that is currently not handled broadly is point cloud data,
      particularly data acquired from LiDAR sensors. Participants were particularly focussed
      on the ocean surface scanning that has occurred over the past years, which resulted in a
      large amount of available point cloud data that is currently underutilized due to the lack of
      visualization techniques. Issues that were raised are the handling of memory requirements
      as these datasets usually tend to be very large, and special care needs to be taken when
      simplifying them. One suggestion simplification technique that was discussed in detail
      were methods of transforming the LiDAR point clouds into polygonal representations that
      could be displayed and stored much more efficiently and would not lose much information
      in the process. Lastly, the participants discussed potentially adding complex rendering
      techniques to these softwares, such as wormhole or blackhole renderings that would operate
      in real-time. These techniques would make it possible to illustrate the effects of gravity
      for high-school level students that already have some familiarity with the matter, but lack
      intuitive representations except for high-budget hollywood movies. Providing these students
      with the ability to change gravitational parameters and allowing them to dynamically inspect
      the results could potentially have large benefits in conveying these complex topics.



      4.3    Towards Augmented Reality Astronomy Research in the mid 2020s
      Melvyn Davies (Lund Observatory, SE), Dave Brown (Microsoft Research – Redmond, US),
      Alyssa A. Goodman (Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, US), and Joshua Eli
      Goldston Peek (Space Telescope Science Inst. – Baltimore, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Melvyn Davies, Dave Brown, Alyssa A. Goodman, and Joshua Eli Goldston Peek


      Much of astronomy research requires collaborative, high-dimensional data exploration. It
      is collaborative because astronomers measure the same objects and structures with many
      different methods, and no one person can be an expert in all technical domains. It is
      high-dimensional because each of these methods can add many new dimensions to each
      object. Software like glue can allow a single user to explore these data, but when we are
      talking about large complex data sets in multiple dimensions, the immediacy and structure
      of true 3D representations in real space dramatically increases the depth of understanding of
      relative scale and structure.
          Virtual reality offers a new window into this world, with much advanced tools developed
      by VR experts and powered by the gaming industry. But VR structurally limits collaboration
      – communication between astronomers happens via facial interaction and body posture, which
      is why most remote group meetings happen via video chat, rather than simply audio call.
          Our group investigated the idea of how augmented reality and mixed reality might open
      up a space for collaborations of research astronomers to explore data together. We used a
      mixed-reality headset (a version 1 HoloLens) to drive home the point that data exploration
      is much richer in 3D.
          VR experts explained the various pros and cons of VR headsets and tooling; how progress
      has been made in making the tools better for data exploration. The concept of the ease of
      access curve, with viz-cave most difficult to access, shading to VR and MR devices, all the
      way to AR-enabled phones, which most participants already had, was discussed. We focused
      on practical matters – what it would look like for research astronomers to mix in AR and
      MR tooling into their daily workflow.
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                                    119


    The concept of merging glue, HoloLens, and ARKit2/Tango (phone) AR technologies
was discussed. It was agreed that such an arrangement made some sense as a toolchain for
casual visual exploration and was not out of reach – glue can stage the data and cast it
to the internet, a single MR user could see a 3D data structure and provide 3D brushing
capabilities, and anyone with a phone could participate in viewing the 3D space.



4.4    Decadal White Paper: Immersive Dome Experiences for
       Accelerating Science
Jackie Faherty (AMNH – New York, US), Brian Abbott (AMNH – New York, US), Alexander
Bock (Linköping University, SE & University of Utah, US), Dave Brown (Microsoft Research
– Redmond, US), David H. Laidlaw (Brown University – Providence, US), Marcus A. Magnor
(TU Braunschweig, DE), Thomas Müller (Haus der Astronomie – Heidelberg, DE), Joshua Eli
Goldston Peek (Space Telescope Science Inst. – Baltimore, US), Wolfgang Steffen (Universidad
Nacional Autonoma de Mexico – México, MX), Gabriel Stöckle (Naturhistorisches Museum
Wien, AT), Mark Subbarao (Adler Planetarium – -Chicago, US), Daniel Weiskopf (Universität
Stuttgart, DE), Ryan Wyatt (California Academy of Sciences – San Francisco, US), and
Anders Ynnerman (Linköping University, SE)
      License      Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Jackie Faherty, Brian Abbott, Alexander Bock, Dave Brown, David H. Laidlaw, Marcus A.
                Magnor, Thomas Müller, Joshua Eli Goldston Peek, Wolfgang Steffen, Gabriel Stöckle, Mark
                Subbarao, Daniel Weiskopf, Ryan Wyatt, and Anders Ynnerman


Astrophysics lies at the crossroads of big datasets (such as the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope
and Gaia), open source software to visualize and interpret high dimensional datasets (such
as Glue, WorldWide Telescope, and OpenSpace), and uniquely skilled software engineers
who bridge data science and research fields. At the same time, more than 4,000 planetariums
across the globe immerse millions of visitors in scientific data. We have identified the potential
for critical synergy across data, software, hardware, locations, and content that—if prioritized
over the next decade—will drive discovery in astronomical research. Planetariums can and
should be used for the advancement of scientific research. Current facilities such as the
Hayden Planetarium in New York City, Adler Planetarium in Chicago, Morrison Planetarium
in San Francisco, the Iziko Planetarium & Digital Dome Research Consortium in Cape
Town, and Visualization Center C in Norrköping are already developing software which
ingests catalogs of astronomical and multi-disciplinary data critical for exploration research
primarily for the purpose of creating scientific storylines for the general public. We propose a
transformative model whereby scientists become the audience and explorers in planetariums,
utilizing software for their own investigative purposes. In this manner, research benefits from
the authentic and unique experience of data immersion contained in an environment bathed
in context and equipped for collaboration. Consequently, in this white paper we argue that
over the next decade the research astronomy community should partner with planetariums
to create visualization-based research opportunities for the field. Realizing this vision will
require new investments in software and human capital.




                                                                                                           19262
120   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


      4.5    Presentation & Authoring
      Jackie Faherty (AMNH – New York, US), Brian Abbott (AMNH – New York, US), Hidehiko
      Agata (NAOJ – Tokyo, JP), Alexander Bock (Linköping University, SE & University of
      Utah, US), Dave Brown (Microsoft Research – Redmond, US), Charles D. Hansen (Univer-
      sity of Utah – Salt Lake City, US), Tom Kwasnitschka (GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for
      Ocean Research Kiel, DE), Wolfgang Steffen (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico –
      México, MX), Gabriel Stöckle (Naturhistorisches Museum Wien, AT), Mark Subbarao (Adler
      Planetarium – Chicago, US), Ryan Wyatt (California Academy of Sciences – San Francisco,
      US), and Anders Ynnerman (Linköping University, SE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Jackie Faherty, Brian Abbott, Hidehiko Agata, Alexander Bock, Dave Brown, Charles D.
                      Hansen, Tom Kwasnitschka, Wolfgang Steffen, Gabriel Stöckle, Mark Subbarao, Ryan Wyatt, and
                      Anders Ynnerman


      Astrographics come to life when coupled with story—either in a live presentation or a
      pre-recorded narrative. Presentation and authoring are thus core functions of astrographics
      tools, and we address priorities and goals for improving these functions.
          As one participant noted, “personal presentation is the most powerful means of communic-
      ation,” and live presentation forms the core of the astrographics experience in planetariums
      and other venues. The community should support presenters in becoming the best they can
      be, and both training and tool development were identified as key in advancing the field.
          There is also the desire to capture the essential qualities of a live presentation—for
      sharing with other presenters and venues, for domecasting from one theater to another, or
      for authoring a playback version of the content



      4.6    Software Integration
      Alyssa A. Goodman (Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, US), Emil Axelsson
      (Linköping University, SE), Thomas Boch (Université de Strasbourg – Strasbourg, FR), Carter
      Emmart (AMNH – New York, US), Andreas Gerndt (DLR – Braunschweig, DE), David
      H. Laidlaw (Brown University – Providence, US), Thomas Müller (Haus der Astronomie
      – Heidelberg, DE), Thomas P. Robitaille (Aperio Software – Leeds, GB), and Edwin A.
      Valentijn (University of Groningen, NL)
            License      Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Alyssa A. Goodman, Emil Axelsson, Thomas Boch, Carter Emmart, Andreas Gerndt, David H.
                      Laidlaw, Thomas Müller, Thomas P. Robitaille, and Edwin A. Valentijn


      It can be argued that before this seminar that the planetarium was not a scientific tool.
      Merging the tools and methods of science into the immersive dome display environment
      of the planetarium has been envisioned but the results of this gathering have enabled the
      fledgling steps toward this goal. With capacities upward to several hundred in one place, and
      ability to network such facilities together worldwide the planetarium community has always
      held the potential for wide scale group immersion. From this point forward, scientists with
      tools familiar to them can now use the global planetarium network for focused interaction
      with their data to concentrate and multiple mental solutions on vital scientific line of inquiry.
      While tested in academia and industry it can be argued that the results of this seminar have
      enabled a vital linkage for large scale data immersion like never before, which in essence is a
      paradigm shift.
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                              121


4.7    How do we, planetaria, get better together and share / stream
       content?
Edwin A. Valentijn (University of Groningen, NL), Carter Emmart (AMNH – New York,
US), Jackie Faherty (AMNH – New York, US), Mark Subbarao (Adler Planetarium – Chicago,
US), and Ryan Wyatt (California Academy of Sciences – San Francisco, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Edwin A. Valentijn, Carter Emmart, Jackie Faherty, Mark Subbarao, and Ryan Wyatt


We had an intense brainstorming session in which we have assessed many current aspects of
collaborations in between planetaria and with vendors. We summarize the recommendations
phrased at this brainstorm on various topics.

   Streaming in real time full dome live content from an event to dome(s): There is not not
   so much interest in the general community, but DOTliveplanetarium will pursue this and
   report on its merits to the other participants.
   Streaming in real time live full dome content between different planetariums (domecasting):
   This is an interesting mode of operation and allows sharing content. OpenSpace can/should
   be the preferred platform for this, facilitating both sending and receiving streams. We
   suggest a community effort to help OpenSpace to achieve this goal.



4.8    Support for Analysis Tools
Anders Ynnerman (Linköping University, SE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Anders Ynnerman


This breakout session focussed on aspects of data analysis. The broad-ranging discussion
can be grouped into three topics: flow from data discovery to data analysis; making the
visualization traceable; and novel analysis techniques with a particular focus on Artificial
Intelligence/Machine Learning.
    A challenge in data discovery is simply to be aware of a certain data set. We discussed
how one might help people find data sets. We also noted how as a starting astronomer, it’s
hard to combine things. Data integration is elusive as compared to working within a single
data set. Data sources and links embedded in images have a lot to do with lineage and
traceability, and the smooth transition from discovery to analysis. Visual flow is needed for
really low friction interactions (find the data quickly) – tools of visualization can be used for
data discovery before exploration. Broad explorations needed for hypothesis generation. In
our view, we haven’t yet applied the methods of visualization to questions of data discovery
    How does one best capture a visualization session? Being able to reproduce the dialogue
of such a session has benefits in many domains: it can help in teaching and training users
and the promotion of best practice. Done well, it can aid in scientific discovery. We discussed
a number of issues and technical details related to traceability. It is not obvious how best to
capture the visualization. For example in going from the initial data to the final visualization,
one may take a relatively circuitous path with a number of blind alleys. Does one remove
some of these? All of these? Mistakes can provide valuable lessons. They may lead to
discoveries of ways forward by other subsequent users. One should therefore compress with
caution. We have code for tracking code (version control). Do we have visualization for
tracking visualization? We noted in the discussion that viztrails goes somewhat in this
direction.


                                                                                                     19262
122   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


          Very much connected with the above discussion are the prospects to use AI/ML to aid
      users. This support can take many formats. For example, recommender systems can help
      users to find data sets (the unknown unknowns) – those who looked at X, also looked at
      Y...We noted how this could be applied to both data sets and research papers. In a broad
      sense, we identified three types of AI augmentation: one could help speed the visualization
      process along by doing the same functions as a user but just more quickly; one could also
      provide faster fitting; and perhaps most significantly one could provide deeper insight. In
      this third type of support, we envisage the AI system to help show the way, ie help turn a
      novice user into a more-experienced user. We did however note some possible pitfalls. The
      AI could for example make erroneous inferences about the users intentions: for example
      recommending colour maps to demarcate certain parts of the data whereas in reality the user
      is interested in other parts: emphasising the peaks when the user wishes to find the troughs.



      4.9    Virtual Presenters
      Anders Ynnerman (Linköping University, SE) and Carter Emmart (AMNH – New York,
      US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Anders Ynnerman and Carter Emmart


      An exciting new development in computer graphics and data analysis is the embodiment
      of the visualization/narration system itself as an avatar, or cognitive companion. For some
      tasks, such as training, natural interaction, and presentation of aggregated information, the
      avatar could be manifested as a photo-real digital human. For other tasks, the cognitive
      companion can be represented as visualizations of multi-source aggregated data. One of
      the most natural human-friendly approaches to interfacing to the system is for the user
      to simply be able to ask informed questions about the application domain, and to expect
      contextualized, insightful answers. For instance, whether the modality used in the interface
      is an avatar or visualization of complex data, one still wants to ask questions to the avatar,
      or about the visualization, as if one is having a dialogue with a literate, expert, in short a
      cognitive assistant.
          As an example of possibilities for new levels of interaction with human representations
      are rapidly opening up through recent advances in visual representation of human avatars
      imaging using light field displays supporting virtual human style interaction. A light field
      display is a system which offers viewing of stereoscopic 3D-images from arbitrary positions
      without 3D-glasses. Compared to traditional 2D displays which shows a 2D image these, new
      displays show 4D light fields, which for each pixel encodes the angular intensity variations
      making it a see-through window into the virtual 3D-world. Light field viewing experiences
      will fundamentally change our notion of a display, how we use it and how we develop content
      for it.
          An exciting possibility is thus the development of a Q&A systems tailored for visual
      science communication. IBM introduced Watson (www.ibm.com), a technology platform
      based on natural language processing and machine learning intended to analyze large amounts
      of unstructured data, and to query the results to provide deep insight about a particular
      application domain. The combination of natural interaction with human representations
      using technologies such as light field displays, where avatar representations act as conveyors
Alyssa A. Goodman, Charles D. Hansen, Daniel Weiskopf, and Anders Ynnerman                          123


of information and ultimately, with such a Q&A systems could lead to a virtual guide that
would further increase the possibilities to provide engaging and explainable visualization for
general audiences.
    Hand-held navigation interface for controlling dome software via a smartphone or similar
pressure-sensitive touchscreen device would be useful. In the planetarium setting, a presenter
typically discusses with the audience while the pilot must remain at a desktop computer
station to drive and navigate the presentation’s software. For even simple programs to be
engaging, a production necessitates two performers: the pilot and a presenter, who can
remain visible and accessible to the audience. Similar to a drone controller, a handheld
device to control the camera path would eliminate the pilot. Having virtual joystick controls
for the left/right thumbs allows arbitrary (within the constraints of dome comfort) camera
motions for flying through a scene. Additionally, one could use the accelerometers of a device
such as an iPhone to control the camera path freeing the presenter to focus on the dome and
move through a scene.




                                                                                                 19262
124   19262 – Astrographics: Interactive Data-Driven Journeys through Space


             Participants
        Brian Abbott                 Alyssa A. Goodman                 Thomas P. Robitaille
      AMNH – New York , US         Harvard-Smithsonian Center for    Aperio Software – Leeds, GB
        Hidehiko Agata             Astrophysics, US
                                                                      Filip Sadlo
      NAOJ – Tokyo, JP               Charles D. Hansen               Universität Heidelberg, DE
        Emil Axelsson              University of Utah – Salt Lake
      Linköping University, SE     City, US                            Wolfgang Steffen
                                     Tom Kwasnitschka                Universidad Nacional Autonoma
        Thomas Boch                                                  de Mexico – México, MX
                                   GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for
      Université de Strasbourg –
                                   Ocean Research Kiel, DE             Gabriel Stöckle
      Strasbourg, FR
                                     David H. Laidlaw                Naturhistorisches Museum
        Alexander Bock             Brown University –
      Linköping University, SE &                                     Wien, AT
                                   Providence, US
      University of Utah, US                                           Mark Subbarao
                                     Marcus A. Magnor
        Dave Brown                                                   Adler Planetarium – Chicago, US
                                   TU Braunschweig, DE
      Microsoft Research –                                            Edwin A. Valentijn
      Redmond, US                    Thomas Müller
                                   Haus der Astronomie –             University of Groningen, NL
        Melvyn Davies              Heidelberg, DE
      Lund Observatory, SE                                            Daniel Weiskopf
                                     Joshua Eli Goldston Peek        Universität Stuttgart, DE
        Carter Emmart              Space Telescope Science Inst. –
      AMNH – New York, US          Baltimore, US                       Ryan Wyatt
        Jackie Faherty               Lucian Plesea                   California Academy of Sciences –
      AMNH – New York, US          ESRI – Redlands, US               San Francisco, US
        Andreas Gerndt               Sebastian Ratzenböck              Anders Ynnerman
      DLR – Braunschweig, DE       Universität Wien, AT              Linköping University, SE
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 19271

Graph Colouring: from Structure to Algorithms
Edited by
Maria Chudnovsky1 , Daniel Paulusma2 , and Oliver Schaudt3

1    Princeton University, US, mchudnov@math.princeton.edu
2    Durham University, GB, daniel.paulusma@durham.ac.uk
3    RWTH Aachen, DE, schaudt@mathc.rwth-aachen.de


      Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 19271 “Graph Col-
ouring: from Structure to Algorithm”, which was held from 30 June to 5 July 2019. The report
contains abstracts for presentations about recent structural and algorithmic developments for the
Graph Colouring problem and variants of it. It also contains a collection of open problems on
graph colouring which were posed during the seminar.
Seminar June 30–July 5, 2019 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/19271
2012 ACM Subject Classification Mathematics of computing → Graph coloring, Mathematics
   of computing → Graph algorithms
Keywords and phrases (certifying / parameterized / polynomial-time) algorithms, computa-
   tional complexity, graph colouring, hereditary graph classes
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.9.6.125
Edited in cooperation with Cemil Dibek



 1      Executive Summary
Maria Chudnovsky (Princeton University, US)
Daniel Paulusma (Durham University, GB)
Oliver Schaudt (RWTH Aachen, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Maria Chudnovsky, Daniel Paulusma, and Oliver Schaudt


The Graph Colouring problem is to label the vertices of a graph with the smallest possible
number of colours in such a way that no two neighbouring vertices are identically coloured.
Graph Colouring has been extensively studied in Computer Science and Mathematics due
to its many application areas crossing disciplinary boundaries. Well-known applications of
Graph Colouring include map colouring, job or timetable scheduling, register allocation,
colliding data or traffic streams, frequency assignment and pattern matching. However,
Graph Colouring is known to be computationally hard even if the number of available colours
is limited to 3.
     The central research aim of our seminar was to increase our understanding of the
computational complexity of the Graph Colouring problem and related NP-complete colouring
problems, such as Precolouring Extension, List Colouring and H-Colouring. The approach
followed at the seminar for achieving this aim was to restrict the input of a colouring problem
to some special graph class and to determine wether such a restriction could make the
problem tractable.
     As input restriction, the main focus was to consider hereditary graph classes, which
are those classes of graphs that are closed under vertex deletion. Hereditary graph classes
           Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
           under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Graph Colouring: from Structure to Algorithms, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 9, Issue 6, pp. 125–142
Editors: Maria Chudnovsky, Daniel Paulusma, and Oliver Schaudt
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
126   19271 – Graph Colouring: from Structure to Algorithms


      provide a unified framework for a large collection of well-known graph classes. The reason
      for this is that a graph class is hereditary if and only if it can be characterized by a (unique)
      set H of minimal forbidden induced subgraphs. This property enables a systematic study
      into the computational complexity of a graph problem under input restrictions. For instance,
      one can first restrict the input to some hereditary graph class for which H is small, say H
      has size 1 or 2, or for which H consists of small graphs only.
          In line with the seminar’s research aim, the seminar brought together researchers from
      Discrete Mathematics, working in structural graph theory, and researchers from Theoretical
      Computer Science, working in algorithmic graph theory. In total, 45 participants participated
      from 14 different countries.
          The scientific program of the seminar consisted of 23 sessions: 4 one-hour survey talks,
      17 contributed talks of at most thirty minutes and 2 open problem sessions. This left ample
      time for discussions and problem solving.
          Each of the four survey talks covered a particular structural or algorithmic key aspect of
      the seminar to enable collaborations of researchers with different backgrounds. On Monday,
      Sophie Sprikl presented a state-of–the-art summary of the Graph Colouring problem for
      H-free graphs and gave the main ideas and techniques behind an important, recent result in
      the area, namely a polynomial-time algorithm for colouring P6 -free graphs with at most four
      colours. On Tuesday, Marcin Pilipczuk gave a tutorial on the framework of minimal chordal
      completions and potential maximal cliques. This technique plays a crucial role for solving
      the Maximum Independent Set problem on some hereditary graph classes, but has a much
      wider applicability. On Wednesday, Bart Jansen gave a presentation on the parameterized
      complexity of the Graph Colouring problem and related colouring problems. Due to a large
      variety of possible parameterizatons, Jansen’s talk covered a wide range of open problems.
      On Thursday, Konrad Dabrowski gave an introduction to the clique-width of hereditary
      graph classes. If a graph class has bounded clique-width, then Graph Colouring and many
      other NP-hard problems become polynomial-time solvable. Hence, as a first step in the
      design of a polynomial-time algorithm, one may first want to verify if the clique-width (or
      any equivalent width parameter) of the graph class under consideration is bounded.
          The two general open problem sessions took place on Monday and Tuesday afternoon.
      Details of the presented problems can be found in the report, together with abstracts of all
      the talks.
Maria Chudnovsky, Daniel Paulusma, and Oliver Schaudt                                                     127


 2      Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Maria Chudnovsky, Daniel Paulusma, and Oliver Schaudt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125

Overview of Talks
     Revisiting a theorem by Folkman on graph colouring
     Marthe Bonamy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
     On an augmenting graph approach for the maximum-weight independent set problem
     Christoph Brause . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
     Introduction to Clique-width and Open Problems
     Konrad Dabrowski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
     Coloring graphs by forbidden induced subgraphs
     Chinh T. Hoàng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
     Shitov’s Counterexample to Hedetniemi Conjecture
     Shenwei Huang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
     Parameterized Complexity of Graph Coloring Problems
     Bart Jansen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
     Classes with no long cycle as a vertex-minor are polynomially chi-bounded
     O-joung Kwon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
     The size Ramsey number of graphs with bounded treewidth
     Anita Liebenau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
     Cliquewidth III: The Odd Case of Graph ColoringParameterized by Cliquewidth
     Daniel Lokshtanov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
     Flexibility of Planar Graphs
     Tomáš Masařík . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
     The Erdős-Hajnal property for graphs with no fixed cycle as a pivot-minor
     Sang-il Oum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
     Computing the chromatic number of a ring
     Irena Penev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
     Tutorial on Potential Maximal Cliques
     Marcin Pilipczuk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
     Ck -coloring of F -free graphs
     Paweł Rzążewski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
     Polynomial Chi-binding functions and forbidden induced subgraphs: A survey
     Ingo Schiermeyer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
     Detecting an odd hole
     Paul Seymour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
     4-coloring P6 -free graphs
     Sophie Spirkl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
     3-coloring with forbidden paths and cycles
     Maya Jakobine Stein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136




                                                                                                       19271
128   19271 – Graph Colouring: from Structure to Algorithms


         Layered wheels
         Nicolas Trotignon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
         Vertex colorings of interval hypergraphs
         Zsolt Tuza . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137

      Open problems
         Parameterized complexity of the coloring problems for H-free graphs
         Petr A. Golovach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
         The Dilworth number of a graphs
         Chinh T. Hoàng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
         Colouring Graphs of Bounded Diameter
         Daniel Paulusma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
         Odd cycle transversal in P5 -free graphs
         Paweł Rzążewski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
         Computing disjoint paths
         Nicolas Trotignon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
         Precoloring extension of graphs
         Zsolt Tuza . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141

      Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
Maria Chudnovsky, Daniel Paulusma, and Oliver Schaudt                                                               129


 3      Overview of Talks
3.1     Revisiting a theorem by Folkman on graph colouring
Marthe Bonamy (University of Bordeaux, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Marthe Bonamy
 Joint work of Marthe Bonamy, Pierre Charbit, Oscar Defrain, Gwenaël Joret, Aurélie Lagoutte, Vincent
               Limouzy, Lucas Pastor, Jean-Sébastien Sereni
Main reference Marthe Bonamy, Pierre Charbit, Oscar Defrain, Gwenaël Joret, Aurélie Lagoutte, Vincent
               Limouzy, Lucas Pastor, Jean-Sébastien Sereni: “Revisiting a theorem by Folkman on graph
               colouring”, CoRR, Vol. arXiv:1907.11429, 2019.
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11429v1


We give a short proof of the following theorem due to Jon H. Folkman [1]: The chromatic
number of any graph is at most 2 plus the maximumover all sub-graphs of the difference
between half the number of vertices and the independencenumber.
References
1    Folkman, J. H.. An upper bound on the chromatic number of a graph (No. RM-5808-PR).
     RAND CORP SANTA MONICA CALIF, 1969.



3.2     On an augmenting graph approach for the maximum-weight
        independent set problem
Christoph Brause (TU Bergakademie Freiberg, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Christoph Brause


The augmenting graph technique is an approach that solves the maximum independent
set problem in various graph classes polynomially. Although we know a little about this
technique, our knowledge about implementations for the maximum-weight independent set
problem is very limited.
    In this talk, we present a polynomial-time augmenting graph approach for the weighted
version and some suitable graph classes, e.g. subclasses of S1,k,k -free graphs, and consider a
combination with decompositions by clique separators.



3.3     Introduction to Clique-width and Open Problems
Konrad Dabrowski (Durham University, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Konrad Dabrowski
 Joint work of Konrad K. Dabrowski, Matthew Johnson, Daniël Paulusma
Main reference Konrad K. Dabrowski, Matthew Johnson, Daniël Paulusma: “Clique-Width for Hereditary Graph
               Classes,” London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series 456:1-56, Cambridge University Press,
               2019.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108649094.002


Graphs classes of bounded clique-width are interesting from a computational perspective,
because many problems, such as Colouring, are polynomial-time solvable on such classes. I will
give an introduction to clique-width and explain some of the techniques at our disposal when
dealing with this parameter. I will also present a number of open problems on boundedness
of clique-width for various graph classes and some related problems on Colouring. See also
our survey https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.00335

                                                                                                                 19271
130   19271 – Graph Colouring: from Structure to Algorithms


      3.4     Coloring graphs by forbidden induced subgraphs
      Chinh T. Hoàng (Wilfrid Laurier University – Waterloo, CA)
            License      Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Chinh T. Hoàng
       Joint work of Yingjun Dai, Dallas J. Fraser, Angèle M. Hamel, Chính T. Hoàng, Frédéric Maffray
      Main reference Dallas J. Fraser, Angèle M. Hamel, Chính T. Hoàng, Frédéric Maffray: “A coloring algorithm for
                     -free line graphs”, Discrete Applied Mathematics, Vol. 234, pp. 76–85, 2018.
                URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dam.2017.06.006


      Let F4 be a set of four-vertex graphs. For any set F4 , it is known that COLORING F4 -free
      graphs is NP-hard or solvable in polynomial time, except when F4 is one of the following
      three sets: {claw, 4K1 }, {claw, 4K1 , co-diamond}, {4K1 , C4 }. In this talk, we survey recent
      advances on these three open problems. We will discuss the two tools that have been proved
      to be useful in attacking the problems: perfect graph theory, and the theory of clique width.



      3.5     Shitov’s Counterexample to Hedetniemi Conjecture
      Shenwei Huang (Nankai University – Tianjin, CN)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Shenwei Huang


      Hedetniemi conjecture is a well-known conjecture in the study of graph coloring. It remained
      open for 53 years until two months ago Shitov came up with a counterexample and hence
      disproved the conjecture. The proof is basic but elegant. In this talk, we will present the
      proof of Shitov’s counterexample.



      3.6     Parameterized Complexity of Graph Coloring Problems
      Bart Jansen (TU Eindhoven, NL)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Bart Jansen


      This talks surveys various aspects of the parameterized complexity of graph coloring problems.
      The goal is to understand how certain complexity parameters contribute to the difficulty
      of finding exact solutions to such problems. We discuss results in various parameterized
      algorithmic regimes, and point out open problems wherever possible. The regimes we consider
      are:
          Fixed-parameter tractable algorithms, for parameterizations that capture the structural
          complexity of the input graph. We will look at questions such as: if graph G is only k
          vertex deletions away from belonging to a graph class where coloring is easy, then can
          the coloring problem on G by solved in f (k)nc time for some function f and constant c?
          Fixed-parameter tractable algorithms that work on a decomposition of the input graph.
          Given a graph G and a tree decomposition of width w, one can test the q-colorability of
          G in time O∗ (q w ), which is essentially optimal assuming the Strong Exponential Time
          Hypothesis. We will see how working over a linear layout of cutwidth w allows the
          problem to be solved much faster, by exploiting an interesting connection to the rank a
          matrix that encodes the compatibility of colorings on two sides of small edge cut.
Maria Chudnovsky, Daniel Paulusma, and Oliver Schaudt                                                    131


   Fixed-parameter tractable algorithms for parameterizations that measure how far the
   input graph violates conditions that guarantee the existence of a good coloring. Brooks’
   theorem guarantees that any graph G that is not a clique or odd cycle, can be colored
   with ∆(G) colors. Hence it is easy to test if a graph whose vertices have degree at most
   q, can be q-colored. How hard is it to test if G has a coloring with q colors, when only k
   vertices of G have degree more than q?
   Kernelization algorithms. Let k be a parameter that captures the structural complexity
   of the input graph – for example, the size of a minimum vertex cover. Is it possible to
   preprocess an input G in polynomial time, obtaining a graph G0 of size polynomial in k,
   so that G has a 3-coloring if and only if G0 has one? What is the best upper-bound on
   the size of G0 in terms of k?



3.7    Classes with no long cycle as a vertex-minor are polynomially
       chi-bounded
O-joung Kwon (Incheon National University, KR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © O-joung Kwon
 Joint work of O-joung Kwon, Ringi Kim, Sang-Il Oum, Vaidy Sivaraman


A class G of graphs is χ-bounded if there is a function f such that for every graph G ∈ G and
every induced subgraph H of G, χ(H) ≤ f (ω(H)). In addition, we say that G is polynomially
χ-bounded if f can be taken as a polynomial function. We prove that for every integer n ≥ 3,
there exists a polynomial f such that χ(G) ≤ f (ω(G)) for all graphs with no vertex-minor
isomorphic to the cycle graph Cn . To prove this, we show that if G is polynomially χ-bounded,
then so is the closure of G under taking the 1-join operation.



3.8    The size Ramsey number of graphs with bounded treewidth
Anita Liebenau (UNSW Sydney, AU)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Anita Liebenau
 Joint work of Anita Liebanau, Nina Kamcev, David R Wood, Liana Yepremyan
Main reference Nina Kamcev, Anita Liebenau, David Wood, Liana Yepremyan: “The size Ramsey number of
               graphs with bounded treewidth”, CoRR, Vol. abs/1906.09185, 2019.
          URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.09185


A graph G is Ramsey for a graph H if every 2-colouring of the edges of G contains a
monochromatic copy of H (not necessarily induced). The size Ramsey number of H is the
smallest number of edges of a graph G that is Ramsey for H. This parameter received a lot
of attention, in particular for sparse graphs H. We generalise earlier work and show that
if the maximum degree and treewidth of H are bounded, then the size Ramsey number is
linear in |V (H)|.




                                                                                                      19271
132   19271 – Graph Colouring: from Structure to Algorithms


      3.9     Cliquewidth III: The Odd Case of Graph ColoringParameterized by
              Cliquewidth
      Daniel Lokshtanov (University of California – Santa Barbara, US)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Daniel Lokshtanov
       Joint work of Fedor V. Fomin, Petr A. Golovach, Daniel Lokshtanov, Saket Saurabh, Meirav Zehaviv
      Main reference Fedor V. Fomin, Petr A. Golovach, Daniel Lokshtanov, Saket Saurabh, Meirav Zehavi:
                     “Clique-width III: Hamiltonian Cycle and the Odd Case of Graph Coloring”, ACM Trans.
                     Algorithms, Vol. 15(1), pp. 9:1–9:27, 2019.
                URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3280824


      Max-Cut(MC), Edge Dominating Set(EDS), Graph Coloring(GC) and Hamiltonian Path(HP)
      on graphs of bounded cliquewidth have received significant attention, as they can be formu-
      lated in MSO2 (and therefore have linear-time algorithms on bounded treewidth graphs by
      the celebrated Courcelle’s theorem), but cannot be formulated in MSO1 (which would have
      yielded linear-time algorithms on bounded cliquewidth graphs by a well-known theorem of
      Courcelle, Makowsky, and Rotics). Each of these problems can be solved in time g(k) nf (k)
      on graphs of cliquewidth k. Fomin et al. [Intractability of Clique-Width Parameterizations.
      SIAM J. Comput. 39(5): 1941-1956 (2010)] showed that the running times cannot be
      improved to g(k)nO(1) assuming W [1] 6= F P T . However, this does not rule out non-trivial
      improvements to the exponent f (k) in the running times. In a follow-up paper, Fomin et
      al. [Almost Optimal Lower Bounds for Problems Parameterized by Clique-Width. SIAM J.
      Comput. 43(5): 1541-1563 (2014)] improved the running times for EDS and MC to nO(k) ,
      and proved g(k)no(k) lower bounds for EDS, MC and HP assuming the ETH. Recently,
      Bergougnoux, Kante and Kwon [WADS 2017] gave an nO(k) -time algorithm for HP. Thus,
      prior to this work, EDS, MC and HP were known to have tight nΘ(k) algorithmic upper and
                                                                   k
      lower bounds. In contrast, GC has an upper bound of nO(2 ) and a lower bound of merely
           1/4
      no(k ) (implicit from the W[1]-hardness proof). Here we close the gap for GC by proving a
                         o(k)
      lower bound of n2 . This shows that GC behaves qualitatively different from the other
      three problems. To the best of our knowledge, GC is the first natural problem known to
      require exponential dependence on the parameter in the exponent of n.



      3.10      Flexibility of Planar Graphs
      Tomáš Masařík (Charles University – Prague, CZ)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Tomáš Masařík
       Joint work of Zdenek Dvorák, Tomás Masarík, Jan Musílek, Ondrej Pangrác
      Main reference Zdenek Dvorák, Tomás Masarík, Jan Musílek, Ondrej Pangrác: “Flexibility of triangle-free planar
                     graphs”, CoRR, Vol. abs/1902.02971, 2019.
                URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.02971


      Proper graph coloring assigns different colors to adjacent vertices of the graph. Usually, the
      number of colors is fixed or as small as possible. Consider applications (e.g. variants of
      scheduling) where colors represent limited resources and graph represents conflicts, i.e., two
      adjacent vertices cannot obtain the same resource. In such applications, it is common that
      some vertices have preferred resource(s). However, unfortunately, it is not usually possible
      to satisfy all such preferences. The notion called flexibility was recently defined by Dvořák,
      Norin, and Postle [1]. There instead of satisfying all the preferences the aim is to satisfy at
      least a constant fraction of any request.
Maria Chudnovsky, Daniel Paulusma, and Oliver Schaudt                                                                133


    We introduce main technical tools in the area and we present a structural statement for:
    Planar graphs without 4-cycles and with lists of size at least five [4].
    Planar graphs without triangles and with lists of size at least four [3].
    Planar graphs of girth at least 6 and with lists of size at least three [2].

    We derive the following statement for all of them. Let G be an above-defined graph with
a list assignment L. There exists an absolute constant such that for any (weighted) choice of
preferred colors for some of the vertices, there is an L-coloring respecting at least a constant
fraction of the preferences.
References
1    Z. Dvořák, S. Norin, and L. Postle, List coloring with requests, Journal of Graph
     Theory, (2019).
2    Z. Dvořák, T. Masařík, J. Musílek, and O. Pangrác, Flexibility of planar graphs
     of girth at least six, arXiv:1902.04069 (2019).
3    Z. Dvořák, T. Masařík, J. Musílek, and O. Pangrác, Flexibility of triangle-free
     planar graphs, arXiv:1902.02971 (2019).
4    T. Masařík, Flexibility of planar graphs without 4-cycles, Accepted to Eurocomb 2019,
     arXiv:1903.01460 (2019).



3.11      The Erdős-Hajnal property for graphs with no fixed cycle as a
          pivot-minor
Sang-il Oum (IBS – Daejeon, KR)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Sang-il Oum
 Joint work of Sang-il Oum, Jaehoon Kim


We prove that for every integer k, there exists ε > 0 such that every n-vertex graph with no
pivot-minors isomorphic to Ck , the cycle graph on k vertices, has a pair of disjoint sets A, B
of vertices such that |A|, |B| ≥ εn and A is complete or anticomplete to B. This proves the
analog of the Erdős-Hajnal conjecture for the class of graphs with no pivot-minors isomorphic
to Ck .



3.12      Computing the chromatic number of a ring
Irena Penev (Charles University – Prague, CZ)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Irena Penev
 Joint work of Frédéric Maffray, Irena Penev, Kristina Vušković
Main reference Frédéric Maffray, Irena Penev, Kristina Vušković: “Coloring rings”, CoRR, Vol. arXiv:1907.11905,
               2019
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11905


A ring is a graph R whose vertex set can be partitioned into k ≥ 4 nonempty sets X1 , . . . , Xk
                                                                                       |X |
such that for all i ∈ {1, . . . , k} the set Xi can be ordered as Xi = {u1i , . . . , ui i } so that
                 |X |
    Xi ⊆ NR [ui i ] ⊆ · · · ⊆ NR [u1i ] = Xi−1 ∪ Xi ∪ Xi+1 ,




                                                                                                                  19271
134   19271 – Graph Colouring: from Structure to Algorithms


      with subscripts taken modulo k. Under such circumstances, we say that the ring R is of
      length k. An odd (resp. even) ring is a ring of odd (resp. even) length.
      Truemper configurations are prisms, pyramids, thetas, and wheels. Rings have played an
      important role in the study of a couple of classes defined by excluding certain Truemper
      configurations as induced subgraphs. A maximum clique and a maximum stable set of a
      ring can be computed in polynomial time, as can an optimal vertex-coloring of an even ring.
      However, odd rings present obstacles for coloring.
      Our main result is that every ring R satisfies

         χ(R) = max{χ(H) | H is a hyperhole in R}.

      We present several corollaries of this result. One corollary is that the chromatic number of a
      ring can be computed in polynomial time.



      3.13      Tutorial on Potential Maximal Cliques
      Marcin Pilipczuk (University of Warsaw, PL)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Marcin Pilipczuk


      In the tutorial, I presented the framework of finding maximum (weighted) independent set
      via minimal chordal completions and potential maximal cliques. The talk contained most
      of the details of the polynomial-time algorithm in the class of P5 -free graphs (Lokshtanov,
      Vatshelle, Villanger [2]). I also highlighted the main contribution of the seminal work of
      Bouchitté and Todinca [1] and difficulties in generalizing from P5 -free graphs to P6 -free
      graphs [3].
      References
      1    V. Bouchitté and I. Todinca. Treewidth and Minimum Fill-in: Grouping the minimal
           separators. SIAM J. Comput., 31(1):212–232, 2001.
      2    D. Lokshtanov, M. Vatshelle, and Y. Villanger. Independent set in P5 -free graphs in
           polynomial time. In C. Chekuri, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM-
           SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2014, Portland, Oregon, USA, January
           5-7, 2014, pages 570–581. SIAM, 2014.
      3    A. Grzesik, T. Klimošová, M. Pilipczuk, and M. Pilipczuk. Polynomial-time algorithm for
           maximum weight independent set on P6 -free graphs. In T. M. Chan, editor, Proceedings
           of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2019, San
           Diego, California, USA, January 6-9, 2019, pages 1257–1271. SIAM, 2019.
Maria Chudnovsky, Daniel Paulusma, and Oliver Schaudt                                                         135


3.14      Ck -coloring of F -free graphs
Paweł Rzążewski (Warsaw University of Technology, PL)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Paweł Rzążewski
 Joint work of Maria Chudnovsky, Shenwei Huang, Paweł Rzążewski, Sophie Spirkl, Mingxian Zhong
Main reference Maria Chudnovsky, Shenwei Huang, Paweł Rzążewski, Sophie Spirkl, Mingxian Zhong:
               “Complexity of Ck -Coloring in Hereditary Classes of Graphs”, in Proc. of the 27th Annual
               European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA 2019), LIPIcs, Vol. 144, pp. 31:1–31:15, Schloss
               Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2019.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2019.31


For a graph F , a graph G is F -free if it does not contain an induced subgraph isomorphic
to F . For two graphs G and H, an H-coloring of G is a mapping f : V (G) → V (H) such
that for every edge uv ∈ E(G) it holds that f (u)f (v) ∈ E(H). We are interested in the
complexity of the problem H-Coloring, which asks for the existence of an H-coloring of an
input graph G. In particular, we consider H-Coloring of F -free graphs, where F is a fixed
graph and H is an odd cycle of length at least 5. This problem is closely related to the well
known open problem of determining the complexity of 3-Coloring of Pt -free graphs.
   We show that for every odd k ≥ 5 the Ck -Coloring problem, even in the precoloring-
extension variant, can be solved in polynomial time in P9 -free graphs. On the other hand, we
prove that the extension version of Ck -Coloring is NP-complete for F -free graphs whenever
some component of F is not a subgraph of a subdivided claw.
References
1    M.Chudnovsky, S. Huang, P. Rzążewski, S. Spirkl, M. Zhong, Complexity of Ck -coloring
     in hereditary classes of graphs, to appear in ESA 2019 Proc.



3.15      Polynomial Chi-binding functions and forbidden induced
          subgraphs: A survey
Ingo Schiermeyer (TU Bergakademie Freiberg, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Ingo Schiermeyer


A graph G with clique number ω(G) and chromatic number χ(G) is perfect if χ(H) = ω(H)
for every induced subgraph H of G. A family G of graphs is called χ-bounded with binding
function f if χ(G0 ) ≤ f (ω(G0 )) holds whenever G ∈ G and G0 is an induced subgraph of
G. In this talk we will present a survey on polynomial χ-binding functions. Especially we
will address perfect graphs, hereditary graphs satisfying the Vizing bound (χ ≤ ω + 1),
graphs having linear χ-binding functions and graphs having non-linear polynomial χ-binding
functions. Thereby we also survey polynomial χ-binding functions for several graph classes
defined in terms of forbidden induced subgraphs, among them 2K2 -free graphs, Pk -free
graphs, claw-free graphs, and diamond-free graphs.




                                                                                                           19271
136   19271 – Graph Colouring: from Structure to Algorithms


      3.16      Detecting an odd hole
      Paul Seymour (Princeton University, US)
             License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Paul Seymour
       Joint work of Maria Chudnovsky, Alex Scott, Paul Seymour, Sophie Spirkl


      A hole is a graph is an induced subgraph of length at least four, and an antihole is a hole in
      the complement. Odd holes are of particular interest, because of the strong perfect graph
      theorem, that says a graph is perfect if and only if it has no odd hole or odd antihole. A
      poly-time algorithm to test if a graph has an odd hole or odd antihole was found in 2006 [1],
      but detecting an odd hole, without stopping on discovery of an odd antihole, has remained
      open. We have now found a poly-time algorithm to test for odd holes [2]. Its running time is
      the same as the old algorithm, but in fact the details are much simpler.
      References
       1 M. Chudnovsky, G. Cornuéjols, X. Liu, P. Seymour and K. Vušković, “Recognizing Berge
           graphs”, Combinatorica, 25 (2005), 143-186.
       2 M. Chudnovsky, A. Scott. P. Seymour and S. Spirkl, “Detecting an odd hole”, submitted
           for publication, arXiv 1903.00208



      3.17      4-coloring P6 -free graphs
      Sophie Spirkl (Rutgers University – Piscataway, US)
             License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Sophie Spirkl
       Joint work of Maria Chudnovsky, Mingxian Zhong, Sophie Spirkl


      I talked about a recent polynomial-time algorithm for deciding if a given graph with no
      induced six-vertex path is four-colorable, and I discussed some of the methods used in the
      proof.
          This is joint work with Maria Chudnovsky and Mingxian Zhong.



      3.18      3-coloring with forbidden paths and cycles
      Maya Jakobine Stein (University of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL)
             License   Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Maya Jakobine Stein
       Joint work of Maya Jakobine Stein, Alberto Rojas


      Graph coloring is hard, even if the number of colors is fixed. Therefore much effort has
      gone into determining the complexity of k-coloring special classes of graphs, in particular
      H-free graphs, where H is a fixed graph (and k is also fixed). It turns out that the problem
      remains NP-complete whenever H is not a linear forest, and for k ≥ 4, the complexity of
      k-coloring Pt -free graphs has been determined for all values of t. There are polynomial time
      algorithms for 3-coloring Pt -free graphs for t ≤ 7, but it is not known if such algorithms exist
      for t = 8, 9, 10, ..... The algorithm given in [1] for P7 -free graphs was found by improving an
      earlier version which only worked for (P7 , C3 )-free graphs, so it seems natural to attack the
      problem by excluding one or more cycles in addition to the path Pt . We found a polynomial
Maria Chudnovsky, Daniel Paulusma, and Oliver Schaudt                                                                  137


time algorithm for 3-coloring (P9 , C5 , C3 )-graphs. A variation of this algorithm works for all
graphs having no induced P2t+1 , no induced odd cycle of length up to 2t − 1, and no induced
C8 .
References
 1 Bonomo, Flavia; Chudnovsky, Maria; Maceli, Peter; Schaudt, Oliver; Stein, Maya; Zhong,
     Mingxian Three-Coloring and List Three-Coloring of Graphs Without Induced Paths on
     Seven Vertices.Combinatorica (2018) 38: 779. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00493-017-3553-8



3.19      Layered wheels
Nicolas Trotignon (ENS – Lyon, FR)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Nicolas Trotignon
 Joint work of Ni Luh Dewi Sintiari, Nicolas Trotignon
Main reference Ni Luh Dewi Sintiari, Nicolas Trotignon: “(Theta, triangle)-free and (even hole, K4 )-free graphs.
               Part 1 : Layered wheels”, CoRR, Vol. abs/1906.10998, 2019.
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10998


We present a construction called layered wheel. Layered wheels are graphs of arbitrarily large
treewidth and girth. They might be an outcome for a possible theorem characterizing graphs
with large treewidth in term of their induced subgraphs (while such a characterization is well
understood in term of minors). They also provide examples of graphs of large treewidth and
large rankwidth in well studied classes, such as (theta, triangle)-free graphs and even-hole-free
graphs with no K4 (where a hole is a chordless cycle of length at least 4, a theta is a graph
made of three internally vertex disjoint paths of length at least 2 linking two vertices, and
K4 is the complete graph on 4 vertices).



3.20      Vertex colorings of interval hypergraphs
Zsolt Tuza (Alfréd Rényi Institute of Mathematics – Budapest, HU)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Zsolt Tuza
 Joint work of Csilla Bujtás, Zsolt Tuza
Main reference Csilla Bujtás, Zsolt Tuza: “Color-bounded hypergraphs, VI: Structural and functional jumps in
               complexity”, Discrete Mathematics, Vol. 313(19), pp. 1965–1977, 2013.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.disc.2012.09.020


The classical notion of proper coloring requires a color assignment to the vertices in such a
way that no hyperedge is monochromatic (Erdős & Hajnal, mid-1960’s). Equivalently this
means at least two colors in each hyperedge. In C-coloring the restriction is put from the
other side, namely that every hyperedge e is allowed to contain at most |e| − 1 colors (Berge
/ Sterboul, early 1970’s). In the more complex model of mixed hypergraps both types of
hyperedges may occur (Voloshin, early 1990’s). A generalization of this structure class is
obtained by putting lower and/or upper bounds on the largest cardinality of monochromatic
subsets of – and/or on the number of colors occurring in – each hyperedge (Bujtás & Tuza,
mid-2000’s).
    Despite that lots of results are known, some simple questions are still open, even on
interval hypergraphs. (An interval hypergraph is a collection of hyperedges e1 , . . . , em whose
underlying vertex set admits an ordering such that each hyperedge ei consists of consecutive




                                                                                                                    19271
138   19271 – Graph Colouring: from Structure to Algorithms


      vertices without gap in that order.) As an example of problems unsolved for over a decade,
      assume that for each ei there is a color which appears on at least a given number ai of
      vertices inside ei . The task is to determine the largest possible number of colors. Is this
      optimization problem polynomial-time solvable or NP-hard?
         In the talk we mention open questions concerning the chromatic polynomial, too.



       4      Open problems
      4.1     Parameterized complexity of the coloring problems for H-free
              graphs
      Petr A. Golovach (University of Bergen, NO)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Petr A. Golovach


      Only very few parameterized results for Coloring on H-free graphs are known. We refer
      to [2] for the detailed survey of the known results and open problems. Here we underline two
      problems that we believe to be the most interesting.
          It is a very long standing open problem whether the 3-Coloring problem for P` -free
      graphs admits a polynomial algorithm for every positive ` or it becomes NP-complete for
      some ` ≥ 8. Currently, it is known that the problem can be solved in polynomial time for
      ` ≤ 7 [1]. This leads to the following question.

           Is 3-Coloring W[1]-hard on P` -free graphs when parameterized by `?

         The next problem was first stated by Hoàng et al. [3]. They proved that that k-Coloring
      can be solved in polynomial time on P5 -free graphs for every positive integer k, that is the
      problem is in XP when parameterized by k, but left open the question whether there is a
      matching lower bound or their result may be improved.

           Is k-Coloring FPT on P5 -free graphs when parameterized by k?

      The question whether k-Coloring parameterized by k is FPT is also open and interesting
      for 2P2 -free graphs that compose a subclass of P5 -free graphs.
      References
      1    F. Bonomo, M. Chudnovsky, P. Maceli, O. Schaudt, M. Stein, and M. Zhong,
           Three-coloring and list three-coloring of graphs without induced paths on seven vertices,
           Combinatorica, 38 (2018), pp. 779–801.
      2    P. A. Golovach, M. Johnson, D. Paulusma, and J. Song, A survey on the compu-
           tational complexity of coloring graphs with forbidden subgraphs, Journal of Graph Theory,
           84 (2017), pp. 331–363.
      3    C. T. Hoàng, M. Kaminski, V. V. Lozin, J. Sawada, and X. Shu, Deciding k-
           colorability of P5 -free graphs in polynomial time, Algorithmica, 57 (2010), pp. 74–81.
Maria Chudnovsky, Daniel Paulusma, and Oliver Schaudt                                               139


4.2    The Dilworth number of a graphs
Chinh T. Hoàng (Wilfrid Laurier University – Waterloo, CA)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Chinh T. Hoàng


Given a graph G, a vertex x dominates a vertex y if every neighbor of y, different from x,
is a neighbor of x. Vertex x is comparable to vertex y, if x dominates y, or y dominates x.
The domination relation is a partial order. The Dilworth number of a graph G is the largest
number of pairwise incomparable vertices in G.

Problem 1. Is it true that there is a polynomial time algorithm to optimally color all graphs
with bounded Dilworth number?

Problem 2. Is it true that if a graph G has bounded Dilworth number then it has bounded
clique width? After I posed this problem, it was pointed out to me that the answer is NO.
The authors Korpelainen, Lozin, and Mayhill constructed a graph with Dilworth number
two and with arbitrarily high clique width.
(https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00373-013-1290-3.pdf)



4.3    Colouring Graphs of Bounded Diameter
Daniel Paulusma (Durham University, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Daniel Paulusma


It is known that k-Colouring is NP-complete for graphs of diameter at most d for all pairs
(k, d) with k ≥ 3 and d ≥ 2 except when (k, d) = (3, 2): determining the computational
complexity of 3-Colouring for graphs of diameter 2 is a long-standing open problem. The
following related problems are also open:
Determine the computational complexity of 3-Colouring and Colouring (where k is part
of the input) for triangle-free graphs of diameter 2.
It can be observed that for all integers d, k, r ≥ 1, the k-Colouring problem is constant-time
solvable for K1,r -free graphs of diameter d and that Colouring is NP-complete for K1,4 -free
graphs. However, the following problem is open:
Determine the computational complexity of Colouring restricted to K1,3 -free graphs of
diameter d for every d ≥ 2.
The above observations and open problems can all be found in [1].
References
1    Barnaby Martin, Daniël Paulusma and Siani Smith, Colouring H-free graphs of bounded
     diameter, Proceedings of the 44th International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations
     of Computer Science (MFCS 2019), Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics, to
     appear.




                                                                                                 19271
140   19271 – Graph Colouring: from Structure to Algorithms


      4.4     Odd cycle transversal in P5 -free graphs
      Paweł Rzążewski (Warsaw University of Technology, PL)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Paweł Rzążewski
       Joint work of Konrad K. Dabrowski, Carl Feghali, Matthew Johnson, Giacomo Paesani, Daniël Paulusma, Paweł
                     Rzążewski
      Main reference Konrad K. Dabrowski, Carl Feghali, Matthew Johnson, Giacomo Paesani, Daniël Paulusma, Paweł
                     Rzążewski: “On Cycle Transversals and Their Connected Variants in the Absence of a Small
                     Linear Forest”, CoRR, Vol. abs/1908.00491, 2019.
                URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.00491


      It is known that the Odd Cycle Transversal is polynomial-time solvable in P4 -free
      graphs, but is NP-complete in P6 -free graphs [1]. What is the complexity of the problem in
      P5 -free graphs?
      References
      1    K. Dabrowski, C. Feghali, M. Johnson, G. Paesani, D. Paulusma, P. Rzążewski, On Cycle
           Transversals and Their Connected Variants in the Absence of a Small Linear Forest, manu-
           script



      4.5     Computing disjoint paths
      Nicolas Trotignon (ENS – Lyon, FR)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Nicolas Trotignon


      Consider the following problem:
         Input: A graph G and a, b, c, d four vertices of G.
         Question: Does there exist two paths, vertex disjoint, with no edges between them and
      such that their ends are all in {a, b, c, d}?
         The complexity of this problem is not known.
      Remarks:
        The problem is trivial when {a, b, c, d} is not a stable set of size four. In a solution, each
        of a, b, c and d must be an end of exactly one of the paths.
        Deciding whether there exit a path from a to b and a path from c to d, vertex-disjoint
        and with edges between them is NP-complete as shown by Bienstock. So, to solve the
        problem, it is hopeless to try the three possible ways the paths may exist separately (a-b
        + c-d; a-c + b-d; a-d + b-c).

          The problem is motivated by the detection of induced minors, see the references.
      References
      1    D. Bienstock. “On the complexity of testing for odd holes and induced odd paths”, Discrete
           Math. 90 (1991) 85–92. (Corrigendum, Discrete Mathematics 102 (1992) 109.)
      2    J. Fiala, M. Kaminski and D. Paulusma. “Induced containment relations in claw-free and
           general graphs”, Journal of Discrete Algorithms 17 (2012) 74–85.
Maria Chudnovsky, Daniel Paulusma, and Oliver Schaudt                                                  141


4.6    Precoloring extension of graphs
Zsolt Tuza (Alfréd Rényi Institute of Mathematics – Budapest, HU)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Zsolt Tuza


The decision problem t-PrExt is the following subproblem of Precoloring Extension.
  Input: Graph G = (V, E), nonnegative integer k, proper coloring of an induced subgraph
H ⊂ G, such that each color occurs at most t times in H.
  Question: Can the coloring of H be extended to a proper k-coloring of the entire G?
   Clearly, 0-PrExt means k-colorability, hence it is linear-time solvable on bipartite graphs.
However, already 1-PrExt is NP-complete on bipartite graphs [2]. Further, on interval
graphs 1-PrExt is solvable in polynomial time, but 2-PrExt is NP-complete [1].
   PROBLEM 1. For t > 1, find graph classes in which t-PrExt is polynomial-time solvable
and (t + 1)-PrExt is NP-complete.
   PROBLEM 2. On interval graphs, design a linear-time algorithm for 1-PrExt, or prove
that every 1-PrExt algorithm is superlinear in |V | + |E|.
References
1    M. Biró, M. Hujter, Zs. Tuza, “Precoloring extension. I. Interval graphs,” Discrete Math.
     100:267–279, 1992.
2    M. Hujter, Zs. Tuza, “Precoloring extension. II. Graph classes related to bipartite graphs,”
     Acta Math. Univ. Comenianae, 62(1):1–11, 1993.




                                                                                                    19271
142   19271 – Graph Colouring: from Structure to Algorithms


              Participants
       Isolde Adler                       Mamadou Moustapha Kanté            Bernard Ries
      University of Leeds, GB           Université Clermont Auvergne –     University of Fribourg, CH
       Marthe Bonamy                    Aubiere, FR                          Paweł Rzążewski
      University of Bordeaux, FR          Tereza Klimosova                 Warsaw University of
                                        Charles University – Prague, CZ    Technology, PL
        Nicolas Bousquet
      Grenoble INP, FR                   Stefan Kratsch                      Oliver Schaudt
                                        HU Berlin, DE                      RWTH Aachen, DE
       Christoph Brause
      TU Bergakademie Freiberg, DE        O-joung Kwon                       Ingo Schiermeyer
                                        Incheon National University, KR    TU Bergakademie Freiberg, DE
       Kathie Cameron
      Wilfrid Laurier University –        Bernard Lidicky                    Pascal Schweitzer
      Waterloo, CA                      Iowa State University, US          TU Kaiserslautern, DE
        Maria Chudnovsky                 Anita Liebenau                      Paul Seymour
      Princeton University, US          UNSW Sydney, AU                    Princeton University, US
       Konrad Dabrowski                  Paloma Lima                         Sophie Spirkl
      Durham University, GB             University of Bergen, NO           Rutgers University –
                                                                           Piscataway, US
        Cemil Dibek                       Daniel Lokshtanov
                                                                             Juraj Stacho
      Princeton University, US          University of California – Santa
                                                                           Google Switzerland – Zürich, CH
       Francois Dross                   Barbara, US
                                                                             Maya Jakobine Stein
      University of Montpellier &         Peter Maceli                     University of Chile –
      CNRS, FR                          Adelphi University – Garden        Santiago de Chile, CL
       Esther Galby                     City, US
                                                                             Stéphan Thomassé
      University of Fribourg, CH          Tomáš Masařík                    ENS – Lyon, FR
       Petr A. Golovach                 Charles University – Prague, CZ
                                                                             Nicolas Trotignon
      University of Bergen, NO            Sang-il Oum                      ENS – Lyon, FR
       Chinh T. Hoàng                   IBS – Daejeon, KR
                                                                             Zsolt Tuza
      Wilfrid Laurier University –       Daniel Paulusma                   Alfréd Rényi Institute of
      Waterloo, CA                      Durham University, GB              Mathematics – Budapest, HU
        Shenwei Huang                     Irena Penev                        Erik Jan van Leeuwen
      Nankai University – Tianjin, CN   Charles University – Prague, CZ    Utrecht University, NL
       Bart Jansen                       Marcin Pilipczuk                    Gerhard J. Woeginger
      TU Eindhoven, NL                  University of Warsaw, PL           RWTH Aachen, DE
       Matthew Johnson                   Michal Pilipczuk                    Victor Zamaraev
      Durham University, GB             University of Warsaw, PL           Durham University, GB
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 19272

Real VR – Importing the Real World into Immersive VR
and Optimizing the Perceptual Experience of
Head-Mounted Displays
Edited by
Marcus A. Magnor1 and Alexander Sorkine-Hornung2

1    TU Braunschweig, DE, magnor@cg.cs.tu-bs.de
2    Facebook Zürich, CH, alexsh@fb.com

      Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 19272 “Real VR
– Importing the Real World into Immersive VR and Optimizing the Perceptual Experience of
Head-Mounted Displays”.
     Motivated by the advent of mass-market VR headsets, this Dagstuhl Seminar addresses the sci-
entific and engineering challenges that need to be overcome in order to experience omni-directional
video recordings of the real world with the sense of stereoscopic, full-parallax immersion as can
be provided by today’s head-mounted displays.
     Since the times of the Lumière brothers, the way we watch movies hasn’t fundamentally
changed: Whether in movie theaters, on mobile devices, or on TV at home, we still experience
movies as outside observers, watching the action through a “peephole” whose size is defined by
the angular extent of the screen. As soon as we look away from the screen or turn around, we are
immediately reminded that we are only “voyeurs”. With modern full-field-of-view, head-mounted
and tracked VR displays, this outside-observer paradigm of visual entertainment is quickly giving
way to a fully immersive experience. Now, the action fully encompasses the viewer, drawing us
in much more than was possible before.
     For the time being, however, current endeavors towards immersive visual entertainment are
based almost entirely on 3D graphics-generated content, limiting application scenarios to purely
digital, virtual worlds only. The reason is that in order to provide for stereo vision and ego-motion
parallax, which are both essential for genuine visual immersion perception, the scene must be
rendered in real-time from arbitrary vantage points. While this can be easily accomplished with
3D graphics via standard GPU rendering, it is not at all straight-forward to do the same from
conventional video footage acquired of real-world events.
     Another challenge is that consumer-grade VR headsets feature spatial resolutions that are still
considerably below foveal acuity, yielding a pixelated, subpar immersive viewing experience. At
the same time, the visual perception characteristics of our fovea are decidedly different from our
peripheral vision (as regards spatial and temporal resolution, color, contrast, clutter disambigu-
ation etc.). So far, computer graphics research has focused almost entirely on foveal perception,
even though our peripheral vision accounts for 99% of our field of view. To optimize perceived
visual quality of head-mounted immersive displays, and to make optimal use of available com-
putational resources, advanced VR rendering algorithms need to simultaneously account for our
foveal and peripheral vision characteristics.
     The aim of the seminar was to collectively fathom what needs to be done to facilitate truly
immersive viewing of real-world recordings and how to enhance the immersive viewing experience
by taking perceptual aspects into account. The topic touches on research aspects from various
fields, ranging from digital imaging, video processing, and computer vision to computer graphics,
virtual reality, and visual perception. The seminar brought together scientists, engineers and
practitioners from industry and academia to form a lasting, interdisciplinary research community
who set out to jointly address the challenges of Real VR.

           Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
           under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Real VR – Importing the Real World into Immersive VR and Optimizing the Perceptual Experience of
Head-Mounted Displays, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 9, Issue 6, pp. 143–156
Editors: Marcus A. Magnor and Alexander Sorkine-Hornung
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
144   19272 – Real VR


      Seminar June 30 – July 3, 2019 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/19272
      2012 ACM Subject Classification Computing methodologies → Computer graphicsComputing
         methodologies → Computer vision
      Keywords and phrases immersive digital reality, perception in vr, real-world virtual reality
      Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.9.6.143
      Edited in cooperation with Susana Castillo



       1     Executive Summary
      Marcus A. Magnor (TU Braunschweig, DE)
      Alexander Sorkine-Hornung (Facebook Zürich, CH)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Marcus A. Magnor and Alexander Sorkine-Hornung


      The Dagstuhl seminar brought together 27 researchers and practitioners from academia
      and industry to discuss the state-of-the-art, current challenges, as well as promising future
      research directions in Real VR. Real VR, as defined by the seminar participants, pursues two
      overarching goals: facilitating the import of real-world scenes into head-mounted displays
      (HMDs), and attaining perceptual realism in HMDs. The vision of Real VR is enabling to
      experience movies, concerts, even live sports events in HMDs with the sense of immersion of
      really “being-there”, unattainable by today’s technologies.
          In the welcome and overview session, the participants collectively decided on the seminar
      program for the following days. In total, the seminar program included the overview session,
      three research presentation sessions, two breakout sessions including a demo track, two
      sessions for one-on-one discussions and individual exchange, one session for writing up the
      results, plus the summary and closing session.
          To kick off the seminar, Alexander Sorkine-Hornung from Oculus VR presented the latest
      developments from an industrial perspective. He gave insights from the development of the
      just-released Oculus Quest and Oculus Rift S HMDs. In the research presentation sessions, 21
      participants gave talks on their work. Participants also met in smaller groups in the breakout
      sessions to discuss the specific challenges of these fields in more detail. In due course, it
      became apparent that Real VR concerns research challenges in a number of different fields:
          Capture
          Reconstruction & modeling
          Rendering & perception
          Display technologies
          Interaction & virtual avatars
          Production & applications

          Some exemplary results of the seminar on these topics were:
          The persistent lack of consumer-market, i.e. affordable, mid- to high-resolution 360-degree
      video cameras to capture dynamic real-world scenes omnidirectionally still hamper research
      and development in Real VR. So far, research groups largely build their own custom-designed
      omnidirectional video cameras. Prominent examples include the omnidirectional camera
      designs by the group of Philippe Bekaert from Hasselt University, Belgium, and the top-of-
      the-line Manifold camera presented by Brian Cabral from Facebook. Besides novel devices,
      also simpler recording methods are sought, e.g. by Tobias Bertel and Christian Richardt at
      Bath, in order to capture real-world content more casually.
Marcus A. Magnor and Alexander Sorkine-Hornung                                                     145


    On scene reconstruction and representation, the jury is still out whether om-
nidirectional video should be considered to represent sparse light field data with dense
depth/disparity as side information, or whether panoramic footage should (and could) be
processed to provide full 3D geometry representations of the scene. As pointed out by Atanas
Gotchev from TU Tampere, Marco Volino from the University of Surrey, and Christian
Richardt from the University of Bath, both forms of representation have their respective
advantages and drawbacks, e.g. when aiming to augment the real scene with additional
virtual content.. Memory requirements and real-time streaming bandwidth requirements are
challenging in either case.
    The form of scene representation also determines which rendering approaches are viable.
For 3D rendering, Dieter Schmalstieg from Graz presented his Shading Atlas Streaming
approach to efficiently divide shading and rendering computation between server and client.
To make use of visual perception characteristics in wide field-of-view HMDs, on the other
hand, foveated rendering approaches, e.g. based on hardware ray tracing and accelerated
machine learning, as presented by Anjul Patney from NVidia, have great potential. As shown
by Qi Sun from Adobe, perceptual methods like saccade-aware rendering can also be used to
enable walking through huge virtual worlds while actually not leaving the confines of one’s
living room. To render from dense depth-annotated 360-deg video, in contrast, advanced
image-based warping methods and hole-filling approaches are needed, as was convincingly
outlined by Tobias Bertel from the University of Bath.
    Gordon Wetzstein from Stanford University presented how future HMDs will become
even more realistic by overcoming current limitations of near-eye displays, in particular the
vergence-accommodation conflict. Along similar lines, Hansung Kim from the University of
Surrey showed how spatial audio enhances perceived VR realism even more.
    Social interaction in the virtual world requires having digital doubles available. The
elaborate steps needed to create convincing human avatars from real-world people were
outlined by Feng Xu from Tsinghua University, Darren Cosker from the University of Bath,
Christian Theobalt from MPII, and Peter Eisert from TU Berlin, covering the full range of
human face, hand and body capture, reconstruction, and modeling. To interact with objects
in virtual space, on the other hand, Erroll Wood from Microsoft Cambridge described how
hand motion and gestures can be reliably tracked and identified in real-time by the upcoming
HoloLens 2 device. Also based on real-time tracking, Li-Yi Wei from Adobe presented a
system that enables presenters to augment their live presentation by interacting with the
shown content in real-time using mere hand gestures and body postures.
    Regarding content production and applications, Christian Lipski from Apple presen-
ted the ARKit software framework developed for creating captivating augmented reality
experiences. James Tompkin from Brown University presented work on multi-view camera
editing of Real VR content during post-production. Johanna Pirker from TU Graz showed
how virtual reality can be paired with human-computer interaction to enhance learning
experiences in the physics classroom. Production aspects and cinematic VR experiences were
also considered prominent drivers of contemporary Real VR research by other presenters, e.g.
Marco Volino, Darren Cosker, Philippe Bekaert, Peter Eisert and Brian Cabral.
    Practically experiencing the new, tetherless Oculus Quest brought along by Alexander
Sorkine-Hornung in the demonstration track made impressively clear how free, unrestricted
user motion extends the usability and acceptance of VR tremendously, made possible by the
pass-through view feature of this HMD.
    Finally, in the coming months, a number of seminar participants will compile an edited
book volume on the state-of-the-art in Real VR that Springer has already agreed to publish
as part of their well-known Lecture Notes on Computer Science (LNCS) Survey Series.



                                                                                                19272
146   19272 – Real VR


       2       Table of Contents
      Executive Summary
        Marcus A. Magnor and Alexander Sorkine-Hornung . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144

      Overview of Talks
           Bridging the gap between VR and TV
           Philippe Bekaert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
           Casual Real VR
           Tobias Bertel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
           Full-360 Inside-out Volumetric Video Capture. Six Degrees of Freedom Video.
           Brian Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
           Virtual Characters and Interaction in Immersive Worlds
           Darren Cosker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
           A Perceptual Graphics Approach to Non-Verbal Communication
           Douglas Cunningham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
           Hybrid Human Modeling
           Peter Eisert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
           3D Visual Scene Sensing, Light Field Processing and Immersive Visualization
           Atanas Gotchev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
           Spatial Audio Reproduction System for VR Using 360◦ Cameras
           Hansung Kim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
           Introducing Apple’s ARKit 3: Real-Time Computer Vision on Mobile Devices
           Christian Lipski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
           From Reality to Immersive VR. What’s missing in VR?
           Marcus A. Magnor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
           Towards Deep Real-time Rendering for Mixed Reality
           Anjul Patney . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
           HCI meets VR: Learning through VR
           Johanna Pirker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
           6-DoF VR Video: Towards Immersive 360◦ VR Video with Motion Parallax
           Christian Richardt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
           Shading Atlas Streaming
           Dieter Schmalstieg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
           Human Learning: Understanding and Computing the Eyes and Brain in VR
           Qi Sun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
           Capturing the real world for interaction in VR and AR
           Christian Theobalt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
           Multi-view Camera Editing: A Few Notes
           James Tompkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
           Light Fields for Immersive Virtual Experiences
           Marco Volino . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
Marcus A. Magnor and Alexander Sorkine-Hornung                                                          147


   Interactive Body-driven Graphics for Augmented Video Performance
   Li-Yi Wei . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
   Computational Near-eye Displays & Digital Eyeglasses with Focus Cues
   Gordon Wetzstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
   Hand Tracking for HoloLens 2
   Erroll Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
   Light Weight 3D Dynamic Reconstruction
   Feng Xu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156




                                                                                                     19272
148   19272 – Real VR


       3     Overview of Talks
      3.1    Bridging the gap between VR and TV
      Philippe Bekaert (Hasselt University – Diepenbeek, BE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Philippe Bekaert


      In this talk, I present a brief overview of VR/AR related R&D work at the visual computing
      group of the Expertise center for Digital Media of Hasselt University in Diepenbeek, Belgium,
      and our young spin-off AZilPix. Topics covered include 360 degrees video camera rigs
      and stitching, free viewpoint video, and a range of applications we have been addressing:
      immersive collaboration, free viewpoint video for sports broadcasting, video capture for multi-
      scopic (“holographic”) video displays, researching the “grammar” of the new medium which
      immersive video implies (with the art performance company CREW, www.crewonline.org),
      investigating the use of 360 video as “the next best thing to being there” (e.g. at major rock
      festivals), an immersive video environment for medical surgery training (with another young
      company dlivemed, www.dlivemed.com), and the use of immersive video as a conventional
      TV broadcasting production tool (the topic of our AZilPix spin-off, www.azilpix.com).
          AZilPix commercialises a multi-camera video capture and processing system offering
      virtual pan-tilt-zoom functionality in ultra high resolution (48 megapixels) cameras. It is
      rooted in our expertise with 360 degree video systems, and offers the ability to mix 360 video
      and regular broadcast TV video in one and the same system. It offers entirely stitching
      artifact free TV broadcast quality 360 degrees video in a very simple and convenient way: by
      means of an extreme fish eye lens on our ultra-high resolution camera.



      3.2    Casual Real VR
      Tobias Bertel (University of Bath, GB)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Tobias Bertel
       Joint work of Tobias Bertel, Neill D.F. Campbell, Christian Richardt


      Creating Real VR experiences is a very challenging and multi-disciplinary task. Real-world
      capturing procedures as well as realistic scene representations are hard to obtain for general
      environments and are key for high-quality novel-view synthesis. My talk begins by motivating
      image-based rendering (IBR) techniques. I focus on the 360º representation and talk about its
      issues. My work, MegaParallax, which provides 360º environments with motion parallax, does
      a step forward to provide more immersive Real VR experiences in ego-centric environments.
      Concepts for the current state-of-the-art in traditional and learned novel-view synthesis,
      namely layered scene geometry, are motivated and illustrated. My talk concludes by pointing
      to encountered issues during my research dealing with 360º environments and sharing a set
      of ideas for the shiny future, which are mainly orbiting around reliable 3D reconstruction for
      ego-centric camera paths, which are crucial for casual Real VR and AR applications, and
      deep learning.
Marcus A. Magnor and Alexander Sorkine-Hornung                                                          149


3.3    Full-360 Inside-out Volumetric Video Capture. Six Degrees of
       Freedom Video.
Brian Cabral (Facebook – Menlo Park, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Brian Cabral


Using a single camera array to capture depth + RGB color remains a daunting challenge for
a variety of reasons ranging from the physical creation of a reliable camera rig, to managing
the large data sets, and then to the reconstruction of a final 360 image. As part of our
research and development we built such a system based on cinematic quality cameras and
sensors. We present the HW and SW architecture, key algorithms, and technical hurdles we
overcame. The talk will conclude with a presentation of results and remaining challenges.



3.4    Virtual Characters and Interaction in Immersive Worlds
Darren Cosker (University of Bath, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Darren Cosker


We are now beginning to see high quality real time characters suitable for immersive
experiences. However, these typically one-off exercises require a great deal of effort, cost
and expertise to create. In this talk I will outline some recent exciting examples of work in
this area – including recent CAMERA work which contributed to commercial VR and video
game projects with the BBC and Aardman. I will draw out some of our and our commercial
partners experiences in this area – applicable to many different aspects of virtual character
creation and animation – which I hope will lead to interesting future challenges.



3.5    A Perceptual Graphics Approach to Non-Verbal Communication
Douglas Cunningham (BTU Cottbus-Senftenberg, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                © Douglas Cunningham


By integrating the knowledge and methods from the fields of Psychology and Informatics, it
is possible to address research questions that were otherwise intractable. In particular, my
lab combines low-level psychophysics with modern computer graphics to allow an ecological
psychology approach to modeling and synthesizing behaviorally relevant, spatio-temporal
information. In this talk, I will provide an overview of recent work on the perception and
(artificial) synthesis of facial expressions as well as work on the relationship between low-level
image statistics and perception.




                                                                                                     19272
150   19272 – Real VR


      3.6    Hybrid Human Modeling
      Peter Eisert (Fraunhofer-Institut – Berlin, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Peter Eisert


      Photorealistic modeling and rendering of humans is extremely important for VR environments,
      as the human body and face are highly complex and exhibit large shape variability but
      also especially as humans are extremely sensitive to looking at humans. Furthermore, in
      VR environments, interactivity plays an important role. While purely computer graphics
      modeling can achieve highly realistic human models, achieving real photorealism with these
      models is extremely computationally expensive. In our research we investigate hybrid
      representations for human bodies and faces, combining classical computer graphics models
      with image- and video-based as well as example-based approaches in order to combine
      interactivity with photorealism. In this talk, we will cover recent advances at HHI in 4D
      human body reconstruction and modeling as well as hybrid face modeling.



      3.7    3D Visual Scene Sensing, Light Field Processing and Immersive
             Visualization
      Atanas Gotchev (Tampere University of Technology, FI)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Atanas Gotchev


      This talk summarizes three topics of our research placed along the chain of 3D visual scene
      sensing, light processing and immersive visualization.
          First, we discuss the problem of denoising 3D scene range measurements acquired by
      Time-of-flight (ToF) range sensors and composed in the form of 2D image-like depth maps.
      We address the specific case of ToF low-sensing environment, which is set by low-light sensing
      conditions, low-power hardware requirements, and low-reflectivity scenes. We present an
      elaborated analysis of noise properties of ToF data sensed in low-sensing conditions and a
      related non-local denoising approach working in complex domain.
          Second, we discuss the problem of light field reconstruction through sparse modelling in
      shearlet domain. We argue that the generated densely sampled light field of a given 3D scene
      is suitable for all applications which require light field reconstruction.
          Third, we discuss our practical experience in developing a wide super-multiview head-up
      display, which augment the vehicle windshield with images flying few meters in front of the
      driver and maintaining smooth parallax.



      3.8    Spatial Audio Reproduction System for VR Using 360◦ Cameras
      Hansung Kim (University of Surrey – Guildford, GB)
            License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                      © Hansung Kim


      Recent progresses in Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) allow us to experience
      various VR/AR applications in our daily life. In order to maximise the immersion of user
      in VR/AR environments, a plausible spatial audio reproduction synchronised with visual
Marcus A. Magnor and Alexander Sorkine-Hornung                                                       151


information is essential. In this talk, we introduce a simple and efficient system to estimate
room acoustic for plausible reproduction of spatial audio using 360◦ cameras for VR/AR
applications. A pair of 360◦ images is used for room geometry and acoustic property
estimation. A simplified 3D geometric model of the scene is estimated by depth estimation
from captured images and semantic labelling using a convolutional neural network (CNN).
The real environment acoustics are characterised by frequency-dependent acoustic predictions
of the scene. Spatially synchronised audio is reproduced based on the estimated geometric
and acoustic properties in the scene. The reconstructed scenes are rendered with synthesised
spatial audio as VR/AR content.



3.9     Introducing Apple’s ARKit 3: Real-Time Computer Vision on
        Mobile Devices
Christian Lipski (Apple Computer Inc. – Cupertino, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Christian Lipski


ARKit is a cutting-edge software framework that makes it easy for developers to create
captivating augmented reality experiences for iPhone and iPad. The ARKit team performs
research in the field of computer vision/machine learning, on various topics such as visual-
inertial slam, face tracking, scene reconstruction and scene understanding. I will present some
of the latest advancements and show which tracking and scene reconstruction algorithms
run today on our mobile devices. Furthermore, I will address the challenges of ensuring
consistent, high quality results of these algorithms.



3.10      From Reality to Immersive VR. What’s missing in VR?
Marcus A. Magnor (TU Braunschweig, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Marcus A. Magnor


Current endeavors towards immersive visual entertainment are still almost entirely based on
3D graphics-generated content, limiting application scenarios to virtual worlds only. The
reason is that in order to provide for stereo vision and ego-motion parallax, two essential
ingredients for genuine visual immersion perception, the scene must be rendered in real-time
from arbitrary vantage points. While this can be easily accomplished with 3D graphics via
standard GPU rendering, it is not at all straight-forward to do the same from conventional
video footage acquired of real-world events. In my talk I will outline avenues of research
toward enabling the immersive experience of real-world recordings and how to enhance the
immersive viewing experience by taking perceptual issues into account.
   I will report on the latest results of our project “Immersive Digital Reality” which is
funded by the German Science Foundation (DFG MA2555/15-1).




                                                                                                  19272
152   19272 – Real VR


      3.11      Towards Deep Real-time Rendering for Mixed Reality
      Anjul Patney (Facebook – Redmond, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Anjul Patney


      Advances in real-time graphics have enabled some of today’s most immersive visual experiences.
      However, recent disruptions have transformed the landscape of technology in this area. On
      one hand, increasing demands from mixed-reality and other displays have forced us to rethink
      how we render real-time graphics for high resolutions, framerates, and fields of view. On
      the other hand, hardware ray tracing and accelerated machine learning have provided two
      promising opportunities to address these challenges. The result is an exciting opportunity to
      shape the next generation of interactive computer graphics. In my talk I will present how
      the two directions fit into my vision of the future of mixed reality graphics.



      3.12      HCI meets VR: Learning through VR
      Johanna Pirker (TU Graz, AT)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Johanna Pirker




      3.13      6-DoF VR Video: Towards Immersive 360◦ VR Video with
                Motion Parallax
      Christian Richardt (University of Bath, GB)
             License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Christian Richardt
      Main reference Tobias Bertel, Neill D. F. Campbell, Christian Richardt: “MegaParallax: Casual 360° Panoramas
                     with Motion Parallax”, IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., Vol. 25(5), pp. 1828–1835, 2019.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2019.2898799


      Virtual reality is a new kind of medium that requires new ways to author content. My
      goal is therefore to create a new form of immersive 360-degree VR video that overcomes
      the limitations of existing 360-degree VR video. This new form of VR content – 6-DoF
      VR video – will achieve unparalleled realism and immersion by providing freedom of head
      motion and motion parallax, which is a vital depth cue for the human visual system and
      entirely missing from existing 360-degree VR video. Specifically, my aim is to accurately
      and comprehensively capture real-world environments, including visual dynamics such as
      people and moving animals or plants, and to reproduce the captured environments and
      their dynamics in VR with photographic realism, correct motion parallax and overall depth
      perception. 6-DoF VR video is a significant virtual reality capability that will be a significant
      step forward for overall immersion, realism and quality of experience.
Marcus A. Magnor and Alexander Sorkine-Hornung                                                                      153


3.14      Shading Atlas Streaming
Dieter Schmalstieg (TU Graz, AT)
       License    Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
               © Dieter Schmalstieg
Main reference Joerg H. Mueller, Philip Voglreiter, Mark Dokter, Thomas Neff, Mina Makar, Markus Steinberger,
               Dieter Schmalstieg: “Shading atlas streaming”, ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 37(6), pp. 199:1–199:16,
               2018.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3272127.3275087


Streaming high quality rendering for virtual reality applications requires minimizing perceived
latency. We introduce Shading Atlas Streaming (SAS), a novel object-space rendering
framework suitable for streaming virtual reality content. SAS decouples server-side shading
from client-side rendering, allowing the client to perform framerate upsampling and latency
compensation autonomously for short periods of time. The shading information created by the
server in object space is temporally coherent and can be efficiently compressed using standard
MPEG encoding. Our results show that SAS compares favorably to previous methods for
remote image-based rendering in terms of image quality and network bandwidth efficiency.
SAS allows highly efficient parallel allocation in a virtualized-texture-like memory hierarchy,
solving a common efficiency problem of object-space shading. With SAS, untethered virtual
reality headsets can benefit from high quality rendering without paying in increased latency.



3.15      Human Learning: Understanding and Computing the Eyes and
          Brain in VR
Qi Sun (Adobe Inc. – San José, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Qi Sun


Immersive content authoring and consumption are critical components for the next generation
VR platforms. It includes real-time rendering/interface software, and display hardware. In this
talk, I will present my previous research on understanding and (more importantly) leveraging
human perceptual factors in the eye and brain for fundamental geometry/imaging/rendering
algorithms and practical applications, such as VR walk-through and computationally foveated
displays.



3.16      Capturing the real world for interaction in VR and AR
Christian Theobalt (MPI für Informatik – Saarbrücken, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Christian Theobalt


In this talk, I will briefly review some of our recent work on high quality human face, body
and hand capture, as well as inverse rendering with a single color or depth camera.




                                                                                                                 19272
154   19272 – Real VR


      3.17      Multi-view Camera Editing: A Few Notes
      James Tompkin (Brown University – Providence, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © James Tompkin


      Capturing the world realistically for VR reproduction is often only the start of the creative
      process: editing the data comes next. In my talk, I discussed some of the problems with
      editing multi-camera footage and presented some of my recent work in this area. These
      works attempt to build a set of tools, similar to how Adobe Photoshop can edit 2D data, but
      for multi-camera footage. For instance, I discussed how we can filter multi-view videos in a
      spatio-temporally consistent way. Then, I discussed how we can perform region selection in
      multi-view image data via view-consistent superpixels and scribble selection. I also discussed
      future display devices for displaying VR content in social settings using massive tiled displays,
      e.g., for virtual concerts.



      3.18      Light Fields for Immersive Virtual Experiences
      Marco Volino (University of Surrey, GB)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                       © Marco Volino


      There is increasing interest in creating photo-realistic cinematic experiences for virtual and
      augmented reality (AR/VR). The use of games engines and computer generated imagery
      allows inter-activity, such as head movement, but do not achieve cinematic photo-realism.
      Conversely, 360 and stereo 360 video achieve photo-realism for a fixed location but do not
      allow head movement or realistic parallax. Light field capture offers a potential solution for
      capturing a scene with full photo-realism whilst allowing changes in viewpoint with correct
      parallax. This talk will discuss recent work for the creation of light field video assets for use
      in cinematic VR experiences.



      3.19      Interactive Body-driven Graphics for Augmented Video
                Performance
      Li-Yi Wei (Adobe Inc. – San José, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                     © Li-Yi Wei
       Joint work of Nazmus Saquib, Rubaiat Habib Kazi, Li-Yi Wei, Wilmot Li
      Main reference Nazmus Saquib, Rubaiat Habib Kazi, Li-Yi Wei, Wilmot Li: “Interactive Body-Driven Graphics
                     for Augmented Video Performance”, in Proc. of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
                     Computing Systems, CHI 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK, May 04-09, 2019, p. 622, ACM, 2019.
                URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300852


      We naturally use hand gestures and body postures when talking to one another, but often
      resort to pre-created slides or videos when presenting with synthetic or virtual effects. Is
      there a way to combine the spontaneity of natural gestures with the power of synthetic
      graphics to enrich our presentation and communication? We investigate a prototype system
      that augments live presentations with interactive graphics to create a rich and expressive
      storytelling environment. Using our system, the presenter interacts with the graphical
      elements in real-time with gestures and postures, thus leveraging our innate, everyday skills
      to enhance our communication capabilities with the audience.
Marcus A. Magnor and Alexander Sorkine-Hornung                                                       155


3.20      Computational Near-eye Displays & Digital Eyeglasses with Focus
          Cues
Gordon Wetzstein (Stanford University, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Gordon Wetzstein


Immersive visual and experiential computing systems, i.e. virtual and augmented reality
(VR/AR), are entering the consumer market and have the potential to profoundly impact our
society. Applications of these systems range from communication, entertainment, education,
collaborative work, simulation and training to telesurgery, phobia treatment, and basic vision
research. In every immersive experience, the primary interface between the user and the
digital world is the near-eye display. Thus, developing near-eye display systems that provide
a high-quality user experience is of the utmost importance. Many characteristics of near-eye
displays that define the quality of an experience, such as resolution, refresh rate, contrast,
and field of view, have been significantly improved over the last years. However, a significant
source of visual discomfort prevails: the vergence-accommodation conflict (VAC). Further,
natural focus cues are not supported by any existing near-eye display. In this talk, we
discuss frontiers of engineering next-generation opto-computational near-eye display systems
to increase visual comfort and provide realistic and effective visual experiences.



3.21      Hand Tracking for HoloLens 2
Erroll Wood (Microsoft Research – Cambridge, GB)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Erroll Wood


Traditional computing devices require us to adapt ourselves to digital input and output
mechanisms, mediating our interactions through flat screens, button presses and touch events.
Mixed reality devices like HoloLens open up a new computing paradigm, where digital content
integrates seamlessly with the physical world, and our devices understand the environments
we inhabit and the people that inhabit them. I will describe how HoloLens 2 tracks the
user’s hands, allowing the user to interact with virtual objects by simply reaching out and
touching them.



3.22      Light Weight 3D Dynamic Reconstruction
Feng Xu (Tsinghua University Beijing, CN)
       License     Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
                 © Feng Xu


3D dynamic reconstruction is an important topic in graphics and computer vision. This
talk majorly focuses on the reconstruction of human face, body and hand, which have many
applications in HCI, VR and AR. The techniques use one or two consumer level sensors
to reconstruct the motions of the target in real time, which we believe may have a great
potential to be used in the future mobile devices and applications for end users.




                                                                                                  19272
156   19272 – Real VR


              Participants
        Philippe Bekaert                  Moritz Kappel                  Frank Steinicke
      Hasselt University –               TU Braunschweig, DE           Universität Hamburg, DE
      Diepenbeek, BE                      Hansung Kim                    Qi Sun
        Tobias Bertel                    University of Surrey –        Adobe Inc. – San José, US
      University of Bath, GB             Guildford, GB                   Christian Theobalt
        Brian Cabral                       Christian Lipski            MPI für Informatik –
      Facebook – Menlo Park, US          Apple Computer Inc. –         Saarbrücken, DE
        Susana Castillo Alejandre        Cupertino, US                   James Tompkin
      TU Braunschweig, DE                 Marcus A. Magnor             Brown University –
        Darren Cosker                    TU Braunschweig, DE           Providence, US
      University of Bath, GB                                             Marco Volino
                                           Anjul Patney
        Douglas Cunningham                                             University of Surrey, GB
                                         Facebook – Redmond, US
      BTU Cottbus-Senftenberg, DE                                        Li-Yi Wei
                                          Johanna Pirker               Adobe Inc. – San José, US
        Peter Eisert                     TU Graz, AT
      Fraunhofer-Institut – Berlin, DE                                   Gordon Wetzstein
                                          Christian Richardt           Stanford University, US
        Atanas Gotechev                  University of Bath, GB
      Tampere University of                                              Erroll Wood
      Technology, FI                      Dieter Schmalstieg           Microsoft Research –
        Adrian Hilton                    TU Graz, AT                   Cambridge, GB
      University of Surrey –               Alexander Sorkine-Hornung     Feng Xu
      Guildford, GB                      Facebook Zürich, CH           Tsinghua University Beijing, CN
