                                                                  Catching Rats in H-minor-free Graphs∗

                                                                                      Maximilian Gorsky†
                                                      Discrete Mathematics Group, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Daejeon, South Korea

                                                                                       Giannos Stamoulis
arXiv:2506.22857v2 [math.CO] 23 Oct 2025




                                                                    Université Paris Cité, CNRS, IRIF, F-75013, Paris, France

                                                                                      Dimitrios M. Thilikos‡
                                                                     LIRMM, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France

                                                                                     Sebastian Wiederrecht
                                                                                  KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea



                                                  We show that every H-minor-free graph that also excludes a (k × k)-grid as a minor has
                                                  treewidth/branchwidth bounded from above by a function f (t, k) that is linear in k and
                                                  polynomial in t := |V (H)|. Such a result was proven originally by [Demaine & Hajiaghayi,
                                                  Combinatorica, 2008], where f was indeed linear in k. However the dependency in t in
                                                  this result was non-explicit (and huge). Later, [Kawarabayashi & Kobayashi, JCTB,
                                                  2020] showed that this bound can be estimated to be f (t, k) ∈ 2O(t log t) · k. Wood
                                                  recently asked whether f can be pushed further to be polynomial, while maintaining
                                                  the linearity on k. We answer this in a particularly strong sense, by showing that the
                                                  treewidth/branchwidth of G is in O(gk + t2304 ), where g is the Euler genus of H. This
                                                  directly yields f (t, k) = O(t2 k + t2304 ).
                                                     Our methods build on techniques for branchwidth and on new bounds and insights for
                                                  the Graph Minor Structure Theorem (GMST) due to [Gorsky, Seweryn & Wiederrecht,
                                                  2025, arXiv:2504.02532]. In particular, we prove a variant of the GMST that ensures
                                                  some helpful properties for the minor relation. We further employ our methods to provide
                                                  approximation algorithms for the treewidth/branchwidth of H-minor-free graphs. In
                                                  particular, for every ε > 0 and every t-vertex graph H with Euler genus g, we give a
                                                  (g + ε)-approximation algorithm for the branchwidth of H-minor-free graphs running
                                                  in 2poly(t)/ε · poly(n)-time. Our algorithms explicitly return either an appropriate
                                                  branch-decomposition or a grid-minor certifying a negative answer.
                                              ∗
                                                 Emails of the authors: m.gorsky@pm.me, stamoulis@irif.fr, sedthilk@thilikos.info, wiederrecht@kaist.ac.kr
                                              †
                                                 Supported by the Institute for Basic Science (IBS-R029-C1).
                                               ‡
                                                 Supported by the French-German Collaboration ANR/DFG Project UTMA (ANR-20-CE92-0027), the ANR
                                           project GODASse ANR-24-CE48-4377, and by the Franco-Norwegian project PHC AURORA 2024-2025 (Projet n°
                                           51260WL).
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                         1
  1.1 The Grid Theorem and its Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          1
  1.2 Combinatorial results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      3
  1.3 Approximation algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       4
  1.4 Sketch of our proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5

2 Preliminaries                                                                                        6

3 Approximating the branchwidth of graphs of bounded Euler genus                                      11
  3.1 Dealing with apices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
  3.2 Approximating the branchwidth of a graph of bounded genus . . . . . . . . . . . . .             13
  3.3 Constructing a grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14

4 Graph Minor Structure Theory                                                                        16
  4.1 Underlying definitions of graph minor structure theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        16
  4.2 The Local Structure Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
  4.3 A variant of the Graph Minor Structure Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          20

5 Improved bounds on the relationship between clique- and grid-minors                              25
  5.1 Sphere-cut decompositions and more tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
  5.2 Finding cliques or grids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

6 Approximating the branchwidth of H-minor-free graphs                                                31




                                                   2
1 Introduction
Treewidth is one of the most extensively studied parameters in structural graph theory. Together
with its closely related parameter branchwidth (introduced in [RS91b]), treewidth has served as
a cornerstone of the Graph Minors Series [RS04] (see Section 2 for the definitions of branch- and
treewidth). Given a graph G, we use tw(G) (resp. bw(G)) to denote the treewidth (resp. branchwidth)
of G. Both parameters are defined via tree-like decompositions that capture how closely a graph
resembles a tree in its topological structure. From a structural perspective, these two parameters are
known to reflect the same underlying notion of “tree-likeness.” Indeed, for every non-acyclic graph G,
it holds that bw(G)−1 ≤ tw(G) ≤ ⌊3/2·bw(G)⌋−1 (see [RS91b]). Variants and generalizations of these
parameters appear widely across a broad range of applications in structural graph theory [HW17,
AFG09, JRST01, HW06, JST15]. Their true significance, however, becomes most apparent in
algorithmic graph theory, where many problems can be solved efficiently, via dynamic programming,
when restricted to graphs of bounded treewidth (or branchwidth) [Cou90, BPT92, ALS91]. Moreover,
since computing both parameters is NP-complete [ST94, ACP87], extensive research has focused
on the design of FPT-algorithms (i.e., algorithms deciding whether tw(G) ≤ k (resp. bw(G) ≤
k) in f (k) · nO(1) time for some computable function f ) [BK96, BT97, KL23], approximation
algorithms [BGHK95, FHL08], and FPT-approximation algorithms [FK24, Kor21]. A particularly
noteworthy island of tractability for branchwidth is the class of planar graphs. Although the
branchwidth of planar graphs is unbounded, it can be computed in polynomial time, thanks to
the celebrated “Ratcatcher algorithm” of Seymour and Thomas [ST94]. This, in turn, yields a
constant-factor approximation for treewidth on planar graphs.

1.1 The Grid Theorem and its Applications
One of the most fundamental results related to treewidth is the celebrated Grid Theorem, which
asserts the existence of a function h : N → N such that if a graph excludes a (k × k)-grid1 as a
minor2 , then its treewidth (or branchwidth) is bounded above by h(k).
This theorem was first established in [RS86], and the function h has since been progressively
improved in subsequent works [RST94, LS15, KK20]. Most notably, Chuzhoy and Tan proved that
h(k) ∈ O(k 9 · polylog(k)) [CC16, CT21], thereby establishing a polynomial upper bound. Since
the (k × k)-grid has treewidth at least k, the theorem yields a min-max equivalence between the
treewidth of a graph G and the largest integer k such that G contains a (k × k)-grid minor. This
maximum k is called the biggest grid number of G, denoted by bg(G).
The above min-max equivalence is especially useful in algorithm design. It enables the following
win/win algorithmic strategy: if a (k×k)-grid minor is present, it can directly lead to a solution, while
its absence guarantees bounded treewidth, enabling dynamic programming techniques. Consequently,


 1
     The (k × k)-grid is the Cartesian product of two paths on k vertices.
 2
     A minor of a graph G is constructed by taking a subgraph of G and “contracting” edges within it. Here, by
      contraction, we mean identification of two vertices that share an edge, followed by the deletion of any loops or
      parallel edges that may appear.




                                                           1
improving bounds on the function h in the Grid Theorem has direct and far-reaching algorithmic
implications, as it refines parameter dependencies in algorithms that rely on such strategies.
It is known that, in general, the function h cannot be improved beyond O(k 2 log k) (see e.g. [Thi12]),
although tighter bounds exist for special classes of graphs. In particular, when the input graph
belongs to a minor-closed class, the relationship between treewidth (or branchwidth) and the biggest
grid number becomes linear. This was first established by Demaine and Hajiaghayi [DH08], who
proved the existence of a function f : N → N such that for every graph excluding a t-vertex graph
H as a minor, the following holds:

                                            tw(G) ≤ f (t) · bg(G).                                                  (1)

This linear relationship has important algorithmic consequences. In particular, it enables sublinear
treewidth bounds for many parameterized problems on H-minor-free graphs. To illustrate this,
consider two representative examples: Feedback Vertex Set and Longest Path. In both
problems, the input is a pair (G, k). Feedback Vertex Set asks for a set of at most k vertices
that intersects all cycles in G, while Longest Path asks for a path with at least k vertices in G.
Thanks to (1), instances (G, √k) where G excludes Kt as a minor can be efficiently reduced3 to graphs
with treewidth tw(G) = Ot ( k).4
Problems exhibiting this behaviour are typically called bidimensional (see [DFHT05]). The sublinear
treewidth condition, combined with standard dynamic programming—often running in 2O(tw) · nO(1)
or 2O(tw log tw) · nO(1) time—yields subexponential parameterized algorithms. For example, using
techniques from [CNP+ 22] (see also [BCKN15, DPBF10, DFT08, BST21]), both Feedback Vertex
Set and Longest Path can be solved in√ 2O(tw) · nO(1) time. This, in turn, implies subexponential
parameterized algorithms running in 2Ot ( k) · nO(1) time for both problems on Kt -minor-free graphs.
The need to establish relations like (1) between tw and bg extends beyond the design of subexponential
parameterized algorithms (as discussed in [DFHT05]). Such relations have proven crucial in deriving
linear kernels [FLST20] and EPTASs [FLS18] for bidimensional problems (see also [FLST20, Dem10,
DHT06, DFHT04, BT22]).
More broadly, these techniques have inspired a family of algorithms with running times of the form:
                                     √                         √
                                2Ot ( k) · O(nc )    or   2Ot ( k log k) · O(nc ),                                  (2)

for problems on H-minor-free graphs. In (2) c is typically some small integer constant. This
phenomenon—termed the “square root phenomenon” by Marx [Mar13]—is pervasive in the context
of parameterized algorithms on minor-closed graph classes. Intuitively, such dependencies stem
from the structural properties of H-minor-free graphs and have also been explored in broader graph
classes [BT22, BBGR24b, BBGR24a].


 3
                                 √      √
   To see this, observe that a (⌈ k⌉ × ⌈ k⌉)-grid minor in G certifies that (G, k) is a no-instance (resp. yes-instance)
    of Feedback Vertex Set (resp. Longest Path). Hence, one may assume that the input graph has treewidth
    sublinear in k.
 4
   By g(n) = Ok (f (n)) we mean that there is a function h : N → N such that g(n) = O(h(k) · f (n)).




                                                           2
We assume henceforth that t := |V (H)| and that n is the size of the input graph. Notice that in
running times resembling those in (2), the influence of the excluded graph H is “hidden” in the
Ot notation. This has motivated efforts to determine explicit bounds for the function f in (1), as
such bounds were not provided in the original result by Demaine and Hajiaghayi [DFHT05]. In this
direction, Kawarabayashi and Kobayashi [KK20] established that f (t) = 2O(t log t) .
Recently, David Wood [Woo25] posed the following question:

Is there a polynomial function f such that for every graph G, we have tw(G) ≤ f (t) · bg(G)? (3)

1.2 Combinatorial results
In this paper, we resolve the question in (3) positively in a way that reveals the pivotal role of the
Euler genus gH := eg(H) of the excluded graph H. We prove that for every H-minor-free graph G,

                                     tw(G) = O(gH · bg(G) + t2304 ).                              (4)

Our bound in (4) reveals that the contribution of the excluded graph H in the aforementioned
subexponential algorithms depends primarily on its Euler genus gH , rather than just its size t.
Specifically, our result implies that the aforementioned subexponential algorithms run in time
                                 √                                √
                          2O(gH · k) · Ot (nc )   or       2O(gH · k log k) · Ot (nc ),

highlighting that the parameter dependence is fundamentally governed by the topological complexity
of H, as captured by its Euler genus.
Excluding graphs and grids.     Given that eg(H) = O(t2 ), (4) can be simplified to the following.

Theorem 1.1. For every t-vertex graph H, every H-minor-free graph G that excludes a (k × k)-grid
as a minor, has treewidth/branchwidth in O(t2 k + t2304 ).

Also our proof of (4) yields the following the following stronger statement regarding induced minors,
which are found by taking induced subgraphs and performing edge contractions.

Theorem 1.2. If a graph G excludes both Kt and the (k × k)-grid as an induced minor, then it
has treewidth/branchwidth in O(t2 k + t2304 ).

Apex graphs. An apex graph is a graph in which there exists a vertex whose removal makes the
graph planar. Recently Hendrey and Wood [HW25] improved a well-known theorem on graphs of
bounded radius r excluding an apex graph with t vertices as a minor, originally proven by Eppstein
with worse bounds [Epp00], by showing that such graphs have treewidth in O∗ (r9 t18 ), where the O∗
notation hides poly-logarithmic factors. According to the results of Kawarabayashi and Kobayashi
in [KK20], the dependency on r can be pushed to be linear, though the bound features a factor that
is exponential in t. Using Theorem 1.1 and the proofs presented in [HW25], this can be improved
in a straightforward fashion to the following.




                                                       3
Theorem 1.3. For any apex graph A with t vertices, every A-minor-free graph G of radius at most
r has treewidth in O(t4 r + t2304 ).

1.3 Approximation algorithms
There is a long line of research on approximating treewidth and branchwidth. Since the two
parameters are linearly related, any approximation algorithm for one immediately implies an
approximation algorithm for the other.
An early result by Bodlaender, Gilbert, Hafsteinsson, and Kloks [BGHK95] established a polynomial-
time O(log n)-approximation algorithm for both parameters. Later, Feige, Hajiaghayi, and
Lee [FHL08] gave a randomized polynomial-time algorithm achieving an improved approxima-
                  √
tion factor of O( log n). On the negative side, computing treewidth within an additive error of
nε for some ε > 0 is NP-hard [BGHK95], and Austrin, Pitassi, and Wu [WAPL15] showed that no
constant-factor approximation exists under the Small Set Expansion Conjecture. More recently,
Bonnet proved that approximating treewidth within a factor of 1.00005 is NP-hard [Bon25].
For restricted graph classes, better approximation algorithms are known. In particular, both
parameters admit constant-factor approximations on asteroid-triple-free graphs [BT03]. Similarly,
for H-minor-free graphs, Feige et al. [FHL08] provided a polynomial-time O(t2 )-approximation
algorithm when H is a t-vertex graph. This raises the natural question of whether this dependence
on t can be improved.
The proof of (4), that is the base of all our combinatorial results, is algorithmic. In Section 6 we
derive from it the following approximation algorithm for treewidth/branchwidth.

Theorem 1.4. There exists an algorithm that, given k ∈ N, a t-vertex graph H of Euler genus gH ,
and an H-minor-free graph G, outputs either a (k×k)-grid minor of G or a tree/branch-decomposition
of G of width O(gH · k + (gH + 1) · poly(t)), in 2poly(t) · poly(n) time.

By leveraging the randomized algorithm of Chekuri and Chuzoy [CC16], the output guaranteed by
Theorem 1.4 can also be achieved with high probability in (t + n)O(1) time.
As a consequence, we obtain a O(gH )-approximation algorithm for computing bw, tw, and bg on
H-minor-free graphs. Since the size of H and its Euler genus gH can differ substantially (e.g.,
when H is planar), this result constitutes a significant improvement over the previous O(|V (H)|2 )-
approximation bounds for branchwidth and treewidth [FHL08].
Finally, we observe that—particularly for the branchwidth parameter—the approximation factor
can be made arbitrarily close to the Euler genus gH of the excluded graph H.

Theorem 1.5. There exists an algorithm that, given a t-vertex graph H with Euler genus gH and
an H-minor-free graph G, outputs a value b such that b ≤ bw(G) ≤ (gH + ε)b, in 2poly(t)/ε · poly(n)
time.

Again, using the randomized algorithm of Chekuri and Chuzoy [CC16], the above approximation
can also be turned into a randomized one running in time 2poly(1/ε) poly(t + n).




                                                 4
Future directions. In this paper we prove that tw, bw, and bg can all5 be approximated in
polynomial time on H-minor free graphs with an approximation factor that depends on the Euler
genus of the excluded graph H rather than the size of H. The natural question arising in the above
context is the following:
         Is the parameter of Euler genus of H the optimal measure for the approximation factor?
We suspect that the answer to this question is negative. However, we certainly believe that Euler
genus is the “most natural” measure that we may imagine for this.
Related work. The linear dependence between tw and bg, as denoted by (1), was revealed for
the first time for minor-closed graph classes in [DH08], while for graphs of bounded genus this was
already known in [DFHT05]. These results germinated the first ideas on the approximability of
treewidth/branchwidth: they can be traced back to the proofs of [DFHT05] for the case of bounded
genus graphs, in [DHN+ 04] for single-crossing minor-free graphs (using the structural theorem of
[RS91a]), and to the proofs of [DH08] and [DFT08] for H-minor free graphs (see also [FHL08]).
Refined structural theorems were also recently used in [TW25] for the derivation of an EPTAS for
branchwidth for graph classes excluding a toroidal and a projective graph. In our proofs, we use
some of the tools presented in [TW25].

1.4 Sketch of our proof
For the proof of Theorem 1.1, which implies (4), we work with branchwidth instead of treewidth,
as branchwidth behaves better with embedded graphs. We make strong use of the structure of
H-minor-free graphs as revealed in [RS03] by the Graph Minor Structure Theorem (GMST). This
theorem indicates that H-minor-free graphs can be tree-decomposed into a collection of graphs,
called torsos, that can be “almost embedded” in a surface where H does not embed. By “almost
embedded” we mean that a considerable part of each torso Gt is embedded “up to 3-separations” in
the surface while the rest of it is either a small number of “apices” or can be drawn inside a bounded
number of faces as “vortices of small width”. (We postpone the precise definitions to Section 4.)
For our purposes, we prove a special variant of the GMST that permits both the values of bw and
bg on G to be computed using the corresponding values of its torsos. As already mentioned, each
torso Gt is partitioned into two parts: the part that is embedded “up to 3-separations”, say G′t ,
and the rest that corresponds either to the apices or the parts that are drawn inside the vortices.
Since the tools we want to apply later need an actual embedding, we use the quasi-4-connected
decomposition of Grohe in [Gro16] to get rid of the vague parts of G′t that develops at the site of
the 3-separations. The proof of our version of GMST uses as a departure point the recent version
of GMST proven in [GSW25] that ensures that both the number of apices or vortices, as well as
the width of the vortices are all bounded by a polynomial function of the size of H. Our proof is
algorithmic, running in time 2poly(t) · poly(n), based on the running time of the GMST in [GSW25].
We next derive a constant-factor approximation algorithm for the branchwidth of each torso Gt
that either outputs a (k × k)-grid minor of Gt , certifying that bw(Gt ) ≥ k, or builds a branch-
 5
     Certainly, the same approximation applies for every graph parameter that is linearly equivalent to treewidth (see
      e.g., [DN19, LPTZ23, MPT23, HW17]).




                                                           5
decomposition of width at most O(gk + poly(t)), where g is the Euler genus of the surface where
G′t is embedded that, in turn, is bounded by the Euler genus of H. For this, we work with the
graph G′t by removing from it additional apex vertices obtained by a surface-cutting approach along
shortest non-contractible curves, using the algorithms of [CCDVL12]. This procedure reduces G′t
to a simpler graph G′′t that is either embedded into a surface different than the sphere in a way
that certifies the existence of a (k × k)-grid using the results of [DFHT05] or to a graph embedded
into a sphere. In the latter case, we apply the Ratcatcher algorithm from [ST94] and find either
a certificate of a (k × k)-grid or a special branch decomposition, called sphere-cut decomposition
(see [RST14, ST10, DFT08, DPBF10]). Using this decomposition we return the apices and vortices
that are missing from the spherical embedding of G′′t to Gt and we do this with an additive cost on
the width of the obtained branch-decomposition of Gt , where the part contributed by the apices
and vortices can be guaranteed to be comparatively small. The fact that this is true is a core result
of [TW25], though their proof is not constructive. To be able to construct a branch-decomposition
explicitly, we thus develop a constructive proof of this result along the way (see Theorem 5.3). This
leads to the construction of a branch-decomposition of each torso Gt of width in O(t2 k + poly(t))
in 2poly(t) · poly(n) time.
As the version of the GMST that we prove roughly permits the computation of both bw(G) and
bg(G) from the corresponding values of its torsos, we derive that the same linear relation between
branchwidth and biggest grid number holds also for G. Once more we note that by using randomized
algorithms due to Chekuri and Chuzoy [CC16], we can push our results to be truly polynomial,
at the cost of only receiving our desired results with high probability. Notably, this change only
impacts the proof of our variant of the GMST and leaves the rest of our methods untouched.


2 Preliminaries
We generally adhere to the notation for graphs defined in [Die10]. All graphs we consider are simple,
meaning that they contain neither loops nor parallel edges, and contain at least one vertex. We call
a maximal induced subgraph of a graph without cut vertices a block.
Surfaces. A surface Σ is a compact 2-dimensional manifold with or without boundaries. The
surfaces we consider are generally assumed to be connected. Given a pair (h, c) ∈ N × [0, 2], we let
Σ(h,c) be the surface without boundary created from the sphere by adding h handles and c crosscaps.
Dyck’s theorem [Dyc88, FW99] tells us two crosscaps are equivalent to a handle in the presence of
a third crosscap and thus our notation is sufficient to capture all surfaces without boundary.
Given a surface Σ, we add an open, respectively closed hole to Σ by removing a closed, respectively
open disk from Σ. If Σ is a surface (with holes), we let Σ be the surface resulting from gluing a
closed, respectively open disk onto each open, respectively closed hole of Σ. We let the genus of Σ
be 2h + c, where Σ(h,c) is the surface to which Σ is isomorphic. Given a surface Σ, we denote by
bd(Σ) the boundary of said surface.
A curve C in a surface Σ is called contractible if it is simple, closed, and is continuously deformable
to a point. We call a curve non-contractible if it is simple, closed, and not contractible. Note that, if




                                                   6
Σ is not a sphere (with or without holes) and we let Σ1 , Σ2 be the two components of Σ − C, for a
non-contractible curve C, then the minimum of the genus of Σ1 and Σ2 is less than the genus of Σ.
Embeddings. Given a graph G, we say that G has an embedding ψ into a surface Σ, if ψ is a
function with domain V (G) ∪ E(G) such that
    i) ψ(v) is a point of Σ for each v ∈ V (G),
   ii) ψ(u) ̸= ψ(v) for all distinct u, v ∈ V (G),
  iii) ψ(uv) is a simple curve in Σ with the ends ψ(u), ψ(v) for all uv ∈ E(G),
  iv) ψ(uv) ∩ ψ(wx) ⊆ {ψ(u), ψ(v)}, for all uv, wx ∈ E(G), and
   v) ψ(uv) ∩ ψ(w) = ∅ for all uv ∈ E(G) and w ∈ V (G) \ {u, v}.
We let ψ(G) be the union of all points and curves in its image and call the connected components
of Σ \ ψ(G) the faces of ψ. If every face of ψ is homeomorphic to an open disk, we say that ψ is a
2-cell-embedding. We will generally work with graphs with a fixed embedding and thus identify the
elements of G with the points and curves in Σ which ψ maps to each other. The minimum number
of vertices of G that is intersected by any non-contractible curve in Σ is called the representativity
(or face-width) of ψ. We consider the representativity of an embedding in the sphere to be infinite.
Of course, given some embedding it may not be immediately clear what its representativity is. For
this purpose, Cabello, Colin de Verdière, and Lazarus provide us with a linear time algorithm that
checks whether a given 2-cell-embedding has representativity at most k [CCDVL12]. They also
prove the following result, which we will make frequent use of.

Proposition 2.1 (Cabello, Colin de Verdière, and Lazarus [CCDVL12]). There exists an algorithm
that, given a graph G with a 2-cell-embedding of representativity k in a surface Σ of genus g with
h holes, finds a non-contractible curve in Σ intersecting the minimum number of vertices of G in
O((g + h) · k · (n + m))-time.

The Euler genus eg(G) of G is the minimum genus of a surface Σ such that G has an embedding
into Σ. Determining the Euler genus of a given graph is an NP-complete problem [Tho89, Tho93].
However, it is possible to efficiently determine whether a graph can be embedded in a surface of
some fixed genus [Moh99, KMR08]. Notably, the embedding produced by the algorithm in [Moh99]
is a 2-cell embedding as long as such an embedding can exist in the surface we ask the graph to be
embedded in. As a consequence we are able to use the following.

Proposition 2.2 (Kawarabayashi, Mohar and Reed [KMR08]). There exists an algorithm that,
given a graph G of Euler genus g, returns a 2-cell embedding of G in a surface of genus at most g in
2poly(g) n-time.

The runtime of this algorithm is not polynomial in all of its parameters. As a consequence, we
sometimes split out our proofs to demonstrate that once a 2-cell embedding is given, our computations
run in polynomial time. See [MT01] for more details on surfaces and embeddings.
Cuts. Let G be a graph and let S ⊆ E(G). If S ⊆ E(G), the set ∂G (S) is the cut around S (in
G), which contains all vertices in V (G) incident to edges in both S and E(G) \ S. We drop the
index G from this set if it is clear from the context which graph is meant.



                                                  7
Branchwidth. We let L(T ) be the set of leaves of the tree T . The non-leaf vertices of a tree
are called internal vertices. A tree is called ternary if all of its internal vertices have degree 3.
Accordingly, a ternary tree with two leaves corresponds to a single edge and a ternary tree with a
single leaf is simply an isolated vertex.
Given a ternary tree T with a bijection τ from E to L(T ), note that each edge e ∈ E(T ) induces
a partitioning of E into two non-empty sets Xe , Ye via τ , where we note that ∂(Xe ) = ∂(Ye ). If
E = E(G), then the branchwidth of (T, τ ) is the maximum over all edges e in E(T ) of |∂(Xe )|
and the branchwidth bw(G) of G is the minimum of the branchwidth over all ternary trees T and
bijections τ as above. We call the pair (T, τ ) a branch-decomposition of G.
The structure of graphs with very small branchwidth is well known. In particular, we will generally
not be interested in graphs with branchwidth at most 1, as these are union of stars [RS91b] and
can thus easily be recognised. The following simple result allows us to reduce the problem of
computing the branchwidth of a graph (and a corresponding branch-decomposition) to computing
the branchwidth of its blocks. We give an explicit proof of this result, since the explicit construction of
the branch-decomposition is somewhat cumbersome and we shall reencounter ideas of the particular
construction we use later on.

Lemma 2.3. For any graph G with bw(G) ≥ 2, the branchwidth of G is the maximum of the
branchwidth of its blocks. In particular, a branch-decomposition of G with width equal to the
branchwidth of G can be constructed from branch-decompositions of its blocks if they each have
width at most the branchwidth of G in time O(m).

Proof. We first want to reduce our problem to the 2-edge-connected components of G, which can
themselves be comprised of several blocks. First, we observe that if we had branch-decompositions of
all components C1 , . . . , Cℓ of G, we can take an arbitrary ternary tree T c with ℓ leaves and construct
a branch-decomposition of G by subdividing an edge of each of the branch-decompositions of the
components and identifying the subdivision vertex with one of the leaves of T c . (We assume here
that ℓ ≥ 2, since the case ℓ = 1 is trivial.) One can now get a bijection between the leaves of the
constructed tree and E(G) by combining the bijections associated with the branch-decompositions
of our components in a natural way. It is then easy to confirm that all edges corresponding to
edges in T c have width 0 and all other edges retain their appropriate width from the existing
branch-decompositions.
Suppose now that G is connected and contains a bridge e = uv, meaning that G − e is no longer
connected. Let Gu be the component of G − e that contains u and let Gv be defined analogously.
(We assume that neither of these components is trivial. Otherwise the desired result is again trivially
achieved.) Further assume that Gu has a branch-decomposition (Tu , τu ) with width at most the
branchwidth of G and let (Tv , τv ) be a branch-decomposition of Gv also with width at most the
branchwidth of G. Then we construct a branch-decomposition of G with width at most bw(G) as
follows. Let T ⋆ be the unique ternary tree with three leaves l1 , l2 , l3 and the root r. Subdivide an
edge of Tu and identify the subdivision vertex with l1 , and subdivide an edge of Tv and identify the
subdivision vertex with l3 . Let T b be the resulting tree and let τ b be the result of combining τu and
τv , as well as adding τ b (l2 ) = e. Thus τ b is a bijection between E(G) and the leaves of T b . Clearly



                                                    8
the rl2 in T b has width 2, justifying the requirement in the statement that we must have bw(G) ≥ 2.
For rl1 the only vertex which can contribute to the width here is u and analogous observation holds
for rl3 and v. All remaining edges correspond to edges in Tu or Tv and retain their width from the
previous branch-decompositions.
Thus, using the constructions just presented, both of which can clearly be carried out in linear time,
we can reduce the proof of the statement to the case in which G is 2-edge-connected, meaning that
it has no bridges and thus all of its blocks consist of more than just an edge.
Let B be a block of G and let B1 , . . . , Bk be 2-edge-connected subgraphs of G such that B ∪ ki=1 Bi =
                                                                                                      S

G, we have V (Bi ) ∩ V (Bj ) = ∅ for all distinct i, j ∈ [k], and |V (B) ∩ V (Bi )| = 1 for all i ∈ [k],
with vi ∈ V (B) ∩ V (Bi ) being a cut vertex in G. Further, suppose that (TB , τB ) is a branch-
decomposition of B and (T1 , τ1 ), . . . , (Tk , τk ) are branch-decompositions of B1 , . . . , Bk , where each
branch-decomposition has width at most bw(G). Since B is a block, for all i ∈ [k], we may let
ei ∈ E(Bi ) be an edge which has vi as an endpoint. Note that it may be true that ei = ej for some
distinct i, j ∈ [k].
Let fi ∈ E(TB ) be the unique edge incident to τB (ei ) in TB . For each i ∈ [k], we subdivide fi ,
letting xi be the corresponding subdivision vertex. (This may cause fi to be subdivided more than
once, which is of no concern for our later arguments.) Then we subdivide an arbitrary edge in Ti
and identify the subdivision vertex with xi . This ultimately results in a tree T with |E(G)| leaves,
allowing us to construct a bijection τ between E(G) and L(T ) by simply combining τ1 , . . . , τk . We
claim that (T, τ ) is a branch-decomposition of G of width at most bw(G).
In T each xi is incident to three edges: e1i being the edge closest to the non-leaf endpoint of fi , e2i
being the edge incident to the subdivision vertex produced in Ti , and e3i being the edge closest to
τB (ei ). Since vi is a cut vertex in G, the only vertices that can contribute to width of e1i are the
endpoints of ei and thus the width of e1i in (T, τ ) is at most 2. For the same reason, the width
of the edge e2i can at most be 1, as v is the only vertex that can appear in the cut around E(Bi ).
Finally, if e3i has τB (ei ) as an endpoint, its width can clearly at most be 2. Otherwise, it is part of
a subdivided path corresponding to fi and the fact that its width is at most 2 can be derived by
induction from our observation on the width of e1i . Any edge corresponding to an edge in Ti for any
i ∈ [k] retains its width in (T, τ ). All of the remaining edges must correspond to edges in TB and
from our observations above, and in particular again the fact that v1 , . . . , vk are cut vertices, we
can deduce that they also retain their widths from (TB , τB ). Thus (T, τ ) is a branch-decomposition
of G of width at most bw(G). Once more it is clear that our construction only takes linear time to
carry out.
To construct our branch-decomposition of G from the branch-decompositions of its blocks, we
may thus proceed as follows: First, combine the decompositions for all non-trivial blocks via the
procedure laid out for 2-edge-connected graphs above. Then combine these decompositions along
bridges. Finally, combine the decompositions of the components of G.

More generally, it is know that there is an FPT-algorithm for the problem of computing the
branchwidth of a graph.




                                                      9
Proposition 2.4 (Bodlaender and Thilikos [BT97]). There exists an algorithm that, given a graph
                                   3
G, outputs bw(G) in time 2O((bw(G)) ) · n.

We call a graph planar if it has an embedding in the sphere. A core result for our purposes is the
fact that it is possible to decide in polynomial time whether the branchwidth of planar graphs is at
most some specified integer k.

Proposition 2.5 (Seymour and Thomas [ST94]). Given a planar graph G and a positive integer k,
there exists an algorithm that decides in time O(n2 ) whether G has branchwidth at most k.

This is remarkable, since this problem is NP-complete in general graphs [ST94]. In contrast, Seymour
and Thomas provide a polynomial time algorithm for finding an optimal branch-decomposition for
a planar graph in time O(n4 ) [ST94]. This has since been improved to the following.

Proposition 2.6 (Gu and Tamaki [GT08]). Given a planar graph G and a positive integer k, there
exists an algorithm that returns a branch-decomposition of G with width bw(G) in O(n3 )-time.

Tangles. A separation in a graph G is a pair (A, B) of vertex sets such that A ∪ B = V (G) and
there is no edge in G with one endpoint in A \ B and the other in B \ A. The order of (A, B) is
|A ∩ B|. If k is a positive integer, we denote the collection of all separations (A, B) of order less
than k in G as Sk (G).
An orientation of Sk (G) is a set O such that for all (A, B) ∈ Sk (G) exactly one of (A, B) and
(B, A) belongs to O. A tangle of order k in G is an orientation T of Sk (G) such that for all
(A1 , B1 ), (A2 , B2 ), (A3 , B3 ) ∈ T , it holds that G[A1 ] ∪ G[A2 ] ∪ G[A3 ] ̸= G. If T is a tangle and
(A, B) ∈ T we call A the small side and B the big side of (A, B).
Let G be a graph and T and D be tangles of G. We say that D is a truncation of T if D ⊆ T .
Tangles witness the fact that a graph has large branchwidth.

Proposition 2.7 (Robertson and Seymour [RS91b]). Let G be a graph and let k be an integer
with k ≥ 2. Then G has a tangle of order k if and only if G has branchwidth at least k.

If we are dealing with graph with a 2-cell-embedding in a surface of positive genus with high
representativity, then we are guaranteed to find a large tangle and thus know that the graph we
embedded has high branchwidth. We note that the version of this theorem we state here is less
specific than what Robertson and Seymour actually prove (see (4.1) in [RS94]).

Proposition 2.8 (Robertson and Seymour [RS94]). Let k be a positive integer and let G be a
graph with a 2-cell-embedding in a surface of positive genus with representativity k. Then G has a
tangle of order k.

Minors. We formally introduce minors to later discuss how to find grid-minor models in case the
branchwidth of the graphs we consider turns out to be too high. A function φ : V (H) → 2V (G) is
called a minor model (of H in G) (or simply a model) if φ(V (H)) is a set of pairwise disjoint vertex
sets, each inducing a connected subgraph of G, and for each edge uv ∈ E(H) there exists an edge
ab ∈ E(G) with a ∈ φ(u) and b ∈ φ(v). A graph H is a minor of a graph G if and only if there
exists a minor model of H in G. This also causes us to say that G has an H-minor.



                                                   10
Treewidth and tree-decompositions. Since we will need it to apply some external results, we
also give a formal definition of treewidth, which is asymptotically equivalent to branchwidth and
generally more popular, but only ancillary to our approach. A tree-decomposition of a graph G is a
pair T = (T, β), where T is a tree and β : V (T ) → 2V (G) such that
    • for every edge e ∈ E(G), there exists a t ∈ V (T ) such that e ⊆ β(t), and
    • for every vertex v ∈ V (G), the set β −1 (v) induces a connected, non-empty subtree of T .
The width of T is the maximum value of |β(t)| − 1 over all t ∈ V (T ) and the treewidth tw(G) of G
is the minimum width over all tree-decompositions of G.
For each t ∈ V (T ), we define the adhesion sets of t as the sets in {β(t) ∩ β(d) : d ∈ NT (t)}, and the
maximum size of them is called the adhesion of t. The adhesion of T is the maximum adhesion of a
node of T .6 If T has a designated root r, we call (T, r, β) a rooted tree-decomposition.
As mentioned in the introduction, branchwidth is asymptotically equivalent to branchwidth.

Proposition 2.9 (Robertson and Seymour [RS91b]). Let G be a non-acyclic graph. Then we have
bw(G) − 1 ≤ tw(G) ≤ ⌊3/2 · bw(G)⌋ − 1.


3 Approximating the branchwidth of graphs of bounded Euler genus
The core result of this section is that, if we are given some integer k, we can efficiently confirm
that either the branchwidth of a graph with a 2-cell-embedding in some given surface of genus g is
at most g(k − 1) + k or the branchwidth of said graph is at least k. In particular, at the cost of
a worse runtime and slightly worse bounds on our approximation, we can even efficiently provide
a branch-decomposition, if the branchwidth is low, or a grid-minor model as a witness that the
branchwidth is above some specified bound.

3.1 Dealing with apices
We start with a simple lemma that will remain useful in the later sections of this article.

Lemma 3.1. Let c be an integer, let G be a graph with bw(G) ≥ 2, and let X ⊆ V (G) be a set
of vertices with |X| ≤ c. Then bw(G) ≤ bw(G − X) + c. In particular, if we are provided with
branch-decompositions of width at most bw(G − X) for each of the blocks of G − X, we can construct
a branch-decomposition of G of width at most bw(G − X) + c in time O(cm).

Proof. Let b := bw(G − X). Then we can derive a branch-decomposition (T ′ , τ ′ ) of G − X width at
most b in linear time via Lemma 2.3. We may assume that X is non-empty and let EX be the set
of edges in E(G) that have at least one endpoint in X.
Let k := |V (G − X)|, let z1 , . . . , zk be the vertices of G − X, and let E0 , E1 , . . . , Ek ⊆ EX be a
partitioning of EX into (possibly empty) sets, such that for all i ∈ [k], the edge e ∈ EX is in Ei
if e = zi x for some x ∈ X and thus E0 = EX \ ki=1 Ei . We assume that the vertices of G − X
                                                       S


 6
     For tree-decompositions with a single vertex we define the adhesion to be 0.




                                                           11
are labelled such that there exists a k ′ ∈ [k] with the property that for any i ∈ [k ′ ] there exists an
edge ei ∈ E(G − X) that is incident to zi and for any i ∈ [k ′ + 1, k], the vertex zi is isolated in
G − X. For each i ∈ [k ′ ], we let (Tbi , τbi ) be defined such that Tbi is an arbitrary ternary tree with
|Ei | leaves and τbi is a bijection from Ei to L(Tbi ). We let (Tb0 , τb0 ) be the pair of a ternary tree Tb0
with |E0 ∪ ki=k′ +1 Ei | leaves7 and a bijection τb0 from E0 ∪ ki=k′ +1 Ei to L(Tb0 ).
               S                                                     S

This allows us to modify the branch-decomposition (T ′ , τ ′ ) of G − X as follows. First, we subdivide
an arbitrary edge of Tb0 , letting w0 be the subdivision vertex and identify w0 with the subdivision
vertex resulting from subdividing an arbitrary edge in T ′ . We call the resulting tree T ′′ . Let
ui := τ ′ (ei ) for all i ∈ [k ′ ]. For each i ∈ [k ′ ] we first subdivide an arbitrary edge in Tbi 8 , letting
wi be the subdivision vertex. Then, we subdivide the unique edge of T ′′ that is incident to ui ,
letting wi′ be the subdivision vertex, and finish by identifying wi and wi′ . Let T be the resulting
tree. We extend τ ′ and the other bijections to T in the obvious way, meaning τ is a bijection from
E(G) = EX ∪ E(G − X) to L(T ) such that τ (e) is defined as τ ′ (e), if e ∈ E(G − X), as τb0 (e), if
e ∈ E0 ∪ ki=k′ +1 Ei , and as τbi (e), if e ∈ Ei for some i ∈ [k ′ ].
           S

Every edge e ∈ E(T ) now naturally defines a bipartition Xe , Ye of the edges of G via τ . It is easy
                                                                           S ′
to see that for any edge e ∈ E(T ) that corresponds to an edge of ki=0 E(Tbi ), we have ∂G (Xe ) ≤ c.
Consider an edge e ∈ E(T ) that corresponds to an edge of T ′ . Then this edge in particular induces
a bipartition Xe′ , Ye′ of the edges in G − X via T ′ and τ ′ . Via our assumption, we know that
∂G−X (Xe′ ) ≤ bw(G − X).
Suppose that there exists a v ∈ ∂G (Xe ) \ (∂G−X (Xe′ ) ∪ X). This implies, w.l.o.g. that there exists
some f ∈ E(G − X) ∩ Xe and g ∈ EX ∩ Ye such that f and g are both incident to v. We first
note that g ̸∈ E0 ∪ ki=k′ +1 Ei thanks to the definition of E0 and our choice of k ′ . Thus g ∈ Ei for
                        S

some i ∈ [k ′ ]. Next, we note that we may assume that e is not incident to ui for any i ∈ [k ′ ], as
this would imply that |∂G (Xe )| ≤ 2, which is acceptable thanks to our assumption that bw(G) ≥ 2.
Together this implies that ei , g ∈ Ye . However, this means that v ∈ ∂G−X (Xe′ ), contradicting our
initial choice of v. This confirms that we have ∂G (Xe ) ≤ bw(G − X) + c for every edge e ∈ E(T ).
To see that this procedure runs in linear time in the number of edges of G, we first note that the
number of blocks of G is bounded by |V (G)| and we perform a constant number of operations
for each of the blocks to construct the initial tree T ′ and τ ′ . Since we give no explicit relation
between the size of X and G, we can only give the estimate from above on |E(X)| as |E(G)|, which
ultimately dominates the runtime of our procedure, as we need to place each edge in E(G) into the
branch-decomposition. Finally, note that we include c in the runtime estimate only for the technical
possibility that c ≥ m, implying that G is a forest.




 7
                                                                                 Sk
   Here and for the remainder of the proof, we ignore the possibility that |E0 ∪ i=k′ +1 Ei | = 0. This is safe as our
    constructions could easily be simplified in this specific case.
 8
   We gloss over the case in which Ti consists of a single vertex. This makes our construction simpler and does not
    influence the truth of our statement.




                                                         12
3.2 Approximating the branchwidth of a graph of bounded genus
We will also need a pair of generalizations of a result on the existence of grids in planar graphs
found in [RST94] for the setting of graphs embedded in surfaces of positive genus. For this purpose,
let us first properly introduce what we mean by a grid.
Let n, m ∈ N be two positive integers. The (n × m)-grid is the graph G with the vertex set
V (G) = [n] × [m] and the edges

           E(G) = {(i, j), (ℓ, k)} : i, ℓ ∈ [n], j, k ∈ [m], and
                    

                                     (|i − ℓ| = 1 and j = k) or (|j − k| = 1 and i = ℓ) .

An n-grid is an (n × n)-grid. A central result from the Graph Minors Series tells us that minor
models of large grids are witnesses of the fact that a graph has high branchwidth. In particular,
there exists a function h : N → N such that for every positive integer k ∈ N, every graph G with
tw(G) ≥ h(k) contains a k-grid as a minor [RS86]. Currently, the best known bound for the function
h(k) is O(k 9 · polylog(k)) [CT21]. However, for graphs embeddable on surfaces, better bounds are
known, beginning with a classic linear bound for planar graphs.

Proposition 3.2 (Robertson, Seymour, and Thomas [RST94] (see (6.3))). Let r be a positive
integer and let G be a planar graph. If bw(G) ≥ 4r then G contains an r-grid minor.

We will use a generalised version of this result for graphs of bounded genus, which we present
together with the core tool used in its proof that discusses representativity.

Proposition 3.3 (Demaine, Fomin, Hajiaghayi, and Thilikos [DFHT05] (see Lemma 3.3)). Let r
be a positive integer and let G be a graph with a 2-cell embedding in a surface of positive genus
with representativity at least 4r. Then G contains an r-grid as a minor.

Proposition 3.4 (Demaine, Fomin, Hajiaghayi, and Thilikos [DFHT05] (see Theorem 4.12)). Let
r be a positive integer and let G be a graph with Euler genus g and bw(G) > 4r(g + 1). Then G
contains an r-grid as a minor.

The proof of the main theorem of this section features one of the main tools that is used throughout
this paper. Namely, to reach graphs on which we can either confirm that the branchwidth of G is
too high or which we can find branch-decompositions for, we simply cut apart the embedded graph
via short non-contractible curves. This technique will be expanded on later, where we will need to
employ a few more tricks to make it work, but the core idea remains the same.

Theorem 3.5. Let k, g be integers and let G be a graph with a 2-cell-embedding ψ in a surface Σ
of genus g. There exists an algorithm that determines whether G has branchwidth at least k or
branchwidth at most g(k − 1) + k in time O(g 2 k(n + m) + n2 ).
In particular, in the second outcome, the algorithm returns a branch-decomposition of G with width
at most g(k − 1) + k if we allow for a O(g 2 k(n + m) + n3 )-runtime.




                                                 13
Proof. We may assume that Σ is not the sphere, as we can otherwise simply apply Proposition 2.5
or Proposition 2.6, depending on whether we want a branch-decomposition or not. First, we apply
Proposition 2.1 to find a non-contractible curve γ witnessing the representativity of ψ, which only
intersects ψ in the vertices of G. If γ intersects at least k vertices, then ψ has representativity at
least k and thus, according to Proposition 2.8, G contains a tangle of order k, which further implies
that G has branchwidth at least k, due to Proposition 2.7. Thus we may instead assume that γ
intersects less than k vertices of G.
Let V (γ) be the vertices that γ intersects. If we delete V (γ) from G, this results in two subgraphs
G1 , G2 of G, with G1 ∪ G2 = G − V (γ), each embedded in one of the two components Σ1 , Σ2 of
Σ − γ. Since γ is non-contractible, the sum of the genus of Σ1 and the genus of Σ2 is less than the
genus of Σ. For both i ∈ [2], each block of Gi has a 2-cell-embedding in Σi induced by ψ.
We may now repeat this procedure on G1 and G2 , which will terminate as each iteration reduces
the genus of the surfaces involved. If we find a subgraph of G embedded on a surface of positive
genus with representativity at least k, we known that the branchwidth of G is at least k according
to Propositions 2.7 and 2.8. Thus we may assume that, after deleting at most g(k − 1) vertices of G,
we have arrived at a subgraph G′ ⊆ G with |V (G′ )| + g(k − 1) ≤ |V (G)| such that each block of G′ is
planar. This allows us to use Proposition 2.5 on each block to either confirm that it, and thus G, has
branchwidth at least k in O(|V (G)|2 )-time, or even find a branch-decomposition of the block with
width at most k in O(|V (G)|3 )-time via Proposition 2.6. To extend this to branch-decomposition of
G with width at most g(k − 1) + k we simply apply Lemma 3.1.

Proposition 2.2 and Theorem 3.5 allow us to approximate the branchwidth of a bounded genus
graph.
Corollary 3.6. Let k, g be integers and let G be a graph of Euler genus at most g. There exists a
computable function f : N → N and an algorithm that determines whether G has branchwidth at
least k or branchwidth at most g(k − 1) + k in time O(f (g)k(n + m) + n2 ).
In particular, in the second outcome, the algorithm returns a branch-decomposition of G with width
at most g(k − 1) + k if we allow for a O(f (g)k(n + m) + n3 )-runtime.
Via binary search, this further allows us to approximate the branchwidth of our graph of bounded
genus. Note that we only need to construct the branch-decomposition once we are actually sure
that the branchwidth of our graph falls below our desired bound, which means that we only need to
compute the branch-decomposition in the last instance of our search process.
Corollary 3.7. Let G be a graph of Euler genus at most g. There exists a computable function
f : N → N and an algorithm that outputs an integer b such that b ≤ bw(G) ≤ g(b − 1) + b in time
O((f (g)(n + m) + n2 ) log n) and furthermore outputs a branch-decomposition of width at most
g(b − 1) + b in time O((f (g)(n + m)) log n + n3 ).

3.3 Constructing a grid
In our algorithms a possible answer is that the branchwidth of the input graph is lower bounded by
some (approximate) value. In this section, we explain how this lower bound can be (approximately)



                                                 14
certified by some minor-model of a grid, in polynomial time. For this purpose, we employ some
known results powerful enough to do most of the work for us.
Let G be a graph with a 2-cell-embedding of G in a surface Σ of Euler genus g. The radial graph
RG of G is a bipartite graph whose vertices are the vertices and the faces of G and where adjacency
expresses incidence between the corresponding faces and vertices. The definition of RG naturally
defines an embedding of RG in Σ. A path in RG defines a radial path in G between the corresponding
vertices or faces. Accordingly, the distance in RG between two vertices defines the radial distance in
G between the corresponding vertices or faces. Given a subgraph H of the radial graph RG , we
denote by N (H) the set of all vertices of RG whose distance from some vertex of V (G) ∩ V (H) is at
most two. Also we denote by EH (G) the set of all edges of G where both their endpoints belong in
N (H). We denote by G/EH (G) the graph obtained by G if we contract all edges of G. We make
use of the following result from [GKST25a, GKST25b] that is, in turn, based on the main result of
[DHK11] and the algorithmic results of [CCDVL12].

Proposition 3.8 (Golovach, Kolliopoulos, Stamoulis, and Thilikos [GKST25a, Lemma 7.5]). There
is an algorithm that, given a 2-cell-embedding of a graph G in a surface Σ of Euler genus g outputs,
in linear time, a subgraph H of the radial graph of G such that the following hold:
    • V (H) is the union of the vertex sets of a collection P of O(g) many shortest radial paths in G,
    • EH (G) is connected in G,
    • G′ := G/EH (G) is a planar graph, and
    • tw(G) = O(eg(G) /2 · tw(G′ )).
                        5




We also need the following result by Gu and Tamaki in [GT11].

Proposition 3.9 (Gu and Tamaki [GT11]). For every integer c ≥ 1 and every b > 2c + 3/2, there
is an algorithm that, given a planar graph G, constructs the minor model φ : V (Γk ) → 2V (G) of a
                                      1
k-grid Γk with k ≥ bg(G)/b in O(n1+ c · log n) time.

Combined these results allow us to show that we can in fact find a grid minor model in a graph
embedded on a surface of bounded genus if the treewidth of the graph is high enough.

Lemma 3.10. There exist a constant c3.10 and an algorithm running in O(n2 )-time that, given a
2-cell-embedding of a graph G in a surface Σ of Euler genus g, where tw(G) ≥ c3.10 · g 5/2 · k, return
a minor model φ of a k-grid Γk such that v∈Γk G[φ(v)] is drawn in some disk within Σ.
                                          S


Proof. Let c′ be a constant such that for every planar graph G, we have tw(G) ≤ c′ · bg(G) (e.g. we
may pick c′ = 5 [Gri11]). Choose c3.10 so that we may apply the algorithm in Proposition 3.8 to
construct a planar graph G′ := G/EH (G) where tw(G′ ) ≥ 16 · c′ · k, which implies bg(G′ ) ≥ 16k.
Let x be the vertex of G′ that is the result of the contraction of the edges in EH (G).
Then we apply the algorithm of Proposition 3.9 for c = 10/9 and b = 4 and obtain the minor
                             ′
model φ : V (Γ4k ) → 2V (G ) of a 4k-grid Γ4k in O(n1.9 · log n) = O(n2 ) time. Notice that φ is also a
minor model of the union of 4 disjoint copies of the k-grid Γk . This gives rise to four minor-models
φ1 , . . . , φ4 of Γk whose unions of images are pairwise disjoint. Moreover, in the planar embedding



                                                  15
of G′ we may further assume, for each φi , with i ∈ [4], that all images of φi can be drawn in a disk
∆i such that the disks ∆1 , . . . , ∆4 are pairwise disjoint. Let ∆i be one of these disks where x is
not drawn. Notice now that ∆i can be seen as a disk of the surface Σ where G is drawn because
un-contracting the edges of EH (G) does not affect the x-avoiding disk ∆i . Therefore φi can be
returned as the claimed minor model of a k-grid in G.

Notice that according to Proposition 3.9 the running time of Lemma 3.10 can be pushed arbitrarily
close to linear in the cost of worst choices of the constant c3.10 .
Finally, note that Lemma 3.10 allows us to refine Theorem 3.5 and Corollary 3.6, as we can
apply this theorem in the proof of Theorem 3.5 by demanding higher representativity. Using
Propositions 2.7 to 2.9 this then gives us the necessary lower bound on the treewidth of our graph
to apply Lemma 3.10 to find the desired grid minor model. However, this comes at the cost of
driving up the bounds for the branchwidth in our approximation.

Theorem 3.11. Let k, g be integers and let G be a graph of Euler genus at most g. There exists a
computable function f : N → N and an algorithm that determines whether G has branchwidth at
least k or branchwidth at most 3/2g(c3.10 · g 5/2 · k) + k in time O(f (g)k(n + m) + n2 ).
In particular, in the first outcome, the algorithm returns a k-grid-minor model and in the second
outcome, the algorithm returns a branch-decomposition of G with width at most 3/2g(c3.10 ·g 5/2 ·k)+k
if we allow for a O(f (g)k(n + m) + n3 )-runtime.


4 Graph Minor Structure Theory
As we get towards the more involved part of our article, we dive into the details of the structure
theory introduced by Robertson and Seymour. Our goal will be to reprove the Graph Minor
Structure Theorem (GMST), which first appears in [RS03], to ensure an additional helpful property.
In particular, we desire more information on how exactly each part of the decomposition it provides
us can be “painted” onto a surface. This part mainly requires us to examine the existing proof of
this theorem carefully and add one ingredient from [Gro16]. We note that we only need to reprove
the very last step of the GMST, as we can directly make use of the Local Structure Theorem.
Thus, aside from having to introduce several definitions, we do not have to invest a lot of work to
accomplish our goal.

4.1 Underlying definitions of graph minor structure theory
The definitions we present are inspired by the work of [KTW18, KTW21, GSW25]. Of course, most
of them are in some way descendants of the work of Robertson and Seymour.
Meshes. Let A, B ⊆ V (G), an A-B-path is a path P that has one endpoint in A, the other in
B, and V (P ) ∩ (A ∪ B) only contains the endpoints of P . Let n, m be integers with n, m ≥ 2. A
(n × m)-mesh is a graph M which is the union of paths M = P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pn ∪ Q1 ∪ · · · ∪ Qm where
   • P1 , · · · , Pn are pairwise vertex-disjoint, and Q1 , · · · , Qm are pairwise vertex-disjoint.




                                                 16
   • for every i ∈ [n] and j ∈ [m], the intersection Pi ∩ Qj induces a path,
   • each Pi is a V (Q1 )-V (Qm )-path intersecting the paths Q1 , · · · Qm in the given order, and each
      Qj is a V (P1 )-V (Pm )-path intersecting the paths P1 , · · · , Ph in the given order.
We say that the paths P1 , · · · , Pn are the horizontal paths, and the paths Q1 , · · · , Qm are the vertical
paths. A mesh M ′ is a submesh of a mesh M if every horizontal (vertical) paths of M ′ is a subpath of
a horizontal (vertical) paths M , respectively. We write n-mesh as a shorthand for an (n × n)-mesh.
More on tangles. Let r ∈ N with r ≥ 3, let G be a graph, and M be an r-mesh in G. Let TM be
the orientation of Sr such that for every (A, B) ∈ TM , the set B \ A contains the vertex set of both
a horizontal and a vertical path of M , we call B the M -majority side of (A, B).
Paintings in surfaces. A painting in a surface Σ is a pair Γ = (U, N ), where N ⊆ U ⊆ Σ, N is
finite, U \ N has a finite number of arcwise-connected components, called cells of Γ, and for every
cell c, the closure c is a closed disk where NΓ (c) := c ∩ N ⊆ bd(c). If |NΓ (c)| ≥ 4, the cell c is called
a vortex. We further let N (Γ) := N , let U (Γ) := U , and let C(Γ) be the set of all cells of Γ.

Any given painting Γ = (U, N ) defines a hypergraph with N as its vertices and the set of closures of
the cells of Γ as its edges. Accordingly, we call N the nodes of Γ.
Σ-renditions. Let G be a graph and Σ be a surface. A Σ-rendition of G is a triple ρ = (Γ, σ, π),
where
   • Γ is a painting in Σ,
   • for each cell c ∈ C(Γ), σ(c) is a subgraph of G, and
   • π : N (Γ) → V (G) is an injection,
such that
R1 G = c∈C(Γ) σ(c),
          S

R2 for all distinct c, c′ ∈ C(Γ), the graphs σ(c) and σ(c′ ) are edge-disjoint,
R3 π(NΓ (c)) ⊆ V (σ(c)) for every cell c ∈ C(Γ), and
R4 for every cell c ∈ C(Γ), we have V (σ(c) ∩ c′ ∈C(Γ)\{c} (σ(c′ ))) ⊆ π(MΓ (c)).
                                                S

We write N (ρ) for the set N (Γ), let Nρ (c) = NΓ (c) for all c ∈ C(Γ), and similarly, we lift the set of
cells from C(Γ) to C(ρ). If it is clear from the context which ρ is meant, we will sometimes simply
write N (c) instead of Nρ (c), and if the Σ-rendition ρ for G is understood from the context, we
usually identify the sets π(N (ρ)) and N (ρ) along π for ease of notation.
Societies. Let Ω be a cyclic ordering of the elements of some set which we denote by V (Ω). A
society is a pair (G, Ω), where G is a graph and Ω is a cyclic ordering with V (Ω) ⊆ V (G). For a
given set S ⊆ V (Ω) a vertex s ∈ S is an endpoint of S if there exists a vertex t ∈ V (Ω) \ S that
immediately precedes or succeeds s in Ω. We call S a segment of Ω if S has two or less endpoints.
Let (G, Ω) be a society and let Σ be a surface with one boundary component B homeomorphic to
the unit circle. A rendition of (G, Ω) in Σ is a Σ-rendition ρ of G such that the image under πρ of
N (ρ) ∩ B is V (Ω) and Ω is one of the two cyclic orderings of V (Ω) defined by the way the points of
πρ (V (Ω)) are arranged in the boundary B.




                                                     17
Traces of paths and cycles. Let ρ be a Σ-rendition of a graph G. For every cell c ∈ C(ρ) with
|Nρ (c)| = 2, we select one of the components of bd(c) − Nρ (c). This selection will be called a
tie-breaker in ρ, and we assume that every rendition comes equipped with a tie-breaker.
Let G be a graph and ρ be a Σ-rendition of G. Let Q be a cycle or path in G that uses no edge of
σ(c) for every vortex c ∈ C(ρ). We say that Q is grounded if it uses edges of σ(c1 ) and σ(c2 ) for
two distinct cells c1 , c2 ∈ C(ρ), or Q is a path with both endpoints in N (ρ). If Q is grounded we
define the trace of Q as follows. Let P1 , . . . , Pk be distinct maximal subpaths of Q such that Pi is
a subgraph of σ(c) for some cell c. Fix i ∈ [k]. The maximality of Pi implies that its endpoints
are π(n1 ) and π(n2 ) for distinct nodes n1 , n2 ∈ N (ρ). If |Nρ (c)| = 2, let Li be the component
of bd(c) − {n1 , n2 } selected by the tie-breaker, and if |Nρ (c)| = 3, let Li be the component of
bd(c) − {n1 , n2 } that is disjoint from Nρ (c). We define L′i by pushing Li slightly so that it is disjoint
from all cells in C(ρ), while maintaining that the resulting curves intersect only at a common
endpoint. The trace of Q is defined to be i∈[k] L′i . If Q is a cycle, its trace thus the homeomorphic
                                              S

image of the unit circle, and otherwise, it is an arc in Σ with both endpoints in N (ρ).
Aligned disks and grounded subgraphs. Let G be a graph and let ρ = (Γ, σ, π) be a Σ-rendition
of G. We say that a 2-connected subgraph H of G is grounded (in ρ) if every cycle in H is grounded
and no vertex of H is drawn by Γ in a vortex of ρ. A disk in Σ is called ρ-aligned if its boundary
only intersects Γ in nodes. If H is planar, we say that it is flat in ρ if there exists a ρ-aligned disk
∆ ⊆ Σ which contains all cells c ∈ C(ρ) with E(σ(c)) ∩ E(H) ̸= ∅ and ∆ does not contain any
vortices of Γ.
Linear decompositions of vortices. Let (G, Ω) be a society. A linear decomposition of (G, Ω) is
a labelling v1 , v2 , . . . , vn of V (Ω) such that v1 , v2 , . . . , vn appear in Ω in the order listed, together
with sets (X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn ) such that
    i) Xi ⊆ V (G) and vi ∈ Xi for all i ∈ [n],
   ii) i∈[n] Xi = V (G) and for every uv ∈ E(G) there exists i ∈ [n] such that u, v ∈ Xi , and
       S

  iii) for every x ∈ V (G) the set {i ∈ [n] : x ∈ Xi } forms an interval in [n].
The adhesion of a linear decomposition is max{|Xi ∩ Xi+1 | : i ∈ [n − 1]}. The width of a linear
decomposition is max{|Xi | : i ∈ [n]}. We say that (G, Ω) has depth at most k if there exists a linear
decomposition with adhesion at most k for (G, Ω).
Depth of vortices. Let G be a graph and ρ be a Σ-rendition of G with a vortex cell c0 . Notice
that c0 defines a society (σ(c0 ), Ωc0 ), where V (Ωc0 ) is the set of vertices of G corresponding Nρ (c0 ).
The ordering Ωc0 is obtained by traversing along the boundary of the closure of c0 in anti-clockwise
direction. We call (σ(c0 ), Ωc0 ) as obtained above the vortex society of c0 .
The depth of the vortex c0 is thereby defined as the depth of its vortex society. Given a Σ-rendition
ρ with vortices, we define the depth of ρ as the maximum depth of its vortex societies.




                                                       18
4.2 The Local Structure Theorem
We now present a version of the local structure theorem derived from [GSW25]. As noted earlier,
we are leaving out a lot of additional detail that the results from [GSW25] yield. Let us first define
one more notion on the relation of meshes and tangles.
M -centrality. Let Σ be a surface and let ρ be a Σ-rendition of a graph G containing an r-mesh
M . We say that ρ is M -central if there is no cell c ∈ C(ρ) such that V (σ(c)) contains the majority
side of a separation from TM . Similarly, let A ⊆ V (G), |A| ≤ r − 1, let Σ′ be a surface and ρ′ be a
Σ′ -rendition of G − A. Then we say that ρ′ is (M − A)-central for G if no cell of ρ′ contains the
majority side of a separation from TM ∩ Sr−|A| .
Weak layouts. Given a graph G with a Σ-rendition ρ, we define the ρ-torso9 of G to be the
graph T with vertex set N (ρ) and the edges resulting from adding an edge uv to T if there exists a
non-vortex cell c ∈ C(ρ) such that u, v ∈ Nρ (c).
Let w, k, d, b, and a be non-negative integers and let Σ be a surface. We say that a graph G
containing a mesh M has a weak k-(a, b, d)-Σ-layout centred at M if there exists a set A ⊆ V (G)
with |A| ≤ a, a submesh M ′ ⊆ M , and a Σ-rendition of G − A, such that
    i) ρ is (M − A)-central,
   ii) ρ has breadth at most b and depth at most d,
  iii) there exists a w-submesh M ′ ⊆ M , with w ≥ a + b(2d + 1) + 7,
  iv) M ′ is flat in ρ,
   v) each vortex of ρ has a linear decomposition of adhesion at most d, and
  vi) the ρ-torso of G − A has a 2-cell-embedding induced by ρ in Σ with representativity at least k.
We call ρ the layout-rendition.
This now finally allows us to state a version of the Local Structure Theorem.

Proposition 4.1 (Gorsky, Seweryn, and Wiederrecht [GSW25]). There exist functions
apex4.1 , depth4.1 , mesh4.1 : N2 → N such that for all integers k ≥ 1 and t ≥ 5, every graph H
on t vertices, every graph G and every mesh4.1 (t, k)-mesh M ⊆ G one of the following holds.
   i) G has an H-minor, or
  ii) G and M have a weak (apex4.1 (t, k), 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4), depth4.1 (t, k))-Σ-layout centred at M in
      a surface Σ into which H does not embed.10
Moreover, it holds that
             apex4.1 (t, k), depth4.1 (t, k) ∈ O (t, k)112 , and mesh4.1 (t, k) ∈ O (t + k)115 .
                                                                                             

In particular, we have mesh4.1 (t, k) ≥ 2depth4.1 (t, k) + apex4.1 (t, k) + 1.
There also exists an algorithm that, given t, k, a graph H, a graph G and a mesh M as above as
input finds one of these outcomes in time poly(t + k) · |E(G)| · |V (G)|2 .

 9
     We choose this name to distinguish these objects from the more common notion of torsos, which we will define later.
10
     The fact that last point in the definition of weak layouts holds is a consequence of the explicit construction of the
      Σ-rendition in the proof of Theorem 15.1 in [GSW25]. In particular, the representativity of the embedding is
      guaranteed by the existence of the extended large surface wall in the embedded part of the graph.




                                                            19
We note that the ρ-torsos we are constructing here are not necessarily minors of the graph we
started with. This is a problem we will now work on fixing by reproving the GMST.

4.3 A variant of the Graph Minor Structure Theorem
We now present a variant of the GMST, which differs from the core result in [GSW25] only in the
fact that the ρ-torsos of the bags of the tree-decomposition without their vortices are minors of the
whole graph. Here we are using the more common notion of torso from structure theory defined as
follows: Given a set X ⊆ V (G), the torso of X in G is the graph obtained from G[X] by adding an
edge uv to X if u, v ∈ X and there exists a component C in G − X such that u, v ∈ NG (V (C)).
For integers w, b, and a, we say that a graph G has a strong (a, b, w)-near embedding in a surface Σ
if there exist a set A ⊆ V (G) called the apex set, with |A| ≤ a, and a Σ-rendition ρ for G − A of
breadth at most b where
     i) all vertices of G − A that do not belong to the interior of a vortex of ρ are grounded,11
    ii) every vortex of ρ has a linear decomposition of width at most w, and
   iii) if G′ is the ρ-torso of G − A, then the result of removing V (σ(c)) \ N (c) for each vortex
        c ∈ C(ρ) from G′ is a minor of G − A and each of its components has a 2-cell-embedding in a
        surface with genus at most that of Σ.

Theorem 4.2. There exist functions adhesion4.2 , apex4.2 , width4.2 : N → N such that for every graph
H on t ≥ 1 vertices and every graph G one of the following holds:
   i) G contains H as a minor, or
  ii) there exists a tree-decomposition (T, β) for G with |V (T )| ∈ O(|V (G)|) and of adhesion
      at most adhesion4.2 (t) such that for every x ∈ V (T ) the torso Gx of β(x) has a strong
      (apex4.2 (t), 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4), width4.2 (t))-near embedding, with the apex set A, into a surface
      where H does not embed.
Moreover, it holds that
                             adhesion4.2 (t), apex4.2 (t), width4.2 (t) ∈ O t2300 .
                                                                                 

There also exists an algorithm that, given H and G as input, finds either an H-minor model in G
or a tree-decomposition (T, β) as above in time 2poly(t) |V (G)|3 |E(G)| log |V (G)|.

Towards a proof of this theorem, we will need several more notions and useful tools.
Highly linked sets. Let α ∈ [2/3, 1)R . Moreover, let G be a graph and X ⊆ V (G) be a vertex set.
A set S ⊆ V (G) is said to be an α-balanced separator for X if for every component C of G − S it
holds that |V (C) ∩ X| ≤ α|X|. Let k be a non-negative integer. We say that X is a (k, α)-linked
set of G if there is no α-balanced separator of size at most k for X in G. Given a (3k, α)-linked set
X of G we define
                            TX := {(A, B) ∈ Sk+1 (G) : |X ∩ B| > α|X|}.
It is not hard to see that TS is a tangle of order k + 1 in G.
11
     It is possible that V (G) ⊆ A, where A is the apex set as above. In this case we assume Σ to be the empty surface.
      Only the empty graph embeds in the empty surface.




                                                           20
Highly linked sets give us an algorithmic way to find large meshes. In particular, given a highly
linked set X, we can find a large mesh whose tangle is a truncation of the tangle induced by X.

Proposition 4.3 (Thilikos and Wiederrecht [TW24] (see Theorem 4.2.)). Let k ≥ 3 be an integer
and α ∈ [2/3, 1). There exist universal constants c1 , c2 ∈ N \ {0}, and an algorithm that, given a
                                                                       c
graph G and a (c1 k 20 , α)-linked set X ⊆ V (G) computes in time 2O(k 2 ) |V (G)|2 |E(G)| log(|V (G)|)
a k-mesh W ⊆ G such that TW is a truncation of TX .

We will also need to be able to find balanced separators efficiently. For this purpose we make use of
a tool due to Reed.

Proposition 4.4 (Reed [Ree92]). There exists an algorithm that takes as input an integer k, a
graph G, and a set X ⊆ V (G) of size at most 3k + 1, and finds, in time 2O(k) m, either a 2/3-balanced
separator of size at most k for X or correctly determines that X is (k, 2/3)-linked in G.

Quasi-4-connected components. As mentioned earlier, we will want to ensure that the torsos
we construct in Proposition 4.1 are actually minors of the original graph. Luckily, there is a
tool due to Grohe [Gro16] that allow us to do this with relative ease by restricting ourselves to
“quasi-4-connected components” of our graph (see also [CK23]).
We call a graph G quasi-4-connected if it is 3-connected and for all separations (A, B) in G of order
3 the set A \ B or B \ A only contains a single vertex.

Proposition 4.5 (Grohe [Gro16]). Every graph has a tree-decomposition (T, β) of adhesion at most
3 such that for all t ∈ V (T ) the torso of β(t) in G is a minor of G that is either quasi-4-connected
or isomorphic to a complete graph of order at most 4.
Furthermore, (T, β) can be computed in O(n3 )-time.

A proof of our variant of the GMST. Now we can prove Theorem 4.2 via a stronger version of
it that we in turn prove by induction. The structure of this proof is derived from one of the core
proofs of [RS91b].

Theorem 4.6. There exist functions link4.6 , apex4.6 , width4.6 : N → N such that for every graph H
on t ≥ 1 vertices, every graph G, and every vertex set X ⊆ V (G) with |X| ≤ 3link4.6 (t) + 1 one of
the following holds:
   i) G contains H as a minor, or
  ii) there exists a rooted tree-decomposition (T, r, β) for G with |V (T )| ∈ O(|V (G)|) and of
      adhesion at most

                                  3link4.6 (t) + apex4.6 (t) + width4.6 (t) + 3

      such that
        a) for every x ∈ V (T ) the torso Gx of β(x) has a strong (4link4.6 (t) + apex4.6 (t), 1/2(t −
           3)(t − 4), 2link4.6 (t) + width4.6 (t))-near embedding, with the apex set A, into a surface
           where H does not embed, and



                                                   21
        b) let Ar be the apex set for the torso Gr at r, then X ⊆ Ar .
Moreover, it holds that
                     apex4.6 (t), width4.6 (t) ∈ O t115 and link4.6 (t) ∈ O t2300 .
                                                                                

There also exists an algorithm that, given H and G as input, finds either an H-minor model in G
or a tree-decomposition (T, β) as above in time 2poly(t) n3 m log m.

Proof. Our functions for this proof are:

                                     apex4.6 (t) := apex4.1 (t, 4)
                                    width4.6 (t) := 2depth4.1 (t, 4) + 1
                                      link4.6 (t) := c1 mesh4.1 (t, 4)20 ,

where c1 is the first constant from Proposition 4.3. The bound on the order of link4.6 (t) is justified
by the fact that mesh4.1 (t, 4) ∈ O(t115 ).
We proceed by induction on |V (G) \ X| and observe that in case |V (G)| ≤ 3link4.6 (t) + 1, we may
simply take T to be the tree on one vertex r and set β(t) := V (G). This satisfies the second part of
our statement if we simply put the entirety of the graph into the apex set for the root. Thus we
may move on assuming |V (G)| ≥ 3link4.6 (t) + 2.
Suppose next that |X| ≤ 3link4.6 (t). This allows us to take some vertex v ∈ V (G) \ X and let X ′ :=
X ∪ {v}. We may now apply the induction hypothesis to G and X ′ , since |V (G) \ X ′ | < |V (G) \ X|,
which results in us either finding H as a minor, or the rooted tree-decomposition we desire. Hence,
we may assume that |X| = 3link4.6 (t) + 1.
Applying Proposition 4.4 to X in G now yields one of two possible outcomes in (2poly(t) m)-time:
    i) A 2/3-balanced separator S for X in G with |S| ≤ link4.6 (t), or
   ii) X is (link4.6 (t), 2/3)-linked in G.
Case 1: There exists a 2/3-balanced separator S for X in G with |S| ≤ link4.6 (t).
Let G′1 , . . . , G′ℓ be the components of G − S and for each i ∈ [ℓ], let Gi := G[V (G′i ) ∪ S]. Moreover,
for each i ∈ [ℓ], let Xi′ := (V (Gi ) ∩ X) ∪ S. By definition of balanced separators, we have

                              |Xi′ | ≤ ⌊2/3 · (3 · link4.6 (t) + 1)⌋ + link4.6 (t)
                                   ≤ 3 · link4.6 (t).

This allows us to define a rooted tree-decomposition (T, r, β) with the desired properties, in the
absence of an H-minor, as follows. First, we introduce the vertex r and set β(r) := X ∪ S. Due to
their relatively small sizes, we may let all of β(r) be the apex set for r.
For each i ∈ [ℓ] where V (Gi ) = Xi′ , we may then simply introduce a vertex xi to the tree, make it
adjacent to r, and set β(xi ) := Xi′ . For the remaining i ∈ [ℓ], there exists some vi ∈ V (Gi ) \ Xi′ ,
allowing us to set Xi = Xi′ ∪ {vi } whilst ensuring that |V (Gi ) \ Xi | < |V (G) \ X|. This allows us to
apply the induction hypothesis to Gi and Xi . If this yields H as a minor, we are done. Otherwise,
there exists a rooted tree-decomposition (Ti , ri , βi ) with the desired properties.




                                                        22
We may assume that we do not find an H-minor this way. For each i ∈ [ℓ] for which vi is defined,
we may then add Ti to our tree, make ri adjacent to r, and set β(x) := βi (x) for all x ∈ V (Ti ). This
concludes the proof of our theorem in this case.
Case 2: X is (link4.6 (t), 2/3)-linked in G.
We start by applying Proposition 4.3 to find a mesh4.1 (t, 4)-mesh M in G such that the tangle TM
is a truncation of the tangle TX , which takes (2poly(t) n2 m log m)-time. This allows us to continue by
applying Proposition 4.1 to M , which takes poly(t)n2 m-time. If this results in an H-minor model,
we are done.
Hence, we must instead find a weak 4-(apex4.1 (t, 4), 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4), depth4.1 (t, 4))-Σ-layout for G
and M centred at M in a surface Σ into which H does not embed, with the layout-rendition ρ.
According to the definition of weak layouts, there therefore exists a w-mesh M ′ ⊆ M − A, with
w ≥ apex4.1 (t) + 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4)depth4.1 (t) + 7, which defines a tangle TM ′ of order w.
We apply Proposition 4.5 to find a tree-decomposition (T ′ , β ′ ) of G − A with adhesion at most 3
such that for all t ∈ V (T ′ ) the torso of β(t) in G is a minor of G that is either quasi-4-connected or
isomorphic to K4 . This again only takes O(n3 )-time. Since TM ′ orients all separations of order less
than w, it in particular orients all of the separations induced by the adhesion sets of (T ′ , β ′ ). As T ′
is a tree, there therefore exists a unique t ∈ V (T ′ ) such that β(t) is on the big side of all separations
of order at most three with respect to TM ′ . We let G⋆ be the torso of β(t).
Our goal is to now show that we can derive a weak 1-(apex4.1 (t, 4), 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4), depth4.1 (t, 4))-
Σ-layout for G⋆ and a w-mesh M ⋆ ⊆ G⋆ from ρ. Let ψ be the 2-cell-embedding of the ρ-torso
G′ of G − A, which exists according to the fact that ρ is a weak layout. In particular, ψ has
representativity 4. Now let (A, B) be a separation of order at most three such that V (G⋆ ) ⊆ B and
let S = A ∩ B. Note that if S \ V (G′ ) ̸= ∅, there exists some vortex c ∈ C(ρ) such that S ⊆ σ(c)
and thus, we do not really care about these types of separations.
We may therefore suppose that S ⊆ V (G′ ) and note that S corresponds to a closed curve γ in Σ
that intersects at most 3 vertices in N (ρ). As ψ has representativity at least 4, this cannot be a
non-contractible curve and thus we may modify ρ (and ψ) by turning the disk bounded by γ into a
cell that contains A and has the vertices that γ intersects on its boundary. Clearly, this new cell is
not a vortex and we may refine ρ and ψ using all of these separations. The result is a rendition ρ′
that has an associated embedding ψ ′ of the ρ′ -torso G′′ of G − A in Σ, such that G′′ is a minor of
G − A. Regarding M ⋆ , we note that meshes are so well connected, that it is impossible for us to
separate any substantial chunk out of the mesh using any separation with less than 4 vertices. Thus,
we may simply adjust M whilst we are refining ρ and ψ to derive a w-mesh from M as desired. By
construction ρ′ is therefore (M ⋆ − A)-central.
From here we continue our work with ρ′ . We let Ar := A ∪ X and observe that

                              |Ar | ≤ |A ∪ X| ≤ 3link4.6 (t) + apex4.1 (t) + 1.

Let c1 , . . . , cq , with q ≤ 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4), be the vortices of ρ′ . Since ρ′ and ρ have the same vortices,
there exists a linear decomposition (Y1 , . . . , Yℓi ) of adhesion at most depth4.1 (t, 4) for each i ∈ [q].




                                                      23
Since ρ′ is (M ⋆ − A)-central and TM is a truncation of TX , this further implies that, for all i ∈ [q]
and j ∈ [ℓi ], we have
                                  |Yji ∩ X| ≤ 2/3|X| ≤ 2link4.6 (t).
Let U be the union of N (ρ′ ) and all vertices appearing in a set Yji ∩ Yj+1
                                                                          i  for some i ∈ [q] and j ∈ [ℓi ].
We will now construct our desired rooted tree-decomposition (T, r, β). First, we set β(r) := U ∪ Ar .
Using our earlier observations, we deduce that, for all i ∈ [q] and j ∈ [ℓi ], we have

                              |Yji ∩ β(r)| ≤ 2link4.6 (t) + 2depth4.1 (t, 4) + 1
                                           ≤ 2link4.6 (t) + width4.6 (t).

For each i ∈ [q] and j ∈ [ℓi ], we let Fi,j := G[A ∪ Yji ]. Then

                         |V (Fji ) ∩ β(r)| ≤ 2link4.6 (t) + width4.6 (t) + apex4.6 (t)
                                          ≤ 3link4.6 (t),

since we have mesh4.1 (t, 4) ≥ width4.6 (t) + apex4.6 (t) (see Proposition 4.1). This allows us to set
   ′ := V (F
Xi,j         i,j ∩ β(r) for the coming arguments. As in Case 1, there are two cases to be considered.
Should we have V (Fi,j ) = Xi,j  ′ , we introduce a vertex r
                                                               i,j adjacent to r and set β(ri,j ) = V (Fi,j ).
Otherwise, there exists some vi,j ∈ V (Fi,j ) \ Xi,j and we can set Xi,j := Xi,j
                                                     ′                            ′ ∪ {v }, which means
                                                                                         i,j
that |V (Fi,j ) \ Xi,j | < |V (G) \ X| for all i ∈ [q] and j ∈ [ℓi ]. Therefore, our induction hypothesis
either yields an H-minor or a rooted tree-decomposition (Ti,j , ri,j , βi,j ) that satisfies the second
outcome of our statement. If we find an H-minor, we are done. Thus we can add the trees Ti,j to
T , make ri,j adjacent to r, and set β(x) := βi,j (x) for each x ∈ V (Ti,j ). This finishes our arguments
for the vortices of ρ′ .
We must now discuss how the graphs Jc′ := σρ′ (c), for the non-vortex cells c ∈ C(ρ′ ), are decomposed
in our tree-decomposition, if we fail to find an H-minor. Recall that ρ′ is (M ⋆ − A)-central and TM
is a truncation of TX . Thus Jc′ cannot contain more than 2link4.6 (t) vertices of X. We may therefore
set Jc := G[A ∪ V (Jc′ )] and Xc′ := V (Jc ) ∩ Ar . It follows that

                                      |Xc′ | ≤ 2link4.6 (t) + apex4.6 (t)
                                            ≤ 3link4.6 (t).

For each non-vortex cell c ∈ C(ρ′ ) where V (Jc ) = Xc′ , we introduce a vertex rc adjacent to r and
set β(rc ) := Xc′ . This leaves us to deal with those non-vortex cells c for which we can find a vertex
vc ∈ V (Jc ) \ Xc′ . Analogous to our previous constructions, we set Xc := Xc′ ∪ {vc } and thus have
|V (Jc ) \ Xc | < |V (G) \ X|. Our induction hypothesis tells us that we either find an H-minor -
and are thus done - or we find a rooted tree-decomposition (Tc , rc , βc ) for each Jc satisfying the
conditions laid out in the second option of our statement. As before, we introduce the trees Tc
to T , make rc adjacent to r, and set β(x) := βc (x) for each x ∈ V (Tc ). This finally completes our
construction of the rooted tree-decomposition (T, r, β) with the outcomes we desire.




                                                      24
Our arguments can be realised as a recursive algorithm, taking a total of n recursive calls to find
the tree-decomposition we want. Each call takes (2poly(t) n2 m log n)-time, leading to a total runtime
in 2poly(t) n3 m log n.

Better runtimes for our GMST-variant through randomization. Notably, using the same argu-
ments used in Section 17 of [GSW25], we can provide an algorithm running in time (t + n)O(1) that
still guarantees polynomial bounds on our parameters. The trade-off here is that the bounds on our
functions get noticably worse, and the associated algorithm is randomised and returns the outcomes
we desire only with high probability instead of certainty. We refer the reader to [GSW25] for an
account of how we can modify our proof of Theorem 4.6 to get the desired results, whilst noting
that this approach uses results from [CKS05, Ami10, CE13, CC16, KTW21, TW24].

Theorem 4.7. There exist functions adhesion4.7 , apex4.7 , width4.7 : N → N such that for every graph
H on t ≥ 1 vertices and every graph G one of the following holds:
   i) G contains H as a minor, or
  ii) there exists a tree-decomposition (T, β) for G with |V (T )| ∈ O(|V (G)|) and of adhesion
      at most adhesion4.7 (t, k) such that for every x ∈ V (T ) the torso Gx of β(x) has a strong
      (apex4.7 (t), 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4), width4.7 (t))-near embedding into a surface, with the apex set A,
      where H does not embed, such that Gx − A is a minor of G.
Moreover, it holds that
                             adhesion4.7 (t), apex4.7 (t), width4.7 (t) ∈ O t11500 .
                                                                                  

There also exists a randomised algorithm that, given H and G as input, finds either an H-minor
model in G or a tree-decomposition (T, β) as above with high probability in time (t + n)O(1) .


5 Improved bounds on the relationship between clique- and grid-minors
We now begin by tackling the task of determining the branchwidth of a graph that excludes both the
Kt and the k-grid as a minor. For this purpose we first introduce more refined tools concerning the
branchwidth of graphs embedded in surfaces and their associated branch-decompositions. Afterwards
we switch immediately into the proof of the main result of this section, which is Theorem 5.6.

5.1 Sphere-cut decompositions and more tools
We will need a few tools from the surrounding theory, particularly concerning (partially) embedded
graphs on surfaces. Our principal goal will be to reprove the following result from [TW25] in a way
that allows us to extract a branch-decomposition.

Proposition 5.1 (Thilikos and Wiederrecht [TW25]). Let G be a 2-connected graph with bw(G) ≥ 2
and a Σ-rendition ρ, where Σ is the sphere, such that ρ has breadth b, every vortex of ρ has a linear
decomposition of width at most w, and for every non-vortex cell c ∈ N (ρ) we have |N (c)| = 2 and
V (σ(c)) − N (c) = ∅. Further let G′ be the result of deleting V (σ(c′ )) \ N (c′ ) from G for each vortex
c′ ∈ C(ρ). Then bw(G) ≤ bw(G′ ) + 2wb.



                                                   25
For this purpose, we need to discuss Proposition 2.5 in more depth, as the ideas used to prove this
result actually provide a branch-decomposition with some particularly strong properties after some
more massaging.
Let G be a graph with an embedding ϕ in the sphere Σ and let F be the set of its faces. A curve γ
in Σ is called a ϕ-noose, or simply a noose if ϕ is clear from the context, if γ intersects the drawing
ϕ only in the vertices of G and furthermore, for each face f ∈ F , the intersection of γ and f is either
empty or contains at most one component. The tuple (T, τ ) is called a sphere-cut decomposition of
G in Σ, if (T, τ ) is a branch-decomposition of G and additionally, for every edge e ∈ E(T ) inducing
the partition Xe , Ye of E(G), there exists a noose γe such that the set of vertices V (γe ) that γe
intersects is equal to ∂G (Xe ).
By combining the core results of [ST94] and [GT08], the following can be derived.

Proposition 5.2 (Dorn, Penninkx, Bodlaender, and Fomin [DPBF10]). Let G be a graph without
vertices of degree one that has an embedding ϕ in the sphere. There exists an algorithm that finds
a sphere-cut decomposition of G with width at most bw(G) in time O(n3 ).

We are now ready to reprove Proposition 5.1 in a constructive way. This result will later be used to
compute branch-decompositions with appropriate width for H-minor-free graphs. The bound we
give on the width of the branch-decomposition we find is mildly worse than what Proposition 5.1
offers us. Nonetheless, for our purposes, the additional factor will completely disappear in our
estimates on all functions we base on this theorem. Incidentally this is also the only proof in which
we need to deal with sphere-cut decompositions.

Theorem 5.3. Let G be a 2-connected graph with bw(G) ≥ 2 and a Σ-rendition ρ, where Σ is the
sphere, such that ρ has breadth b, every vortex of ρ has a linear decomposition of width at most
w,12 and for every non-vortex cell c ∈ N (ρ) we have |N (c)| = 2 and V (σ(c)) − N (c) = ∅. Further
let G′ be the result of deleting V (σ(c′ )) \ N (c′ ) from G for each vortex c ∈ C(ρ). Then there exists
an algorithm that finds a branch-decomposition of G with width at most bw(G′ ) + 2wb + 6b in
O(bwm + n3 )-time.

Proof. We may assume that ρ has at least one vortex, as the statement otherwise trivially holds.
Thus b is positive. Furthermore, by definition of a linear decomposition, we also know that w is
positive, since each bag of each linear decomposition contains at least one vertex.
First, we want to ensure that every vertex in Nρ (c) for any vortex c ∈ C(ρ) is incident to an edge
drawn outside of the vortices. Let v1 , v2 , . . . , vℓ be a linearization of the order Ωc originating from
the vortex-society (Gc , Ωc ) of c in ρ. We next introduce the edges vi vi+1 and vℓ v1 , unless they are
already found in G′ . The graph that results from carrying out this process for all vortices is called
G′′ . For each vortex c ∈ C(ρ) we can modify ρ by pushing the drawing of each edge between two
vertices in Nρ (c) into c. A linear decomposition (X1 , . . . , Xℓ ) of (Gc , Ωc ) (restricted to G′′ ) of width
3 is then simply defined by letting Xi = {v1 , vi , vi+1 } for all i ∈ [ℓ − 1] and Xℓ = {v1 , vℓ }. The
resulting Σ-rendition ρ′′ verifies that G′′ has a Σ-rendition in the sphere with breadth b and width

12
     We assume that we are provided with these linear decompositions.




                                                         26
3, such that for every non-vortex cell c ∈ N (ρ′′ ) we have |N (c)| = 2 and V (σρ′′ (c)) − N (c) = ∅.
According to Proposition 5.1, we have bw(G′′ ) ≤ bw(G′ ) + 6b.
Next, we observe that by construction of G′′ , there also exists a Σ-rendition ρ⋆ of G′′ based on ρ
such that for every cell c ∈ N (ρ⋆ ) we have |N (c)| = 2, all vortices of ρ are disjoint from c, and
V (σρ⋆ (c)) − N (c) = ∅. From this we can derive an embedding ϕ of G′′ in Σ such that ϕ only
intersects the vortices of ρ in the vertices that lie on their boundaries according to ρ. Our goal
will be to now find a branch-decomposition for G⋆ = G′′ ∪ G of width at most bw(G′ ) + 2wb + 6b,
which can be used to easily derive a branch-decomposition of the same width for G, as G ⊆ G⋆ by
definition.
Let c ∈ C(ρ) be a fixed vortex. Since each vortex is bounded by a cycle in G′′ , there exists a
block B of G′′ that contains Nρ (c). Using ϕ and the fact that bw(G′′ ) ≤ bw(G′ ) + 6b, we use
Proposition 5.2 to find a sphere-cut decomposition (T ′′ , τ ′′ ) of B. We then modify (T ′′ , τ ′′ ) as follows.
For each vortex c ∈ C(ρ), let v1 , . . . , vℓ be a linearization of Ωc from the vortex society (Gc , Ωc ) in ρ
associated with the linear decomposition represented by the sets (Z1 , . . . , Zℓ ). Recall that this linear
decomposition has width at most w and thus |Zi | ≤ w for all i ∈ [ℓ]. Let Ec := E(Gc ) \ E(G′′ ) and
note that σρ (c) = Gc and Ec ∩ E(G′′ ) contains only edges that we added on the boundary of the
vortices when constructing G′′ . We partition Ec into ℓ sets E1 , . . . , Eℓ by letting E1 := E(Gc [Z1 ])
and for all i ∈ [2, ℓ], letting Ei := E(Gc [Zi ]) \ i−1      j=1 Ej . Note that this is a partitioning of Ec
                                                           S

according to the properties of a linear decomposition.
For each i ∈ [ℓ], let ei ∈ E(B) be vi vi+1 ∈ E(B), if i ∈ [ℓ − 1], and vℓ v1 ∈ E(B), if i = ℓ. Further,
let ui := τ ′′ (ei ) ∈ L(T ′′ ). We construct T ′ from T ′′ by subdividing the unique edge incident to ui
in T ′′ and naming the subdivision vertex wi , for each i ∈ [ℓ] such that Ei ̸= ∅. Next, let Ti be an
arbitrary ternary tree with |Ei | leaves, with an arbitrary edge subdivided and with wi′ being the
subdivision vertex in Ti . (If |Ei | = 0, we let Ti be the empty graph and if |Ei | = 1 we let wi′ be
the unique vertex of Ti .) From this we construct T in the obvious way by taking T ′ ∪ ℓi=1 Ti and
                                                                                                   S

adding the edge wi wi′ for each i ∈ [ℓ] with Ei ̸= ∅. In case Ei ̸= ∅, we further let τi be an arbitrary
bijection from Ei to L(Ti ). For each e ∈ E(B) ∪ Ec , we then set τ (e) to τ ′′ (e), if e ∈ E(B), and to
τi (e), if e ∈ Ei .
The tuple (T, τ ) now satisfies the definition of a branch-decomposition for the graph B ⋆ := B ∪ Gc .
Now, we are interested in the width of this new decomposition. Every edge e ∈ E(T ) defines a
partition Xe , Ye of the edges in E(B) ∪ Ec . First, note that for any edge e ∈ E(T ) corresponding to
an edge in ℓi=1 E(Ti ), we clearly have |∂B ⋆ (Xe )| ≤ w. Furthermore, for any of the edges e ∈ E(T )
              S

incident to ui for some i ∈ [ℓ], we have |∂B ⋆ (Xe )| ≤ 2, which is acceptable.
Thus we may now concentrate on an arbitrary edge e ∈ E(T ) such that e is neither incident to ui
for some i ∈ [ℓ], nor contained in ℓi=1 E(Ti ). Note that this in particular implies that e induces a
                                             S

partition Xe′′ , Ye′′ in (T ′′ , τ ′′ ) of the edges in E(B), such that Xe′′ ⊆ Xe and Ye′′ ⊆ Ye .13 Clearly, by
construction of (T, τ ), we have |∂B ⋆ (Xe )| ≥ |∂B (Xe′′ )|, since ∂B (Xe′′ ) ⊆ ∂B ⋆ (Xe ). We may therefore
assume that there exists a v ∈ ∂B ⋆ (Xe ) \ ∂B (Xe′′ ), as we would otherwise be done. Let f ∈ Xe and
g ∈ Ye be two edges that are both incident to v.


13
     In case e = wi wi′ for some i ∈ [ℓ] one of the two sets Xe′′ , Ye′′ is empty.




                                                                 27
Suppose that f ∈ E(B) and therefore f ∈ Xe′′ . Then, since v ∈ ∂B ⋆ (Xe ) \ ∂B (Xe′′ ), we must have
g ∈ Ec and in particular v ∈ Nρ (c). This implies that v ∈ V (Ωc ). We may assume w.l.o.g. that
v = v1 from our linearization of Ωc and furthermore, that g ∈ E1 . Since e is not incident to any ui ,
it is in particular not incident to u1 and thus, other than just having g ∈ Ye , we also have e1 ∈ Ye′′
and thus v ∈ ∂B (Xe′′ ), yielding a contradiction. We conclude that f ∈ Xe \ Xe′′ and g ∈ Ye \ Ye′′ ,
independent of the particular choice of v ∈ ∂B ⋆ (Xe ) \ ∂B (Xe′′ ).
As (T ′′ , τ ′′ ) is a sphere-cut decomposition and e corresponds to an edge of T ′′ , there exists a noose γ,
with V (γ) being the vertices of B it intersects, that intersects c − Nρ (c) in at most one component.
Let ∆1 , ∆2 be the closure of the two components of Σ − γ and note that γ forms the boundary of
both of these disks. Thus, using the embedding ϕ of B in Σ, there exist two subgraphs G1 and G2
of B which we label such that G1 ∪ G2 = B, V (G1 ∩ G2 ) = V (γ), E(G1 ) = Xe′′ , and E(G2 ) = Ye′′ .
Recall that ei = vi vi+1 if i ∈ [ℓ − 1] and eℓ = vℓ v1 , if i = ℓ.
Due to the fact that γ intersects c − Nρ (c) in at most one component, there either exists a j ∈ [2]
such that ei ∈ E(Gj ) for all i ∈ [ℓ], or there exist two distinct j, h ∈ [ℓ], with j < h, such that
e1 , . . . , ej ∈ E(G1 ), ej+1 , . . . , eh ∈ E(G2 ), and eh+1 , . . . , eℓ ∈ E(G1 ). By construction of (T, τ ), the
first option implies that we have Ec ⊆ Xe′′ or Ec ⊆ Ye′′ , which means that ∂B ⋆ (Xe ) \ ∂B (Xe′′ ) = ∅
and thus we have confirmed that |∂B ⋆ (Xe )| ≤ bw(G′ ) + 6b.
Otherwise, since we know that e is an edge of T that is not incident to ui in T and still corresponds
to an edge of T ′′ , we know that ei ∈ Xe if and only if Ei ⊆ Xe , again by construction of (T, τ ).
Thus, we have ∂B ⋆ (Xe ) \ ∂B (Xe′′ ) ⊆ (Zj ∩ Zj+1 ) ∪ (Zh ∩ Zh+1 ) and, since the width of ρ is w, we
have (Zj ∩ Zj+1 ) ∪ (Zh ∩ Zh+1 ) ≤ 2w. Hence, we have |∂B ⋆ (Xe )| ≤ bw(G′ ) + 2w + 6b. Thus (T, τ )
has width at most bw(G′ ) + 2w + 6b.
We can now repeat this construction for all vortices whose boundaries are contained in V (B), yielding
a branch-decomposition of B together with its associated vortices of width at most bw(G′ )+2wb′ +6b,
where b′ ≤ b is the number of vortices belonging to B. Using arguments analogous to the proof of
Lemma 2.3, we observe that we can repeat this procedure for every block of G⋆ and then easily
combine the resulting branch-decompositions into a branch-decomposition of G⋆ of width at most
bw(G′ ) + 2wb + 6b in time O(bwm).

To interact with Theorem 4.2, we also need an observation about the location of parts of the graph
with high branchwidth, if the graph has a tree-decomposition with low adhesion.

Proposition 5.4 (Thilikos and Wiederrecht [TW25]). Let c be a positive integer, let G be a graph
with bw(G) > c, and let (T, β) be a tree-decomposition of G with adhesion at most c. Then the
branchwidth of G is at most the maximum of the branchwidth of the torsos of the bags of (T, β).

5.2 Finding cliques or grids
We first establish the following function:

              b5.6 (t, k, g) := 4k + max(g, 0)(4k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)) +
                                max(adhesion4.2 (t), apex4.2 (t)) + 1/2width4.2 (t)(t − 3)(t − 4).



                                                        28
Additionally, recall the following classic theorem on the Euler genus of Kt .

Proposition 5.5 (Ringel and Young [RY68, Rin74]). If t ≥ 3 is an integer, the Euler genus of Kt is

                                                (t − 3)(t − 4)
                                                            
                                                               .
                                                      6

Using Theorem 4.2 and Proposition 5.5, we can conclude that b5.6 (t, k, eg(Kt )) ∈ O(t2 k + t2304 ).
Moving on to the proof of our main theorem, we note that we phrase this theorem in terms of
H-minors instead of fixing H to be Kt to get a slightly more general result.

Theorem 5.6. Let k be a positive integer, let H be a graph with t := |V (H)|, and let G be a graph
bw(G) ≥ b5.6 (t, k, eg(H) − 1). Then G contains either H or a k-grid as a minor.

Proof. We begin by applying Theorem 4.2. If this yields a H-minor model we are done. Thus we may
assume that we instead find a tree-decomposition (T, β) for G of adhesion at most adhesion4.2 (t) such
that for every x ∈ V (T ) the torso Gx of β(x) has a strong (apex4.2 (t), 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4), width4.2 (t))-
near embedding, with the apex set A, into a surface where H does not embed such that Gx − A is
a minor of G. Note that b5.6 (t, k) > adhesion4.2 (t) and thus, according to Proposition 5.4, there
exists some t ∈ V (T ) such that the torso Gt of β(t) has branchwidth at least b5.6 (t, k).
Let At be the apex set belonging to t, let G′t := Gt − At , and let ρ be the rendition of G′t into a
surface Σ into which H does not embed that is associated with the strong near embedding of Gt .
This in particular means that the genus of Σ is below eg(H). As a consequence of Lemma 3.1 and
|At | ≤ apex4.2 (t), we know that G′t still has branchwidth at least b5.6 (t, k) − apex4.2 (t). Let B be
the result of deleting V (σρ (c)) \ Nρ (c) from G′t for each vortex c ∈ C(ρ). We note that according to
the definition of a strong near embedding B is a minor of Gt − A, and thus in particular G, such
that each of its components has a 2-cell-embedding in a surface into which H does not embed.
We construct B ′ by adding a vertex vc for each vortex c ∈ C(ρ) and making vc adjacent to all
vertices in N (c). This immediately yields a 2-cell-embedding ϕ of B ′ into Σ, which can be chosen
such that vc is the sole vertex in the interior of c and the vertices of N (c) are the only vertices
found on the boundary of c for all vortices c ∈ C(ρ). Let U := V (B ′ ) \ V (B). Since ρ has at most
1/2(t − 3)(t − 4) vortices, we have |U | ≤ 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4).

Suppose that Σ is the sphere. Using Proposition 5.1 we note that B still has branchwidth at least
b5.6 (t, k) − (apex4.2 (t) + 1/2width4.2 (t)(t − 3)(t − 4)), which is at least 4k. Thus B contains a k-grid
minor according to Proposition 3.2 and G also contains the same k-grid minor, since B is a minor
of G.
We may therefore suppose that Σ has positive genus. Suppose that B ′ has representativity at least
4k+ 1/2(t−3)(t−4), then B must have representativity at least 4k and thus contain a k-grid according
to Proposition 3.3. We may therefore let γ be a non-contractible curve γ in Σ that intersects ϕ only
in vertices, with V (γ) being the set of these vertices, and |V (γ)| < 4k + 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4).
We can assume that the restriction of γ to any vortex c ∈ V (ρ) has one non-trivial component
γ ′ which is a curve in c that contains vc ∈ U and ends on two distinct points ucγ , wγc in bd(c). In
particular this means that for each vortex c ∈ V (ρ) such that vc ∈ U , if we let (Gc , Ωc ) be the vortex



                                                      29
society of c in ρ, the points ucγ , wγc naturally induce a partition of Ωc into two segments Ic1 , Ic2 . Since
ρ has depth at most width4.2 , the vortex c therefore also has depth at most width4.2 , which means
that there exists an Ic1 -Ic2 -separator Sc of order 2width4.2 in σρ (c). If c ∈ V (C) is not a vortex or
vc ̸∈ U , we set Sc := ∅. Furthermore, we set S := (V (γ) \ U ) ∪ c∈C(ρ) Sc . Since the breadth of ρ is
                                                                     S

at most 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4), we conclude that |S| ≤ 4k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 .
Clearly, since γ is non-contractible, the closure of the components of Σ − γ consists of two surfaces
Σ1 , Σ2 , each having γ in their boundary. We now construct renditions for these two surfaces based
on ρ that allow us to determine which of the parts of G′t − S we should continue with.
For each c ∈ V (ρ) such that vc ∈ V (γ), we add c to the surfaces Σ1 and Σ2 . We call the resulting
surfaces Σ′1 and Σ′2 . Now we take the restriction ϕi of ϕ to Σi for each i ∈ [2], chosen such that
the vertices of Ici are drawn by ϕi for each vortex c ∈ C(ρ) with vc ∈ U , and derive a vortex-free
rendition ρi from this in the natural way by enclosing each edge in a disk. For both i ∈ [2], we
add to ρi all vortices c ∈ C(ρ) with c ⊆ Σi . The graph Gi that is to be embedded by ρi is then
defined as the union of the component of B − S that is embedded by ϕi on Σi and, for each vortex
c ∈ C(ρi ), all components of σρ (c) − Sc that contain a vertex of Ici .
Observe that ρi has breadth at most 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4) and depth at most width4.2 for both i ∈ [2].
Furthermore, Σ1 and Σ2 both have lesser genus than that of Σ. Thanks to Lemma 3.1, we also
know that one of the two graphs G1 and G2 still has branchwidth at least

        b5.6 (t, k) − (apex4.2 (t) + 1/2width4.2 (t)(t − 3)(t − 4) + 4k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)).

We may now repeat this procedure by picking the graph among G1 , G2 with higher branchwidth
and again finishing up our proof if the surface they are embedded on is the sphere (with a few holes)
or alternatively searching for non-contractible curves and reducing further. Since each of these
steps reduces the genus of the involved surfaces further, we must finish this process after at most
eg(H) − 1 iterations, leaving us with a graph of branchwidth at least

 b5.6 (t, k) − (apex4.2 (t) + 1/2width4.2 (t)(t − 3)(t − 4) + (eg(H) − 1)(4k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)))

that is embedded in the sphere (with some holes). Since this value is at least 4k, this graph thus
contains a k-grid according to Proposition 3.4 and thus we are done.

Furthermore, by analysing our proof, we notice that we always find our grid in a part of the graph
that is embedded on some surface. This allows us, in the absence of a Kt -minor, to find the k-grid
not only as a minor, but as an induced minor, if we double the value of k for which we are searching
and subsequently “sacrifice” half of the 2k-grid minor we find to ensure that the result is an induced
k-grid. Thus, as a consequence of our efforts, we also get a proof of Theorem 1.2.
If we want to turn this proof into an algorithm, we only need to be able to find the k-grid
algorithmically, since Theorem 4.2 already provides us with an H-minor model if it finds one. We




                                                     30
may again employ Lemma 3.10 to find our grid, once more at the cost of a somewhat worse function,
which we give as follows:

            b5.7 (t, k, g) := k + max(g, 0)(3/2c3.10 kg /2 + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)) +
                                                      5


                            max(adhesion4.2 (t), apex4.2 (t)) + 1/2width4.2 (t)(t − 3)(t − 4).

Depending on whether we use Theorem 4.2 or Theorem 4.7, our proof of Theorem 5.6 can thus be
slightly adjusted to yield.

Theorem 5.7. Let k and t be positive integers, let H be a graph with |V (H)| = t, and let G be a
graph with branchwidth at least b5.7 (t, k, eg(H) − 1). There exists an algorithm running in time
2poly(t) kn3 m log n, that yields a minor model for H or for a k-grid in G.

We forgo stating the explicit function for the case in which we apply Theorem 4.7.

Theorem 5.8. There exists some function b5.8 : N3 → N with b5.7 (t, k, g) ∈ O(g 7/2 k + gt11502 ) and
an algorithm that, for any positive integer k, any graph H with t := |V (H)|, and any graph G with
bw(G) ≥ b5.8 (t, k, eg(H) − 1), finds a minor model for H or for a k-grid in G with high probability
in time (t + n)O(1) .


6 Approximating the branchwidth of H-minor-free graphs
We now use the insights gained in the previous section to show that we can approximate both the
branchwidth of H-minor-free graphs and the maximum size of a grid in H-minor-free graphs.
For the proof of the main result of this section, we again establish a function, by setting

                b6.1 (t, k, g) := k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t) + 3(t − 3)(t − 4) +
                                max(g, 0)(k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)) + apex4.2 (t).

As a consequence we have b6.1 (t, k, g) ∈ O(gk + gt2302 ). We remark that in this proof we are
implicitly building surface cut decompositions (see [RST14]) for the graphs in each of the bags. To
combine them to a branch-decomposition of the entire graph we however need to deform these
decompositions further.

Theorem 6.1. Let k be an integer, let H be a graph with t := |V (H)|, and let G be a graph
that does not contain H as a minor. There exists an algorithm that determines whether G has
branch-width at least k or branchwidth at most b6.1 (t, k, eg(H) − 1) in time 2poly(t) kn3 m log n.
In particular, in the second outcome, the algorithm returns a branch-decomposition of G with width
at most b6.1 (t, k, eg(H) − 1).

Proof. Since G does not contain an H-minor model, we may apply Theorem 4.2 to find a tree-
decomposition (T ⋆ , β) for G with |V (T ⋆ )| ∈ O(|V (G)|) and of adhesion at most adhesion4.2 (t) such




                                                   31
that for every x ∈ V (T ⋆ ) the torso Gx of β(x) has a strong (apex4.2 (t), 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4), width4.2 (t))-
near embedding, with the apex set A, into a surface Σ into which H does not embed such that Gx −A
is a minor of G. Note that according to Theorem 4.2 we can find (T ⋆ , β) in 2poly(t) n3 m log n-time,
which incidentally completely dominates the runtime of all other operations we will perform, other
than an additional factor of k we incur later on. We root this tree-decomposition at some arbitrary
vertex r ∈ V (T ⋆ ).
Decomposing the bags of (T, β) or finding large grids. Let t ∈ β(t) and let Gt be the torso of
β(t), with the apex set At and G′t := Gt − At . Further, let ρ be the Σ-rendition of G′t associated
with the strong near embedding of Gt . We note here that we specifically assume that for every
vortex c ∈ C(ρ) and each set X of the linear-decomposition of the vortex-society of c, we have
constructed G′t such that all possible edges between vertices of X are included in G′t . This does not
harm our later efforts, as this does not change the width of our vortices, but does help us in the
construction of a branch-decomposition of G later.
Recall that according to the definition of strong near embedding the components of the graph B,
defined as the result of removing V (σρ (c)) \ Nρ (c) for all vortices c ∈ C(ρ) from G′t , each have a 2-cell
embedding in a surface of genus at most that of Σ. We define B ′ as in the proof of Theorem 5.6,
meaning that B ′ is the result of adding a vertex vc and all edges between vc and the vertices in
Nρ (c) for each vortex c ∈ C(ρ). This means that in particular there exists a 2-cell-embedding ϕ of
B ′ into Σ in which vc is the only vertex in the interior of the disk c that is a vortex of ρ and the
vertices contained in bd(c) are exactly Nρ (c). Let U be the collection of all vertices vc ∈ V (B ′ ) for
which c ∈ C(ρ) is a vortex. Due to the properties of our strong near embedding of Gt we know that
|U | ≤ 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4).
Suppose that Σ has positive genus. Should B ′ have representativity at least k + 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4), we
use Propositions 2.7 and 2.8 to conclude that B ′ has branchwidth at least k + 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4). Thus,
due to the small size of U , the graphs B and G have branchwidth at least k and we are done. We may
therefore assume that we can instead apply Proposition 2.1 to find a non-contractible curve γ in Σ that
intersects ϕ only in vertices, with V (γ) being these vertices, such that |V (γ)| < k + 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4).
As in the proof of Theorem 5.6, we may assume that the intersection of γ and each vortex c ∈ C(ρ)
for which vc ∈ V (γ) contains only one non-trivial curve γ that contains vc and has two distinct
endpoints ucγ , wγc in bd(c). Note that this is algorithmically feasible since we only need to know
V (γ) and the partition of bd(c) defined by the points ucγ , wγc for the coming arguments. Let (Gc , Ωc )
be the vortex society of c in ρ. Using ucγ , wγc we may partition Ωc into two segments Ic1 , Ic2 and,
since ρ and thus (Gc , Ωc ) have depth at most width4.2 (t), this allows us to find an Ic1 -Ic2 -separator
Sc in σρ (c) of order at most 2width4.2 (t). For any c ∈ C(ρ) such that vc ̸∈ V (γ) we let Sc := ∅ and
define S = (V (γ) \ U ) ∪ c∈C(ρ)Sc . We conclude that |S| ≤ k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t).
                           S

Since γ is non-contractible, Σ − γ consists of two surfaces whose closures Σ1 , Σ2 have combined
genus less than the genus of Σ. For both i ∈ [2] we add all disks c ∈ C(ρ) to Σi that are vortices
and whose interior intersects Σi . We let the resulting surfaces be Σ′1 and Σ′2 , and let ϕi be the
restriction of ϕ to Σi for both i ∈ [2], chosen such that the vertices of Ici are drawn by ϕi in Σi for
each vortex c ∈ C(ρ) with vc ∈ U . From this we derive a vortex-free rendition ρi by enclosing each
edge of the graph embedded by ϕi in a disk. For both i ∈ [2], we then add to ρi all vortices c ∈ C(ρ)



                                                     32
with c ⊆ Σi and construct Gi , intended to be the graph decomposed by ρi , by taking the union of
the component of B − S that is embedded by ϕi and, for each vortex c ∈ C(ρi ), all components of
σρ (c) − Sc that contain a vertex of Ici . For both i ∈ [2], the Σi -rendition ρi has breadth at most
1/2(t − 3)(t − 4) and depth at most width4.2 (t) by construction.

Let g ≤ max(eg(H) − 1, 0) be the genus of Σ. By iterating the process just outlined, we arrive
either at a witness that G has branchwidth at least k, or there exists a set S ′ ⊆ V (G′t ) with

                                    |S ′ | ≤ g(k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)),

such that we can decompose G′t − S ′ into graphs G1 , . . . , Gg+1 each having a rendition ρ′i in the
sphere with breadth at most 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4) and depth at most width4.2 (t). We note that in case
eg(H) = 0, meaning that H is planar, S ′ is empty. This serves to explain why we use the summand
max(g, 0)(k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)) in the definition of b6.1 (t, k, g),
By construction, for each i ∈ [g + 1], we can remove all sets V (σρ′i (c)) \ Nρ′i (c), where c ∈ C(ρ′i )
is a vortex, to find a graph Bi which has a 2-cell-embedding ϕ′i in Σi derived from ρ′i and such
that Bi is a minor of G. This allows us to apply Proposition 2.5 to either confirm that Bi has
branchwidth at least k, or we find a branch-decomposition of width at most k. As a result, we can
find a branch-decomposition of Bi with width at most k + width4.2 (t)(t − 3)(t − 4) + 3(t − 3)(t − 4)
via Theorem 5.3.
Repeating this process for all i ∈ [g + 1] allows us to either confirm that G has branchwidth at least
k, or instead find a branch-decomposition as described above for each Bi . Applying Lemma 3.1
yields a branch-decomposition (Tt′ , τt′ ) of the entirety of Gt of width at most

  k + (t − 3)(t − 4)(width4.2 (t) + 2) + |S ′ ∪ At | = k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t) + 3(t − 3)(t − 4) +
                                                           g(k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)) + apex4.2 (t).

Piecing together a branch-decomposition for G. We now combine the branch-decompositions of
the bags of (T ⋆ , β) into a branch-decomposition of G with width at most b6.1 (t, k, eg(H) − 1). For
this purpose, let t ∈ V (T ⋆ ) now be arbitrary and let t1 , . . . , tℓ be its children in T ⋆ , with (Tt′ , τt′ )
and (Tt′1 , τt′1 ), . . . , (Tt′ℓ , τt′ℓ ) being the associated branch-decompositions for Gt and Gt1 , . . . , Gtℓ . We
allow for ℓ = 0 to be the case, if t is a leaf of T ⋆ . Furthermore, we will assume that all edges
represented in (Tt′ , τt′ ) are removed from the branch-decompositions of its children. This clearly does
not increase the width of any of these decompositions.
To show that we can reconcile these decompositions, we need to take note of the particulars
of a few of our proofs. First, note that by using the explicit constructions from the proofs of
Lemma 3.1 and Theorem 5.3 to build (Tt′ , τt′ ), we can guarantee the following properties. Let A
be the apex set associated with Gt and let A′ be the set we constructed above with A ⊆ A′ and
|A′ | = max(eg(H) − 1, 0)(k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)) such that Gt − A′ has components B1t , . . . , Bgt ′ ,
with g ′ ≤ max(eg(H) − 1, 0), that each have a rendition in the sphere with at most 1/2(t − 3)(t − 4)
vortices each of width at most width4.2 (t). For all i ∈ [g ′ ] and for each vortex c in the rendition
of Bit in the sphere, there exists a linear decomposition (X1c , . . . , Xℓcc ) of width at most width4.2 (t),
associated with the linearisation of the vertices v1c , . . . , vℓcc on the boundary of c and a partitioning



                                                         33
E1c , . . . , Eℓcc of the edges associated with c. Each vertex vic , with i ∈ [ℓc ] is associated with a subtree
Tic ⊆ Tt′ rooted in a vertex wic that has two children, one being associated via τt′ with the edge
eci = vic vi+1c , or v c v c , if i = ℓ , and the other being associated with a subtree of T ′ whose leaves
                         i 1             c                                                         t
comprise those corresponding to Eic according to τt′ and possibly some edges associated with vertices
in A, depending on where Lemma 3.1 placed them. In particular, the edge incident to wic that lies
outside of Tic can be observed to have width at most width4.2 (t) + 1, using the arguments from
the proof of Theorem 5.3, since the cut at worst contains all of Xic and the one vertex in eci that
potentially lies outside of Xic .
Next, we make some observations on the tree-decomposition (T ⋆ , β) and in particular, where we
can expect Si := β(t) ∩ β(ti ) to lie with respect to A and the rendition ρ of G′t = Gt − A, for i ∈ [ℓ].
There are three options. First, we note that it is possible that Si ⊆ A. Next, most of the proof
of Theorem 4.6 is devoted to the case in which there exists some vortex c ∈ C(ρ) with a linear
decomposition (X1c ′ , . . . , Xℓc′c ′ ) (of width at most width4.2 (t)) and there exists some j ∈ [ℓ′c ] such that
Si ⊆ A ∪ Xjc ′ . Recall that we have assumed above that for every bag of a linear decomposition of a
vortex c ∈ C(ρ) we have included all possible edges in G′t . Note further that A ⊆ A′ . Thus another
possibility for the location of Si is that there exists a Bjt , with j ∈ [g ′ ], which has a rendition with a
vortex c, such that there exists an h ∈ [ℓc ] with Si ⊆ A′ ∪ Xhc . Finally, the third and last option is
that there exists some cell c ∈ C(ρ) that is not a vortex, and thus we have |Nρ (c)| ≤ 3, such that
we have Si ⊆ A ∪ Nρ (c). We let t1 , . . . , tℓ be sorted such that there exists k, p ∈ [0, ℓ] with k < p
and t1 , . . . , tk fall into the first option, tk+1 , . . . , tp fall into the second option, and tp+1 , . . . , tℓ are
associated with some non-vortex cell c of ρ.
We now construct our new branch-decomposition as follows. First, for each i ∈ [ℓ], we subdivide an
arbitrary edge of Tt′i and let usi be the subdivision vertex. Next, we let T 1 be a ternary tree with
k leaves and the root r1 , in which we subdivide an arbitrary edge, with u1 being the subdivision
vertex, and then identify us1 , . . . , usk via an arbitrary bijection with the leaves of L(T ). Finally,
we subdivide an arbitrary edge of Tt′ and make the subdivision vertex adjacent to u1 to form Tt1 .
The bijections τt′ , τt′1 , . . . , τt′k are then expanded in a straightforward fashion to Tt1 to form the new
branch-decomposition (Tt1 , τt1 ). We observe that, since Si ⊆ A, the width of this new decomposition
remains firmly below our bound of b6.1 (t, k, eg(H) − 1), as all new cuts that are introduced have
width at most |A| = apex4.2 (t).
Next, for each i ∈ [k + 1, p], let ji ∈ [g ′ ] be the unique index such that there exists a vortex ci
in the rendition of Bjti in the sphere and there exists a set Yici in the linear decomposition of the
vortex-society of ci with Si ⊆ A′ ∪ Yici . We subdivide the unique edge of Tjcii incident to the leaf ljcii
that is not associated with an edge contained in the vortex-society of ci and let u2i be the subdivision
vertex. Next, subdivide an arbitrary edge of Tt′i and make the subdivision vertex adjacent to u2i .
Repeating this operation for all i ∈ [k + 1, p] yields Tt2 , where, if we have Yici = Yic′ i for two distinct
i, i′ ∈ [k + 1, p], we continue to subdivide the edge incident to ljcii . We again extend τt1 , τt′k+1 , . . . , τt′p
in a straightforward fashion to τt2 to get the new branch-decomposition (Tt2 , τt2 ). To see that the
width of (Tt2 , τt2 ) did not increase past b6.1 (t, k, eg(H) − 1), we first observe that the unique edge
incident to wjcii that lies outside of Tjcii now has width at most

            apex4.2 (t) + max(eg(H) − 1, 0)(k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)) + width4.2 (t) + 1,



                                                          34
as Si ⊆ Yici ∪ A′ represents the only interaction between Gti and Gt . Note in particular that
this bound was already the appropriate bound for (Tt′ , τt′ ) according to our proof of Lemma 3.1.
Within the subtree of Tt2 corresponding to Tjcii , the same bound holds via the same observation. In
particular, via analogous arguments to those presented in the proof of Theorem 5.3, our construction
ensures that b6.1 (t, k, eg(H) − 1) is an upper bound on the width of all cuts induced by any edge in
Tt2 outside of these special subtrees.
Finally, concerning the third option, we first let ci be the non-vortex cell in ρ with Si ⊆ A′ ∪ Nρ (ci )
for each i ∈ [p + 1, ℓ]. We once more subdivide an arbitrary edge in Tt′i and let u3i be the
subdivision vertex. Next, let fi be an edge in G′t incident to a vertex in Nρ (ci ), preferably
with both endpoints in Nρ (ci ), which is only an issue if |Nρ (ci )| = 1. (If no such vertex exists,
we may treat (Tt′i , τt′i ) like the first case and note that the resulting cuts have width at most
apex4.2 (t) + max(eg(H) − 1, 0)(k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)).) We subdivide the unique edge incident
to the leaf of Tt2 that τt2 associates with fi and make the resulting subdivision vertex adjacent to u3i .
Repeating this for all i ∈ [p + 1, ℓ] yields our final tree Tt3 and the associated bijection τt3 can again
be derived in a straightforward fashion from τt2 , τt′p+1 , . . . , τt′ℓ . In line with our previous arguments,
we note that due to |Nρ (ci )| ≤ 3, the most significant increase to our bounds is found in the edge
incident to the former parent of the leaf of Tt2 that τt2 associates with fi . This edge may now have
width at worst

                   apex4.2 (t) + max(eg(H) − 1, 0)(k + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)) + 3.

As in the previous cases, the remaining edges also still have their width below our bound of
b6.1 (t, k, eg(H) − 1). Thus we have successfully united the branch-decompositions of Gt with
those of its children Gt1 , . . . , Gtℓ . Iterating this process bottom-up in the tree-decomposition
(T ⋆ , β), starting from the leaves and working its way towards the root r of T ⋆ , ultimately yields
a branch-decomposition of G that has width at most b6.1 (t, k, eg(H) − 1). This completes our
proof.

We note that the formulation of our statement lets us simplify our estimate on b6.1 (t, k, g) by using
Proposition 5.5 and noting that, if t := |V (H)|, we get b6.1 (t, k, eg(H) − 1) ∈ O(eg(H)k + t2304 ).
There are a host of consequences from this theorem. We start by noting that Theorem 4.7 tells us
that we can in fact perform the above computations in polynomial time via a randomised algorithm,
if we accept that the answer is only returned to us with high probability and with worse bounds on
the part of b6.1 that only depends on t.

Corollary 6.2. Let k be an integer, let H be a graph with t := |V (H)|, and let G be a graph that does
not contain H as a minor. There exists a function b6.2 : N3 → N with b6.2 (t, k, g) ∈ O(gk + gt11502 )
and an algorithm that determines whether G has branchwidth at least k or branchwidth at most
b6.2 (t, k, eg(H) − 1) with high probability in time (t + n)O(1) .

Both version of this theorem of course allow us to approximate the branchwidth of any given graph
G that excludes a given other graph H as a minor with relative ease by simply testing all n possible
values for it.



                                                      35
Corollary 6.3. Let H be a graph with t := |V (H)| and let G be a graph that does not contain H
as a minor. Then
   • there exists an algorithm that outputs a value b with b ≤ bw(G) ≤ b6.1 (t, b, eg(H) − 1) in time
     2poly(t) n3 m log2 n, and
   • there exists an algorithm that outputs a value b with b ≤ bw(G) ≤ b6.2 (t, b, eg(H) − 1) in time
     (t + n)O(1) with high probability.

Furthermore, note that we only find the k-grid in one specific situation within the proof of
Theorem 6.1, namely when we end up with an embedded graph on a surface with positive genus
and high representativity, or with an embedded graph of high branchwidth on the sphere. Thus,
since any Kk2 also contains a k-grid, instead of approximating the branchwidth of G, we can also
approximate the size of a largest k-grid in G using the same methods.

Corollary 6.4. Let H be a graph with t := |V (H)|, let G be a graph that does not contain H as a
minor, and let k be the maximum integer such that G contains a k-grid minor. Then
  • there exists an algorithm that outputs a value k with k ≤ k ≤ b6.1 (t, k, eg(H) − 1) in time
     2poly(t) n3 m log2 n, and
  • there exists an algorithm that outputs a value k with k ≤ k ≤ b6.2 (t, k, eg(H) − 1) in time
     (t + n)O(1) with high probability.

In case we explicitly want to find a grid in our algorithm, we can again employ the tricks presented
in Section 3.3 to make our results spit out either a large grid-minor model or a branch-decomposition
of small width at the cost of slightly worse functions. We again state a pair of results, corresponding
to whether we use Theorem 4.2 or Theorem 4.7

Theorem 6.5. There exists a function b6.5 : N3 → N with b6.5 (t, k, g) ∈ O(kg 7/2 + gt2302 ) and an
algorithm that, for any positive integer k, any graph H with t := |V (H)|, and any graph G not
containing H as a minor, returns either a branch-decomposition of width at most b6.5 (t, k, eg(H) − 1)
or a k-grid-minor model in G in time 2poly(t) kn3 m log2 n.

Theorem 6.6. There exists a function b6.6 : N3 → N with b6.6 (t, k, g) ∈ O(kg 7/2 + gt11502 ) and an
algorithm that, for any positive integer k, any graph H with t := |V (H)|, and any graph G not
containing H as a minor, returns either a branch-decomposition of width at most b6.5 (t, k, eg(H) − 1)
or a k-grid-minor model in G with high probability in time (t + n)O(1) .

Finally, in case we want to simply the function b6.1 (t, k, g) and get a neater approximation at the
cost of a somewhat worse runtime, we can adapt a technique presented in [TW25] to find an EPTAS
of the following form.

Theorem 6.7. There exists a function f6.7 : N2 → N and an algorithm that, given a graph
H with t := |V (H)|, a value ε > 0, and an H-minor-free graph G as input, outputs a value
b where b ≤ bw(G) ≤ (eg(H) + ε)b and runs in time O(2poly(t) n4 m log n + f6.7 (ε, t)n), where
                 2304
f6.7 (ε, t) = 2(t ·1/ε) .




                                                  36
Proof. First, we run the first algorithm mentioned in Corollary 6.3 and obtain a value b such that
b ≤ bw(G) ≤ b6.1 (t, b, eg(H) − 1). Notably, using Proposition 5.5, we can estimate b6.1 , such that

  b6.1 (t, b, eg(H)) = b + (t − 3)2 (t − 4)2 width4.2 (t) +
                       max(eg(H) − 1, 0)(b + (t − 3)(t − 4)width4.2 (t)) + apex4.2 (t) + adhesion4.2 (t)
                    ≤ eg(H)b + 2t4 width4.2 (t) + apex4.2 (t) + adhesion4.2 (t).

We let c := 2t4 width4.2 (t) + apex4.2 (t) + adhesion4.2 (t).
If c/b < ε, then c < εb and we thus have bw(G) ≤ eg(H)b + c < (eg(H) + ε)b. This allows us to
output b.
Otherwise c/b ≥ ε, which means that c/ε ≥ b and thus bw(G) ≤ eg(H)b + c ≤ (eg(H)c/ε + c =
c(eg(H)/ε + 1). Let c′ := c(eg(H)/ε + 1). This allows us to use Proposition 2.4 in order to output bw(G)
      ′
in 2c n-time.
In both cases, we return a value b⋆ such that b⋆ ≤ bw(G) ≤ (eg(H) + ε)b⋆ and thus we can confirm
                     ′
that f6.7 (ε, t) = 2c is chosen correctly.

We can of course adapt this proof to get the following result on a randomised approximation
algorithm that returns the desired value with high probability.

Theorem 6.8. There exists a function f6.7 : N2 → N and a randomised algorithm that, given a
graph H with t := |V (H)|, a value ε > 0, and an H-minor-free graph G as input, outputs with high
probability a value b where b ≤ bw(G) ≤ (eg(H) + ε)b and runs in time O(poly(t + n) + f6.7 (ε, t)n),
                        11504 ·1/ε)
where f6.7 (ε, t) = 2(t             .

Both Theorems 6.7 and 6.8 can be modified to spit out branch-decompositions and grid-minor
models. Since this notably makes the approximation factor worse, we do not state or prove this
here directly. For example, in the case where we apply Theorem 6.5 instead of Theorem 6.1 in the
proof of Theorem 6.7, the algorithm returns a value b with b ≤ bw(G) ≤ (eg(H)7/2 + ε)b.

Acknowledgements. The authors wish to thank anonymous referees for several helpful suggestions,
which improved the presentation of the paper and some of the running times of the presented
algorithms. We further thank Tony Huynh and Bojan Mohar for helpful discussions and particularly
thank Sang-il Oum for communicating David Wood’s question to us.


References
[ACP87]       Stefan Arnborg, Derek G. Corneil, and Andrzej Proskurowski. Complexity of finding
              embeddings in a k-tree. SIAM J. Algebraic Discrete Methods, 8(2):277–284, 1987.
[AFG09]       Denise Amar, Evelyne Flandrin, and Grzegorz Gancarzewicz. A degree condition
              implying that every matching is contained in a hamiltonian cycle. Discrete Mathematics,
              309(11):3703–3713, June 2009. doi:10.1016/j.disc.2008.02.003.




                                                      37
[ALS91]   Stefan Arnborg, Jens Lagergren, and Detlef Seese. Easy problems for tree-decomposable
          graphs. Journal of Algorithms, 12:308–340, 1991.
[Ami10]   Eyal Amir. Approximation Algorithms for Treewidth. Algorithmica, 56(4):448–479,
          April 2010. doi:10.1007/s00453-008-9180-4.
[BBGR24a] Gaétan Berthe, Marin Bougeret, Daniel Gonçalves, and Jean-Florent Raymond. Feed-
          back vertex set for pseudo-disk graphs in subexponential FPT time. In Daniel Král
          and Martin Milanic, editors, Graph-Theoretic Concepts in Computer Science - 50th In-
          ternational Workshop, WG 2024, Gozd Martuljek, Slovenia, June 19-21, 2024, Revised
          Selected Papers, volume 14760 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 65–78.
          Springer, 2024. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-75409-8\_5.
[BBGR24b] Gaétan Berthe, Marin Bougeret, Daniel Gonçalves, and Jean-Florent Raymond. Subex-
          ponential algorithms in geometric graphs via the subquadratic grid minor property:
          The role of local radius. In Hans L. Bodlaender, editor, 19th Scandinavian Sympo-
          sium and Workshops on Algorithm Theory, SWAT 2024, June 12-14, 2024, Helsinki,
          Finland, volume 294 of LIPIcs, pages 11:1–11:18. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum
          für Informatik, 2024. URL: https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.SWAT.2024.11, doi:
          10.4230/LIPICS.SWAT.2024.11.
[BCKN15] Hans L. Bodlaender, Marek Cygan, Stefan Kratsch, and Jesper Nederlof. Deterministic
          single exponential time algorithms for connectivity problems parameterized by treewidth.
          Inf. Comput., 243:86–111, 2015. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ic.2014.12.
          008, doi:10.1016/J.IC.2014.12.008.
[BGHK95] Hans L. Bodlaender, John R. Gilbert, Hjálmtýr Hafsteinsson, and Ton Kloks. Ap-
          proximating treewidth, pathwidth, frontsize, and shortest elimination tree. Journal of
          Algorithms, 18(2):238–255, 1995.
[BK96]    Hans L. Bodlaender and Ton Kloks. Efficient and constructive algorithms for the
          pathwidth and treewidth of graphs. J. Algorithms, 21(2):358–402, 1996. doi:10.1006/
          jagm.1996.0049.
[Bon25]   Édouard Bonnet. Treewidth inapproximability and tight eth lower bound. In Proceedings
          of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2025, Prague,
          Czech Republic., June 23-27, 2025. ACM, 2025.
[BPT92]   Richard B. Borie, R. Gary Parker, and Craig A. Tovey. Automatic generation of
          linear-time algorithms from predicate calculus descriptions of problems on recursively
          constructed graph families. Algorithmica, 7:555–581, 1992.
[BST21]   Julien Baste, Ignasi Sau, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Hitting minors on bounded
          treewidth graphs. II. single-exponential algorithms. CoRR, abs/2103.06536, 2021. URL:
          https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.06536, arXiv:2103.06536.
[BT97]    Hans L. Bodlaender and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Constructive linear time algorithms for
          branchwidth. In Automata, Languages and Programming, volume 1256, pages 627–637.
          Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1997. doi:10.1007/3-540-63165-
          8_217.




                                               38
[BT03]    Vincent Bouchitté and Ioan Todinca. Approximating the treewidth of at-free graphs.
          Discret. Appl. Math., 131(1):11–37, 2003. doi:10.1016/S0166-218X(02)00414-6.
[BT22]    Julien Baste and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Contraction bidimensionality of geometric
          intersection graphs. Algorithmica, 84(2):510–531, 2022. URL: https://doi.org/10.
          1007/s00453-021-00912-w, doi:10.1007/S00453-021-00912-W.
[CC16]    Chandra Chekuri and Julia Chuzhoy. Polynomial Bounds for the Grid-Minor Theorem.
          Journal of the ACM, 63(5):1–65, December 2016. doi:10.1145/2820609.
[CCDVL12] Sergio Cabello, Éric Colin De Verdière, and Francis Lazarus. Algorithms for the
          edge-width of an embedded graph. Computational Geometry, 45(5-6):215–224, July
          2012. doi:10.1016/j.comgeo.2011.12.002.
[CE13]    Chandra Chekuri and Alina Ene. Poly-logarithmic Approximation for Maximum Node
          Disjoint Paths with Constant Congestion. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual
          ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 326–341. Society for Industrial
          and Applied Mathematics, January 2013. doi:10.1137/1.9781611973105.24.
[CK23]    Johannes Carmesin and Jan Kurkofka. Characterising 4-tangles through a connectivity
          property, September 2023. arXiv:2309.00902, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2309.00902.
[CKS05]   Chandra Chekuri, Sanjeev Khanna, and F. Bruce Shepherd. Multicommodity flow,
          well-linked terminals, and routing problems. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Seventh
          Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 183–192, Baltimore MD USA,
          May 2005. ACM. doi:10.1145/1060590.1060618.
[CNP 22] Marek Cygan, Jesper Nederlof, Marcin Pilipczuk, Michal Pilipczuk, Johan M. M. van
     +

          Rooij, and Jakub Onufry Wojtaszczyk. Solving connectivity problems parameterized
          by treewidth in single exponential time. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 18(2):17:1–17:31,
          2022. doi:10.1145/3506707.
[Cou90]   Bruno Courcelle. The monadic second-order logic of graphs. I. Recognizable sets of finite
          graphs. Information and Computation, 85(1):12–75, March 1990. doi:10.1016/0890-
          5401(90)90043-H.
[CT21]    Julia Chuzhoy and Zihan Tan. Towards tight(er) bounds for the Excluded Grid
          Theorem. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 146:219–265, January 2021.
          doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2020.09.010.
[Dem10]   Erik Demaine. Algorithmic graph minors and bidimensionality. In Dimitrios Thilikos,
          editor, Graph Theoretic Concepts in Computer Science, volume 6410 of Lecture Notes
          in Computer Science, pages 2–2. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2010.
[DFHT04] Erik D. Demaine, Fedor V. Fomin, Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, and Dimitrios M.
          Thilikos. Bidimensional parameters and local treewidth. SIAM J. Discret. Math.,
          18(3):501–511, 2004. doi:10.1137/S0895480103433410.
[DFHT05] Erik D Demaine, Fedor V Fomin, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, and Dimitrios M
          Thilikos. Subexponential Parameterized Algorithms on Bounded-Genus Graphs and
          H-Minor-Free Graphs. Journal of the ACM, 52(6):866–893, November 2005. doi:
          10.1145/1101821.1101823.




                                               39
[DFT08]  Frederic Dorn, Fedor V. Fomin, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Catalan structures and
         dynamic programming in H -minor-free graphs. In Shang-Hua Teng, editor, Proceedings
         of the Nineteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2008,
         San Francisco, California, USA, January 20-22, 2008, pages 631–640. SIAM, 2008.
         URL: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1347082.1347152.
[DH08]   Erik D. Demaine and Mohammadtaghi Hajiaghayi. Linearity of grid minors in treewidth
         with applications through bidimensionality. Combinatorica, 28(1):19–36, January 2008.
         doi:10.1007/s00493-008-2140-4.
[DHK11]  Erik D. Demaine, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, and Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi. Con-
         traction decomposition in h-minor-free graphs and algorithmic applications. In Lance
         Fortnow and Salil P. Vadhan, editors, Proceedings of the 43rd ACM Symposium on
         Theory of Computing, STOC 2011, San Jose, CA, USA, 6-8 June 2011, pages 441–450.
         ACM, 2011. doi:10.1145/1993636.1993696.
[DHN 04] Erik D. Demaine, Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, Naomi Nishimura, Prabhakar Ragde,
      +

         and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Approximation algorithms for classes of graphs excluding
         single-crossing graphs as minors. J. Comput. System Sci., 69(2):166–195, 2004. doi:
         10.1016/j.jcss.2003.12.001.
[DHT06]  Erik D. Demaine, Mohammadtaghi Hajiaghayi, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. The
         bidimensional theory of bounded-genus graphs. SIAM J. Discrete Math., 20(2):357–371,
         2006.
[Die10]  Reinhard Diestel. Graph Theory. Number 173 in Graduate Texts in Mathematics.
         Springer, Heidelberg ; New York, 4th ed edition, 2010.
[DN19]   Zdenek Dvorák and Sergey Norin. Treewidth of graphs with balanced separations. J.
         Comb. Theory B, 137:137–144, 2019. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jctb.2018.
         12.007, doi:10.1016/J.JCTB.2018.12.007.
[DPBF10] Frederic Dorn, Eelko Penninkx, Hans L. Bodlaender, and Fedor V. Fomin. Efficient
         exact algorithms on planar graphs: Exploiting sphere cut decompositions. Algorithmica,
         58(3):790–810, 2010. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00453-009-9296-1, doi:
         10.1007/S00453-009-9296-1.
[Dyc88]  Walther Dyck. Beiträge zur Analysis situs: I. Aufsatz. Ein- und zweidimensionale
         Mannigfaltigkeiten. Mathematische Annalen, 32(4):457–512, December 1888. doi:
         10.1007/BF01443580.
[Epp00]  D. Eppstein. Diameter and Treewidth in Minor-Closed Graph Families. Algorithmica,
         27(3):275–291, June 2000. doi:10.1007/s004530010020.
[FHL08]  Uriel Feige, Mohammadtaghi Hajiaghayi, and James R. Lee. Improved approximation
         algorithms for minimum weight vertex separators. SIAM J. Comput., 38(2):629–657,
         2008. doi:10.1137/05064299X.
[FK24]   Fedor V. Fomin and Tuukka Korhonen. Fast fpt-approximation of branchwidth. SIAM
         J. Comput., 53(4):1085–1131, 2024. URL: https://doi.org/10.1137/22m153937x,
         doi:10.1137/22M153937X.




                                             40
[FLS18]   Fedor V. Fomin, Daniel Lokshtanov, and Saket Saurabh. Excluded grid minors and
          efficient polynomial-time approximation schemes. J. ACM, 65(2):10:1–10:44, 2018.
          doi:10.1145/3154833.
[FLST20] Fedor V. Fomin, Daniel Lokshtanov, Saket Saurabh, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos.
          Bidimensionality and kernels. SIAM J. Comput., 49(6):1397–1422, 2020. doi:
          10.1137/16M1080264.
[FW99]    George K Francis and Jeffrey R Weeks. Conway’s ZIP Proof. The American Mathemat-
          ical Monthly, 106(5):393–399, May 1999. doi:10.1080/00029890.1999.12005061.
[GKST25a] Petr A. Golovach, Stavros G. Kolliopoulos, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M.
          Thilikos. Finding irrelevant vertices in linear time on bounded-genus graphs. CoRR,
          abs/1907.05940v6, 2025. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.05940v6, arXiv:1907.
          05940.
[GKST25b] Petr A. Golovach, Stavros G. Kolliopoulos, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M.
          Thilikos. Finding irrelevant vertices in linear time on bounded-genus graphs. In Yossi
          Azar and Debmalya Panigrahi, editors, Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM
          Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2025, New Orleans, LA, USA, January
          12-15, 2025, pages 3762–3774. SIAM, 2025. doi:10.1137/1.9781611978322.126.
[Gri11]   Alexander Grigoriev. Tree-width and large grid minors in planar graphs. Discret. Math.
          Theor. Comput. Sci., 13(1):13–20, 2011. URL: https://doi.org/10.46298/dmtcs.
          539, doi:10.46298/DMTCS.539.
[Gro16]   Martin Grohe. Quasi-4-Connected Components, February 2016. arXiv:1602.04505,
          doi:10.48550/arXiv.1602.04505.
[GSW25]   Maximilian Gorsky, Michał T. Seweryn, and Sebastian Wiederrecht. Polynomial
          Bounds for the Graph Minor Structure Theorem, April 2025. arXiv:2504.02532,
          doi:10.48550/arXiv.2504.02532.
[GT08]    Qian-Ping Gu and Hisao Tamaki. Optimal Branch-Decomposition of Planar Graphs in
          o(n3 ) Time. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 4(3):1–13, June 2008. doi:10.1145/
          1367064.1367070.
[GT11]    Qian-Ping Gu and Hisao Tamaki. Constant-factor approximations of branch-
          decomposition and largest grid minor of planar graphs in O(n1+ϵ ) time. Theor. Comput.
          Sci., 412(32):4100–4109, 2011. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2010.07.017,
          doi:10.1016/J.TCS.2010.07.017.
[HW06]    Petr Hlinený and Geoff Whittle. Matroid tree-width. Eur. J. Comb., 27(7):1117–1128,
          2006. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejc.2006.06.005, doi:10.1016/J.EJC.
          2006.06.005.
[HW17]    Daniel J. Harvey and David R. Wood. Parameters Tied to Treewidth. Journal of
          Graph Theory, 84(4):364–385, April 2017. doi:10.1002/jgt.22030.
[HW25]    Kevin Hendrey and David R. Wood. Polynomial Bounds in the Apex Minor Theorem,
          March 2025. arXiv:2503.04228, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2503.04228.




                                              41
[JRST01]   Thor Johnson, Neil Robertson, Paul D. Seymour, and Robin Thomas. Directed tree-
           width. J. Comb. Theory B, 82(1):138–154, 2001. URL: https://doi.org/10.1006/
           jctb.2000.2031, doi:10.1006/JCTB.2000.2031.
[JST15]    Jisu Jeong, Sigve Hortemo Sæther, and Jan Arne Telle. Maximum matching width:
           new characterizations and a fast algorithm for dominating set. In 10th International
           Symposium on Parameterized and Exact Computation, volume 43 of LIPIcs. Leibniz
           Int. Proc. Inform., pages 212–223. Schloss Dagstuhl. Leibniz-Zent. Inform., Wadern,
           2015.
[KK20]     Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi and Yusuke Kobayashi. Linear min-max relation between the
           treewidth of an H-minor-free graph and its largest grid minor. Journal of Combinatorial
           Theory, Series B, 141:165–180, March 2020. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2019.07.007.
[KL23]     Tuukka Korhonen and Daniel Lokshtanov. An improved parameterized algorithm for
           treewidth. In Barna Saha and Rocco A. Servedio, editors, Proceedings of the 55th
           Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2023, Orlando, FL, USA,
           June 20-23, 2023, pages 528–541. ACM, 2023. doi:10.1145/3564246.3585245.
[KMR08]    Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, Bojan Mohar, and Bruce Reed. A Simpler Linear Time
           Algorithm for Embedding Graphs into an Arbitrary Surface and the Genus of Graphs
           of Bounded Tree-Width. In 2008 49th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations
           of Computer Science, pages 771–780, Philadelphia, PA, USA, October 2008. IEEE.
           doi:10.1109/FOCS.2008.53.
[Kor21]    Tuukka Korhonen. A single-exponential time 2-approximation algorithm for treewidth.
           In 62nd IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2021,
           Denver, CO, USA, February 7-10, 2022, pages 184–192. IEEE, 2021. doi:10.1109/
           FOCS52979.2021.00026.
[KTW18]    Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, Robin Thomas, and Paul Wollan. A new proof of the flat
           wall theorem. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 129:204–238, March 2018.
           doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2017.09.006.
[KTW21]    Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, Robin Thomas, and Paul Wollan. Quickly excluding a
           non-planar graph, January 2021. arXiv:2010.12397.
[LPTZ23]   Emmanouil Lardas, Evangelos Protopapas, Dimitrios M. Thilikos, and Dimitris Zoros.
           On strict brambles. Graphs Comb., 39(2):24, 2023. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
           s00373-023-02618-y, doi:10.1007/S00373-023-02618-Y.
[LS15]     Alexander Leaf and Paul Seymour. Tree-width and planar minors. Journal of Combina-
           torial Theory, Series B, 111:38–53, March 2015. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2014.09.003.
[Mar13]    Dániel Marx. The square root phenomenon in planar graphs. In Michael R. Fellows,
           Xuehou Tan, and Binhai Zhu, editors, Frontiers in Algorithmics and Algorithmic Aspects
           in Information and Management, Third Joint International Conference, FAW-AAIM
           2013, Dalian, China, June 26-28, 2013. Proceedings, volume 7924 of Lecture Notes in
           Computer Science, page 1. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-38756-2\_1.




                                              42
[Moh99]   Bojan Mohar. A Linear Time Algorithm for Embedding Graphs in an Arbitrary
          Surface. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 12(1):6–26, January 1999. doi:
          10.1137/S089548019529248X.
[MPT23]   Guillaume Mescoff, Christophe Paul, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. The mixed search
          game against an agile and visible fugitive is monotone. Discret. Math., 346(4):113345,
          2023. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.disc.2023.113345, doi:10.1016/J.DISC.
          2023.113345.
[MT01]    Bojan Mohar and Carsten Thomassen. Graphs on Surfaces. Johns Hopkins Studies in
          the Mathematical Sciences. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 2001.
[Ree92]   Bruce A. Reed. Finding approximate separators and computing tree width quickly. In
          Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
          - STOC ’92, pages 221–228, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada, 1992. ACM Press.
          doi:10.1145/129712.129734.
[Rin74]   Gerhard Ringel. Map Color Theorem. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
          1974. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-65759-7.
[RS86]    Neil Robertson and Paul D Seymour. Graph minors. V. Excluding a planar graph.
          Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 41(1):92–114, August 1986. doi:10.1016/
          0095-8956(86)90030-4.
[RS91a]   Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Excluding a graph with one crossing. In Neil
          Robertson and Paul D. Seymour, editors, Graph Structure Theory, Proceedings of
          a AMS-IMS-SIAM Joint Summer Research Conference on Graph Minors held June
          22 to July 5, 1991, at the University of Washington, Seattle, USA, volume 147 of
          Contemporary Mathematics, pages 669–675. American Mathematical Society, 1991.
[RS91b]   Neil Robertson and Paul D Seymour. Graph Minors. X. Obstructions to Tree-
          Decomposition. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 52(2):153–190, July
          1991. doi:10.1016/0095-8956(91)90061-N.
[RS94]    Neil Robertson and Paul D Seymour. Graph Minors. XI. Circuits on a Surface. Journal
          of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 60(1):72–106, January 1994. doi:10.1006/jctb.
          1994.1007.
[RS03]    Neil Robertson and Paul D Seymour. Graph Minors. XVI. Excluding a non-planar
          graph. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 89(1):43–76, September 2003.
          doi:10.1016/S0095-8956(03)00042-X.
[RS04]    Neil Robertson and Paul D Seymour. Graph Minors. XX. Wagner’s conjecture. Journal
          of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 92(2):325–357, November 2004. doi:10.1016/j.
          jctb.2004.08.001.
[RST94]   Neil Robertson, Paul D Seymour, and Robin Thomas. Quickly Excluding a Planar
          Graph. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 62(2):323–348, November 1994.
          doi:10.1006/jctb.1994.1073.
[RST14]   Juanjo Rué, Ignasi Sau, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Dynamic programming for graphs
          on surfaces. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 10(2):8:1–8:26, 2014. doi:10.1145/2556952.




                                             43
[RY68]   Gerhard Ringel and J. W. T. Youngs. Solution of the Heawood Map-Coloring Problem.
         Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 60(2):438–445, June 1968. doi:
         10.1073/pnas.60.2.438.
[ST94]   Paul D Seymour and Robin Thomas. Call routing and the ratcatcher. Combinatorica,
         14(2):217–241, June 1994. doi:10.1007/BF01215352.
[ST10]   Ignasi Sau and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Subexponential parameterized algorithms
         for degree-constrained subgraph problems on planar graphs. J. Discrete Algorithms,
         8(3):330–338, 2010. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jda.2010.02.002, doi:10.
         1016/J.JDA.2010.02.002.
[Thi12]  Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Graph minors and parameterized algorithm design. In Hans L.
         Bodlaender, Rod Downey, Fedor V. Fomin, and Dániel Marx, editors, The Multivariate
         Algorithmic Revolution and Beyond - Essays Dedicated to Michael R. Fellows on the
         Occasion of His 60th Birthday, volume 7370 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
         pages 228–256. Springer, 2012. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-30891-8\_13.
[Tho89]  Carsten Thomassen. The graph genus problem is NP-complete. Journal of Algorithms,
         10(4):568–576, December 1989. doi:10.1016/0196-6774(89)90006-0.
[Tho93]  Carsten Thomassen. Triangulating a Surface with a Prescribed Graph. Journal of
         Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 57(2):196–206, March 1993. doi:10.1006/jctb.1993.
         1016.
[TW24]   Dimitrios M Thilikos and Sebastian Wiederrecht. Excluding Surfaces as Minors in
         Graphs, February 2024. arXiv:2306.01724v4.
[TW25]   Dimitrios M. Thilikos and Sebastian Wiederrecht. Approximating Branchwidth on
         Parametric Extensions of Planarity. In Graph-Theoretic Concepts in Computer Science,
         volume 14760, pages 460–474. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 2025. URL: https:
         //arxiv.org/abs/2304.04517, doi:10.1007/978-3-031-75409-8_32.
[WAPL15] Yu (Ledell) Wu, Per Austrin, Toniann Pitassi, and David Liu. Inapproximability of
         treewidth and related problems (extended abstract). In Qiang Yang and Michael J.
         Wooldridge, editors, Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference
         on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2015, Buenos Aires, Argentina, July 25-31, 2015,
         pages 4222–4228. AAAI Press, 2015. URL: http://ijcai.org/Abstract/15/600.
[Woo25]  David Wood. Personal Communication, March 2025.




                                             44
