                                             Computing the Polytope Diameter is Even
                                             Harder than NP-hard (Already for Perfect
                                                           Matchings)
                                                                                    Lasse Wulf
                                                         IT University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, lasw@itu.dk
arXiv:2502.16398v3 [cs.CC] 3 Nov 2025




                                                                                        Abstract
                                                The diameter of a polytope is a fundamental geometric parameter that plays a crucial
                                             role in understanding the efficiency of the simplex method. Despite its central nature, the
                                             computational complexity of computing the diameter of a given polytope is poorly under-
                                             stood. Already in 1994, Frieze and Teng [Comp. Compl.] recognized the possibility that this
                                             task could potentially be harder than NP-hard, and asked whether the corresponding deci-
                                             sion problem is complete for the second level of the polynomial hierarchy, i.e. Πp2 -complete.
                                             In the following years, partial results could be obtained. In a cornerstone result, Frieze
                                             and Teng themselves proved weak NP-hardness for a family of custom defined polytopes.
                                             Sanità [FOCS18] in a break-through result proved that already for the much simpler frac-
                                             tional matching polytope the problem is strongly NP-hard. Very recently, Steiner and Nöbel
                                             [SODA25] generalized this result to the even simpler bipartite perfect matching polytope
                                             and the circuit diameter. In this paper, we finally show that computing the diameter of the
                                             bipartite perfect matching polytope is Πp2 -hard. Since the corresponding decision problem is
                                             also trivially contained in Πp2 , this decidedly answers Frieze and Teng’s 30 year old question.
                                                Our results in particular hold even when the constraint matrix of the given polytope is
                                             totally unimodular. They also hold when the diameter is replaced by the circuit diameter.
                                                As our second main result, we prove that for some ε > 0 the (circuit) diameter of the
                                             bipartite perfect matching polytope cannot be approximated by a factor better than (1 + ε).
                                             This answers a recent question by Nöbel and Steiner. It is the first known inapproximability
                                             result for the circuit diameter, and extends Sanità’s inapproximability result of the diameter
                                             to the totally unimodular case.

                                        Keywords: Diameter, circuit diameter, computational complexity, polynomial hierarchy, sec-
                                        ond level, bipartite perfect matching polytope, combinatorial reconfiguration, Πp2 , Σp2 , Hirsch
                                        conjecture, simplex method, 1-skeleton
                                        Funding: This work was supported by Eva Rotenberg’s Carlsberg Foundation Young Re-
                                        searcher Fellowship CF21-0302 “Graph Algorithms with Geometric Applications”.
                                        Acknowledgements: I am thankful to Eva Rotenberg for great encouragement and helpful
                                        discussions, and to Hung P. Hoang for introducing me to this intriguing problem.




                                                                                            1
1 Introduction
The diameter of a polytope is the maximum length of a shortest path (in terms of edges)
between any two vertices of the polytope. This property plays a crucial role in understanding
the complexity of algorithms that traverse polytopes, such as the simplex algorithm for linear
programming.
   The famous simplex algorithm, as invented in its basic form in the 1950s by George Dantzig,
aims to solve linear programming, i.e. to maximize a linear functional ct x over a polytope P .
Roughly speaking, the simplex algorithm works such that in each step the algorithm visits one
of the vertices of P , and a pivot rule decides which of the incident edges in the 1-skeleton of
P to traverse in order to visit the next vertex. The performance of the algorithm is hence
closely tied to the polytope’s diameter. If the diameter is small relative to the polytope’s size,
fewer steps might be needed to find an optimal solution, making the algorithm more efficient.
However, if the diameter is large relative to the polytope’s size, then under any pivot rule the
simplex algorithm needs to perform many steps in the worst case. More precisely, if diam(P )
denotes the diameter of P , there exists an initialization vertex of the simplex algorithm and a
direction c ∈ Rn , such that the algorithm needs to perform at least diam(P ) steps.
   One of the most famous open questions of mathematical optimization, as re-iterated by
Smale in his list of unsolved problems for the 21st century [Sma98], is whether there exists a
strongly polynomial time algorithm for linear programming. Maybe surprisingly, the simplex
algorithm is still a potential candidate for a positive resolution of this conjecture – while for
most known pivot rules counterexamples have been found which cause the simplex algorithm
to have superpolynomial running time (see e.g. [DFH23, KM72]), the existence of a pivot rule
such that the simplex algorithm has strongly polynomial runtime still remains a famous open
question.
   Since the runtime of the simplex algorithm is lower-bounded by diam(P ), a necessary condi-
tion for such a strongly polynomial pivot rule would be that for every polytope P ⊆ Rd with n
facets, its diameter is bounded by a polynomial function in n and d. This condition has become
known under the name polynomial Hirsch conjecture.

                 diam(P ) ≤ poly(n, d) for all polytopes P ⊆ Rd with n facets.

Much like the existence of a strongly polynomial pivot rule, the polynomial Hirsch conjecture is
a famous conjecture in the theory of mathematical optimization and convex geometry, and still
remains wide open. It is a relaxation of the classic Hirsch conjecture, which was established by
Hirsch in 1957 and stated that diam(P ) ≤ n − d for all polytopes. The classic Hirsch conjecture
has since been disproven, first for unbounded polytopes by Klee and Walklup [KW67] and
finally for bounded polytopes in 2012 by Santos [San12]. However, even today the best known
counterexamples are quite close to Hirsch’ original conjecture, in the sense that Matschke,
Santos and Weibel found polytopes P with diam(P ) ≥ 21     20 (n − d) [MSW15]. In the important
special case of 0/1 polytopes, i.e. polytopes with the property that all vertices lie on 0/1-integer
coordinates, the Hirsch conjecture is known to be true, as shown by Naddef [Nad89].
   The complexity of computing the diameter. We consider the problem Diameter of
computing the diameter of a polytope. More specifically, since we are interested in questions re-
garding computational complexity, it is more convenient to talk about its corresponding decision
version Diameter-Decision. These problems are defined as follows.

      Problem: Diameter
      Input: A ∈ Qm×d and b ∈ Qm describing the polytope P = {x ∈ Rd : Ax ≤ b}.
      Task: Compute the diameter diam(P ).




                                                 2
     Problem: Diameter-Decision
     Input: A ∈ Qm×d and b ∈ Qm describing P = {x ∈ Rd : Ax ≤ b}, and some t ∈ N.
     Question: Is diam(P ) ≤ t?

   Since the diameter of a polytope is the central object of study of the Hirsch conjecture, which
has been established already in 1957, one would expect that the computational complexity of
Diameter and Diameter-Decision is well understood. However, that is not the case. As
a cornerstone result, Frieze and Teng [FT94] proved that Diameter is weakly NP-hard for
a family of custom defined polytopes. Sanità [San18] in a break-through result proved that
already for the much simpler fractional matching polytope the problem Diameter is strongly
NP-hard. Very recently, Nöbel and Steiner [NS25] generalized this result to the even simpler
bipartite perfect matching polytope. However, none of these papers could establish whether
the problem Diameter-Decision is actually contained in the class NP. Indeed, this is not
a coincidence. Already in 1994, Frieze and Teng recognized the possibility that the problem
Diameter-Decision could be even harder than NP-hard and asked

Question 1 (Frieze and Teng [FT94]). Is Diameter-Decision Πp2 -complete?

   Here, the class Πp2 = co-Σp2 denotes the class in the second level of the polynomial hierarchy
introduced by Stockmeyer [Sto76]. Roughly speaking, the class Πp2 contains all the problems
of the form: FOR ALL objects x, does there EXIST some object y such that some efficiently
testable property P(x, y) holds? This is a natural fit to Diameter-Decision, since diam(P )
is small if and only if FOR ALL vertex pairs, there EXISTS a short path in P connecting the
pair. Similar to the P ̸= NP conjecture, complexity theorists believe that co-NP ̸= Πp2 , or
equivalently, that the polynomial hierarchy does not collapse to the first level [Woe21]. If this
belief is true, it means that every Πp2 -complete problem is not contained in NP (or co-NP), since
it is complete for a much larger complexity class. Indeed, we show in this paper that Question 1
has a positive answer, already for the bipartite perfect matching polytope. This provides an
explanation why previous papers could not establish membership of Diameter-Decision to
NP. The precise result together with its implications will be explained below.
   Bipartite perfect matchings. All our results hold already for the very well known and
widely studied bipartite perfect matching polytope, which has countless important applications in
combinatorial optimization. Given a bipartite graph G = (V, E), let us define the characteristic
vector χM ∈ RE of some perfect matching M ⊆ E as the edge indexed vector (xe )e∈E that has
xe = 1 if e ∈ M and xe = 0 otherwise. The bipartite perfect matching polytope of G is then
defined as the convex hull of all characteristic vectors of perfect matchings.

                     PG := conv{χM : M ⊆ E is a perfect matching of G}

In particular, the vertices of PG correspond bijectively to perfect matchings of G. It is well-
known that PG has the following compact halfspace-encoding (see e.g. [KV11]). Here the term
δ(v) denotes the set of edges incident to vertex v.
                           X
                                xe = 1                         ∀v ∈ V
                          e∈δ(v)

                                   xe ≥ 0                       ∀e ∈ E

1.1 Our contribution
We present two main results. As our first main, result, we decidedly answer Frieze and Tengs’
30 year old question. Let BPM-Diameter-Decision denote the restriction of Diameter-
Decision to only the bipartite perfect matching polytope, then



                                                3
Theorem 1. BPM-Diameter-Decision is Πp2 -complete.

   In particular, computing the diameter of a polytope, i.e. problem Diameter, is Πp2 -hard,
even when restricted to totally unimodular constraint matrices. Since Πp2 ⊇ NP is a larger
complexity class than the class NP (and this inclusion is strict under the complexity-theoretic
assumption that the polynomial hierarchy does not collapse to the first level), this result is
stronger than the hardness results of [FT94, San18, NS25].
   Is it also true that Diameter-Decision ∈ Πp2 for all families of polytopes beside the bipartite
perfect matching polytope? A standard argument shows that for all families F of polytpes where
it is known that the polynomial Hirsch conjecture holds, we indeed have Diameter-Decision ∈
Πp2 restricted to that family F. Hence if the polynomial Hirsch conjecture is true, we have that
Diameter-Decision is Πp2 -complete and our hardness result cannot be improved further (than
the class Πp2 ). Even without the assumption that the polynomial Hirsch conjecture is true, our
hardness result cannot be improved further for the bipartite perfect matching polytope, and
the family of all 0/1-polytopes, since here the Hirsch conjecture is already known to hold.
   What are the consequences of a problem being Πp2 -complete? Such problems are in general
much harder to solve than even NP-complete problems. (An illustrative explanation of that
fact is given e.g. by Woeginger [Woe21].) Since integer programming is contained in NP, unless
the polynomial hierarchy collapses, our result implies the diameter of a polytope cannot be
computed by a mixed integer program with only polynomially many variables and constraints.
As a consequence, computation of the diameter can be compared to other notoriously hard-
to-compute parameters, like the generalized Ramsey number (which Schaefer showed to be
Πp2 -complete [Sch01]).
   Since exact computation of the diameter turns out to be very hard, we turn to approximation
of the diameter and prove as our second main result

Theorem 2. There exists ε > 0 such that the diameter of the bipartite perfect matching polytope
cannot be approximated better than (1 + ε) in polynomial time, unless P ̸= N P .

   Our proof of Theorem 2 is an adaptation of a recent proof of Nöbel and Steiner [NS25].
Interestingly, Nöbel and Steiner suspected that their methods could probably not be adapted
to show an inapproximability result. Hence we show that their suspicion is not the case, if only
in the weak sense of a (1 + ε)-approximation. Sanità showed that finding the diameter of the
fractional matching polytope is an APX-hard problem [San18]. Hence our Theorem 2 can be
understood as an extension of Sanità’s result to the bipartite perfect matching polytope (and
thus the totally unimodular case).

1.2 Applications to the circuit diameter
In 2015, Borgwardt, Finhold and Hemmecke [BFH15] proposed a generalization of the diam-
eter of a polytope, called the circuit diameter. This concept is motivated by so-called circuit
augmentation schemes, which are generalizations of the simplex algorithm and have attracted
a lot of attention over the last decade. The basic idea behind circuit augmentation schemes is
that we would like to move more freely through some polytope P than only traversing its edges.
These algorithms consider a set C(P ) of potential directions, called the circuits of the polytope.
For the sake of completeness, we include here the definition of the set C(P ) (although it is not
needed to understand the rest of the paper).

Definition (from [BGK+ 25]). Let P = {x ∈ Rd : Ax = a, Bx ≤ b} be a polyhedron. The set of
circuits of P , denoted by C(P ) with respect to its linear description A, B consists of all vectors
g ∈ ker(A) \ {0} for which Bg is support-minimal in the set {Bx : x ∈ ker(A) \ {0}} and g has
coprime integral components.




                                                 4
   It can be shown that C(P ) always includes the original edge directions of P . A single circuit
move starting from some x ∈ P now selects some circuit g ∈ C(P ) and moves maximally along
direction g, i.e. to the point x + λg with the property that λ ≥ 0 is maximal with respect to
x + λg ∈ P . Hence circuit moves are allowed to cross the interior of the polytope and end up
at non-vertices of P . This fact makes circuit augmentation schemes more powerful than the
simplex algorithm and a compelling subject of study. Indeed, many different pivot rules and
algorithms for circuit augmentation schemes have been proposed by various authors over the
last 10 years [DLHL15, BV20, BBFK21, LKS22, DKNV22]. Analogous to the regular distance
and diameter, we can define the circuit distance between x, y ∈ P as the minimum number of
circuit moves necessary to reach y from x, and the circuit diameter cdiam(P ) as the maximum
circuit distance over all vertex pairs of P . Analogously to the simplex algorithm, cdiam(P ) gives
a lower bound for the worst-case runtime of circuit augmentation schemes under any pivot rule.
Remarkably, De Loeira, Kafer and Sanità came very close to proving the polynomial “circuit”
Hirsch conjecture, in the sense that they proved that for every polytope P , its circuit diameter
is bounded by a polynomial in n, d and the maximum encoding-length among the coefficients in
its input encoding [LKS22]. The classic Hirsch conjecture adapted to the circuit diameter, as
proposed by Borgwardt, Finhold and Hemmecke [BFH15] still remains open. In order to shed
light on this question, multiple authors have studied the circuit diameter of different families of
polytopes, e.g. in [SY15, BSY18, KPS19, DKNV22, BBB23].
   The question about the computational complexity of computing the circuit diameter was
raised by Sanità [San20] and reiterated by Kafer [Kaf22] and Borgwardt et al. [BGK+ 25]. This
question was recently (partially) settled by Nöbel and Steiner [NS25], who showed strong NP-
hardness. Analogously to the circuit diameter, they could not show containment in NP.
   The main results in this paper have interesting consequences for the circuit diameter. This
is because all our results are obtained for the perfect matching polytope, and for this polytope
it is actually known that diam(P ) = cdiam(P ) (see e.g. Corollary 4 in [BV22] or Lemma 2
in [CS23a]). Hence we immediately obtain the following corollaries of our main theorems. Let
Cdiam-Decision denote the decision problem corresponding to computing the circuit diameter,
then

Corollary 3. Cdiam-Decision is Πp2 -complete, even when restricted to the bipartite perfect
matching polytope.

  This strengthens the recent NP-hardness result of Nöbel and Steiner [NS25] and shows that
just like the diameter, the circuit diameter is even harder to compute than NP-hard. We remark
that in contrast to Theorem 1, we automatically have the containment Cdiam-Decision ∈ Πp2
due to the almost polynomial “circuit” Hirsch conjecture of [LKS22]. Hence this hardness result
cannot be strengthened further than the class Πp2 . As a corollary of our second main theorem,
we have

Corollary 4. There exists ε > 0, such that the circuit diameter of a polytope cannot be approx-
imated by a factor better than (1 + ε), unless P = NP.

  Corollary 4 provides the first known inapproximability result for the circuit diameter of a
polytope. As a consequence, unless P = NP, no circuit augmentation scheme can find the optimal
solution in worst-case runtime of (1 + ε) cdiam(P ) steps or less. This can be compared to the
result of Cardinal and Steiner [CS23a], who show that no circuit augmentation scheme can have
worst-case runtime O(log n/ log log n) to find a circuit walk between two vertices of distance two
(assuming ETH). It is a very interesting question to ask whether our inapproximability result
can be improved to any constant factor.




                                                5
1.3 Related work
There are several other works that deal not with the diameter, but rather with the problem of
computing the distance of two given vertices of some polytope P . In the case of the distance
this problem was shown to be NP-hard for the bipartite perfect matching polytope PG inde-
pendently by Aichholzer et al. [ACH+ 21] and Ito et al. [IKK+ 22]. Additionally, Borgward et al.
[BGK+ 25] show NP-hardness of computing circuit distances in 0/1-network flow polytopes, and
Cardinal and Steiner show the same for polymatroids [CS23b]. These results were strengthened
by Cardinal and Steiner [CS23a] to a O(log n/ log log n)-hardness of approximation result for
computing a short path between two vertices of distance two on the bipartite perfect matching
polytope, assuming ETH. As explained in [NS25], the techniques for handling polytope diam-
eters and distances are very different, since distances can be very short (which is often helpful
for proofs), but diameters are usually large.
  Finally, a related series of work deals with combinatorial reconfiguration of perfect matchings
[IDH+ 11, KMM12, GKM19, BHIM19, BBH+ 19, BMPT25]. In these papers, the notion of
adjacency between two perfect matchings differs from the adjacency on the bipartite perfect
matching polytope considered in the present paper.


2 Technical Overview
We give a quick overview of the arguments used to obtain the main result of the paper. Recall
the following. A perfect matching (abbreviated PM) of a graph G = (V, E) is a subset M ⊆ E
such that every vertex is touched exactly once. A path or cycle is alternating with respect
to some PM M if it alternates between edges in M and not in M . An alternating path is
explicitly allowed to start and/or end with an edge not in M . It is well-known that given two
PMs M1 , M2 , their symmetric difference M1 △ M2 = (M1 \ M2 ) ∪ (M2 \ M1 ) is a vertex-disjoint
union of alternating cycles. Since we are concerned with shortest paths in the bipartite perfect
matching polytope, we first need to understand, when two of its vertices are adjacent. This is
a well-known fact first shown by Chvátal.

Lemma ([Chv75], see also [NS25]). Let G = (V, E) be a bipartite graph, and let x = χM and
y = χN be two vertices of the polytope PG , corresponding to two perfect matchings M, N ⊆ E.
The vertices x and y are adjacent in the 1-skeleton of P if and only if the edges in the symmetric
difference M △ N form a single alternating cycle.

  Based on this insight, we define the following: Flipping an alternating cycle C means trans-
forming the PM M into the PM M △ C. A flip sequence of length d from a PM M1 to a
PM M2 is a sequence (C1 , . . . , Cd ) such that for all i ∈ [d], the cycle Ci is alternating with
respect to the perfect matching M △ C1 △ · · · △ Ci−1 , and we have M2 = M1 △ C1 △ · · · △ Cd .
For two PMs M1 , M2 , we define dist(M1 , M2 ) as the length of the shortest flip sequence from
M1 to M2 . Finally, we define problem BPM-Diameter-Decision as the restriction of prob-
lem Diameter-Decision to the special case of the bipartite perfect matching polytope. This
means that the input is a bipartite graph G, and some threshold t ∈ N. The problem is to
decide whether diam(PG ) ≤ t, or alternatively whether

                          max{dist(M1 , M2 ) : M1 , M2 PM of G} ≤ t.

   Overview of the first main result. We wish to prove that BPM-Diameter-Decision
is Πp2 -complete. As a starting point, one can look at the classic Πp2 -complete problem ∀∃-SAT
[Sto76]. Here, we are given a SAT-formula φ in conjunctive normal form, such that its variables
are partitioned into two disjoint parts X, Y (and such that w.l.o.g. every clause contains exactly
three literals). The question is whether for all assignments of X there exists an assignment of




                                                6
Y that makes φ true, i.e.

                              ∀α ∈ {0, 1}X : ∃β ∈ {0, 1}Y : φ(α, β) = 1.

One can compare this to the definition of the diameter. The diameter of a polytope P is at
most d if and only if for all vertex pairs of P there is a path of length at most d in the 1-skeleton
connecting those two vertices. In the special case of the bipartite perfect matching polytope PG
of some graph G this means that

          ∀M1 , M2 a PM of G : ∃ a flip sequence of length at most d from M1 to M2 .                   (1)

   Our main idea is to combine recent advances in understanding of both the diameter of the
bipartite perfect matching polytope, as well as recent understandings of the typical structure
of Πp2 -complete problems. In particular, the clever construction of Nöbel and Steiner [NS25]
manages to transform a given graph H into another graph G such that short flip sequences in
G relate closely to Hamiltonian cycles in H. They use this to obtain an elegant proof for the
NP-hardness of Diameter. On the other hand, Grüne and Wulf [GW24] recently introduced
a wide-ranging meta-theorem that characterizes a “typical” problem complete for the class Σp2
= co-Πp2 . (A similar result is also presented in [GW25].) The study of [GW24] motivates the
definition of the following Πp2 -complete variant of the Hamiltonian cycle problem. Let k ∈ N.
Given a directed graph H together with a set E ′ = {e1 , e1 , . . . ek , ek } of 2k distinct arcs, consider
a subset P ⊆ E ′ . We say that P is a pattern, if |P ∩{ei , ei }| = 1 for all i ∈ [k]. Some Hamiltonian
cycle C in H respects the pattern P , if C ∩ E ′ = P . In other words, the pattern determines
for each pair {ei , ei }, which one of these two arcs the Hamiltonian cycle is allowed to use and
which one it is not allowed to use. We prove in Section 4.2 using techniques from [GW24] that
the following problem is Πp2 -complete:

      Problem: ∀∃-HamCycle
      Input: Directed graph H, distinct vertices v (1) , . . . , v (k) for some k ∈ N, such that
      for all i ∈ [k], the vertex v (i) has exactly two outgoing arcs, denoted by ei , ei . The
      set E ′ := {e1 , e1 , . . . , ek , ek }.
      Question: Is the following true:
      ∀ patterns P ⊆ E ′ : ∃ a Hamiltonian cycle C respecting P ?

  We reduce ∀∃-HamCycle to BPM-Diameter-Decision. In Section 4.5, we show: Given
an instance of ∀∃-HamCycle, consisting out of a directed graph H on n = |V (H)| vertices
together with arcs E ′ = {e1 , e1 , . . . ek , ek }, one can in polynomial time construct an undirected
bipartite graph GH on Θ(n9 ) vertices such that the following two lemmas hold:

Lemma 5. If for all patterns P ⊆ E ′ the directed graph H contains a Hamiltonian cycle
respecting P , then diam(PGH ) ≤ 4n4 + 46n.

Lemma 6. If diam(PGH ) ≤ 4n4 + 46n, then for all patterns P ⊆ E ′ the directed graph H
contains a Hamiltonian cycle respecting P .

   Together, these two lemmas prove our main theorem. In order to understand how our con-
struction works, it is helpful to first understand the elegant idea of [NS25]. Nöbel and Steiner
introduce so-called tower-gadets (see Figure 1), and furthermore combine multiple towers into
a gadget which for our purpose shall be called city gadget (see Figure 2). They show that there
exist perfect matchings M1 and M2 such that any short flip sequence from M1 to M2 must
contain at least one cycle that visits every city gadget. This is sufficient for their argument,
but we require a stronger statement. Let us call a cycle C in the graph GH regular, if C visits
every city gadget.



                                                    7
   We first show, that in a short enough flip sequence (C1 , . . . , Cd ), if n tends to infinity, then
an arbitrarily large percentage of the cycles (C1 , . . . , Cd ) must be regular. We remark that it
is inherent to the arguments used in [NS25] that in general there can always be several cycles
that are irregular, i.e. they do not visit every city gagdet. Such irregular cycles are technically
challenging for us to deal with, but their existence can not be excluded.
   We significantly expand upon the ideas of [NS25] by introducing so-called XOR-gadgets (Fig-
ure 4), ladder-gadgets (Figure 7) and sophisticated ∀-gadgets (Figure 10). These gadgets have
the property that if they interact with some regular cycle C, then their behavior is well under-
stood. On the other hand, if they interact with some irregular cycle, then the “damage” done
by this irregular cycle is in some sense restricted.
   It is described in Section 4.5 how to define the desired bipartite undirected graph GH given
the directed graph H. The graph GH contains many copies of the gadgets described above.
Given two perfect matchings M1 , M2 of GH , one can ask what is their distance dist(M1 , M2 ) in
the polytope PGH . We are able to show, that in a certain sense, this distance crucially depends
on the structure of the matchings M1 , M2 restricted to the ∀-gadgets. In particular, consider
a fixed pattern P ⊆ E ′ in H. We show that one can find PMs M1 , M2 in GH by carefully
choosing their restriction to the ∀-gadgets, and completing this choice to the whole graph GH
in the right manner, such that dist(M1 , M2 ) is small if and only if there is a Hamiltonian
cycle respecting the pattern P in the directed graph H. (This argument depends crucially on
the asymmetric behavior of the set of perfect matchings of the ladder gadget, explained more
closely in Section 4.4.) Note that this approach highlights the similarity between Problem (1)
and ∀∃-HamCycle, i.e. perfect matchings of GH correspond to patterns P ⊆ E ′ and vice versa.
However, note that there is a major difference: Patterns are binary, that is for all i ∈ [k] the set
P either contains ei or ei . In contrast, the set of perfect matchings of a ∀-gadget is not binary
at all, rather it is exponentially large. Nonetheless, we are able to overcome this final technical
difficulty. On a high level, we show that we can interpret a PM of a ∀-gadget as a “mixture”
of so-called top-states and bottom-states, and make use of the property that for all patterns
P ⊆ E ′ the directed graph H has a Hamiltonian cycle respecting P .
   We explain one more idea, which is also used in [NS25]. We will define a subset Vs ⊆ V (GH )
of size |Vs | = Θ(n) of the Θ(n9 ) vertices of GH , called the semi-default vertices. We call
a PM M of the graph GH a semi-default matching, if M matches the semi-default vertices
in a pre-described way. We show that the semi-default matchings lie “dense” in all perfect
matchings. In particular, given an arbitrary PM M , one can find a semi-default PM M ′ such
that dist(M, M ′ ) ≤ 23n ≪ n4 . The intuition we will use is that in order to transform any PM
M1 into any PM M2 , we first look for semi-default representatives M1′ , M2′ of M1 , M2 . Then, we
use at most 23n irregular cycles to transform M1 to M1′ , at most 4n4 regular cycles to transform
M1′ into M2′ , and at most 23n irregular cycles to transform M2′ into M2 . This completes the
proof sketch of the first main result. More details are given in Section 4.
   Overview of the second main result. We wish to prove that the diameter is hard to
approximate to a factor (1 + ε). For this, we consider a similar reduction as for the first main
result. We again make central use of the city gadgets introduced by [NS25] to “enforce” that
most cycles in a short flip sequence (C1 , . . . , Cd ) visit all cities. This is reminiscent of the
Hamiltonian cycle problem. It is therefore natural to show a certain approximation version
of the Hamiltonian cycle problem. It roughly states that we can w.l.o.g. consider problem
instances such that in yes-instances it is possible to visit all cities, but in no-instances it is only
possible to visit a (1 − ε) fraction of all cities. We prove a result of this kind suited to our
needs in Theorem 22. We achieve this as a consequence of the PCP theorem using established
techniques. If we have a yes-instance, then the diameter of PG is small, since we can efficiently
visit all city gagdets. However, if it is only possible to visit a (1 − ε) fraction of all cities, then
the diameter of PG must be large. This is because city gadgets (in the right configuration) have
the property that each city must be visited many times by the cycles in (C1 , . . . , Cd ). This




                                                  8
completes the proof sketch of the second main result. More details are given in Section 5.


3 Preliminaries
In this paper, we use the notation N = {1, 2, . . .} and [n] := {1, . . . , n}. We use uv as a shorthand
notation for the undirected edge {u, v}. All paths and cycles are simple. All graphs are assumed
to be undirected, unless stated otherwise. Paths and cycles in a directed graph always adhere
to the orientation of the edges. For G = (V, E), we denote V (G) := V and E(G) := E.
  A language is a set L ⊆ {0, 1}∗ . A language L ⊆ {0, 1}∗ is contained in Πp2 if there exists
some polynomial-time computable function V (verifier), such that for all w ∈ {0, 1}∗ for suitable
m1 , m2 ≤ poly(|w|)

                    w ∈ L ⇔ ∀y1 ∈ {0, 1}m1 ∃y2 ∈ {0, 1}m2 : V (w, y1 , y2 ) = 1.

A language L is Πp2 -hard, if every L′ ∈ Πp2 can be reduced to L with a polynomial-time many-one
reduction. If L is both Πp2 -hard and contained in Πp2 , it is Πp2 -complete.
   An introduction to the polynomial hierarchy and the classes Πp2 and Σp2 = co-Πp2 can be found
in the book by Papadimitriou [Pap94], or the article by Woeginger [Woe21].
   Let X = {x1 , . . . , xn } be a set of boolean variables. The corresponding set of literals is
{x1 , . . . , xn } ∪ {x1 , . . . , xn }. A clause is a disjunction of literals. A boolean formula φ is in
conjunctive normal form (CNF) if it is a conjunction of clauses. An assignment is a map
α : X → {0, 1}. We write φ(α) ∈ {0, 1} to denote the evaluation of φ under assignment α.


4 The Reduction
In this section, we present our proof of Πp2 -completeness. We first show containment in the class
Πp2 in Section 4.1. Then we introduce the Πp2 -complete problem ∀∃-HamCycle in Section 4.2.
We introduce a number of different gadgets in Sections 4.3 and 4.4, with the ∀-gagdet being
the most complicated one. In Section 4.5 we define the graph GH , and in Section 4.6, we show
that the diameter of the polytope PGH has the desired properties.

4.1 Containment
It is relatively easy to show the containment of Diameter-Decision in the class Πp2 , as long
as the following assumption holds.
Lemma 7. Let F be a family of polytopes. If it holds that for each P ∈ F we have diam(P ) ≤
poly(n, d, |P |), where n is its number of facets, d its dimension, and |P | its encoding length, then
Diameter-Decision restricted to the family F is contained in Πp2 . An analogous statement
holds for the circuit diameter cdiam(P ) and Cdiam-Decision.
Proof. Let P = {x ∈ Rd : Ax ≤ b}, and consider some t ∈ N. We have diam(P ) ≤ t if and only
if

∀x, y vertices of P : ∃(v1 , . . . , vk ) : x = v1 , y = vk , k ≤ t, all vi and vi+1 are neighboring vertices.

Furthermore, given a sequence (v1 , . . . , vk ) of vectors in Rd , it is possible to test in polynomial
time, whether v1 , . . . , vk are actually vertices of the polytope and whether vi is adjacent to vi+1
for all i ∈ [k −1] (see e.g. [FT94]). In particular, we can w.l.o.g. restrict such sequences to length
k ≤ diam(P ) ≤ poly(n, d, |P |). Therefore, the encoding space of the sequence (v1 , . . . , vk ) is at
most polynomial in the input size. Thus by the definition of Πp2 , we have Diameter-Decision ∈
Πp2 . For the circuit diameter, the same argument applies. We use the fact that given two
points vi , vi+1 ∈ P , one can test in polynomial time whether vi , vi+1 are one circuit move apart
[BGK+ 25].



                                                     9
  In particular, we have BPM-Diameter-Decision ∈ Πp2 , and CDiam-Decision ∈ Πp2 .

4.2 The Base Problem
Consider problem ∀∃-HamCycle, as defined in Section 2.
Lemma 8. ∀∃-HamCycle is Πp2 -complete (even when restricted to planar directed graphs of
maximum in- and outdegree 2).
Proof. The problem is contained in Πp2 , since it can be stated as:
                     ∀ patterns P ⊆ E ′ : ∃ a Hamiltonian cycle C respecting P ,
and given a directed graph H together with sets P ⊆ E ′ , C ⊆ E(H), it can be checked in
polynomial time whether C is a Hamiltonian cycle and respects the pattern P . So it remains to
show Πp2 -hardness. Our proof strategy is to first consider a classic reduction by Plesnı́k [Ple79],
which reduces 3SAT to the directed Hamiltonian cycle problem in planar digraphs of maximum
in- and outdegree 2. We show that we can modify Plesnı́k’s reduction to be instead a reduction
from ∀∃-SAT to ∀∃-HamCycle. It is not necessary to re-iterate all the details of Plesnı́k’s
reduction. Instead, it suffices to notice the following key properties: Given a 3SAT formula φ,
the reduction constructs in polynomial time a (planar and 2-in/outdegree-bounded) directed
graph Hφ . If φ has N variables and M clauses, the graph Hφ contains N so-called variable
gadgets and M so-called clause gadgets. Plesnı́k proceeds to prove that every Hamiltonian
cycle must traverse the variable gadgets in order, and must make a “decision” for each variable
gadget. In particular, the i-th variable gadget starts with some vertex v (i) of outdegree 2.
Immediately after entering v (i) , every Hamiltonian cycle needs to decide whether it leaves v (i)
via the first outgoing arc and traverses the variable gadget in the “xi = true” configuration, or
if it leaves v (i) via the second outgoing arc and traverses the variable gadget in the “xi = false”
configuration. Let us define ei as the first, and ei as the second outgoing arc of vertex v (i) , and
let E ′′ = {e1 , e1 , . . . , eN , eN }. By studying [Ple79] it can be checked that the following holds:
    • For every i ∈ {1, . . . , N }, every Hamiltonian cycle C in Hφ uses exactly one of the two
      arcs ei and ei .
    • There is a direct correspondence between subsets of the arc set E ′′ that can be part
      of a Hamiltonian cycle and satisfying assignments for the formula φ. Formally: Let
      Z = {z1 , . . . , zN } be the variable set of φ. For an assignment α : Z → {0, 1}, let Pα
      denote the corresponding set of arcs defined by Pα = {ei : α(zi ) = 1} ∪ {ei : α(zi ) = 0}.
      Given an assignment α, there exists a Hamiltonian cyle C in Hφ with C ∩ E ′′ = Pα if and
      only if φ(α) = 1.
Finally, we describe how to modify this reduction to a reduction from ∀∃-SAT to ∀∃-HamCycle.
Given a 3SAT formula φ(X, Y ), we assume w.l.o.g. that φ is a formula over N = 2n variables
partitioned into two parts X, Y of equal size |X| = |Y | = n. We consider the graph Hφ as
above. Then, we consider the arcs E ′′ = {e1 , e1 , . . . , e2n , e2n }, and let E ′ = {e1 , e1 , . . . , en , en }
be those arcs of E ′′ that appear in the variable gadgets corresponding to X (but not to Y ).
By the above observation, for a fixed pattern P ⊆ E ′ , there is a Hamiltonian cycle respecting
P , if and only if it is possible to complete P with another pattern P2 ⊆ E ′′ \ E ′ and complete
P ∪ P2 to a Hamiltonian cycle. Again, by the above correspondence, this implies that φ is a
yes-instance of ∀∃-SAT if and only if (Hφ , E ′ ) is a yes-instance of ∀∃-HamCycle.
  We remark that the key properties described above are not specific to Plesnı́k’s proof. Similar
properties appear in other folklore proofs for the NP-hardness of Hamiltonian cycle, and in
plenty of NP-hardness proofs of other combinatorial problems. In [GW24] a systematic study
of this property is performed, and its implications on completeness in the second level of the
polynomial hierarchy are discussed.



                                                        10
       ah       bh


       ..           ..
        .            .                                                                              ?

       a2       b2
       a1       b1

v           a0 b0        w

      (a) Definition                 (b) default                            (c) locked            (d) semi-default

Figure 1: A tower gadget of height h, and different states a perfect matching of the tower gadget
          may have.


4.3 Towers and Cities
Nöbel and Steiner [NS25] introduce so-called tower gadgets. For some h ∈ N, a tower gadget of
height h is an induced subgraph on the vertex set
                                                             h
                                                             [
                                               {v, w} ∪             {ai , bi }
                                                             i=0

and edge set
                                                 h
                                                 [                  h
                                                                    [
                                {va0 , b0 w} ∪         {ai bi } ∪         {ai ai−1 , bi bi−1 }.
                                                 i=0                i=1

An example for h = 6 is depicted in Figure 1a. Recall that our plan is to use these tower gadgets
as part of some larger graph GH . We will maintain the invariant that every tower gadget is
connected to the rest of GH only via the two vertices v and w. If some tower gadget T is
contained in GH , and M is a PM of GH , the PM M restricted to T can behave in many different
ways. We give names to some of these behaviors. Consider Figures 1b to 1d.SWith respect to
a fixed PM M , the tower gadget T is called in default state, if {va0 , b0 w} ∪ hi=1 {ai bi } ⊆ M .
The tower gadget T is called locked, if it is in default state, except for the 4 top vertices, where
instead ah ah−1 , bh bh−1 ∈ M . The tower gadget T is called in semi-default state, if va0 , b0 w ∈ M
(and the rest of the tower can be matched in any arbitrary way).
   Consider a tower gadget T , subgraph of GH , which starts in the locked state, and which we
want to transform into the default state using a flip sequence of alternating cycles (C1 , . . . , Cd ),
where Ci ⊆ GH for i ∈ [d]. Of course, we can achieve this task by using a single alternating
cycle C on the vertices {ah , ah−1 , bh−1 , bh }. However, if we choose to do this, it comes with
a disadvantage: Even though we have achieved our goal using a single cycle C, the influence
of the alternating cycle C ⊆ GH is limited to only T (but C could be useful also somewhere
else). This motivates the following definition: Let T be a tower gadget in the graph GH and
M be a fixed PM of GH . A cycle C ⊆ GH is called well-behaved 1 for T , if restricted to T it
is a v-w-path. A sequence of paths (P1 , . . . , Pd ) is a well-behaved flip sequence for T , if for all
i = 1, . . . , d the path Pi is a path from v to w inside T such that Pi is alternating with respect
to the matching M △ P1 △ · · · △ Pi−1 .

Lemma 9 (adapted from [NS25]). Let T be a tower gadget of height h for some h ∈ N. If
(P1 , . . . , Pd ) is a well-behaved flip sequence for T which transforms T from the locked state into
the default state, then d ≥ 2h − 2.
 1
     In [NS25] this behavior is called “touching the tower”. However, we would like to use the same name also for
      our more advanced gadgets later on, where the name “touching” could be misinterpreted.




                                                            11
                                    ≡                                         ...
             x      c       y                x                                               y


                   Figure 2: A city gadget consists out of many tower gadgets.



                                                 ?


                                    ≡                                         ...
             x      c       y                x                                               y


Figure 3: A city gadget is called matched, or in semi-default state, if all of its towers are in
          semi-default state.


   For the sake of completeness, we provide the proof sketch of Lemma 9. Let Mi be the PM
after applying the first i paths P1 , . . . , Pi for i = 0, . . . , d. Let H(Mi ) := {j ∈ [h] : aj bj ∈ Mi }
be the set of indices corresponding to the horizontal edges of Mi . Because the flip sequence
is well-behaved, every path can switch between the left and the right side of the tower only a
single time. This means that H(Mi+1 ) results from H(Mi ) by adding or deleting only a single
item. Furthermore, because every path Pi is also alternating, the first time Pi encounters some
horizontal edge aj bj of Mi−1 , the path Pi must include it. Hence, in order to go from the locked
to the default position, one must first remove the h − 2 horizontal edges of H(M0 ), and then
add all h horizontal edges. Since each requires a single path, we have d ≥ 2h − 2.

Lemma 10 (adapted from [NS25]). Let T be a tower gadget of height h, and let M1 , M2 be two
PMs of T in semi-default position. Then there exists a well-behaved flip sequence (P1 , . . . , Pd )
which transforms M1 into M2 such that d = 2h.

   Here the intuition is that we can first remove all the at most h horizontal edges of M1 , and
then insert all the at most h horizontal edges of M2 . It can be checked that this is possible with
a well-behaved flip sequence (P1 , . . . , Pd′ ) for some d′ ≤ 2h, where in particular all paths are
alternating with respect to the current matching. Since both M1 and M2 are in semi-default
state, d′ is an even number. Finally, we can assume w.l.o.g. that d′ = 2h. Indeed, if d′ < 2h,
we can just choose any alternating path P from v to w (which always exists) and consider the
flip sequence (P1 , . . . , Pd′ , P, P ). Since flipping the same path twice does have no effect on the
matching, this new flip sequence has the same end result.
   We now combine multiple tower gadgets into so-called city gadgets. These were also used in
[NS25], but not given an explicit name. A city gadget of width t and height h between vertices x
and y is defined as follows: It consists out of t towers T1 , . . . , Tt , such that vertex x is identified
with vertex v of the first tower T1 , vertex y is identified with vertex w of the last tower Tt , and
for i = 2, . . . , t, the edge b0 w of tower Ti−1 is identified with edge va0 of the next tower Ti . An
example is depicted in Figure 2. Note that x and y are connected by a path of odd length.
A city gadget is called in semi-default state or matched, if all of its towers are in semi-default
state. Since every tower has an even number of vertices, a city gadget is matched if and only if
               (T )
the edge xa0 1 of the first tower is in the matching. Similarly to before, we will maintain the



                                                     12
invariant, that a city gagdet is connected to the rest of GH only via the vertices x and y. City
gagdets are useful since they “enforce” that certain locations must be visited. Let us say that
                                                                                               (T )
some cycle C in the graph GH visits a city gagdet g, if the cycle C contains the first edge xa0 1
of the city gadget g. Note that a cycle C visits a city if and only if C is well-behaved for every
tower of the city.
Definition 11. Let GH be a graph containing several city gadgets. A (not necessarily alternat-
ing) cycle C in GH is called regular, if it visits every single city gadget of GH .
Lemma 12. Let n ∈ N. Let GH be a graph which contains at most 17n city gadgets, with every
city gadget having the same height h = 2n4 and width t = 4n4 + 100n. Let M1 be a PM of GH
such that w.r.t. M1 every tower of every city is in locked state, and M2 be a PM of GH such
that every tower of every city is in default state. If (C1 , . . . , Cd ) is a flip sequence from M1 to
M2 with d ≤ 4n4 + 46n, then we also have d ≥ 4n4 − 2 and furthermore at most 1000n2 of the
d cycles are not regular.
Proof. Consider a fixed city gadget g. We claim that the gagdet g contains a tower T ⋆ such
that each of C1 , . . . , Cd either does not visit g at all or is well-behaved for T ⋆ . Indeed, there
can be at most d towers in g with the property that one of the cycles (C1 . . . , Cd ) is entirely
contained in them. Since t > d, at least one tower Tj has the property that none of the cycles
(C1 , . . . , Cd ) is contained entirely in Tj . We let T ⋆ := Tj Now, observe that T ⋆ starts in locked
state, ends up in default state, and only interacts with well-behaved cycles. Due to Lemma 9,
at least 2h − 2 well-behaved cycles are required for this task. Hence at least 2h − 2 cycles visit
the city g. In particular d ≥ 2h − 2 = 4n4 − 2. If we define the set

                                Cg := {i ∈ [d] : Ci does not visit g},

then |Cg | ≤ d − (2h − 2) ≤ 46n + 2. Furthermore if a cycle is not regular, then it is contained
in Cg for at least one city g, and so
                                                   X
                    |{i ∈ [d] : Ci not regular}| ≤   |Cg | ≤ 17n(48n) ≤ 1000n2 .
                                                    g

Here the index g runs over all cities of the graph.

  The XOR-gadget. In the final construction of the graph GH , we will choose the parameters
such that Lemma 12 is applicable. The lemma then tells us that of the Θ(n4 ) cycles in any
short flip sequence, at most O(n2 ) are not regular, i.e. the majority of cycles visit all cities.
Based on this insight, we introduce our next gadgdet, the so-called XOR-gadget. Given a graph
G, and two edges ab, uv ∈ E(G), a XOR-gadget between ab and uv is created by subdividing
the edge ab four times, creating four new vertices x1 , . . . , x4 , and subdividing the edge uv four
times, creating four new vertices y1 , . . . , y4 . After that, we connect xi and yi with a city gagdet
for i = 1, . . . , 4. An example is shown in Figure 4. Note that if C is a regular cycle, then C
traverses the XOR-gadget either from u to v, but does not traverse the gadget from a to b, or
traverses the gadget from a to b, but does not traverse the gadget from u to v. (This can be
formally proven by noticing that every regular cycle visits all cities and additionally uses either
the edge x1 x2 or the edge x2 x3 .) In order to simplify future notation, let us say that in the first
case the cycle C uses the edge uv, but does not use the edge ab, while in the second case C
uses the edge uv, but does not use the edge ab (these formulations are slightly imprecise since
technically the edges ab and uv do not exist in GH ). In conclusion, every regular cycle has to
visit the XOR-gadget and uses exactly one of the two edges ab and uv.
  A XOR-gadget is called in semi-default state if every of its four city gadgets is in semi-regular
state (see Figure 5). Observe that two XOR-gadgets can be applied to the same edge (see
Figure 6).
  Finally, we require the following technical lemma:



                                                  13
                                                                                 x1          x2          x3       x4
                           a                        b                    a                                                 b

                                      xor                        ≡               c           c       c            c

                           u                        v                    u                                                 v
                                                                                 y1          y2          y3       y4

             a                                               b                           a                                             b

                  c            c      c     c                                                    c        c           c        c

             u                                               v                           u                                             v

Figure 4: Definition of a XOR-gadget. Note that if a cycle visits every city, then in every XOR-
          gadget it “traverses” exactly one of the two edges ab and uv.




                                                a                                                    b

                                                         c       c           c       c

                                                u                                                    v

Figure 5: A XOR-gadget is called in semi-default state, if every of its city gadgets is in semi-
          default state.




             a                        b                              a                                                                     b

                 xor                 ≡
                                    xor                                      c       c       c       c                c    c       c   c
                                                                                                                       ′
                                                                                                              v       u
     u                 v       u′                       v′           u                                                                     v′

              Figure 6: Multiple XOR-gadgets can be applied to the same edge.




                                                                         14
a6           b6
  a5       b5

                          ?

  a2       b2
  a1       b1
a0           b0
 (a) Definition         (b) semi-default              (c) default                (d) bottom-open    (e) top-open

            Figure 7: A ladder gadget. Ladder gadgets always have a fixed height of 5.


Lemma 13. If G is a bipartite graph and e, e′ are distinct edges, then one can add a XOR-gadget
between e and e′ such that the graph remains bipartite.

Proof. Since every city gadget connects its two endpoints via an odd-length path, the XOR-
gadget itself is bipartite, such that vertex set {a, v} and vertex set {u, b} lie in different parts
of the bipartition. Let vertices w1 , w2 be the endpoints of edge e and vertices w1′ , w2′ be the
endpoints of edge e′ in the graph G. Since G is bipartite, w1 and w2 lie in different parts, and
w1′ and w2′ lie in different parts (w.r.t. the bipartition of G). We do a case distinction: If the
vertex sets {w1 , w2′ } and {w2 , w1′ } lie in different parts of the bipartition of G, then we add the
XOR-gadget in such a way that (w1 , w2 ) is identified with (a, b) and (w1′ , w2′ ) is identified with
(u, v). The resulting graph is bipartite, since a bipartite graph is inserted into another bipartite
graph respecting the bipartition. In the other case, if the vertex sets {w1 , w1′ } and {w2 , w2′ }
lie in different parts of the bipartition of G, then we add the XOR-gadget in such a way that
(w1 , w2 ) is still identified with (a, b), but (w1′ , w2′ ) is identified with (v, u). This means that we
effectively mirror the bottom edge of the XOR-gadget. The resulting graph is bipartite.


4.4 Ladders and the ∀-gadget
As explained in Section 2, the ∀-gadget needs to exhibit asymmetric behavior. In order to
achieve this asymmetric behavior, we introduce yet another gadget, the ladder gadget. We show
that the ladder gadget exhibits a very slight asymmetric behavior, and amplify this effect by
combining many ladder gadgets together. A ladder gadget is an induced subgraph on the 14
vertices
                                  {a0 , . . . , a6 } ∪ {b0 , . . . , b6 }
and edge set
                                        5
                                        [                  5
                                                           [
                                              {ai bi } ∪         {ai ai+1 , bi bi+1 }.
                                        i=1                i=0

An example is depicted in Figure 7a. Ladder gadgets are similar to tower gadgets, but have a
connection to both their top and bottom side. While tower gadgets have a variable height, a
ladder gadget in this paper always has a fixed height of 5. We will maintain the invariant that
a ladder is connected to the rest of the graph GH only via the vertices a0 , b0 , a6 , b6 . Consider
a fixed PM M of GH . With respect to M a ladder gadget is called in semi-default state, if the
vertices a0 , b0 , a6 , b6 are matched to vertices outside the gadget by M . It is in default state, if
{a1 b1 , . . . , a5 b5 } ⊆ M . It is called the bottom-open ladder, if {a5 b5 , a4 a3 , b4 b3 , a2 a1 , b2 b1 } ⊆ M .
It is called the top-open ladder, if {a5 a4 , b5 b4 , a3 a2 , b3 b2 , a1 b1 } ⊆ M (see Figures 7b to 7e).
   Similar to the case of tower gagdets, we again want to consider well-behaved cycles. Let L be
some ladder gagdet. Assume we have some (not necessarily alternating) cycle C in the graph




                                                             15
                        L1                    L2                     L3



Figure 8: Ladder L1 is transformed into ladder L3 with two well-behaved alternating cycles from
          the top. Ladders L1 and L3 are in semi-default state, ladder L2 is not.


GH , such that C includes at least one vertex of L. The cycle C is called well-behaved for the
ladder gadget L, if either

   • both a0 a1 , b0 b1 ∈ E(C) and both a5 a6 , b5 b6 ̸∈ E(C), or

   • both a5 a6 , b5 b6 ∈ E(C) and both a0 a1 , b0 b1 ̸∈ E(C).

In other words, the cycle C enters the ladder either from the top (i.e. via the edge a5a6 or b5 b6 )
or from the bottom (i.e. via the edge a0 a1 or b0 b1 ), leaves from the the same side it entered,
and after that does not visit the inner ladder (vertices ai , bi for i ∈ {1, . . . , 5}) again. In the
first case, let us say that the well-behaved cycle C visits L from the top, in the second case,
let us say that C visits L from the bottom. The next lemma establishes the already claimed
asymmetry, by showing that in order to transform the bottom-open ladder (the top-open ladder,
respectively) into the default ladder with well-behaved cycles, we need to primarily come from
the bottom (the top, respectively). Similarly to before, a sequence (C1 , . . . , Cd ) of cycles is
called a well-behaved flip sequence for the ladder L that transforms M1 into M2 , if each of
C1 , . . . , Cd is well-behaved, and restricted to L, we have that Ci is an alternating path with
respect to M △ C1 △ · · · △ Ci−1 for all i ∈ [d], and M2 = M1 △ C1 △ · · · △ Cd . Figure 8 showcases
a well-behaved flip sequence of length 2.

Lemma 14. Let L be a ladder gadget. If (C1 , . . . , Cd ) is a well-behaved flip sequence for L that
transforms the bottom-open ladder into the default state, then d ≥ 4. Additionally if d = 4, then
each of C1 , . . . , C4 must come from the bottom. The analogous statement is true if L starts as
the top-open ladder, except that now each of C1 , . . . , C4 must come from the top.

Proof. Observe that every well-behaved cycle C includes exactly one edge of the form ai bi ,
where i ∈ [5]. (This follows in particular since a well-behaved cycle visits a ladder only once,
either from the top or from the bottom.) Let H(M ) := {i ∈ [5] : ai bi ∈ M } be the index set
of horizontal edges that some PM M contains. The previous fact implies that after flipping
a well-behaved cycle, the set H(M ) changes by only addition or deletion of a single element.
Since for the default ladder H(M ) = {1, . . . , 5}, and for the bottom-open ladder H(M ′ ) = {5},
we see that if (C1 , . . . , Cd ) is a flip sequence transforming the former into the latter, then d ≥ 4.
Further, if d = 4, assume one of the cycles Cj for j ∈ [4] comes from the top. Then either the
cycle Cj or some cycle Cj ′ for j ′ < j contains the edge a5 b5 as the only horizontal edge. This is a
contradiction to the fact that we go from H(M ) = {1, . . . , 5} to H(M ′ ) = {5} in only four steps.
Finally, the statement about the top-open ladder holds analogously by vertical symmetry.

   We remark that in the above lemma it is crucial that the cycles are well-behaved. In particular,
if a cycle is allowed to enter a ladder from the top, but leave from the bottom, then one can
show that it is possible to transform the bottom-open ladder into the default ladder with only
two alternating cycles. Our construction of GH will ensure that in a short enough flip sequence,
the majority of all ladders only ever interact with well-behaved cycles.



                                                   16
                                                            bottom-open


                                                   2b                          2b
                         2b

                                                                                                          2b
                                         2t                  2b                      2t


                                         2b                 2t                       2b
                                                                                                          2t
             default
                        2t                         2t                          2t




                                                                top-open

Figure 9: All 8 semi-default ladders. Arrows indicate that one can be turned into the other by
          using two well-behaved cycles, either both from the top (2t) or both from the bottom
          (2b). In order to transform the top-open ladder into the default ladder, one requires
          at least 4 well-behaved cycles, all from the top.


  The necessary condition of Lemma 14 for transforming a ladder into another is complemented
by the following sufficient condition.

Lemma 15. Let L be a ladder gadget. Let M1 and M2 be two semi-default states of L. There is
a well-behaved flip sequence (C1 , . . . , C4 ) of length 4 that transforms M1 into M2 . Furthermore
there is one such sequence so that C1 , C2 both come from the top, or both come from the bottom,
and C3 , C4 both come from the top, or both come from the bottom.

Proof. Observe that there are 8 different semi-default ladders, since a semi-default ladder has
either 1, 3 or 5 horizontal edges, and all possibilities to arrange these are displayed in Figure 9.
Furthermore, Figure 9 shows a graph, where two ladders are connected with an edge, if one can
be transformed into the other using two well-behaved cycles, either both from the top (denoted
2t), or both from the bottom (denoted 2b). Note that this relation is symmetric, i.e. if L1 can
be transformed into L2 with two well-behaved cycles, then L2 can also be transformed into L1 .
To prove the lemma it now suffices to observe that the graph of Figure 9 has diameter 2, i.e.
every pair of ladders is connected by a path with at most two edges. Finally, we remark that if
(C1 , . . . , Cd ) with d = 2 or d = 0 is an even shorter flip sequence from M1 to M2 , we can also
find a flip sequence of length exactly four: We can simply choose any well-behaved cycle C from
the top or bottom (at least one always exists), and consider the sequence (C1 , . . . , Cd , C, C).

  ∀-gadgets. After we showed that a single ladder gadget can exhibit a slight asymmetry
between top and bottom, we now show how to amplify this asymmetry by combining a lot
of ladders into a single gadget. Assume we are given an undirected graph GH , and three
distinct vertices called vout , uin , win . Let t ∈ N. A ∀-gadget of width t is the subgraph that is
depicted in Figure 10 such that it is connected to the rest of GH via only these three vertices.
Precisely, we introduce 10 new vertices {x1 , . . . , x10 }. After that, we connect the four pairs
(x1 , x2 ), (x3 , x4 ), (x5 , x6 ), (x7 , x8 ) with a city gadget each. We add the edge set

            {vout x1 , vout x5 , x1 x8 , x5 x4 , x2 x3 , x6 x7 , x4 x9 , x8 x9 , x9 x10 , x10 uin , x10 win }.



                                                           17
                                                                                            xor

                                x1           c            x2               x3        c            x4                       uin




                       vout                                         ...
                xor
                                                 L1                              Lt                           x9     x10


                                             c                                       c                                     win
                                x5                        x6               x7                     x8

                                                                                            xor



               Figure 10: A ∀-gadget between the three vertices vout , uin , and win .

                                                                                      xor

                                            x1        c        x2          x3    c          x4                     uin



                                                      ?
                                     vout                            ...
                          xor
                                                      L1                        Lt                     x9   x10


                                                      c                          c                                 win
                                            x5                 x6          x7               x8

                                                                                      xor




Figure 11: A ∀-gadget is in semi-default state, if all its city gadgets and all its XOR-gadgets are
           in semi-default state and the edge x9 x10 is matched.


Three XOR-gadgets are applied to the edge pairs (x2 x3 , x6 x7 ), (x2 x3 , x10 uin ), and (x6 x7 , x10 win )
respectively. Finally, a total amount of t ladder gadgets are added. For each of these t ladders,
vertex a6 in the ladder is identified with vertex x2 in the ∀-gadget. Likewise, b6 is identified
with x3 , a0 is identified with x6 , and b0 is identified with x7 . This completes the description of
the ∀-gadget.
   A ∀-gadget is called in semi-default state with respect to a fixed PM M , if all its city-gadgets,
and all its XOR-gagdets are in semi-default state, and x9 x10 ∈ M (see Figure 11). We now
describe the main functionality of a ∀-gadget. Recall that a regular cycle is a (not necessarily
alternating) cycle in GH that visits all cities. Let A be a ∀-gadget and C be a regular cycle.
We say that the cycle C is in top state with respect to the gadget A, if C uses the edge x10 uin .
Analogously, we say that the cycle C is in bottom state with respect to the gadget A, if C uses
the edge x10 win . Let us for the remainder of this section assume w.l.o.g. that the graph GH
contains at least one city gadget outside of A, such that every regular cycle needs to both enter
                                                                    S5
and leave A. Let us say that C visits some ladder, if V (C) ∩        i=1 {ai , bi } ̸= ∅ for the vertices
a0 , . . . , a6 , b0 , . . . , b6 of that ladder.
Lemma 16. If A is a ∀-gadget, and C is a regular cycle in GH , then C is either in top state or
bottom state (but not both). Furthermore, the cycle C visits exactly one ladder L of the gadget,
and C is well-behaved for L. If the cycle C is in top state (bottom state, respectively) then it
visits L from the top (from the bottom, respectively).
Proof. Since C is regular, the city-gadgets and XOR-gadgets behave as intended. In particular,
the cycle C uses all four edges x1 x2 , x3 x4 , x5 x6 , x7 x8 , and exactly one of the two edges x10 uin
and x10 win (because they are connected by a chain of XOR-gadgets). Since we assumed that
there is at least one city gadget outside of the ∀-gadget A, and A is only connected to the rest



                                                                       18
                                                              xor

                           x1   c    x2             x3    c         x4              uin




                    vout                      ...
              xor
                                L1                       Lt              x9   x10


                                c                         c                         win
                           x5        x6             x7              x8

                                                              xor


                                           (a) Top state

                                                              xor

                           x1   c    x2             x3    c         x4              uin




                    vout                      ...
              xor
                                L1                       Lt              x9   x10


                                c                         c                         win
                           x5        x6             x7              x8

                                                              xor


                                          (b) Bottom state

Figure 12: If C is a cycle visiting every city gadget, then a ∀-gadget is in one of the following
           two states: Either C contains the edge x10 uin and visits exactly one ladder coming
           from the top (top state), or C contains the edge x10 win and visits exactly one ladder
           coming from the bottom (bottom state).




                                                19
of the graph via the three vertices vout , uin , win , the cycle C enters the gadget in vertex vout and
leaves via either vertex uin or win . We now distinguish between the following cases.
   Case 1: C uses x10 uin . In this case C also uses x6 x7 , but does not use the two edges
x2 x3 , x10 uin . Since C enters the gadget at vout , it uses exactly one of the two edges vout x1 and
vout x5 .
   Case 1a: C uses vout x1 . In this case, consider vertex x5 . Since it has degree 3, and we
already know that C uses x5 x6 , but not vout x5 , we deduce that C uses x4 x5 . Then, combining
all the information we have so far, we see that the cycle C looks like in Figure 12a. Precisely, C
enters at vout , goes to x1 , traverses from x1 to x4 by entering a ladder gadget, goes to x5 , and
then visits vertices x6 - x10 in that order before leaving via uin . In particular, the cycle C visits
exactly one ladder. This is because in order to enter or exit a ladder, the cycle needs to visit
one of the four vertices x2 , x3 , x6 or x7 . However, x6 and x7 are blocked. Therefore x2 needs
to be used to enter a ladder, and x3 needs to be used to exit the same ladder, and no different
ladder can be entered after that. Hence C visits exactly one ladder, coming from the top.
   Case 1b: C uses vout x5 . In that case, the argument is analogous to case 1a, with the
exception that C uses the edge x1 x8 . Still, it remains that x6 , x7 are blocked, so C visits
exactly one ladder coming from the top. To summarize, in both cases 1a and 1b, the cycle visits
a ladder from the top and leaves the gadget via the edge x10 uin .
   Case 2: C uses x10 win . Then, due to vertical symmetry, the cycle visits exactly one ladder
from the bottom, and leaves via the edge x10 win .

  The above lemma shows that every regular cycle can only interact with one ladder in a well-
behaved manner. But what about the irregular cycles? Since irregular cycles do not need to
visit every city, they can potentially interact with our gadgets in a much less controlled way.
Still, the “damage” done by an irregular cycle is restricted, as the following lemma shows.

Lemma 17. If A is a ∀-gagdet, and C is some cycle in GH , then C visits at most 4 ladders
inside A.

Proof. Observe that in the graph GH − {x2 , x3 , x6 , x7 }, each of the t ladders of A is its own
connected component. Whenever the cycle C visits a ladder, it needs to enter and exit using
one of these four vertices. Hence every ladder that C visits is associated to two vertices of
x2 , x3 , x6 , x7 . (We assume that C enters and exists the ladder, because if C is entirely contained
in it, we are done). On the other hand, each of these four vertices is associated to at most two
ladders. Hence C visits at most 4 ladders inside A.

4.5 Definition of GH
We are now ready to describe the main construction. Assume we are given an instance of
∀∃-HamCycle. This instance consists out of a directed graph H together with some k ∈ N
and vertices v (1) , . . . , v (k) in H, each having outdegree 2. Let n := |V (H)|. For i ∈ [k], let
u(i) and w(i) denote the two outneighbors of vertex v (i) . Define the two arcs ei := (v (i) , u(i) )
and ei := (v (i) , w(i) ), as well as the set E ′ := {e1 , e1 , . . . , ek , ek }. The question is whether for
all patterns P ⊆ E ′ the directed graph H has a Hamiltonian cycle respecting P . Given this
instance, the undirected graph GH is defined in two steps. In a first step, we consider the set
of 2n vertices                                  [
                                                    {xin , xout }.
                                            x∈V (H)

In a second step, we add the following edges and gadgets:

   • For x ∈ V (H), we connect xin to xout with a city gadget.
                                                        (i)   (i)       (i)
   • For i ∈ [k], we connect the three vertices vout , uin and win with a ∀-gadget.



                                                      20
                                                                                                     (1)         (1)
                                                                                                    uin         uout
                                                                                                           c
                  H                                  GH                  (1)              (1)
                                                                        vin          c   vout
                                     u(1)                                                       ∀
                      v   (1)                                                                              c
                                                      ain       c       aout                         (1)         (1)
              a                      w(1)                                                           win         wout
                                ..                                                                         ..
                                 .                                                                          .
                                                          bin       c         bout
                                                                                                     (k)         (k)
              b                      u(k)                                                           uin         uout
                                                                                                           c
                                                                                          (k)
                                                                        (k)          c   vout
                                                                    vin                         ∀
                      v (k)          w(k)                                                                  c
                                                                                                     (k)         (k)
                                                                                                    win         wout



                                Figure 13: Construction of the graph GH from H.


   • For each arc (x, y) ∈ E(H) \ E ′ , we add the edge xout yin to GH .
Furthermore, we let all city gadgets, including those inside the XOR- and ∀-gadgets have a
height of 2n4 and width of 2n4 + 100n. We let all ∀-gadgets have a width of t = n4 (i.e. they
contain exactly n4 ladders each). This completes the description of GH . A schematic of the
construction is depicted in Figure 13. Observe that GH contains a total of k ∀-gadgets, 3k
XOR-gagdets, and n + 16k ≤ 17n city gadgets. Since each city gadget has Θ(n8 ) vertices, and
these are the majority of all vertices, we have |V (GH )| = Θ(n9 ). In particular GH can be
constructed in polynomial time given H.
Lemma 18. The graph GH is bipartite.
Proof. First consider the graph G′H obtained from GH by deleting all the ∀-gadgets with excep-
                      (i)    (i)   (i)
tion of the vertices vout , uin , win . The graph G′H is clearly bipartite, since every edge and every
city gadget connects some vertex xout to some vertex yin , and the city gadgets connect their
endpoints with an odd-length path. Consider Figure 10. By assigning for i ∈ [10] the vertex xi
to color class i mod 2, and using Lemma 13, we see that a ∀-gadget is bipartite, such that the
two sets {vout } and {uin , win } are contained in different parts of the bipartition. Since in G′H
                     (i)    (i)   (i)
the three vertices vout , uin , win have the analogous behavior with respect to the bipartition of
G′H , we see that if we add the ∀-gadgets back into G′H , the graph remains bipartite. Hence GH
is bipartite.

 For the proof of our main theorem, we define a particular PM of GH , called the default PM
Mdef . The PM Mdef ⊆ E(GH ) is defined by having
   • all towers of all city gadgets in GH in default state

   • all ∀-gagdets in GH in semi-default state

   • all t ladders in every ∀-gagdet in default state.
(By the term “all city gadgets in GH ”, we mean all n + 16k gadgets, including those inside
other gadgets.) Observe that this is a well-defined perfect matching of GH , since every vertex
xin , xout for x ∈ V (H), as well as every vertex inside a city gagdet or ∀-gagdet is touched exactly
once. Furthemore, let us say that some PM M ′ of GH is in semi-default state, if with respect to
M ′ , all the city gadgets in GH and all ∀-gadgets in GH are in semi-default state. The following
shows that the semi-default PMs lie in a certain sense “dense” in the 1-skeleton of PGH .
Lemma 19. For every PM M of GH , there exists some PM M ′ of GH in semi-default state,
with flip distance dist(M, M ′ ) ≤ 23n.



                                                      21
Proof. Consider the vertex set Vs ⊆ V (GH ) defined by
                         [           [ (X)           (X)
                                                          [ (A)           (A)
                 Vs :=       {xin } ∪ {x1 , . . . , x4 } ∪ {x1 , . . . , x10 }.
                          x∈V (H)         X                        A

Here, the index X runs over all XOR-gadgets in GH , the index A runs over all ∀-gadgets in
              (X)                                                                                (A)
GH , and xi          denotes the corresponding vertex in the XOR-gadget (see Figure 4) and xi
denotes the corresponding vertex in the ∀-gadget (see Figure 10). We make the following claim:
A PM M ′ is in semi-default state if and only if M ′ assigns the same partner as the PM Mdef to
every vertex v ∈ Vs . Indeed, if we recall the definitions of a semi-default state of a city gadget,
a XOR-gadget, and a ∀-gadget, we see that whenever for some PM M ′ the vertices of Vs are
matched in the same way as in Mdef , the PM M ′ must be in semi-default state (we use that
every tower has an even number of vertices). We have |Vs | = n+12k+10k ≤ 23n. Now, given an
arbitrary PM M , consider the symmetric difference M △ Mdef . Since |V (GH )| = Θ(n9 ), the set
M △ Mdef could in general contain up to O(n9 ) vertex-disjoint cycles. Let C1 , . . . , Ct be those
cycles of M △ Mdef that contain some vertex of Vs . Then t ≤ 23n. If we flip the vertex-disjoint
cycles C1 , . . . , Ct one after another, we transform M into a semi-default PM M ′ , because M ′
assigns the same partners as Mdef to vertices in Vs . By construction dist(M, M ′ ) ≤ 23n.

4.6 Proof of the main theorem
In this subsection we prove Lemmas 5 and 6, which together prove our main theorem. Consider
throughout this subsection a fixed instance of ∀∃-HamCycle consisting out of a directed graph
H with vertices v (1) , . . . , v (k) and edges E ′ = {e1 , e1 , . . . , ek , ek }. Let GH be defined as in
Section 4.5. As is standard in hardness reductions, we can assume a lower bound on the size of
the input instance. Specifically, we assume w.l.o.g. that n = |V (H)| ≥ 83 000.
Lemma 5. If for all patterns P ⊆ E ′ the directed graph H contains a Hamiltonian cycle
respecting P , then diam(PGH ) ≤ 4n4 + 46n.
Proof. For all patterns P ⊆ E ′ , let CP be a Hamiltonian cycle respecting P in the directed
graph H. Let M1 , M2 be two arbitrary PMs of GH . We show that dist(M1 , M2 ) ≤ 4n4 + 46n.
Since M1 , M2 are arbitrary, this proves the lemma. First, due to Lemma 19, there exist PMs
M1′ , M2′ of GH in semi-default state and dist(M1 , M1′ ) ≤ 23n and dist(M2 , M2′ ) ≤ 23n. We claim
dist(M1′ , M2′ ) ≤ 4n4 . If we can show this claim, we are done, since then

           dist(M1 , M2 ) ≤ dist(M1 , M1′ ) + dist(M1′ , M2′ ) + dist(M2′ , M2 ) ≤ 4n4 + 46n.

   We give a quick overview of the proof. We have the task to transform M1′ into M2′ using
a short flip sequence (C1 , . . . , Cd ) with d ≤ 4n4 . Assume we can find a flip sequence with
the property that it correctly transforms M1′ into M2′ locally restricted to each city gadget,
and correctly transforms M1′ into M2′ locally restricted to each ∀-gadget. Then we are done,
since both M1′ , M2′ are semi-default and so their difference is contained in the union of all city
gadgets and ∀-gadgets. In order to correctly perform the transformation restricted to the city
gadgets, we will ensure that each of C1 , . . . , Cd is a regular cycle. Then we can visit each city
and transform each tower of height h with 2h = 2n4 cycles. In order to correctly perform
the transformation restricted to the ∀-gadgets, we note that the main difficulty is the correct
transformation of the ladders. Due to Lemma 15, we can transform any semi-default ladder
into any other semi-default ladder in only 4 steps, if we can control the direction we are coming
from. Indeed, the main idea of the proof is that, since H contains a Hamiltonian cycle for any
pattern, we can for each of the k ∀-gadgets A1 , . . . , Ak choose independently, whether we want
to traverse it in top state or bottom state. Furthermore, this choice does not need to be fixed,
but can be changed arbitrarily many times during the flip sequence (C1 , . . . , Cd ) independently
for each Aj , where j ∈ [k].



                                                    22
   We are now ready to start the proof. Let T be a fixed tower gadget in GH . Since T has height
2n4 and T is in semi-default state with respect to both M1′ and M2′ , due to Lemma 10 there
                                           (T )      (T )
exists a well-behaved flip sequence (P1 , . . . , Pd ) for T of length d = 4n4 that transforms the
PM M1′ restricted to T into the PM M2′ restricted to T .
   Let Aj be a fixed ∀-gadget of GH for some j ∈ [k]. Note that Aj contains n4 ladders
L1 , . . . , Ln4 . Let i ∈ [n4 ] and consider the ladder Li . Since both M1′ and M2′ are in semi-
default state, the ladder Li is semi-default with respect to both M1′ and M2′ . Due to Lemma 15
                                (L )     (L )
there exists a sequence (P1 i , . . . , P4 i ) of length 4 of well-behaved paths for Li transforming
                                                                                           (L )  (L )
the PM M1′ restricted to Li into the PM M2′ restricted to Li , and such that both P1 i , P2 i
                                                              (Li ) (Li )
come from the same direction (top/bottom) and both P3 , P4 come from the same direction
(top/bottom). We can represent this fact as a string s(Li ) ∈ {tt, bb}2 , i.e. one of the strings
tttt, ttbb, bbtt, bbbb. More formally, the string s(Li ) has four characters, indicating that if one
can visit the ladder Li with four cycles coming from either the top (t) or bottom (b) in the same
sequence as in the string s(Li ), then one can transform M1′ into M2′ restricted to the ladder Li .
We can concatenate the strings s(Li ) for i = 1 up to i = n4 and obtain a string
                                                           4
                                         s(A) ∈ {tt, bb}2n .

We can interpret the string s(Aj ) as the “total demand” of the ∀-gadget Aj . If we can manage to
visit the ladders of Aj with 4n4 well-behaved cycles from the top or bottom in the same sequence
as the string s(Aj ) describes, we can transform M1′ into M2′ (restricted to Aj ). Let A1 , . . . , Ak
be the k distinct ∀-gadgets contained in GH . Observe that the demand strings s(Aj ), s(Aj ′ ) can
in general be very different from each other for distinct j, j ′ ∈ [k]. However, we now crucially
use the property that H has a Hamiltonian cycle for all patterns P ⊆ E ′ . Concretely, for all
j ∈ [k] consider the first two characters of the string s(Aj ), denoted by pj ∈ {tt, bb}. We can
define a pattern P ⊆ E ′ ⊆ E(H) based on these characters in a natural way by letting

                        P := {ej : j ∈ [k], pj = tt} ∪ {ej : j ∈ [k], pj = bb}.

  We define a cycle C in GH depending on those characters as follows:

   • For all j ∈ [k], if pj = tt, then C traverses the ∀-gadget Aj in top state and visits ladder
     L1 in that gadget from the top.

   • Otherwise, if pj = bb, then C traverses the ∀-gadget Aj in bottom state and visits ladder
     L1 in that gadget from the bottom.

   • C visits all city gadgets in GH

   • In between the cities and ∀-gadgets, the cycle C follows globally the same path as the
     Hamiltonian cycle CP . Formally, for all arcs (a, b) ∈ E(CP ) \ E ′ , we have aout bin ∈ E(C).
                                                                        (L)
   • Restricted to each ladder gadget L, the cycle C is equal to P1 . Restricted to each tower
                                         (T )
     gadget T , the cycle C is equal to P1 .

   Claim 1: C is a well-defined cycle in GH and is alternating with respect to M1′ .
   Proof of the claim. We split C into those segments inside and those segments outside some
∀-gadget. Restricted to some ∀-gadget A, the cycle C is a well-defined path, since both top-state
and bottom-state have this property (see Figure 12). Furthermore, inside of A the cycle C is
alternating with respect to M1′ , since M1′ is in semi-default state (see Figure 11). In particular,
note that since the XOR-gadgets are in semi-default state, both ways in which C could interact
with the XOR-gadget are alternating (see Figure 5). Restricted to the ladder L1 inside of A,
                          (L )
the cycle C is equal to P1 1 and hence M1′ -alternating as well. Observe that for all j ∈ [k] if



                                                  23
                                                                         (j)     (j)
pj = tt, then C traverses gadget Aj in top state, i.e. it goes from vout to uin . We can interpret
this as corresponding to the arc ej = (v (j) , u(j) ) ∈ E(H). Likewise, if pj = bb, we can interpret
this as the arc ej ∈ E(H).
   Outside the ∀-gadgets, the cycle C is a well-defined cycle, because whenever C encounters
some city gadget of some vertex x ∈ V (H), it uses the gadget to go from xin to xout . In order to
change from one city gadget to another, C uses either a ∀-gadget or some edges corresponding
to arcs of CP ⊆ H. If C uses a ∀-gadget it behaves just like the pattern P . Since CP is a
Hamiltonian cycle of H respecting the pattern P , we conclude that C is a single cycle in GH
that visits every city gadget. Since every city gadget is in semi-default state in M1′ , and since
                                                (T )
for every tower T the cycle C is equal to P1 , the cycle C is M1′ -alternating. This proves the
claim.
   We define a second cycle C ′ in GH , by specifying that C ′ has exactly the same edges as C,
with the exception of all tower gadgets and all ladders that C traverses. For all towers T , the
                              (T )            (T )
cycle C ′ is now equal to P2 instead of P1 . Analogously, for all ladders L that C visits, the
                              (L)             (L)
new cycle C ′ is equal to P2 instead of P1 .
   Claim 2: C ′ is a well-defined cycle in GH and is alternating with respect to M1′ △ C, and
M1′ △ C △ C ′ is a PM in semi-default state.
   Proof of the claim. Since C is a well-defined cycle and C ′ differs from it only on the towers and
ladders, C ′ is also a well-defined cycle (note that if C and C ′ differ on a ladder, both come from
the same direction). Consider all edges of C ′ not part of some ladder or tower. All these edges
are also part of C, and C is M1′ -alternating. Hence C ′ is alternating with respect to M1′ △ C
on those edges. Inside some tower T , the cycle C ′ is also alternating with respect to M1′ △ C,
             (T )  (T )
because (P1 , P2 , . . . ) is a well-behaved flip sequence. The same holds for ladders. Finally,
M1′ △ C △ C ′ is in semi-default state, because M1′ is in semi-default state, and since both the
cycles C, C ′ traverse all city gadgets of the graph (as well as the edge x9 x10 of every ∀-gadget).
Hence we can check that in every city gadget, every XOR-gadget, and every ∀-gadget the PM
M1′ △ C △ C ′ is again in semi-default state (because, intuitively speaking, every city gadget and
the edges x9 x10 were flipped twice). This proves the claim.
   To summarize, we have found two cycles C, C ′ such that by flipping C, C ′ we have eliminated
the first two characters of all demand strings s(Aj ), for j ∈ [k] (which have length 4n4 ) and
                                                                                             (T )  (T )
for each tower T somewhere in GH we have successfully flipped the first two paths P1 , P2
of its flip sequence (which has length 4n4 ). Furthermore the PM M1′ △ C △ C ′ is again in
semi-default state. Iterating this argument shows that one can reach M2′ from M1′ by flipping
4n4 cycles, hence dist(M1′ , M2′ ) ≤ 4n4 . We remark that in the next iteration, the pattern P is in
general different from the pattern in this iteration, but that is not a problem, since H contains
a Hamiltonian cycle for all patterns.

Lemma 6. If diam(PGH ) ≤ 4n4 + 46n, then for all patterns P ⊆ E ′ the directed graph H
contains a Hamiltonian cycle respecting P .

Proof. We give a short overview of the proof: Let P ⊆ E ′ be an arbitrary pattern. We define
depending on P a perfect matching MP of GH and consider it together with the default matching
Mdef . By assumption diam(PGH ) ≤ 4n4 + 46n, so in particular dist(MP , Mdef ) ≤ 4n4 + 46n. We
then proceed to show that in any sufficiently short flip sequence (C1 , . . . , Cd ) from MP to Mdef
with d ≤ 4n4 + 46n, for some i ∈ [d] a cycle Ci can be transformed into a Hamiltonian cycle
respecting P in H. Roughly speaking, the fact that Ci mimics a Hamiltonian path will follow
from the fact that most of the cycles C1 , . . . , Cd must be regular (i.e. visit every city). Similarly,
the fact that Ci mimics a cycle respecting the pattern P will follow from the fact that a regular
cycle must (usually) visit a top-open ladder from the top and a bottom-open ladder from the
bottom. Hence the fact diam(PGH ) ≤ 4n4 + 46n implies that H contains a Hamiltonian cycle
respecting P . Since P was arbitrary, this suffices to show.




                                                   24
   Let now P ⊆ E ′ be a pattern. Let A1 , . . . , Ak be the ∀-gadgets of GH . We define a PM MP
of GH as follows.

   • MP is in semi-default position.

   • All tower gadgets are in locked position.

   • For all j ∈ [k], we distinguish whether ej ∈ P or ej ∈ P . If ej ∈ P , then all the n4
     ladders of Aj are top-open ladders. Otherwise, if ej ∈ P , then all the n4 ladders of Aj are
     bottom-open ladders.

We verify that MP is a well-defined perfect matching of GH . Since MP is in semi-default
position, all vertices outside tower and ladder gadgets are touched exactly once. All vertices
inside some tower or ladder gadget are also touched exactly once.
  Consider the PM Mdef as defined in Section 4.5. By assumption there exists a flip sequence
C = (C1 , . . . , Cd ) with d ≤ 4n4 + 46n from MP to Mdef . By Lemma 12 at most 1000n2 of these
cycles are not regular, and C contains at least 4n4 − 1002n2 regular cycles. For some j ∈ [k]
consider some fixed ∀-gadget Aj . The gadget Aj contains n4 ladders L1 , . . . , Ln4 . Let us call a
ladder corrupted, if it is visited by at least one irregular cycle in C. Consider the set

                               Lj = {Li : i ∈ [n4 ], Li is not corrupted }

of all uncorrupted ladders in Aj . Due to Lemma 17 we have |Lj | ≥ n4 − 4000n2 . Every ladder
in Lj gets only visited by regular cycles. On the other hand, every regular cycle visits only one
ladder of the gadget Aj due to Lemma 16. Since we have d ≤ 4n4 + 46n, an average ladder
from Lj gets visited at most
                                            4n4 + 46n
                                           n4 − 4000n2
times, i.e. roughly 4 times. More precisely, let

                           L′j := {L ∈ Lj : L gets visited exactly 4 times}.

Then we have
                                  4|L′j | + 5|Lj \ L′j | ≤ d ≤ 4n4 + 46n.
Since of course |L′j | + |Lj \ L′j | = |Lj |, this implies

                           |Lj \ L′j | ≤ 4n4 + 46n − 4|Lj | ≤ 16 000n2 + 46n
                    and             |L′j | = |Lj | − |Lj \ L′j | ≥ n4 − 20 000n2 − 46n.

Now consider again the gadget Aj and how it interacts with some regular cycle C. Due to
Lemma 16, the cycle C is either in top state or bottom state with respect to gadget Aj and
visits only one ladder from the same direction. Let us say C respects the pattern P at Aj , if
either both C is in top state and ej ∈ P , or both C is in bottom state and ej ∈ P . Let

                     Cj := {Ci : i ∈ [d], Ci is regular and Ci respects P at Aj }.

Recall that we have defined MP to contain only top-open ladders inside Aj if ej ∈ P , and
only bottom-open ladders inside Aj if ej ∈ P . Note that every ladder in L′j is visited only by
regular (and therefore well-behaved) cycles, and exactly four of them. Hence the assumptions
of Lemma 14 are met. Therefore these 4 cycles all need to come from the top if L is top-open,
and they all need to come from the bottom if L is bottom-open. This shows

                                     |Cj | ≥ 4|L′j | ≥ 4n4 − 81 000n2 .




                                                     25
This implies that for all j ∈ [k]

                         |C \ Cj | ≤ d − 4n4 + 81 000n2 ≤ 81 000n2 + 46n.

Finally, using |C| ≥ 4n4 − 1002n2 we arrive at
                           k
                           \                  k
                                              X
                                 Cj ≥ |C| −         |C \ Cj | ≥ 4n4 − 83 000n3 .
                           j=1                j=1

In particular, for n = |V (H)| large enough, there exists some cycle C ∈ kj=1 Cj . This cycle
                                                                          T
C ⊆ GH is regular, i.e. it traverses every city gadget corresponding to some x ∈ V (H) from
xin to xout . Furthermore, it traverses every ∀-gadget in the same manner as the pattern P .
Therefore the directed graph H has a Hamiltonian cycle respecting the pattern P .


5 Inapproximability
In this section, we prove that for some ε > 0 the diameter (and the circuit diameter) of the
bipartite perfect matching polytope cannot be approximated better than (1 + ε) unless P = NP.
We remark that our techniques inherently can show inapproximability only for a small ε > 0
(concretely we obtain ε = 1/16 226 ≈ 6.1 · 10−5 ), and we do not optimize our reductions to
obtain the best possible ε. To state our theorem completely formally, let us say an algorithm
A is an approximation algorithm for the diameter with approximation guarantee (1 + ε), if A
never underestimates the diameter, and overestimates it by at most a factor (1 + ε). This means

                                 diam(P ) ≤ A(P ) ≤ (1 + ε) diam(P ).

(The same kind of approximation is considered in [San18]). The main result of this section is
then stated as follows.
Theorem 2. There exists ε > 0 such that the diameter of the bipartite perfect matching polytope
cannot be approximated better than (1 + ε) in polynomial time, unless P ̸= N P .
   We remark that alternatively one could also consider approximation algorithms that are
allowed to both over- and underestimate the true diameter, i.e. algorithms with
                                         A(P ) diam(P )
                                 max{           ,       } ≤ (1 + ε′ ).
                                        diam(P ) A(P )
Since the proof of Theorem 2 is in terms of a gap-reduction, it follows that such two-sided
approximation algorithms cannot have an approximation guarantee better than (1 + ε′ ), where
(1 + ε′ )2 = (1 + ε), i.e. ε′ ≈ ε/2.
   In the remainder of this section, the term 3SAT denotes the satisfiability problem, where the
input is a boolean formula φ in conjunctive normal form (CNF) such that every clause has at
most 3 literals. Max 3SAT is the maximization problem corresponding to 3SAT, where the goal
is to find an assignment that satisfies as many of the clauses of φ as possible. The problem Max
3SAT-d is equal to problem Max 3SAT with the additional restriction that for each variable xi ,
the number of clauses that contain the literal xi or the literal xi is at most d.
   The following is a direct consequence of the PCP theorem [ALM+ 98] in combination with
constructions of certain expander graphs and is proven e.g. in Arora [Aro94, p.84], see also the
survey of Trevisan [Tre04].
Theorem 20 (Theorem 7 in [Tre04]). There are constants d and ε1 and a polynomial time
computable reduction from 3SAT to Max 3SAT-d such that if φ is satisfiable then f (φ) is
satisfiable, and if φ is not satisfiable then the optimum of f (φ) is less than 1 − ε1 times the
number of clauses.



                                                      26
                                                                 v1                 v2

                                                                                    z1
                                                                              e1         e1
                   y1 . . . y4
           a                          b
                 y5            y8
          a′       y9 . . . y12       b′                                      e2         e2

                                                     x1 ∨ x 2 ∨ x3

           a                          b
                                                                              e3         e3

          a′                          b′                         v3                 z2k
                      (a) XOR-Gadget                              (b) Reduction

Figure 14: Folklore reduction of 3SAT to the Hamiltonian cycle problem. Arrows marked with
           a cross denote an XOR-gadget, as illustrated in (a). Vertices marked with a square
           are all connected in one clique.


  Using a standard strategy for inapproximability proofs, we can adapt Theorem 20 to our
needs. Specifically, consider a graph G = (V, E). A closed walk in G is a sequence W =
(v1 , . . . , vk ) of vertices, such that vi vi+1 ∈ E for all i ∈ [k − 1] and also vk v1 ∈ E. In contrast
to a cycle, a closed walk may visit some vertices more than once. Given a closed walk W in G
and some i ∈ N0 , we let

                            Wi := {v ∈ V : W visits v exactly i times}.



Definition 21. Let ε > 0. A walk W in a graph G = (V, E) on n = |V | vertices is called
ε-good, if |W1 | ≥ (1 − ε)n (or equivalently |V \ W1 | ≤ εn).

  It seems likely that the following result is already known, however we were unable to locate
a reference. It proves hardness of approximation for walks that are “almost Hamiltonian”, i.e.
ε-good.

Theorem 22. There is a constant ε2 > 0 and a polynomial time computable reduction that
takes a 3SAT formula φ and outputs an undirected graph H such that

   • If φ is satisfiable, then H contains a Hamiltonian cycle

   • If φ is not satisfiable, then H does not contain an ε2 -good walk.

   In order to prove Theorem 22, we rely on a folklore reduction from 3SAT to the Hamiltonian
cycle problem. We show that this reduction without any modification satisfies also the stronger
requirements of Theorem 22. The reduction is defined as follows: Assume we are given a 3SAT
instance φ′ in CNF with clauses C1 , . . . , Cm and variables x1 , . . . , xk .
   The reduction is depicted in Figure 14. Let ab and a′ b′ be two edges. We first define XOR-
gadgets between ab and a′ b′ by introducing additional vertices y1 , . . . , y12 and connecting them
like in Figure 14. They are similar to the XOR-gagdets in Section 4.3, with the exception that we
replace the city gadgets with single vertices. Analogously to before, we can conclude that every
Hamiltonian cycle uses exactly one of the two edges ab and a′ b′ of a XOR-gadget. Given the



                                                   27
3SAT formula φ, we can then define an undirected graph H as follows: H contains k variable
gadgets, m clause gadgets, and three additional vertices v1 , v2 , v3 as depicted in Figure 14.
Here, variable gadgets are defined as follows: The graph H includes vertices z1 , . . . , z2k . For
all i ∈ [k] there are two parallel edges from z2i−1 to z2i , which we denote by ei and ei . We
interpret them as the edges corresponding to literal xi and literal xi . We connect ei and ei with
a XOR-gadget. Note that after the XOR-gadget is applied, there is no multi-edge anymore, i.e.
we still have that H is a simple graph. A clause gadget is defined as follows: For some clause
                                                                                 (j)         (j)
Cj with Cj = ℓ1 ∨ · · · ∨ ℓtj where tj ∈ {1, 2, 3}, we introduce tj vertices u1 , . . . , utj in H, and
we connect them in a cycle of length tj (i.e. a loop if tj = 1, two parallel edges if tj = 2, and a
triangle if tj = 3). For i = 1, . . . , tj , a XOR-gadget connects the i-th edge of this cycle to the
edge inside the variable gadget corresponding to the literal ℓi . Note that again this makes the
graph simple. We add the edges v1 v2 , v2 z1 , z2k v3 and z2i z2i+1 for all i = 1, . . . , k − 1. Finally,
in the vertex set
                                             m
                                                 (j)          (j)
                                            [
                                V ′ :=         {u1 , . . . , utj } ∪ {v1 , v3 },
                                        j=1

every vertex is connected to each other (i.e. H is a clique induced on V ′ ). The set V ′ is
highlighted with square marks in Figure 14.
   We quickly verify that this folklore reduction is indeed a correct reduction from 3SAT to
Hamiltonian cycle. Indeed, every Hamiltonian cycle F visits v2 (note that v2 ̸∈ V ′ ). Hence
every Hamiltonian cycle traverses the variable gadgets in order and uses exactly one of the two
edges ei or ei for i ∈ [k]. (For simplicity of notation, we say that the cycle F uses ei even
though due to the XOR-gadgets the edge ei is not an actual edge of H.) If for some clause
gadget corresponding to clause Cj the cycle F makes the wrong variable choices, i.e. includes
none of the literals of Cj , then due to the XOR-gadgets, the cycle F restricted to the clause
gadget of Cj is a already a cycle. But that is a contradiction, since a Hamiltonian cycle cannot
contain a smaller cycle. Hence we conclude that if F is a Hamiltonian cycle in H, then φ′ is
satisfiable. On the other hand, due to V ′ inducing a clique, if φ is satisfiable, then H has a
Hamiltonian cycle.
   We now show that the same reduction also satisfies the requirements of Theorem 22. The main
idea behind the proof is the following: Since every ε-good walk W has |W1 | ≥ (1 − ε)|V (H)|,
we have that the majority of all gadgets in H are entirely contained in W1 , i.e. all their vertices
are visited exactly once by W . We show that this implies that most of the gadgets work as
intended, hence for ε2 small enough, a ε2 -good walk W implies that a fraction of at least (1−ε1 )
clauses of φ can be made true.

Proof of Theorem 22. Assume we are given some 3SAT instance φ. Let ε1 , d be constants as in
Theorem 20. In a first step we transform φ into an instance φ′ = f (φ) of Max 3SAT-d such
that φ′ has the properties described in Theorem 20. In a second step, we transform φ′ into a
graph H = (V, E) as described above. We let
                                                      ε1
                                           ε2 :=             .
                                                   61(d + 1)

If φ′ is satisfiable, then H contains a Hamiltonian cycle, as proven above. So it remains to prove
that if φ′ is not satisfiable, then H does not contain a ε2 -good walk. For the sake of contradiction,
assume H contains a ε2 -good walk W , we show that φ′ is satisfiable. Let n := |V (H)|. Let m
be the number of clauses of φ′ . Note that the graph H contains k variable gadgets, m clause
gadgets, at most 3m + k XOR-gadgets, and the three additional vertices v1 , v2 , v3 . Since these
in total are all the vertices of H, we have (using k ≤ 3m and w.l.o.g. m ≥ 4)

                        n ≤ 2k + 3m + k + 16(3m) + 3 ≤ 60m + 3 < 61m.




                                                   28
Consider some XOR-gadget g in the graph H. We say that the XOR-gadget g consists of
precisely the 16 vertices Vg := {a, b, a′ , b′ } ∪ {y1 , . . . , y12 } as shown in Figure 14. Let i ∈ [k] and
consider the 3SAT variable xi . Observe that the variable gadget of xi contains the XOR-gadget
g0 between ei , ei and in addition to that it is connected to at most d XOR-gadgets g1 , . . . , gt
with t ≤ d. Let us say that with respect to the walk W , the variable xi is uncorrupted, if
                                                                  
                                                        [ t
                                 {z2i−1 , z2i } ∪             Vgj  ⊆ W1 ,
                                                       j=0

and it is corrupted otherwise. Since the above vertex sets are pairwise disjoint for all i ∈ [k],
we have that every vertex in V \ W1 can corrupt at most one variable. Hence

                            |{i ∈ [k] : xi is corrupted}| ≤ |V \ W1 | ≤ ε2 n.

We claim that if a variable xi is uncorrupted, then the walk W traverses the variable gadget
of xi either only using edge ei , or only using edge ei . Indeed, consider the walk W and its
interaction with some XOR-gadget g. Since the XOR-gadget is contained entirely in W1 (i.e.
Vg ⊆ W1 ), we can see that the walk W enters and leaves every of the vertices y5 , . . . , y8 exactly
once. Furthermore, for each y ∈ {y5 , . . . , y8 }, the walk enters and leaves y using two different
edges, since otherwise the walk would use a neighbor of y more than once (but all neighbors of
y belong to W1 ). Hence the walk W contains the subwalks (yi , yi+4 , yi+8 ) for all i = 1, . . . , 4.
By extending this argument to y1 , . . . , y4 and y9 , . . . , y12 , we see that W uses exactly one of the
two edges ab and a′ b′ . Now, consider vertex z2i−1 . Since an uncorrupted XOR-gadget connects
ei and ei , the walk has to use one of the two edges ei , ei . On the other hand, if the walk would
use both edges ei , ei , then because all XOR-gadgets (attached to either ei or ei ) work properly,
the walk meets itself at z2i . Hence z2i ̸∈ W1 , a contradiction. This proves the claim.
   For j ∈ [m] consider the clause Cj . It contains at most three literals, i.e. Cj = ℓ1 ∨ · · · ∨ ℓtj
with tj ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Let us call the clause Cj corrupted, if one of the variables corresponding to
                                                                          (j)          (j)
its literals ℓ1 , . . . , ℓtj is corrupted, or if one of the tj vertices u1 , . . . , utj of the clause gadget
is not contained in W1 . For the first reason at most dε2 n clauses are corrupted, because a
corrupted variable corrupts at most d clauses. For the second reason, at most |V \ W1 | ≤ ε2 n
clauses are corrupted, since the corresponding vertex sets are disjoint. Therefore

                |{j ∈ [m] : Cj is corrupted}| ≤ dε2 n + ε2 n < 61(d + 1)ε2 m = ε1 m.

For i ∈ [k], we can now consider the natural variable assignment
                             
                             1
                                         if xi uncorrupted, and W uses ei
                    α(xi ) := 0           if xi uncorrupted, and W uses ei
                             
                              arbitrary if xi corrupted.
                             

For every uncorrupted clause Cj for some j ∈ [m], we claim that the assignment α satisfies Cj .
Indeed, note that all of its variables are uncorrupted, and so all of the XOR-gadgets attached
to Cj work as intended. Therefore if α does not satisfy Cj , then the walk W describes a cycle
                                                             (j)          (j)
restricted to the clause gadget, and so one of the vertices u1 , . . . , utj is visited at least twice
by W , a contradiction. Since there are less than ε1 m corrupted clauses, due to Theorem 20,
formula φ′ has even an assignment that satisfies every clause. This was to show.

Theorem 2. There exists ε > 0 such that the diameter of the bipartite perfect matching polytope
cannot be approximated better than (1 + ε) in polynomial time, unless P ̸= N P .
Proof. We show that there exists a polynomial-time computable reduction, that given a 3SAT
formula φ returns a bipartite graph G, such that for some constant n0 ∈ N



                                                     29
   • If φ is satisfiable, then diam(PG ) ≤ 2n2 + 2n

   • If φ is not satisfiable, then diam(PG ) > (1 + ε)(2n2 + 2n) for all n ≥ n0 .

This suffices to prove the theorem. Given a SAT formula φ, due to Theorem 22 there exists a
constant ε2 > 0 and a polynomial-time computable graph H such that if φ is satisfiable, H has
a Hamiltonian cycle, and if φ is not satisfiable, H does not have an ε2 -good walk. We choose
some constant 0 < δ < ε2 very close to zero and let
                                                   1
                                     ε :=                    − 1.
                                            (1 + δ)(1 − ε2 )

Note that ε > 0, since 0 ≤ (1 + δ)(1 − ε2 ) = 1 + δ − ε2 − δε2 < 1. We construct a graph G from
H as follows. We let n := |V (H)|. First we consider the vertex set
                                           [
                                               {vin , vout }.
                                         v∈V (H)


Then we connect for all v ∈ V (H) the two vertices vin , vout with a city gadget of height n2 and
width 4n2 + 4n. Finally, we add the edge set
                                     [
                                          {aout bin , bout ain }
                                     ab∈E(H)

to H. We remark that this construction of G resembles the original construction of [NS25].
It is similar to our construction of Section 4.5, with the difference that H is undirected (in
Section 4.5 for technical reasons it is more convenient to work with a directed graph, while in
the current section it is more convenient to work with an undirected graph). The graph G is
bipartite, since city gadgets connect their endpoints via an odd-length path, and all other other
edges connect some vertex aout to some vertex bin . The proof of Theorem 2 is now completed
with the following two Lemmas 23 and 24.

Lemma 23. If φ is satisfiable, then diam(PG ) ≤ 2n2 + 2n.

Proof. Let M1 , M2 be arbitrary PMs of G, we will show dist(M1 , M2 ) ≤ 2n2 + 2n. Since M1 , M2
are arbitrary, this suffices to show. Call some PM M in semi-default state, if every city gadget
is in semi-default state with respect to M . Observe that G contains certainly at least one PM
Mdef which is in semi-default state. Consider the vertex set Vs := {vin : v ∈ V (H)}. We have
|Vs | = n. Furthermore, a PM M is in semi-default state if and only if the PM M assigns the same
partners to vertices of Vs as the matching Mdef . Analogously to Lemma 19 we conclude that
there exist semi-default PMs M1′ , M2′ such that dist(M1 , M1′ ) ≤ n and dist(M2 , M2′ ) ≤ n. Let
T be fixed tower gagdet in G. Since T has height n2 , due to Lemma 10 there is a well-behaved
                   (T )      (T )
flip sequence (P1 , . . . , Pd ) of length d = 2n2 that transforms M1′ into M2′ restricted to T .
Since φ is satisfiable, G contains a Hamiltonian cycle F . We can consider for i = 1, . . . , 2n2 the
cycle Ci defined as follows: Ci visits every city gadget. Inside some tower T , the cycle Ci is
             (T )
equal to Pi . Outside the towers, it follows globally the same route as the Hamiltonian cycle
F , i.e. it uses all the edges {aout bin : ab ∈ E(F )}. Analogously to Lemma 5, we see that for
each i ∈ [2n2 ], the object Ci is a well-defined cycle. Since M1′ is in semi-default state, one can
show by induction that the cycle Ci is alternating with respect to M1′ △ C1 △ · · · △ Ci−1 for all
i ∈ [d]. Furthermore, the flip sequence (C1 , . . . , Cd ) transforms M1′ into M2′ . We conclude in
total
            dist(M1 , M2 ) ≤ dist(M1 , M1′ ) + dist(M1′ , M2′ ) + dist(M2′ , M2 ) ≤ n + 2n2 + n.




                                                   30
Lemma 24. If φ is not satisfiable, then for all n larger than some constant n0 , we have
diam(PG ) > (1 + ε)(2n2 + 2n).
Proof. We consider the contrapositive, that is we that assume diam(PG ) ≤ (1 + ε)(2n2 + 2n),
and we want show that φ is satisfiable. Consider PMs M1 , M2 of G defined as follows. Both
M1 , M2 have all city gadgets in semi-default position. Furthermore, M1 has all tower gadgets
in locked position (see Figure 1c). In contrast, M2 has all tower gadgets in default position
(see Figure 1b). Note that M1 and M2 are well-defined PMs of G. Let d := dist(M1 , M2 ). By
assumption on the diameter, we have d ≤ (1 + ε)(2n2 + 2n) and there exists a flip sequence
(C1 , . . . , Cd ) from M1 to M2 . Consider for some vertex v ∈ V (H) the corresponding city gadget
gv . By definition its width is t = 4n2 + 4n. Due to ε < 1, we have d < t. This implies that
among the t towers in city gv , there exists one tower Tv⋆ with the property that none of the cycles
C1 , . . . , Cd is entirely contained in Tv⋆ . Hence every cycle of (C1 , . . . , Cd ) either is well-behaved
for Tv⋆ or does not visit the city gv at all. For each i ∈ [d], let pi be the number of different
towers Tv⋆ that the cycle Ci visits, formally
                                    pi := |{v ∈ V (H) : Ci visits Tv⋆ }|.
  We apply Lemma 9 to the tower Tv⋆ , and see that at least 2n2 − 2 cycles need to visit Tv⋆ in
order to transform M1 into M2 (restricted to Tv⋆ ). On the other hand, a fixed cycle Ci can visit
each tower Tv⋆ at most once. By double counting we obtain
                    d
                    X
                           pi = |{(i, v) ∈ [d] × V (H) : Ci visits Tv⋆ }| ≥ (2n2 − 2)n.
                     i=1

Since δ is a constant, for n ≥ n0 (δ) large enough we have (1 + δ)(2n3 − 2n) ≥ (2n3 + 2n2 ). Then
by the pigeonhole principle, there exists a j ∈ [d] such that
                  2n3 − 2n              2n3 + 2n2                n
       pj ≥             2
                               ≥                  2
                                                         =                = (1 − ε2 )n.
              (1 + ε)(2n + 2n)   (1 + ε)(1 + δ)(2n + 2n)   (1 + ε)(1 + δ)
Therefore the cycle Cj visits at least (1 − ε2 )n city gadgets. We claim that we can modify
the cycle Cj ⊆ G to obtain an ε2 -good walk W in H. We start with W = ∅ and modify W
according to the following rule:
   • Whenever Cj visits some vertex vin in G (where v ∈ V (H)), the next step of Cj is either
     to traverse the city gadget and visit vout , or to traverse some edge of the form vin wout . In
     the first case, we do not modify W , in the second case we add (v, w) to the walk W . Note
     that this is legal since wv = vw is an edge in H.
   • Analogously, whenever Cj visits some vertex vout in G (where v ∈ V (H)), the next step
     of Cj is either to traverse the city gadget and visit vin , or to traverse some edge of the
     form vout win . In the first case, we do not modify W , in the second case we add (v, w) to
     the walk W . Again this is legal since vw is an edge in H.
Note that the above procedure indeed constructs a well-defined closed walk W in H. (If Cj
is currently at one of the two vertices vin or vout , then W is currently at v). Furthermore,
note that if Cj visits a city gadget gv corresponding to some v ∈ V (H), then v ∈ W1 . This is
because Cj is a simple cycle and hence cannot visit a city twice. Since pj ≥ (1 − ε2 )n, we have
|W1 | ≥ (1 − ε2 )n, i.e. W is ε2 -good. Since H was constructed according to Theorem 22, we have
that the formula φ is satisfiable.

   Concrete value of ε. Arora [Aro94] proves Theorem 20 for constants d = 13 and ε1 = 1/19.
Hence we obtain ε2 = 1/16 226 ≈ 6.1 · 10−5 and finally ε = ε2 (note that for δ arbitrarily small,
ε can be made arbitrarily close to 1/(16 226 − 1), where as a trade-off n0 gets bigger). Since we
did not optimize our reductions for the best possible ε, this can likely be improved.



                                                     31
6 Conclusion
In this work, we proved that computing the diameter (the circuit diameter, respectively) of the
bipartite perfect matching polytope is Πp2 -complete. As a result, computation of the diameter
can be compared to computation of other notoriously hard parameters like the generalized
Ramsey number. Furthermore, we showed that the diameter (the circuit diameter, respectively)
cannot be approximated in polynomial time with a factor better than 1 + ε, unless P = NP.
We remark that these two main results are incomparable. On the one hand the second result
is stronger, because it is an inapproximability result. On the other hand, the second result is
weaker, since it only shows NP-hardness instead of Πp2 -hardness.
   There are many open questions that remain. It seems likely that our value of ε ≈ 6.1 · 10−5
can be improved, especially when comparing against the related result of Cardinal and Steiner
for polytope distances [CS23a]. We hence ask the question, whether the (circuit) diameter of a
polytope does or does not admit a constant-factor approximation. One could also ask, whether it
is possible to combine our two main results, i.e. whether approximation of the (circuit) diameter
is Πp2 -hard. We remark however that even though theoretically valid, results of this kind seem
to be very sparse in the literature. One reason for this might be that approximation algorithms
are always required to be polynomial time, and so it could be argued that a completeness result
for a higher class than NP offers less insights. The author of this paper would be interested in
such a result anyway.
   Our Πp2 -completeness result does not hold for the monotone diameter as defined in [NS25],
since it follows from the arguments presented there that the decision problem for the monotone
diameter of the bipartite perfect matching polytope is contained in NP. We therefore ask if for
some other polytope it can be proven that computation of the monotone diameter is Πp2 -hard.
Furthermore, Kaibel and Pfetsch [KP03] ask for the complexity of computing the diameter of
a simple polytope, i.e. a polytope P ⊆ Rd where every vertex has degree d. Since the bipartite
perfect matching polytope is not simple, this question remains unanswered.
   As a final question, we ask whether our Πp2 -completeness and inapproximability results can
also be extended to the case of bipartite, planar graphs of maximum degree 3, similar as in
[IDH+ 11]. Our current Lemma 17 provides a barrier for this result, since it states that the
four vertices x2 , x3 , x6 , x7 inside a ∀-gadget are essential to the proof. However, they have an
arbitrarily high degree and together with their surroundings create a non-planar graph. Hence
in order to prove hardness in this restricted case, a different approach may be needed.


References
[ACH+ 21] Oswin Aichholzer, Jean Cardinal, Tony Huynh, Kolja Knauer, Torsten Mütze,
          Raphael Steiner, and Birgit Vogtenhuber. Flip distances between graph orienta-
          tions. Algorithmica, 83(1):116–143, 2021.

[ALM+ 98] Sanjeev Arora, Carsten Lund, Rajeev Motwani, Madhu Sudan, and Mario Szegedy.
          Proof verification and the hardness of approximation problems. Journal of the ACM
          (JACM), 45(3):501–555, 1998.

[Aro94]    Sanjeev Arora. Probabilistic checking of proofs and hardness of approximation prob-
           lems. University of California, Berkeley, 1994.

[BBB23]    Alexander E Black, Steffen Borgwardt, and Matthias Brugger. On the circuit di-
           ameter conjecture for counterexamples to the Hirsch conjecture. arXiv preprint
           arXiv:2302.03977, 2023.

[BBFK21] Steffen Borgwardt, Cornelius Brand, Andreas Emil Feldmann, and Martin Kouteckỳ.




                                                32
           A note on the approximability of deepest-descent circuit steps. Operations Research
           Letters, 49(3):310–315, 2021.

[BBH+ 19] Marthe Bonamy, Nicolas Bousquet, Marc Heinrich, Takehiro Ito, Yusuke Kobayashi,
          Arnaud Mary, Moritz Mühlenthaler, and Kunihiro Wasa. The perfect matching
          reconfiguration problem. In 44th International Symposium on Mathematical Foun-
          dations of Computer Science (MFCS 2019). Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für
          Informatik, 2019.

[BFH15]    Steffen Borgwardt, Elisabeth Finhold, and Raymond Hemmecke. On the circuit
           diameter of dual transportation polyhedra. SIAM J. Discret. Math., 29(1):113–121,
           2015.

[BGK+ 25] Steffen Borgwardt, Weston Grewe, Sean Kafer, Jon Lee, and Laura Sanità. On the
          hardness of short and sign-compatible circuit walks. Discrete Applied Mathematics,
          367:129–149, 2025.

[BHIM19] Nicolas Bousquet, Tatsuhiko Hatanaka, Takehiro Ito, and Moritz Mühlenthaler.
         Shortest reconfiguration of matchings. In Ignasi Sau and Dimitrios M. Thilikos,
         editors, Graph-Theoretic Concepts in Computer Science - 45th International Work-
         shop, WG 2019, Vall de Núria, Spain, June 19-21, 2019, Revised Papers, volume
         11789 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 162–174. Springer, 2019.

[BMPT25] Carla Binucci, Fabrizio Montecchiani, Daniel Perz, and Alessandra Tappini. Flip-
         ping matchings is hard. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.02842, 2025.

[BSY18]    Steffen Borgwardt, Tamon Stephen, and Timothy Yusun. On the circuit diameter
           conjecture. Discrete & Computational Geometry, 60:558–587, 2018.

[BV20]     Steffen Borgwardt and Charles Viss. An implementation of steepest-descent aug-
           mentation for linear programs. Operations Research Letters, 48(3):323–328, 2020.

[BV22]     Steffen Borgwardt and Charles Viss. Circuit walks in integral polyhedra. Discret.
           Optim., 44(Part):100566, 2022.

[Chv75]    Vašek Chvátal. On certain polytopes associated with graphs. Journal of Combina-
           torial Theory, Series B, 18(2):138–154, 1975.

[CS23a]    Jean Cardinal and Raphael Steiner. Inapproximability of shortest paths on perfect
           matching polytopes. In Alberto Del Pia and Volker Kaibel, editors, Integer Pro-
           gramming and Combinatorial Optimization - 24th International Conference, IPCO
           2023, Madison, WI, USA, June 21-23, 2023, Proceedings, volume 13904 of Lecture
           Notes in Computer Science, pages 72–86. Springer, 2023.

[CS23b]    Jean Cardinal and Raphael Steiner. Shortest paths on polymatroids and hyper-
           graphic polytopes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00779, 2023.

[DFH23]    Yann Disser, Oliver Friedmann, and Alexander V Hopp. An exponential lower bound
           for zadeh’s pivot rule. Mathematical Programming, 199(1):865–936, 2023.

[DKNV22] Daniel Dadush, Zhuan Khye Koh, Bento Natura, and László A Végh. On circuit
         diameter bounds via circuit imbalances. In International Conference on Integer
         Programming and Combinatorial Optimization, pages 140–153. Springer, 2022.

[DLHL15] Jesús A De Loera, Raymond Hemmecke, and Jon Lee. On augmentation algorithms
         for linear and integer-linear programming: From edmonds–karp to bland and be-
         yond. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 25(4):2494–2511, 2015.



                                             33
[FT94]    Alan M. Frieze and Shang-Hua Teng. On the complexity of computing the diameter
          of a polytope. Comput. Complex., 4:207–219, 1994.

[GKM19] Manoj Gupta, Hitesh Kumar, and Neeldhara Misra. On the complexity of opti-
        mal matching reconfiguration. In Barbara Catania, Rastislav Královic, Jerzy R.
        Nawrocki, and Giovanni Pighizzini, editors, SOFSEM 2019: Theory and Practice
        of Computer Science - 45th International Conference on Current Trends in Theory
        and Practice of Computer Science, Nový Smokovec, Slovakia, January 27-30, 2019,
        Proceedings, volume 11376 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 221–233.
        Springer, 2019.

[GW24]    Christoph Grüne and Lasse Wulf. Completeness in the polynomial hierarchy
          for many natural problems in bilevel and robust optimization. arXiv preprint
          arXiv:2311.10540, 2024.

[GW25]    Christoph Grüne and Lasse Wulf. The complexity of blocking all solutions. arXiv
          preprint arXiv:2502.05348, 2025.

[IDH+ 11] Takehiro Ito, Erik D. Demaine, Nicholas J. A. Harvey, Christos H. Papadimitriou,
          Martha Sideri, Ryuhei Uehara, and Yushi Uno. On the complexity of reconfiguration
          problems. Theor. Comput. Sci., 412(12-14):1054–1065, 2011.

[IKK+ 22] Takehiro Ito, Naonori Kakimura, Naoyuki Kamiyama, Yusuke Kobayashi, and
          Yoshio Okamoto. Shortest reconfiguration of perfect matchings via alternating cy-
          cles. SIAM J. Discret. Math., 36(2):1102–1123, 2022.

[Kaf22]   Sean Kafer. Polyhedral diameters and applications to optimization. PhD thesis,
          University of Waterloo, 2022.

[KM72]    Victor Klee and George J Minty. How good is the simplex algorithm. Inequalities,
          3(3):159–175, 1972.

[KMM12] Marcin Kamiński, Paul Medvedev, and Martin Milanič. Complexity of independent
        set reconfigurability problems. Theoretical computer science, 439:9–15, 2012.

[KP03]    Volker Kaibel and Marc E. Pfetsch. Some algorithmic problems in polytope theory.
          In Michael Joswig and Nobuki Takayama, editors, Algebra, Geometry, and Software
          Systems [outcome of a Dagstuhl seminar], pages 23–47. Springer, 2003.

[KPS19]   Sean Kafer, Kanstantsin Pashkovich, and Laura Sanità. On the circuit diameter of
          some combinatorial polytopes. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 33(1):1–25,
          2019.

[KV11]    Bernhard H Korte and Jens Vygen. Combinatorial optimization, volume 1. Springer,
          2011.

[KW67]    Victor Klee and David W Walkup. The d-step conjecture for polyhedra of dimension
          d¡ 6. Acta Math, 1967.

[LKS22]   Jesús A. De Loera, Sean Kafer, and Laura Sanità. Pivot rules for circuit-
          augmentation algorithms in linear optimization. SIAM J. Optim., 32(3):2156–2179,
          2022.

[MSW15] Benjamin Matschke, Francisco Santos, and Christophe Weibel. The width of
        five-dimensional prismatoids. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society,
        110(3):647–672, 2015.



                                            34
[Nad89]   Denis Naddef. The Hirsch conjecture is true for (0, 1)-polytopes. Mathematical
          Programming: Series A and B, 45(1):109–110, 1989.

[NS25]    Christian Nöbel and Raphael Steiner. Complexity of polytope diameters via perfect
          matchings. In Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
          Algorithms (SODA), pages 2234–2251. SIAM, 2025.

[Pap94]   Christos H. Papadimitriou. Computational complexity. Addison-Wesley, 1994.

[Ple79]   Ján Plesnı́k. The NP-completeness of the Hamiltonian cycle problem in planar
          digraphs with degree bound two. Inf. Process. Lett., 8(4):199–201, 1979.

[San12]   Francisco Santos. A counterexample to the Hirsch conjecture. Annals of mathemat-
          ics, pages 383–412, 2012.

[San18]   Laura Sanità. The diameter of the fractional matching polytope and its hardness
          implications. In Mikkel Thorup, editor, 59th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foun-
          dations of Computer Science, FOCS 2018, Paris, France, October 7-9, 2018, pages
          910–921. IEEE Computer Society, 2018.

[San20]   Laura Sanità.    Diameter of polytopes: Algorithmic and combinatorial as-
          pects. https://www.lse.ac.uk/ipco-2020/summer-school/Sanita-complete.
          pdf, 2020. Online; accessed 20 February 2025.

[Sch01]   Marcus Schaefer. Graph ramsey theory and the polynomial hierarchy. J. Comput.
          Syst. Sci., 62(2):290–322, 2001.

[Sma98]   Steve Smale. Mathematical problems for the next century. The mathematical intel-
          ligencer, 20:7–15, 1998.

[Sto76]   Larry J. Stockmeyer. The polynomial-time hierarchy. Theor. Comput. Sci., 3(1):1–
          22, 1976.

[SY15]    Tamon Stephen and Timothy Yusun. The circuit diameter of the Klee-Walkup
          polyhedron. Electronic Notes in Discrete Mathematics, 49:505–512, 2015.

[Tre04]   Luca Trevisan. Inapproximability of combinatorial optimization problems. Electron.
          Colloquium Comput. Complex., TR04-065, 2004.

[Woe21]   Gerhard J. Woeginger. The trouble with the second quantifier. 4OR, 19(2):157–181,
          2021.




                                            35
