                                                     The Randomized Local Computation Complexity
                                                              of the Lovász Local Lemma
                                                      Sebastian Brandt            Christoph Grunau             Václav Rozhoň
                                                        ETH Zurich                  ETH Zurich                  ETH Zurich

                                                                                 December 6, 2021
arXiv:2103.16251v2 [cs.DS] 3 Dec 2021




                                                                                       Abstract
                                                 The Local Computation Algorithm (LCA) model is a popular model in the field of sublinear-
                                             time algorithms that measures the complexity of an algorithm by the number of probes the
                                             algorithm makes in the neighborhood of one node to determine that node’s output.
                                                 In this paper we show that the randomized LCA complexity of the Lovász Local Lemma
                                             (LLL) on constant degree graphs is Θ(log n). The lower bound follows by proving an Ω(log n)
                                             lower bound for the Sinkless Orientation problem introduced in [Brandt et al. STOC 2016]. This
                                             answers a question of [Rosenbaum, Suomela PODC 2020].
                                                 Additionally, we show that √every randomized LCA algorithm for a locally checkable problem
                                             with a probe complexity of o( log n) can be turned into a deterministic LCA algorithm with
                                             a probe complexity of O(log∗ n). This improves exponentially upon the currently best known
                                             speed-up result from o(log log n) to O(log∗ n) implied by the result of [Chang, Pettie FOCS
                                             2017] in the LOCAL model.
                                                 Finally, we show that for every fixed constant c ≥ 2, the deterministic VOLUME complexity
                                             of c-coloring a bounded degree tree is Θ(n), where the VOLUME model is a close relative of the
                                             LCA model that was recently introduced by [Rosenbaum, Suomela PODC 2020].


                                        1    Introduction
                                        For many problems in the area of big data processing it is on one hand prohibitively expensive
                                        to read the whole input, while on the other hand one is only interested in a small portion of the
                                        output at a time. One such problem comes up in the context of social networks. Many social
                                        networks suggest users different users they might want to follow or be friends with. To make such
                                        a recommendation, it is computationally too expensive to process the complete social network.
                                        Instead, it is much more efficient to look at a small local neighborhood around a user, i.e., the
                                        friends of her friends or the followers of her followers.
                                        Motivated by problems where one is only interested in small parts of the output at once, Rubinfeld
                                        et al. [RTVX11] and Alon et al. [ARVX12] introduced the Local Computation Model (LCA). An
                                        LCA algorithm provides query access to a fixed solution for a computational problem. That is,
                                        instead of outputting the entire solution at once, a user can ask the algorithm about specific bits
                                        of the output. To answer these queries, the LCA algorithm has probe access to the input and the
                                        main complexity measure of an LCA algorithm is the number of input probes the algorithm needs
                                        to perform to answer a given query. The specific output queries a user can ask and the specific
                                        input probes the LCA algorithm can use to learn about the input depend on the specific scenario.
                                        In the context of graph problems, the output query usually asks about the output of a given node
                                        or edge and the LCA algorithm can usually perform probes to the input of the form “What is the

                                                                                           1
j-th neighbor of the i-th node?”, where each node has a unique ID from the set [n]. The answer
to such a probe is the ID of the specific node together with additional local information associated
with that node such as for example its degree. The most well-studied type of LCA algorithms are
so-called stateless LCA algorithms. The only shared state between different queries of stateless LCA
algorithms is a seed of random bits. In particular, this implies that the output of an LCA algorithm
is independent of the order of the queries asked by the user. In this paper, by an LCA algorithm
we always mean a stateless LCA algorithm.
Connections to the LOCAL model: The LCA model is closely related to the LOCAL model.
In particular, Parnas and Ron observed that an O(T (n))-round LOCAL algorithm implies an LCA
algorithm with a probe complexity of ∆O(T (n)) where ∆ denotes the maximum degree of the input
graph. The reason is that one can first learn the O(T (n))-hop neighborhood around a node with
∆O(T (n)) many probes and then simulate the LOCAL algorithm around that node to determine
its output. Motivated by this connection, a recurrent theme in the study of LCA algorithms is
the question in which cases it is possible to go below this straightforward simulation result. A
sample of such results include a deterministic (∆ + 1)-coloring LCA algorithm on constant degree
graphs with a probe complexity of O(log∗ n) [EMR14], a randomized LCA algorithm for Maximal
Independent Set with a probe complexity of ∆O(log log ∆) log n [Gha19] and computing an expected
O(log s)-approximation for Set Cover with a probe complexity of (st)O(log s log log t) where s denotes
the maximum set size and t denotes the maximum number of sets a given element can be contained
in [GMRV20].
Locally Checkable Labelings: A very fruitful research direction was and is up to this date the
study of the LOCAL complexity landscape of so-called locally checkable labeling problems (LCLs)
on constant degree graphs. Informally speaking, an LCL problem requires each vertex/edge to
output one of constantly many symbols such that the output of all nodes in the local neighborhood
around each node satisfies some constraints imposed by the LCL.
    While the LOCAL complexity landscape for LCLs on constant degree graphs is not completely
characterized up to this date, a lot of progress has already been made. In particular, each LCL
problem belongs to one of the following four classes. Fig. 1 is a graphical illustration of these four
classes.
  A Problems with a complexity of O(1).

   B Basic symmetry-breaking tasks such as (∆+1)-coloring with a complexity between Ω(log log∗ n)
     and O(log∗ n).

   C Shattering problems such as ∆-coloring with a randomized complexity of poly(log log n) and
     a deterministic complexity of poly(log n).

  D Global problems with a complexity of Ω(log n).
   Furthermore, it is known that the complexity regimes corresponding to B and D are in some
sense dense and that the multiplicative gap between the randomized and deterministic LOCAL
complexity of any LCL problem is at most polylogarithmic in n.
Lovász Local Lemma: Arguably, one of the most useful tools in distributed computing is the
distributed Lovász Local Lemma (LLL).
    The LLL states that a collection of bad events can simultaneously be avoided given that each bad
event only happens with a small probability and each bad event only depends on a small number
of other bad events. The Distributed LLL asks an algorithm to find a point in the underlying
probability space in a distributed manner that avoids all the bad events. Formally, each bad event

                                                  2
corresponds to a vertex in the input graph and depends on some independent random variables.
Two nodes are connected by an edge if the two corresponding bad events depend on a common
random variable. The output of each node is a value for each random variable the corresponding
bad event depends on such that none of the bad events occurs.
    It was proven by Chang and Pettie [CP17] that any randomized LOCAL algorithm with a
complexity of o(log n) can be sped up to run in time TLLL (n) which denotes the randomized LOCAL
complexity of the distributed LLL under any polynomial criterion (Definition 2.7) on constant
degree graphs. Currently, the best upper bound to solve the distributed LLL under any polynomial
criterion on constant degree graphs is poly log log n randomized and poly log n deterministic [MT10,
FG17, RG20, GGR21]. This is polynomially larger than the currently best known lower bound of
Ω(log log n) for randomized and Ω(log n) for deterministic algorithms [BFH+ 16, Mar13, CKP16]. It
is a major open problem in the area of LOCAL algorithms to close this gap. Finally, the works
of [FG17, CKP16, CP17] show that any o(log log n) round randomized algorithm or o(log n) round
deterministic algorithm can be solved deterministically in O(log∗ n) rounds. The above works and
results are part of the project of classification of LCLs in the LOCAL model, and they imply that
the class (C) of problems contains exactly those that do not belong to the classes (A) and (B) and
can be solved by transforming the problem instance into an LLL instance with polynomial (but
not exponential) criterion and then solving the LLL instance. The precise transformation is given
by [CP17, Theorem 4] and it is straightforward to check that it ensures that also in the LCA model
the complexity of any problem in class (C) is asymptotically at most the complexity of the LLL
under any polynomial criterion.1
Our Work in LCA: Our work contributes to the understanding of the fundamental problem of
characterizing LCLs in the LCA model.
    While the classes (A) and (B) of LCL problems coincide for the LOCAL and LCA model by
[PR07, EMR14, CKP16], and for the class (D) of global problems we have some preliminary results
by [RS20], it seems that essentially nothing is known for the class (C) of shattering problems.
    As our main contribution we show that the randomized LCA complexity of the distributed LLL
is Θ(log n). Before our work, only the trivial lower bound of Ω(log log n) coming from the LOCAL
model [BFH+ 16] and only the trivial upper bound 2poly log log n that follows from the Parnas-Ron
reduction and the LOCAL algorithm of Fischer and Ghaffari [FG17] were known. Independently of
our work, Dorobisz and Kozik [DK21] achieved a polylogarithmic query complexity for the problem
of hypergraph coloring. This is similar to our work as their problem can be formulated as an
instance of LLL (with a less restrictive LLL criterion).

Theorem 1.1. The randomized LCA complexity of the distributed LLL on constant degree graphs
is Θ(log n). The upper bound holds for the polynomial criterion p ≤ (e∆)−c for some c = O(1),
while the lower bound holds even for the exponential criterion p ≤ 2−∆ .

   In fact, for the minimally more restrictive criterion p < 2−∆ , the distributed LLL can already
be solved in O(log∗ n) rounds in the LOCAL model [BMU19, BGR20], which implies also a probe
complexity of O(log∗ n) in the LCA model [EMR14].
   Second, we show the following general speedup theorem.

   1
     By construction, the nodes of the created LLL instance are constant-radius neighborhoods of the nodes of the
original input instance, and essentially there is an edge between two neighborhoods if they intersect. Hence, an LCA
algorithm solving the LLL instance can be simulated on the original instance by probing, for each probe in the LLL
instance, also its entire neighborhood up to some constant distance, which incurs only a constant-factor overhead.
Note that we use here that the input instances have constant degree. Also note that all of this holds also in the
VOLUME model.


                                                         3
                 LOCAL, general graphs                                    VOLUME, general graphs
                                                    n                                                             n
                                                                                                            1/k
                                                                                                        n
                                        log n                                                     log n
                                                                              log n/ log log n
                 randomized                                                                √
                                                                     randomized               log n
                                                ?
                            log log n                                                   log log n                         this work


                   log∗ n                                                      log∗ n


    log log∗ n                                                  log log∗ n


1                                                           1
                   ∗         ∗
     1     log log n log n log log n        log n       n        1        log log∗ n log∗ n log log n   log n         n
                       deterministic                                             deterministic
Figure 1: On the left we see the landscape of LCLs in the LOCAL model that consists of four types of
problems. Note that we are especially interested in class (C) of problems that can be solved by reducing
them to the distributed LLL. Their LOCAL complexity is conjectured to be Θ(log log n) randomized and
Θ(log n) deterministic, but the currently known best upper bounds are only poly log log n randomized and
poly log n deterministic.
On the right we see the landscape of LCLs in the VOLUME model. Our new Theorem 1.2 implies that
there are no LCLs in the bright red area. The randomized complexity of LLL in LCA is moreover settled to
Θ(log n).


Theorem 1.2. For any  √ LCL Π, if there is a randomized LCA algorithm that solves Π and has a
probe complexity of o( log n), then there is also a deterministic LCA algorithm for Π with a probe
complexity of O(log∗ n).

    Putting the two theorems
                     √       together, we get that the randomized LCA complexity of all problems
in class (C) is in Ω( log n) and O(log n). This almost settles the randomized complexity of all
problems in class (C). We conjecture that the square root is not tight and the following is, in fact,
the case.

Conjecture 1.3. Any randomized LCA algorithm that solves an LCL Π with probe complexity
o(log n) can be turned into a deterministic LCA algorithm that solves Π and has a probe complexity
of O(log∗ n).

VOLUME model: Motivated by the success story of studying the LOCAL complexity landscape
of LCLs on bounded degree graphs, Rosenbaum and Suomela [RS20] initiated the study of the
complexity landscape of LCLs on constant degree graphs in the so-called VOLUME model. The
VOLUME model is a close relative of the LCA model. The main difference between the two models
is that the VOLUME model does not allow so-called far probes, that is, a VOLUME model algorithm
can only probe a connected region around the queried vertex. Also, each node has a unique identifier
in the range {1, 2, . . . , poly(n)} instead of [n] and the nodes only have access to private randomness
instead of shared randomness. The VOLUME model is a bit cleaner to work with than the LCA

                                                                      4
model. Nevertheless, there are generic simulation results that often allow to transfer upper and
lower bounds between the LCA and the VOLUME model. Mainly by transferring known results and
techniques from the LOCAL model to the VOLUME model, Rosenbaum and Suomela obtained the
result illustrated in Fig. 1—the first rough outline of the complexity landscape of LCLs on constant
degree graphs in the VOLUME model.
Our Work in the VOLUME model:
  We show the following theorem about coloring bounded degree trees in the VOLUME model.

Theorem 1.4. Let c ≥ 2 be arbitrary. Then, the deterministic VOLUME complexity of c-coloring
bounded degree trees with maximum degree poly(c) is Θ(n).

     We note that the deterministic and randomized LOCAL complexity for the same problem is
Θ(log n) assuming c ≥ 3. It would be very interesting to extend the result to the LCA model. The
main reason we did not manage to extend it to the LCA model are far probes. These are especially
difficult to handle if we want the identifiers from [n]. If we do not allow the LCA algorithm to
perform far probes, but we want identifiers from [n] instead of poly(n), then an approach similar to
ours gives an Ω(n1−o(1) ) lower bound. Our argument also breaks down for randomized algorithms.
Hence, it is an interesting problem to prove any randomized polynomial lower bound or to come
up with an efficient randomized algorithm.
Further Related Work: Connection of LCA to Parallel Algorithms: As the only shared
state between queries of LCA algorithms is the random seed, after distributing the random seed to
all processors, the processors can answer queries independent of each other and therefore in parallel.
Moreover, many randomized LCA algorithms also work with k-wise independent random bits for
k = O(poly(log n)) and hence standard techniques often allow for random seeds of polylogarithmic
length [ARVX12].
There also exists a close connection between the Massively Parallel Computation (MPC) model
[KSV10]—a theoretical model to study map-reduce type algorithms—and the LCA model. In the
MPC model, the input of a computational problem is distributed across multiple machines. The
computation proceeds in synchronous round. At the beginning of each round, each machine can
perform some local computation. Afterwards, each machine can send and receive messages to other
machines with the restriction that each machine can send and receive at most as many bits as the
size of its local memory. The most stringent regime in the MPC model is the sublinear memory
regime where each machine has a local memory of O(nα ) bits for some α ∈ (0, 1). In this regime,
a machine cannot get a global view of the graph. Hence, most known algorithms gather the local
neighborhood around each node followed by executing a local algorithm on the neighborhood to
deduce the output of a node. However, the local neighborhood around a node often contains too
many vertices to fit into a single machine. In such a scenario, it is important that we can compute
the output of a node by only considering a minuscule fraction of its local neighborhood. This is
exactly what LCA algorithms try to accomplish. In particular, Ghaffari and Uitto [Gha19] devised
a sparsification technique that resulted in state-of-the-art algorithms for Maximal Independent Set
both in the LCA model and the MPC model. Moreover, [RS20] stated a generic result that directly
allows to transfer results from the LCA model to the MPC model.


2    Our Method in a Nutshell
In this section we informally present the high-level ideas of our proofs.
The Gap Result of Theorem 1.2:


                                                  5
    We start to describe the high-level idea of the proof that there is √no LCL with a random-
ized/deterministic LCA/VOLUME complexity between ω(log∗ n) and o( log n). This is the con-
ceptually simplest result and it works by directly adapting ideas known from the LOCAL model.
The main trick is to consider the deterministic VOLUME model where the identifiers can come
from an exponential instead of a polynomial range (cf. Section 7.1 in [RS20]). The result then
follows from two observations. First, a variant of the Chang-Pettie speedup [CP17] shows that any
VOLUME algorithm with a probe complexity of o(n) that works with exponential IDs can be sped
up to have a probe complexity of Θ(log∗ n). Second, a variant of the Chang-Kopelowitz-Pettie
                                                                                          √
derandomization [CKP16] shows that any randomized algorithm with probe complexity o( log n)
can be derandomized to give a deterministic o(n)-probe algorithm that works with exponential IDs.
The root comes from the exponential IDs: during the argument we apply a union bound over all
bounded degree n-node graphs equipped with unique IDs from an exponential range.
The LLL Complexity of Theorem 1.1:
    The upper bound can directly be proven by adapting the LLL algorithm of [FG17] for the
LOCAL model to the VOLUME model. To prove an Ω(log n) lower bound, we prove a corresponding
lower bound of Ω(log n) for the Sinkless Orientation Problem, which can be seen as an instance
of the distributed LLL (Definition 2.5). To prove this lower bound, we use the same high-level
proof idea as described in the previous paragraph. However,
                                                          √      to get a tight Ω(log n) lower bound
we need additional ideas. More concretely, the number log n is an artifact of a union bound over
     2
2O(n ) many non-isomorphic ID-labeled graphs. As we show the Sinkless Orientation lower bound
on bounded-degree trees, it is actually sufficient to union bound over all non-isomorphic ID-labeled
bounded-degree trees. As the number of non-isomorphic unlabeled trees is 2O(n) , we already made
progress. However, this itself is still not enough as we need identifiers from an exponential range to
                                                          2
speed the algorithm up to Θ(log∗ n) and there are 2O(n ) many ways to assign unique exponential
IDs. Note that even if we would assign IDs from a polynomial range, there still would be 2O(n log n)
ways to do it, which would only allow to hope for an Ω(log n/ log log n) bound.
    To circumvent this issue we borrow an idea from a parallel paper [BCG+ 21] where the technique
of ID graphs is developed to overcome a different issue. The idea is as follows: we will work in the
deterministic model with exponential IDs. However, we promise that the ID assignment satisfies
certain additional properties. More concretely, we construct a so-called ID graph (which is not to
be confused with the actual input graph). Each node in the ID graph corresponds to one of the
exponentially many IDs. Moreover, the maximum degree of the ID graph is constant and two nodes
in the input graph that are neighbors can only be assigned IDs that are neighbors in the ID graph.
Having restricted the ID assignment in this way, it turns out that we only need to union bound over
2O(n) different ID-labeled trees. Hence, a o(log n) randomized VOLUME algorithm would imply a
o(n) deterministic VOLUME algorithm that works on graphs with exponential IDs that satisfy the
constraints imposed by the ID graph. Unfortunately, due to this additional restriction, we cannot
simply speed-up the algorithm to the Θ(log∗ n) complexity. However, it turns out that the famous
round elimination lower bound for Sinkless Orientation from [BFH+ 16] works even relative to an
ID graph (the formal proof is in fact simpler as one does not pass through a randomized model).
This finishes the lower bound proof for the VOLUME model. This directly leads to the same lower
bound for the LCA model by a result of [GHL+ 16].
The Deterministic VOLUME Complexity of Coloring Bounded Degree Trees with Con-
stantly Many Colors is Θ(n) (Theorem 1.4):
   We first sketch a well-known proof of the Ω(log n) LOCAL lower bound for the same problem.
We then show how to adapt this proof to the VOLUME model. To prove a LOCAL lower bound
of Ω(log n), one fools the algorithm by running it on a graph having a girth of Ω(log n) and a


                                                  6
large constant chromatic number instead of a tree. Due to the high girth, the graph looks in
the o(log n)-hop neighborhood around each node like a tree. Hence, any LOCAL algorithm with
a round complexity of o(log n) cannot detect that it is not run on a valid input. Moreover, as
the chromatic number of this high-girth graph is strictly larger than the constantly many colors
available to the algorithm, there need to exist two neighboring nodes that get assigned the same
color by the LOCAL algorithm. To arrive at a contradiction, one can now construct a tree that
contains these two neighboring nodes and moreover the LOCAL algorithm will again assign these
two neighboring nodes the same color. The main difficulty in transferring this proof to the VOLUME
model is that o(n) probes might suffice to find a cycle in the high-girth graph. Hence, the VOLUME
algorithm might detect that the input is not a tree. To make it harder for the VOLUME algorithm
to find a cycle, we add additional vertices and edges to this high-girth graph without introducing
any new cycles. In fact, the resulting graph will have infinitely many vertices (though one could
restrict oneself to work with a finite graph). As we still want to give the deterministic algorithm
with a probe complexity of o(n) the illusion that the graph only contains n many vertices, we
assign each node in the graph an identifier from [n10 ]. This identifier can of course not be unique.
In order to prevent the VOLUME algorithm from detecting duplicate identifiers, we assign each
node an identifier uniformly and independently at random. Assigning identifiers in that way, it is
unlikely for the algorithm to find a duplicate ID. Moreover, the random identifiers do not provide
any information about the topology of the graph and thus one can show that it is unlikely that
the algorithm finds a cycle. By a probabilistic method argument, this allows us to arrive at a
contradiction in a similar manner as in the LOCAL model lower bound.

2.1   Definitions

Notation:
    We use the classical graph-theoretical notation, e.g., we write G = (V, E) for an unoriented
graph. A half-edge is a pair h = (v, e), where v ∈ V , and e ∈ E is an edge incident to v. Often we
assume that G additionally carries a labeling of vertices or half-edges. We use BG (u, r) to denote
the ball of radius r around a node u in G. When talking about half-edges in BG (u, r), we talk
about all half-edges (v, e) such that v ∈ BG (u, r). For example, BG (u, 0) contains all half-edges
incident to u.

Definition 2.1 (LCLs). An LCL problem (or simply LCL) Π for a constant degree graph is a
quadruple (Σin , Σout , r, P) where Σin and Σout are finite sets, r is a positive integer, and P is a
finite collection of Σin -Σout -labeled graphs. A correct solution for an LCL problem Π on a Σin -
labeled graph (G, fin ) is given by a half-edge labeling fout : H(G) → Σout such that, for every node
v ∈ V (G), the triple (BG (v, r), fin0 , f 0 ) is isomorphic to a member of P, where f 0 and f 0
                                          out                                          in      out are
the restriction of fin and fout , respectively, to BG (v, r).

    Intuitively, the collection P provides the constraints of the problem by specifying how a correct
output looks locally, depending on the respective local input. From the definition of a correct
solution for an LCL problem it follows that members of P that have radius > r can be ignored.

Definition 2.2 (LCA model [RTVX11] [ARVX12]). In the LCA model, each node is assigned a
unique ID from the set [n]. Moreover, each node is equipped with a port numbering of its edges and
each node might have an additional input labeling. The LCA algorithm needs to answer queries.
That is, given a vertex/edge, it needs to output the local solution of the vertex/edge in such a
way that combining the answers of all vertices/edges constitutes a valid solution. To answer a
query, the algorithm can probe the input graph. A probe consists of an integer i ∈ [n] and a port

                                                  7
number and the answer to the probe is the local information associated with the other endpoint of
the edge corresponding to the specific port number of the vertex with ID i. The answer to a query
is only allowed to depend on the input graph itself and possibly a shared random bit string in case
of randomized LCA algorithms. The complexity of an LCA algorithm is defined as the maximum
number of probes the algorithm needs to perform to answer a given query, where the maximum is
taken over all input graphs and all query vertices/edges. A randomized LCA algorithm needs to
produce a valid complete output (obtained by answering the query for each vertex) with probability
1 − 1/nc for any desirably large constant c.
Definition 2.3 (VOLUME model [RS20]). The VOLUME model is very similar to the LCA model
and hence we only discuss the differences. The IDs in the VOLUME model are from the set
{1, 2, . . . , poly(n)}, as in the LOCAL model, instead of [n]. Moreover, a VOLUME model algo-
rithm is confined to probe a connected region. In the case of randomized VOLUME algorithms, each
node has a private source of random bits which is considered as part of the local information and is
therefore returned together with the ID of a given vertex. We note that the shared randomness of
the LCA model is strictly stronger than the private randomness of the VOLUME model and therefore
the LCA model is strictly more powerful than the VOLUME model.
Definition 2.4 (LOCAL model [Lin92], [Pel00]). In the LOCAL model of distributed computing,
the goal is to compute a graph problem in a network. Each node in the network corresponds to a
computational entity and is equipped with a unique identifier in {1, 2, . . . , poly(n)}. In the beginning,
each node in the network only knows its ID, some global parameters like n and the maximum degree
∆ of the network, and perhaps some local input. Computation proceeds in synchronous rounds.
That is, in each round, each processor can first perform unbounded local computation and then send
each of its neighbors a message of unbounded length. Each node has to decide at some point that
it terminates and then it must output its local part of the global solution to the given problem. The
round complexity of a distributed algorithm is the number of rounds until the last round terminates.
Definition 2.5 (Sinkless Orientation). The Sinkless Orientation problem asks to orient each edge
of a given input graph in such a way that each vertex of sufficiently high constant degree is incident
to at least one outgoing edge.
Lemma 2.6 (Lovász Local Lemma (LLL), [EL74]). We denote with {X1 , X2 . . . , Xm } a set of mu-
tually independent random variables and with E1 , . . . , En probabilistic events. Each Ei is a function
of some subset of the random variables X1 , X2 , . . . , Xm and this subset is denoted by vbl(Ei ). We
say that Ei and Ej depend on a common random variable if vbl(Ei ) ∩ vbl(Ej ) 6= ∅. Assume that there
is some p < 1 such that for each 1 ≤ i ≤ n, we have P (Ei ) ≤ p, and let d be a positive integer such
that each Ei shares a random variable with at most d other Ej , j 6= i. If 4pd ≤ 1, then there exists
an assignment of values to the random variables such that none of the events Ei occurs.
Definition 2.7 (Distributed Lovász Local Lemma). The constructive LLL asks to find a concrete
assignment of the random variables X1 , X2 , . . . , Xm such that none of the bad events E1 , E2 , . . . , Em
occurs. In the Distributed LLL, the set of nodes of the input graph is simply the set of bad events
{E1 , E2 , . . . , Em }. Moreover, Ei and Ej are connected by an edge iff vbl(Ei )∩vbl(Ej ) 6= ∅ and i 6= j. In
the end, each node Ei needs to know the assignment of values to all the random variables in vbl(Ei ).
These assignments need to be consistent and they need to simultaneously avoid all the bad events.
Often, one considers variants of the LLL that further restrict the space of allowed input instances
by replacing the criterion 4pd ≤ 1 with a more restrictive inequality. A polynomial criterion is one
of the form pf (d) ≤ 1, where f (d) is some polynomial in d. An exponential criterion is one of the
form pf (d) ≤ 1, where f (d) is exponential in d.

                                                      8
   By directing each edge independently with probability 1/2 in each direction, one can view
Sinkless Orientation as an instance of the Distributed LLL that satisfies the exponential criterion
p2d ≤ 1. In particular, this implies that the Ω(log n) Sinkless Orientation lower bound directly
implies an Ω(log n) lower bound for the LLL under the exponential criterion p2d ≤ 1.


3    Preliminaries
The following is a well-known fact that follows from a straightforward simulation idea.
Lemma 3.1 (Parnas-Ron reduction, [PR07]). Any LOCAL algorithm with a round complexity of
t(n) can be converted into an LCA/VOLUME algorithm with a probe complexity of ∆O(t(n)) , where
∆ denotes the maximum degree of the input graph.
    The following lemma is a restatement of Theorem 3 in [GHL+ 16].
Lemma 3.2. Suppose that there is a randomized LCA algorithm with probe complexity t(n) that
solves an LCL Π. Then there is a randomized LCA algorithm with probe complexity t0 (n) =
t(poly(n)) that solves Π, does not perform any far probes, and works even if the unique identi-
fiers come from a polynomial range (instead of from [n]). This also holds if we restrict ourselves to
trees.
    We use this lemma to extend a lower bound that we prove for the VOLUME model to LCA
algorithms (that are allowed to perform far probes).
    We also need to use the following lemma which informally states that far probes are of no use
for deterministic LCA algorithms with a small probe complexity.
Theorem 3.3 (Theorem 1 in [GHL+ 16]). Any LCL problem that can be solved in the LCA model
deterministically with probe complexity t(n) can be solved
                                                         √ with a deterministic round complexity of
t0 (n) = t(nlog n ) in the LOCAL model provided t(n) = o( log n).
   For our purposes, we actually need a slightly stronger version of Theorem 3.3 which is, in fact,
what the proof of Theorem 3.3 in [GHL+ 16] gives.
Theorem 3.4. Any LCL problem that can be solved in the LCA model deterministically with probe
complexity t(n) can be solved deterministically
                                  √             with a probe complexity of t0 (n) = t(nlog n ) in the
VOLUME model provided t(n) = o( log n).


4    Warm-up: Speedup of Randomized Algorithms in LCA
In this section we prove Theorem 1.2 that we restate here for convenience.
Theorem 1.2. For any  √ LCL Π, if there is a randomized LCA algorithm that solves Π and has a
probe complexity of o( log n), then there is also a deterministic LCA algorithm for Π with a probe
complexity of O(log∗ n).
    In fact, we show that the resulting deterministic LCA algorithm with a probe complexity of
O(log∗ n) can also be turned into a VOLUME algorithm with the same probe complexity. The
following lemma is proven with a similar argument as Theorem 3 in [CKP16].
Lemma 4.1 (Derandomization
                       √        in LCA). If there exists a randomized LCA algorithm A with a probe
complexity of t(n) = o( log n) for a given LCL Π, then there also exists a deterministic VOLUME
algorithm A0 for Π with a probe complexity of o(n) and where the identifiers are from [2O(n) ].

                                                 9
Proof. Let r be the local checkability radius of Π. First, we apply Lemma 3.2 to convert the
algorithm A into one having the same asymptotic complexity but which does not use any far
probes and assumes only identifiers from a polynomial range. Without loss of generality, we can
assume that A works in a setting where, instead of being assigned an identifier, each node has
access to a private random bit string (in other words, A works in the VOLUME model with the
addition of shared randomness). This is justified as, with access to private randomness in each
node, the algorithm can generate unique identifiers with probability 1 − 1/ poly(n), as the first
O(log n) random bits of each node are unique with probability 1 − 1/ poly(n).
    Next, let Gn denote the set of all n-node graphs (up to isomorphism) of maximum degree ∆
with each vertex labeled with a unique identifier from [2O(n) ] and where each vertex has an input
label from the finite set of input labels from the given LCL. The number of unlabeled graphs of
maximum degree at most ∆ is 2O(n log n) as it can be described by O(n·∆·log n) bits of information.
Next, for a fixed n-node graph, the number of its labelings with identifiers from [2O(n) ] is upper
                               2
bounded by (2O(n) )n = 2O(n ) and the number of distinct input label assignments is upper bounded
by 2O(n) . Hence, the number of (labeled) graphs in Gn is strictly smaller than some suitably chosen
                        2              2
N = 2O(n log n) · 2O(n ) · 2O(n) = 2O(n ) .
    Now, let ρ : [2O(n) ] → {0, 1}N be a function that maps each ID to a stream of bits, chosen
uniformly at random from the space of all such functions. Similarly, let ρ∗ be a bit string chosen
uniformly at random from {0, 1}N . Consider the algorithm Aρ,ρ∗ solving Π on all graphs G ∈ Gn
that is defined as follows. First, Aρ,ρ∗ (internally) maps each identifier Iv it sees (at some node
v) in G to a bit string by applying the function ρ, and then it simulates algorithm A, where the
private random bit string that A has access to in each node v is given by ρ(Iv ), the shared random
bit string is given by ρ∗ , and the input parameter given to A describing the number of nodes is
set to N . Equivalently, this can be seen as running A (with randomness provided by ρ and ρ∗ ) on
the graph H obtained from G by adding N − n isolated nodes (where we are only interested in the
output of A on the nodes of H that correspond to nodes in G).
    Since, on N -node graphs, A provides a correct output with probability at least 1 − 1/N , and ρ
and ρ∗ are chosen uniformly at random, we see that, for every G ∈ Gn , the probability that Aρ,ρ∗
fails on G is at most 1/N . Since the number of graphs in Gn is strictly smaller than N , it follows
that there are a function ρdet : [2O(n) ] → {0, 1}N and a bit string ρ∗det ∈ {0, 1}N such that Aρdet ,ρ∗det
does not fail on any graph in Gn .
    As the runtime of Aρdet ,ρ∗det is equal to the runtime of A on N -node graphs, we can conlude
                                                                                             √
that Aρdet ,ρ∗det is a deterministic VOLUME algorithm with probe complexity t(N ) = o( log N ) =
  p
o( log 2O(n2 ) ) = o(n), as desired.

    Similarly, the next lemma is a variant of Theorem 6 in [CKP16] and the discussion in Section
7.1 in [RS20].

Lemma 4.2 (Speedup in VOLUME with exponential identifiers). If there exists a deterministic
VOLUME algorithm A for an LCL Π = (Σin , Σout , r, P) with a probe complexity of o(n) that works
with unique identifiers from [2O(n) ], then there also is a deterministic VOLUME algorithm A0 for Π
with a probe complexity of O(log∗ n).

Proof. Let n0 be a big enough constant. The algorithm A0 does the following on a given input graph
G with maximum degree ∆: first, it uses the algorithm of Even et al. [EMR14] to construct a coloring
of the power graph Gn0 +r —the graph with the vertex set of G and where two nodes are connected
by an edge iff they have a distance of at most n0 + t in the graph G—with ∆n0 +r + 1 = 2O(n0 )
colors with a probe complexity of O(log∗ n). Then we interpret those colors as identifiers and run


                                                    10
the algorithm A on G but we tell the algorithm that the input graph has n0 nodes instead of n.
The query complexity of A0 is O(log∗ n · o(n0 )) = O(log∗ n).
    To see that A0 produces a valid output, note that if A0 fails at a node u, we may consider all
the nodes that were needed for the simulation of A in the r-hop neighborhood of u together with
their neighbors—the number of such nodes is bounded by ∆ · ∆r · o(n0 ) < n0 , by choosing n0 large
enough. But as all those nodes are labeled by unique identifiers from [2O(n0 ) ], we can get a graph
of size n0 on which the original algorithm A fails, a contradiction.

    Theorem 1.2 now follows from Lemmas 4.1 and 4.2.
    We remark that by using polynomial instead of exponential identifiers in Lemma 4.1, we
would get that a randomized LCA/VOLUME algorithm of complexity t(n) = o(log n/ log log n)
can be derandomized to a deterministic algorithm with complexity t(2O(n log n) ) = o(n). The term
2O(n log n) comes from a union bound over all n-node graphs of maximum degree ∆ labeled with
polynomial-sized unique identifiers. This is the reason for the segment between the complexity
pairs [log n, log log n] and [n, log n/ log log n] in Fig. 1 (cf. Section 1.2 and Figure 2 in [RS20] that
does not differentiate between Θ(log n) and Θ(log n/ log log n)).


5     The Ω(log n) VOLUME Lower Bound for Sinkless Orientation
In this section, we prove the lower bound of Theorem 1.1. We prove it by providing the respective
lower bound for the Sinkless Orientation problem (Definition 2.5) on trees.
Theorem 5.1. There is no randomized LCA algorithm with probe complexity o(log n) for the
problem of Sinkless Orientation or ∆-coloring, even if the input graph is a tree with a precomputed
∆-edge coloring. In particular, the LCA complexity of LLL is Ω(log n), even in the regime p ≤ 2−∆ .
    The general idea of the proof is the same as in Section 4: we want to derandomize the as-
sumed o(log n)-probe randomized algorithm for Sinkless Orientation to a deterministic o(n)-probe
VOLUME algorithm, this time restricting what constitutes a valid ID assignment. We then reduce
the problem of showing that such a VOLUME algorithm does not exist to the problem of showing
that there does not exist a nontrivial deterministic LOCAL algorithm for Sinkless Orientation. We
will explain later in more detail what we mean by nontrivial. Finally, we conclude the proof by
showing that such a LOCAL algorithm does not exist.
    As we saw in Section 4, a direct application
                                      √          of the derandomization by Chang-Kopelowitz-Pettie
allows us only to argue that an o( log n)-probe algorithm leads to an o(n)-probe deterministic
algorithm, so we need to do better. There are two obstacles to obtaining a union bound over 2O(n)
graphs in Lemma 4.1:
    1. the number of n-node graphs of maximum degree ∆ is bounded only by 2O(n log n) ,
                                                                                   2
    2. the number of ways of labeling n objects with labels from [2O(n) ] is 2O(n ) .
   To get an Ω(log n) lower bound, both terms need to be improved to 2O(n) .
   This is easy with the first term – in fact, the whole lower bound works even if we restrict
ourselves to trees. The number of trees with maximum degree ∆ can easily be upper bounded by
∆O(n) and an even stronger upper bound of 2.96n is known.
   The issue is with the second bullet point—the number of labelings of n objects with labels from
                                                  2
range 2O(n) clearly cannot be improved from 2O(n ) .
   To decrease the number of possibilities, we need to restrict our space of labelings of a tree with
unique identifiers in such a way that the number of possibilities drops to 2O(n) , yet this restriction

                                                   11
should not make it easier to solve Sinkless Orientation in the VOLUME model. This is done by the
ID graph technique developed in a parallel paper [BCG+ 21] for a different purpose. An ID graph
H is a graph that states which pairs of identifiers are allowed for a pair of neighboring nodes of
the input tree. In our case, one should think about it as a high-girth high chromatic number graph
on 2O(n) nodes with each node representing an identifier. The girth of the graphs is at least Θ(n)
and its chromatic number at least ∆ (i.e., the maximum degree of the input graph). Our definition
is a little subtler due to the fact that we work on edge-colored trees where arguments are usually
easier.
ID graph: We now define the ID graph, prove that the number of labelings of n-node trees
consistent with it is bounded by 2O(n) in Lemma 5.7, and then prove Lemma 5.8. Each vertex
of the ID graph can be considered as an identifier that will later be used to provide IDs to the
considered input graph.

Definition 5.2 (ID graph). Let R and ∆ be positive integers. An ID graph H = H(R, ∆) is a
collection of graphs H1 , H2 , . . . , H∆ such that the following hold:

  1. For all i, j satisfying 1 ≤ i, j ≤ ∆ : V (Hi ) = V (Hj ); we use V (H) to denote the set of vertices
     in H, that is, V (H) = V (H1 ),

  2. |V (H)| = ∆10R ,

  3. ∀v ∈ V (H), ∀1 ≤ i ≤ ∆ : 1 ≤ degHi (v) ≤ ∆10 ,

  4. girth(H) ≥ 10R,

  5. Any independent set of Hi has less than |V (H)|/∆ vertices.

Lemma 5.3 (ID graph existence). There exists an ID graph H = H(R, ∆) for all sufficiently large
R, ∆ > 0.

   This lemma is proved in a parallel paper [BCG+ 21] developing the technique for a different
purpose. For completeness we also leave a proof to Appendix A.
   As there are possibly many ID graphs that satisfy the given conditions, from now on, whenever
we write H(R, ∆), we mean the lexicographically smallest ID graph H(R, ∆).

Definition 5.4 (Proper H-labeling of a ∆-edge-colored tree). Let T be a tree having a maximum
degree of at most ∆ and whose edges are properly colored with colors from [∆]. A proper H-labeling
of T with an ID graph H is a labeling h : V (T ) → V (H) of each vertex u ∈ V (T ) with a vertex
h(u) ∈ V (H) such that whenever u, v ∈ V (T ) are incident to a common edge colored with color
c ∈ [∆], then h(u) and h(v) are neighboring in Hc .

Definition 5.5 (Solving an LCL relative to H). When we say that a deterministic VOLUME or
LOCAL algorithm for an LCL Π works relative to an ID graph H, we mean that the algorithm
works if the unique node identifiers are replaced by a proper H(n, ∆)-labeling for instances of size
n and with maximum degree at most ∆.
   We also say that an algorithm works relative to ID graphs {Hn }n∈N if it works for every n-node
input graph that is H-labeled by Hn .

Observation 5.6. If a deterministic local algorithm A solves a problem Π of checkability radius
t in r rounds (in case of the LOCAL model) or with r probes (in case of the volume model) with
∆O(r) -sized identifiers, then it also solves Π relative to H(t + r, ∆).


                                                  12
Proof. The validity of A depends on all possible ways of labeling an (r + t)-hop neighborhood of a
vertex u with identifiers, as the correctness of the output at u depends only on the outputs given by
A at each vertex v in u’s t-hop neighborhood (by the definition of an LCL problem), and each such
output depends only on the r-hop neighborhood of the respective node v. But the set of allowed
labelings relative to H(t + r, ∆) is a subset of all labelings with unique identifiers.

Lemma 5.7. The number of non-isomorphic n-node trees with maximum degree ∆ = O(1) that
are labeled with a proper ∆-edge coloring and an H-labeling for H = H(n, ∆), is 2O(n) .

Proof. There are O(2.96n ) non-isomorphic unrooted trees on n vertices [oei]. Additionally, there
are at most ∆n−1 ways of assigning edge colors from the set [∆] once the tree is fixed. Hence, there
are 2O(n) non-isomorphic trees labeled with edge colors.
    For any such tree T , pick an arbitrary vertex u in it. There are |V (H)| = ∆O(n) ways of labeling
u with a label from H (Property 2 in Definition 5.2). Once u is labeled with a label h(u) ∈ V (H),
we can construct the labeling of the whole tree T by gradually labeling it, vertex by vertex, always
labeling a node whose neighbor was labeled already. Every time we label a new node v with the
label h(v) ∈ V (H) such that v is adjacent to an already labeled node w via an edge of color c, we
have poly(∆) possible choices for the label of v, since this is the degree of h(w) in Hc (Property 3
in Definition 5.2). Hence, the total number of H-labelings of T is 2O(n) .
    Putting everything together, the number of non-isomorphic trees labeled by edge colors from
[∆] and IDs from H is 2O(n) .

    The following lemma is analogous to Lemma 4.1, i.e., the derandomization from [CKP16], but
working relative to the ID graph and only on the set of trees allows us to derandomize a randomized
VOLUME algorithm with probe complexity t(n) to obtain a deterministic VOLUME algorithm with
probe complexity t(2O(n) ), while the original construction only obtains a deterministic VOLUME
                                        2
algorithm with probe complexity t(2O(n ) ).

Lemma 5.8 (From randomized LCA to deterministic VOLUME relative to an ID graph). If there
exists a randomized LCA algorithm with probe complexity t(n) = o(log n) for Sinkless Orientation
on trees with maximum degree ∆ = O(1) that are properly ∆-edge colored, then there also exists a
deterministic VOLUME algorithm for Sinkless Orientation on trees with maximum degree ∆ = O(1)
that are properly ∆-edge colored with probe complexity o(n) relative to ID graphs {H(n, ∆)}n≥n0
where n0 is a large enough constant.

Proof. We omit the proof as it can be proven in the exact same way as Lemma 4.1, except that
                                                                                                2
now we tell the randomized algorithm that the number of nodes is N = 2O(n) instead of N = 2O(n )
as we need to union bound over a smaller number of labeled graphs. One also needs to make use
of the fact that all the IDs in an n-node H(n, ∆)-labeled graph are unique, which follows from the
fact that the girth of H(n, ∆) is strictly larger than n.

Hardness of Deterministic Sinkless Orientation relative to an ID graph: We now prove
that there cannot be a deterministic local algorithm with volume complexity o(n) that works with
exponential IDs, even when those IDs satisfy constraints defined by an ID graph H(n, ∆).
    To do so, we first show that an o(n)-probe VOLUME algorithm implies that there exists some
constant n∗ ∈ N and a deterministic LOCAL algorithm that solves Sinkless Orientation on an
(infinite) properly H(n∗ , ∆)-labeled tree in strictly less than n∗ rounds. This is an analogue of
Lemma 4.2.



                                                 13
Lemma 5.9. If there exists a deterministic VOLUME algorithm A that solves Sinkless Orientation
on n-node trees with maximum degree ∆ = O(1) that are properly ∆-edge colored relative to H(n, ∆)
and with a probe complexity of f (n) ≤ n/(3∆) for all large enough n, then there exists a constant n∗
and a deterministic LOCAL algorithm A0 that solves Sinkless Orientation on all (possibly infinite)
trees with maximum degree ∆ that are properly ∆-edge colored and H(n∗ , ∆)-labeled in fewer than
n∗ rounds.

Proof. Consider running the algorithm A for fixed n∗ and ∆ such that f (n∗ ) ≤ n∗ /(3∆) on any
tree T having a maximum degree of ∆ that is properly ∆-edge colored and H(n∗ , ∆)-labeled. We
now prove that A solves the Sinkless Orientation problem on T . If not, then there exists a node u
such that either all the edges are oriented towards u or u has a neighbor v such that the outputs
of u and v are inconsistent. Consider now the set S consisting of the at most 2 · (n∗ /3∆) vertices
that A probes in order to compute the answer for both u and v. The set S ∪ N (S) has at most
∆ · |S| < n∗ vertices. If we run A on G[S ∪ N (S)], it will fail, too, since the two runs of A on T
and T [S ∪ N (S)] are identical. Appending a non-zero number of vertices to the vertices from N (S)
and labeling them so that the final labeling is still a H(n∗ , ∆)-labeling gives a graph T 0 on exactly
n∗ nodes that is properly H(n∗ , ∆)-labeled such that A fails on T 0 . This is a contradiction with
the correctness of A on n∗ -node trees.
    Hence, we get a deterministic VOLUME algorithm for Sinkless Orientation that performs at
most n∗ /(3∆) probes and that works for any H(n∗ , ∆)-labeled tree T . This directly implies that
there exists a LOCAL algorithm with a round complexity of at most n∗ /(3∆) that solves Sinkless
Orientation on any H(n∗ , ∆)-labeled tree T , as needed.

    Finally, the following theorem is a simple adaptation of the lower bound for Sinkless Orientation
in the LOCAL model via round elimination in [BFH+ 16]).

Theorem 5.10. The deterministic complexity of Sinkless Orientation in the LOCAL model relative
to H(k, ∆) is at least k.

   This theorem is proved in a parallel paper [BCG+ 21] developing the technique for a different
purpose. For completeness we also leave a proof to Appendix A. Finally, we can put all the pieces
together to prove Theorem 5.1.

Proof of Theorem 5.1. We first apply the derandomization of Lemma 5.8 to deduce the existence
of a deterministic algorithm with o(n) probes, relative to {H(n, ∆)}n∈N . Afterwards, we use
Lemma 5.9 to conclude that there is an r > 0 and a deterministic local algorithm that solves
sinkless orientation in less than r rounds relative to an ID graph H(r, ∆), which is finally shown to
be impossible by Theorem 5.10.

Remark 5.11. One can check that we actually prove the existence of some ε = ε(∆) > 0 such that
any randomized LCA algorithm for sinkless orientation needs at least ε log n probes for all n ≥ n0 .


6    Upper Bound for LLL on Constant Degree Graphs
In this section, we complement the lower bound by proving the following matching upper bound
result.

Theorem 6.1. There exists a fixed constant c such that the randomized LCA/VOLUME complexity
of the LLL on constant degree graphs under the polynomial criterion p(e∆)c ≤ 1 is O(log n).



                                                  14
Proof. The result follows by a slight adaptation of the LOCAL algorithm of [FG17] to the VOLUME
model. In particular, Fischer and Ghaffari show how to shatter a constant-degree graph in O(log∗ n)
rounds of the LOCAL model. By shattering, we mean that their algorithm fixes the values for a
subset of the random variables such that the following two properties are satisfied.

  1. The probability of each bad event conditioned on the previously fixed random variables is
     upper bounded by ∆−Ω(c) .

  2. Consider the graph induced by all the nodes whose corresponding bad event has a non-zero
     probability of occurring. The connected components in this graph all have a size of O(log n)
     with probability 1 − 1/ poly(n).

Note that the shattering procedure – denoted as the pre-shattering phase – directly implies a
                                                                          ∗
randomized VOLUME algorithm with probe complexity O(log n · ∆O(log n ). To see why, note that
we can determine the state of all random variables after the pre-shattering phase that a given bad
                                                      ∗
event depends on with a probe complexity of ∆O(log n) by applying the Parnas-Ron reduction to
the O(log∗ n) round LOCAL algorithm. This in turn allows us to find the connected component of
                                     ∗
a given node with O(log n · ∆O(log n) ) probes, as long as the connected component has a size of
O(log n), which happens with probability 1−1/ poly(n). Afterwards, one can find a valid assignment
of all the random variables in the connected component in a brute-force centralized manner. Note
that the standard LLL criterion ep(∆ + 1) ≤ 1 guarantees the existence of such an assignment.
     To improve the probe complexity to O(log n), we show how to adapt the pre-shattering phase
such that it runs in O(1) LOCAL rounds while still retaining the two properties stated above.
Once we have shown this, the aforementioned VOLUME simulation directly proves Theorem 6.1.
The pre-shattering phase of [FG17] works by first computing a 2-hop-coloring with ∆2 + 1 colors,
where a 2-hop coloring is a coloring that assigns any two nodes having a distance of at most 2
a different color. Once this coloring is computed, the algorithm iterates through the constantly
many color classes and fixes in each iteration a subset of the random variables. Each random
variable will be set with probability 1 − ∆−Ω(c) , even when fixing the randomness outside the
c1 -hop neighborhood for some fixed constant c1 ≥ 2 not depending on c adversarially. The only
step that takes more than constant time is the computation of the coloring. Instead of computing
                                                                            0
the coloring deterministically, we instead assign each node one out of ∆c colors for some fixed
positive constant c0  1, independently and uniformly at random. We say that a node fails if its
chosen color is not unique in its 2-hop neighborhood. Note that a given node fails with probability
                 0
at most 1/∆Ω(c ) . We then postpone the assignment of each random variable that affects any
of the failed nodes. For all the other random variables, we run the same process as described
in [FG17] by iterating through the poly(∆) = O(1) color classes in O(1) rounds of the LOCAL
model. The pre-shattering phase of [FG17] still deterministically guarantees that each bad event
occurs with probability 1 − ∆−Ω(c) conditioned on the random variables set in the pre-shattering
phase. Moreover, each bad event that does not correspond to a failed node occurs with probability
0 after the pre-shattering partial assignment with probability at least 1−∆−Ω(c) , independent of the
randomness outside the c1 -hop neighborhood. An application of Lemma 6.2 therefore guarantees
that by choosing c and c0 large enough, each connected component after the pre-shattering phase
has a size of O(log n) with high probability in n, thus concluding the proof of Theorem 6.1.
Lemma 6.2 (The Shattering Lemma, cf. with Lemma 2.3 of [FG17]). Let G = (V, E) be a graph
with maximum degree ∆ = O(1). Consider a process which generates a random subset B ⊆ V where
P r[v ∈ B] ≤ ∆−c1 , for some constant c1 ≥ 1, independent on the randomness of nodes outside the
c2 -hop neighborhood of v, for all v ∈ V , for some constant c2 ≥ 1. Then, with probability at least


                                                 15
1 − n−c3 , for any constant c3 < c1 − 4c2 − 2, we have that each connected component of G[B] has
size O(log n).



7    Lower Bound for Constant Coloring
Theorem 1.4. Let c ≥ 2 be arbitrary. Then, the deterministic VOLUME complexity of c-coloring
bounded degree trees with maximum degree poly(c) is Θ(n).

Proof. The upper bound of O(n) follows trivially from the fact that every tree is bipartite. To prove
the lower bound, assume for the sake of contradiction that there exists a deterministic VOLUME
algorithm A that c-colors a bounded degree tree with o(n) probes. By a result from Bollobás [Bol78],
there exists a (connected) graph G on n nodes with chromatic number strictly greater than c that has
a constant maximum degree ∆G (with the constant only depending on c) and girth g = Ω(logc n).
Now, we consider the unique infinite ∆H -regular graph H (up to isomorphism) that contains G as
an induced subgraph and G and H have the same set of cycles. We choose ∆H as small as possible
such that (∆H − 1)g/4 ≥ n10 . Note that ∆H = poly(∆G ) and therefore H has constant maximum
degree. Now, we assign each node in H an identifier uniformly and independently at random from
the set {1, 2, . . . , n10 }. Note that these identifiers are not unique. Moreover, we also randomize
the port assignment in H such that each node chooses its port assignment independently and each
permutation has the same probability to be chosen. Now, for every query corresponding to a node
in G, we run algorithm A on H to provide an answer to the query. Even though H has an infinite
number of vertices and contains cycles, we tell A that it is a tree with exactly n vertices. Note that
the range of identifiers supports that illusion, though the algorithm might encounter two nodes
with the same ID or detect a cycle. We now need the following claim.
Claim. With strictly positive probability over the randomness of the ID-and port assignment, all
nodes probed by A while answering the n different queries got assigned pair-wise distinct IDs.
Moreover, while answering the query for some node v, A does not probe a node u corresponding to
a node in G such that the distance between u and v is at least g/4.
    Before we prove this claim (in Lemma 7.1), we show how it implies Theorem 1.4. According to
the probabilistic method, there exists a fixed assignment of identifiers and ports such that when we
run the process described above with this fixed assignment, there do not exist two distinct nodes
that got assigned the same ID such that A probed these two nodes at some point in the process
of answering the n different queries, and for each node v that A is queried on, A does not probe
a node u corresponding to a node in G during answering the query for v such that the distance
between u and v is strictly greater than g/4. Now, let v and w be two arbitrary neighboring nodes
in the graph G. Consider the graph induced by all the nodes that A has probed in the graph H
when answering the query for v and w. Note that this induced graph does not contain any cycle, as
otherwise when queried on v or w, algorithm A would have seen a node in G with a distance strictly
greater than g/4. Hence, the induced graph is a bounded-degree forest with o(n) vertices and all
the vertices have a unique identifier. Hence, for n large enough, we can add additional vertices and
edges to make it a bounded-degree tree Tv,w on n vertices such that Tv,w would be a valid input
to the algorithm and when queried on Tv,w , the colors that A outputs at v and w would still be
the same as when queried on H. Note that here we make use of the fact that A is deterministic,
as otherwise we would not have the guarantee that A would probe the exact same vertices in the
exact same order. Now, as we assumed that G has a chromatic number strictly greater than c,


                                                 16
there are two neighboring nodes v, w in G that get assigned the same color by A. As these two
nodes are also neighboring in Tv,w , A outputs the same color for two neighboring nodes in Tv,w .
This is however a contradiction as Tv,w is a valid input for A and we assumed that A is a correct
deterministic algorithm.

   It remains to prove the claim in the proof of Theorem 1.4, which we restate as Lemma 7.1.

Lemma 7.1. With strictly positive probability over the randomness of the ID-and port assignment,
there do not exist two distinct nodes that got assigned the same ID such that A probed these two
nodes at some point in the process of answering the n different queries. Moreover, while answering
the query for some node v, A does not probe a node u corresponding to a node in G such that the
distance between u and v is at least g/4.

Proof. First, note that A performs at most n2 probes to answer the n queries and therefore sees at
most n2 different nodes. For i 6= j ∈ [n2 ], let Aij be the event that the i-th and the j-th vertex that
A probes are distinct vertices and have the same ID. We have P r[Aij ] = 1/n10 and thus a union
bound over the n4 pairs implies that the first part of the lemma holds with probability 1 − 1/n6 .
    Before showing that the second part of the lemma holds with probability at least 1/2, we first
give some intuition why it holds. Let v be a node in H corresponding to a node in G. As the girth
of H is g and H is ∆H -regular, the g/4-hop neighborhood around v is a tree with each node having
a degree of ∆H except the leaf vertices. Note that the total number of leaf vertices is at least n10 ,
but at most n of them correspond to nodes in G. Hence, it is intuitively hard for A to probe any
of the leaf vertices corresponding to nodes in G. However, it needs to probe such a vertex in order
to find a node in G having a distance strictly greater than g/4. Though the intuition is simple, one
needs to carefully argue that this intuition is correct. To do so, we perform a series of reductions.
For the sake of contradiction, assume that A finds with probability at least 1/n2 a vertex in G that
has a distance of g/4 to a given queried vertex that corresponds to a node in G.
Reduction 1: Omitting the Identifiers: First, we argue that A does not really need the random
identifiers. To do so, consider a VOLUME model variant in which the algorithm itself assigns IDs
to vertices. That is, each time the algorithm probes a vertex it has not encountered before it can
assign this vertex a new ID. Now, consider the following randomized algorithm A0 that works in this
new setting by assigning each newly encountered vertex an identifier uniformly and independently
at random from the set {1, 2, . . . , n10 } and then simulating algorithm A with these self-assigned
IDs. Then, both A and A0 have exactly the same probability of finding a vertex that corresponds
to a vertex in G and that has a distance of at least g/4 to the queried vertex v.
Reduction 2: No Probes Outside the g/4-hop neighborhood: For the next reduction, we
consider the setting with self-assigned identifiers as above and add the following modification. Once
an algorithm encounters some vertex with a distance of exactly g/4 to the originally queried vertex
v, we tell the algorithm whether this vertex corresponds to a vertex in G or not. Furthermore, we
do not allow any probes outside the g/4-hop neighborhood around v. Thus, the algorithm only gets
to know vertices inside the g/4-hop neighborhood of v. Now, we explain how to turn a randomized
algorithm that works in the setting with the self-assigned IDs into an algorithm that has the exact
same probability of finding a far-away vertex that corresponds to a vertex in G in this new setting
described above. We again simulate the randomized algorithm. If the algorithm encounters a
vertex that corresponds to a vertex in G with a distance of g/4 to v, then the algorithm simply
stops the execution as the algorithm has achieved its goal. Otherwise, if the algorithm would like
to make a probe outside the g/4-hop neighborhood, then the algorithm virtually simulates these
probes. The structure of the graph outside the g/4-hop neighborhood (not counting the vertices


                                                  17
that correspond to nodes in G) is completely known to the algorithm without making any probes.
The only unknown are the port assignments. However, the algorithm can make up a random port
assignment in its mind (with exactly the same distribution as the port assignment would have in
the real graph) and then answer the probes accordingly. It is easy to see that this new algorithm
succeeds with the same probability as the previous algorithm.
Reduction 3: Guessing Game: For a given port assignment of H, we define an order on all
the nodes of distance precisely g/4 from v in the following way: We associate with each such node
the sequence of ports one needs to take to get from v to the respective vertex. Then, we order
the vertices according to the lexicographical order of their associated sequences. Let Ng/4 ≥ n10
be the number of nodes with a distance of g/4 to v. With each port assignment p of the g/4-hop
neighborhood around v, we identify a tuple tupp ∈ {0, 1}Ng/4 . We set (tupp )i = 1 if the i-th vertex
with respect to the order defined corresponds to a vertex in G and 0 otherwise. Thus, tupp contains
at most n non-zero entries.
     Consider the distribution over {0, 1}Ng/4 that we get by choosing the port assignment at random
as described in the beginning. Now, we define the following game: A port assignment p is chosen
uniformly at random. This port assignment is generally unknown to the algorithm. The only
information the algorithm obtains about the port assignment is, for each vertex, the port number
corresponding to the edge leading to the parent of the vertex. By parent, we mean the parent with
respect to the tree rooted at v induced by the g/4-hop neighborhood of v. Now, the task of the
(randomized) algorithm is to output an index set I ⊂ [Ng/4 ] with |I| ≤ n. The algorithm is said to
win the game if there exists an index ind ∈ I such that (tupp )ind = 1.
     We show that we can construct a (randomized) algorithm that wins the game with a probability
of at least 1/n2 when given the algorithm from the previous setting (which finds a vertex that
corresponds to a node in G and that has a distance of g/4 to v with probability of at least 1/n2 )
as a subroutine. To do this, we simulate the algorithm from the previous subsection. Then, we
take I as the index set corresponding to all the vertices of distance g/4 to v that the algorithm
“finds” during the execution. Note that in order to determine the corresponding index set, we need
to know the position of any examined vertex in the lexicographical order. However, this can be
done as it is sufficient to know the port assignments of all the parents. To be able to simulate the
algorithm from the previous section we need to provide the neighborhood oracle corresponding to
the chosen port assignment p. Although p is not completely known, this can actually be done as
it is sufficient to just know the port number corresponding to the parent. Furthermore, we need
to answer whether a vertex of distance g/4 that the algorithm probes corresponds to a vertex in
G or not. This is actually not possible. However, it is sufficient to always tell the algorithm that
the vertex does not correspond to a node in G. Now, we show that we win the guessing game
with probability at least 1/n2 . This can be seen as follows: Let p be the selected port assignment
function and r the random bits that the simulated algorithm uses. Assume that the algorithm loses
the game. Now, consider the simulated algorithm is run in the previous setting with the same port
assignment function and the same random bits. Then, the algorithm would not have found a vertex
of distance g/4 to v that corresponds to a node in G. This follows as the execution is identical in
both cases as the oracle calls and the answers to whether a vertex of distance g/4 to v corresponds
to a node in G is answered in the same way in both cases.
Guessing Game is Impossible: Next, we show that the game that we have defined above
cannot be won with a probability of at least 1/n2 . To that end, consider some fixed index set I =
{ind1 , ..., indk } with k ≤ n. For i ∈ [k], we define Ai as the event that the sequence seq ∈ {0, 1}Ng/4
chosen in the game satisfies seqindi = 1. Also note that Ai is independent from the information
given to the algorithm, i.e., the collection of port numbers corresponding, for each vertex, to the


                                                   18
edge leading to its parent. By symmetry, we have
                                                       n     1
                                         P r[Ai ] ≤        ≤ 9.
                                                      Ng/4  n
                                S
   Furthermore, we define A = i∈I Ai . A corresponds exactly to the event that one wins the
game if one had chosen the index set I. Thus, we can use a union bound to get:
                                         [            X                     1     1
                         P r[A] = P r[       Ai ] ≤        P r[Ai ] ≤ k ·     9
                                                                                ≤ 8.
                                                                            n    n
                                         i            i

   Hence, we arrived at a contradiction, which proves Lemma 7.1 (and therefore Theorem 1.4).


Acknowledgements
We thank Mohsen Ghaffari, Jan Grebı́k, and Jukka Suomela for useful discussions. This project has
received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Unions Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 853109).


References
[ARVX12] Noga Alon, Ronitt Rubinfeld, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Space-efficient local computa-
         tion algorithms. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
         on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1132–1139. SIAM, 2012.

[BCG+ 21] Sebastian Brandt, Yi-Jun Chang, Jan Grebı́k, Christoph Grunau, Václav Rozhoň, and
          Zoltán Vidnyánszky. Local problems on trees from the perspectives of distributed
          algorithms, finitary factors, and descriptive combinatorics, 2021.

[BFH+ 16] Sebastian Brandt, Orr Fischer, Juho Hirvonen, Barbara Keller, Tuomo Lempiäinen,
          Joel Rybicki, Jukka Suomela, and Jara Uitto. A lower bound for the distributed Lovász
          local lemma. In Proc. 48th ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 479–
          488, 2016.

[BGR20]    Sebastian Brandt, Christoph Grunau, and Václav Rozhoň. Generalizing the sharp
           threshold phenomenon for the distributed complexity of the Lovász local lemma. In
           Proceedings of the 39th Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC),
           pages 329–338, 2020.

[BMU19]    Sebastian Brandt, Yannic Maus, and Jara Uitto. A sharp threshold phenomenon for
           the distributed complexity of the Lovász local lemma. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM
           Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 389–398, 2019.

[Bol78]    Béla Bollobás. Chromatic number, girth and maximal degree. Discrete Mathematics,
           24(3):311–314, 1978.

[CKP16]    Yi-Jun Chang, Tsvi Kopelowitz, and Seth Pettie. An exponential separation between
           randomized and deterministic complexity in the LOCAL model. In Proc. 57th IEEE
           Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2016.




                                                      19
[CP17]     Yi-Jun Chang and Seth Pettie. A time hierarchy theorem for the LOCAL model. In
           Proc. 58th IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 156–167,
           2017.

[DK21]     Andrzej Dorobisz and Jakub Kozik. Local computation algorithms for coloring of uni-
           form hypergraphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.10990, 2021.

[EL74]     Paul Erdős and Lovász László. Problems and results on 3-chromatic hypergraphs and
           some related questions. Coll Math Soc J Bolyai, 10, 01 1974.

[EMR14]    Guy Even, Moti Medina, and Dana Ron. Deterministic stateless centralized local al-
           gorithms for bounded degree graphs. In European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA),
           pages 394–405. Springer, 2014.

[FG17]     Manuela Fischer and Mohsen Ghaffari. Sublogarithmic distributed algorithms for
           Lovász local lemma, and the complexity hierarchy. In Proc. 31st Symp. on Distributed
           Computing (DISC), pages 18:1–18:16, 2017.

[GGR21]    Mohsen Ghaffari, Christoph Grunau, and Václav Rozhoň. Improved deterministic net-
           work decomposition. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
           Algorithms (SODA), pages 2904–2923. SIAM, 2021.

[Gha19]    Mohsen Ghaffari. Distributed maximal independent set using small messages. In Proc.
           ACM-SIAM Symp. on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 805–820, 2019.

[GHL+ 16] Mika Göös, Juho Hirvonen, Reut Levi, Moti Medina, and Jukka Suomela. Non-local
          probes do not help with many graph problems. In Cyril Gavoille and David Ilcinkas, ed-
          itors, Distributed Computing, pages 201–214, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2016. Springer Berlin
          Heidelberg.

[GMRV20] Christoph Grunau, Slobodan Mitrović, Ronitt Rubinfeld, and Ali Vakilian. Improved
         local computation algorithm for set cover via sparsification. In Proceedings of the Four-
         teenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 2993–
         3011. SIAM, 2020.

[KSV10]    Howard Karloff, Siddharth Suri, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. A model of computation for
           mapreduce. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
           Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 938–948. SIAM, 2010.

[Lin92]    Nati Linial. Locality in distributed graph algorithms. SIAM Journal on Computing,
           21(1):193–201, 1992.

[Mar13]    A. Marks. A determinacy approach to Borel combinatorics. Journal of the American
           Mathematical Society, 29:579–600, 2013.

[MT10]     Robin A. Moser and Gábor Tardos. A constructive proof of the general Lovász local
           lemma. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 57(2):1–15, 2010.

[oei]      Oeis foundation inc. (2019), the on-line encyclopedia of integer sequences. http://
           oeis.org/A000081.

[Pel00]    David Peleg. Distributed Computing: A Locality-Sensitive Approach. SIAM, 2000.


                                               20
[PR07]      Michal Parnas and Dana Ron. Approximating the minimum vertex cover in sublin-
            ear time and a connection to distributed algorithms. Theoretical Computer Science,
            381(1):183–196, 2007.

[RG20]      Václav Rozhoň and Mohsen Ghaffari. Polylogarithmic-time deterministic network de-
            composition and distributed derandomization. In Proc. Symposium on Theory of Com-
            putation (STOC), 2020.

[RS20]      Will Rosenbaum and Jukka Suomela. Seeing far vs. seeing wide: Volume complexity
            of local graph problems. In Proceedings of the 39th Symposium on Principles of Dis-
            tributed Computing (PODC), page 89–98, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for
            Computing Machinery.

[RTVX11] Ronitt Rubinfeld, Gil Tamir, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Fast local computation algo-
         rithms. In Innovations in Computer Science - ICS 2011, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
         China, January 7-9, 2011. Proceedings, pages 223–238, 2011.


A     Missing proofs from Section 5
Here we prove Lemma 5.3.

Proof. In the following, we assume that both ∆ and R are sufficiently large. Furthermore, we define
n := ∆1000R . We let each Hi be equal to an Erdős-Rényi graph with n vertices and where each
edge is included with probability p = ∆2 /n.
   The expected number of cycles of length less than 10R in H is upper bounded by
                           10R−1               10R−1
                            X
                                    j    j
                                                X              j
                                   n (∆p) =               ∆3        ≤ ∆10R ≤ n1/100 .
                            j=2                    j=2

    Let Vcycle denote the set of all vertices that are contained in a cycle of length less than R in H.
It holds that |Vcycle | ≤ n1/2 with probability at least 99/100. Next, we denote with Vdeg the set of
all vertices whose degree in some Hi is 0 or the degree is at least ∆10 in H. As the expected degree
of each node in Hi is at least 0.5∆2 and the expected degree of each node in H is at most ∆3 , a
Chernoff Bound followed by a union bound implies that a given vertex v ∈ V (H) is contained in
                                          2                                                          2
Vdeg with probability at most ∆ · e−Θ(∆ ) . Hence, the expected size of Vdeg is at most n · ∆ · e−Θ(∆ ) .
                                   99
Thus, with probability at least 100   it holds that |Vdeg | ≤ ∆n10 .
Next, we bound the probability that there exists a subset S consisting of d ∆2n10 e many vertices such
that
                                             X                      n
                                                   degH (v) ≥          .
                                                                    ∆2
                                             v∈S
                                                   P
    For a fixed set S, the expected value of         v∈S degH (v) is at most

                                             ∆3 |S|
                                                
                                                       n
                                                    ≤     .
                                             n   2    2∆2
    Hence, by a Chernoff Bound followed by a union bound, the probability that we have such a
set S is at most



                                                         21
                                    
                               n                2                10          2     1
                                       · e−Θ(n/∆ ) ≤ (e∆10 )d2n/∆ e · e−Θ(n/∆ ) ≤     .
                            d2n/∆10 e                                             100
   Next, we bound the probability that the size of the largest independent set in Hi is at least
dn/∆3/2 e for some i ∈ [∆]. We can upper bound the probability by


                                             (dn/∆3/2 e)              dn/∆3/2 e
                             
                       n                                      
                 ∆·             · 1 − ∆ 2
                                          /n      2
                                                          ≤ ∆   e∆ 3/2
                                                                                  e−Θ(n/∆)
                    dn/∆3/2 e
                                                                               3/2 )
                                                              ≤ eΘ(log(∆)n/∆           e−Θ(n/∆)
                                                              = e−Θ(n/∆)
                                                                 1
                                                              ≤     .
                                                                100
    Now, let Vrem := Vdeg ∪ Vcycle and denote with Vf ix the set of all vertices that have at least one
neighbor in Vrem . We can assume the following.
    • |Vrem | ≤ ∆2n10
    • |Vf ix | ≤ ∆n2
    • For each i ∈ [∆], the size of the largest independent set in Hi is at most ∆n3/2 .
    Now, let H 0 , H10 , . . . , H∆0 denote the graphs obtained from H, H , . . . , H by removing all the
                                                                                    1        ∆
vertices in Vrem . The girth of H 0 is at least R, the maximum degree of H 0 is at most ∆10 − 1 and
H 0 has at least n/2 vertices. Now, let V0 denote the set of vertices that have a degree of 0 in one of
the Hi0 ’s. As V0 ⊆ Vf ix , we can deduce that |V0 | ≤ |Vf ix |. Next, we iteratively do the following: as
long as there exists some vertex v ∈ V (H 0 ) and some i ∈ [∆] such that degHi0 (v) = 0, we add one
edge incident to v to Hi0 (and therefore H 0 ) such that the girth of H 0 is still at least 10R and the
maximum degree of H 0 is at most ∆10 . Note that we add at most |V0 |∆ ≤ ∆                     n
                                                                                                 edges in total. To
                                                                                            10 10R+1    √
show that we can always add such an edge, note that there are at most (∆ )                            ≤ n vertices
                                                                                   √      n
with a distance less than R to v. Hence, there are at least n/2 − n − ∆                      vertices with a degree
               10                0
of at most ∆ − 1 in H and a distance of at least 10R to v. Hence, we can add such an edge to
Hi0 (and therefore H 0 ) such that H 0 still has a maximum degree of at most ∆10 and a girth of at
least 10R. Now, let H 00 , H100 , . . . , H∆
                                           00 denote the graphs obtained after we have added all the edges.

The resulting graph H has at least n/2 vertices and the girth of H 00 is at least 10R. Moreover,
                              00

the degree of each vertex in Hi00 is at least 1 and the size of the largest independent set in Hi00 is at
                    00 )|
most ∆n3/2 < |V (H∆       . Hence, H100 , H200 , . . . , H∆
                                                          00 satisfy our desired properties.




   Next, we prove Theorem 5.10. The proof follows along the lines of [BFH+ 16]. It is in fact
simpler as one does not need to keep track of probabilities.

Proof. Assume that there is a t-round LOCAL algorithm A with t ≤ k that solves Sinkless Orien-
tation on an infinite ∆-regular tree that is properly ∆-edge colored and H(k, ∆)-labeled. We show
that then there is also a (t−1/2)-round LOCAL algorithm A0 for the same problem, that is, an algo-
rithm where the decision of each edge e = (u, v) depends on B(e, t − 1) := B(u, t − 1) ∪ B(v, t − 1).
The algorithm A0 considers all possible ways how B(u, t) \ B(e, t − 1) can be extended with an
H(k, ∆)-labeling and if there is one such extension such that A orients the half-edge (u, e) out,
then A0 orients e in the direction from u to v. The same holds for v and if neither case oc-
curs, e is oriented arbitrarily. Observe that it cannot happen that both B(u, t) \ B(e, t − 1) and

                                                        22
B(v, t) \ B(e, t − 1) can be extended with an H(k, ∆)-labeling such that A orients both (u, e) out
and (v, e) out as this would mean that A is not correct. Here we importantly use the fact that a
valid H-extension for B(u, t) \ B(e, t − 1) and a valid H-extension for B(v, t) \ B(e, t − 1) can be
naturally “glued” together so as to yield one valid H-extension. An analogous reasoning allows us
to transform A0 into a (t − 1)-round algorithm A00 .
    Repeating the above reasoning we conclude that a 0-round algorithm A∗ exists. Such an al-
gorithm decides for each vertex the orientation of its half-edges only based on its H(k, ∆)-label.
As for each vertex A∗ needs to orient at least one of its half-edges in the outward direction, we
can color each vertex of H(k, ∆) with a color from [∆] such that A∗ orients the edge with the
respective color outwards. By the pigeonhole principle, there exists a color c ∈ [∆] such that at
least a (1/∆)-fraction of vertices of H is colored with c. However, Definition 5.2 implies that the
set of vertices colored by c in H(k, ∆) is not independent in Hc . Hence, we get an example of a
two-node configuration where A∗ fails, a contradiction.




                                                23
