                                         Generalizing LCL Complexity Gaps to Unbounded Degree via
                                                       Monadic Second-Order Properties
                                                                           Chiara Piombi
                                                             CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
                                                                        Saarbrücken, Germany
                                                                      chiara.piombi@cispa.de
arXiv:2606.10693v1 [cs.DC] 9 Jun 2026




                                                                                        Abstract
                                                 The last decade of research on the LOCAL model has seen tremendous progress in un-
                                             derstanding locally checkable labeling (LCL) problems, culminating in an almost complete
                                             classification of the possible complexities LCL problems can exhibit. In particular, on undi-
                                             rected trees, Chang and Pettie showed that there is no LCL problem with complexity between
                                             ω(log n) and no(1) [CP17] and Chang showed that, for every positive integer k, there is no
                                             LCL problem with complexity between ω(n1/(k+1) ) and o(n1/k ) [Cha20]; additionally, which
                                             side of each gap a problem is found on is decidable.
                                                 While the class of LCL problems – which, roughly speaking, consists of problems for which
                                             the correctness of a solution can be described by a finite set of allowed node configurations,
                                             which in turn can be locally verified by a constant-time algorithm – includes many important
                                             problems, it has one major restriction: problems can be defined only on bounded degree
                                             graphs, which consequently restricts all the classification and gap results mentioned above.
                                                 In this work, we propose a generalization of LCL problems to unbounded degree using
                                             Presburger monadic second-order (PMSO) formulas; more specifically, we consider what we
                                             call Local PMSO (LPMSO) problems, i.e., problems whose correct solutions are both finitely
                                             described by a PMSO formula and locally verifiable by a LOCAL algorithm in constant time –
                                             this class contains many of the important problems studied in the LOCAL model but defines
                                             them on unbounded degree graphs. As our main result we prove that, on unbounded degree
                                             rooted trees, the aforementioned ω(log n)–no(1) and ω(n1/(k+1) )–o(n1/k ) complexity gaps
                                             (and their decidability) extend to the class of LPMSO problems.
                                                 We obtain our gap results by proving two theorems that may be of independent interest:
                                               1. We show that computing just a solution of an LPMSO problem is asymptotically as
                                                  hard as computing both a solution and a certificate for its correctness, if the certification
                                                  is based on the minimal automaton verifying the PMSO formula.
                                               2. By modifying the minimal verification automaton slightly, we create a so-called rational
                                                  multiset tree automaton whose run on the input rooted tree encodes both a solution
                                                  and a certificate for its correctness; then we show that computing a run of any rational
                                                  multiset tree automaton on a rooted tree is asymptotically equivalent to solving the
                                                  same problem on a rooted tree whose degree is bound by a constant depending only
                                                  on the problem description.

                                        Funding. This work is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Re-
                                        search Foundation) – Project number 534005335.

                                        Acknowledgements. I want to thank Sebastian Brandt and Gustav Schmid for insightful dis-
                                        cussions, and Jonathan Osser and Noa Izsak for answering my questions about logical formalism
                                        and automata theory.




                                                                                            1
1     Introduction
One of the central and most fruitful areas of research in the LOCAL model in the last decade is
the study of the possible complexities that problems from the class of so-called Locally Checkable
Labeling (LCL) can exhibit. This class includes many interesting problems, but has the major
drawback of being only defined on bounded-degree graphs. In this work, we propose a gener-
alization of the class of LCL problems to the unbounded-degree setting based on finite model
theory and automata theory, and provide gap results for our characterization – i.e., we show that
there are intervals of the complexity landscape into which no problems from our generalized class
falls.
     We begin by introducing the LOCAL model and discussing the literature on LCL problems
and their generalizations.

1.1   Background and previous work
The LOCAL model We consider Linial’s LOCAL model of distributed computing [Lin87],
where the input is a graph G = (V, E) representing a network with processors on each vertex
v ∈ V which can communicate over the edges e ∈ E. The computation proceeds in synchronous
rounds where each processor sends one message to each of its neighbors; there are no limitations
on message size or local computation power, and the complexity of an algorithm is the number
of rounds until all nodes terminate and output their own part of a global solution.
    We additionally assume that all nodes either know the graph size (the number n of vertices
of the graph) or a polynomial bound on it and are equipped with some way to distinguish
between nodes: in the deterministic LOCAL model, nodes are equipped with globally unique
IDs composed of O(log n) bits, while in the randomized LOCAL model nodes are equipped with
infinite strings of random bits generated independently. Under those assumptions, a LOCAL
algorithm that runs in T (n) rounds is equivalent to an algorithm that for each node v gathers
the T (n)-hop neighborhood of v to determine v’s output. We then refer to the complexity of a
problem in the LOCAL model as its locality.

Locally Checkable Labelling problems A problem is truly local when its locality is a
constant which does not depend on the size of the input graph; local problems are considered to
be efficiently solvable in the LOCAL model and they are, in a way, a distributed analogue of the
centralised problem class P. Similarly, a natural analogue of the NP class is the class of Locally
Checkable Labelings (LCL) problems defined by Naor and Stockmeyer [NS93]; these are problems
that can be verified in constant time by a distributed algorithm. Explicitly, LCLs are described
via a finite set of configurations (labeled r-hop neighborhoods for some finite n ≥ 0) such that
the overall solution is correct if and only if for every node v in the graph there is an isomorphism
between the r-hop neighborhood of v and one of the configurations. This description naturally
induces two restrictions: LCL problems are required to have finitely many input and output
labels and can only be defined on graphs whose maximum degree is bounded by a constant; this
is because all possible labels and degrees have to appear in the finitely many configurations.

Complexity landscape The complexity of LCL problems has been widely studied, especially
in the last 10 years (see [Bal+19b; Bal+21; Bra+17] amongst others). The most interesting
results to come out of this study are gaps, results that show no problem can have a complex-
ity strictly between two classes; gap results are extremely powerful, as they can be used to
automatically improve both upper bounds and lower bounds.
    Conversely, density results (like the ones found in [Bal+18]) show the lack of major gaps
by constructing a set of problems whose complexities form a dense set of the interval between
two functions. These two types of results together form what is referred to as the complexity
landscape of LCL problems; this complexity landscape is today almost completely understood

                                                 2
([Suo20] and Figure 1 for an overview). Even more information can be gathered by restricting

                                       DETERMINISTIC


                        dense                                         dense


           1     log log∗ n   log∗ n                          log n               n
                                                   ?
                                       log log n       TLLL
                                       RANDOMIZED


                Figure 1: The complexity landscape of LCLs on general graphs.

the types of graphs the problem is defined on: the complexity landscape of LCL problems is
fully understood for many graph classes, such as paths [Bal+19b], undirected trees [Cha20],
rooted trees [Bal+21], and grids [Bra+17]. We focus especially on undirected and rooted trees;
they have very similar complexity landscapes, as a problem on rooted trees can be encoded as
a problem on unrooted trees with inputs on the nodes – additionally, both have the interesting
property of containing countably many discrete complexity classes. Specifically, an LCL problem
on (both rooted and undirected) trees has deterministic complexity either

                    O(1), Θ(log∗ n), Θ(log n), or Θ(n1/k ) for some k ∈ N≥1 ,

or is unsolvable. The main difference lies in the randomized complexity: there exist problems on
undirected trees with deterministic complexity Θ(log n) and randomized complexity Θ(log log n),
such as sinkless orientation [Bal+23] but no such problems exist for rooted trees [Bal+21].

                                       DETERMINISTIC
                                                                        n1/k




           1                  log∗ n                          log n               n


                                            log log n
                                       RANDOMIZED


               Figure 2: The complexity landscape of LCLs on undirected trees.



                                                                        n1/k




           1                  log∗ n                          log n               n



Figure 3: The complexity landscape of LCLs on rooted trees; note that the randomized and
deterministic landscapes are the same.


                                                        3
Another focus of the research on distributed complexity gaps is decidability, by which we mean
whether an algorithm exists that for a given problem decides which side of a gap it lies on.
Herein lies another difference between the complexity landscape of rooted and undirected trees:
the complexity of LCLs on rooted trees is fully decidable, while only the “polynomial” gaps (the
ω(log n) − no(1) and ω(n1/(k+1) ) − o(n1/k ) gaps) are known to be decidable for unrooted trees.

Generalizing LCL problems As we have seen, Locally Checkable Labeling problems have a
nice and clean complexity landscape; however they are limited by the nature of their description.
We focus specifically on the fact they can only be defined for bounded degree graphs; most natural
problems, such as finding a maximal independent set (MIS) or a maximal matching, have graph-
theoretic descriptions that do not depend on the problem description – and even those who do,
such as (∆ + 1)-coloring, can be defined for non-constant values of the maximum degree ∆.
    Our objective is to generalize LCLs in a way that preserves some of the gap results described
above and contains as many problems as possible: this would allow us to use the gaps to boost
upper bound and lower bounds on the complexity of a problem on unbounded degrees as well.
What properties should this generalization have?
    First of all, we require our problems to be locally verifiable: we can trivially create problems
that are not locally verifiable but have complexity T (n) for any sublinear function T , by requiring
the nodes to output their T (n)-hop neighborhood.
    We could try to naturally define the class of all problems that are locally verifiable, without
any restriction on having a finite description, finite labels or bounded degree; however it was
shown in [Sch26, Theorem 1] that for any real number r ∈ (0, 1] there is such a problem with
complexity Θ(nr ) in unbounded degree trees. We then require our problems to have some form of
finite description – this is also an advantage when trying to decide the complexity of a problem,
as it allows the decidability algorithm to read the whole description.
    Lastly, we observe that even these restrictions are not enough to recover all of the above
mentioned graph results: we know that finding a MIS on unbounded degree trees has complexity
                                                                       ∗
Θ(log n/ log log n) ([BE08; Bal+19a]), which shows
                                                 √ that the ω(log n) to o(log n) gap does not
                                        ∗
hold (but a smaller one, i.e. a ω(log n) to o( log n) or o(log log n) could still hold). In this
paper we focus on the polynomial gaps for rooted trees.

Locally Finite Labeling problems One approach towards generalising LCL problems with
finite descriptions is Locally Finite Labeling problems, defined by Schmid in [Sch26]. LFL prob-
lems are described similarly to LCL problems, as a finite set of r-hop neighborhoods such that a
solution is correct if every node can find a morphism between its own r-hop neighborhood and
one of these configurations; however, LFL configurations mark some edges as “optional”: each
“optional” edge can be used by the morphism arbitrarily many times (including 0). This class
of problems has been shown to have decidable polynomial gaps.
    Many important problems on unbounded degree graphs can be expressed in this formalism,
such as finding a maximal independent set, k-coloring, and sinkless orientation; on the other
hand, problems whose description depends on arithmetic cannot always be described as LFLs.
One example is degree splitting, where each node is required to have as many blue neighbors as
red neighbors [Sch26, Section 1.2].

Meta-results on the theory of graphs Could we find some other way to finitely describe
a problem on unbounded degree trees? In this paper, we focus on problems whose solutions can
be described by a single formula in the monadic second-order (MSO) logic on trees, which are
assumed to be rooted, unordered and unranked. The relationship between trees and monadic
second-order logic is well-documented by Courcelle’s theorem [CE12], which states that every
MSO-definable property can be verified by a sequential algorithm on graphs of bounded treewidth
in linear time.


                                                 4
    Monadic second-order properties on trees and tree-like graphs have been studied before in
the context of distributed algorithms: Feuilloley, Bousquet and Pierron [FBP22] showed that
MSO properties for trees can be certified with constant-size certificates and verifiability radius
1, while Jauregui, Li, Montealegre and Todinca [Jau+18] showed that there is a CONGEST
implementation of Courcelle’s algorithm that can verify an MSO property on graphs of bounded
treewidth in Õ(D) rounds, where D is the diameter of the graph. Both of these results deal with
verification problems, meaning problems where we need to check whether a (possibly labeled)
graph has a defined property – such as whether a labeling is a correct solution to a problem,
or a graph has a certain structure. We will show that the relationship between MSO on trees
and tree automata is strong enough to define meta-theorems on construction problems; that
is, problem where you are required to construct a solution (usually a labeling) satisfying some
property described by the problem – in our case, through a logical formula.

Automata theory and Presburger definitions Automata theory appears in the proofs of
LOCAL complexity gaps on trees by Chang and Pettie ([CP17; Cha20]) as a way to formalize
the replacement of one tree with another which has a locally similar structure. Those results
use the bound on the maximum degree and constant checkability radius to construct the finite
states of the automaton, and so do not trivially generalize to the unbounded degree setting.
However, properties describable by MSO logic – and by some of its extensions – can be char-
acterized as properties recognizable by selected types of bottom-up tree automata (see [BT05]
for a review). We focus on the largest of these recognizable extensions: Presburger monadic
second-order logic (PMSO). Presburger formulas are able to describe simple arithmetic con-
straints on integer variables; Presburger monadic second-order logic on rooted trees allows us to
check those arithmetic constraints on the sets of children of a node – they can be checked by a
class of automata called rational multiset tree automata, where rational multiset languages are
roughly the multiset languages recognized by Presburger formulas.
    In this paper, we show how we can use the local verifiability induced by the automata to
obtain gaps for PMSO certification problems – meaning problems where a solution is given and
we want to compute a certificate of its correctness that is locally verifiable. For automata-
recognizable properties, this can be done by returning a run of the verifying automaton on
the rooted tree. Additionally, we show that for construction problems which are both PMSO-
definable and locally verifiable, we can find a certification problem which also encodes a valid
solution – and solving this certification problem is asymptotically exactly as hard as computing
a solution.

1.2   Organization
We start by giving a high-level overview of the results and proof techniques in Section 1.3,
concluding with some related open questions; then in Section 2 we give precise definitions for the
LOCAL model (deterministic and randomised), local verifiers, and the language of graphs. The
bulk of the paper, where we prove the main result, is Section 3; the proof overview contains more
specific references to its parts. Appendix A discusses the conversions between problems on rooted
and unrooted trees and between node-labeling and edge-labeling problems; Appendix B contains
some technical results about graph decompositions, and Appendix C contains an adaptation of
the proof of the Myhill-Nerode theorem to the class of rational multiset tree automata.

1.3   A tour of the results
Presburger monadic second-order construction problems We focus on problems de-
scribed by Presburger monadic second-order (PMSO) logic on rooted trees. PMSO is an exten-
sion of monadic second-order logic which allows for “linear” constraints described in terms of



                                                5
basic arithmetic (only using N, + and ≤) on the children of a node1 ; this allows us to define
problems that first-order or even monadic second-order formulas cannot, such as degree splitting
[HMN22] and its variants. As an example, consider a graph that is {B, R}-labeled (colored with
blue or red) – this is encoded by two unary relations (i.e. sets) B and R, so that “x is blue”
can be expressed as Bx. We can convert this unary relation to a second-order variable by the
monadic second-order formula
                                   ∃SB ∀x (x ∈ SB ) ↔ (Bx)
and we can do the same for the relation Rx (“x is red”) and the variable SR . Then the degree
splitting problem “the difference between the number of blue children and red children of each
node must be at most 1” (to account for nodes with an odd number of children) can be expressed
by the formula

                   ∀x (((x ∈ SB ) ↔ (Bx)) ∧ ((x ∈ SR ) ↔ (Rx)) ∧ x/φ(SB , SR )) ,

where φ is the Presburger formula

                                     φ(A, B) = |A| ≤ |B| ≤ |A| + 1 .

    We define the class of construction problems Π on rooted trees for which the property “the
graph G is correctly labeled with a solution of Π” is both describable by a PMSO formula and
locally decidable; we call these Local PMSO, or LPMSO construction problems. We observe
that the solutions to LCL problems can be described by first-order formulas – this is because
the statement “the r-hop neighborhood of vertex x is isomorphic to the finite graph A” can be
expressed by a first-order formula with free variable x, and we can simply require each x to satisfy
at least one of the finitely many isomorphism formulas to the allowed configurations. Then, any
LCL problem can be defined by a PMSO formula over bounded-degree rooted trees; conversely,
many unbounded-degree generalizations of natural LCLs can be described by PMSO formulas,
such as finding a MIS, a maximal matching, a k-coloring or degree splitting. However, this class
does not include the generalizations of problems for which the number of labels depends on the
maximum degree (i.e. is potentially unbounded), such as (∆ + 1)-coloring.
    The main result of this paper is that the Local PMSO class exhibits the same so-called
polynomial complexity gaps as the class of LCL problems on rooted trees.

Theorem 1.1. Let Π be a Local PMSO construction problem on rooted trees; then one of the
following holds:

       • Π is unsolvable, or

       • Π has deterministic and randomized LOCAL complexity O(log n), or

       • Π has deterministic and randomized LOCAL complexity Θ(n1/k ) for some k ∈ N≥1 .

Additionally, there is a sequential algorithm that can decide based only on the PMSO description
of Π which of those cases applies, and which k applies in the last case.

     The proof of this theorem takes up the majority of this work. The result is achieved by solving
what at first glance seems to be a harder problem: computing both a solution of Π and a one-
round verifiable certificate of the correctness of the solution (Theorem 1.2 + Lemma 1.3); then
showing that this new problem is not actually harder, as by choosing our certificates carefully,
we can compute them from a valid solution with a constant-round algorithm (Theorem 1.4).
     It is known that a MSO-definable property on trees can be certified with constant-size cer-
tificates [FBP22], and this can easily be extended to PMSO-definable properties on rooted trees;
   1
    This can be extended further to refer to all neighbors of a node on undirected general graphs; however, the
rooted tree formulation is required for the automata-theoretic characterization to hold.


                                                      6
the certificates are the states of a specific type of bottom-up automata called rational multiset
tree automata (RatMTA). These automata traverse a rooted tree from the leaves up to the root
– a run is a labeling which assigns to each node the state the automaton was in when it reached
that note. Seidl, Schwentick, and Muscholl [SSM03] proved that a property defined by a PMSO
formula φ is also recognized by a rational multiset tree automaton A – meaning for every tree
T which satisfies φ, there is a run of A on T which gives an accepting state at the root.

    Automata certification problems As the first result, we show that automata certifica-
tion problems on rooted trees exhibit polynomial gaps: for any RatMTA A on Σ-labeled rooted
trees we define the associated automata certification problem of computing a run of A on any
instance Σ-labeled rooted tree.

Theorem 1.2. Let A = (Σ, Q, δ, F ) be a rational multiset tree automaton, and let ΠA be the
problem of computing a run of A on Σ-labeled rooted trees; then one of the following holds:

   • ΠA is unsolvable, or

   • ΠA has deterministic and randomized LOCAL complexity O(log n), or

   • ΠA has deterministic and randomized LOCAL complexity Θ(n1/k ) for some k ∈ N≥1 .

Additionally, there is a sequential algorithm that can decide based only on the description of A
which of those cases applies, and which k applies in the last case.

    We give an overview of the proof of Theorem 1.2, which takes up all of Section 3.4. This proof
is an adaptation of the ω(log n) − no(1) and ω(n1/(k+1) ) − o(n1/k ) gap results for undirected trees
from Chang and Pettie [CP17; Cha20]; the central difference induced by the unbounded-degree
setting is the definition of classes and types. We quickly review the crucial definitions from these
proofs.

   • A partial Q-labeling of a graph G = (V, E) is a labeling with the symbols of Q ⊎ {∗};
     nodes labeled with ∗ are considered unlabeled. A partial labeling l′ : V → Q ⊎ {∗} can
     be completed (or extended to a complete labeling) if there is a labeling l : V → Q which
     agrees with l′ on all nodes that are unlabeled; formally, if l′ (v) ̸= ∗ then l′ (v) = l(v).

   • A pole of an undirected tree T is simply a special node; we refer to trees with one or two
     poles as unipolar and bipolar respectively.

   • The class of a partially labeled unipolar or bipolar tree with respect to a LCL problem Π
     is the set of all labelings of the r-hop neighborhood(s) (where r is the verifiability radius
     of Π) of the pole(s) which can be extended to valid labelings extended to full labelings of
     the unipolar tree which are valid according to Π and agree with the partial labeling.

   • A bipolar tree H can be interpreted as a string of unipolar trees with a path connecting
     their poles, where the first and last node of this path are the poles of H; the string of types
     of those unipolar trees is the type of H. Note that two trees with the same type have the
     same class.

The two central properties of these definitions are: one, we can replace a unipolar or bipolar
graph that is connected to a larger graph only by the poles by another of the same class without
impacting whether the partial labeling can be completed. Two, there are finitely many classes
of both unipolar and bipolar trees: this is because they are sets of Q-labelings of trees of height
r and bounded maximum degree. These two properties can be used to define an automaton on
the classes of unipolar trees, but the second one clearly does not hold in the unbounded degree
setting.


                                                 7
    However, in this proof, we are given a rational multiset tree automaton from the start: we
show how we can use it and adapt it to give a new automata-theoretic definition of types, which
act as a generalization of the concept of both types and classes defined above – satisfying both
the replacement and finiteness properties.
    In fact, we show another strong property of automata-theoretic types: they can be used to
reduce the degree of our instance, allowing us to use results from the LCL version of the proof
directly. Specifically, we can determine a value ∆ (which only depends on the description of the
rational multiset tree automaton we start with) such that every type of unipolar and bipolar
trees – which in this context are called tree types and context types respectively – contains a tree
of maximum degree ∆; even stronger, for each unipolar and bipolar tree, we can find a subtree
of maximum degree ∆ of the same type.
    We will use this degree reduction procedure to argue that our certification problem is not
harder than the corresponding problem on graphs of maximum degree at most ∆ – which is an
LCL, since our certification can be verified in one round by the transition function. To do so, we
apply the classification results from the Chang-Pettie proofs indirectly: if we have a O(log n)
or O(n1/k ) round algorithms for the restricted LCL problem, then we have a so-called a feasible
function of suitable strength, which allows us to precompute labels for some parts of our tree. We
use this feasible function to describe a O(log n) or O(n1/k ) algorithm for the unbounded degree
certification problem. This structure is robust: both the Chang-Pettie classification and the
algorithms we describe can be implemented in both the deterministic and randomized LOCAL
model.
    We give further details on this proof in the paragraphs below.

    Automata-theoretic types Throughout this paper, we refer to the subtree rooted at a
node v of a rooted tree; this is the subtree induced by v and all of its descendants. We can
interpret a subtree rooted at v as a unipolar tree with a pole at the root v – in general, in this
rooted framework, we require unipolar trees to have their pole at the root.
    Conceptually, we define the type of a node v of a rooted tree as the set of all states of v that
can be extended to a valid (but not necessarily accepting) run of the subtree rooted at v – in
practice, we define the type of a node v of an unlabeled tree as the state it is assigned by the
deterministic and complete version of the automaton A we start from, called Adet . If the set of
states of A is Q, the set of states of Adet is 2Q , the set of all subsets of Q. Note that when we
talk about “unlabeled” and “partially labeled” trees here, we are referring to output labels, i.e.
automaton states: the trees might still be labeled by input labels in Σ.
    We extend the definition of Adet to work on rooted trees which are partially labeled with
states of A, such that a node that already has a label q is either assigned state {q} (if there is a
valid labeling of its rooted subtree which agrees with the partial labeling) or state ∅ (if there is
no such labeling) – we call this new automaton Alab , and define the type of a partially labeled
rooted tree as the state that Alab assigns to its root (which is unique, as Alab is deterministic
and complete). The full definitions of Adet and Alab can be found in Section 3.4.1; the relation
between this definition and the conceptual definition we provide at the start can be seen in
Lemma 3.29.
    What about bipolar trees? In this rooted framework, we require a bipolar tree to have a
consistently directed path between the poles – we can then relate bipolar trees to the automata-
theoretic concept of a context: a rooted tree with one specifically marked leaf, called a variable
node. We denote a context as C[x], where x represents the variable node – given a rooted tree
T , we can substitute T into C[x] (denoted as C[T ]) by identifying the variable node of C[x] with
the root of the tree T . We can interpret a context as a bipolar tree with one pole at the root
and one at the variable node.
    Contexts allow us to define the replacement properties of types, which are discussed exten-
sively in Section 3.3 – roughly, thanks to the Alab automaton for partially labeled rooted trees


                                                 8
we constructed, we can replace a rooted (unipolar) tree with a rooted (unipolar) tree of the
same type in every context (overall graph) without affecting whether the partial labeling can be
completed. For each context C[x] we can find a function between types Type(T ) 7→ Type(C[T ])
– the type of a context (bipolar tree) can be identified with this function, of which there are
finitely many. We show that we can replace a context (bipolar tree) by one of the same type in
every context composition (overall graph) without affecting whether the partial labeling can be
completed.
    Large contexts can be hard to efficiently analyze, so we restrict to direct contexts, meaning
contexts where the variable node is an immediate child of the root; every context C can be
expressed as a string of direct contexts C1 , . . . , Ck , each corresponding to a node along the
directed path from root to variable node, such that C = C1 ◦ . . . ◦ Ck . This roughly corresponds
to the string of classes of unipolar trees which defines a bipolar trees in the Chang-Pettie
definitions.

    Degree reductions Rational multiset tree automata have transitions defined by rational
sets of multisets. Rational sets of multisets can be equivalently defined as sets of multisets
definable by a Presburger formula, or as semilinear sets of multisets – finite unions of linear
sets. A linear set of multisets is a set of the form

                                  L = M0 + NM1 + . . . + NMk ,

where M0 , M1 , . . . , Mk are multisets and + represents multiset union. M0 is the base multiset
or base vector.
     We focus on tree types and direct context types; the type of a partially labeled tree or direct
context is fully defined by the multiset of tree types of its (non-variable) children, the input
label of its root, and the partial output label of its root. We can then identify types with sets of
multisets (containing all multisets that appear in some tree or context of that type) – for tree
types, the set corresponding to the root input-output label pair (i, s) state q is the semilinear set
δlab ((i, s), q). We prove in Lemma 3.18 that the set representing a context type is also semilinear.
     Semilinear sets have a useful property (Lemma 3.6): there is a value d such that for every
multiset M in the semilinear set there is an element M ′ ⊆ M also in the semilinear set of size
≤ d – d is simply the length of the largest base multiset of a linear component, as the base
multiset of a linear set is contained in all multisets of a linear set.
     By using this property a node v of a rooted tree which knows the types of all its children
can compute its own tree type, and find a subset of its children that would define the same tree
type of size ≤ d. We can set ∆R as the largest d over all possible types, and define a procedure
ForgetChildrenR (v) in which v “forgets” about the children which are not required to define its
type, reducing its degree to ≤ ∆R + 1 (as the possible edge between v and its parent is not
affected) without changing its type.
     Similarly, if a node v knows the types of all its children but one, it can treat itself as a
context and the unknown child as a variable node; we can then repeat the procedure above for
context types, define ∆C as the maximum d over all finite context types, and define a procedure
ForgetChildrenC (v) in which v “forgets” about some of its children and reduces its degree to
≤ ∆C + 2 (as the edges between v’s parent, v and the unknown child are unaffected) without
changing its type.
     The finite representation of types in general is discussed in Section 3.3.1; while the degree
reduction procedure is detailed later in Section 3.4.2.

    Feasible functions Thanks to the degree reduction procedures we defined, we are able to
utilize tools that were defined to solve LCL problems on bounded-degree graphs – in particular,
feasible functions. Roughly speaking, a function is feasible on unlabeled (with regards to the
output labeling) bipolar trees if it allows us to choose labels for the middle nodes of “long

                                                 9
enough” bipolar trees in a way that can always be extended to a full labeling of any unlabeled
tree containing it. However, if we want to apply this feasible function multiple times, we need
to define it on partially labeled bipolar trees – this is not always possible for all partially labeled
bipolar trees. Intuitively, every application of the feasible function might create new types of
bipolar tree – a function is k-feasible roughly if it can be applied k times in a row, and ∞-feasible
if it is feasible over all partially labeled bipolar trees. A more detailed definition can be found
in Section 3.4.3.
     Now, consider the problem ΠA,∆ , which is the restriction of ΠA to rooted trees of maximum
degree at most ∆ = max{∆R + 1, ∆C + 2}. Clearly, ΠA,∆ cannot be harder than ΠA , as any
algorithm for ΠA needs to solve all instances of ΠA,∆ .
     We convert ΠA,∆ to a problem of the same complexity on undirected trees (see Appendix A
for details) and use the following results from the Chang-Pettie proofs: ΠA,∆ can be solved in
O(log n) rounds if and only if a ∞-feasible function exists for ΠA,∆ , and similarly ΠA,∆ can
be solved in O(n1/k ) rounds if and only if a k-feasible function exists for ΠA,∆ . We argue that
we can use these feasible functions to obtain O(log n) and O(n1/k ) algorithms for ΠA as well –
this is roughly equivalent to claiming that we can use an algorithm for ΠA,∆ to solve ΠA , but
without being able to treat the algorithm as a black-box.

    Algorithm We describe the algorithm used to solve ΠA ; the technical description, as well
as correctness and complexity analysis, can be found in Section 3.4.4.
    During the preprocessing step, we can compute a description of Alab , as well as the value of
∆ by brute-force enumeration of the finitely many tree types and context types. Then we can
compute the exact LCL description of ΠA,∆ over undirected trees, and use the results from Chang
and Chang-Pettie to decide its complexity and explicitly compute a suitable feasible function f
– including the value ℓ, which depends only on the description of ΠA,∆ , such that f is feasible
for all bipolar trees of length ∈ [ℓ, 2ℓ].
    We compute a parametrized decomposition of our unlabeled rooted tree instance T = (V, E)
with parameters γ, ℓ, L, which is an ordered partition of the vertex set V in

                             R1 < C1 < R2 < . . . < RL < CL < RL+1

with the following properties:

   1. for every i ∈ [1, . . . , L + 1], the subgraph induced by Ri is a forest of rooted tree of height
      at most γ such that only the parent of the roots might be in a higher layer, and

   2. for every i ∈ [1, . . . , L], the subgraph induced by Ci is a forest such that every connected
      component is a directed path of length ∈ [ℓ, 2ℓ], and only the starts/ends might have a
      parent/child in a higher layer (respectively).

Aside from the parameters of this decomposition, the algorithm is the same for both the O(log n)
case and O(n1/k ) case – we apply the feasible function on the layers Ci iteratively, so the number
of layers cannot be higher than the “strength” of the feasible function. If f is a ∞-feasible function
(equivalently, ΠA,∆ has complexity O(log n)) we compute a (1, ℓ, O(log n)) decomposition in
O(log n) rounds; if f is a k-feasible function (equivalently, ΠA,∆ has complexity O(n1/k )) we
compute a (O(n1/k ), ℓ, k)-decomposition in O(n1/k ) rounds – details on how we compute the
decompositions can be found in Appendix B.
     Then, we can compute the types (according to Alab ) of all nodes going “up” the layers: we
can compute the types of a layer Ri in O(γ) rounds by brute force, as long as we know the types
of all nodes in the previous layers – as we do, each node applies the procedure ForgetChildrenR
to virtually reduce its own degree to ≤ ∆. When we reach a Ci layer, assuming we know the
types of all nodes of previous layer, we can compute the types of nodes of Ci as direct contexts –
we apply the degree reduction procedure to them as well, virtually reducing their degree to ≤ ∆.

                                                  10
Now each connected component of Ci represents a bipolar tree of length ∈ [ℓ, 2ℓ] and maximum
degree ≤ ∆: we can apply the feasible function f for ΠA,∆ to assign labels to the middle nodes
of the bipolar tree in a way that will not result in an unextendable labeling – which tells us their
type according to Alab . Then we can compute the types of all nodes of the bipolar tree which
are ancestors of the labeled nodes, while nodes which are descendants can wait to compute their
type until the last layer, since their parents do not need to wait for them anymore. This takes
O(ℓ) rounds, and we repeat the whole process for each layer, taking O((γ + ℓ)L) rounds.
    Once we have computed the types of all nodes in the (now partially labeled) graph according
to Alab , we can choose an accepting state for the root from its type (this must exist due to
the feasibility of the function – see Lemma 3.30). Then all nodes that have selected a state
(through the prelabeling or by being the root) can choose a label for their children, including
the children that were temporarily “forgotten” to reduce the degree, which then choose a label
for their children, and so on – we can show that every node is the O((γ + ℓ)L)-hop descendant
of a prelabeled node, so this takes O((γ + ℓ)L) rounds and achieves a valid labeling. The
O((γ + ℓ)L) complexity corresponds to O(n1/k ) for γ ∈ O(n1/k ), ℓ ∈ O(1), L = k and to O(log n)
for γ, ℓ ∈ O(1), L ∈ O(log n).
    This completes the proof of Theorem 1.2.

    Encoding labels as states Because every PMSO property can be recognized by a rational
multiset tree automaton, we could use Theorem 1.2 to compute a certificate for an existing
solution – we show that we can instead use it to compute both a solution and a certificate of
its correctness. Specifically, we will find an automaton which does not certify the property “is
this labeling a valid solution for Π?” but instead “does there exist a valid labeling of this graph
according to Π?”. The details of this construction can be found in Section 3.5; the main result
from that section that we will use to prove Theorem 1.1 is Lemma 1.3.
Lemma 1.3. Let A = (Σin × Σout , Q, δ, F ) be a rational multiset tree automaton recognising a
Σin ×Σout -labeled rooted tree property G; then there is a RatMTA A′ = (Σin , Σout ×Q, δ ′ , Σout ×F )
which recognises the language of all Σin -labeled rooted trees T such that there exists a Σout -labeling
of T such that:
   • T labeled with the resulting Σin × Σout -labeling is in G (is recognized by A), and

   • a valid run of A′ consists of a valid Σout -labeling and a run of A verifying the correctness
     of this labeling.
   Together, Theorem 1.2 and this result show that the polynomial gaps hold for problems
requiring us to compute both a solution and a certificate of the correctness of this solution. This
problem is at least as hard as computing only a solution – the last remaining step is showing
that they actually have the same complexity.

    Minimal automaton Note that up to this point, we have required the correctness of our
solution to be described by a PMSO sentence (equivalently, certifiable by a rational multiset tree
automaton), but not locally verifiable; let us now assume we have a property G which is both
PMSO-definable and locally decidable with radius r.
    By the result of Seidl, Schwentick, and Muscholl [SSM03] we are guaranteed that some
rational multiset tree automaton exists which can recognize G. However, not every RatMTA
recognizing G will allow us to efficiently compute certificates – we provide an example below.
    Let Π be a very simple problem: we want to label a rooted tree without inputs with the
label T . No other conditions are given, and there is a 0-round LOCAL algorithm that outputs
T on each node – which is trivially O(log n). We define a rational multiset tree automaton
that recognises the language T of T -labeled rooted trees: AT = ({T }, {0, 1}, δT , {0, 1}) where
δ(T, 0) = M({1}) (all multisets composed only of 1s) and δ(T, 1) = M({0}) (all multisets

                                                  11
composed only of 0s). Those sets are semilinear (in fact, they are linear) and so this is a valid
RatMTA; a run of AT is a 2-coloring of the rooted tree, which always exists for every rooted
tree – since the automaton accepts every state, this automaton accepts every tree. However,
computing a 2-coloring of a rooted tree takes Ω(n) rounds in the LOCAL model [Bal+21]. The
result we were trying to achieve – computing a solution and a certificate is not harder than
computing only a solution – is then false for this specific choice of automaton.
    Our example purposefully constructed a wasteful automaton, and we can see that the lan-
guage T could be more easily recognized by a one-state automaton – then, we could compute
a run of it in 0 rounds. To avoid such wasteful constructions, we need to work on the simplest
possible automaton; this corresponds to the automata-theoretic concept of minimal (by number
of states) deterministic and complete automaton. For classical (ranked, ordered) bottom-up tree
automata, the existence and uniqueness of the minimal automaton is guaranteed by the Myhill-
Nerode theorem: we prove a version of it for rational multiset tree automata on unranked,
unordered trees in Appendix C.
    The states of the minimal automaton are in bijection with the equivalence classes of a relation
depending only on the property, denoted ≡G , which is the coarsest context-free equivalence; two
trees T1 and T2 are equivalent iff for every context C[x] we have C[T1 ] ∈ G ⇔ C[T2 ] ∈ G.
In simpler words, T1 ≡G T2 if we can replace a rooted subtree T1 by T2 while preserving the
correctness of the labeling; as we have observed during the previous proofs, this is in general
true for trees of the same type, meaning the same state of the root, so the coarsest (minimal
number of equivalence classes) such equivalence relation corresponds to the automata with the
minimal number of states.

     Locally computing states This replacement property is in fact the same that underlies
the proof for the bounded degree gaps; however, in that case, two partially labeled unipolar
trees are equivalent roughly speaking if the 2r-hop neighborhoods of their poles are isomorphic
and any partial labeling of this isomorphic neighborhood can be extended in one tree if and only
if it can be extended in the other. In the unbounded degree setting, there are infinitely many
equivalence classes for this relation – however, because it satisfies the replacement property, this
neighborhood-based equivalence is a refinement of the relation ≡G defined above; by restrict-
ing to fully labeled trees, this implies that two correctly labeled trees with isomorphic 2r-hop
neighborhoods of the root have the same type in the minimal automaton.
     We can then build a very simple reduction from our original problem (“find a correct solution
for Π”) to the following problem: find both a correct solution for Π and a run of the minimal
automaton certifying that solution. By Lemma 1.3 we know this can be expressed as a single
automaton certification problem on unlabeled trees, and by Theorem 1.2 we know these problems
have polynomial gaps.

Theorem 1.4. Let Π = (Σin , Σout , G) be a Local PMSO problem with checkability radius k and
let A = (Σin × Σout , Q, δ, F ) be the minimal deterministic and complete RatMTA recognising G.
Denote GQ the graph language of (Σin × Σout × Q)-labeled rooted trees such that for each G ∈ GQ :

  1. the underlying Σin × Σout -labeled graph of G is in G, and

  2. the underlying Q-labeled graph of G is the run of A on its underlying Σin × Σout -labeled
     graph.

Then given a correct solution to Π, we can compute the run of A which accepts it in 2k + 2
rounds; equivalently, Π and Π′ = (Σin , Σout × Q, GQ ) have the same asymptotic complexity.

   Together Theorem 1.2, Lemma 1.3 and Theorem 1.4 form a full proof of Theorem 1.1.




                                                12
1.4   Open questions
The central result of this paper is a step towards a possible generalization for LCL problems based
on finite model theory and automata theory; however, the use of bottom-up tree automata forces
us to restrict the results to rooted trees. In Section 2.3 we propose a generalization of the PMSO
logic – usually defined only on rooted trees – to general graphs; however, without the directional
input of the rooting, we cannot easily generalize the automata-theoretic characterization as well.
We conjecture that by using a suitable generalization of bottom-up tree automata – possibly
inspired by alternating distributed graph automata defined by Reiter in [Rei15] – we could extend
the gap results to undirected trees. We leave this for future work.
    Similarly, it is possible that our choice of assumptions on local decidability could be improved,
giving us a larger class of problems exhibiting the same gaps; LD∗ is the weakest notion of local
decidability, which does not allow the verifier to know the total size of the graph or the values of
the unique IDs. The graph size especially needs to be heavily taken into account when proving the
replacement properties of types, which are fundamental to the proof of Theorem 1.4, especially
the degree reduction procedures.
    We speculate that stronger notions of local decidability might actually falsify the gap result
– that is, that there is a PMSO-definable problem on rooted trees which can only be locally
verified by an algorithm which is aware of the size of the graph, and which has complexity Θ(nr )
for some r ∈ (0, 1) which is not of the form r = 1/k.
    Additionally, this paper focuses on the so-called “polynomial” gaps – many questions about
the full complexity landscape of this class are still open. Are there any Local PMSO problems
of complexity between ω(1) and O(log∗ n)? Is there a difference between the randomized and
deterministic complexities of Local PMSO problems on unbounded-degree rooted trees? Are
other common techniques used to prove results on LCL problems – such as round elimination –
applicable to Local PMSO problems? We speculate that many such techniques can be proven
to work in suitably large classes of problems described by logical formulas, establishing a class
of meta-theorems for the LOCAL model.


2     Definitions, notation, and assumptions
In this section we review some preliminaries on the LOCAL model and finite model theory.

2.1   Local computation
We refer to the standard LOCAL model as defined in [Lin92]. Specifically, we refer to two
variants of it: the first is the deterministic LOCAL model, where every node of the input graph
G is provided with a globally unique ID from the interval [1, . . . , nc ] where n is the number of
nodes of G and c ≥ 1 is a known constant; additionally, each node is aware of the exact value of
n.
    The second variant is the randomized LOCAL mode, where nodes are not provided unique
IDs, but instead access to a perfectly random coin toss, where each coin is independent of the
others; equivalently, each node is provided an endless string of random bits. Nodes are still
aware of the exact value of n, and the solution of the algorithm is required to be correct with
probability at least 1 − n1 over the probability space of all possible coin results.
    For most of this paper, we focus on node labeling problems: we assume our graph is simple
trees, and that we only care about whether an edge exists or not; we do not get inputs or assign
outputs to them, except for a possible orientation. This is because – up to some graph operations
that can be simulated internally in the nodes – problems with inputs and outputs on edges and
half-edges can be transformed into problems on nodes only. See Appendix A for a more detailed
description of this construction.



                                                 13
    Additionally, we discuss the issue of solvability: throughout this paper, we assume a problem
is solvable if it can be solved on every instance of the considered graph class. We denote a
problem as weakly solvable if it can be solved on all but finitely many graphs, or equivalently if
there exists a constant n0 such that it can be solved on all graphs with more than n0 vertices
– this is the definition of solvability that is often used in the literature. Observe however that
a weakly solvable problem can be converted into a solvable problem at the cost of increasing
both the complexity and verifiability radius (i.e. the complexity of a distributed verifier for the
solution; see definition below) by n0 , such that an algorithm can always recognize if the instance
given is unsolvable and output some error. If a LOCAL problem is unsolvable for infinitely many
instances – equivalently, for at least one instance of infinitely many graph sizes – we say it is
unsolvable.

2.2   Local verifiers
We discuss local verification following the notation from [FHK12; Fra+13], with one major
difference: we do not assume our instances are connected graphs. This is not relevant in the
context of undirected or rooted trees, as all trees are assumed to be connected; but it is relevant to
defining the class of local first-order problems. This is because connectivity is not axiomatizable
by a first-order sentence; when working with monadic second-order or higher logic, connectivity
can be required in the problem description itself.

Definition 2.1. An instance is a pair (G, x) where G = (V, E) is a simple graph and x is a
function V → {0, 1}∗ assigning to every node a binary input string, called a label.

Definition 2.2. A graph property (or graph language) is a decidable class of instances.

Definition 2.3. We define a generalised graph construction problem as a tuple Π = (Σin , Σout , G)
where:

   • Σin is a finite set of input labels,

   • Σout is a finite set of output labels, and

   • G is a property of Σin × Σout -labeled graphs.

An instance for Π is a Σin -labeled graph (G, λin ), and a solution to Π is a Σout -labeling λout of
G such that (G, λin × λout ) is in G.

   Each construction problem is naturally associated with a decision problem, that is the one
that checks whether (G, λin ×λout ) ∈ G (decides G) as a language; however, multiple construction
problems can be associated with the same decision problem.

Definition 2.4. A distributed verifier for a graph property P is a distributed algorithm A with
output space {“yes”,“no”} such that, for all graphs G we have

                               G ∈ P ⇔ ∀v ∈ V A(G, x, v) = “yes”

meaning, A outputs “yes” on all nodes if and only if G ∈ L.

    There has been a large volume of discussion about the role of identifiers and knowledge of
size(G) have on the class of locally decidable problems; see [FHK12; Fra+13]. We choose to
restrict local verifiers in a way that is analogous to LCL problems: the allowed configurations,
and so the local verifier, do not depend on the ID assignment or on the knowledge of size(G).
However, the algorithm can use the uniqueness of IDs (and not their value) to precisely determine
the topology of the graph; this is the deterministic anonymous LOCAL model defined in [FHK12].


                                                  14
   Let t : N → N be a function; we define the class of Locally Decidable problems in time t
(denoted LD∗ (t)) as the class of all graph properties that can be decided by a distributed verifier
that takes at S
              most t(n) communication rounds, where n is the size of the gaph. We define
LD∗ (O(t)) := c∈N LD∗ (c · t); finally, we define LD∗ := LD∗ (O(1)) as the class of all problems
that can be decided by a distributed verifier in constant rounds.

2.3    Axiomatizable graph properties
To work within a logic formalism, we must first establish a vocabulary and axioms for the theory
of graphs. A (finite, simple, unlabeled) graph is commonly represented as a pair (V, E) where
V is a finite set of vertices/nodes and E ⊆ V × V is a set of edges; we can interpret it as a
structure on an vocabulary containing a single binary symbol E, where E(x, y) means there is a
(directed) edge from vertex x to vertex y (often denoted as xEy or child(x, y) when discussing
rooted trees).
     First-order logic (FO) allows us to build formulas using a chosen vocabulary, equality (=),
boolean symbols (∨, ∧, ¬) and quantifiers (∃, ∀) only over the elements of the “universe” V (i.e.
the vertices). Conversely, second-order logic allows us to define second-order variables, which
are sets of tuples of elements of V , and quantify over them.
     Second-order logic is more powerful in the sense that it can describe many more properties
of graphs; however, this expressive power comes at a cost, as full second-order logic can express
enough arithmetic to fall under Gödel’s famous incompleteness theorems. Throughout this
paper we instead work in monadic second-order logic (MSO), which is generated by the symbols
of first-order logic plus quantifiers only on sets (i.e. 1-tuples) of variables. Importantly, this does
not allow us to quantify over pairs of vertices, i.e. to define sets of edges or functions between
vertices.
     We say a graph property is definable by a type of logic if there exists a single sentence (a
formula where every variable is defined by a quantifier) in that logic such that the property is
the set of all graphs that satisfy this sentence; those are called the models of φ and denoted
M od(φ). Note that as most logic formalisms are closed under conjunction, being defined by one
or finitely many sentences is equivalent.
     Some examples of first-order axioms are the graph being loopless, undirected, or of bounded
constant degree; some more complex properties, like being connected or being a tree, can be
described by monadic second-order logic but not first-order logic.
     Additionally, we often work with graphs labeled by a finite alphabet Σ, which are structures
on a vocabulary containing the binary symbol E and unary symbols {Ss }s∈Σ such that Ss (x)
(denoted x ∈ s) represents the vertex x being labeled s. To make this a proper labeling, a
monadic second-order axiom2 is required: Part({Ss }s∈Σ ), where
                                           _
            Part(S1 , . . . , Sk ) := ∀x :    x ∈ S1 ∧        (x is part of at least one set)
                                              i∈[1,...,k]
                            ^
                                          (x ∈ Si ) → ¬(x ∈ Sj )   (x is not in two sets at once)
                     i,j∈[1,...,k],i̸=j

Note that this is a valid (finite) formula only if Σ is finite.
Definition 2.5. We call Presburger formulas over a set of integer variables V those generated
by V, N, +, ≤ and divk (p) for all k ∈ Z+ .
    Crucially, Presburger formulas can encode linear multiplication (i.e. multiplication by a
constant) but do not allow general multiplication (i.e. multiplying two variables) – Presburger
arithmetic is not expressive enough to fall under Gödel’s incompleteness theorems.
   2
    As the second-order variables here are unary relations in the vocabulary and not really variables, Part can
also be written as a first-order formula.


                                                            15
Definition 2.6. We call Presburger MSO (PMSO) formulas on the language of rooted trees those
generated by MSO syntax augmented by propositions of the type x/φ, where φ is a Presburger
formula on the set of integer variables V = {|X| : X is a second-order variable}. The formula
x/φ holds in some directed graph under a valuation ρ if the valuation µ mapping each variable
|X| from φ to the cardinality of ρ(X) ∩ children(ρ(x)) is a solution for φ.

    In other words, PMSO can capture complex relationship between sets (defined by Presburger
formulas), but those sets are restricted to the children of a given node. Presburger monadic
second-order formulas are usually defined only over rooted trees – we propose a natural extension
of their definition to general undirected graphs.

Definition 2.7. We call undirected Presburger MSO (uPMSO) formulas on the language of undi-
rected graphs those generated by MSO syntax augmented by propositions of the type x/φ, where
φ is a Presburger formula on the set of integer variables V = {|X| : X is a second-order variable}.
The formula x/φ holds in some graph under a valuation ρ if the valuation µ mapping each vari-
able |X| from φ to the cardinality of ρ(X) ∩ neighbors(ρ(x)) is a solution for φ.

   We will specifically look at the intersection of those classes with the class of locally verifiable
problems defined above.

Definition 2.8. We define the class of Local First-Order (LFO) problems as the set of all graph
languages which are axiomatizable by a first-order sentence and verifiable by a LOCAL algorithm
in constant-time; formally, LFO = FO ∩ LD∗ . Similarly, we define the classes of

    • Local Monadic Second-Order problems (LMSO),

    • Local Presburger-Monadic Second-Order problems (LPMSO), and

    • Local undirected Presburger-Monadic Second-Order problems (LuPMSO).


3    Local monadic second-order problems
The objective of this section is to prove that the class of Local Presburger Monadic Second-
Order problems on rooted trees has a complexity landscape with polynomial gaps, similar to the
bounded degree case (see [Bal+21]).

Theorem 1.1. Let Π be a Local PMSO construction problem on rooted trees; then one of the
following holds:

    • Π is unsolvable, or

    • Π has deterministic and randomized LOCAL complexity O(log n), or

    • Π has deterministic and randomized LOCAL complexity Θ(n1/k ) for some k ∈ N≥1 .

Additionally, there is a sequential algorithm that can decide based only on the PMSO description
of Π which of those cases applies, and which k applies in the last case.

    We will prove this in two steps: first, in Section 3.4 we show that the related problem ΠQ
of computing both a valid output labeling and an automata-based certificate of correctness has
one of the given complexities; ΠQ is trivially harder than Π, but in Section 3.6 we show that a
constant-round reduction from Π to ΠQ exists, and so they have the same asymptotic complexity.




                                                 16
3.1    Background: rational sets
We follow the notations from [BT05] and [CMM00]; to compare their results, we use semilinear
sets. We use M(Q) to denote the set of multisets of elements of Q.

Definition 3.1. A subset L of Nk is said to be linear if it is of the form

               L = u0 + Nu1 + . . . + Nun = {u0 + t1 u1 + . . . + tn un | t1 , . . . , tn ∈ N}

for some u0 , . . . , un ∈ Nk . In particular, u0 is called the base vector of L. A subset of Nk is said
to be semilinear if it is a finite union of linear subsets.

   We can identify a multiset M over a finite alphabet Σ (with a fixed order Σ = {s1 , . . . , sk })
with a vector in Nk where the i-th element represents the multiplicity of si . This is called the
Parikh vector of M ; we do not distinguish between M and its Parikh vector, and refer to a
multiset language as semilinear if and only if its Parikh image is semilinear.

Definition 3.2. The family Rat(M(A)) of rational multiset languages is the smallest subset of
P(M(A)) which:

   • contains all finite languages; every finite subset of M(A) is in Rat(M(A)),

   • is closed under finite union; if L1 , L2 ∈ Rat(M(A)) then L1 ∪ L2 ∈ Rat(M(A)),

   • is closed under finite multiset union; if L1 , L2 ∈ Rat(M(A)) then L1 + L2 = {m1 ∪
     m2 | m1 ∈ L1 , m2 ∈ L2 } ∈ Rat(M(A)), and

   • is closed under Kleene star; for a multiset language
                                                     S L idenote L = {∅}, L = L, and
                                                                  0        1

     L i+1 = L + L ; then if L ∈ Rat(M(A)) then L = i∈N L ∈ Rat(M(A)).
              i   1                               ∗


Definition 3.3. A (nondeterministic) finite multiset automaton (FMA) is a structure A =
(Σ, Q, q0 , f, F ), where:

   • Σ is the input alphabet,

   • Q is a finite set of states,

   • q0 is the initial state,

   • f is a transition function Σ × Q → 2Q ,

   • F ⊆ Q is the set of final states.

A configuration of A is a pair (q, τ ), where q is a state (the current state) and τ is a multiset (the
current content of the bag). A configuration transitions into another (denoted (q, τ ) ⊢ (q ′ , τ ′ ))
if there is an element s ∈ Σ such that

   • τ = τ ′ ⊎ {s}, and

   • q ′ ∈ f (s, q).

The multisets M accepted by this automaton are the ones for which there exists a chain of
transitions starting from (q0 , M ) and ending at (qf , ∅) where qf ∈ F .

   Note that we only defined nondeterministic automata; contrary to word or even tree au-
tomata, deterministic FMA are strictly weaker than their nondeterministic counterparts.

Theorem 3.4. Let L be a multiset language. The following are equivalent:

 (1) L is semilinear.

                                                     17
 (2) L is rational.

 (3) L is definable by a Presburger sentence.

 (4) There exists a finite multiset automaton recognising L.

Proof. (1) ⇔ (2) is a common result on rational sets of commutative monoids, found explicitly
in [ES69, p.175].
    (1) ⇔ (3) is found in [GS66, Theorem 1.3].
    (1) ⇔ (4) can be found in [CMM00].

Corollary 3.5. Rational multiset languages are closed under finite union, finite intersection
and complement, corresponding to the boolean disjunction, conjunction and negation operations
on Presburger formulas.

Lemma 3.6. Let L be a semilinear multiset language. Then we can compute a value d(L) ∈ N
such that for all M ∈ L there is M ′ ∈ L such that M ′ ⊆ M and |M ′ | ≤ d(L).

Proof. We can pick l0 as the maximum length of the base vectors of the linear components of
L, since every element of a linear set contains its base vector.

3.2   Background: bottom-up tree automata
Definition 3.7. A rational-multiset tree automaton (RatMTA) is a tuple A := (Σ, Q, δ, F )
where:

   • Σ is a finite set of labels,

   • Q is a finite set of states,

   • δ : Σ × Q → Rat(M(Q)) is the transition function, which assigns to each pair of a label
     and a state a rational set of multisets of Q, and

   • F ⊆ Q is the accepting set of states.

If for each s ∈ Σ the set {δ(s, q)}q∈Q forms a partition of M(Q), the automaton is called
deterministic.
    A valid run of A on an unranked, unordered rooted tree T = ((V, E), r, λ) is a labeling
µ : V → Q such that for each node v ∈ V the multiset {{µ(vc ) : vc ∈ Cv }} is in δ(λ(v), µ(v)). A
rooted tree T is accepted by A iff there is an accepting run on T , meaning a run on T such that
the label state of its root is in F .
    We say that a RatMTA A := (Σ, Q, δ, F ) is deterministic if for every s ∈ Σ, q1 , q2 ∈ Q
we have δ(s, q1 ) ∩ δ(s, q2 ) = ∅; we say that a RatMTA is complete if for all s ∈ Σ we have
  q∈Q δ(s, q) = M(Q). In a deterministic and complete RatMTA the family {δ(s, q)}q∈Q is a
S
partition of M(Q) for all s ∈ Σ.

    The relationship between Presburger arithmetic and rational multisets shown in Theorem 3.4
extends to Presburger MSO formulas on trees and rational multiset tree automata: we restate
[SSM03, Theorem 5] below. Note that while the authors formulation uses Presburger u-tree
automata, they are simply rational multiset tree automata defined using Presburger formulas
instead of rational sets, and the two are equivalent by Theorem 3.4 (also mentioned explicitly
in Section 2 of their paper).

Theorem 3.8. Let L be a language of unranked, unordered rooted trees. L is PMSO-definable
iff there exists a RatMTA A that accepts L.



                                                18
3.3   Warmup: rational automata properties
Through this section, we extend well-known results for finite, ordered bottom-up tree automata
(see [Com+08]) to rational multiset tree automata, and show the connection between rooted
tree types (from [CP17]) and states of an automaton. The results below hold for deterministic,
complete RatMTA: luckily, in [Col02, Lemma 2.2-2.3] Colcombet proved that this is not a
restriction on the languages we can consider.
Theorem 3.9. Every labeled, rooted tree language which can be recognised by a RatMTA can be
recognised by a deterministic, complete RatMTA.
Definition 3.10. A context in the theory of Σ-labeled rooted trees is a (Σ ⊎ {x})-labeled rooted
tree which has exactly one leaf node labeled as x; this is called the variable node.
    We denote contexts as C[x]; given a rooted tree T , we can substitute T into C[x] by identifying
the root of T with the variable node of C[x] – we denote this as C[T ]. We can imagine contexts
having a pole in place of the variable node, and any rooted tree having a pole at the root; the
operation of replacing a unipolar tree T1 by another T2 is then expressed through contexts as
going from C[T1 ] to C[T2 ], where C is the rest of the graph.


                                                                  C[x]
                       T1                T2
                                                           x




                            C[T1 ]                                C[T2 ]




                       Figure 4: Replacing T1 by T2 in the context C[x].

Definition 3.11. Given a graph language G, we define an equivalence relation ≡G as follows:
T1 ≡G T2 if and only if for every context C we have C[T1 ] ∈ G if and only if C[T2 ] ∈ G.
   In other words, T1 ≡G T2 if replacing T1 by T2 in a tree does not affect membership in G.
    Given a deterministic, complete rational multiset tree automaton A, for every rooted tree
T we have exactly one run of A (accepting or not); we define the type of T (denoted Type(T ))
as the state of its root. Crucially, since the transition function only looks at the states and not
any input labels, if we have Type(T1 ) = Type(T2 ) we can replace T1 by T2 in any context C[x]
without changing the run of A on the nodes of C[x].
Lemma 3.12. Let A = (Σ, Q, δ, F ) be a deterministic, complete rational multiset tree automa-
ton, C[x] a context, and T1 , T2 Σ-labeled rooted trees: then
                    Type(T1 ) = Type(T2 ) ⇒ Type(C[T1 ]) = Type(C[T2 ]).

                                                19
Proof. Let r1 be the run of A on T1 , r2 be the run of A on T2 , and r be the run of A on C[T1 ]
restricted to the nodes of C[T1 ] ∖ T1 ; since Type(T1 ) = Type(T2 ) and the transition function
depends only on the states, r ∪ r2 is the run of A on C[T2 ]. If r is empty (C is the trivial context
where the root is the variable node) then the types of T1 , T2 , C[T1 ], C[T2 ] are all the same; else,
r assigns the same state to both roots and Type(C[T1 ]) = Type(C[T2 ]).

Corollary 3.13. Let A = (Σ, Q, δ, F ) be a rational multiset tree automaton recognising a graph
language G, and let T1 , T2 be Σ-labeled rooted trees: then

                               Type(T1 ) = Type(T2 ) ⇒ T1 ≡G T2

    We prove something stronger, a generalization of the Myhill-Nerode theorem (see [Com+08,
p36]) for rational multiset tree automata: if a language is recognizable by any deterministic,
complete RatMTA then ≡G has finitely many equivalence classes, and those classes form the
states of a deterministic, complete RatMTA which is minimal (by number of states) and unique
up to relabeling the states.
Theorem 3.14. (Myhill-Nerode) Let G be a tree language which can be recognised by a de-
terministic, complete RatMTA A. Then:
 (1) ≡G has finite index, upper bounded by the number of states of A, and
 (2) there is a deterministic, complete RatMTA which recognises G whose states are in bijection
     with the equivalence classes of ≡G .
Proof. Found in Appendix C.

    But what about bipolar trees? Contexts are themselves rooted trees, so we can imagine
them as having one pole at the variable node (going out) and one pole at the root (going in);
specifically, we are interested in direct contexts, which have the variable node as a direct child of
the root node – in other words, bipolar trees which have both poles at the root. After accounting
for the direction, these function similarly to rooted tree types by the definition given by Chang
and Pettie in [CP17]; we can encode any context (bipolar tree) as a string of direct contexts,
each corresponding to one node on the path between the root and variable node – we define a
notion of type for them corresponding to bipolar tree types from [CP17].
    We can interpret contexts, and more specifically direct contexts, as functions between types;
by the previous lemma if Type(T1 ) = Type(T2 ) then Type(C[T1 ]) = Type(C[T2 ]). As we have
finite types, we have finitely many functions between types; these functions form our context
types.
Definition 3.15. The type of a context C with respect to a deterministic, complete automaton
A is the function
                            Type(C) : Type(T ) 7→ Type(C[T ]).
    Context types have the same replacement properties as types: we can replace a context C1
(directed bipolar tree) with one of the same type C2 such that the run of A is the same on all
nodes outside of C1 , C2 .
Lemma 3.16. Let A = (Σ, Q, δ, F ) be a deterministic, complete rational multiset tree automa-
ton, let C[x], C1 [x], C2 [x] be contexts, and let T be a Σ-labeled rooted tree: then

                Type(C1 ) = Type(C2 ) ⇒ Type(C[C1 [T ]]) = Type(C[C2 [T ]]).

Proof. Trivially Type(T ) = Type(T ); since Type(C1 ) = Type(C2 ), we have that

          Type(C1 [T ]) = Type(C1 )(Type(T )) = Type(C2 )(Type(T )) = Type(C2 [T ]),

and by Lemma 3.12 Type(C[C1 [T ]]) = Type(C[C2 [T ]]).

                                                  20
3.3.1   Finitely representing types
Each tree is associated to a type by a complete, deterministic rational multiset tree automaton
A = (Σ, Q, δ, F ); this type is the state assigned to the root by the automaton. If we focus
on the transition function, we see that there are two factors determining the possible states of
children of the root: the root’s label and its state – to each pair of a label and state, we naturally
associate a semilinear set δ(s, q). By Lemma 3.6 we know there is a value d(δ(s, q)), which we
simply denote d(s, q), such that every element of δ(s, q) has a subset of size ≤ d(s, q) that is
also in δ(s, q). We define ∆R to be the maximum value of d(s, q) over all choices of s ∈ Σ and
q ∈ Q; we will use this property during the proof to reduce the number of children a node has
while maintaining its state. Formally:

Lemma 3.17. Let T be a labeled rooted tree, let s ∈ Σ be the label of its root, and let C(T ) be
the set of subtrees rooted at the children of the root of T . Then there is a labeled rooted tree T ′
such that:

 (1) the root of T ′ is labeled s,

 (2) Type(T ′ ) = Type(T ),

 (3) C(T ′ ) ⊆ C(T ), and

 (4) |C(T ′ )| ≤ ∆R .

Proof. Let M (C(T )) be the multiset of states of the children of the root of T . Apply Lemma 3.6 to
M (C(T )) ∈ δ(s, Type(T )); by definition of ∆R there is a M ′ ⊆ M such that M ′ ∈ δ(s, Type(T ))
and |M ′ | ≤ d(s, Type(T )) ≤ ∆R . Observe that M is a bijection between C(T ) and M (C(T )),
and define C := M −1 (M ′ ). Construct a tree T ′ with a s-labeled root and children the roots of
elements of C; then (1) and (3) hold by definition, (2) holds since M ′ ∈ δ(s, Type(T )) and (4)
holds since |C| = |M ′ | ≤ ∆R .

    We would like to define a similar procedure for context types: however, they cannot be easily
represented by a single semilinear set. Instead, we restrict to contexts where the variable node
is an immediate child of the root, which we call direct contexts. We can identify a direct context
with a pair of the label of its root and the multiset of types of the other children of the root;
then a direct context type can be represented by the set of all pairs representing its elements or
as a function of types (see previous section).

Lemma 3.18. Let A = (Σ, Q, δ, F ) be a deterministic, complete RatMTA. Then there is a value
∆C ∈ N, computable from the description of A, such that for every pair (s, M ) representing a
direct context type f we can compute a multiset M ′ such that:

   • (s, M ′ ) represents f ,

   • |M ′ | ≤ ∆C , and

   • M′ ⊆ M.

Proof. Consider a pair of states q, qf ∈ Q; we want to show that the set contexts(s, q, qf ) of all
direct contexts C (represented as multisets of states) such that Type(t) = q ⇒ Type(C[t]) = qf
and the root of C is labeled s is a semilinear set. The set δdet (s, qf ) is semilinear: we iterate
over its linear components Ls,qf ,1 ∪ . . . ∪ Ls,qf ,m and remove one instance of q where possible.
    Formally, let
                                     L = b + Na1 + . . . + Naw




                                                 21
where b, a1 , . . . , aw are Q-indexed vectors of N; let πq be the projection to the index q. Let q
be the q-th base vector, which is 0 everywhere except at q where it is 1. Then
                       
                       
                       (b − q) + Na1 + . . . + Naw              if πq (b) ̸= 0
                       
                       ∅                                        if πq (b) = 0, ∀i ≤ w πq (ai ) = 0
                       
                       
   removeq (L) =           [
                       
                               (b + ai − q) + Na1 + . . . + Naw otherwise
                       
                       
                       
                         1≤i≤l
                     πq (ai )̸=0


Then we can define contexts(s, q, qf ) as the union of all the removeq (Ls,qf ,i ); this is a finite union
of semilinear sets, so it is semilinear.
    Given a context type as a function of types f : Q → Q, we can explicitly represent it as a
set of pairs {(q, f (q))}q∈Q ; then the set of all direct contexts of type f which have their root
labeled s is the set                             \
                               contexts(f, s) :=     contexts(s, q, f (q))
                                                  q∈Q

which is a finite intersection of semilinear sets, so it is semilinear. Then by Lemma 3.6 there is a
value D(f ) := D(contexts(f, s)) such that for all M ∈ contexts(f, s) we can find a M ′ ⊆ M such
that M ′ ∈ contexts(f, s) and |M ′ | ≤ D(f ). Finally, we have finitely many possible functions f
and labels s, so we explicitly define ∆C as the maximum value of D(f ) over all contexts(f, s).

Corollary 3.19. Let C be a labeled direct context, let s ∈ Σ be the label of its root, and let C(C)
be the set of subtrees rooted at the non-variable children of the root of C. Then there is a labeled
direct context C ′ such that:

 (1) the root of C ′ is labeled s,

 (2) Type(C ′ ) = Type(C),

 (3) C(C ′ ) ⊆ C(C), and

 (4) |C(C ′ )| ≤ ∆C .

3.4    Constructing automata certificates
Let A = (Σ, Q, δ, F ) be a rational multiset tree automaton, and let GA be the class of all rooted
trees which are labeled with an accepting run for A. We define the automaton certification
problem associated with A as ΠA := (Σ, Q, GA ), and denote the class of all problems associated
to RatMTA as automata certification problems.

Theorem 1.2. Let A = (Σ, Q, δ, F ) be a rational multiset tree automaton, and let ΠA be the
problem of computing a run of A on Σ-labeled rooted trees; then one of the following holds:

   • ΠA is unsolvable, or

   • ΠA has deterministic and randomized LOCAL complexity O(log n), or

   • ΠA has deterministic and randomized LOCAL complexity Θ(n1/k ) for some k ∈ N≥1 .

Additionally, there is a sequential algorithm that can decide based only on the description of A
which of those cases applies, and which k applies in the last case.

    The proof of Theorem 1.2 takes up all of Section 3.4; a high level overview of it, including
references to the specific sections, can be found in Section 1.3.



                                                   22
3.4.1   Preprocessing: partially labeled tree types
We denote the type of an unlabeled rooted tree as the set of all labelings of the root that can
appear in a valid labeling of the rooted tree. Our choice of notation seems to conflict with the
definition of type given in Section 3.3; however, by constructing a suitable deterministic and
complete automaton Adet which uses sets of states of A as states, the two notations coincide.
This construction can also be used as a proof of Theorem 3.9, as the two automata recognize
the same language of rooted trees.
                                                                                                 Q
    Let A = (Σ, Q, δ, F ); we define Qdet = 2Q , and define an operation h : M(Q) → 2M(2 )
which sends a multiset M of states Q to the set of all multisets M ′ of sets of states 2Q for which
there is a choiceSfunction, a bijection c : M ′ → M which sends a set to one of its element. Then
Fdet := h(F ) = Q∈F h(Q) and for all s ∈ Σ we define
                                          \                     \
                          δdet (s, H) =         h(δ(s, q)) ∩           h(δ(s, q))C
                                          q∈H                  q∈Q∖H


where the complement is taken with respect to the set of all multisets of 2Q . In simpler words,
instead of labeling nodes with the states of a run, we label them with exactly the set of states
they might receive in any run.
    Observe that h sends semilinear sets to semilinear sets; the simplest way to observe that
is taking the multiset automaton representation of M (see Theorem 3.4) and replacing every
transition corresponding to q with transitions corresponding to all sets of states containing q –
since additionally semilinear sets are closed under finite intersection and complement, Adet =
(Σ, 2Q , δdet , Fdet ) is a rational multiset tree automaton.Formally, observe that for any s ∈ Σ the
family {δdet (s, H)}H⊆Q are the atoms of the σ-algebra generated by the family {h(δ(s, q))}q∈Q
over all multisets of 2Q ; then they form a partition of M(2Q ) and Adet is deterministic and
complete.
    We call a tree which is Σ-labeled unlabeled, in the sense that it has not been assigned an
output label from Q. Then the type of an unlabeled rooted tree T by the definition above
corresponds to the type of T according to Adet . Recall Corollary 3.13: we can replace a rooted
subtree by one of the same type without affecting the overall labeling. During the run of our
algorithm, however, we want to compute the type of partially labeled rooted trees, for which
some states have already been assigned: to do so, we further modify Adet .
    Define an automaton Alab = (Σ × (Q ⊎ {∗}), 2Q , δlab , Flab ) over Σ × (Q ⊎ {∗})-labeled rooted
trees, where ∗ represents unlabeled nodes. Explicitly, we define

                                      Flab = QF ∈ 2Q QF ∩ F ̸= ∅
                                              

                              ∀s ∈ Σ : δlab ((s, ∗), Q0 ) = δdet (s, Q0 )

                                                SQ1 ∋q δdet (s, Q1 ) if Q0 = {q}
                                                S
                                                
                  ∀s ∈ Σ : δlab ((s, q), Q0 ) =    Q1 ̸∋q δdet (s, Q1 )   if Q0 = ∅
                                                                          otherwise
                                                
                                                 ∅
                                                

Since semilinear sets are closed under finite union, this is a rational multiset tree automaton;
additionally, for any (s, q) ∈ Σ × Q the sets δlab ((s, q), {q}) and δlab ((s, q), ∅) form a partition
of M(2Q ) while the others are empty – then this is still a deterministic, complete automaton.
We will define the type of a partially Q-labeled rooted tree T as the type of T according to
the automaton Alab – we could equivalently define it as the set of all output labels of its root
that can appear in a full labeling which is coherent with the given partial labeling, but we will
leave the proof of this equivalence for Lemma 3.29. Similarly, we define context types and direct
context types according to Alab as in Section 3.3.



                                                     23
3.4.2      Degree reduction by forgetting some children
We make a few remarks about the similarities and differences between the types described in
the previous section and concepts used in the bounded-degree versions of this proof.
Remark. We can roughly equate direct context types with rooted tree classes from [Cha20] and
context types with bipolar tree types by replacing the variable node with a pole and adding
another pole at the root. In the same way as we can represent a bipolar tree as a string of
rooted trees H = (T1 , . . . , Tc ), we can represent a context as a composition of direct contexts
C = C1 ◦ . . . ◦ Cc , and both of those operation distribute over types.
    In fact, the equivalence relation induced by two contexts having the same type is a coarsening
of the one obtained by two bipolar trees having the same type; this is necessary, as without a
bound on the degree there are infinitely many bipolar tree type equivalence classes. However,
this coarsening still satisfies one important property: we can replace a bipolar tree with another
of the same context type without changing the types of the rest of the graph (see Corollary 3.13
and Lemma 3.16).
    One result of the coarsening of the equivalence relation is that two trees can be equivalent
even if they have a different topology (including input labels), specifically different maximum
degrees. In fact, Lemmas 3.17 and 3.18 show that we can use the properties of semilinear sets
to replace high-degree partially labeled rooted trees and direct contexts with low-degree rooted
trees and direct contexts of the same types. We make this explicit by defining two versions of a
procedure called ForgetChildren.
       • ForgetChildrenR (v): consider a node v which is aware of the types of all of its children,
         and let Tv be the subtree rooted at v. By Lemma 3.17 we can find a tree Tv′ of the same
         type, sharing the same input and partial output labels for the root, and whose children
         are a subset of the children of v; note that because we are already aware of the types of all
         children, we can find this subset of children without any extra communication. Procedure
         ForgetChildrenR (v) causes the node to ignore the edges corresponding to the children
         which are not in this subset, virtually replacing itself with Tv′ , until procedure Remember
         is called.
       • ForgetChildrenC (v): consider a node v which is aware of the types of all but one of its
         children. Treat the unknown child as a variable node and v as the root of a direct context
         Cv [x]: by Corollary 3.19 there is a direct context Cv′ [x] with the same type and sharing
         the same input and partial output labels for the root, such that the nonvariable children
         of Cv′ are a subset of those of Cv . Procedure ForgetChildrenC (v) causes the node to ignore
         the edges corresponding to the children which are not in this subset, virtually replacing
         itself with Cv′ , until procedure Remember is called.
These procedures reduce the degree of a node v to either ≤ ∆R + 1 (if ForgetChildrenR (v) is
called – the possible incoming edge of v is not considered) or ≤ ∆C + 2 (if ForgetChildrenC (v)
is called – the edges going into v and to the variable node are not considered). However, we
need to compute the types of almost all children of a node to apply them, which is not trivial
for trees of high height; to help, we will show that we can precompute certain labels to “split”
our tree into pieces of more manageable size.

3.4.3      Feasible functions
We define ΠA,∆ as the natural restriction of ΠA to the family of rooted trees of maximum degree
≤ ∆ := max{∆R + 1, ∆C + 2} (which we call the reduction degree of ΠA ). This is a LCL with
checkability radius 1 on rooted trees, which we can convert into a problem on unrooted trees
with inputs by encoding the direction in the input labels3 ; see Appendix A for details.
   3
    To make sure the input labels are on nodes, the conversion splits every edge in four parts; so ΠA has
checkability radius 1 on rooted trees, but 4 on unrooted trees. Note, however, that a feasible function labeling


                                                      24
    Ideally, we would like to apply the ForgetChildren procedures we just described to the whole
tree instance, so that we can apply the algorithm for ΠA,∆ directly. However, as observed above,
computing the types of every node in the graph is not efficient, as in general we cannot find the
type of a parent node before its child.
    Instead of treating the algorithm for ΠA,∆ as a black-box, we use to extract a feasible function,
which allows us to precompute some labels for nodes that know the types of all their children
but one – by the way the partially labeled type automaton Alab is defined, assigning a state
(output label) q to a node fully determines its type as {q} as long as the label was chosen in a
way that can be extended to a valid labeling; otherwise its type will be ∅. Computing the type
of a parent node before its child in this way is necessary to break up long directed paths, where
we cannot afford to wait to label the start of the path until all the other nodes have chosen a
label one by one.
Definition 3.20. Let H be a partially labeled bipolar tree with core path (v1 , . . . , vx ) of length
x ≥ ℓ (where ℓ is a constant value depending only on the description of ΠA,∆ ). Let e be the
middle edge between v⌊x/2⌋ and v⌊x/2⌋+1 , and assume that N r−1 (e) is unlabeled; let f be a
function assigning labels to the elements of N r−1 (e). Then f is a feasible function for H if
for every partially labeled graph (G, l) which contains H as a subgraph and for l′ the labeling
obtained by extending l with the labels of f , if l can be extended to a full solution then l′ can
be extended to a full solution.
    A function is ∞-feasible if it is feasible for every partially labeled bipolar tree H.
Lemma 3.21. For a LCL problem Π on undirected trees, the following are equivalent:
 (1) Π is solvable in no(1) rounds in the randomised LOCAL model,
 (2) Π is solvable in O(log n) rounds in the deterministic LOCAL model, and
 (3) there is a ∞-feasible function for Π.
Additionally, whether (3) holds is decidable.
Proof. This statement is a summary of Lemmas 14,15,16 from [CP17].

    For problems of higher complexities, we require a weaker concept of feasibility. We say that
a function f is 1-feasible if it is feasible for any unlabeled bipolar tree; observe that applying f
to a bipolar tree can (and often will) change its type, and even create trees of types that are
never realized by unlabeled trees; but those types can be accounted for and computed by the
partially labeled tree automaton Alab .
    We say a partially labeled tree has labeling layer k if it can be obtained by applying f in
parallel to arbitrarily many bipolar subtrees of labeling layer k − 1, where unlabeled trees have
labeling layer 1. Then a function is k-feasible if it is feasible on all trees of labeling layer k. Note
that up to replacing subtrees with some of the same type, trees of labeling layer k correspond
to trees in Hk from [Cha20].
Lemma 3.22. For a LCL problem Π on undirected trees, the following are equivalent:
 (1) Π is solvable in o(n1/(k−1) ) rounds in the randomised LOCAL model,
 (2) Π is solvable in O(n1/k ) rounds in the deterministic LOCAL model, and
 (3) there is a k-feasible function for Π.
Additionally, whether (3) holds is decidable.
Proof. This statement is a summary of Lemmas 15, 17, and 18 from [Cha20].
the 3-hop neighborhood of an edge in the unrooted tree version will label the 0-hop neighborhood of the related
edge in the rooted tree version.


                                                      25
3.4.4   Algorithm
We state two theorems formalising the relation between the complexities of ΠA and ΠA,∆ ;
note that the theorems treat ΠA,∆ as both a problem on rooted trees and on undirected trees
interchangeably – this is justified in Appendix A.

Theorem 3.23. Let ΠA be an automaton certification problem, and let ΠA,∆ be its LCL restric-
tion to the reduction degree. Then the following are equivalent:

 (1) ΠA,∆ is solvable in O(log n) rounds in the deterministic or randomised LOCAL model,

 (2) there is a ∞-feasible function for ΠA,∆ ;

 (3) ΠA is solvable in O(log n) rounds in the deterministic and randomised LOCAL model.

Theorem 3.24. Let ΠA be an automaton certification problem, and let ΠA,∆ be its LCL restric-
tion to the reduction degree. Then the following are equivalent:

 (1) ΠA,∆ is solvable in O(n1/k ) rounds in the deterministic or randomised LOCAL model,

 (2) there is a k-feasible function for ΠA,∆ ;

 (3) ΠA is solvable in O(n1/k ) rounds in the deterministic and randomised LOCAL model.

    We prove Theorems 3.23 and 3.24 at the same time; in both cases, (1) ⇔ (2) by the previous
section and (3) ⇒ (1) since any algorithm for ΠA also solves ΠA,∆ . We need to prove (2) ⇒ (3):
the algorithms we present are identical save for the choice of graph decomposition.
    We work on (γ, ℓ, L)-decompositions; their definition for unbounded degree undirected trees
are provided in [Sch26], but we give a slightly stronger definition which requires the orientation
of the layers to be consistent with the direction of the rooted tree.

Definition 3.25. A (γ, ℓ, L)-decomposition of a rooted tree is a partition of the nodes into
2k + 1 ordered layers R1 < C1 < R2 < C2 < . . . < Rk < Ck < Rk+1 which satisfies:

  1. every Ri induces a subgraph where every connected component is a rooted tree of height
     ≤ γ, and only the root can have a neighbor in a greater layer (with respect to <),

  2. every Ci induces a subgraph where every connected component is a consistently directed
     path of length ∈ [ℓ, 2ℓ], and only the endpoints can have a neighbor in a greater layer.

    The important parameter here is the number of layers L, as each new layer will require
a stronger feasible function. If we have a ∞-feasible function this is not a problem: we can
compute a (1, ℓ, L) decomposition with L ∈ O(log n) for any n (where ℓ is the same parameter
that appears in the feasibility definition).

Lemma 3.26. For any positive integer ℓ there is a L(n) ∈ O(log n) such that we can compute
a (1, ℓ, L)-decomposition in O(log n) rounds.

   If instead we have a k-feasible function, we compute a (γ, ℓ, k)-decomposition where γ ∈
O(n1/k ).

Lemma 3.27. For any positive integers k, ℓ and γ = n1/k (2ℓ)1−1/k we can compute a (γ, ℓ, k)-
decomposition in O(n1/k ) rounds.

   The proofs of Lemmas 3.26 and 3.27 are simple adaptations of the existing ones to the
unbounded degree rooted setting and can be found in Appendix B.
   From here, the steps are the same; we iterate through the layers, starting from R1 , compute
the type of all nodes according to Alab , and apply ForgetChildrenR to all vertices of R1 . Then

                                                 26
we reach C1 : each connected component is a directed path, and each node knows the types of
all its children but one (which may be in C1 itself or, for the last vertex, in a higher layer). We
apply ForgetChildrenC to all of its vertices; now C1 ∪ R1 is a bipolar tree of degree ≤ ∆ and
core path length ∈ [ℓ, 2ℓ] – we apply the feasible function f for ΠA,∆ to assign labels to two of
the central nodes. Because f is 1-feasible (and equivalently, ΠA,∆ is solvable) then the labeling
computed can be extended to a valid labeling; then the type of nodes that were assigned a label
state q ∈ Q are of type {q}.
     Nodes that are ancestors of the prelabeled nodes can now compute their own types one after
the other (this takes at most ℓ rounds) while nodes which are descendants of the prelabeled
nodes join R2 , delaying their type computation to the next step. We repeat the steps above for
each layer: compute all types and reduce degree for Ri ; compute context types, reduce degree,
precommit some labels, compute types for Ci , until we have computed types for all nodes of the
input graph.
     To complete the algorithm, every node applies Remember to return to the full tree, then
the root chooses an accepting state from its type and labels itself with it; then every node
that already has an assigned state (root and prelabeled nodes) chooses labels for its children.
We repeat this until the tree is fully labeled, which we show also takes O((γ + ℓ)L) rounds in
Lemma 3.32. We prove that this choice is possible and leads to a correct labeling in Lemmas 3.29
and 3.30.
Lemma 3.28. Let ΠA be the problem associated to the rational multiset tree automaton A =
(Σ, Q, δ, F ). Let Alab = (Σ × (Q ⊎ {∗}), 2Q , δlab , Flab ) be the partially labeled type automaton of
A. Given a run r of Alab on a Σ-labeled and partially Q-labeled rooted tree (G, l) which does
not label the root with ∅ we can find a run r′4 of A on the underlying unlabeled rooted tree G
such that for all nodes v of G, r′ (v) ∈ r(v) and r(v) extends the partial Q-labeling of G.
Proof. First of all, observe that by definition of Alab = (Σ × (Q ⊎ {∗}), 2Q , δlab , Flab ) if any node
receives state ∅, so does its parent (since no set h(δ(s, q)) can contain ∅); by transitivity, if any
node receives state ∅, so does the root – we can assume no node receives state ∅, and in particular
every node that has an assigned label q is of state {q}.
    Arbitrarily choose an element from the state assigned to the root. We show that for every
node that has chosen a state of A from its assigned state of Alab , there is a way to choose an
element for each of its children from their assigned state of Alab such that the resulting transition
is valid for A.
    Let v be a node with Σ-label s, let H be its assigned state of Alab and q ∈ H be its assigned
state of A. We distinguish two cases:
       • v was labeled in G with a state q ′ : then H = {q ′ } and since q ∈ H, q = q ′ . Then the
         multiset M of states of Alab of its children is in δlab ((s, q), {q}); observe that it is the
         union of δdet (s, Qi ) where the Qi s are all states containing q, so in particular δdet (s, Qi ) ⊆
         h(δ(s, q)) and then M ∈ δlab ((s, q), {q}) ⊆ h(δ(s, q)).
       • v is unlabeled in G: then the multiset M of types (according to Alab ) of its children is in
         δlab ((s, ∗), H) = δdet (s, H) ⊆ h(δ(s, q)).
In either case, M ∈ h(δ(s, q)); by definition there is a choice function c from M to an element
M ′ ∈ δ(s, q) such that for every state Q0 ∈ 2Q in M we have c(Q0 ) ∈ Q0 : we assign states of A
to the children of v according to c.
    We can then use top-down tree induction – the base case is the root, where we can choose
arbitrarily – to prove that every node v can choose the labels of its children such that the
transition function of A at v is respected; then the result is a valid run of A. Additionally, since
every node labeled q is of type {q}, the run we obtain is an extension of the Q-labeling of G.
   4
    Note that those runs need to be valid, ie respect the transition function, but not necessarily accepting, ie
have an accepting state at the root.


                                                      27
                   ð           C1         C2          C3         C4           ð




                                                      Apply ForgetChildrenC

                   ð           C1′        C2′         C3′        C4′          ð
                                                 e




                                                      Label with f

                   ð           C1′        C2′         C3′        C4′          ð
                                                 e




                                                      Remember edges

                   ð           C1         C2          C3         C4           ð




         Figure 5: Using ForgetChildren and the feasible function to label bipolar trees.

Lemma 3.29. Let ΠA be the problem associated to the rational multiset tree automaton A =
(Σ, Q, δ, F ). Let Alab = (Σ×(Q⊎{∗}), 2Q , δlab , Flab ) be the partially labeled type automaton of A.
Then for any Σ-labeled and partially Q-labeled rooted tree G with root r the following statements
are equivalent:

 (1) the type assigned by Alab to r contains an accepting state of A,

 (2) G is accepted by Alab ,

 (3) the partial Q-labeling of G can be extended to an accepting run of A on the underlying
     unlabeled graph.

Proof. This statement and proof is just a formalization of the statement “Alab assigns to each
node a state corresponding to the set of states of A that can appear in a run of A which extends
the partial labeling”.
    (1) ⇔ (2) since Flab is defined as any set of states 2Q that contains at least one state of F .

                                                 28
     (1) ⇒ (3): by the previous lemma, we can select an accepting state q of A to the root that
is contained in the type assigned by Alab and then compute a valid run of A that assigns q to
the root and extends the Q-labeling of G.
     (3) ⇒ (1): let r be the accepting run of A that extends the Q-labeling of G, and let r′ be the
run of Alab on G; we show that for every vertex v we have r(v) ∈ r′ (v). We work by bottom-
up tree induction: for the base case, let l be a leaf, and observe that ∅ ∈ δlab ((s, ∗), r′ (l)) =
δdet (s, r′ (l)) (r′ is valid in l) implies ∅ ∈ δ(s, r(l)) ⇔ r(l) ∈ r′ (l); then since r(l) is a valid label
of l according to A, r(l) ∈ r′ (l). If l was labeled by r(l) in G, this still holds; let H be the state
that Alab would have assigned it if it was unlabeled, then r(l) ∈ H by the same reasoning and
∅ ∈ δlab ((s, ∗), H) ⊆ δlab (r(l), {r(l)}). Then Alab assigns {r(l)} as a state to l, which obviously
contains r(l).
     For the inductive step, let M be the set of states of children of v according to r and let M ′ be
the set of states of children of v according to r′ ; by induction we have a bijective choice function
c : M ′ → M which sends a set of states to one of its elements. Then M ′ ∈ h(M ) and since M ∈
δ(s, r(v)) we have M ′ ∈ h(δ(s, r(v))); assume v is unlabeled, then M ′ ∈ δlab ((s, ∗), r′ (v)); since
δlab ((s, ∗), r′ (v)) = δdet (s, r′ (v)) has nonempty intersection with h(δ(s, r(v))) we have r(v) ∈
r′ (v). Assume v is labeled with r(v), and let H be the state that Alab would have assigned it
if it was unlabeled, then r(v) ∈ H and M ′ ∈ δlab ((s, ∗), H) ⊆ δlab ((s, r(v)), {r(v)}); then Alab
assigns {r(v)} as a state to v, which obviously contains r(v).

Lemma 3.30. Let G be a Σ-labeled (not labeled with Q) rooted tree with root r. Then the type
that the above algorithm assigns to the root r contains at least one accepting state.
Proof. Recall that our assumption is that there is a feasible function (equivalently, that ΠA,∆
is solvable) – we first need to show that G is solvable by ΠA , or equivalently (by Lemma 3.29)
that G is accepted by Alab .
    Assume we had computed the types of all nodes of G according to Alab without ever prela-
beling nodes through a feasible function; then applied the procedure ForgetChildrenR to every
node and completely removed the “forgotten” edges. This procedure leaves the types of all nodes
unchanged by definition, in particular it will leave the type of the root unchanged – it also dis-
connects the graph, so we only consider the connected component G′ containing the root, which
is a rooted tree of maximum degree ≤ ∆. Because ΠA,∆ is solvable, G′ is solvable as an instance
of ΠA,∆ ; which means G is accepted by Alab , as the two problems are described by the same
automaton A. Then the type of the root of G and G′ (without any prelabeling) contains an
accepting state.
    Let us now look at the algorithm; we show that every step of the algorithm preserves at least
one of the equivalent definitions in Lemma 3.29. We only need to focus on the steps that change
the topology of the graph: the virtual removal of edges in the ForgetChildren procedures and
the partial labeling by the feasible function. As we have already observed, either ForgetChildren
preserves the types of all nodes; then it preserves (1). Additionally, by definition the feasible
function always extends the labeling l of G to l′ such that if l could be extended to a valid
labeling then so can l′ ; then it preserves (3).

Lemma 3.31. Every node of G is the γ · (L + 1) + ℓ-hop descendant of either the root or a node
that was preassigned a label.
Proof. Assume this node v is in layer Ri . Then it is at most distance γ from the root of its
layer. The root is the child of a node in a higher layer; if this layer is Cj for some j ≥ i, then
the middle node of it has been prelabeled and v is the γ + ℓ-hop descendant of it. If this layer is
Rj for some j > i, then v is the 2γ-hop descendant of its root; we can at most repeat this once
for every layer R1 , . . . , RL+1 until we reach the root of G.

Lemma 3.32. Applying the above algorithm using a (γ, ℓ, L)-decomposition takes O((γ + ℓ)L)
rounds to terminate.

                                                    29
Proof. For the Alab type labeling step: each i ∈ [1, . . . , L], Ri is composed of rooted trees of
depth at most γ + ℓ (as at most ℓ nodes can be promoted from Ci−1 to Ri during the algorithm)
so computing all types by brute-force takes O(γ + ℓ) rounds. Similarly, Ci is composed of paths
of length at most 2ℓ, and labeling them takes O(ℓ) time; at the end, labeling RL+1 takes a
further O(γ + ℓ) rounds. In total, this takes O((γ + ℓ)L) rounds.
     For the A state labeling step: at each round, each node that has already decided on a label
chooses labels for its children and communicates them. Since by Lemma 3.31 every node is the
γ · (L + 1) + ℓ-hop descendant of a node that has chosen its label during the first part, this takes
O((γ)L + ℓ) ⊆ O((γ + ℓ)L) rounds.

    Then the overall algorithm takes O((γ + ℓ)L) rounds. By applying it with a ∞-feasible
function and a (1, ℓ, O(log n))-decomposition (which we can compute in O(log n) rounds by
Lemma 3.26), we prove Theorem 3.23; by applying it with a k-feasible function and a (O(n1/k ), ℓ, k)-
decomposition (which we can compute in O(n1/k ) rounds by Lemma 3.27), we prove Theo-
rem 3.24. A simple corollary to Theorem 3.24 covers the case where both problems are unsolv-
able.
Corollary 3.33. Let ΠA be an automaton certification problem, and let ΠA,∆ be its LCL re-
striction to the reduction degree. Then ΠA,∆ is unsolvable if and only if ΠA is unsolvable.
Proof. Because ΠA,∆ is a restriction of ΠA , if ΠA,∆ is unsolvable so is ΠA .
   For the converse, assume ΠA,∆ is solvable: then there is a O(n) algorithm to solve it; by
Theorem 3.24, there is a O(n) algorithm to solve ΠA , which is not unsolvable.

   Together with the classical classification results for LCL problems from [CP17; Cha20] this
proves Theorem 1.2.

3.5    Interlude: labels and certificates
Throughout the proof of Theorem 1.2, we worked under the assumption that our graph was
Σ-labeled and computed a certificate (a Q-labeling) of the correctness of the Σ-labeling. When
talking about a Local PMSO labeling problem Π = (Σin , Σout , G) we could use the algorithms
from Theorem 1.2 to certify a solution (Σout -labeling) we have already computed: we instead
want to use it to compute both a solution and a certificate of its correctness.
    We can do this with a little trick: instead of using the automaton which verifies the correct-
ness of a solution directly – by checking whether a Σin ×Σout -labeled rooted tree has the property
G – we modify it into an automaton that verifies if a Σin -labeled rooted tree can be Σout -labeled
according to G; additionally, this automaton encodes valid Σout labeling in its accepting runs.
Lemma 1.3. Let A = (Σin × Σout , Q, δ, F ) be a rational multiset tree automaton recognising a
Σin ×Σout -labeled rooted tree property G; then there is a RatMTA A′ = (Σin , Σout ×Q, δ ′ , Σout ×F )
which recognises the language of all Σin -labeled rooted trees T such that there exists a Σout -labeling
of T such that:
   • T labeled with the resulting Σin × Σout -labeling is in G (is recognized by A), and
   • a valid run of A′ consists of a valid Σout -labeling and a run of A verifying the correctness
     of this labeling.
Proof. The only thing that needs to be defined in A′ is δ ′ ; given a multiset M of states we define
as XΣ (M ) the set of multisets of Σ × Q such that projecting all their elements to the second
component gives M . Essentially, we allow every possible combination of labels as long as the
states respect M , since the transition function does not depend on the labels of the children
nodes; then for every state q ∈ Q and pair (si , so ) ∈ Σin × Σout we define

                                 δ ′ (si , (so , q)) := XΣ (δ((si , so ), q)).

                                                     30
Its correctness is trivial, as the transition function depends only on the state, but we need to
prove that it is a rational multiset tree automata; the easiest way to see that δ ′ (si , (so , q)) is a
rational set is using the finite multiset automaton characterization. Given a multiset automaton
AM := (Q, QA , q0 , f, FA ) for δ((si , so ), q) (note that its alphabet is the states of A) we can
replace the alphabet with Σout × Q and the transition function by

                  fΣout : (Σout × Q) × QA → 2QA         fΣout ((so , q), qA ) := f (q, qA )

ignoring s ∈ Σ completely; visually, we replaced every transition arrow associated to a symbol
q with multiple arrows corresponding to all elements of Σ × {q}.

   Note that even if we start from a deterministic, complete automaton A (as we do in the
next section), the resulting automaton A′ might be nondeterministic; this does not matter for
applying Theorem 3.4.
   Conceptually, this step is equivalent to taking a PMSO sentence φ on Σin × Σout -labeled
graphs with out-label sets {Sso }so ∈Σout to a PMSO sentence of the form

                                 ∃so ∈Σout Sso Part({Sso }so ∈Σout ) ∧ φ

where Part({Ss }s∈Σ ) is the first order sentence expressing “{Ss }s∈Σ is a partition” (see Section 2.3
for details) and φ uses the second-order variables Sso in place of the unary relations representing
the Σout -labeling – so it is defined on Σin -labeled graphs.
    In other words, we accept every Σin -labeled tree for which a valid Σout -labeling exists instead
of every graph which is already correctly labeled. This is only a valid formula if Σout is a finite
set, for the same reason as to why A′ is only a valid finite state automaton if Σout is a finite set.

3.6    Bridging the verification gap
To conclude, we show that any LPMSO problem is asymptotically as hard as an automaton
certification problem. Theorem 3.8 guarantees that for any PMSO property G describing a
LPMSO problem Π, there is some rational multiset tree automaton certifying G; however, not
every such RatMTA will allow us to prove the desired result. We give an example: let Π =
({∗}, {T }, GT ) be the trivial problem of labeling an unlabeled rooted tree with T everywhere.
Clearly, GT is locally verifiable in 0 rounds; additionally it can be described by the simple PMSO
formula ∀x x ∈ ST (“every node is labeled T ”). We define a rational multiset tree automaton
that recognises the language GT of T -labeled rooted trees: AT = ({T }, {0, 1}, δT , {0, 1}) where
δ(T, 0) = M({1}) (all multisets composed only of 1s) and δ(T, 1) = M({0}) (all multisets
composed only of 0s). A valid run of A is a 2-coloring of the rooted tree with {0, 1}; since all
states are accepting, every valid run is an accepting run. Solving the automaton certification
problem associated with AT is equivalent to 2-coloring a rooted tree, which is known to take
Ω(n) rounds [Bal+21].
    We need to choose our automata carefully so that we are not forced to do extra work: for
this purpose we choose the deterministic and complete RatMTA which is minimal with respect
to the number of states, which is given to us by Theorem 3.14 (restated below).

Theorem 3.14. (Myhill-Nerode) Let G be a tree language which can be recognised by a de-
terministic, complete RatMTA A. Then:

 (1) ≡G has finite index, upper bounded by the number of states of A, and

 (2) there is a deterministic, complete RatMTA which recognises G whose states are in bijection
     with the equivalence classes of ≡G .




                                                   31
    Recall that ≡G is the coarsest possible “replacement” relation: we can replace a rooted
subtree with an equivalent one without impacting the overall correctness of the labeling. In
particular, the equivalence relationship between multipolar trees based on isomorphisms of the
k-hop neighborhood of the poles (where k is the local checkability radius of our problem) which
is defined in [CP17] has the same property, and so is a refinement of ≡G ; we will use this fact to
compute a certificate for a valid solution in constant rounds.
Theorem 1.4. Let Π = (Σin , Σout , G) be a Local PMSO problem with checkability radius k and
let A = (Σin × Σout , Q, δ, F ) be the minimal deterministic and complete RatMTA recognising G.
Denote GQ the graph language of (Σin × Σout × Q)-labeled rooted trees such that for each G ∈ GQ :
  1. the underlying Σin × Σout -labeled graph of G is in G, and

  2. the underlying Q-labeled graph of G is the run of A on its underlying Σin × Σout -labeled
     graph.
Then given a correct solution to Π, we can compute the run of A which accepts it in 2k + 2
rounds; equivalently, Π and Π′ = (Σin , Σout × Q, GQ ) have the same asymptotic complexity.
    We say that a (Σin × Σout )-labeled rooted tree is k-away from happy with respect to a
locally verifiable (in k rounds) problem Π = (Σin , Σout , G) if, by running the k-round verification
algorithm for Π, every node at distance ≥ k + 1 from the root (which is too far away to
communicate with the root) returns “yes”.
Definition 3.34. Let Π = (Σin , Σout , G) be a problem whose solution can be locally checked in
k rounds. We define an equivalence relation on (Σin × Σout )-labeled rooted trees ≡Π as follows:
t1 ≡Π t2 if and only if
  1. N 2k+2 (r(t1 )) ∼
                     = N 2k+2 (r(t2 )) (the 2k + 2-radius neighborhoods of their roots are isomor-
     phic), and

  2. t1 is k-away from happy iff t2 is k-away from happy (with respect to Π).
Lemma 3.35. For any Π = (Σin , Σout , G) we have t1 ≡Π t2 ⇒ t1 ≡G t2 .
Proof. Let t1 ≡Π t2 and let C be any context; we want to show that C[t1 ] ∈ G ⇔ C[t2 ] ∈ G,
since the order is arbitrary it suffices to show C[t1 ] ∈
                                                        / G ⇒ C[t2 ] ∈
                                                                     / G.
    Assume C[t1 ] ∈ / G, and run the r-rounds verification algorithm on C[t1 ] and C[t2 ]. The
algorithm returns “no” on at least one node v of C[t1 ]; this can happen in three cases:
  1. v is not a member of t1 : all nodes of C[t2 ] ∖ t2 have the same view to the corresponding
     nodes of C[t1 ] ∖ t1 , so the corresponding node in C[t2 ] will also return “no” and C[t2 ] ∈
                                                                                                 / G;

  2. v is a member of t1 which is ≤ k steps away from the root: since the 2k + 2-hop neighbor-
     hoods of the roots are isomorphic, the corresponding nodes have isomorphic k-hop views,
     so the corresponding node in C[t2 ] will also return “no” and C[t2 ] ∈
                                                                          / G;

  3. v is a member of t1 which is > k steps away from the root: then t1 is not k-away from
     happy, so neither is t2 , then there is a node in t2 and C[t2 ] which will return “no” and
     C[t2 ] ∈
            / G.


    In essence, we have proven that ≡Π (which has infinitely many equivalence classes) is a
refinement of ≡G , which for PMSO-definable languages has finitely many equivalence classes
(which are up to renaming the states of the minimal automaton). In other words, knowing the
2k +2-hop neighborhood of a node and whether it is k-away from happy is sufficient to determine
its exact state in the minimal automaton; we show this correspondence is computable.

                                                 32
Lemma 3.36. Let Π = (Σin , Σout , G) be a Local PMSO problem on rooted trees whose solution
can be locally checked in k rounds. Then there exists a computable function

                             f : T (Σin × Σout )/ ≡Π → T (Σin × Σout )/ ≡G

which for every (Σin × Σout )-labeled rooted tree t maps [t]Π to the equivalence class [t]G .

Proof. f exists and is well-defined by Lemma 3.35; we just need to show that it is computable.
    We represent an equivalence class TΠ ∈ T (Σ)/ ≡Π as a pair (N 2k+2 (r), b) where N 2k+2 (r) is
a 2k + 2-height rooted tree (considered as a 2k + 2-hop neighborhood centered at the root) and
b is a bit representing whether the trees of this class are k-away from happy or not; note that
this representation might lead to empty classes, but the function is defined on nonempty classes
(alternatively, it can be defined as sending empty class to empty class).
    We do a preprocessing step on Π: for every equivalence class q of G (corresponding to the
states of the minimal automaton) and every label pair (si , so ) in Σin × Σout we want to compute
a finite representative t whose root is labeled (si , so ) and which is of class q. We show that every
pair has a finite representative of maximum degree ∆ and maximum height |Σin |·|Σout |·h, where
h is the number of equivalence classes of G. Let t be any element of class TG ; we can compute
the type of all its nodes and apply the procedure ForgetChildren to reduce its maximum degree
to ∆ without affecting the type of the root.
    Now let us only consider trees of maximum degree ∆ and initialize a set Q containing all
possible Σin × Σout -labelings of a leaf. We define a recursive function g which constructs all
trees of maximum degree ∆ of height 1 where the root is Σin × Σout -labeled and the leaves are
labeled with trees of Q – then, for each leaf node labeled by a tree t1 we replace the leaf with
the tree t1 . We iterate over the finitely many trees that are created this way, and compute a
run of the minimal automaton on it; if the tuple of the root state q and root labels (si , so ) of t
does not appear in any element of Q, we add the tree t to Q′ – once we have iterated over all
trees constructed this way, we set g(Q) := Q ∪ Q′ . We remark on the properties of g:

   • g is deterministic (as long as we process the trees in a deterministic order),

   • Q starts with one element and is weakly increasing (Q ⊆ g(Q)),

   • Q does not contain two trees with the same state and root label pair: in other words,

                             |Q| ≤ |Σin × Σout | · |T (Σ)/ ≡G | = |Σin | · |Σout | · h,

   • if h0 is the maximum height of a tree in Q, then h0 + 1 is the maximum height of a tree
     in g(Q).

Since g is a deterministic monotone (in the set inclusion sense) function with an upper bound
|Σin | · |Σout | · h on size, it reaches a fixed point after at most |Σin | · |Σout | · h iterations; at that
point, we have found a representative of maximum degree ∆ and maximum height h for every
state and label pair which can have a representative.
    Finally, we describe the process for computing f : given a pair (N 2k+2 (r), b), we consider every
possible assignment of states to the leaves of N 2k+2 (r), which are Σin × Σout -labeled. Then for
every state and label pair assigned to a leaf, we replace the leaf with the finite representative
that we precomputed; then we can check if this tree is k-away from happy. If the pair we are
given represents a nonempty class, we show that we will find at least one tree of this form that
represents it: simply take any tree of this class, compute a run of the minimal automaton, and
then replace the subtrees rooted at nodes 2k + 2-away from the root with the corresponding
representatives.
    We have finitely many assignments of states to the leaves of N 2k+2 (r); we can iterate through
all of them, and if we find a valid representative (a tree which is k-away from happy if b = 1,

                                                     33
one who is not if b = 0) we compute its equivalence class; we set this class as the result of
f ((N 2k+2 (r), b)) – if we cannot find any tree of this class, the class is empty and we can set
f (∅) = ∅.

   We can now prove Theorem 1.4:

Proof. We describe an algorithm that starts from a correct solution of Π and computes a correct
solution of Π′ in 2k + 2 rounds. Since the solution is correct, every rooted subtree is in particular
k-away from happy; then every node can gather its 2k + 2-hop descendants and determine its
own state by computing f (N 2k+2 (r), 1), then output the pair of its original label and state.


References
[Bal+18]     Alkida Balliu et al. “New classes of distributed time complexity”. In: Proceedings
             of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC
             2018, Los Angeles, CA, USA, June 25-29, 2018. Ed. by Ilias Diakonikolas, David
             Kempe, and Monika Henzinger. ACM, 2018, pp. 1307–1318. doi: 10.1145/3188745.
             3188860. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3188745.3188860.
[Bal+19a]    Alkida Balliu et al. “Lower Bounds for Maximal Matchings and Maximal Indepen-
             dent Sets”. In: 60th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
             FOCS 2019, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, November 9-12, 2019. Ed. by David Zuck-
             erman. IEEE Computer Society, 2019, pp. 481–497. doi: 10 . 1109 / FOCS . 2019 .
             00037. url: https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2019.00037.
[Bal+19b]    Alkida Balliu et al. “The Distributed Complexity of Locally Checkable Problems
             on Paths is Decidable”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium on Principles
             of Distributed Computing, PODC 2019, Toronto, ON, Canada, July 29 - August
             2, 2019. Ed. by Peter Robinson and Faith Ellen. ACM, 2019, pp. 262–271. doi:
             10.1145/3293611.3331606. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3293611.3331606.
[Bal+20]     Alkida Balliu et al. “Classification of Distributed Binary Labeling Problems”. In:
             34th International Symposium on Distributed Computing, DISC 2020, Virtual Con-
             ference, October 12-16, 2020. Ed. by Hagit Attiya. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl -
             Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020, 17:1–17:17. doi: 10 . 4230 / LIPICS . DISC .
             2020.17. url: https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.DISC.2020.17.
[Bal+21]     Alkida Balliu et al. “Locally Checkable Problems in Rooted Trees”. In: PODC ’21:
             ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, Virtual Event, Italy, July
             26-30, 2021. Ed. by Avery Miller, Keren Censor-Hillel, and Janne H. Korhonen.
             ACM, 2021, pp. 263–272. doi: 10.1145/3465084.3467934. url: https://doi.
             org/10.1145/3465084.3467934.
[Bal+23]     Alkida Balliu et al. “Sinkless Orientation Made Simple”. In: Symposium on Simplic-
             ity in Algorithms (SOSA). Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2023,
             175–191. isbn: 9781611977585. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611977585.ch17. url: http:
             //dx.doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611977585.ch17.
[BE08]       Leonid Barenboim and Michael Elkin. “Sublogarithmic distributed MIS algorithm
             for sparse graphs using nash-williams decomposition”. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-
             Seventh Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC
             2008, Toronto, Canada, August 18-21, 2008. Ed. by Rida A. Bazzi and Boaz Patt-
             Shamir. ACM, 2008, pp. 25–34. doi: 10 . 1145 / 1400751 . 1400757. url: https :
             //doi.org/10.1145/1400751.1400757.




                                                 34
[Bra+17]   Sebastian Brandt et al. “LCL Problems on Grids”. In: Proceedings of the ACM
           Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2017, Washington, DC,
           USA, July 25-27, 2017. Ed. by Elad Michael Schiller and Alexander A. Schwarz-
           mann. ACM, 2017, pp. 101–110. doi: 10.1145/3087801.3087833. url: https:
           //doi.org/10.1145/3087801.3087833.
[BT05]     Iovka Boneva and Jean-Marc Talbot. “Automata and Logics for Unranked and Un-
           ordered Trees”. In: Term Rewriting and Applications, 16th International Conference,
           RTA 2005, Nara, Japan, April 19-21, 2005, Proceedings. Ed. by Jürgen Giesl. Lec-
           ture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2005, pp. 500–515. doi: 10.1007/978-
           3-540-32033-3\_36. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-32033-3\_36.
[CE12]     Bruno Courcelle and Joost Engelfriet. Graph Structure and Monadic Second-Order
           Logic - A Language-Theoretic Approach. Vol. 138. Encyclopedia of mathematics and
           its applications. Cambridge University Press, 2012. isbn: 978-0-521-89833-1. url:
           http://www.cambridge.org/fr/knowledge/isbn/item5758776/?site\_locale=
           fr\_FR.
[Cha20]    Yi-Jun Chang. “The Complexity Landscape of Distributed Locally Checkable Prob-
           lems on Trees”. In: 34th International Symposium on Distributed Computing, DISC
           2020, Virtual Conference, October 12-16, 2020. Ed. by Hagit Attiya. LIPIcs. Schloss
           Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020, 18:1–18:17. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.
           DISC.2020.18. url: https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.DISC.2020.18.
[CMM00]    Erzsébet Csuhaj-Varjú, Carlos Martín-Vide, and Victor Mitrana. “Multiset Au-
           tomata”. In: Multiset Processing, Mathematical, Computer Science, and Molecular
           Computing Points of View [Workshop on Multiset Processing, WMP 2000, Curtea
           de Arges, Romania, August 21-25, 2000]. Ed. by Cristian Calude et al. Lecture Notes
           in Computer Science. Springer, 2000, pp. 69–84. doi: 10.1007/3-540-45523-X\_4.
           url: https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45523-X\_4.
[Col02]    Thomas Colcombet. “Rewriting in the partial algebra of typed terms modulo AC”.
           In: 4th International Workshop on Verification of Infinite-State Systems (CONCUR
           2002 Satellite Workshop), Infinity 2002, Brno, Czech Republic, August 24, 2002. Ed.
           by Antonín Kucera and Richard Mayr. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer
           Science 6. Elsevier, 2002, pp. 40–54. doi: 10.1016/S1571-0661(04)80532-2. url:
           https://doi.org/10.1016/S1571-0661(04)80532-2.
[Com+08]   Hubert Comon et al. Tree Automata Techniques and Applications. HAL, 2008,
           p. 262. url: https://inria.hal.science/hal-03367725.
[CP17]     Yi-Jun Chang and Seth Pettie. “A Time Hierarchy Theorem for the LOCAL Model”.
           In: 58th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS
           2017, Berkeley, CA, USA, October 15-17, 2017. Ed. by Chris Umans. IEEE Com-
           puter Society, 2017, pp. 156–167. doi: 10 . 1109 / FOCS . 2017 . 23. url: https :
           //doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2017.23.
[ES69]     Samuel Eilenberg and M.P Schützenberger. “Rational sets in commutative monoids”.
           In: Journal of Algebra 13.2 (Oct. 1969), 173–191. issn: 0021-8693. doi: 10.1016/
           0021- 8693(69)90070- 2. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021- 8693(69)
           90070-2.
[FBP22]    Laurent Feuilloley, Nicolas Bousquet, and Théo Pierron. “What Can Be Certified
           Compactly? Compact local certification of MSO properties in tree-like graphs”.
           In: PODC ’22: ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, Salerno,
           Italy, July 25 - 29, 2022. Ed. by Alessia Milani and Philipp Woelfel. ACM, 2022,
           pp. 131–140. doi: 10.1145/3519270.3538416. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/
           3519270.3538416.

                                             35
[FHK12]    Pierre Fraigniaud, Magnús M. Halldórsson, and Amos Korman. “On the Impact of
           Identifiers on Local Decision”. In: Principles of Distributed Systems, 16th Interna-
           tional Conference, OPODIS 2012, Rome, Italy, December 18-20, 2012. Proceedings.
           Ed. by Roberto Baldoni, Paola Flocchini, and Binoy Ravindran. Lecture Notes in
           Computer Science. Springer, 2012, pp. 224–238. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-35476-
           2\_16. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35476-2\_16.
[Fra+13]   Pierre Fraigniaud et al. “What can be decided locally without identifiers?” In:
           ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC ’13, Montreal,
           QC, Canada, July 22-24, 2013. Ed. by Panagiota Fatourou and Gadi Taubenfeld.
           ACM, 2013, pp. 157–165. doi: 10.1145/2484239.2484264. url: https://doi.
           org/10.1145/2484239.2484264.
[GS66]     Seymour Ginsburg and Edwin Spanier. “Semigroups, Presburger formulas, and lan-
           guages”. In: Pacific Journal of Mathematics 16.2 (Feb. 1966), 285–296. issn: 0030-
           8730. doi: 10.2140/pjm.1966.16.285. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.2140/pjm.
           1966.16.285.
[HMN22]    Magnús M. Halldórsson, Yannic Maus, and Alexandre Nolin. “Fast Distributed Ver-
           tex Splitting with Applications”. In: 36th International Symposium on Distributed
           Computing, DISC 2022, Augusta, Georgia, USA, October 25-27, 2022. Ed. by Chris-
           tian Scheideler. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022,
           26:1–26:24. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2022.26. url: https://doi.org/10.
           4230/LIPIcs.DISC.2022.26.
[Jau+18]   Benjamin Jauregui et al. Distributed Treewidth Computation and Courcelle’s The-
           orem in the CONGEST Model. 2018. doi: 10 . 48550 / ARXIV . 1805 . 10708. url:
           https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.10708.
[Lin87]    Nathan Linial. “Distributive Graph Algorithms-Global Solutions from Local Data”.
           In: 28th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, Los Angeles,
           California, USA, 27-29 October 1987. IEEE Computer Society, 1987, pp. 331–335.
           doi: 10.1109/SFCS.1987.20. url: https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.1987.20.
[Lin92]    Nathan Linial. “Locality in Distributed Graph Algorithms”. In: SIAM J. Comput.
           21.1 (1992), pp. 193–201. doi: 10 . 1137 / 0221015. url: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
           1137/0221015.
[NS93]     Moni Naor and Larry J. Stockmeyer. “What can be computed locally?” In: Pro-
           ceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
           May 16-18, 1993, San Diego, CA, USA. Ed. by S. Rao Kosaraju, David S. Johnson,
           and Alok Aggarwal. ACM, 1993, pp. 184–193. doi: 10.1145/167088.167149. url:
           https://doi.org/10.1145/167088.167149.
[Rei15]    Fabian Reiter. “Distributed Graph Automata”. In: 2015 30th Annual ACM/IEEE
           Symposium on Logic in Computer Science. 2015, pp. 192–201. doi: 10.1109/LICS.
           2015.27.
[Sch26]    Gustav Schmid. LCLs Beyond Bounded Degrees. 2026. arXiv: 2602.02340 [cs.DC].
           url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.02340.
[SSM03]    Helmut Seidl, Thomas Schwentick, and Anca Muscholl. “Numerical document queries”.
           In: Proceedings of the twenty-second ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGART symposium
           on Principles of database systems. SIGMOD/PODS03. ACM, 2003, 155–166. doi:
           10.1145/773153.773169. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/773153.773169.




                                             36
[Suo20]      Jukka Suomela. “Landscape of Locality (Invited Talk)”. In: 17th Scandinavian Sym-
             posium and Workshops on Algorithm Theory, SWAT 2020, Tórshavn, Faroe Is-
             lands, June 22-24, 2020. Ed. by Susanne Albers. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-
             Zentrum für Informatik, 2020, 2:1–2:1. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.SWAT.2020.2. url:
             https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.SWAT.2020.2.


A     Converting between problem types
Throughout the proof of Theorem 1.2, we treat ΠA,∆ alternatively as a problem on bounded
degree rooted trees (with or without inputs) and as a problem on bounded degree undirected trees
with inputs; this encoding is often mentioned as a trivial result without detail [NS93; Bal+21].
In this section we formalize this result as two lemmas: one showing the immersion (encoding)
of rooted trees in unrooted node-labeled trees (Lemma A.1) and a more general result showing
that we can encode locally verifiable requirements on the graph structure or input labels of trees
as part of a problem description without changing the overall complexity (Lemma A.6).

A.1    Edge labels to node labels
Lemma A.1. Let T (Σ) be the class of Σ-labeled undirected trees and let Td (Σ) be the class of
Σin -labeled directed trees; let E be the set {h, t, e} then for any Σ there is a function c : Td (Σ) ,→
T (Σ ⊎ E) with the following properties:

 (1) c is an immersion (it is injective, but not surjective),

 (2) for each Td ∈ Td (Σ) there is an immersion cTd from the vertices of Td to the vertices of
     c(Td ) which preserves Σ-labels, and such that dc(Td ) (c(v1 ), c(v2 )) = 4dTd (v1 , v2 ),

 (3) for any T ∈ T (Σ ⊎ E) the statement “does there exist a Σ-labeled directed tree Td such that
     c(Td ) = T ?” is locally decidable, and

 (4) for any T ∈ T (Σ ⊎ E) the statement “does there exist a Σ-labeled rooted tree Tr such that
     c(Tr ) = T ?” is locally decidable.

Proof. This proof is inspired by similar encodings found in distributed graph algorithms litera-
ture, for example in [Bal+20].
    We begin by observing that we can encode an edge orientation as a labeling on half-edges,
where one half of edge e receives label h (head) and the other half receives label t (tail). This
encoding can be checked in one round: each node sends the label of each half-edge over that
edge, and receives the same message from each neighbor, then checks that over each edge the
messages sent and received exactly form the set {h, t}. Additionally, each node can check that
the number of h labels it is adjacent to (its own indegree) is at most one; if this is true for every
node of a graph which we know to be a tree, then the tree is rooted.
    Let Td = (V, E) be a node and half-edge labeled graph as above. We define its incidence
graph (also known as the Levi graph of the associated incidence structure) as the bipartite
graph L(Td ) = (V ⊎ E, inc) which has a node for each node and edge of the original graph,
where v ∈ V and e ∈ E are adjacent if they are incident in the original graph. Visually, we add
a node splitting each edge of the original graph in half.
    We repeat this operation once more: let hE be the set of half-edges of Td , then c(Td ) :=
L(L(Td )) = (V ⊎ E ⊎ hE, inc) is a tree with one node for each node, edge and half-edge of T such
that each edge is adjacent to exactly its two halves, each half-edge is adjacent to its edge and
incident node, and each node is adjacent to all of its incident half-edges. All nodes in V keep
their Σ labels, all nodes in E are labeled e, and nodes in hE are labeled h or t according to their
orientation. In one round, each node can check whether the orientation is locally consistent:


                                                  37
   • nodes labeled h or t check that they have exactly one neighbor labeled e (originally an
     edge) and exactly one labeled with a label in Σ (originally a vertex),

   • nodes labeled e check that they have exactly one neighbor labeled h and exactly one labeled
     t,

   • nodes with a label in Σ check that all their neighbors are labeled with h or t; if we are
     checking that the original tree was rooted, they additionally check that they have at most
     one h-labeled neighbor.

Since each edge has been split in 4, we have dc(Td ) (c(v1 ), c(v2 )) = 4dTd (v1 , v2 ).
   Finally, we observe that the operation is bijective over its codomain; we can contract the
nodes with labels in E (which have degree 2) back to edges which we orient towards the node
nearest to the h label.

    In the above statement, property (1) ensures we can convert between the two types of graphs
freely; property (2) ensures that if we have a LOCAL algorithm to solve any problem Π on
directed/rooted trees (even on directed trees, and outside the PMSO-verifiable classes) in T (n)
rounds, we can run the same algorithm on their image through c in ≤ 4T (n) + 1 rounds, where
the +1 accounts for gathering half-edge information at the boundary (note that this requires
knowledge of n or at least some bound on T (n)). Finally, properties (3) and (4) ensure we
can properly define a problem on all undirected trees which is only hard on the trees that are
encoding a valid directed/rooted tree structure.

A.2    Expanding graphs
We show how to expand any problem defined on a subset of trees to a problem defined on all
trees, as long as membership in the subset is locally verifiable. Observe that a local verifier for a
problem can give “false positives”: since decision problems are made by consensus, as long as one
node in every false instance outputs “no”, the instance will be rejected regardless of the amount
of “no”s it outputs. We can require our verifier to be minimal – meaning it will always reject a
neighborhood that does not appear in any valid instance.

Definition A.2. Let V be a k-round local verifier for property G. We say V is minimal if for
every k-hop neighborhood N that is accepted by V there is G ∈ G such that N is isomorphic to
the k-hop neighborhood of a node in G.

Remark. If we have a k-round local verifier V for a property G and we allow our verification
algorithm to compute uncomputable functions, we can always find a minimal verifier V ′ ; we
define V ′ as follows: return “yes” on neighborhood N if and only if V does and there exists a
G ∈ G such that N appears in G.
    Minimal verifiers for tree languages have an extension property, meaning we can extend
neighborhoods of any size which are accepted by the verifier into valid graphs.

Lemma A.3. Let V be a k-round minimal local verifier for a (directed or undirected) tree
property G. Let G be a tree, and let W be a set of nodes of G such that:

   • V returns “yes” on every node of W , and

   • the subgraph induced by W of G is connected.

Then the subgraph induced by W and every node that is k-away from W in G is isomorphic to
an induced subgraph of a tree G′ ∈ G.




                                                 38
Proof. If |W | = 1, this is trivially true since V is minimal. Conversely, if W = V (G) this is
trivial since every node of G is accepted and G ∈ G.
    Let v be a node on the boundary of W , that is, a node which is in W but has a neighbor in
G which is not in W . Let N k (v) be its k-hop neighborhood in G – we classify the edges incident
to v into nonempty sets EW (v) (edges between v and a node of W ) and EN (v) (edges between
v and a node not in W ). Then by the minimality of V, let Hv be the tree Hv ∈ G such that
N k (v) is isomorphic to the the k-hop neighborhood of a node v ′ ∈ H.
    We “glue” Hv and G together – recall that both Hv and G are trees, so for each node x ∈ G
there is a unique shortest path from x to v. For every x ∈ / N k (v), if this shortest path passes
through an edge of EN (v), we remove x – conceptually, we remove all nodes that are “on the
other side” of v from W and more than k-away from v. Similarly in Hv , for every x′ ∈   / N k (v ′ ) if
the shortest path between x′ and v ′ passes through the isomorphic image of an edge of EW (v)
we remove x′ ; now, we join Hv and G by identifying the two isomorphic neighborhoods. Observe
that this operation does not affect the k-hop neighborhood of any node in W .
    We repeat this operation on every node v on the boundary of W , and claim the resulting
graph G′ is in G: we run V on every node v of G′ , which has to be either:

   • a member of W – its k-hop neighborhood is isomorphic to its neighborhood in G and we
     know that V outputs “yes” on all nodes of W , so it outputs “yes” for v in G′ as well, or

   • not a member of W – let w be the node of W which v is closest to, which is unique since
     the subgraph induced by W is connected, and let Hw be the graph that was glued at w.
     Then the distance between w and any node that does not correspond to a node in Hw is
     at least the distance between w and v (at least 1) plus the distance between w and this
     node (which is outside N k (w), so at least k) – in other words, N k (v) in G′ is isomorphic
     to N k (v) in Hw , and since Hw ∈ G the verifier V outputs “yes” for v in G′ as well.

Then V accepts all nodes of G′ so G′ ∈ G.

    Observe that this “extension” graph G′ might be much larger or smaller than the graph G
we start from; this makes applying a LOCAL algorithm for G′ (whose complexity depends on
graph size) on G difficult. We can solve this by requiring an even stronger property from our
verifier: the extension G′ we find has to be at least as big as G, but bigger by at most a constant
multiplicative factor.

Definition A.4. Let V be a k-round local verifier for a tree property G. We say V has bounded
expansion if there is a function f : N → N such that n ≤ f (n) ∈ O(n) (the expansion function)
for every tree G and every W ⊆ V (G) such that:

   • W is not empty,

   • N 1 (W ) ⊊ G,

   • V returns “yes” on every node of W , and

   • the subgraph induced by W of G is connected.

Then the subgraph induced by W and every node that is k-away from W in G is isomorphic to
an induced subgraph of a tree G′ ∈ G of size |G′ | = f (|G|).

   Once again, we show that the verifier from Lemma A.1 has this property.

Proposition A.5. The 1-round verifier V for encoded rooted trees defined in the proof of Lemma
A.1 has bounded expansion with expansion function f (n) = 4n − 3.



                                                  39
Proof. Observe that the encoding of a rooted tree T with k vertices is a undirected tree with
k Σ-labeled vertices and 3 vertices for each edge of T : then the encoding of T is a tree with
3(k − 1) + k = 4k − 3 nodes.
    If W = V (G) this is trivial since every node of G is accepted and G ∈ G.
    We show how to extend the graph induced by N 1 (W ) to a valid encoded tree. Let v be a
node immediately outside the boundary of W , meaning a node of G ∖ W which has a neighbor
in W ; since W induces a connected subgraph, v has exactly one such neighbor, which we call
w. Let l : Σ ⊎ {h, t, e} be the labeling of G; one of the following cases has to be true:

 (1) l(w) ∈ Σ, l(v) = h: we can extend N 1 (W ) by appending a path of length 3 to v, such that
     the path w − v − v1 − v2 − v3 is labeled l(w) − h − e − t − l(w); then every vertex in this
     path is accepted by V.

 (2) l(w) ∈ Σ, l(v) = t: the same as the previous case, but the path is instead labeled l(w) −
     t − e − h − l(w).

 (3) l(w) = h, l(v) = e: we can extend N 1 (W ) by appending a path of length 2 to v, such that
     the path w − v − v1 − v2 is labeled h − e − t − s and s is an arbitrary element of Σ; then
     every vertex in this path is accepted by V.

 (4) l(w) = t, l(v) = e: the same as the previous case, but the path is labeled t − e − h − s
     instead.

 (5) l(w) = e, l(v) ∈ {h, t}: we can extend N 1 (W ) by appending a single vertex to v and
     labeling it by an arbitrary element s ∈ Σ.

 (6) l(w) ∈ {h, t}, l(v) ∈ Σ: we do not need to extend N 1 (W ), as v is already accepted by V.

Let n be the number of vertices of G. This procedure adds at most 3 new vertices every time
it is used, and has to be run once for every vertex on the boundary of W , of which there are at
most n; then the new graph G′ has at most 4n vertices. Let n′ be its actual number of vertices:
since G′ is a valid instance (every node of G′ is accepted by V) there is a k such that n′ = 4k − 3,
then 4k − 3 = n′ ≤ 4n =⇒ k < n.
     G′ is an encoding of a tree T with k vertices; since W ⊆ N 1 (W ) ⊊ G, there is at least one
leaf of G which is not in W – then there is also a leaf v of G′ which is not in the isomorphic
image of W , either because it was in N 1 (W ) (case (6) above) or because it was added at the
end of a path (cases (1)-(5)). We can append a directed path of n − k vertices to the degree 1
node corresponding to v in T ; the resulting rooted tree T ′ has n vertices, and its encoding is an
undirected tree with 4n − 3 vertices which contains N 1 (W ) as an isomorphic subtree.

A.3    Extending problems
Under the strong assumptions we proved in the previous section, we can extend a locally verifiable
problem on a locally decidable class of graphs to a larger class of graphs – specifically, we can
extend encodings of rooted tree problems to all undirected labeled trees.

Lemma A.6. Let Π be a locally verifiable (with radius r) problem defined on a class G of
Σin -labeled trees. Let G ′ be a class of trees such that:

   • G ⊆ G′,

   • G ′ is Σ′in -labeled for some finite Σ′in (clearly Σin ⊆ Σ′in ),

   • G ∈ LD∗ (k) for some k ∈ N over G ′ ; in other words, the statement “G ∈ G” is locally
     decidable in k rounds for any G ∈ G ′ , and


                                                   40
   • the k-round local verifier for G has bounded expansion.

Then we can define a locally verifiable problem Π′ on G ′ such that:

   1. any valid solution of Π′ for a graph G ∈ G is also a valid solution of Π for G, and

   2. Π and Π′ have the same asymptotic complexity.

Proof. We describe the locally verifiable problem Π′ by its verification algorithm: Π is a tuple
(Σin , Σout , r, A) where Σin , Σout are finite sets of input and output labels respectively, r is the
checkability radius and A is a r-round anonymous-LOCAL algorithm on Σin ×Σout -labeled graphs
such that a Σout labeling of a Σin -labeled graph G is a valid solution to Π if and only if A returns
“yes” on every node of G.
    We define Π′ = (Σ′in , Σout ⊎ {err, err0 , err1 , err2 }, max{r, k}, A′ ): we only need to define A′ .
Let V be the minimal k-round local verifier of membership in G; we define A′ to accept if and
only if:

   • the center is out-labeled with err if and only if V outputs “no” at the center (looking at
     its k-hop neighborhood), and

   • if the center is out-labeled with err1 (resp: err2 ) then it is accepted if and only if it has a
     neighbor labeled with err0 (resp: err1 ), and

   • if the center is out-labeled with err0 then it is accepted if and only if it has a neighbor
     labeled with either err2 or err, and

   • if the center is out-labeled with an element of Σout and there is any error label (err, err0 ,
     err1 , or err2 ) in its r-hop neighborhood, it is accepted, and

   • if the center is out-labeled with an element of Σout and there is no error label in its r-hop
     neighborhood, it is accepted if and only if A returns “yes” at the center (looking at its
     r-hop neighborhood).

We prove that Π′ has the required properties. First, let G ∈ G: we solve Π′ on G, and show
that all out-labels are in Σout . Assume by contradiction there is a err out-label on some node:
then the local verifier has output “no” on that node, which would imply G ∈              / G, but this is
false by hypothesis. Assume then that there is a erri for some i ∈ {0, 1, 2}: since there are no
err out-labels, every erri out-labeled node is adjacent to an erri−1 mod 3 out-labeled node: we
can follow a path in the tree which is out-labeled err2 , err1 , err0 , err2 . . . – this path will never
contain a cycle, as T is by definition a tree, but it can also never end (as it can only end at
an err label), so it will eventually contain more nodes than G itself, which is a contradiction.
Finally, since all nodes are out-labeled from Σout , their r-hop neighborhood has to be accepted
by A, so the solution is correct for Π.
    Second, we show that Π and Π′ have the same asymptotic complexity: let f ∈ O(n) be the
expansion function of G over G ′ , and assume we have a T (n) algorithm to solve Π; since T (n)
and f (n) are at most linear there is c > 0 (WLOG, we assume c ≥ 1) and n0 ∈ N such that
for every n′ ≥ n0 we have T (f (n′ )) ≤ cf (T (n′ )). We can assume without loss of generality that
T (n) is weakly increasing, as if T (n) > T (n + 1) we can find a T (n)-round algorithm for graphs
of size n + 1 as a T (n)-round algorithm which does not use the extra information it gathers.
    Let n be the number of nodes of our input instance G: if n < n0 , we gather the whole
graph and run the verifier algorithm V on every node: if any nodes output “no”, the algorithm
out-labels them with err, and every other node out-labels itself with errd−1 mod 3 where d is
the shortest distance between itself and an error.
    Assume n ≥ n0 , and so T (f (n)) ≤ cf (T (n)): let T ′ (n) := cf (T (n)) ∈ O(T (n)). Each node
gathers its (2T ′ (n) + k)-hop neighborhood and runs the k-round verifier V for every node of its

                                                   41
2T ′ (n)-hop neighborhood. Let E the set of nodes for which V returns “no”. If there are any
such nodes in the 2T ′ (n)-hop neighborhood of v, let d be the minimum distance between v and
a node of E: if d = 0, v is out-labeled with err, else it is out-labeled with errd−1 mod 3 .
     Assume no nodes in the 2T ′ (n)-hop neighborhood of v return “no”, and there is a node in the
tree that can see n nodes (the whole graph) in its T ′ (n)-hop neighborhood: then any two nodes
are at most 2T ′ (n) distance from each other, and every node has gathered the whole graph,
which is a correct instance since no nodes have been rejected – then each node can use the
T (n) ≤ f (T (n)) ≤ cf (T (n)) algorithm for Π to compute a full solution and choose the out-label
for v accordingly.
     Assume no nodes in the 2T ′ (n)-hop neighborhood of v return “no”, and there are no nodes
in the tree that can see n nodes (the whole graph) in their T ′ (n)-hop neighborhood: then by
the bounded expansion property of V, there is a graph with at most f (n) nodes which contains
the T ′ (n) + k-hop neighborhood of v as a isomorphic induced subgraph – we then run the
T (n′ )-round algorithm for Π while pretending that the real number of nodes is n′ = f (n), since
T (n′ ) = T (f (n)) ≤ cf (T (n)) = T ′ (n), and choose the out-label for v accordingly.
     We verify that this results in a correct solution: let v be a node of G′ . Then
    • v is out-labeled err if and only if it is at distance 0 from a node rejected by V – meaning
      it is rejected itself;
    • if v is out-labeled erri , then there is a m ∈ N such that the minimum distance between v
      and a node ve labeled err is 3m + i + 1; let v ′ be the neighbor of v along the minimum
      path between v and ve , then v ′ is at distance 3m + i from ve and it is labeled either err
      (if m = i = 0) or erri−1 mod 3 ;
    • if every node in the r-hop neighborhood of v is out-labeled with an element of Σout , then
      the (T (n) + r)-hop neighborhood of v is accepted by V – there is a graph G ∈ G which
      contains an induced subgraph isomorphic to the (T ′ (n) + r + k)-hop neighborhood of v,
      and the algorithm for Π has to be correct on G, meaning the r-hop neighborhood of v has
      to be accepted by A, and
    • if none of the above apply, v is out-labeled with an element of Σout and has a r-hop
      neighbor which is labeled with an error label, which is correct.
The runtime of this algorithm for Π′ is max{n0 , 2T ′ (n) + k}; since 2T ′ (n) + k ∈ O(T (n)), Π and
Π′ have the same asymptotic complexity.

    Since we have shown that the verifier for the set of undirected graphs encoding rooted trees
has a bounded expansion verifier, we can convert a problem on rooted trees to a problem on
unrooted trees; specifically, we can convert a LCL on rooted trees (with or without input labels)
to a LCL on undirected trees with input labels. Then, classification results which apply to all
problems on undirected trees with inputs (such as the classification results of [CP17; Cha20])
apply to problems on rooted trees as well, making the statements of Theorem 3.23 and 3.24
well-defined.


B     Graph decompositions
We provide a more detailed proof of Lemmas 3.26 and 3.27. Both proofs are standard for
bounded degree graphs, and their proofs do not strongly rely on the bounded degree; they are
included purely for completeness. We define two shared steps for the two algorithms:
    Rake: a Rake step takes one round – each node which is a leaf joins the current layer, then
removes itself from the graph by communicating its removal to its parent.
    Compress(l): a Compress step takes a parameter l, and takes l + 1 rounds – each node that
has indegree= 1 and outdegree=1 checks whether it is part of a directed path of nodes with the

                                                42
same degrees of length ≥ l. If it is, it joins the current layer and removes itself from the graph
by communicating its removal to both its parent and child.
Lemma B.1. Let ℓ be a constant and P be a path of length n ≥ ℓ. Then in O(log∗ n) rounds in
the randomized or deterministic LOCAL model we can construct a (ℓ, ℓ)-ruling set R such that
P ∖ R has connected components of length [ℓ, 2ℓ].
Proof. We start by computing a (ℓ + 1)-hop (2ℓ + 1)2 -coloring – since ℓ is a constant, this is
possible in O(log∗ n) rounds using Linial’s algorithm [Lin92]. Then, we use this coloring to
greedily compute a (ℓ, ℓ) ruling set of the graph: nodes can choose by looking at their l-hop
neighborhood whether to join the ruling set, and no nodes that are ≤ ℓ apart make the choice
at the same time. The nodes of the ruling set split the path in parts of length [ℓ, 2ℓ], except
for the first and last part, which have length [0, ℓ]. In 2ℓ rounds, the first and last nodes of the
ruling set can reposition themselves: this results in first and last parts of length x ∈ [ℓ, 3ℓ]. If
x ≤ 2ℓ, we are happy; if x ∈ (2ℓ, 3ℓ] we add the node at position ⌈x/2⌉ to the ruling set. Every
part is now of size [ℓ, 2ℓ]; the overall complexity is O(log∗ n).

   We can now give complete proofs of Lemmas 3.26 and 3.27.
Lemma 3.26. For any positive integer ℓ there is a L(n) ∈ O(log n) such that we can compute
a (1, ℓ, L)-decomposition in O(log n) rounds.
Proof. Assume n ≥ 2; we do a Rake step and a Compress(ℓ) step at the same time, adding the
Rake vertices to Ri and the Compress(ℓ) vertices to Ci – this is possible as no vertex can be
removed or even considered by both Rake and Compress(ℓ) at the same time. We show that
overall, we remove at least 4ℓ
                            n
                               vertices. Denote:

           n1 = size of V1 := {vertices with indeg = 1, outdeg = 0}
           n2 = size of V2 := {vertices with indeg = 1, outdeg = 1}
           n3 = size of V3 := {vertices with indeg = 1, outdeg ≥ 2}
           nA = size of A := {vertices in V2 that are removed with Compress(ℓ)}
           nB = size of B := {vertices in V2 that are not removed with Compress(ℓ)}

Observe that the root is not counted in any of these sets, as it has indegree 1; then n1 +n2 +n3 =
n − 1. We denote by dr the outdegree of the root, then by adding the outdegrees:

             n2 + 2n3 ≤ 0n1 + 1n2 + 2n3 + dr ≤ n − 1 = n1 + n2 + n3 ⇒ n1 ≥ n3 .                 (1)

Consider the vertices of B: their connected components are directed paths of length ≤ ℓ − 1
where both endpoints are connected to a vertex in V1 ∪ V3 or the root. By contracting these
paths to a single edge and removing the vertices of A, we obtain a forest with n1 + n3 + 1 vertices
and ≤ n1 + n3 edges: then

                                      nB ≤ (ℓ − 1)(n1 + n3 )
                 nA = n2 − nB ≥ n2 − (ℓ − 1)(n1 + n3 ) = ℓn2 − (n − 1)(ℓ − 1)
                                       nA            ℓ−1
                                 n2 ≤      + (n − 1)                                            (2)
                                        ℓ              ℓ
We apply inequalities (1) and (2) to obtain:
                                nA            ℓ−1
                        2n1 +       + (n − 1)      ≥ n1 + n2 + n3 = n − 1
                                 ℓ              ℓ
                                                      nA    n−1
                                   2n1 + 2nA ≥ 2n1 +      ≥
                                                       ℓ      ℓ
                                                  n−1      n
                                       n1 + n A ≥        ≥
                                                   2ℓ      4ℓ

                                                43
for n ≥ 2. Since n1 is the number of vertices removed by Rake and nA is the number of vertices
removed by Compress, we remove at least 4ℓn
                                            vertices at each step until we have at most 2 vertices
left; they are removed by two extra Rake steps. Then in

                            L = ⌈log 4ℓ (n) − log 4ℓ (2) + 2⌉ ∈ O(log n)
                                      4ℓ−1                  4ℓ−1


steps we remove all the vertices.
    The resulting R1 , C1 , . . . , RL is not yet a valid (1, ℓ, L) decomposition, as paths in Ci might
be longer than 2ℓ. We use Lemma B.1 on each connected component of each Ci separately and
in parallel ; this is possible even if the overall graph has unbounded degree, since each component
is a path. Then for each Ci , we promote all nodes that are in the ruling set to Ri+1 : these nodes
are happy since they have no neighbors in higher layers and the remaining components of Ci
have length [ℓ, 2ℓ], so we now have a valid (1, ℓ, L) decomposition.
    Overall, it takes ℓ + 1 ∈ O(1) rounds to do Rake and Compress(ℓ) and we repeat them for
O(log n) times; the postprocessing step takes O(log∗ n) rounds, so the overall complexity is
O(log n).

Lemma 3.27. For any positive integers k, ℓ and γ = n1/k (2ℓ)1−1/k we can compute a (γ, ℓ, k)-
decomposition in O(n1/k ) rounds.

Proof. In this proof, we do γ Rake steps and one Compress(ℓ) step for each pair of layers Ri , Ci ;
however, we cannot do them at the same time as repeated instances of Rake can remove vertices
that started with outdegree= 1, which affects the Compress step. We add all vertices removed
by the ith iteration of applying Rake γ times to Ri , and all vertices removed by the ith iteration
of Compress(ℓ) to Ci .
    Let Si be the vertices left after performing the above operations for i − 1 times, and Si′ be the
result of applying Rake γ times – note that S1 = V . We want to prove that |Sk | ≤ γ, meaning
that all vertices will be removed by the last application of γ Rake steps.
    Let Ai be the vertices of Si′ that have indegree = 1 and outdegree= 1 but are not removed
by the ith Compress(ℓ); let Bi be the vertices of Si′ which have either indegree = 0 (the root) or
outdegree ̸= 1; then |Si+1 | = |Ai | + |Bi |. The connected components of the subgraph induced by
Ai are directed paths of length at most (ℓ − 1): if we contract them in Si+1 , we obtain a forest
with vertices in Bi – then |Ai | ≤ (ℓ − 1)(|Bi | − 1).
    Let Bi1 be the set of vertices that have outdegree= 0 at the beginning of the ith Compress;
by adding outdegrees, we find that

                               0|Bi1 | + 2|Bi ∖ Bi1 | = 2|Bi ∖ Bi1 | ≤ |Bi |
                                             |Bi ∖ Bi1 | ≤ |Bi |/2
                                               |Bi1 | ≥ |Bi |/2

Additionally, each element of Bi1 had to have been adjacent to a connected component of Si ∖ Si′
(removed in the ith Rake step) of size at least γ: therefore

                                         |Bi |/2 ≤ |Bi1 | ≤ |Si |/γ

Finally, we show
                                                                                     2ℓ
                   |Si+1 | = |Ai | + |Bi | ≤ (ℓ − 1)(|Bi | − 1) + |Bi | ≤ ℓ|Bi | ≤      |Si |
                                                                                     γ
By applying this to every layer from 1 to k − 1, we get
                                                           k−1
                                                       2ℓ
                                         |Sk | ≤                   n ≤ γ,
                                                       γ

                                                        44
and all vertices get removed by the kth Rake step.
    The resulting R1 , C1 , . . . , Rk is not yet a valid (γ, ℓ, k) decomposition, as paths in Ci might
be longer than 2ℓ. We use Lemma B.1 on each connected component of each Ci separately and
in parallel ; this is possible even if the overall graph has unbounded degree, since each component
is a path. Then for each Ci , we promote all nodes that are in the ruling set to Ri+1 : these nodes
are happy since they have no neighbors in higher layers and the remaining components of Ci
have length [ℓ, 2ℓ], so we now have a valid (γ, ℓ, k) decomposition.
    Overall, it takes ℓ + γ ∈ O(n1/k ) rounds to do Rake γ times and Compress(ℓ) and we re-
peat them for k ∈ O(1) times; the postprocessing step takes O(log∗ n) rounds, so the overall
complexity is O(n1/k ).


C     Myhill-Nerode
Theorem 3.14. (Myhill-Nerode) Let G be a tree language which can be recognised by a de-
terministic, complete RatMTA A. Then:
 (1) ≡G has finite index, upper bounded by the number of states of A, and
 (2) there is a deterministic, complete RatMTA which recognises G whose states are in bijection
     with the equivalence classes of ≡G .
Proof. (1): let δ(t) denote the state of the root of t; observe that δ(t1 ) = δ(t2 ) ⇒ t1 ≡G t2 , so
the number of congruence classes of ≡G is bounded by the number of states, which is finite.
    (2): let A = (Σ, Q, δ, F ) and let Q′ be the set of congruence classes of ≡G (defined equivalently
over all trees or over the set of states; see (1)). Consider the quotient projection h : Q → Q′ ;
we can define ḣ which applies h to multisets pointwise, and ḧ which applies ḣ to multiset
languages pointwise. ḧ sends semilinear (rational) sets to semilinear (rational) sets, as in any
vector defining a linear set we can find the index of h(q) by adding the indices of all elements of
h(q). We define a transition δmin : Σ × Q′ → Rat(M(Q′ )) as δmin (s, h(q1 )) = ḧ(δ(s, q1 )). Recall
that A is complete and deterministic, so we can define an inverse function γ : Σ × M(Q) → Q
where γ(s, M ) = q ⇔ M ∈ δ(s, q). Similarly, we define
                   γmin (s, ḣ(M )) = h(q) ⇔ ḣ(M ) ∈ δmin (s, h(q)) = ḧ(δ(s, q1 ))
and observe that δmin is well-defined and induces a deterministic and complete RatMTA iff γmin
is well-defined and total.
     Let M1 , M2 such that ḣ(M1 ) = ḣ(M2 ): we show that for all s ∈ Σ we have h(γ(s, M1 )) =
h(γ(s, M2 )). Consider rooted trees t1 , t2 with |M1 | = |M2 | children to the root, such that the
children of t1 , t2 have sub-root states corresponding to the elements of M1 , M2 respectively.
Clearly δ(t1 ) = q1 and δ(t2 ) = q2 . Since ḣ(M1 ) = ḣ(M2 ), we can find a one-to-one correspon-
dence f : M1 → M2 such that h(q) = h(f (q)) for all q ∈ M1 . Let C[x] be a context, and consider
C[t1 ]. We replace each child tree of the root of t1 of type q with the corresponding child tree
of the root of t2 of type f (q): this operation is equivalent to replacing t1 with t2 . Each step of
this replacement preserves membership of the overall tree in G, so C[t1 ] ∈ G ⇔ C[t2 ] ∈ G and
t1 ≡G t2 . Then γmin is well defined; since h, ḣ, ḧ are surjective it is also total.
     Finally, we define Amin = (Σ, Q′ , δmin , F ′ = F/ ≡G ). We need to show that Amin correctly
recognises G: given a rooted tree (V, E, r) any accepting run l : V → Q of A corresponds to
an accepting run h ◦ l of Amin . Conversely, for each accepting run l˙ of Amin , we can label A
by exploring the tree root-to-leaves and letting each subroot (with label s and state q) choose a
valid multiset of children states M ∈ δ(s, q) such that ḣ(M ) is the set of states of its children in
l;˙ then, for each child subtree t1 with δ(t1 ) = q1 which was wrongly labeled q2 , we can replace
it with t2 with δ(t2 ) = q2 since q1 ≡G q2 . The result is a tree T ′ labeled with an accepting run
of A such that T ∈ G ⇔ T ′ ∈ G.


                                                  45
