                                        Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase
                                        (and the additive conjunction of linear logic)
                                        Luc Dartois #
                                        Université Marie et Louis Pasteur, CNRS, institut FEMTO-ST, F-25000 Besançon, France

                                        Lê Thành Dũng (Tito) Nguyễn                    #Ñ
                                        LIS, CNRS & Aix-Marseille University, France

                                        Charles Peyrat
                                        Université Paris-Est Créteil, France

                                              Abstract
                                        We investigate a natural generalization to trees of Hennie machines, a known automaton model
arXiv:2605.03928v1 [cs.FL] 5 May 2026




                                        for regular string functions. Tree-to-tree Hennie machines are tree-walking tree transducers with
                                        the ability to rewrite the node labels of their input tree, subject to a bounded visit restriction.
                                        Interestingly, they do not merely compute regular tree functions (i.e. MSO transductions), but a
                                        larger class of functions with linear size-to-height increase (LSHI).
                                            We prove that this class sits between LSHI macro tree transducers (MTTs) and MSO set
                                        interpretations. To argue for its robustness, we show that it is closed under precomposition (resp.
                                        postcomposition) by MTTs of linear size (resp. height) increase. As a consequence, it contains the
                                        entire composition hierarchy of MTTs of linear height increase; we also prove that this composition
                                        hierarchy is strict.
                                            Finally, we give an alternative characterization of this function class based on a λ-calculus with
                                        linear types. The key difference with similar characterizations of MSO transductions is the use of
                                        additive tuples in the encoding of output trees. Our equivalence proof, using game semantics /
                                        geometry of interaction, is heavily inspired by an analogous result on higher-order recursion schemes.

                                        2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Transducers

                                        Keywords and phrases macro tree transducers, monadic second-order logic, set interpretations,
                                        linear lambda-calculus, game semantics


                                         1     Introduction
                                        Macro tree transducers (MTTs) are an automata model for tree transformations first intro-
                                        duced by Engelfriet and Vogler in the 1980s [21, 22]. There have been many developments
                                        concerning MTTs since then; one starting point of this paper is the recent:

                                        ▶ Theorem 1.1 (Gallot, Maneth, Nakano & Peyrat [28]). Given a macro tree transducer
                                        computing a function f on ranked trees, one can decide whether it has:
                                        linear height increase (LHI): height(f (t)) = O(height(t))
                                        linear size-to-height increase (LSHI): height(f (t)) = O(|t|)
                                        Compare this to an important result from a quarter century ago:

                                        ▶ Theorem 1.2 (Engelfriet & Maneth [20]). Given an MTT computing a function f on ranked
                                        trees, one can decide whether it is of linear size increase (LSI). Furthermore, if it is, then
                                        one can translate it to an Monadic Second-Order transduction that defines f . (Conversely,
                                        every MSO transduction can be translated into an MTT.)

                                            This seems more informative than the statement of the analogous Theorem 1.1: in
                                        addition to decidability, it gives us an equivalence between LSI-MTTs and a completely
                                        different formalism for describing functions from trees to trees, based on MSO logic. This
2   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


    equivalence is a consequence of the strategy for decidability: it comes from boundedness
    properties on the runs of (suitably normalized) MTTs that characterize the LSI property.1
       Similar boundedness properties arise in the decision procedure for Theorem 1.1. Hence
    the question: what consequences can we draw concerning MTTs of linear (size-to-)height
    increase? We show that they can be translated to MSO set interpretations (MSO-SI), an
    extension of MSO transductions from the 2000s [10] recently studied2 by Lhote et al. [24, 27].
    More than that: to prove this comparison in expressive power, we find it enlightening to
    consider an intermediate model of independent interest:
        LSHI-MTT ⊂ tree-to-tree Hennie machines ⊂ MSO-SI
    In fact, this new machine model is our actual main topic here. Recall that a Hennie
    machine [17, Section 7] is a Turing machine:
        with a single read/write input tape and a write-only left-to-right output tape;
        whose tape head must stay within the original bounds of the input string (that is, the
        only usable memory is the space initially occupied by the input);3
        visiting each cell of the tape a bounded number of times.4
    In other words, it is a bounded-visit two-way transducer extended with the ability to use the
    positions of input letters as mutable memory cells. In this informal description, replacing
    the two-way string transducer by its usual generalization to trees, namely the tree-walking
    tree transducer (see e.g. [11, Chapter 8]), results in the notion of tree-to-tree Hennie machine
    (THM).
    ▷ Claim 1.3. THMs have linear size-to-height increase.
    Proof idea. The bounded visit property forces THMs to terminate in linear time. In the
    tree-to-tree case, the branches are produced in parallel by forking processes, each taking
    linear time. We give a more rigorous proof in Section 3.2.                               ◀

        Just as recent works on polyregular functions [3, 37] seem to answer “what string-to-
    string functions of polynomial size increase can be computed by ‘reasonable’ transducers”, we
    envision our study of tree-to-tree Hennie machines as a contribution towards understanding
    “what LSHI functions can be computed by ‘reasonable’ transducers”. The class of functions
    computed by THMs does not seem to coincide with any previously defined formalism.5 Yet
    we argue that it is robust, by exhibiting closure properties and alternative characterizations.
    These results are summarized in Figure 1; the rest of this introduction discusses them further.


    1
      Reducing various quantitative decision problems to boundedness questions is a general idea with wide-
      ranging applicability in automata theory, see e.g. [8, 1]. Note also that using a quite different approach,
      Gallot, Lhote and Nguyễn [27] gave alternative proofs of Theorem 1.2 and of a generalization of the
      LSHI half of Theorem 1.1.
    2
      Let us also mention the work of Bojańczyk et al. [5, 4] on string-to-string MSO interpretations, an
      intermediate case between transductions and set interpretations. They are one of the equivalent
      characterizations of polyregular functions.
    3
      Actually, this condition does not appear in Hennie’s original work [34, Section II.C] on language
      recognition by bounded-visit Turing machines, nor in its subsequent extension by Rajlich [48] to string
      outputs. However the name “Hennie machine” seems be consistently used to refer to a machine
      model that satisfies this restriction on the tape head, starting with its introduction by Engelfriet and
      Hoogeboom [17, §7] (for later examples, cf. [32, 31, 33]).
    4
      Guillon, Pighizzini, Prigioniero and Průša [32, 31, 33] define Hennie machines (as language acceptors)
      by a linear-time restriction instead of a bounded-visit restriction, but these are effectively equivalent,
      see [32, Lemma 1] or [34, proof of Theorem 3].
    5
      Though in the tree-to-string case, it collapses to MSO transductions (Corollary 5.4). In the string-
      to-string case this was one of Engelfriet and Hoogeboom’s main results on Hennie machines [17,
      Theorem 26].
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                                3


                                                LHI-MTT ◦ THM            THM ◦ MSO transductions
 Closure prop.                                Corollary 8.5                         Theorem 7.9
                                Corollary 4.8                                                     Theorem 5.3
      Inclusions   LSHI-MTT                      tree-to-tree Hennie Machines (THM)                                MSO-SI

                                                              Theorem 7.1
    Equivalences        affine λ-transducers with additive branching      actor-based tree transducers



      Figure 1 Summary of the main results. An arrow indicates inclusion of function classes.


Closure properties. We show that the functions computed by THM
 1. are regularity reflecting, i.e. the inverse image of a regular tree language is effectively
     regular (Corollary 8.1);
 2. are closed under precomposition by MSO tree transductions (i.e. macro tree transducers
     of linear size increase);
 3. are closed under postcomposition by LHI-MTTs.
As a consequence, THMs subsume the composition hierarchy of LHI-MTTs, whose strictness
we also show (Corollary 9.1).
     The proof of the third item relies on characteristics of LHI-MTTs uncovered in Gallot et
al.’s proof of Theorem 1.1, as discussed at the beginning. We relate these characteristics to a
“narrow-visit” condition on THMs. Narrow-visit implies LHI, and a large part of the proof
consists in showing: [narrow-visit THM] ◦ THM = THM (Theorem 8.4).
     For the first two items above, it is convenient to use our alternative characterization, due
to its good compositional properties.

λ-calculus characterization. We prove that THMs are expressively equivalent to affine6
λ-transducers with additive branching. This is a formalism in the style of linear higher-order
tree transducers [26, 46] or “implicit automata” [45, 44, 47]. Compared to these works, we
extend the type system of these affine λ-transducers with the additive conjunction ‘&’ of
linear logic, and use it7 in the encoding of output trees to group the children of a node.
Intuitively, this means that the affineness restrictions apply separately for each output branch
(just like the bounded-visit restriction of our Hennie machines) rather than globally.
    This idea is natural in the context of the previous work of Clairambault and Murawski [7].
They prove that two formalisms generating infinite trees are expressively equivalent: one
based on affine λ-calculus and using additive branching, the other based on automata whose
infinite memory is subject to a bounded-visit condition. Our own proof is a direct adaptation
of theirs.
    To compile λ-transducers into THMs, we reuse a form of finite-memory geometry of
    interaction8 developed in [7]. This involves a detour through yet another model of
    computation, based on communicating finite-state processes that we call “actors”.9


6
  In the λ-calculus, a linear (resp. affine) function uses its argument exactly (resp. at most) once. Affineness
  is closer to the “single use restrictions” in automata theory.
7
  An idea originating in the work of Clairambault, Grellois and Murawski [6].
8
  The name “Geometry of Interaction” refers to a family of semantics (both operational and denotational)
  of linear logic and λ-calculi, closely related to game semantics.
9
  They were originally called “transducers” [7, §3.2], but we avoid this name here to avoid confusion. The
  name “actor” alludes both to the geometry of interaction and to the more general “Actor model” of
  message-passing computation [35, 12, 39].
4   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


          The converse translation is more technically elementary, but of broader significance in the
          grand scheme of things: it gives us regularity reflection. In a paper closely related to our
          work [9], Colcombet, Lhote and Ohlmann leverage this result to prove that string-to-string
          MSO-SI are regularity-reflecting — with the side effect of settling an old open problem
          on automatic structures, cf. [24, §1]. One initial impetus for our work, actually, was to
          provide this piece of the proof of [9]. The use of “yield-Hennie machines” in [9] led us to
          introduce and study tree-to-tree Hennie machines more generally, with an independent
          motivation coming from the line of work on MTTs described previously.

    ▶ Remark 1.4. Without the affineness constraint, simply typed λ-transducers subsume
    virtually all transducer models (for both strings and trees) from the literature, see e.g. [44,
    §1.4.1].
        Regularity reflection for λ-transducers (cf. [29, §5.3.1] or [44, Corollary 1.4.1]10 ) is a
    straightforward application of the naive set-theoretic semantics of the simply typed λ-calculus:
    if we interpret the base type as a finite set of states, then all higher-order types are also
    interpreted as finite sets, and λ-terms are interpreted as elements of these sets. This
    technically simple yet conceptually deep idea underlies several connections between automata
    theory and λ-calculus, from the use of finitary denotational semantics in higher-order model
    checking [51, 30] to the theory of regular languages of λ-terms [49, 42, 43]. Let us note that
    Clairambault and Murawski’s aforementioned [7] comes from a line of work motivated by
    higher-order model checking [6, 41].

    Plan of the paper. In Section 2 we fix some notations and recall some generalities on tree
    automata/transducers. In Section 3 we introduce unrestricted tree-to-tree Hennie machines,
    the bounded-visit restriction (defining THMs) and the narrow-visit restriction, as well as
    some features extending THMs. The three sections that follow are independent; we translate:
        LSHI-MTTs to THMs in §4;
        THMs to MSO set interpretations in §5;
        actor-based tree transducers to THMs in §6.
    In §7 we use actors to relate THMs and λ-transducers, and deduce the closure by precomposi-
    tion by MSO transductions. In §8 we look at postcomposition properties: we prove regularity
    reflection (via λ-transducers) and postcomposition by LHI-MTT. Finally, in §9 we study the
    LHI-MTT composition hierarchy.


     2        Notations & preliminaries
    A ranked set is a set Σ endowed with a function rk : Σ → N. A finite ranked set is called a
    ranked alphabet. We use the notations Σ(k) = {σ ∈ Σ | rk(σ) = k} and RΣ = max(rk(Σ)).
    We use [k] as a shorthand for the set {1, . . . , k}.
       A tree t over a ranked set Σ is defined by:
       a nonempty prefix-closed domain Dom(t) ⊂ [RΣ ]∗ , whose elements are called the nodes of
       t;
       a map labt : Dom(t) → Σ, the labeling of t, such that

              ∀u ∈ Dom(t),       {i ∈ N | ui ∈ Dom(t)} = [rk(labt (u))]


    10
         Corollary of Hillebrand and Kanellakis’s [36, Theorem 3.4], which is the origin of Nguyễn and Pradic’s
         aforementioned “implicit automata” research programme.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                    5


Thus, we also refer to rk(labt (u)) as the rank of the node u.
   We write TΣ for the set of trees over Σ, and when Σ ∩ Y = ∅,

    TΣ (Y ) = TΣ∪Y      with rk(y) = 0 ∀y ∈ Y

In other words, the elements of TΣ (Y ) are like trees over Σ except that some leaves may
have labels from Y .
    The axioms entail that Dom(t) contains the empty sequence ε; it is called the root of t.
The leaves are the rank 0 nodes, or equivalently, the maximal nodes for the prefix ordering.
This ordering is also called the ancestor relation on nodes, and its converse is the descendant
relation. For u ∈ Dom(t) \ {ε}, we write u↑ for the parent of u, i.e. the unique node for
which ∃i ∈ [RΣ ] : u = (u↑)i.
    We write Dk = {↑} ∪ [k] for the set of directions we can move in from a node of arity
k in a tree, where ↑ represents the upward direction towards the parent. According to the
previous notations, if u = ̸ ε is a rank k node of a tree t and d ∈ Dk , then ud defines a node
in t (one of the neighbors in u).
    A partial branch b of t is the downward closure of a node s — its endpoint — in Dom(t)
with respect to the prefix order. A branch, or total branch for disambiguation purposes, is a
partial branch whose endpoint is a leaf.
    The size |t| of a tree t is the cardinality of its domain. Its height height(t) is the maximum
size of its branches minus one.
    For a node s in a tree t, the subtree of t rooted at s is defined by:

    Dom(t↾s ) = {u ∈ [RΣ ]∗ | su ∈ Dom(t)}
      labt↾s (u) = labt (su)

The substitution of s by t′ in t is obtained from t by replacing the subtree rooted at s by t′ —
formally:

    Dom(t[s ← t′ ]) = (Dom(t) \ {s} · [RΣ ]∗ ) ∪ {s} · Dom(r)
                        (
                          labt′ (v) if u = sv for some v ∈ Dom(r)
      labt[s←t′ ] (u) =
                          labt (u) otherwise

In this paper, it is often (but not always) the case that in such a substitution, s is a leaf; we
then speak of a first-order substitution.
    For two families ⃗σ = (σi ) of distinct letters and ⃗t′ = (t′i ) of trees with the same indices,
we denote by t[⃗σ ← ⃗t′ ] or t[σi ← t′i ∀i] the simultaneous substitution of all nodes of t with
label σi of t by t′i (recall that this replaces the entire subtrees rooted at these nodes). In the
case of a singleton family we write t[σ ← t′ ].
    For σ ∈ Σ of rank k and t1 , . . . , tk ∈ TΣ , we write σ(t1 , . . . , tk ) for the unique tree whose
root has label σ and whose subtree rooted at the node i is ti for all i ∈ [k]. Every tree can be
uniquely decomposed this way; since |ti | < |σ(t1 , . . . , tk )| this allows reasoning by structural
induction.

2.1      A running example
Let Σexa = {a, b} with rk(a) = 2 and rk(b) = 0. We define pbt : N → TΣexa (for “perfect
binary tree”) by:

    pbt(0) = b       pbt(n + 1) = a(pbt(n), pbt(n)) for n ∈ N
6   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


    and our running example exa : TΣexa → TΣexa by

        exa(t) = pbt(| Dom(t) ∩ 1∗ 2∗ |)

    In other words, height(exa(t)) counts the number of nodes of t that are reached from the
    root by paths that cannot take a “turn” from going right to going left. This function has:
    exponential size increase: on inputs a(a(. . . a(b, b) · · · ), b), b);
    linear size-to-height increase: height(exa(t)) ⩽ |t|;
    quadratic height increase: the number of words in 1∗ 2∗ of length at most n is (n+1)(n+2)/2.

    2.2     Classical tree automata
    A deterministic bottom-up tree automaton over Σ consists of:
        a finite set Q of states;
        for each σ ∈ Σ, a transition function δ[σ] : Qrk(σ) → Q.
    We may identify δ[σ] with an element of Q when rk(σ) = 0. As usual, this can be extended to
    δ[t] ∈ Q for every tree t ∈ TΣ by structural induction: δ[σ(t1 , . . . , tk )] = δ[σ](δ[t1 ], . . . , δ[tk ]).
        We shall be concerned with two extensions of deterministic bottom-up tree automata
    with additional data:
        A bottom-up recognizer comes with a codomain F and a map φ : Q  F . It defines a
        recognizable function t 7→ φ(δ[t]) from trees to F (whose range is always finite even when
        F is infinite). The languages whose indicator functions are recognizable (with F = {0, 1})
        form the well-known class of regular tree languages.
        A bottom-up relabeler comes with a rank-preserving map ρ : Σ × Q → Γ. It defines a
        shape-preserving tree-to-tree function, called a bottom-up relabeling: for k = rk(σ),

                 JRK : TΣ → TΓ             (where R is the relabeler)
            σ(t1 , . . . , tk ) 7→ ρ(σ, δ[σ(t1 , . . . , tk )])(JRK(t1 ), . . . , JRK(tk ))

    2.3     Tree-generating machines
    We recall from [46, §3] a lightweight formalism for describing various tree transducer models.
    A tree-generating machine with output alphabet Γ is made of:
        a set Conf of configurations;
        an initial configuration Cinit ∈ Conf;
        a (partial) computation-step function Conf ⇀ TΓ (Conf).
    TΓ (Conf) should be seen as a set of global states of a computation:
        the nodes with labels in Γ are part of the eventual output tree, which is being produced
        in a top-down fashion;
        the leaves with labels in Conf correspond to processes running in parallel, each in charge
        of producing one of the remaining subtrees of the output.
    By taking rewrite rules that substitute a leaf by the image of its label by the computation-step
    function, we get a confluent rewriting system on TΓ (Conf). A run is a rewriting sequence
    starting from Cinit . By confluence, there is at most one tree in TΓ that can be reached by the
    runs (indeed, such trees are normal forms). If it exists, we call it the output of the machine.
        To define the semantics JT K : TΣ ⇀ TΓ of a tree transducer T , our methodology is to
    specify how to build a tree-generating machine from T and a given input tree t ∈ TΣ ,
    depending on the transducer model. The output of this tree-generating machine is then used
    as the definition of JT K(t).
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                7


2.4     A branchwise semantics
It is often useful to reason on the trajectory of a single process producing one of the output
branches, rather than the entire family of processes producing the output tree in parallel.
This is why we propose an alternative presentation of the semantics of a tree-generating
machine, which does not appear in [46].
    Let Γ be the ranked output alphabet. We define the set of branch words of a tree over Γ
by structural induction:

               brawo(γ) = {γ} when rk(γ) = 0
                                 [
     brawo(γ(t1 , . . . , tk )) = (γ, i) · brawo(ti ) when k ⩾ 1
                                i



▷ Claim 2.1. For t ∈ TΓ , b = (γ1 , i1 ) . . . (γn , in )γn+1 ∈ brawo(t):
   labt (i1 . . . iℓ ) = γℓ+1 for all ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , n};
   mapping b to {ε, i1 , . . . , (i1 . . . in )} defines a size-preserving bijection from brawo(t) to
   the total branches of t.
Consequently, brawo : TΓ → P(Γ         e ∗ Γ(0) ) is injective, where

     e = {(γ, i) | γ ∈ Γ, i ∈ {1, . . . , rk(γ)}}
     Γ

We therefore aim to characterize the output of a tree-generating machine (with the notations
of the previous subsection) through its branch words. To do so, we consider a labeled
                                                  e∗ .
transition system over Conf ∪ Γ(0) with labels in Γ
                                    e ∗ and x ∈ Conf ∪ Γ(0) .
▶ Definition 2.2. Let C ∈ Conf, b ∈ Γ
        b         def
     C→
      − x ⇐⇒ bx ∈ brawo(computation-step(C))
                                b
                         − ∗ y by the existence of some decomposition b = b1 . . . bn that
As expected, we define x →
labels some path
             1b       n b
     x = x0 −→ . . . −→ xn = y

This is an instance of labeled transition system with monoidal structure on labels, see for
instance [50, Example 2.3].

▷ Claim 2.3. If the output of the tree-generating machine exists, then its set of branch
                                          b
                   e ∗ , γ ∈ Γ(0) , Cinit →
words is {bγ | b ∈ Γ                      − ∗ γ}.

In general, we refer to a path starting from Cinit (not necessarily ending on an element of
Γ(0) ) as a branch-outputting run.

 3      Tree-to-tree Hennie machines
3.1     Unrestricted THMs: definition & semantics
▶ Definition 3.1. An unrestricted tree-to-tree Hennie machine (uTHM) is a tuple H =
(Q, M, ⊤, Σ, Γ, qinit , δ) where:
    Q is the finite set of states of H;
    M is the finite set of memory symbols of H;
8   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


        ⊤ ∈ M is the initial memory value of H;
        Σ (resp. Γ) is the ranked input (resp. output) alphabet;
        qinit ∈ Q is the initial state of H;
        δ : Q × Σ × M ⇀ TΓ (Q × M × DRΣ ) is the (partial) transition function of H, such that
        for all σ ∈ Σ,

           δ(Q × {σ} × M ) ⊆ TΓ (Q × M × Drk(σ) )

    The semantics of this uTHM has been informally sketched in the introduction. To describe it
    rigorously, we use the formalism of tree-generating machines. We start with its configurations
    over an input t ∈ TΣ : they are tuples (u, q, µ) where
        u is a node of t, the current position;
        q ∈ Q is the current state;
        µ : Dom(t) → M describes the current memory values.
    For such a configuration and (q ′ , m, d) ∈ Q × M × DRΣ , let
                                                    (
                      ′                ′   ′          µ′ (u) = m
        (u, q, µ) = (q , m, d) = (ud, q , µ ) where
                                                      µ′ (v) = µ(v) for v ̸= u

    — the machine “writes the symbol m in memory at the current position u before moving to
    the new position ud”. The result of this operation is undefined if ud ∈
                                                                          / Dom(t).
       We extend the definition of = to TΓ (Q×M ×DRΣ ) by application to the leaves; inductively:
    C = γ(t1 , . . . , tk ) = γ(C = t1 , . . . , C = tk ).
       Let Conf(H, t) be the set of configurations of the uTHM H on the input tree t. The
    computation-step function is

        Conf(H, t) ⇀ TΓ (Conf(H, t))
          (u, q, µ) 7→ (u, q, µ) = δ(q, labt (u), µ(u))

    Finally, the initial configuration is Cinit (t) = (ε, qinit , (v 7→ ⊤)).
    ▶ Example 3.2. We give a uTHM that computes exa from §2.1.
       There are 2 states, q0 (initial) and q1 .
       There are 4 memory symbols ⊤, L, R, ✠.
       The transitions are (undefined in the 2 unspecified cases):

           (q0 , a, ⊤) 7→ a((q1 , L, 2), (q1 , L, 2))             (q0 , b, ⊤) 7→ a(b, b)
           (q1 , a, ⊤) 7→ a((q1 , R, 2), (q1 , R, 2))              (q1 , a, L) 7→ (q0 , ✠, 1)
            (q1 , b, ⊤) 7→ a((q1 , ✠, ↑), (q1 , ✠, ↑))             (q1 , a, R) 7→ (q1 , ✠, ↑)

    On an input tree t ∈ TΣexa , all branch-outputting runs ending in b traverse the same
    configurations in the same order; the only difference is in the labels ((a, 1) vs. (a, 2)). Such a
    run starts by writing L to the root, and going down to the right child in state q1 . It then
    goes right, writing R in memory on all encountered nodes, until it reaches a leaf. It then
    starts going up while writing ✠ on the visited nodes (including the leaf) until it reaches a
    node where the memory is L. After having thus visited all nodes in Dom(t) ∩ 2∗ , it then
    moves to the left child of the root, which has not yet been visited, and switches back to the
    initial state q0 . The computation then proceeds as it did before on the subtree rooted at the
    left child.
        Note that the transitions only output a node a when the current memory is ⊤, which
    ensures that each input node is counted at most once when determining the output height.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                            9


3.2    The bounded-visit restriction
▶ Remark 3.3. A uTHM computing a string-to-boolean function (i.e. max(rk(Σ)) = 1 and
Γ = {true : 0, false : 0}) is the same thing as a deterministic linear bounded automaton. It
is well known that this automaton model can recognize at least all context-free languages [40,
Theorem 3] while its nondeterministic variant recognizes precisely the context-sensitive
languages [40, Theorem 1].
   In order to stay within the realm of “finite-state computability” we shall therefore impose
the bounded-visit restriction. The latter can be conveniently defined by using the branchwise
semantics.

▶ Definition 3.4. Let H be a uTHM with input alphabet Σ.
    The number of visits of a branch-outputting run of H at a node u (resp. a set of nodes
S) of the input tree is the number of configurations in the path whose current position is u
(resp. is in S).
    H is bounded-visit on an input language L ⊆ TΣ whenever there is a uniform bound N
such that, for any t ∈ L, any node u of t and any branch-outputting run on the input t, the
number of visits at u is at most N . A tree-to-tree Hennie machine (THM) is a uTHM that is
bounded-visit on all inputs (L = TΣ ).

Example 3.2 is a THM: it visits each node at most twice.
   We can now establish linear size-to-height increase rigorously.


Proof of Claim 1.3. By definition of height & Claims 2.1 / 2.3,

   height(JHK(t)) = max{|b| | ∃γ : bγ ∈ brawo(JHK(t))}
                                                        b 1     b  ℓ
                   = max{|b1 . . . bℓ | | ∃γ : Cinit (t) −→ . . . −→ γ}

The labeled transition system → for H has labels derived from the branch words of the
range δ(Q × Σ × M ) of the transition function of H (to see this, unfold the definition of the
computation-step function). Since this range is finite, |bi | = O(1) in the above description,
so |b1 . . . bℓ | = O(ℓ). Finally, ℓ = O(|t|) because any branch-outputting run of a THM visits
each of the |t| nodes O(1) times — this is the bounded-visit restriction.                    ◀


▶ Remark 3.5. Unfortunately, it is undecidable whether a uTHM is a THM, already in the
string-to-boolean case [32, Theorem 1 + Lemma 1]. However, given an explicit bound, we
have a decidability result (Corollary 5.5).
    We also define the number of downwards visits of a branch-outputting run of a uTHM at
an input node u by counting the occurrences of transitions of the form (u↑, . . . ) → (u, . . . )
(thus, if u is the root, this number is zero). The following property guarantees that “bounded-
downwards-visit” is the same thing as bounded-visit.

▷ Claim 3.6. The number of visits at a node is at most the sum of the numbers of downwards
visits at this node and at its children.

Proof. Along a branch-outputting run, the position of a uTHM moves locally, therefore every
upwards visit of u from ui must have been preceded by a downwards visit of ui from u. ◀
10   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


     3.3    Weight-reducing THMs & totality
     The bounded-visit restriction is defined semantically. We present here a syntactic counterpart,
     taken from [32] for Hennie machine as acceptors of string languages.

     ▶ Definition 3.7. A uTHM with the set M of memory symbols and the transition function δ
     is weight-reducing if there exists a partial order on M such that
         the initial symbol ⊤ is maximal;
         for every m ∈ M , only memory symbols that are strictly smaller than m appear in
         δ(. . . , . . . , m).
     For instance, Example 3.2 is weight-reducing (⊤ > L, R > ✠). The following result may be
     compared with [32, Lemma 2].

     ▶ Proposition 3.8. Every weight-reducing uTHM is a THM.
        Conversely, given a uTHM H and N ∈ N, one can compute a weight-reducing THM H′
     such that JH′ K is a total function and:
        for t in the domain of JHK s.t. all branch-outputting runs of H visit at most N times
        each node, JH′ K(t) = JHK(t);
        on other inputs, H′ returns an output that contains some chosen default leaf symbol.
     In particular, if H is a THM whose number of visits is uniformly bounded by N , then
     JHK ⊆ JH′ K.

     Speaking of totality, the semantics of a THM is naturally a partial function, but we focus on
     the case when the function happens to be total. This restriction is not very significant: as
     we explain below (Corollary 5.5), the domain of a partial THM is effectively regular.

     3.4    The narrow-visit restriction
     Recall that a chain in a partially ordered set (poset) is a totally ordered subset, while an
     antichain is a subset of pairwise incomparable elements. When we say that a set of nodes in
     a tree is an antichain, we mean with respect to the ancestor ordering.

     ▶ Definition 3.9. A uTHM H is narrow-visit on an input language L whenever there is a
     uniform bound N such that, for any t ∈ L, any antichain S of t and any branch-outputting
     run on the input t, the number of visits at S is at most N .

     We rephrase the narrow-visit property by combining a basic observation with a classical
     duality theorem (which is closely related to other dualities in combinatorial optimization,
     cf. [25]).

     ▶ Theorem 3.10 (Dilworth [14]). A poset is included in the union of N < ∞ chains iff all
     its antichains have cardinality at most N .

     ▷ Claim 3.11. For a set of tree nodes, the following are equivalent:
        it is a chain (for the ancestor ordering);
        it is included in some branch of the tree.

     ▶ Corollary 3.12. An uTHM H is narrow-visit on an input language L if and only if the two
     following conditions hold jointly:
         H is bounded-visit on L;
         for every branch-outputting run whose input tree is in L, the set of visited nodes (i.e.
         those with a nonzero number of visits) is included in the union of O(1) input branches.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                           11


▶ Corollary 3.13. If a uTHM is narrow-visit on all inputs, then it is a THM and it has
linear height increase.

Proof. As we have seen when proving Claim 1.3, the output height is at most linear in the
length of branch-outputting runs. On an input t, such a run visits O(1) branches, each of
which has at most height(t) + 1 nodes, and each node is visited O(1) times.            ◀

3.5    Basic extensions
To conclude Section 3, we present three additional features that can be added to uTHMs
and THMs. We show that these extensions are conservative, i.e. do not lead to an increase in
expressive power.

Stay-instructions The positions of two successive configurations of an uTHM are always
distinct neighbors. We extend the syntax of transitions to allow staying on the current
position; this is often convenient in our constructions of THMs. Stay-instructions are indicated
by a new symbol ⟲, and relax the requirement on the transition function δ to be

   δ(Q × {σ} × M ) ⊆ TΓ (Q × M × ({⟳} ∪ Drk(σ) ))

The semantics is extended by taking u⟲ = u for any input node u.

▶ Lemma 3.14. Every uTHM with stay-instructions can be effectively translated to an
equivalent uTHM. This translation preserves the bounded-visit and narrow-visit restrictions
on any input language.

Bottom-up initialization. Our second conservativity result can be understood as a “closure
under precomposition” property.

▶ Lemma 3.15. Given a uTHM H and a bottom-up relabeler R (cf. §2), whose respective
input and output alphabets match, one can effectively construct a uTHM H′ such that
JH′ K = JHK ◦ JRK.
   If H is bounded-visit on JRK(L), then H′ is bounded-visit on L.

The idea of the proof is to perform a post-order tree traversal that computes and records in
memory, at each node, the state reached there by the deterministic bottom-up automaton
contained in R.

▶ Definition 3.16. A uTHM with bottom-up initialization is:
    the data of a uTHM — we reuse the notations of Def. 3.1;
    a deterministic bottom-up tree automaton (Q′ , δ ′ );
    a map init : Q′ → M .
Its semantics is the same as for uTHM except that for an input tree t ∈ TΣ , the initial
memory value at node u is init(δ ′ [t↾u ]).
    We then define in the same way as Definition 3.4 the bounded-visit condition. A THM
with bottom-up initialization is a uTHM with bottom-up initialization that happens to be
bounded-visit.

▶ Proposition 3.17. Every uTHM with bottom-up initialization can be effectively translated
to an equivalent uTHM.
    The translation preserves the bounded-visit condition on any input language, but not the
narrow-visit condition.
12   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


     Proof. For any uTHM H′′ with bottom-up initialization, let:
        R be the bottom-up relabeler using (Q′ , δ ′ ) from the above definition and ρ : (σ, q ′ ) 7→
        (σ, init(q ′ ));
        H be a uTHM simulating H′′ while reading from the input letters the initial memory
        values when it encounters a node for the first time — thus, when H′′ is bounded-visit on
        all inputs, H is bounded-visit on the range of JRK.
     Then JH′′ K = JHK ◦ JRK. Therefore, we can apply Lemma 3.15.                                   ◀


     Regular lookaround. Finally, we consider the extension of tree-to-tree Hennie machines
     with the ability to use regular information about the current configuration to decide the next
     transition.

     ▶ Definition 3.18 (Encodings of configurations). Consider a uTHM H with the notations of
     Definition 3.1.
         For t ∈ TΣ , we encode (u, q, µ) ∈ Conf(H, t) as the tree over Σ × M × (Q ∪ {notHere}),
     with the ranks inherited from Σ, whose domain is Dom(t) and whose label at each node v is

         (labt (v), µ(v), [q if v = u, otherwise notHere])

     ▶ Definition 3.19. A uTHM with regular lookaround (uTHMR ) H from an input alphabet Σ
     to an output alphabet Γ consists of:
         the data of a uTHM without the transition function as in Definition 3.1, i.e. (Q, M, ⊤, Σ, Γ, qinit );
         a recognizable transition function δ : TΣ×M ×(Q∪{notHere}) → TΓ (Q × M × Dk ).
     The configurations of the machine H are the same as if it were an ordinary uTHM (the
     transition function is not involved). The semantics is defined analogously to ordinary uTHMs,
     except that the computation-step function passes the entire configuration to the transition
     function — since it is recognizable, it only depends on a finite amount of information:

         Conf(H, t) ⇀ TΓ (Conf(H, t))             (for t ∈ TΣ )
                  C 7→ C = δ(encoding of C)

     We combine bottom-up initialization with dynamic maintenance of local lookaround informa-
     tion to prove:

     ▶ Theorem 3.20. Every uTHMR can be effectively translated to an equivalent uTHM. The
     translation preserves the bounded-visit condition on any input language.

     ▶ Corollary 3.21. The classes of functions computed by uTHMs and by THMs are both closed
     by precomposition by MSO relabelings.

     The aforementioned MSO relabelings are tree transformations that keep the shape of a
     tree (i.e. its domain) while changing its labels in a regular fashion; see for instance [11,
     Definition 7.20] for a book reference.
     ▶ Remark 3.22. For automata models such as e.g. tree-walking tree transducers and macro
     tree transducers, regular lookaround morally amounts to preprocessing by MSO relabelings.
     But for THMs, this is not the case because the information given by the regular lookaround
     depends not only on the input tree and current position, but also on the current memory
     values at each node.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                         13


 4        Macro tree transducers
Notations specific to this section. We reserve two special sets of symbols, a set X = {xi :
i ∈ N \ {0}} of variables and another set Y = {yi : i ∈ N \ {0}} of parameters. We also write
Xk = {xi : i ⩽ k} and Yk = {yi : i ⩽ k} for k ∈ N.
    A tree in TΣ (Y ), whose leaves may be parameters, is called a tree context over Σ. A
k-ary tree context is a tree in TΣ (Yk ).
    For Q a ranked set and Z an arbitrary set, ⟨Q, Z⟩ is the ranked set of pairs ⟨q, z⟩ for
q ∈ Q, z ∈ Z, with rk(⟨q, z⟩) = rk(q).

4.1       MTTs: definition and semantics
▶ Definition 4.1. A (total deterministic) MTT M from an input alphabet Σ to an output
alphabet Γ (both ranked) consists of:
   a finite ranked set Q of states & an initial state qinit ∈ Q((0)) ;
    for each state q ∈ Q and each input letter σ ∈ Σ, a context

          RHSM (q, σ) ∈ TΓ∪⟨Q,Xrk(σ) ⟩ (Yrk(q) )

The latter is meant to be the right-hand side of a rewrite rule

      ⟨q, σ(x1 , . . . , xrk(σ) )⟩(y1 , . . . , yrk(q) ) → RHSM (q, σ)

Let us illustrate what this means before giving a formal definition:

▶ Example 4.2. Here is an MTT for the function exa from §2.1.

           ⟨q0 , a(x1 , x2 )⟩ → ⟨q1 , x2 ⟩(a(⟨q0 , x1 ⟩, ⟨q0 , x1 ⟩))
                     ⟨q0 , b⟩ → a(b, b)     (i.e. pbt(1) as defined in §2.1)
      ⟨q1 , a(x1 , x2 )⟩(y1 ) → ⟨q1 , x2 ⟩(a(y1 , y1 ))
               ⟨q1 , b⟩(y1 ) → a(y1 , y1 )

We have ⟨q0 , a(b, b)⟩ → ⟨q1 , b⟩(a(⟨q0 , b⟩, ⟨q0 , b⟩))                       → ⟨q1 , b⟩(a(pbt(1), ⟨q0 , b⟩))
                            → ⟨q1 , b⟩(pbt(2)) → pbt(3) = exa(a(b, b)).
In the literature, the semantics of MTTs allow the rewrite rules to apply to any subtree
rooted at some node with label of the form ⟨q, t⟩. Let us call such trees redexes:

      Redex(M) = {t ∈ TΓ∪⟨Q,TΣ ⟩ | labt (ε) ∈ ⟨Q, TΣ ⟩}

There is also a standard notion [21, Definition 3.4] of outside-in derivation 11 that only
rewrites outermost redexes: those that are not contained in some other redex, i.e. whose root
does not have a ⟨Q, TΣ ⟩-labeled strict ancestor. The example above is not outside-in: the
only steps rewriting outmost redexes are the first and the last.
    We now capture outside-in derivations — which suffice to interpret total deterministic
MTTs as total functions [21, §4.1] — in the framework of tree-generating machines. This
serves as our reference definition of the semantics of MTTs in this paper, avoiding the need
to manipulate “second-order substitutions” in full generality.


11
     Or “OI derivation”, corresponding to call-by-name evaluation in the λ-calculus, while inside-out (IO)
     derivations correspond to call-by-value.
14   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


         The tree-generating machine for the MTT M on an input t ∈ TΣ has the set of con-
     figurations Redex(M) and the initial configuration ⟨qinit , t⟩. Its computation-step function
     is

         Redex(M) → TΓ∪⟨Q,TΣ ⟩ ∼      = TΓ (Redex(M))
                            (
                             replace every label ⟨q ′ , xi ⟩ by ⟨q ′ , ti ⟩
        ⟨q, σ(⃗t)⟩(⃗t′ ) 7→
                             in RHSM (q, σ)[⃗y ← ⃗t′ ]

     using the fact that:

     ▷ Claim 4.3. The simultaneous substitution

        [r seen as a leaf ← r seen as a tree           ∀r ∈ Redex(M)]
                                               ∼
     defines a bijection TΓ (Redex(M)) −
                                       → TΓ∪⟨Q,TΣ ⟩ whose inverse turns outermost redexes into
     leaves.

     4.2    Syntactic criteria for linear (size-to-)height
     We now recall the results of Gallot, Maneth, Nakano and Peyrat [28] on L(S)HI-MTTs.
     Originally, they are stated in terms of MTTs with regular lookahead. As usual, regular
     lookahead amounts to preprocessing by a bottom-up relabeling; we propose a rephrasing
     that takes this point of view.

     ▶ Definition 4.4. Let M be an MTT with the notations above.
        Let us fix a rank 0 symbol □. We define the MTT M■ with:
        input alphabet Σ ∪ {□} and output alphabet Γ ∪ ⟨Q, {■}⟩;
        the same ranked set of states Q as M;
        the rules of M, plus ⟨q, □⟩(⃗y ) → ⟨q, ■⟩(⃗y ) for q ∈ Q.
     For instance, for the MTT Mexa of Example 4.2,

        JM■
          exa K(a(□, b)) = ⟨q1 , ■⟩(pbt(2))

     M■ is called the “extension” of M in [28]. Its inputs are trees in TΣ ({□}); they can be seen
     as inputs to M in TΣ with some “missing subtrees” marked by □. Informally, the output
     of M■ represents what happens if we run M on such an incomplete input, computing as
     much as possible while recording the places where M gets stuck because it wants to explore
     a missing subtree.
         For an input language L ⊆ TΣ , we denote by L□ ⊆ TΣ ({□}) the set of “inputs from L
     with missing subtrees”, that is, the smallest superset of L closed under replacing a subtree
     by □. The set of “inputs from L with a single missing subtree” is

        L1□ = {t ∈ L□ | t has only one □-labeled leaf}

     ▶ Definition 4.5. For t′ ∈ TΓ∪⟨Q,{■}⟩ , let height■ (t′ ) be the maximum number of ⟨Q, {■}⟩-
     labeled nodes on a branch of t′ .
         An MTT M is finite nesting (resp. finite yield nesting) on an input language L when
     height■ ◦JM■ K is bounded on L1□ (resp. L□ ).
                                           ′                                             ′    ∗ ∗
     One can show that height■ (M■   exa (t )) is the number of □-labeled nodes in Dom(t ) ∩ 1 2 for
          ′
     all t ∈ TΣexa ({□}). Therefore, Mexa is finite nesting, but not finite yield nesting — which is
     consistent with the (size-to-)height increase properties stated in §2.1, since:
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                    15


▶ Theorem 4.6 (rephrasing of [28, §4]). Given an MTT M, one can compute an MTT M′
and a bottom-up relabeler R such that:
   JMK = JM′ K ◦ JRK;
   M is LSHI iff M′ is finite nesting on the range of R;
   M is LHI iff M′ is finite yield nesting on the range of R.

4.3       From MTTs to (u)THMs
The main result of this section is:

▶ Theorem 4.7. Any (total deterministic) MTT M can be effectively translated to a uTHM
H such that:
   JMK = JHK;
   for any input tree t, any antichain S of nodes of t, and any branch-outputting run of H,
   the number of downwards visits at S is at most height■ ◦JM■ K(t[s ← □ ∀s ∈ S]).
The second item implies that, for any input language L,

            M finite nesting on L =⇒ H bounded-visit on L
      M finite yield nesting on L =⇒ H narrow-visit on L

    To give some intuition for the proof, one may see the rules of an MTT as mutually recursive
definitions of JqK : TΣ × TΓ rk(q) → TΓ for each state q. This recursion can be compiled to
a call stack. In fact, MTTs are expressively equivalent to pushdown tree transducers [22,
Theorem 5.16],12 though we do not use this result and prefer to give a direct construction
from MTTs in order to control the number of visits. To represent the stack in memory, our
uTHM records at each node the currently active recursive call, if any, whose argument in
TΣ is the subtree rooted at that node. There can be at most one such call per node, so
we can use a finite set of memory symbols. As for height■ ◦JM■ K(t[s ← □ ∀s ∈ S]), it
overapproximates the total number of calls, in a branch-outputting run, whose arguments in
TΣ are subtrees rooted at nodes in S.
    From Theorems 4.6 and 4.7, combined with Lemma 3.15 on precomposing THMs by
bottom-up relabelings, we get:

▶ Corollary 4.8. LSHI-MTT ⊂ THM.

▶ Corollary 4.9. Given an LHI-MTT M, one can compute an THM H and a bottom-up
relabeler R such that JMK = JHK ◦ JRK and H is narrow-visit on the range of JRK.

This last property is involved in the proof of Corollary 8.5.

 5        Inclusion in MSO set interpretations
We assume basic knowledge of monadic second-order logic. For a ranked alphabet Σ, the
formulas of MSO(Σ) use the atomic predicates σ(x), x ⩽anc y and childi (x, y) to express
respectively that x has label σ, x is an ancestor or y, and y is the i-th child of x.

▶ Definition 5.1 ([10]). An MSO set interpretation (on ranked trees), or MSO-SI for short,
consists of:


12
     Other similar equivalence results include HDT0L systems vs. a variant of pushdown transducers [23] &
     copyful streaming string transducers vs. marble transducers [16, 15].
16   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


        a natural number c;
        input and output ranked alphabets Σ and Γ;
        the following MSO(Σ) formulas, where X⃗ = X1 , . . . , Xc and Y
                                                                      ⃗ = Y1 , . . . , Yc are sequences
        of second-order variables:

                 label         ancestor             child
                   ⃗ γ∈Γ
             (φγ (X))               ⃗ Y
                              φanc (X, ⃗)          ⃗ Y
                                              (φi (X, ⃗ ))i⩽R
                                                             Γ



     An MSO-SI I on an input tree t generates a relational structure I(t) whose universe is the
     set of assignments

            ⃗ → P(Dom(t)) | ∃γ ∈ Γ : (t, ν) |= φγ (X)
                                                   ⃗
        
         ν: X

                                                   ⃗ and
     and whose relations are γ(ν) ⇐⇒ (t, ν) |= φγ (X)

                                              ⃗ Y
          ν ⩽anc ν ′ ⇐⇒ (t, ν, ν ′ ) |= φanc (X, ⃗)
                                                ⃗ Y
        childi (ν, ν ′ ) ⇐⇒ (t, ν, ν ′ ) |= φi (X, ⃗)   for i ⩽ RΓ

     Then JIK : TΣ ⇀ TΓ is defined on t, if, and only if, I(t) is isomorphic to a tree, which we
     take as the value of JIK(t).

     ▶ Example 5.2. We give an MSO-SI I defining our running example from §2.1. We assume
     that all formulas are restricted to nodes in 1∗ 2∗ , which is MSO definable by guarding all
     quantifications ∃x (resp. ∃X) with ψ1∗ 2∗ (x) = ∃z child∗1 (ε, z) ∧ child∗2 (z, x) (resp ∀x ∈
     X ψ1∗ 2∗ (x)) where child∗i is the transitive closure of the childi relation and ε is the constant
     marking the root. Intuitively, I relies on a (right-depth) ordering ⩽ of the nodes of the input
     in Dom(t) ∩ 1∗ 2∗ . We define the successor in this order by

        S⩽ (x, y) ≡ child2 (x, y) ∨ (∀z ¬ child2 (x, z))∧
                    ∃z child∗2 (z, x) ∧ ∀z ′ ¬ child2 (z ′ , z) ∧ child1 (z, y)
                                                                                  


     Then the output nodes of depth i are defined by partitions into X1 , X2 of the i-smallest
     elements of ⩽.
         Let us consider the formula ψdom (X1 , X2 ) stating that X1 and X2 are disjoint and X1 ∪X2
     is a set downward closed by ⩽, and max⩽ (X1 , X2 , x) which holds true if x is the ⩽-largest
     element in X1 ∪ X2 . Then we define T by c = 2, φa (X1 , X2 ) is ψdom and X1 ∪ X2 does not
     cover all ⩽, while φb (X1 , X2 ) is ψdom (X1 , X2 ) and X1 ∪ X2 does cover all ⩽. The ancestor
     formula is
                                                      ^
                                 φanc (X,⃗ Y
                                           ⃗ ) = ∀z        z ∈ X i ⇒ z ∈ Yi
                                                        i=1,2

                                                                         ⃗ Y
     where x ⩽ y is the transitive closure of S⩽ (x, y). And finally φi (X, ⃗ ) is the conjunction of
           ⃗ Y
     φanc (X, ⃗ ) and

                                       ⃗ x) ∧ max⩽ (Y
                           ∃x, y max⩽ (X,           ⃗ , y) ∧ S⩽ (x, y) ∧ y ∈ Yi

        The main result of this section is the following Theorem:

     ▶ Theorem 5.3. Any total THM H can be effectively translated to an MSO-SI I such that
     JHK = JIK.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                              17


Sketch of proof. The main ingredients of the proof are the notions of local and (coherent)
global profiles. Intuitively, a branch-outputting run of H is entirely characterized by the
finite visits it does to each input nodes. A local profile on an input node is then a sequence
of visits. A global profile simply associates to each input node a local profile. It is coherent
if the local profiles collectively describe a (partial) branch-outputting run. As a THM moves
step by step, the coherence of a global profile can be decided by neighboring properties and
hence it is MSO-definable.
    To define the MSO-SI I, we set c as the number of possible local profiles. By associating
each set Xp to a local profile p, an evaluation (t, ν) where the Xi are a partition of t defines
a global profile on Dom(t). The domain formulas φγ (X)         ⃗ state that the coloring X   ⃗ is a
coherent global profile and describes a branch-outputting and a distinguished node γ in its
last transition. The ancestor formula φanc (X,  ⃗ Y⃗ ) states that the global profile defined by Y
                                                                                                 ⃗
                                          ⃗                                      ⃗   ⃗
is an extension of the one defined by X. Finally, the successor formulas φi (X, Y ) are similar
to the ancestor formula, additionally requiring that the extension is only one step, i.e. with
a unique new visit that produces an element of Γ, the i-th successor of X.     ⃗                 ◀


▶ Corollary 5.4. Tree-to-string Hennie machines (i.e. THMs whose output alphabet have
maximum rank 1) can be effectively translated to equivalent MSO transductions.

Proof. Since the size of a string is equal to its height (plus one), by Claim 1.3 tree-to-string
THMs are linear size increase. MSO-SI of linear size increase can be translated to MSO
transductions [27, Theorem 1.5], therefore Theorem 5.3 gives the result.                      ◀


▶ Corollary 5.5. The subset of inputs of a uTHM on which it is defined and visits each node
at most N times is effectively a regular language.

Proof. Let H be a uTHM with JHK : TΣ ⇀ TΓ . We apply Proposition 3.8, taking a default
leaf symbol ■ ∈ / Γ. We then get a total THM H′ with output alphabet Γ ∪ {■} such that
   ′ −1
JH K (TΓ ) is the aforementioned subset. The first-order formula ∀x. ¬■(x) defines TΓ
within TΓ ({■}), so its inverse image by any MSO set interpretation is regular [10, §2.3].
(Corollary 8.1 states a stronger preservation property of THMs, but its proof goes through
λ-calculus.)                                                                             ◀


 6     Actors: an interactive model of computation

This section treats part of the equivalence proof between tree-to-tree Hennie machines and a
λ-calculus characterization — a part that that does not involve any λ-term. We introduce a
model of computation for tree-to-tree functions, based on a formalism from from Clairambault
and Murawski [7] of tree-generating, finite-state processes which we call actors. The main
result in this section (Lemma 6.10) is a translation from actor-based tree transducers with a
certain boundedness property to Hennie machines.
    The idea is that an actor and its environment interact by exchanging messages; during
the course of the interaction, both the actor and the environment may also output tree
nodes. We describe the allowed messages for an actor using types, which form a subset of
linear logic formulas (though a more general notion of interface would have been possible):
A, B ::= o | A ⊸ B | A & B.
18   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


     ▶ Definition 6.1 ([7, §3.1]). The sets IM(A) of incoming messages and OM(A) of outgoing
     messages at a type A are defined by:

                    IM(o) = {•}                                          OM(o) = ∅
           IM(A ⊸ B) = OM(A) + IM(B)                            OM(A ⊸ B) = IM(A) + OM(B)
            IM(A & B) = IM(A) + IM(B)                            OM(A & B) = OM(A) + OM(B)

     using the disjoint sum operation X + Y = {L} × X ∪ {R} × Y .

        Intuitively, an actor is in a passive state when it is waiting for an incoming message
     from the environment. Upon receiving this message, it becomes active, then performs
     some computation, and eventually sends an outgoing message, returning the control to the
     environment by becoming again passive.

     ▶ Definition 6.2 ([7, Def. 2]). An actor α of type A over the ranked alphabet Γ (notation:
     Γ ⊩ α : A) consists of:
        a finite set Q⊖ of passive states & an initial state q0⊖ ∈ Q⊖ ;
        a finite set Q⊕ of active states, nonempty, disjoint from Q⊖ ;
        two transition functions δ ⊖ : Q⊖ × IM(A) ⇀ Q⊕ and

                  δ ⊕ : Q⊕ ⇀ Q⊕ ∪ {γ(q1⊕ , . . . ) | γ ∈ Γ, qi⊕ ∈ Q⊕ } ∪ (Q⊖ × OM(A))
                                   | {z }
                    this notation implies that γ takes rk(γ) arguments


     When A = o, we associate to this actor the tree-generating machine:
        whose set of configurations is Q⊕ ;
        whose initial configuration is δ ⊖ (q0⊖ , •);
        whose computation-step function is δ ⊕ .
     The output of this machine is the tree generated by Γ ⊩ α : o.

     ▶ Example 6.3. Every tree over Γ can be generated by an actor with a single passive state,
     and whose active states correspond to the internal nodes of the tree.

     ▶ Example 6.4. We illustrate the use of multiple passive states with an actor of type
     A ⊸ (A & A). It relays messages back and forth between the A on the left of ⊸ and the two
     As on the right; the incoming messages on the left are forwarded to a recipient determined
     by the state. Formally: Q⊖ = {L, R} and Q⊕ , δ ⊖ , δ ⊕ are chosen to satisfy

                                OM(A)+(IM(A)+IM(A))               IM(A)+(OM(A)+OM(A))
                          z     }|      {        z     }|      {
           (δ ◦ δ ) : Q × IM(A ⊸ (A & A)) ⇀ Q⊖ × OM(A ⊸ (A & A))
              ⊕      ⊖      ⊖

                                           (x, (L, m)) 7→ (x, (R, (x, m)))
                                      (x, (R, (y, m))) 7→ (y, (L, m))

         We now explain how to “plug together” two actors Γ ⊩ α : A and Γ ⊩ β : A ⊸ B. The
     application β(α) is a sort of product13 automaton, keeping track of the state of both α and β,
     and transferring messages between them: for instance, a message m ∈ OM(A) emitted by α
     is then received by β under the form (L, m) ∈ {L} × OM(A) ⊂ IM(A ⊸ B). The exchanges
     of messages between α and β are treated as internal computation steps of β(α).


     13
          It can be seen as a variant with two-way communication of the cascade product of sequential transducers.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                  19


▶ Definition 6.5 (special case of [7, Def. 3]). Let Γ ⊩ α : A and Γ ⊩ β : A ⊸ B. For their
sets of states and transition functions, we use the notations of the previous definition with
indices α, β. The application β(α) has the sets of states

    Q⊖       ⊖    ⊖
     β(α) = Qα × Qβ              Q⊕        ⊕    ⊖       ⊖    ⊕
                                  β(α) = (Qα × Qβ ) ∪ (Qα × Qβ )

Indeed, α perceives β to be part of its environment, and vice versa. For this reason, at any
point during an interaction, if one of them is active, then the other must be passive.
   The initial state is (q0,α , q0,β ). The transition functions are
     ⊖
    δβ(α) : ((qα⊖ , qβ⊖ ), m) 7→ (qα⊖ , δβ⊖ (qβ⊖ , (R, m)))

(redirecting incoming messages from the environment to β) and

                                       p⊕ 7→ (p⊕ , qβ⊖ )
                                                                        

     ⊕
                             ⊕                      ⊕ ⊖
          : (qα⊕ , qβ⊖ ) 7→ 
                                                                          ⊕ ⊕ 
    δβ(α)                   γ(p1 , . . . ) 7→ γ((p1 , qβ ), . . . )
                                                                          δα (qα )
                                                                         
                                   ⊖              ⊖ ⊖ ⊖
                               (p , m) 7→ (p , δβ (qβ , (L, m)))
                                         p⊕ 7→ (qα⊖ , p⊕ )
                                                                      

                             γ(p⊕                    ⊖ ⊕
                                   1 , . . . ) 7→ γ((qα , p1 ), . . . )
                                                                      
               ⊖ ⊕                                                      δ ⊕ (q ⊕ )
                                                                                   
            (qα , qβ ) 7→  ⊖
                            
                                                    ⊖ ⊖            ⊖  β       β
                            (p , (L, m)) 7→ (δα (qα , m), p )
                             (p⊖ , (R, m)) 7→ ((qα⊖ , p⊖ ), m)

▶ Definition 6.6. An actor-based tree transducer with input alphabet Σ and output alphabet
Γ (both ranked) is specified by a type A and:
     “transition actors”, with rk(σ) + 1 times A
   z                }|                   {
   Γ ⊩ βσ : A ⊸ (A ⊸ . . . (A ⊸ A) . . . ) for each σ ∈ Σ;
   Γ ⊩ βout : A ⊸ o (“output actor”).
On an input t ∈ TΣ , it outputs the tree generated by Γ ⊩ βout (αt ) : o, where we define
inductively

    Γ ⊩ ασ(t1 ,... ) = βσ (αt1 ) . . . (αtrk(σ) ) : A   for σ ∈ Σ
                                                                         ⊖
   Let us denote the components of the actor βσ with indices: Q⊖                ⊕ ⊖ ⊕
                                                                    σ , q0,σ , Qσ , δσ , δσ ; and
similarly for βout . By induction on t ∈ TΣ , one can deduce from Definition 6.5 that:

▷ Claim 6.7. Up to bijections that just reindex products, the states of βout (αt ) are:

   Q⊖ ∼
                                        Y
       = Q⊖          ⊖
           Dom(t) × Qout  where Q⊖X =       Q⊖labt (u) for X ⊆ Dom(t)
                                                    u∈X
      ⊕ ∼
                                     [
    Q    = Q⊖         ⊕
            Dom(t) × Qout        ∪    {u} × Q⊕           ⊖             ⊖
                                             labt (u) × QDom(t)\{u} × Qout
                                 u∈Dom(t)

    The intuitive idea is that if the composite actor βout (αt ) is in an active state x = (u, . . . ),
this means that its subprocess βσ corresponding to the node u in t (with σ = labt (u))
is currently active while the others are passive — and the passive states of these other
subprocesses are also recorded in the Q⊖  Dom(t)\{u} component of x. We simulate βout (αt ) by
a uTHM running on the input t, whose position corresponds to the current active subprocess,
and which writes in memory the passive states. We then get:

▶ Lemma 6.8. Every actor-based tree transducer A can be translated to a uTHM H such
that the partial function JHK extends JAK.
20   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


         The effective construction uses the bottom-up initialization and regular lookaround
     features presented in Section 3.5.
         To conclude this section, we give a sufficient condition for the a priori unrestricted Hennie
     machine built above to be bounded-visit.

     ▶ Definition 6.9. An actor Γ ⊩ α : A with states Q⊖ , Q⊕ and transitions δ ⊖ , δ ⊕ is weight-
     reducing when one can map each state q ∈ Q⊖ ∪ Q⊕ to a weight ω(q) in such a way
     that:
         for every q ⊖ ∈ Q⊖ and m ∈ IM(A), if δ ⊖ (q ⊖ , m) is defined, then its weight is strictly less
        than ω(q ⊖ );
         for q ⊕ ∈ Q, every state that appears in δ ⊕ (q ⊕ ) has a weight less than or equal to ω(q ⊕ ).

        An actor-based transducer is weight-reducing when all the actors that compose it are
     weight-reducing.

     ▶ Lemma 6.10. Every weight-reducing actor-based tree transducer A can be translated to a
     THM H such that JAK ⊆ JHK.


      7      Affine λ-transducers with additive branching
     The goal of this section is to show:

     ▶ Theorem 7.1. The following devices can compute the same total tree-to-tree functions:
     1. tree-to-tree affine λ-transducers with additive branching;
     2. weight-reducing actor-based tree transducers;
     3. tree-to-tree Hennie machines.
     Lemma 6.10 gives us (2) ⊆ (3). We show (1) ⊆ (2) in Section 7.1 and (3) ⇒ (1) in Section 7.2.
     In §7.3, we deduce the closure of this function class by precomposition by LSHI-MTT.
         But first, we state a few definitions. As in the previous section, our grammar of types is
     A, B ::= o | A ⊸ B | A & B. We use the abbreviations (taking into account that our type
     system does not contain the multiplicative conjunction ⊗):

          A&k = |A & ·{z
                       · · & A}   A⊗k ⊸ B = A
                                            | ⊸ ·{z
                                                  · · ⊸ A} ⊸ B
                     k times                        k times

     where ⊸ is right-associative. It does not matter whether ‘&’ is left- or right-associative
     as long as we stay consistent when encoding additive k-tuples as nested pairs (notation:
     ⟨T1 , . . . , Tk ⟩).
         Our typing judgments are of the form Φ | Θ ⊢ T : A where Φ is a context of reusable
     constants, Θ is a context of affine variables, T is a λ-term and A is a type. We always take
     the context of constants Φ to be an encoding of a ranked alphabet Γ; there are two variants:

                additive branching:   Γ& = {γ : o& rk(γ) ⊸ o | γ ∈ Γ}
          multiplicative branching:   Γ⊗ = {γ : o⊗ rk(γ) ⊸ o | γ ∈ Γ}

     Our grammar of λ-terms, typing rules and reduction rules are standard, cf. e.g. [7, Figure 1],
     and are recalled in the appendix. By turning ⊸ into → and & into ×, we can translate
     our affine λ-terms to simply typed λ-terms with products, in a way that preserves reduction
     steps. Therefore, we inherit the strong normalization and confluence of β-reduction from the
     simply typed case. This ensures that every affine λ-term has a unique normal form.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                            21


▷ Claim 7.2 ([6, §2.2.3]). The encoding that maps, for instance, the tree a(b(c), c) to the
λ-term a ⟨(b c), c⟩ (resp. a (b c) c) defines, for any ranked alphabet Γ, a bijection between TΓ
and the λ-terms T in normal form such that Γ& | ∅ ⊢ T : o (resp. Γ⊗ | ∅ ⊢ T : o).

    We now adapt the definition of a λ-transducer from [46] (which is a simplification of the
classical notion of higher-order transducer) to potentially use the encoding with additive
branching for the output, but not for the input — observe the A⊗ rk(σ) below.

▶ Definition 7.3. An affine λ-transducer TΣ → TΓ is specified by a memory type A and the
λ-terms:
   Γ⊙ | ∅ ⊢ Tσ : A⊗ rk(σ) ⊸ A (“transition terms”) for σ ∈ Σ;
   Γ⊙ | ∅ ⊢ U : A ⊸ o (“output term”).
where ⊙ is equal to:
   & for a λ-transducer with additive branching;
   ⊗ for a λ-transducer with multiplicative branching.
For an input tree t ∈ TΣ , the output of the λ-transducer is the tree encoded by the normal
form of U Tt , where we define inductively Tσ(t1 ,...,trk(σ) ) = Tσ Tt1 . . . Ttrk(σ) for σ ∈ Σ.

▶ Example 7.4. Here is a λ-transducer that computes exa (cf. §2.1).
   Its memory type is o & (o ⊸ o).
   Its b-transition is ⟨a ⟨b, b⟩, λy. a ⟨y, y⟩⟩ and its a-transition is λx1 . λx2 . ⟨π2 x1 (a ⟨π1 x2 , π1 x2 ⟩), λy. π2 x1 (a ⟨y, y⟩)⟩.
   Its output term is λx. π1 x.
Note the resemblance with the MTT of Example 4.2. Morally, the two components o and
o ⊸ o of the memory type correspond to the MTT states q0 (of rank 0) and q1 (of rank 1)
respectively.

7.1     λ-transducers to actors: game semantics
The tree-generating game semantics from [7, §3] maps each affine λ-term T to its strategy
JT K: the set of all its possible interactions with its environment. These interactions consist of
exchanging messages (i.e, playing moves, in the game metaphor) and outputting tree nodes.
Furthermore, there is a partial function Strat from the actors of §6 to strategies defined in [7,
§3.2]. Overloading metaphors, we say that an actor α plays a term T when Strat(α) = JT K.
    We recall some properties of this “playing” relation.
    Every λ-term Γ& | ∅ ⊢ T : A is played by some effectively computable actor Γ ⊩ α : A [7,
    Theorem 23 in Appendix B].
       For example [7, Lemma 21 in §B], the actor from Example 6.4 plays Γ& | ∅ ⊢ λx. ⟨x, x⟩ :
       B ⊸ (B & B).
    Furthermore, if Γ ⊩ β : A ⊸ B plays U , then β(α) plays U T [7, Proposition 22 in §B].
    Finally, if A = o, then α generates the tree encoded by the normal form of T [7,
    Proposition 4].
Thanks to these properties, to translate an affine λ-transducer with additive branching into
a actor-based tree transducer, we can take:
    for each input letter, a transition actor that plays the transition term for this letter,
    an output actor that plays the output term.
We still have to make sure that the actors we take are weight-reducing — which is not the
case for Example 6.4. Fortunately, the following property suffices to do so.

▶ Proposition 7.5. For every actor Γ ⊩ α : A there exists a weight-reducing actor Γ ⊩ α′ : A
such that Strat(α) = Strat(α′ ).
22   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


     Proof sketch. For lack of space, we do not recall the precise definition of strategies and
     explain the argument informally.
         Strat maps an actor to the interaction sequences that it can perform and that are valid
     for the game interpretation of A. As noted in [7, proof of Theorem 7], each message can
     occur at most once in a valid interaction in this game semantics, reflecting the affineness of
     the type system. By adding to the states of α a counter of the messages already received,
     and aborting the computation when this counter would otherwise exceed |IM(A)|, we get a
     weight-reducing actor α′ — the weight of a state of α′ is the value of the counter — with the
     same valid interactions as α.                                                               ◀

     ▶ Remark 7.6. The “restriction” on tree stack automata considered in [7, Theorem 7] is
     analogous to our bounded-visit condition.

     7.2    THMs to λ-transducers
     Let H be a weight-reducing THM with the notations of §3. We give some guiding intuitions
     and the definition of an affine λ-transducer with additive branching meant to be equivalent
     to H. The correctness proof is relegated to the appendix.
         The idea is to represent as a λ-term the “behavior” of H when it enters a subtree t↾u of
     the input, taking into account the current memory values for u and its descendants. This
     behavior is a function of the current state. After possibly producing part of the output, H
     might exit the subtree, i.e. move upwards from u into the surrounding context t[u ← □].
     Upon exit, the behavior should “return” the new state and a new behavior, reflecting the
     new memory values, to the “caller” i.e. the context. This way, the new behavior can be called
     the next time H enters t↾u .
         One subtlety is that there may be multiple return points, because H may produce multiple
     output branches in parallel. To handle this, we program in continuation-passing style: a
     behavior takes as argument a continuation that expects a behavior. Naively, this suggests
     a recursive type of behaviors, but we leverage the weight-reducing condition to unfold the
     recursion finitely:

        A0 = o&Q        An+1 = (An ⊸ o&Q ) ⊸ o&Q          for n ∈ N

     following [7, §5]. Tuples ⟨tq | q ∈ Q⟩ indexed by the set of states Q are encoded as nested
     pairs; one can think of them as functions from Q. The type An represents “n-truncated
     behaviors”, allowing for at most n exits of t↾u , i.e. upwards moves from u. Morally, this
     truncation is lossless when n is greater than the weight of the current memory value at u —
     we define the weight of a memory symbol m ∈ M as ω(m) = |{m′ ∈ M | m′ < m}|.
         Let us fix some default leaf symbol γ0 ∈ Γ(0) . We build truncated behaviors composition-
     ally, using λ-terms
                  ⃗
                  n;k
        Γ& | ∅ ⊢ Tσ,m : An1 ⊸ · · · ⊸ Anrk(σ) ⊸ Ak

     defined by strong induction on n1 + · · · + nrk(σ) + k:
         ⃗
         n;k
        Tσ,m = λ⃗z. λx. ⟨(encoding of δ(q, σ, m))[. . . ] | q ∈ Q⟩

     where [. . . ] is a simultaneous substitution that consists of:
                                  ⃗
                                  n;k−1 
        (q ′ , m′ , ↑) ← πq′ x Tσ,m  ′ ⃗z if k ⩾ 1, else γ0
        Intuitively: we “return” the new state q ′ and the new (k − 1)-truncated behavior, where
        the memory at the current node has changed from m to m′ , by calling the continuation x.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                     23


                  or just zi without argument when ni = 0
                           z          }|            {
                                         n′ ;k ′ 
                                         ⃗
      (q ′ , m′ , i) ← πq′ zi λznew . Tσ,m    ′ ⃗
                                                z x    for i ∈ [rk(σ)]
                   ′
      where ⃗n = n1 , . . . , ni−1 , ni − 1, ni+1 , . . . , nrk(σ)
           T ⃗z′ = T z1 . . . zi−1 znew zi+1 . . . zrk(σ)
      Intuitively: we “call” the behavior of the subtree t↾ui rooted at the i-th child of the current
      node u, passing it the new state q ′ . Once it “returns” znew (by calling the continuation
      that we pass), u becomes the current node again. It is as if we had just entered t↾u , but
      the memory at u has become m′ , and the memory at ui and its descendants may also
      have changed as reflected in the new behavior znew .

▶ Lemma 7.7. JHK is computed by the λ-transducer with:
   memory type AN for N = |M |;
                    N,...,N ;N    ⊗ rk(σ)
   transition term Tσ,⊤        : AN       ⊸ AN for σ ∈ Σ;
   output term λz. πqinit (z (λznew . ⟨γ0 | q ∈ Q⟩)) : AN ⊸ o.

   To prove this lemma we show (in the appendix) that β-reduction simulates the tree-
generating machine for H.

7.3       Precomposition by LSHI-MTT
▶ Lemma 7.8. The functions computed by affine λ-transducers with additive (resp. multiplica-
tive) branching are closed under precomposition by affine λ-transducers with multiplicative
branching.

Proof. Let A, B be two λ-transducers given respectively by:

      Γ⊗ | ∅ ⊢ Tσ : Ark(σ) ⊸ A                              Π⊙ | ∅ ⊢ Tγ′ : B rk(γ) ⊸ B
      Γ⊗ | ∅ ⊢ U : A ⊸ o                                    Π⊙ | ∅ ⊢ U ′ : B ⊸ o

where ⊙ ∈ {&, ⊗}. Then JBK ◦ JAK is computed by this λ-transducer:

      Π⊙ | ∅ ⊢ Tσ [γ ← Tγ′ ∀γ ∈ Γ] : A[o ← B]rk(σ) ⊸ A[o ← B]
      Π⊙ | ∅ ⊢ λx. U ′ (U [γ ← Tγ′ ∀γ ∈ Γ] x) : A[o ← B] ⊸ o

The multiplicative encoding of Γ is crucial: it is the reason why the substitution [o ← B]
sends the type of γ to the type of Tγ .                                                 ◀

   This is the same argument as [46, Proposition 1.8]. In that paper, Nguyễn and Vanoni
study λ-transducers for an affine λ-calculus without ‘&’ — in particular, the branching
is multiplicative. Thus, the above proposition applies to precomposition by the devices
from [46]. Their main result [46, Theorem 1.5]14 is that tree-to-tree MSO transductions are
equivalent to

      multiplicative affine λ-transducers ◦ MSO relabelings



▶ Theorem 7.9. The functions computed by THMs are closed under precomposition by MSO
transductions.

14
     This statement by Nguyễn and Vanoni should be seen as a convenient rephrasing of a result of Gallot,
     Lemay and Salvati [26, Theorem 3] (see also [29, Chapter 6]).
24   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


     Proof. By the above result of [46], it suffices to check that THMs are closed under precom-
     position by:
     MSO relabelings: cf. Corollary 3.21;
     the affine λ-transducers from [46]: cf. Lemma 7.8.                                       ◀

      8      Postcomposition properties of THMs
     We have already mentioned that our affine λ-calculus can be directly translated to the simply
     typed λ-calculus with products. It is known that simply typed λ-transducers with products
     are regularity reflecting — see the references given in Remark 1.4. Therefore:

     ▶ Corollary 8.1. THMs are regularity reflecting: the inverse image of a regular tree language
     by a THM is effectively regular.

          We can then deduce that:

     ▶ Corollary 8.2. The class of total functions computed by THMs is closed under postcompo-
     sition by bottom-up relabelings.

     The proof combines the regular lookaround feature of §3.5 with:

     ▷ Claim 8.3. Let H be a THM with JHK : TΣ → TΓ .
        The function gH that maps a configuration of H, encoded as per Definition 3.18, to the
     output tree obtained by starting H from this configuration is itself definable by a THM.
        Therefore, it preserves regular languages by inverse image.

          Finally, the most technical result of this section is:

     ▶ Theorem 8.4. If H is a THM and N is narrow-visit on the range of JHK, then JN K ◦ JHK
     can be realized by some THM.

     Proof idea. We only give some high-level ideas here. The construction is detailed in the
     appendix.
         Essentially, the composite THM virtually evaluates N on the tree outputted by H: when
     N asks to explore this intermediate tree, H is lazily evaluated in order to produce the
     relevant part of its output. This is reminiscent of the composition of reversible two-way
     transducers [13, §3.1]. Indeed, our composite THM records enough information in memory
     to “rewind the computation” of H, so that we may simulate upwards moves of N on the
     intermediate tree.
         However, in order to simulate the read-write memory accesses by N , we need to remember
     the nodes of the intermediate tree that we have already visited (and the memory values stored
     therein), instead of re-generating them on the fly. In other words, the composition needs to
     be evaluated in “call-by-need” whereas the composition of reversible two-way transducers is
     “call-by-name”.15
         We store a representation of a “global state” in TΓ (Conf(H, t)) (cf. §2.3) of the computation
     of H that is distributed among the nodes of the input t. The distribution reflects the origins16


     15
        The reference semantics is call-by-value: compute the full output of H, then feed it to N . It is well
        known that call-by-name and call-by-value differ in their observable results in the presence of effects
        such as mutable state. What happens in our proof is that a form of call-by-need, whose laziness allows
        us to respect computational bounds, turns out to be a valid optimization of call-by-value in this very
        specific setting.
     16
        In a sense analogous to [2].
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                         25


of the nodes of the intermediate tree (in TΓ ) already generated in that global state. Since
the memory at each node is finite, this means that the size of the global state must be
linearly bounded by the input size. This is possible thanks to the narrow-visit condition
and Corollary 3.12: a branch-outputting run of N explores O(1) many branches, so it only
requires a portion of the intermediate tree whose size is linearly bounded by the intermediate
height; the latter is O(|t|) because H is linear size-to-height increase.
    Similarly, the composite THM is bounded-visit because N is bounded-visit and explores
O(1) branches of the intermediate tree, each of them generated in a bounded-visit fashion by
H.                                                                                          ◀

▶ Corollary 8.5. LHI-MTT ◦ THM = THM.
   As a consequence, k∈N LHI-MTTk ⊂ THM.
                     S

Proof. This reduces to postcomposition by bottom-up relabelings (Corollary 8.2) and
by narrow-visit uTHMs (Theorem 8.4), thanks to the decomposition of Corollary 4.9 for
LHI-MTTs.                                                                          ◀

 9        On the LHI-MTT composition hierarchy
As announced in the introduction, we show here:
▶ Corollary 9.1. LHI-MTTk−1 ⊊ LHI-MTTk for every k ⩾ 1.
We actually derive this from the stronger Theorem 9.2 below, stated in terms of tree-walking
tree transducers (TWTs).17 Their classical definition may be found in e.g. [11, Chapter 8];
equivalently, we may describe them here concisely as THMs:
    with a single memory symbol (the idea is that they do not write any information on the
    nodes: a TWT configuration consists only of a state and a position);
    whose transitions can depend on whether the current node is the root, and if not, for
    which i ∈ RΣ it is an i-th child.
In terms of expressive power, TWT ⊂ MTT [19, Lemma 34], which is why Corollary 9.1
follows from the following result:
▶ Theorem 9.2. LHI-TWTk ̸⊂ MTTk−1 for every k ⩾ 1.
   As a consequence, THM ̸⊂ MTTk−1 .
    Our proof exhibits a concrete separating function: the k-fold iteration EncPebk of a
function EncPeb defined by Engelfriet and Maneth in [19, Section 4]. More rigorously,
EncPeb is a family of similar tree-to-tree functions, one for each input alphabet — which
never coincides with the output alphabet, so the composition EncPebk actually involves k
different members of the family. To avoid cumbersome notations, we ignore these subtleties
concerning alphabets. For lack of space, we do not recall the full definition of EncPeb; our
only argument that requires examining it is for:
▶ Proposition 9.3. EncPeb ∈ LHI-TWT.
Proof. A tree-walking tree transducer computing EncPeb is built in [19, proof of Lemma 9].
    Ignoring the node labels, the shape of EncPeb(t) is obtained by grafting, to each node u
in the tree t, an additional subtree which is a copy of t rerooted at u by tree rotations.
Therefore, a downwards path from the root of EncPeb(t) to a leaf corresponds to:


17
     In the key reference [19], they are called “0-pebble transducers”, cf. Remark 9.5.
26   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


        a downwards path from the root of t to a node u,
        followed by the reverse upwards path from u to the root,
        followed by a downwards path from the root of t to a leaf.
     Hence height(EncPeb(t)) ⩽ 3 × height(t).                                                                    ◀

        Other than that, we mainly use the connection that EncPeb has to “pebble tree trans-
     ducers” — a keyword that we syntactically manipulate by matching its occurrences in two
     theorem statements, with no need to access its definition.

     ▶ Theorem 9.4 ([19, proof of Theorem 10]). Every function computed by some k-pebble tree
     transducer is in TWT ◦ EncPebk .

     ▶ Remark 9.5. We index the pebble hierarchy according to the convention from [18, 19]:
     tree-walking transducers are 0-pebble transducers. The recent literature on polyregular
     functions [3, 15, 37] would call them 1-pebble transducers instead.

     Proof of Theorem 9.2. We show that EncPebk ∈   / MTTk−1 .
        We use the following result [18, proof of Theorem 5]: there exists a (string-to-string)
                  / MTTk which is computed by a k-pebble transducer. By Theorem 9.4, we can
     function18 f ∈
     write f = g ◦ EncPebk for some g ∈ TWT ⊂ MTT. Thus, if EncPebk were in MTTk−1 , we
     would get f ∈ MTT ◦ MTTk−1 , reaching a contradiction.                                  ◀

        Let us remark that together, Corollary 8.5, Proposition 9.3 and Theorem 9.4 yield a
     positive result concerning the expressivity of tree-to-tree Hennie machines:

     ▶ Corollary 9.6. Every function computed by some pebble tree transducer is in TWT ◦ THM.

      10         Future work
     We would like to investigate further the relationship of THMs with other automata models.
     For instance we believe that TWT ◦ THM should be a natural tree-to-tree counterpart of
     the “Ariadne-transducers” from [9]. We also conjecture that THM ̸⊂ k MTTk — this is
                                                                           S

     because our translation to λ-transducers seems to be intrinsically unsafe in the sense of
     higher-order recursion schemes. Also, several decision problems on THMs are still open, such
     as equivalence of two THMs.


              References
      1       Ashwani Anand, Sylvain Schmitz, Lia Schütze, and Georg Zetzsche. Verifying unboundedness
              via amalgamation. In Pawel Sobocinski, Ugo Dal Lago, and Javier Esparza, editors, Proceedings
              of the 39th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2024, Tallinn,
              Estonia, July 8-11, 2024, pages 4:1–4:15. ACM, 2024. doi:10.1145/3661814.3662133.
      2       Mikołaj Bojańczyk. Transducers with origin information. In Javier Esparza, Pierre Fraigniaud,
              Thore Husfeldt, and Elias Koutsoupias, editors, Automata, Languages, and Programming - 41st
              International Colloquium, ICALP 2014, Copenhagen, Denmark, July 8-11, 2014, Proceedings,
              Part II, volume 8573 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 26–37. Springer, 2014.
              doi:10.1007/978-3-662-43951-7_3.


     18
          What Engelfriet and Maneth actually prove in [18] is that f is not in yield ◦ MTTk−1 , but this coincides
          with the subclass of MTTk consisting of string outputs. For more details on this point, see the discussion
          by Kiefer, Nguyễn and Pradic [38, Section 5.1], who prove a variation on [18, Theorem 5] involving
          polyregular functions of quadratic size increase [38, Theorem 5.1].
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                              27


 3   Mikołaj Bojańczyk. Transducers of polynomial growth (invited talk). In Christel Baier
     and Dana Fisman, editors, LICS ’22: 37th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in
     Computer Science, Haifa, Israel, August 2 - 5, 2022, pages 1:1–1:27. ACM, 2022. doi:
     10.1145/3531130.3533326.
 4   Mikołaj Bojańczyk. Folding interpretations. In 38th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic
     in Computer Science, LICS 2023, Boston, MA, USA, June 26-29, 2023, pages 1–13. IEEE,
     2023. doi:10.1109/LICS56636.2023.10175796.
 5   Mikołaj Bojańczyk, Sandra Kiefer, and Nathan Lhote. String-to-string interpretations with
     polynomial-size output. In 46th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
     Programming, ICALP 2019, July 9-12, 2019, Patras, Greece, pages 106:1–106:14, 2019.
     doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2019.106.
 6   Pierre Clairambault, Charles Grellois, and Andrzej Murawski. Linearity in Higher-order
     Recursion Schemes. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 2(POPL):39:1–39:29,
     December 2017. doi:10.1145/3158127.
 7   Pierre Clairambault and Andrzej S. Murawski. On the Expressivity of Linear Recursion
     Schemes. In Peter Rossmanith, Pinar Heggernes, and Joost-Pieter Katoen, editors, 44th
     International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS 2019),
     volume 138 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 50:1–50:14.
     Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019. Long version with appendices:
     https://hal.science/hal-02313542. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.MFCS.2019.50.
 8   Thomas Colcombet. Logic and regular cost functions. In 32nd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium
     on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2017, Reykjavik, Iceland, June 20-23, 2017, pages 1–4.
     IEEE Computer Society, 2017. doi:10.1109/LICS.2017.8005061.
 9   Thomas Colcombet, Nathan Lhote, and Pierre Ohlmann. Expregular functions, 2026. To
     appear in the proceedings of ICALP 2026. arXiv:2602.21019.
10   Thomas Colcombet and Christof Löding. Transforming structures by set interpretations.
     Logical Methods in Computer Science, 3(2), 2007. doi:10.2168/LMCS-3(2:4)2007.
11   Bruno Courcelle and Joost Engelfriet. Graph Structure and Monadic Second-Order Logic:
     A Language-Theoretic Approach. Cambridge University Press, June 2012. doi:10.1017/
     cbo9780511977619.
12   John Darlington and Yike Guo. Formalising actors in linear logic. In Dilip Patel, Yuan
     Sun, and Shushma Patel, editors, Proceedings of the 1994 International Conference on Object
     Oriented Information Systems, OOIS 1994, London, UK, December 19-21, 1994, pages 37–53.
     Springer, 1994. doi:10.1007/978-1-4471-3016-1_3.
13   Luc Dartois, Paulin Fournier, Ismaël Jecker, and Nathan Lhote. On reversible transducers.
     In Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Piotr Indyk, Fabian Kuhn, and Anca Muscholl, editors, 44th
     International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2017, July
     10-14, 2017, Warsaw, Poland, volume 80 of LIPIcs, pages 113:1–113:12. Schloss Dagstuhl -
     Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2017. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2017.113.
14   Robert P. Dilworth. A decomposition theorem for partially ordered sets. Annals of Mathematics,
     51(1):161, January 1950. doi:10.2307/1969503.
15   Gaëtan Douéneau-Tabot. Optimization of string transducers. PhD thesis, Université Paris
     Cité, November 2023. URL: https://theses.hal.science/tel-04690881.
16   Gaëtan Douéneau-Tabot, Emmanuel Filiot, and Paul Gastin. Register Transducers Are Marble
     Transducers. In Javier Esparza and Daniel Kráľ, editors, 45th International Symposium
     on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS 2020), volume 170 of Leibniz
     International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 29:1–29:14, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2020.
     Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.MFCS.2020.29.
17   Joost Engelfriet and Hendrik Jan Hoogeboom. MSO definable string transductions and
     two-way finite-state transducers. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, 2(2):216–254,
     April 2001. doi:10.1145/371316.371512.
28   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


     18   Joost Engelfriet and Sebastian Maneth. Two-way finite state transducers with nested pebbles.
          In Krzysztof Diks and Wojciech Rytter, editors, Mathematical Foundations of Computer
          Science 2002, 27th International Symposium, MFCS 2002, Warsaw, Poland, August 26-30,
          2002, Proceedings, volume 2420 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 234–244. Springer,
          2002. doi:10.1007/3-540-45687-2_19.
     19   Joost Engelfriet and Sebastian Maneth. A comparison of pebble tree transducers with macro
          tree transducers. Acta Informatica, 39(9):613–698, 2003. doi:10.1007/s00236-003-0120-0.
     20   Joost Engelfriet and Sebastian Maneth. Macro tree translations of linear size increase
          are MSO definable. SIAM Journal on Computing, 32(4):950–1006, 2003. doi:10.1137/
          S0097539701394511.
     21   Joost Engelfriet and Heiko Vogler. Macro tree transducers. Journal of Computer and System
          Sciences, 31(1):71–146, 1985. doi:10.1016/0022-0000(85)90066-2.
     22   Joost Engelfriet and Heiko Vogler. Pushdown machines for the macro tree transducer.
          Theoretical Computer Science, 42:251–368, 1986. doi:10.1016/0304-3975(86)90052-6.
     23   Julien Ferté, Nathalie Marin, and Géraud Sénizergues. Word-Mappings of Level 2. Theory of
          Computing Systems, 54(1):111–148, January 2014. doi:10.1007/s00224-013-9489-5.
     24   Emmanuel Filiot, Nathan Lhote, and Pierre-Alain Reynier. Lexicographic Transductions of
          Finite Words. In Paweł Gawrychowski, Filip Mazowiecki, and Michał Skrzypczak, editors,
          50th International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS
          2025), volume 345 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 50:1–
          50:18, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2025. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. doi:
          10.4230/LIPIcs.MFCS.2025.50.
     25   Delbert Ray Fulkerson. Note on Dilworth’s decomposition theorem for partially ordered sets.
          Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 7(4):701, August 1956. doi:10.2307/
          2033375.
     26   Paul Gallot, Aurélien Lemay, and Sylvain Salvati. Linear high-order deterministic tree
          transducers with regular look-ahead. In Javier Esparza and Daniel Král’, editors, 45th
          International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science, MFCS 2020,
          August 24-28, 2020, Prague, Czech Republic, volume 170 of LIPIcs, pages 38:1–38:13. Schloss
          Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.MFCS.2020.38.
     27   Paul Gallot, Nathan Lhote, and Lê Thành Dũng Nguyễn. The structure of polynomial growth
          for tree automata/transducers and mso set queries, 2025. arXiv:2501.10270.
     28   Paul Gallot, Sebastian Maneth, Keisuke Nakano, and Charles Peyrat. Deciding linear height
          and linear size-to-height increase of macro tree transducers. In Karl Bringmann, Martin Grohe,
          Gabriele Puppis, and Ola Svensson, editors, 51st International Colloquium on Automata,
          Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2024, July 8-12, 2024, Tallinn, Estonia, volume 297
          of LIPIcs, pages 138:1–138:20. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
          doi:10.4230/LIPICS.ICALP.2024.138.
     29   Paul D. Gallot. Safety of transformations of data trees: tree transducer theory applied to a
          verification problem on shell scripts. PhD thesis, Université de Lille, December 2021. URL:
          https://theses.hal.science/tel-03773108.
     30   Charles Grellois. Semantics of linear logic and higher-order model-checking. PhD thesis,
          Université Paris 7, April 2016. URL: https://theses.hal.science/tel-01311150/.
     31   Bruno Guillon, Giovanni Pighizzini, Luca Prigioniero, and Daniel Průša. Converting nondeter-
          ministic two-way automata into small deterministic linear-time machines. Information and
          Computation, 289, 2022. doi:10.1016/J.IC.2022.104938.
     32   Bruno Guillon, Giovanni Pighizzini, Luca Prigioniero, and Daniel Průša. Weight-reducing
          Turing machines. Information and Computation, 292, 2023. doi:10.1016/J.IC.2023.105030.
     33   Bruno Guillon and Luca Prigioniero. Linear-time limited automata. Theoretical Computer
          Science, 798:95–108, 2019. doi:10.1016/J.TCS.2019.03.037.
     34   Frederick C. Hennie. One-tape, off-line turing machine computations. Information and Control,
          8(6):553–578, 1965. doi:10.1016/S0019-9958(65)90399-2.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                       29


35   Carl Hewitt, Peter Boehler Bishop, and Richard Steiger. A universal modular ACTOR formal-
     ism for artificial intelligence. In Nils J. Nilsson, editor, Proceedings of the 3rd International Joint
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Standford, CA, USA, August 20-23, 1973, pages 235–245.
     William Kaufmann, 1973. URL: http://ijcai.org/Proceedings/73/Papers/027B.pdf.
36   Gerd G. Hillebrand and Paris C. Kanellakis. On the Expressive Power of Simply Typed and
     Let-Polymorphic Lambda Calculi. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual IEEE Symposium on
     Logic in Computer Science, pages 253–263. IEEE Computer Society, 1996. doi:10.1109/LICS.
     1996.561337.
37   Sandra Kiefer. Polyregular functions – characterisations and refutations (invited talk).
     In Joel D. Day and Florin Manea, editors, Developments in Language Theory - 28th In-
     ternational Conference, DLT 2024, Göttingen, Germany, August 12-16, 2024, Proceed-
     ings, volume 14791 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 13–21. Springer, 2024.
     doi:10.1007/978-3-031-66159-4_2.
38   Sandra Kiefer, Lê Thành Dũng Nguyễn, and Cécilia Pradic. Refutations of pebble minimization
     via output languages, 2023. arXiv:2301.09234.
39   Joeri De Koster, Tom Van Cutsem, and Wolfgang De Meuter. 43 years of actors: a taxonomy
     of actor models and their key properties. In Sylvan Clebsch, Travis Desell, Philipp Haller, and
     Alessandro Ricci, editors, Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Programming Based
     on Actors, Agents, and Decentralized Control, AGERE 2016, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
     October 30, 2016, pages 31–40. ACM, 2016. doi:10.1145/3001886.3001890.
40   Sige-Yuki Kuroda. Classes of languages and linear-bounded automata. Information and
     Control, 7(2):207–223, 1964. doi:10.1016/S0019-9958(64)90120-2.
41   Guanyan Li, Andrzej S. Murawski, and Luke Ong. Probabilistic verification beyond context-
     freeness. In Christel Baier and Dana Fisman, editors, LICS ’22: 37th Annual ACM/IEEE
     Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, Haifa, Israel, August 2 - 5, 2022, pages 33:1–33:13.
     ACM, 2022. doi:10.1145/3531130.3533351.
42   Paul-André Melliès. Higher-order parity automata. In 2017 32nd Annual ACM/IEEE
     Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), pages 1–12, Reykjavik, Iceland, June 2017.
     IEEE. doi:10.1109/LICS.2017.8005077.
43   Vincent Moreau. A topological and fibrational approach to higher-order automata. PhD thesis,
     Université Paris Cité, July 2025. URL: https://theses.hal.science/tel-05428993.
44   Lê Thành Dũng Nguyễn. Implicit automata in linear logic and categorical transducer theory.
     PhD thesis, Université Paris XIII (Sorbonne Paris Nord), December 2021. URL: https:
     //theses.hal.science/tel-04132636.
45   Lê Thành Dũng Nguyễn and Cécilia Pradic. Implicit automata in typed λ-calculi I: aperiodicity
     in a non-commutative logic. In Artur Czumaj, Anuj Dawar, and Emanuela Merelli, editors,
     47th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2020,
     July 8-11, 2020, Saarbrücken, Germany (Virtual Conference), volume 168 of LIPIcs, pages
     135:1–135:20. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.
     ICALP.2020.135.
46   Lê Thành Dũng Nguyễn and Gabriele Vanoni. Slightly Non-Linear Higher-Order Tree
     Transducers. In Olaf Beyersdorff, Michał Pilipczuk, Elaine Pimentel, and Nguyễn Kim
     Thang, editors, 42nd International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science
     (STACS 2025), volume 327 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages
     68:1–68:20, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2025. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
     doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2025.68.
47   Cécilia Pradic and Ian Price. Implicit automata in λ-calculi iii: affine planar string-to-string
     functions. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Informatics and Computer Science, Volume 4 -
     Proceedings of MFPS XL, Dec 2024. doi:10.46298/entics.14804.
48   Václav Rajlich. Bounded-crossing transducers. Information and Control, 27(4):329–335, 1975.
     doi:10.1016/S0019-9958(75)90159-X.
30   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


     49    Sylvain Salvati. Lambda-calculus and formal language theory. Habilitation thesis, Université
           de Bordeaux, 2015. URL: https://theses.hal.science/tel-01253426.
     50    Paweł Sobociński. Relational presheaves, change of base and weak simulation. Journal of
           Computer and System Sciences, 81(5):901–910, August 2015. doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2014.12.
           007.
     51    Igor Walukiewicz. Automata theory and higher-order model-checking. ACM SIGLOG News,
           3(4):13–31, 2016. doi:10.1145/3026744.3026745.


      A      Proofs for Section 3

     A.1     Proof of Proposition 3.8
     Proof. We first show how to make H weight-reducing and N -bounded, and secondly and
     to make H′ a total function with a default output. To make H′ weight-reducing and
     equal to H on its N -bounded branch-outputting runs, we enrich the memory of H with a
     counter initialized by N at each node u. Each subsequent visit to a node u decrements its
     counter. Finally, when the counter reaches 0, the transition function outputs the default leaf
     symbol, ensuring that all branch-outputting runs are weight-reducing and N -bounded, while
     maintaining equivalence with H on N -bounded branch-outputting runs.
        Secondly, the function JH′ K is made total by first making the transition function total
     by defaulting to a special leaf-symbol when H would be undefined, and secondly handling
     the case where H would try to move up of its root by allowing H′ to identify the root
     through special memory symbols. This can be done at the first transition, since the initial
     configuration is at the root.                                                               ◀

     A.2     Proof of Lemma 3.14
     Let H be a uTHM with stay instructions of transition function δ. If t0 = δ(q0 , σ, m0 ), then let
     us build t1 by replacing each symbol ⟨q, m, ⟲⟩ in t0 with δ(q, σ, m). Iterating this procedure
     to build t2 , t3 , . . . tk deterministically either : yields a finite sequence such that tk contains
     no staying transition, or : loops, which we can detect by remembering, along each branch,
     every pair (qi , mi ) ever reached. Let us then build H′ , a quasi-copy of H, by removing
     rule r. If we built a finite sequence, replace it with a new rule δH′ (q 0 , σ, m0 ) = tk . These
     substitutions are the same that would have happened in a run of H, so JHK = JH′ K. If, on
     the other end, we looped, then we do not add any transition. We know from the existence of
     the loop and determinism that any run that uses this rule terminate anyways, so removing
     the rule preserves semantics. We use this construction to remove each transition using stay
     instructions one by one, which will yield a uTHM without stay instructions but equivalent to
     H. Finally, it also (non-strictly) decreases the number of visits to any given input node and
     thus keeps the bounded-visit and narrow-visit restrictions satisfied.

     A.3     Proof of Lemma 3.15
     Informally, the uTHM H′ first writes in the nodes’ memory the state computed by the
     bottom-up automaton. It then behaves like H, using the memory symbol in addition to the
     input symbol to determine the relabeling.
         The first phase visits rk(σ) + 1 = O(1) times each node with label σ. The first time we
     encounter this node (by going down), we just go further down to the first child if possible.
     At the (k + 1)-th visit for 0 ⩽ k < rk(σ), we have already processed the subtrees rooted
     at the k first children of the current node, recording these subtrees’ relabeler states in the
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                          31


current node’s memory, and we go on to visit the (k + 1)-th child. At the (rk(σ) + 1)-th
visit, we apply the transition function to the information we have gathered to determine the
relabeling ρ(σ, p) of the current subtree, record it in memory — it will be used as the new
label of the node —, and move up to the parent in state p.
    More precisely, let H = (Q, M, ⊤, Ξ, Γ, q0 , δ) and R = (P, Σ, Ξ, {α[σ] | σ ∈ Σ}, ρ).
Let S be the set of sequences of elements of P of length at most RΣ . We define H′ =
(Q ∪ P ∪ {init}, M × Ξ ∪ {⊤} ∪ S, ⊤, Σ, Γ, init, β) where β is decomposed into two modes, one
doing a postfix reading of the input to add the relabeling information, and one simulating H
using the previously computed information. The first mode is defined as:
    β(init, σ, ⊤) = (init, ⊤, 1) if rk(σ) ̸= 0.
    β(init, σ, ⊤) = (p, (⊤, ρ(σ, p)), ↑) if rk(σ) = 0 and p = α[σ] ∈ P .
    β(p′ , σ, (p1 , . . . , pk )) = ((p, (⊤, ρ(σ, p)), ↑) if k + 1 = rk(σ) and α[σ](p1 , . . . , pk , p′ ) = p.
    β(p′ , σ, (p1 , . . . , pk )) = ((init, (p1 , . . . , pk , p′ ), k + 2) if k + 1 < rk(σ).
When this mode would try to move up of the root, we switch to the state q0 and start the
simulating mode which is defined as follows:
    β(q, σ, (m, ξ)) = (q ′ , (m′ , ξ), d′ ) where (q ′ , m′ , d′ ) = δ(q, ξ, m).

A.4      Proof of Theorem 3.20
Consider a uTHMR with the notations from Definition 3.19. We translate it to a uTHM
whose execution simulates the original THMR step-by-step while maintaining some additional
information that replaces the regular lookaround. Its set of states (resp. memory values) is
of the form Q′ = Q × (. . . ) (resp. M ′ = M × (. . . )), so that the correspondence between new
and old configurations amounts to applying suitable projections. Its transition function is

    δ ′ : (q ′ , m′ , σ) 7→ apply ℓq′ ,m′ ,σ to every state call leaf of δ(λ(q ′ , m′ , σ))

where:
    ℓq′ ,m′ ,σ : Q × M × DRΣ → Q′ × M ′ × DRΣ extends the calls in the original transitions with
    instructions to update the additional information in the state and memory;
    λ : Q′ × M ′ × Σ → QLA should output the correct lookaround state: for any reachable
    configuration, the image by δLA of the encoding of the corresponding configuration of
    the original THMR should be equal to the image by λ of the argument passed to the
    transition function.
To define λ we decompose the computation of the lookaround state. Let t ∈ TΣ×M be
an input tree labeled with memory values for the original machine. Let v be a node of
t, with label ⟨σ, m⟩. Let us break down t with the vertex v removed into its connected
components: t = C[y ← ⟨σ, m⟩(s1 , . . . , srk(σ) )], where C is a context with a single occurrence,
at position v, of the parameter y. Let us also write s × {notHere} for the result of applying
x 7→ (x, notHere) to every node label in s. We define:

    ρi (t, v) = δLA [si × {notHere}] ∈ QLA           for i ⩽ rk(σ),     or null otherwise
     φ(t, v) = δLA [C × {notHere}] ∈ (QLA → QLA )

(The action of a single-parameter context on the states of a bottom-up automaton is defined
in the usual way, with the key property that δLA (C ′ [y ← s]) = δLA (C ′ )(δLA (s)).)
    If we know this information, then we can recover the lookaround state of a configuration.
Indeed, for q ∈ Q, the configuration (v, q, t) of the original machine (we use here a definition
of configuration whose third component is a memory-annotated input tree) is encoded as

    (C × {notHere})[y ← ⟨σ, m, q⟩(s1 × {notHere}, . . . , srk(σ) × {notHere})]
32   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


     whose image by δLA is equal to

         φ(t, v)(δLA [(σ, m, q)](ρ1 (t, v), . . . , ρrk(σ) (t, v))) ∈ QLA

     We choose a definition of λ that mirrors this equation:

         λ : (q ′ , m′ , σ) 7→ φ′ (q ′ , m′ )(δLA [(σ, m, q)](ρ′1 (q ′ , m′ ), . . . , ρ′rk(σ) (q ′ , m′ )))

     where m (resp. q) is the first component of m′ (resp. q ′ ), for some maps

         ρ′i : Q′ × M ′ → QLA                   φ′ : Q′ × M ′ → (QLA → QLA )

     For this λ to satisfy its desired specification, it suffices to make sure that

         ρ′i (q ′ , m′ ) = ρ(t, v)            φ′ (q ′ , m′ ) = φ(t, v)

     whenever q ′ and m′ are respectively the state and the memory at the current head position
     in a configuration of the new THM that projects to (v, q, t).
         To achieve this, we take the new sets of states and memory values to be respectively

          Q′ = Q × (QLA ∪ (QLA → QLA ))
         M ′ = M × DRΣ × (QLA ∪ {null})RΣ × (QLA → QLA )

     For q ′ = (q, p) ∈ Q′ and m′ = (m, d, r1 , . . . , rRΣ , f ) ∈ M ′ , we define
                       (                                            (
         ′ ′     ′       p if d =↓i                   ′ ′      ′     p if d =↑
        ρi (q , m ) =                              φ (q , m ) =
                         ri otherwise                                f otherwise

     In other words, all the lookahead information can be read from memory, except for one value
     (and d indicates which one): it is the responsibility of the previous transition to compute
     this missing value and record it in p as part of the state.
         Let us now turn to the transitions. If the original uTHMR moves in a direction d′′ , then,
     informally, the new uTHM also does so in the step-by-step simulation. Furthermore:
         In the directional component of the memory, it records d′′ . Indeed, if d′′ =↓i , then the
         machine might mutate the memory of the i-th child of the current node v before the
         head position comes back to v (if it ever does). Thus, we cannot predict the lookaround
         information for the i-th subtree at the next visit of v, so we record the direction ↓i as our
         one allowed exception. A similar analysis holds when d =↑ regarding the context above v.
         However, since the moves of the head are local, the memory of the rest of the tree (that
         is, outside of the aforementioned subtree or context) is not going to change before visiting
         v again. This is why the new machine also records ρ′1 (q ′ , m′ ), . . . to memory, to be used
         at the next visit. (Here (q ′ , m′ , σ) is the argument passed to the transition function.)
     Formally, recall that the transition function involves a relabeling of state call leaves; we
     define it as:

         ℓq′ ,m′ ,σ (q ′′ , m′′ , d′′ ) = ((q ′′ , p′′ ), (m′′ , d′′ , r1′′ , . . . , rrk(σ)
                                                                                       ′′
                                                                                             , f ′′ ), d′′ )

     where ri′′ = ρ′i (q ′ , m′ ), f ′′ = φ′ (q ′ , m′ ) and
                 (
           ′′     δLA [(σ, m′′ , notHere)](r1′′ , . . . , rrk(σ)
                                                           ′′
                                                                 ) ∈ QLA                                       if d′′ =↑
         p =
                    f ′′ ◦ δLA [(σ, m′′ , notHere)](r1′′ , . . . , ri−1
                                                                    ′′        ′′
                                                                        , −, ri+1            ′′
                                                                                  , . . . , rrk(σ) )           if d′′ =↓i
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                    33


Let us explain the case d′′ =↑ of this last equation (the other case is similar). Let (v, q ′ , t′ ) be
a reachable configuration, with (σ, m′ ) being the label of v in t′ . By moving in the direction
↑ we go to the parent w of the node v. It must be the case that w has already been visited
before (in order to reach v from the root), and the last visit to w has concluded with a
move towards the child v, in direction ↓i for some i. The responsibility of the transition
from (v, q ′ , t′ ) to the successor configuration (w, (q ′′ , p′′ ), s′ ) is therefore to make sure that
p′′ = ρi (s, w) where s is the projection of s′ . By unfolding the definitions, and noting that s′
and t′ differ only at the node v, one can check that the above choice for p′′ works.
    A final detail: our new uTHM uses the bottom-up initialization feature from Lemma 3.15.
If the input subtree rooted at a node is σ(t1 , . . . , tk ) then its initial memory is

     (⊤, δLA [t1 × {(⊤, notHere)}], . . . , δLA [tk × {(⊤, notHere)}], null, . . . , null, id)
                                                                       |      {z        }
                                                                           RΣ − k times

This guarantees that the correspondence between ρ, φ and ρ′ , φ′ holds at the first visit of
each node.

 B       Proofs for Section 4
We prove first the first statement of Theorem 4.7, namely that any MTT can be translated
into an equivalent uTHM.

Proof of Theorem 4.7. Before formally defining the equivalent uTHM H, we explain how
it simulates M. The main difference between MTT and uTHM is that the MTT processes
its input once while having pointers to different parts of its output, while the uTHM can
process its input several times, but only produces its output in a top-down fashion. On the
other hand, a uTHM has access to a finite memory for each node and for each branch of
the output. In order to simulate M, the uTHM H applies, for each branch, an outside-in
evaluation process, meaning that it always evaluates the topmost call state of a branch. It
also stores in each node the sequence of remaining calls to be processed.
    H starts simulating M at the root, applying its initial transition. When H reaches a
node from its parent, it does so in a given state q of M. Together with the node label σ, it
gives a transition (q, σ) of M, where r ∈ TΓ∪⟨Q,Xj ⟩ (Yk ) with j being the rank of σ and k
being the rank of q. The corresponding transition of H produces a tree where each branch b
is truncated at the first ⟨Q, Xj ⟩ symbol ⟨q ′ , xi ⟩. It launches a head in state q ′ on direction
i, and writes on its node the truncated part of the branch b. If there is no ⟨Q, Xj ⟩ symbol,
then either the branch is done and nothing else needs to be done, or there is a Yi symbol, in
which case the reading head moves up, back to its parent, in a state indicating the branch i
being produced.
    When H reaches a nodes from one of its children, then it contains a remainder of the
branch to produce, and the state indicates which branch to follow. It then acts similarly
to above, according to the state at the top of the branch, minus the state call at the root
whose simulation has finished. The computation stops when all branches have reached their
respective ends.
    Formally, let M = (Q, Σ, Γ, q0 , δ). We define a uTHM H = (P, N, ⊤, Σ, Γ, p0 , α) as follows.
We set the set of states P = Q ∪ [RQ ] and p0 = q0 . To define the memory N , we need to
consider the possible productions of M . We first consider Out to be the set of output trees
δ(q, σ) for q, σ in Q, Σ. Let Out′ be the set of subtrees of elements of Out that are rooted at
an element of ⟨Q, Xj ⟩. The set of memory symbols N is finally defined as {⊤} ∪ Out′ .
    It remains to define the transition function α:
34   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


        α(q, σ, ⊤) produces the tree δ(q, σ) where each branch is truncated before the first symbol
        that does not belong to Γ, and for each truncated subtree t, we set a processing head:
           ⟨q, t, j⟩ if the top symbol belongs is ⟨q, xj ⟩,
           ⟨i, ⊤, ↑⟩ if t is reduced to a parameter Yi .
        α(i, σ, t) behaves similarly to the first case, using the i-th branch of t (without its root)
        instead of δ(q, σ). Note that in this case α(i, σ, t) nonetheless produces the possible finite
        Γ branches attached to the root of t.
        the case α(q, σ, t) is undefined as it does not appear since H only reaches a node in a
        state in Q if its memory is emptied (i.e. in memory state ⊤).
        Note that the uTHM can only reach a node in a state i coming from one of its children,
        so the case (i, σ, ⊤) does not happen either.

         We now prove the correctness of the construction, namely that JMK = JHK. As mentioned
     earlier, we in fact prove that H realizes an outside-in evaluation of calls of M on every
     branches, meaning that it produces its output similarly to M does by always applying the
     topmost derivation possible on each branch, called the outside-in derivation. This proves the
     correctness of simulation since all derivations of MTTs lead to the same output.
         In order to prove this, we describe what outside-in partial derivations of M look like.
     The MTT M processes its input in a top-down fashion, stacking state calls on the partial
     output. A state call ⟨q, s⟩ is replaced, by a derivation step, by a tree whose state calls are
     children of s. If the topmost state call is processed each step (branch-wise), then the state
     calls of children of a node are processed before its own state calls. The resulting derivation is
     a tree where for any branch, all state calls of siblings of a given node are grouped together.
     More, the depths of state calls in the derivation tree are inverted compared to the depths of
     the node they point to.
         Let us consider a partial output t′ of M over some input t, meaning that ⟨q0 , t⟩ ⇒∗M t′ ,
     obtained using the outside-in derivation. We show that H reaches a configuration where
     it has produced the maximal prefix t′′ of t′ that belongs to TΓ , and for each topmost node
     n = ⟨q, s⟩ appearing of t′ (hence not in t′′ ), H has a processing head on s in state q. Moreover
     for each node s′ and such node n, the memory of s′ for the branch denoted by n is ⊤ if s′
     is a descendant of s, and otherwise contains the maximal subtree of t′′ below n containing
     symbols of Γ and all state calls on its children, and such that its root is a state call.
         At the start of the computation of M, nothing is produced and the initial configuration
     of H satisfies this property.
         Now assume that property holds true at some point of the computation, and let n = ⟨q, s⟩
     be the topmost node of some branch b of t′ that does not belong to Γ. The outside-in
     derivation of M on this branch applies to n and replaces ⟨q, s⟩ by δ(q, lab(s)). By induction
     hypothesis, H has a processing head of s in state q. Since n is the topmost state call and
     points to s, there is no state call related to any children of s, so the memory state of s is
     ⊤. The derivation of M replaces ⟨q, s⟩ with the context c = δ(q, lab(s)) and plugs it in t′ to
     form a new partial output t′′ . Similarly, the corresponding transition α(q, lab(s), ⊤) produces
     the Γ part of c. For any branch of c with a state call, let n′ = ⟨q ′ , si⟩ be its topmost state
     call. H launches a processing head on si in state q ′ , and stores on s the (possibly empty)
     tree below n′ , satisfying the invariant for the unfinished branch. If a branch of c is entirely
     comprised of Γ-symbols, the branch is entirely computed and the invariant is also satisfied.
     Finally, if a branch of c ends in some parameter Yi , the possible topmost state call of t′′ of
     this branch relates to a node s′ above s. The machine H moves up, in state i, up to the
     first ancestor node that still contains a state call in its memory state, possibly updating the
     state i. Thanks to the invariant, it corresponds to s′ and the memory state of s′ contains
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                              35


the remainder of the branches to produce and the state indicates which branch is being
produced. The transition applied here then launches a processing head on the child of s′
corresponding to the state call, in the corresponding state, and removes from t the produced
part, satisfying the invariant.
   This proves that JMK ⊆ JHK when seen as relations. And since M and H realizes total
functions, this means that JMK = JHK, which concludes the proof.                          ◀

    The second point of Theorem 4.7 is a consequence of the more general following property:
each call of the machine M to a node u corresponds exactly to one downward visit of the
machine H to the same node u. Indeed by construction of H, each downward visit of H to a
node u consumes a call stored by its parent. As the memory is constructed from transitions
of M that are yet to be expanded, we get that calls of M are in bijection to downward visits
of H. Then the number of downward visits at an antichain S of nodes of an input t, for a
branch-outputting run of H, is the number of calls of ■ that can be stored in nodes of S
by the branch-outputting run, which is bounded by the maximal number of ■ that can be
stacked during a computation of M■ .


 C     Proofs for Section 5
The goal of this section is to construct, given a finite visits THM, an MSO-SI that realizes
the same function. The main ingredient of the proof is the use of local profiles, which are
abstractions of the run of a THM at a given input position regarding a given output position.
Thanks to the finite visits property, local profiles are bounded. We use them for the coloring
Xi of the MSO set interpretation. A global profile of an input then associates to each input
position a local profile. The domain formula of the MSO-SI states that a global profile is
coherent, meaning that all local profiles concern a same output position.
    To define the successor and ancestor formulas, we rely on the fact that the local profiles
for a given output position are extensions of the local profiles for its ancestors, as THM
produces their output in a top-down fashion. In particular, this means that a partial run up
to producing a given output position has to produce all its ancestors.
    For the remainder of this section, we fix a (finite visits) THM H = (Q, M, ⊤, Σ, Γ, qinit , δ).
We denote by B (resp. P B) the set of (resp. prefix) branches in the right hand side of
                                   S                              S
transition rules of H, i.e. the set q,σ,m B(δ(q, σ, m)) (resp. q,σ,m P B(δ(q, σ, m)))).

C.1     Hennie Profiles
A node of the output tree H(t) for some input tree t is uniquely characterized by the
branch-outputting run leading to it. Said branch is determined by a sequence of transitions
of H on t, i.e. by an input node, a state and a memory state. Should we call a visit pair
a pair composed by a state of Q and a branch of BP , the trace left on an input node of
producing an output node is a finite sequence of visit pairs. Formally, we set:

▶ Definition C.1 (Local profiles). For σ ∈ Σ, a local H Hennie profile over σ is a finite
sequence (q1 , b1 ), . . . (qk , bk ) of visit pairs that satisfies the following conditions:
1. k is smaller of equal to maximal number of visits of H.
2. for all 0 < i < k − 1, bi is a branch of B and its leaf is a reading head,
3. b0 ∈ B(δ(q0 , ⟨σ, ⊤⟩)) , and
4. ∀i < k − 1, bi+1 ∈ B(δ(qi+1 , ⟨σ, mi ⟩)), where mi is defined inductively as the memory set
   by the previous transition.
36   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


     We call ΛH (σ) the set of local H Hennie profiles over σ, or simply Λ(σ) when H is clear
     from context, and ΛH = ∪σ∈Σ ΛH (σ) the set of all local H Hennie profiles.

         Intuitively, a local profile requires that at each visit of the input position, the memory
     state corresponds to the one written by the last visit (or ⊤ for the first visit). We also require
     that each visit but potentially the last selects a complete and non terminating branch of the
     production of the transition.
         Producing a an output node, and the branch leading to it, might require to visit several
     if not all nodes of the input, generating local profiles for all input nodes. This gives rise to
     the notion of global profiles:

     ▶ Definition C.2 (Global profiles). A global H Hennie profile α over t is a mapping from nodes
     of t to local H Hennie profiles respecting the condition: ∀u ∈ Dom(t), α(u) ∈ ΛH (labt (u)).
     We call NH (t) the set of global H Hennie profiles over t.

        Global profiles assigns to each node a local profile corresponding to its label. The next
     notion allows us to describe global profiles that effectively characterize partial runs.

     ▶ Definition C.3 (Execution order). Consider a global Hennie profile α. For u a node of
     t and i an integer, we denote by (u, i) the i-th visiting pair (qi , bi ) of α(u) if it exists. An
     execution order of mnu is a total ordering ⩽e of all visiting pairs (u, i) such that:
        For all u, (u, i) ⩽e (u, j) iif i ⩽ j,
        For all visiting pair (q, b) of some node u, with the leaf of b being some head ⟨q ′ , m, d⟩ if,
        and only if, there exists some visiting pair (q ′ , b′ ) in ud and (q ′ , b′ ) is the ⩽e -successor of
        (q, b).

         We finally define coherent full profiles that we later prove to be the colorings we need to
     define the MSO-SI transformation.

     ▶ Definition C.4 (Coherence). A global profile is said to be coherent if it admits an execution
     order whose smallest element is the first visiting pair of the root, with state qinit .

     ▶ Proposition C.5. In a coherent global profile ν over t, there exists a unique u ∈ Dom(t)
     that contains a branch b which endpoint is not labeled in ⟨Q, M, D⟩.

     Proof. A pair (q, b) has a successor if and only if the endpoint of b is labeled in ⟨Q, M, D⟩,
     but the order ⩽e needs to be total, so there must be exactly one visiting pair whose endpoint
     is not in ⟨Q, M, D⟩ : the maximum (u, i) of ⩽e .                                            ◀

        The previous definitions amount to this key lemma that links coherent global profiles
     with output nodes.

     ▶ Lemma C.6. Given an input t of H, there is a bijection between the output nodes of JHK(t)
     (or equivalently branch-outputting runs with a distinguished node in the last branch) and the
     set of coherent H-profiles over t.

     Proof. First, let α : Dom(t) → ΛH be a coherent global profile with execution order ⩽e .
     Using Proposition C.5, there exists exactly one node u with a visiting pair (q, b) ∈ α(u) such
     that the endpoint of b is an element of Γ. We prove by induction on the execution order
     that the concatenation of the branches of the visiting pairs along the execution order is a
     branch-outputting run of JHK(t) with the last transition potentially truncated. Then by
     Proposition C.5 the endpoint of this truncated branch-outputting run is an element of Γ, thus
     an output node of JHK(t). Initially, the smallest element of ⩽e is, by definition of coherence,
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                  37


the first visiting pair (qinit , b) of the root of t, where b is a (potentially truncated) branch of
δ(qinit , lab(ε), ⊤). Hence at the first step b is a possibly truncated branch-outputting run of
the initial transition of H on t.
       Now suppose that we have constructed a branch-outputting run b1 . . . bn up to some
visiting pair (q, bn ) of some node u of t, and let ⟨q ′ , m, d⟩ be the endpoint of bn . Note that if
the endpoint of b is an element γ of Γ, by Proposition C.5 we have exhausted the execution
order and we can conclude. By definition of the execution order there is a visiting pair
(q ′ , b′ ) in ud that is the successor of the visiting pair (q, bn ). Then b′ is a branch (or a prefix
of a branch, in which case we can also conclude) of δ(q ′ , lab(ud), m′ ) where m′ is the last
memory state written at ud by the previous visiting pair (or ⊤ if it is the first visiting pair
of the node). We concatenate b′ to the already produced branch-outputting run by replacing
⟨q ′ , m, d⟩ by b′ . As we followed the transition of H, we successfully extended our induction.
       Conversely, given an output node o of JHK(t), we construct a coherent global profile
                                                                                    0              b
as follows. Using the branchwise semantics of THM, consider the unique sequence x0 −→
    bn−1
. . . −−−→ xn where x0 = Cinit and π2 (b0 . . . bn−1 γ) is the step by step branch computation
from the initial configuration up to the computation step that output node o. Let xi =
(ui , qi , ti ) for all i < n Then we construct the local profiles as follows: local profiles are
initialized as the empty sequence. Then for i ranging from 0 to n − 2, we add to the node ui
the visiting pair (qi , bi ), and we add to un−1 the pair (qn−1 , b′ ) where b′ is bn−1 truncated at
o. We prove that the set of sequences we defined is a coherent global profile. First, they are
local profiles since :
 1. each profile has a length corresponding to the number of visits of the node, it is hence
      bounded by the maximal number of visits.
 2. Each bi is one computation step of H, so it is a full, branch of a right-hand side of δ, and
      ends with a reading head except for the last configuration xn ,
 3. The first visit of a given input node has the memory set to ⊤,
 4. The branch bi is the result of applying the transition of the reading head in state qi , with
      the memory set by the last visit of the position.
    It is then a global profile since all visiting pairs of the local profile apply transitions of the
label of the corresponding node. The execution order is naturally defined by the sequence
of bi ordering their corresponding pairs. By construction it satisfies both conditions of the
definitions. And finally it is coherent since we start at the initial configuration.                ◀

    We are now able to define the labeling formulas ϕγ .

▶ Lemma C.7. We can construct MSO formulas ϕγ ({Xλ | λ ∈ ΛH }), for γ ∈ Γ, such that
for any input t and assignment α : Dom(t) → ΛH , (t, α) |= ϕγ ({Xλ | λ ∈ ΛH }) if, and only
if, α is a coherent global profile in bijection with an output node labeled by γ.

Proof. We first define a formula ϕ({Xλ | λ ∈ ΛH }) such that (t, α) |= ϕ if, and only if,
α is a coherent global profile. First, the formula states that the sets Xi form a partition
of the domain of t. The predicate x ∈X         λ is interpreted as the node quantified by x is
labeled by local profile λ. The global      profile condition is simply the subformula ψgp =
∀x, ∧σ∈Σ σ(x) → ∨λ∈ΛH (σ) x ∈ Xλ . Next, we define the execution order via a formula
ψi,j (x, y) that is satisfied if the successor in the execution order of the i-th visiting pair of
the profile of x is the j-th visiting pair of y. As the successor in the execution order is always
a neighbor (self, child or parent) and only depends on the local profile of the two which is
finite information, the formula ψi,j (x, y) can be written as a disjunction of types on x and y
in its direct neighborhood. Then the existence of the execution order is the formula stating
38   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


     that the transitive closure the successor formula is a total order, i.e. transitive, reflexive and
     antisymmetric, which are all MSO definable properties. Finally, the coherence is defined by
     stating that the minimal element of the execution order is the first visiting pair of the root.
     The label γ correspond to the label of the maximal element of the execution order.               ◀

          We conclude this Section by giving the reduction from THM to MSO-SI.

     Proof of Theorem 5.3. Similarly to the proof of Lemma C.7, we set c = |ΛH |, the number
     of second order variables of T is equal to the number of local profiles. The labeling formulas
     ϕγ are taken from Lemma C.7.
          Finally, we need to define the ϕi formula interpreting the i-th child relation as well as the
     ϕanc formula interpreting the ancestor relation. A global profile α describes the ancestor of
     an other global profile α′ if, and only if, for all node u, α′ (u) is obtained from α(u) by adding
     visiting pairs to it, and by enriching the maximal element of the execution order. This is
     a local property that can be tested separately on each node, verifying that α′ (u) is indeed
     an extension of α(u), and both are coherent global profiles. Similarly, a coherent global
     profile α′ describes the i-th child of an other coherent global profile α if α′ is obtained from
     α by replacing the maximal element of the execution order (q, b) with b ending in some γ by
     (q, b′ ) where b′ is b enriched with the i-th child in the transition δ(q, ⟨σ, m⟩). Then either the
     leaf of b′ is an element of Γ, or the local profiles of α′ are local profile of α enriched with
     visiting pairs whose branches are reduced to a single node. The fact that α′ is a coherent
     global profile assures then that all these branches added are reduced to a single reading head,
     except for the maximal element. As these properties are MSO definable by a disjunction over
     the finite set of local profiles, we are able to define formulas ϕi for the successor.           ◀

      D         Proofs for Section 6
     D.1        Proof and further details for Claim 6.7
     We first look at the k-ary application of actors in general. Recall that OM(A ⊸ B) =
     {L}×IM(A)∪{R}×OM(B) and that IM(A ⊸ B) is defined similarly. We use the abbreviation
     argi m = (R, . . . (R, (L, m)) . . . ) with i − 1 times R.
     ▷ Claim D.1.             Let k ∈ N. Let Γ ⊩ α : B1 ⊸ · · · ⊸ Bk ⊸ A and Γ ⊩ βi : Bi for i ∈ [k].
     Then:
                                  k                                                k             k
                                  Y                                                Y             [
     Q⊖                 ⊖
      β(α1 )...(αk ) = Qβ ×             Q⊖
                                         αi         Q⊕                 ⊕
                                                     β(α1 )...(αk ) = Qβ ×               Q⊖
                                                                                          αi ∪        Q⊖   ⊖          ⊖      ⊕    ⊖           ⊖
                                                                                                       β ×Qα1 ×· · ·×Qαi−1 ×Qαi ×Qαi+1 · · ·×Qαk
                                  i=1                                              i=1          i=1
           ∼ denotes bijections that only reindex products. Intuitively, at any time, at most one of the
     where =
     subprocesses is active.
                                 ⊖      ⊖                ⊖
          The initial state is (q0,β , q0,α 1
                                              , . . . , q0,αk
                                                              ) and the transitions are:
      ⊖
     δβ(α 1 )...(αk )
                      : ((qβ⊖ , qα⊖1 , . . . , qα⊖k ), m) 7→ (δβ⊖ (qβ⊖ , (R, . . . (R, m) . . . )), qα⊖1 , . . . , qα⊖k ) with k times R

                                                                                    p⊕ 7→ (qβ⊖ , qα
                                                                                                  ⊖
                                                                                                      , . . . , p ⊕ , . . . qα
                                                                                                                             ⊖
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    1                          k
                                                                                                                                 )
           ⊕
                           : (qβ⊖ , qα
                                     ⊖              ⊕            ⊖
                                                                     ) 7→ γ(p⊕                  ⊖ ⊖                ⊕          ⊖                      ⊕ ⊕ 
          δβ(α                           , . . . , qα   , . . . qα            1 , . . . ) 7→ γ((qβ , qα1 , . . . , p1 , . . . qαk ), . . . )          δαi (qαi )
                                                                       
               1 )...(αk )             1              i            k


                                                                             (p⊖ , m) 7→ (δβ⊖ (qβ⊖ , argi m), qα
                                                                                                               ⊖
                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                   , . . . , p ⊖ , . . . qα
                                                                                                                                          ⊖
                                                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                                                              )
                                                                                                      p⊕ 7→ (p⊕ , qα
                                                                                                                   ⊖              ⊖
                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                       , . . . , qα k
                                                                                                                                      )
                                                                                          γ(p⊕                  ⊕ ⊖               ⊖
                                                                                              1 , . . . ) 7→ γ((p , qα1 , . . . , qαk ), . . . )
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                        (qβ⊕ , qα
                                                ⊖              ⊖                                                                                                   ⊕ ⊕
                                                    , . . . , qα   ) 7→                                                                                           δβ (qβ )
                                                                       
                                                  1              k                         ⊖                      ⊖      ⊖              ⊖ ⊖                   ⊖
                                                                                        (p , argi m) 7→ (p           , qα 1
                                                                                                                             , . . . , δα (qαi , m), . . . , qα k
                                                                                                                                                                  )
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                         (p , (R, . . . (R, m) . . . )) 7→ ((p⊖ , qα
                                                                            ⊖                                      ⊖
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                  ⊖
                                                                                                                       , . . . , qα k
                                                                                                                                      ), m)
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                                               39


Proof. The case k = 0 is tautological, while k = 1 is the definition of application, up to the
bijection that swaps pairs. Inductive case:
                                                               k
                                                                      !           k+1
                                                                  Q⊖ ∼
                                                              Y                   Y
    Q⊖            = Q⊖ × Q⊖
      β(α1 )...(αk+1 )         αk+1       = Q⊖ × Q⊖ ×
                                          β(α1 )...(αk )       αk+1      = Q⊖ ×β      Q⊖      αi           β          αi
                                                                                       i=1                      i=1



    Q⊖                   ⊕       ⊖                 ⊖       ⊕
     β(α1 )...(αk+1 ) = Qαk+1 × Qβ(α1 )...(αk ) ∪ Qαk+1 × Qβ(α1 )...(αk )
                                           k                                  k              k
                                                                                                                                                        !
                                           Y                                  Y              [
                     = Q⊕       ⊖
                        αk+1 × Qβ ×              Q⊖     ⊖
                                                  αi ∪ Qαk+1 ×        Q⊕
                                                                       β ×          Q⊖
                                                                                     αi ∪          Q⊖    ⊖             ⊖       ⊕     ⊖             ⊖
                                                                                                    β × Qα1 × · · · × Qαi−1 × Qαi × Qαi+1 · · · × Qαk
                                           i=1                                i=1            i=1
                                k                               k+1           k
                                Y                               Y             [
                     ∼  ⊖
                     = Qβ ×            Q⊖     ⊕       ⊕
                                        αi × Qαk+1 ∪ Qβ ×             Q⊖
                                                                       αi ∪         Q⊖    ⊖             ⊖       ⊕     ⊖             ⊖
                                                                                     β × Qα1 × · · · × Qαi−1 × Qαi × Qαi+1 · · · × Qαk+1
                                 i=1                            i=1           i=1
                                k+1            k+1
                                Y              [
                     ∼  ⊕
                     = Qβ ×            Q⊖
                                        αi ∪         Q⊖    ⊖             ⊖       ⊕     ⊖             ⊖
                                                      β × Qα1 × · · · × Qαi−1 × Qαi × Qαi+1 · · · × Qαk+1
                                 i=1           i=1

 The expressions for the transitions can also be derived inductively from the definitions.                                  ◀

    Let us now fix an actor-based tree transducer with the notations of Definition 6.6. By
structural induction on t ∈ TΣ , and using the above claim, we can deduce expressions (up to
product reindexing) of the states and transitions of αt involving Dom(t), using the fact that

    Dom(σ(t1 , . . . , trk(σ) )) ∼
                                 = {ε} + Dom(t1 ) + · · · + Dom(trk(σ) )

Finally using the definition of application we can describe the states and transitions of
βout (αt ). The states are given in the statement of Claim 6.7. The initial state is q0⊖ =
   ⊖                        ⊖                               ⊖                 ⊖     ⊖
((q0,lab t (u)
               )u∈Dom(t) , q0,out ), and we have δ ⊖ ((⃗q, qout ), •) = (⃗q, δout (qout , •)).
                                                   ⊕     ⊖          ⊖                 ⊕        ⊕
    For an active state of the form x = (u, q , (qv )v̸=u , qout ), we have δ (x) = fx (δlab     t (u)
                                                                                                       (q ⊕ ))
where

      fx : γ(p⊕            ⊕                 ⊕     ⊖          ⊖
              1 , . . . , prk(c) ) 7→ γ((u, p1 , (qv )v̸=u , qout ), . . . )
                                                            ⊖
                               p⊕ 7→ (u, p⊕ , (qv⊖ )v̸=u , qout )
                                             ⊖            ⊖                                      ⊖
                    (qu⊖ , argi m) 7→ (ui, δlab t (ui)
                                                       (qui , (R, . . . (R, m))), (qv⊖ )v̸=ui , qout )
                                        (
                                               ⊖           ⊖                            ⊖
                                         (w, δlab        (qw  , argi m), (qv⊖ )v̸=w , qout ) if u = wi for some i
    (qu⊖ , (R, . . . (R, m) . . . )) 7→            t (w)
                                                                ⊖      ⊖
                                            ⊖
           |          {z          }      ((qv )v∈Dom(t) , δout (qout , (L, m)))                  otherwise, i.e. u = ε
       rk(labt (u)) times R


Finally, δ ⊕ (((qu⊖ )u∈Dom(t) , q ⊕ )) is given by the case (qα⊖ , qβ⊕ ) of Definition 6.5.

D.2      Proof of Lemma 6.8
We design a machine H whose runs on the input t simulate βout (αt ) step by step. Its states
and memory values are:
                 [                       [
   QH = Q⊕ out ∪    Q⊕    ⊖
                     σ × Qout    MH =       Q⊖σ
                         σ∈Σ                                 σ∈Σ

A configuration (u, q, µ) of H represents an active state q ⊕ of βout (αt ) when:
   either q ∈ Q⊕            ⊕
                  out and q = ((µ(v))v∈Dom(t) , q),
                  ⊖                                       ⊖
   or q = (qu⊕ , qout ) and q ⊕ = (u, qu⊕ , (µ(v))v̸=u , qout ).
40   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


                                      ⊖    ⊖
     The initial state of H is δout      (q0,out , •). Using bottom-up initialization, for each node with
                                                               ⊖
     label σ, we take the initial memory value to be q0,σ        . This way, the initial configuration of H
     is the unique representation of δ (q0 , •) where q0⊖ is the initial state of βout (αt ). (However,
                                             ⊖ ⊖

     the representations of active states in Q⊕ \ (Q⊖                    ⊕
                                                              Dom(t) × Qout ) are not unique: the memory
     value at the current position is undetermined.)
         The argument of the transition function is some regular lookaround state, containing
     enough information to determine:
         the label σ of the current node;
                                                                                              ⊖
         the current state — let us treat here the case where it has the form (q ⊕ , qout       );
         the labels σ1 , . . . , σrk(σ) and memory values q1⊖ , . . . of the current node’s children;
                                                               ⊖
         either the label σup and the memory value qup           of the parent or the knowledge that the
         current node has no parent i.e. is the root.
     On such an input, the transition function returns the result of applying to δσ⊕ (q ⊕ ) the map
                                          ⊖
                            p⊕ 7→ ((p⊕ , qout ), [some arbitrary value], ⟲)          (note the stay-instruction)
            γ(p⊕            ⊕               ⊕ ⊖
               1 , . . . , prk(c) ) 7→ γ(((p1 , qout ), [some arbitrary value], ⟲), . . . )

                 (p⊖ , argi m) 7→ ((δσ⊖i (qi⊖ , (R, . . . (R, m))), qout
                                                                     ⊖
                                                                         ), p⊖ , i)
                                     (
                                         ⊖     ⊖
            ⊖                          (δout (qout , (L, m)), p⊖ , ⟲)              if the current node is the root
          (p , (R, . . . (R, m))) 7→      ⊖     ⊖                ⊖       ⊖
                                       ((δσup (qup , argj m), qout ), p , ↑) if the current node is an j-th child

     (for a non-root node, this number j can also be determined by regular lookaround). This
     definition closely reflects the transitions of βout (αt ) described in the previous subsection of
     the appendix, in order to get a step-by-step simulation.

      E       Details and proofs for Section 7
     E.1      Specification of our affine λ-calculus
     Grammar of λ-terms: t, u ::= x | a | λx. t | t u | ⟨t, u⟩ | π1 t | π2 t. Reduction rules:
     (λx. T ) U →β T [x ← U ] and πi ⟨T1 , T2 ⟩ →β Ti . Typing:

                                        Φ | Θ, x : A ⊢ T : B             Φ | Θ ⊢ T : A ⊸ B Φ | Θ′ ⊢ U : A
          Φ | Θ, x : A ⊢ x : A         Φ | Θ ⊢ λx. T : A ⊸ B                     Φ | Θ, Θ′ ⊢ T U : B
                                    Φ|Θ⊢T :A Φ|Θ⊢U :B                         Φ | Θ ⊢ T : A 1 & A2
                                                                                                   (i ∈ {1, 2})
       Φ, c : A | Θ ⊢ c : A           Φ | Θ ⊢ ⟨T, U ⟩ : A & B                  Φ | Θ ⊢ πi T : A i

     E.2      Proof of Lemma 7.7
     In order to show that β-reduction, starting from a λ-term built from an input t ∈ TΣ by our
     λ-transducer, simulates the tree-generating machine for H on the same input t, we explain
     how relate configurations of H to λ-terms.
         First we note that (u, q, µ) ∈ Conf(H, t) contains the same information as the data of:
         the state q;
                                                                                            u,µ
         the subtree t↾u annotated with the memory values from µ — this gives us a tree t        ∈
        T⟨Σ,M ⟩ ;
         the context t[u ← □] above u, plus memory annotations, yielding a one-hole context
         tu,µ T⟨Σ,M ⟩ ({□}) with a single leaf with label □.
                                                                     u,µ
     We explain how to represent (memory-annotated) subtrees t , then contexts tu,µ , then
     configurations.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                                      41


▶ Definition E.1 (set of λ-representations of a subtree). ⌈−⌉n : T⟨Σ,M ⟩ → {sets of terms of type An }
is defined by:
                                     (
                                       ∅                                                  if k < ω(m)
    ⌈⟨σ, m⟩(t1 , . . . , trk(σ) )⌉k =  ⃗n;k
                                        Tσ,m T1 . . . Trk(σ) | ⃗n ∈ Nrk(σ) , Ti ∈ ⌈ti ⌉ni otherwise

For contexts note that the continuation passed to a subtree behavior can also be thought
of as the behavior of the surrounding context. Let Bn = An−1 ⊸ o&Q for n ⩾ 1, so that
An = Bn ⊸ o&Q . We define ⌊C⌋n as a set of terms of type Bn for a one-hole context C.

▶ Definition E.2 (set of λ-representations of a context). ⌊−⌋k maps one-hole contexts to sets
of terms of type Bk for k ⩾ 1. It is defined by induction on the depth of the hole □: the base
case is ⌊□⌋k = {λx. ⟨γ0 | q ∈ Q⟩} and the inductive case is
                                                               ⃗
                                                               n;ℓ
                                                         
    ⌊C[□ ← ⟨σ, m⟩(t1 , . . . , ti , □, ti+1 , . . . )]⌋ = λx. Tσ,m T1 . . . x . . . Trk(σ) U
                                                         ⃗n ∈ Nrk(σ) , ni = k − 1, Tj ∈ ⌈tj ⌉nj , ℓ ≥ ω(m), U ∈ ⌊C⌋ℓ

▶ Definition E.3 (set of λ-representations of a configuration). V−U maps configurations to
sets of terms of type o:
                                                  u,µ
    V(u, q, µ)U = {πq (T U ) | ∃k ⩾ 1 : T ∈ ⌈t          ⌉k , U ∈ ⌊tu,µ ⌋k }

We define (↭) ⊂ {λ-terms T s.t. Γ& | ∅ ⊢ T : o} × TΓ (Conf(H, t)) as the relation generated
from T ↭ (u, q, µ) ⇐⇒ T ∈ V(u, q, µ)U by the context closure (∀i, Ti ↭ gi ) =⇒
γ ⟨T1 , . . . , Tk ⟩ ↭ γ(g1 , . . . , gk ) (g stands for “global state”).

▶ Lemma E.4 (Simulation). For all (u, q, µ) ∈ Conf(H, t) and V ∈ V(u, q, µ)U, there is
V →∗β V ′ s.t. V ′ ↭ computation-step((u, q, µ)).
                                                                                            u1,µ
Proof. Let σ = labt (u) and m = µ(u). By definition of V−U, for some T1 ∈ ⌈t                       ⌉n1 , . . . , Trk σ ∈
   u rk(σ),µ
⌈t           ⌉nrk(σ) and U ∈ ⌊tu,µ ⌋k ,

T ′ = πq (Tσ,m
           ⃗
           n;k
               T1 . . . Trk(σ) U ) →∗β (encoding of δ(q, σ, m)) [the substitution of §7.2] [⃗z ← T⃗ , x ← U ]
                                                                |           {z           }|         {z     }
                                                                                call this smove                call this sβ

Meanwhile, the inductive definition of = on TΓ (Conf(H, t)) entails that the image of (u, q, µ)
by the computation-step function can be similarly described as δ(q, σ, m)[(q ′ , m′ , d) ←
(u, q, µ) = (q ′ , m′ , d) ∀q ′ , m′ , d]. Therefore, it suffices to check that:

    ∀q ′ , m′ , d, ∃V ′′ : (q ′ , m′ , d)smove sβ →∗β V ′′ ↭ (u, q, µ) = (q ′ , m′ , d) = (ud, q ′ , µ′ )
                                                                                       

where µ′ (u) = m′ and µ′ (v) = µ(v) for v =   ̸ u, and (q ′ , m′ , d′ ) ranges over the labels of leaves
of δ(q, σ, m) of this form. If there is no such leaf, then the result is vacuously true. If there
is at least one, then we have: k ⩾ ω(m) > ω(m′ ) ⩾ 0. Note that the definition of smove
depends on whether k = 0 or k ⩾ 1; thus, the weight-reducing property guarantees that we
are in the latter case.
    We then proceed by case disjunction on d.
    First we consider the case d ∈ [rk σ], i.e. d ̸=↑.
                                                 n′ ;k
                                                 ⃗
        (q ′ , m′ , d)smove sβ = πq′ zd λznew . Tσ,m                                              sβ n′d = nd − 1
                                                                                               
                                                      ′ z1 . . . zd−1 znew zd+1 . . . zrk(σ) x

                                                  n′ ;k
                                                  ⃗
                                                                                                     n′i = ni for i ̸= d
                                                                                                 
                               = πq′ Td λznew . Tσ,m   ′ T1 . . . Td−1 znew Td+1 . . . Trk(σ) U
                                        |                           {z                          }
                                                                call this U ′
42   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


          One can recognize the shape of a λ-representation of a one-hole context: U ′ ∈ ⌊t′ ⌋nd
          where
                                                u1,µ               u·(d−1),µ               u·(d+1),µ
             t′ = tu,µ [□ ← ⟨σ, m′ ⟩(t                 ,...,t                      , □, t               , . . . )]
                                         ′            u1,µ′                u·(d−1),µ′               u·(d+1),µ′
                = tu,µ′ [□ ← ⟨σ, µ (u)⟩(t                     ,...,t                       , □, t                , . . . )] = tud,µ′

          Note also that Td ∈ ⌈tud,µ ⌉nd = ⌈tud,µ′ ⌉nd . Therefore (q ′ , m′ , d)smove sβ = πq′ Td U ′ ∈
                                                                                                      

          V(ud, q ′ , µ′ )U.
          In the remaining case d = ↑, we can assume that u is not the root, since we are translating
          a THM that realizes a total function. Therefore, writing σ ′ = labt (u↑):
                                                               ′
                                                                           n ′                                                                                      o
                                                          u↑1,µ                        u↑ rk(σ ),µ
     U ∈ ⌊tu,µ ⌋k = ⌊tu↑,µ [□ ← ⟨σ ′ , µ(u↑)⟩(t                   , . . . , □, . . . , t             )]⌋k =      Tσ⃗n′ ,µ(u↑)
                                                                                                                        ;ℓ
                                                                                                                              T1′ . . . x . . . Trk(σ)
                                                                                                                                                 ′
                                                                                                                                                       U′ | . . .
                                                                                                                     ′
     (q ′ , m′ , ↑)smove sβ = πq′ x Tσ,m
                                     ⃗
                                     n;k−1                            ⃗
                                                                      n;k−1 ⃗
                                                                                                  →β πq′ Tσ⃗n′ ,µ(u↑)
                                                                                                                ;ℓ
                                                                                                                      T1′ . . . Tσ,m
                                                                                                                                 ⃗
                                                                                                                                 n;k−1 ⃗                      ′         ′
                                                                                                                                                                       
                                         ′ ⃗z             sβ = πq′ U Tσ,m ′ T                                                        ′ T               . . . Trk(σ ′) U
                                                                                                        |                              {z                                   }
                                                                                                                                  call this V ′′
                                                  ⃗
                                                  n;k−1 ⃗                                           u,µ′
           First, from the shape we can see that Tσ,m ′ T ∈ ⌈t                                             ⌉k−1 modulo one sanity check:
          since H is weight-reducing,

             ω(m′ ) < ω(m) ⩽ k                      therefore               ω(m′ ) ⩽ k − 1

          Also, if u is an i-th child, then Tj′ ∈ ⌈tu↑j,µ ⌉n′j for j ̸= i and U ′ ∈ ⌊tu↑,µ ⌋ℓ and n′i = k − 1
          and ℓ ⩾ µ(u↑) = µ′ (u↑) by definition of ⌊−⌋. Therefore, V ′′ ∈ V(u, q ′ , µ′ )U.                ◀

     ▶ Remark E.5. We only use the fact that the memory writes that occur during upwards
     exits are weight-reducing. Thus ω could be replaced by a function on memory symbols
     that bounds the upwards exists instead of the number of visits. This is consistent with the
     intuitions for “n-truncated behaviors” given in the main text.
       To conclude the proof of Lemma 7.7, we observe that the λ-transducer that we build
     maps t ∈ TΣ to a λ-term

     (λz. πqinit (z (λx. ⟨γ0 | q ∈ Q⟩))) Tt →β πqinit (Tt (λx. ⟨γ0 | q ∈ Q⟩)) ∈ V(ε, qinit , µinit )U = VCinit (t)U
                                        |{z}               |      {z      }
                                    ε,µinit
                            in ⌈t           ⌉   N   by structural induction in ⌊□⌋N by definition



      F       Proofs of Section 8

     F.1      Proof of Claim 8.3 and Corollary 8.2
     Let H be a THM with JHK : TΓ → TΣ and R a bottom-up relabeler with JRK : TΣ → TΞ .
         We first give a justification of Claim 8.3: the new machine for gH uses bottom-up
     initialization to copy in memory the values provided by the input, then performs a tree
     traversal to position its head at the position indicated by the configuration, and finally, it
     simulates H.
         For any position u ∈ [RΞ ]∗ and label ξ ∈ Ξ, the language Lu,ξ = {t ∈ TΞ | u ∈
     Dom(t) ∧ labt (u) = ξ} is regular. A classical property of bottom-up relabelings is that they
                                                                                    −1
     preserve regular tree languages by inverse image; and so does gH . Therefore, gH  (JRK−1 (Lu,ξ ))
     is regular.
         Let h be the maximum height of a tree in the range of the transition function of H.
                                            −1
     There are finitely many languages gH      (JRK−1 (Lu,ξ )) for u of length at most h and ξ ∈ Ξ.
     Thus, without loss of generality, we may assume that these languages are all recognized
     by the same bottom-up automaton (δ, Q), with only the set of accepting states changing.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                            43


This means for every u ∈ [RΞ ]⩽h there exists a partial function ψu : Q ⇀ Ξ such that
ψu (δ[t]) = labJRK(gH (t)) (u) for any tree t. Note that if t encodes a configuration of H
reachable on the input tree s, then gH (t) appears as a subtree of JHK(s) at some position w.
Then the bottom-up nature of R entails that labJRK(JHK(s)) (wu) = labJRK(gH (t)) (u).
    We can now sketch the construction of a new THM with regular lookaround (cf. Theo-
rem 3.20) that computes JRK ◦ JHK. It simulates H step-by-step — more than that: its states
and memory values (and therefore its configurations) are exactly the same — while applying
the relabeling on the fly. The lookaround automaton is (δ, Q); we assume, again w.l.o.g.,
that if t encodes a configuration of H, then the lookaround state δ[t] suffices to determine
the current state of this configuration, as well as the label and memory value of its current
node. The new transition function maps a lookaround state to a relabeling of the image of
the corresponding (state,label,memory) tuple by the transition function of H. To determine
the new label at position u, we just apply ψu to the lookaround state — this is justified by
the reasoning in the previous paragraph.

F.2    Proof of Theorem 8.4
Given H and N two Hennie machines, we aim to construct a Hennie machine G that realizes
the composition N ◦ H. Over an input tree t, G simulates the execution of N on the
intermediate tree JHK(t) by simulating H to build it implicitly in memory. During the
execution of G, each node of t holds in memory all the right hand sides of rules of H that
it has produced (we call those (memory) fragments). We compute that lazily, by moving
forward the simulation of H only when N asks for a yet unknown part of JHK(t). In addition,
each node of JHK(t) in memory of G is decorated with the memory of N used in our simulated
run of N . We remember where the reading head of N is in the intermediate tree JHK(t) by
adding pointers to our memory symbols.
    Finally, to allow movement of the simulated reading head of N between different JHK(t)
fragments, the root and some leaves of the fragments are enriched with Link symbols, which
take the place of those JHK(t) fragments that are stored at a different input node in t. They
contain the information of what is the node itself, and a precise tree in the memory forest of
said node, indicated by a natural number.
    Note that there are only finitely many transitions rules in H. Additionally, as long as
forests are of bounded size (in the number of trees they contain), then there also are only
finitely many link symbols to decorate trees with. Thus, if our forests have bounded size,
then we need only finitely many memory symbols.
    Lets us describe formally the tools we have introduced here

▶ Definition F.1 (Ordered pointed forest of pointed trees). A pointed tree on Σ is a tree in Σ
together with a node • in its domain. An ordered pointed forest m of pointed trees of size k,
on alphabet Σ, is a finite sequence t1 , . . . , tk of pointed trees on Σ together with a natural
number 1 ≤ ⋄ ≤ k. For 1 ≤ i ≤ k, we use •i to denote the distinguished node in tree ti .

    The following notations are useful when discussing pointed forests : if t is a pointed tree
on alphabet Σ with memory in N , and s ∈ Dom(t), then t[• = s] is the tree obtained by
setting the pointed node to s. Letting σ ∈ Σ, we also define t[• ← σ] the tree obtained from
t by setting the label of • to σ. In a similar fashion, if m is an ordered pointed forest of
pointed trees on Σ with k trees, and 1 ≤ i ≤ k, then m[⋄ = i] changes the pointed tree of m,
and m[i ← t] sets the i-th tree to be t. The size |m| of m is the number of trees it contains.
    To have an easier description of the transition function of N ◦ H, we allow it to take
stationary transitions, that do not move the reading head, as discussed in Section 3.5.
44   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


                                                  0
     ▶ Theorem F.2. Let H = (QH , MH , Σ, Γ, qH     , δH ) be a THM which visits input nodes at
                                                0
     most Cf v times, and N = (QN , MN , Γ, Ξ, qN , δN ) a narrow-visit Hennie machine, visiting
     on each branch outputing run on a tree of Dom(JN K) ∩ Im(JHK) the union of at most Cf nv
     branches. Then there exists a THM G such that JGK = JN K ◦ JHK.
     ▶ Definition F.3 ( N ◦ H ). Letting the maximum forest size Cf s = Cf v × Cf nv , we define
     G as follows : Its set of states QG is separated into three subsets we call "regimes".

        QG =          QN              ∪ (QN × [Cf s ]) ∪ (QN × QH × [Cf s ] × [Cf s ]) ∪{qzero}
                      |{z}              |   {z       }   |         {z                }
               N -simulating regime    G-machinery regime            H-simulating regime

     Its set of memory symbols is MG , a finite subset of the set of pointed ordered forests of
     pointed trees over the alphabet ⟨Γ, MN ⟩ ∪ Link, with size ≤ Cf s . To obtain a finite subset, we
     restrict ourselves to trees which have the same shape as the right-hand side of some rule of
     H. Symbols in Link are special symbols used to hold both : the necessary information about
     both the inter-fragments structure of the intermediate tree JHK(t), and the memory of our
     simulation of H. We explain the intuition behind their definition later while discussing the
     transitions δG of G, and here, we only define them as

        Link = (QH × DRΣ × [Cf s ]) ∪ (QH × DRΣ × [Cf s ]) ∪ (QH × DRΣ × QH )
               |      {z          } |        {z          } |        {z     }
                  DownLink , of arity 0        UpLink , of arity 1       DownNewLink , of arity 0

     The input and output alphabets are Σ and Ξ. The initial state is qzero, and the initial
     memory the empty forest.
        Finally, we describe the transitions of G, grouped by how they move between different
     regimes of the states of G. The following figure is a representation of these 5 types of
     transitions and their relation to regimes.



             G-machinery regime


             N -simulating regime


             H-simulating regime

         The "transitions of regime X" are those transitions which go in or out of regime X.
         A first transition is used to initialize the memory content at the root of the input tree : we
     let δG (qzero, ⟨σ, ⊤G ⟩) = ⟨q0 , t∗ , ⟲⟩ where t∗ is built by taking δH (qH
                                                                               0
                                                                                 , ⟨σ, ⊤H ⟩), and replacing
     each occurrence of ⟨qH , mH , d⟩ with (qH , mH , d).
         Now let σ ∈ Σ, qG ∈ QG , and mG ∈ MG .
         The driving transition type is the type of N  N transitions, named after the second
     machine in our composition. They are driving in the sense that the other types of transitions
     are taken lazily, not any earlier than when N  N transitions come to need them. In
     the N -simulating regime, where N  N transitions happen, there is a fragment of the
     intermediate tree JHK(t) loaded in memory over the node which we read, and we use it to
     simulate executing our second machine N , updating the decorating memory as it instructs
     us. Here, the forest-level pointer ⋄ points to the particular fragment in our forest that our
     simulation of N is currently visiting, while the tree-level pointer •⋄ is used to represent the
     precise position of the reading head of N in this fragment.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                 45


▶ Definition F.4 (N  N transitions). If qG ∈ QN and labmG (•⋄ ) = ⟨γ, m⟩ ∈ ⟨Γ, M ⟩, then
we define the right-hand side as

    δ(qG , ⟨γ, m⟩)[⟨q ′ , m′ , d′ ⟩ ← ⟨q ′ , mG [•⋄ ← ⟨γ, m′ ⟩][•⋄ = •⋄ d′ ], ⟲⟩]

    The second and third types of transitions we define are the N  G and G  N transitions.
They are named after the composed machine itself, because they do not correspond to any
real step in an execution of either N or H, they are only related to the internal workings of G.
They are invoked when our simulated N asks for a node of the intermediate tree that is not
in the current fragment. When this happens, our construction guarantees they instead find
an UpLink or DownLink symbol, say (n, d, i). For these transitions, we’ll only need the (d, i)
information. This tuple represents both : a direction in the input tree, and the position of a
tree in the forest stored over in this direction. This tells our machine G where in memory is
stored the fragment containing the node we were looking for. By taking a N  G transition,
the machine G commits this information to its states, and moves on the input tree to try
and find the missing fragment.
▶ Definition F.5 (N  G transitions). If qG = qN ∈ QN and labmG (•⋄ ) = (n, d, i), with
i ≥ 1, then we define the right-hand side as the root only tree ⟨(qN , i), mG , d⟩.
    Because of the particular shape of the resulting state of G, these transitions are always
followed by the other type G  N . These transitions consume the information i that was
stored in state to place the pointers • and ⋄ at the right place, preparing to resume the
simulation of the second machine N .
▶ Definition F.6 (G  N transitions). Arriving in state (qN , i) and reading a new memory
symbol m′G , we take a transition of right-hand side ⟨qN , m′G [⋄ = i][•i = •i d! ], ⟲⟩. Direction
d! is the unique direction that points to a neighbor of •i . It is unique because we only leave a
fragment when pointing to a symbol in Link. The definition of H  N transitions guarantees
that all symbols in Link are either, by construction of the memory, a root of arity 1, or a
leaf of arity 0, so they have a unique neighbor.
    Finally, we describe N  H and H  N transitions. They can be seen as a particular case
of the previous type : since the memory is initially empty, we’ll, at the first visit, actually
have to compute the fragments of the intermediate tree that we want to work on before they
can be processed. This is done "on the fly", when our simulation of N asks for them. That
is to say, like with the previous N  G transitions, it is done only when we encounter a
Link symbol. The difference this time is that these transitions are triggered only by reading
DownNewLink symbols. They are the links that represent yet uncomputed fragments of
JHK(t). Because the fragment does not yet exist, we do not have any information about its
position in the forest, but what we have instead is the necessary state qH that is used to
compute it, explaining the qH and d components of their (qH , mH , d) shape. Once read and
committed to state, this information is discarded by overwriting with a DownLink symbol,
pointing to a fragment that will be generated in the next transition. To ensure that the
future fragment will be able to link back to the current one through its root, we also commit
to states the information ⋄ of the position of the current fragment, for use in a future UpLink
symbol.
▶ Definition F.7 (N  H transitions). If qG = qN ∈ QN and labmG (•⋄ ) = (qH , mH , d), then
we define the right-hand side as the root-only tree ⟨(qN , qH , i, ⋄), mG [•⋄ ← (mH , d, i)], d⟩. i is
defined here as the one plus the length of the forest in memory at direction d, and is computed
using regular lookaround.
46   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


         Like the G-machinery regime, the H-simulating regime is temporary, and we always
     go back to N -simulating with a H  N transition. Here we finally make use of the mH
     information stored in Link symbols : since we are guaranteed to leave an input node only
     with a N  G or N  H transition, we know that when we move to a new node in the
     input, the pointer •⋄ in memory (if it exists, i.e. the forest is non-empty), is pointing to
     a Link symbol. By definition of N  H transitions, this Link symbol contains the last
     written memory of H at this point in its current simulated branch-outputting run. We use
     that information together with the gH stored in our current G state to compute the a new
     fragment to be added to memory. This new fragment corresponds to the right hand-side
     of a rule of H, but every reading head in the right-hand side of our rule is replaced with a
     DownNewLink symbol, we add an UpLink symbol at the root to link back to the fragment
     we moved down from, and finally we resume simulation of N by setting the current visited
     fragment to be this newly created one.

     ▶ Definition F.8 (H  N transitions). Arriving on node sd from node s in state (qN , qH , i, j)
     and reading a new memory symbol mG , we take a transition of right-hand side ⟨qH , mG [i ←
     δH (qH , ⟨σ, mH ⟩)∗ ][⋄ = i], ⟲⟩, where mH is either ⊤H if mG is empty, or π1 (labmG (•⋄ )) if it
                                                        ′
     is not. The operation ∗ replaces every symbol ⟨qH    , m′H , d′ ⟩ with (qH
                                                                              ′
                                                                                , m′H , d′ ), decorates every
     node with label in Γ with ⊤N , adds a new root (mH , d , j) (where d−1 is the direction such
                                                               −1

     that sdd−1 = s, and can be computed using lookaround), and finally sets •i to the old root.

         This concludes the definition of our constructed machine G.

     ▶ Theorem F.9. JGK = JN K ◦ JHK

         The core of the proof relies on the notion of stitched tree. The stitched tree Stitch(c)
     is built from the memory µ in a configuration c of G on an input tree t, and is defined as
     the tree obtained by plugging together all the trees fragments in memory, along pairs of
     DownLink, UpLink symbols produced during the same G  H, H  G transition pair. Using
     the stitched tree, we decode from a configuration of G both a configuration of N on JHK(t),
     and the smallest global state in an execution of H on t that contains all the node visited by
     that configuration of N .

     ▶ Definition F.10 (Matching nodes). If c = (v, q, µ) is a configuration of G over some input
     t, u and u′ two nodes in t, i < |µ(u)|, and j < |µ(u′ )|, we say that a node s in µ(u)i of label
     (mH , d, k) in DownLink matches the root node in µ(u′ )j of label in UpLink if and only if
     u′ = ud and j = k.

     ▶ Definition F.11 (Stitched tree). The stitched tree Stitch(c) is the tree defined by the
     following relational structure :
         the universe is ⊎u∈Dom(t),i<|µ(u)| Dom(µ(u)i ) the disjoint union of all nodes in all forests
         over all input nodes.
         except for the "first child" relation, the child relations are the union of the child relations
         of the family (µ(u)i )u∈Dom(t),i<|µ(u)| .
         the "first child" relation is the union of the first child relations of the family (µ(u)i )u∈Dom(t),i<|µ(u)| ,
         union the "s matches s′ " relation.
     For any node s ∈ Stitch(c), we call "the origin o(s) of s" the node u in the input such that
     s is a node in Dom(µ(u)i ) for some i. For any u ∈ Dom(t), any i < |µ(u)|, any node
     s ∈ Dom(µ(u)i ), Stitchc (u, i, s) is the corresponding node in Dom(Stitch(c)).

     It is undefined if C has its state in the H-simulating regime.
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                             47


    We verify that this relational structure indeed represents a tree. G  H rules are the only
type of rules that add DownLink symbols to memory. Since the n, d, i are chosen such that
there is no i-th tree in direction d, a node can only match another node that is created later,
and thus there are no looping sequences of matching nodes. Additionally, since each root
node is matched by the DownLink that was written at the last step, the relational structure
describes a connex graph. The relational structure defines a connex, directed graph without
loop, and we can order the children of any node, thus Stitch(c) is indeed a tree.
    We will now decode, from a stitch tree Stitch(c) on input tree t, the global state of H it
represents. Intuitively, DownNewLink symbols correspond one-to-one to ouput heads of H
(see how they are added to memory in transitions of type H  G). We just need to build
back the memories of those different output heads. If u is a node in Dom(t), we define νsc (u)
as the memory symbol mH in the last UpLink symbol that has origin u along the branch
leading to s.

▶ Definition F.12. DecodeH(c) is defined by the procedure that builds it from the stitched tree
Stitch(c). Replace all symbols (qH , mH , d) ∈ DownNewLink at some leaf s with ⟨qH , o(s)d, νsc ⟩,
then remove all remaining internal DownLink and UpLink symbols by replacing them with
edges from their unique parent to their unique child (remember both types contain only symbols
of arity 1).

   Assuming for now that this is indeed a global state of H on some input, this encoding
describes a partial mapping ℜ from nodes in fragments in µ(Dom(t)) to nodes in JHK(t)
: ℜ first send any node that is not a Link to its place in the stitched tree, then to the
corresponding node in the encoded global state of H, and then to JHK(t) by inclusion.
   We now describe how to decode the configuration DecodeN(C) of N from a configuration
C of G. Letting C = (u, q, µ), we define Point(C) as the node •⋄ of µ(u). lab(Point(C)) is
then a shorthand for labµ(u) (•⋄ ).

▶ Definition F.13. DecodeN(C) is defined by the procedure that builds it from the stitched
tree Stitch(C). Letting C = (qG , u, µ), we take the state of N that is already explicit in q, set
the reading head to ℜ(Point(C)), and define the memory over a node s ∈ Dom(JHK(t)) as
the memory stored at its unique preimage by ℜ, or ⊤N if it does not have one.

It is undefined if Point(C) has a label in Link. If a configuration C is such that both
DecodeH(C) and DecodeN(C) are well-defined, we call C decodable.

▶ Lemma F.14. Given a branch-outputting run of G, the sequence of configurations of H
decoded from the stitched trees is a run of H.

                                             bN        bN      bG
Proof. Let t ∈ TΣ be some input tree, C0G −−
                                                                n−1
                                              → C1N −−
                                              0
                                                        → . . . −−−→ CnG be a branch-outputting
                                                        1


run of G on t, and for i ≤ n, let hi be the global state of H encoded in Ci . For any i ≤ n, we
let Ci = (qi , ui , µi ).


Irrelevant transitions We first verify that only transitions of the H-simulating regime
have an impact on the sequence (hi ). For any i < n such that neither qi nor qi+1 are in
the H-simulating regime, we know that the transition that goes from Ci to Ci+1 is not a
transition of the H-simulating regime, so the changes in memory between µi and µi+1 are
only made on N memory symbols or pointing relations. The encoded global states hi and
hi+1 don’t depend on this information, and thus hi = hi+1 .
48   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


     Simulation of a H step Each step of H is simulated by a pair of N  H, H  N transitions,
     hence we will compare pairs of configurations hk−1 and hk+1 . We look at such pairs of
     H global states, and verify that they are transformed in a way that is coherent with the
     transition function of H. Let k < n such that qk = (qN , qH , i, j) is in the H-simulating
     regime.
          We will show that there exists a node s in hk−1 labelled with (u, q, µ) such that hk+1 =
     hk−1 [s ← (u, q, µ) = δH (q, labt (u), µ(u)], i.e. hk+1 is obtained from hk−1 by applying δH at
     some node s.
          We first look at the effect of the transitions on the stitched trees. We know that k > 0,
     because q0 is not in the H-simulating regime, and again, that the transitions from Ck−1 to
     Ck and from Ck to Ck+1 are respectively of type N  H and H  N . Let us look at the
     differences between µk−1 and µk+1 . Because the first transition is of type N  H, we know
     that labµk−1 (uk−1 ) (•⋄ ) ∈ DownNewLink, and let it equal (qH , mH , d). Then by definition
     of N  H transitions, this first transition sets µk (uk−1 ) = µk−1 (uk−1 )[•⋄ ← (mH , d, i)],
     where i is one plus the length of the forest µ(uk ), and µk = µk−1 everywhere else. The
     second transition defines µk+1 (uk ) = µk (uk )[i ← δH (qH , labt (uk ), mH )∗ ] with mH = ⊤H
     if µk (uk ) empty and π1 (labµk (uk ) (•⋄ )) otherwise, and defines µk+1 = µk everywhere else.
     Then µk+1 differs from µk−1 only over uk−1 and uk . Additionally, because C0 , . . . Cn is a
     branch-outputting run, uk = uk−1 d, and thus node •⋄ in µk+1 (uk−1 ) matches the root of
     µk+1 (uk ). The relational structure defining Stitch(Ck+1 ) is the same as that of Stitch(Ck−1 ),
     except we took its disjoint union with the relational structure of tree δH (qH , labt (uk ), mH )∗ ,
     and the root MemToStitchCk+1 (uk , i, ε) of this δH (qH , labt (uk ), mH )∗ is the first child of node
     MemToStitchCk+1 (uk−1 , ⋄, •), which now has a label in DownLink instead of DownNewLink.
     Because decoding a global state of H from a stitched tree forgets the decorating N memory
     symbols and removes the DownLink and UpLink nodes, then we have Stitch(Ck+1 ) =
     Stitch(Ck−1 )[MemToStitchCk−1 (uk−1 , ⋄, •) ← δH (qH , labt (uk−1 ), mH )].
          We identified a rule of H that describes how Stitch(Ck+1 ) is built from Stitch(Ck−1 ). We
     now verify that the new configurations in hk+1 have correctly defined memories. Let s′ be a
     configuration-labeled node in hk+1 , and call s the node MemToStitchCk−1 (uk−1 , ⋄, •). Recall
     that the memory in labhk+1 (s′ ) is νs′ , and that for a node u ∈ Dom(t), νs′ (u) is defined as
     the H memory symbol in the last UpLink symbol of origin u in the branch leading to s. The
     only new DownLink symbol in Stitch(Ck+1 ) is the symbol (mH , d, i) from the first transition.
     And thus, by definition of ν Ck+1 , for any s′ ∈ Dom(hk+1 ), νs′ = νs everywhere, except that
     νs′ (uk−1 ) = mH if s′ ≤ s.
                                                                                                         ◀

     ▶ Lemma F.15. JN K ◦ JHK ⊆ JGK

        Given a branch-outputting run of N on JHK(t), we inductively build a branch-outputting
     run of G that has the same output. We verify a two-part induction hypothesis to help us
     build this run of G, composed of both a "fidelity" and a "frugality" condition. The fidelity
     condition states that the run of G we’re building decodes to exactly the branch-outputting
     run of N we were given, and that outputs are equal, while the frugality condition states
     that we do this without storing any unnecessary fragment in the memory of G. This is an
     important condition to verify, because G supports only a bounded amount of fragments in
     memory, and we need to stay within these bounds. Together with the narrow-visit property
     of N , the frugality condition ensures we do.
        We’ll use induction on n ∈ N on the following induction hypothesis : for all branch-
                              bN         bN        bN
                                                    n−1
     outputting runs C0N −−
                          → C1N −−
                          0
                                 → . . . −−−→ CnN of N on JHK(t), there exists m ∈ N
                                 1
L. Dartois, L. T. D. Nguyễn & C. Peyrat                                                                        49


                                          bG        bG           bG
and a branch-outputting run C0G −→       C1G −→
                                     0           1             G  m−1
                                                   . . . −−−→ Cm of G on t, such that, noting
 N      N   N    N         G     G G       G
Ci = (ui , qi , µi ), and Ci = (ui , qi , µi ) :
    Both runs have the same output
     G
    Cm is decodable                                       Fidelity conditions
             G
    DecodeN(Cm ) = CkN

    ∀u ∈ Dom(t), ∀f ∈ µGm (u), ∃s ∈ Dom(f ), ∃i ∈ [n], ℜ(s) = uN
                                                               i                Frugality condition

 Remember we proved in the preceding lemma that all runs of G decode to some run of H, so we
are indeed allowed to evaluate ℜ on any arbitrary node in memory. Assuming the hypothesis
                                  bN           bN        bN
is true for n ∈ N. Let C0N −−
                            → C1N −−
                            0      1        n
                                   → . . . −−  N
                                            → Cn+1 be a branch-outputting run of N ,
           bG       bG       bG
and C0G −→ C1G −→
         0      1             m−1
                              G
                  . . . −−−→ Cm the branch-outputting run of G built by our induction
                                    bN         bN         bN
                                                           n−1
hypothesis, applied to C0N −−
                            → C1N −−
                            0
                                   → . . . −−−→ CnN . Let us consider the transition
                                   1


      bN
CnN −−  n
         → Cn+1 N
                    . We know by induction hypothesis that DecodeN(Cm               G
                                                                                      ) = (uN       N    N
                                                                                               n , qn , µn ).
Because of the definition of DecodeN, this means that π1 (labµ(uGm ) (•⋄ )) = labt (un ), qm = qnN ,
                                                                                             N     G

and π2 (labµ(uGm ) (•⋄ )) = µN         N
                                  n (un ). By definition of N  N transitions in G, this means that
      G
δG (qm  , labt (uGm ), µGm (uGm )) = δN (qnN , labJHK(t) (uN     N   N                        G      N
                                                           n ), µn (un ). And thus, letting bm = bn and
   G          G           G          G    G     G    G
Cm+1 = Cm = δG (qm , labt (um ), µm (um ))[bm ], we verify the first fidelity condition.
     Now, there are three main possibilities, depending on the label π1 (labµG (uG ) (•⋄ )) of
                                                                                        m+1   m+1
the pointed node.
                                                                                  G
     First case, if that label is not a Link, we immediately know that Cm+1             is decodable. We
prove the third fidelity condition for this first case. Because of the definition of N  N
                                     G        N
transitions, we know that qi+1           = qk+1   . Again by definition, the memory symbol had its
pointed second label replaced with µk+1 (uN       N
                                                        k ), and then its point was moved along the
                                                                                            G            N
direction indicated in the transition of N . Thus we conclude DecodeN(Cm+1                      ) = Ck+1
Because we have not produced any new fragments in memory, the frugality condition at step
m + 1 directly follows from that of time m. our induction hypothesis. This concludes the
first case π1 (labµG (uG ) (•⋄ )) ∈      / Link.
                    m+1   m+1

    Second case, if π1 (labµG (uG ) (•⋄ )) ∈ DownLink ∪ UpLink, we prove that G takes a
                             m+1    m+1
serie of transitions through the G-machinery regime, but eventually lands in a decodable
configuration. This corresponds, in the memory of G, to moving through fragments composed
only of UpLink and DownLink symbols. Those "trivial" fragments correspond to transitions
                                                     G
of H that did not produce any output. From Cm+1          , G takes a N  G, then a G  N
transition. These transitions modify neither the memory nor the output, so we can define
µGm+2 = µGm+3 = µGm+1 and bGm+1 = bGm+2 = ε to preserve the first fidelity condition. If after
                     G
these transitions, Cm+3   still is not decodable, then we repeat the process until we reach a
decodable configuration. We can repeat, because being undecodable means we must still be
pointing to a Link. It cannot be a DownNewLink, otherwise the current fragment would be
trivial (contain only links). Having a DownNewLink would then imply that it is a leaf in
the stitched tree, violating the frugality hypothesis. We now prove that repeatedly taking
N  G, G  N transiitons eventually terminates. All links pointed after taking a G  N
transition must go in the same direction. If any link is in DownLink (resp. UpLink), then
we enter the next fragment from an UpLink (resp. DownLink), and the following G  N
transition moves us away, to a node with a parent (resp. child), which thus has to, like the
first one, be a DownLink (resp. UpLink) (if it is still a Link). Finally, each transition is a
step in the stitched tree, which is finite and constant along these transitions. The up case is
50   Tree transducers of linear size-to-height increase


     easy, and we eventually reach, in the worst case, the root of the stitched tree which is not a
     Link. The down case is covered by the frugality condition, which states that we know we
     will eventually reach a node that is not a link, because it is in the domain of ℜ. We prove
     the third fidelity condition similarly to the first case for equality of memory and state in the
     decoded configuration of N . Equality of reading heads is subtler. We did begin by moving
     the pointed node along some direction j indicated in the transition of N . Because we saw
                                                                     G              G
     only Link symbols along the way, the pointed node of Cm+k             and of Cm+k    may not map
                                                                                     G
     (with respect to MemToStitch) to a parent and its j-th child in Stitch(Cm+k          ), but they do
     in the final decoded configuration of H, which can be built by removing Link symbols from
               G
     Stitch(Cm+k   ), and thus they do (with respect to ℜ) in JHK(t) by inclusion. We still have
     not produced any new fragment in memory, so the frugality condition again follows directly
     from induction. This concludes the second case.
                                                                 G
          The H-simulating case happens when π1 (Point(Cm+1          )) is in DownNewLink. We will
     take a N  H, H  N transition pair, and reach a configuration CGm+3 , following branches
     bGm+1 = bGm+2 = ε. In the same way, we repeat the process until it stops. We reach a decodable
     configuration because each pair of transitions corresponds to a step in the simulated run of H,
     which cannot loop indefinitely. Additionally, there is no empty tree, so we eventually produce
     a fragment with a non-Link node. As soon as we do, we are back in a decodable configuration
        G
     Cm+k   . The proof of the third fidelity condition is similar to the proof for the previous case.
     We did produce new fragments in memory, so we need to verify the frugality condition. But
                                       G         N                                G
     we just proved that DecodeN(Cm+k      ) = Cn+1   . In particular, ℜ(Point(Cm+k    )) = uNn+1 , which
                           G
     means that Point(Cm+k ) satisfies the frugality condition for all the fragments we just added.
     This concludes the last case.

     ▶ Lemma F.16. JGK ⊆ JN K ◦ JHK
                                                                   bG       bG      bG
     Proof. We reuse the two previous lemmas. Let RG = C0G −→      C1G −→
                                                                                     n−1
                                                                0       1
                                                                           . . . −−−→ CnG be a total
     branch-outputting run of G on some input tree t, along some branch b. We will prove by
     induction on the length of a prefix of this run that there exists an equivalent run of N on
     JHK(t).
        The run RG up to its first decodable state is equivalent to the initial configuration of N
     on JHK(t), by the previous lemma.
                                                                                                     bG
        Assume there exists k ∈ [n − 1] such that CkG = (qG , uG , νG ) is decodable, and C0G −→
                                                                                               0


          bG       bG                                                                      bG       bN
     C1G −→ . . . −−−→ CkG is equivalent to a branch-outputting run RN = C0N −→
                    k−1
          1                                                                   0
                                                                                C1N −−
                                                                                     1
                                                                                     →
          bN
                     of N on JHK(t). Because CkG is decodable, it must be the case that
           m−1     N
     . . . −−−→ Cm
     lab(Point(Ck )) is some pair ⟨γ, mN ⟩, and qG ∈ QN . Then the transition from CkG to Ck+1
                  G                                                                            G

     must be a N  N transition. By definition, there exists a corresponding rule δN (qG , γ, mN )
                                                               N
     of N , and thus we can define a configuration successing Cm+1 by following branch b. By the
                                          bG       bN      bN
     previous proof, this new run C0N −→
                                       0
                                          C1N −−1        m
                                                → . . . −−    N
                                                         → Cm+1    accepts an equivalent run of G
     on t, and by determinism of G and totalness of RG , this equivalent run is a prefix of RG . We
     conclude by induction on k.                                                                  ◀
