                                                                   Graph classes through the lens of logic∗
                                                                                            Michał Pilipczuk†



                                                                                                  Abstract
arXiv:2501.04166v1 [math.CO] 7 Jan 2025




                                                     Graph transformations definable in logic can be described using the notion of transductions. By
                                                 understanding transductions as a basic embedding mechanism, which captures the possibility of en-
                                                 coding one graph in another graph by means of logical formulas, we obtain a new perspective on the
                                                 landscape of graph classes and of their properties. The aim of this survey is to give a comprehensive
                                                 presentation of this angle on structural graph theory.
                                                     We first give a logic-focused overview of classic graph-theoretic concepts, such as treedepth, shrub-
                                                 depth, treewidth, cliquewidth, twin-width, bounded expansion, and nowhere denseness. Then, we
                                                 present recent developments related to notions defined purely through transductions, such as monadic
                                                 stability, monadic dependence, and classes of structurally sparse graphs.




                                             ∗
                                               This work is a part of project BOBR that received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European
                                          Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 948057).
                                             †
                                               Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland. E-mail: michal.pilipczuk@mimuw.edu.pl
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                                1

2 Preliminaries                                                                                               4
  2.1 Graph theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    4
  2.2 Logic on graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     5
  2.3 Transductions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     8

3 Classic concepts                                                                                           12
  3.1 Star-like graphs: treedepth and shrubdepth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       12
       3.1.1 Treedepth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     12
       3.1.2 Shrubdepth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      14
  3.2 Path- and tree-like graphs: pathwidth, treewidth, and (linear) cliquewidth . . . . . . . . . .         19
       3.2.1 Treewidth and pathwidth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         19
       3.2.2 Cliquewidth and linear cliquewidth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21
  3.3 Minor-free classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
  3.4 Twin-width and sparse twin-width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         27
       3.4.1 Twin-width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      28
       3.4.2 Sparse twin-width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       32
  3.5 Sparsity: bounded expansion and nowhere denseness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            32
       3.5.1 Definitions and intuitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      33
       3.5.2 Characterizations: bounded expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          35
       3.5.3 Characterizations: nowhere denseness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          39
       3.5.4 Model-checking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      41

4 New concepts                                                                                               43
  4.1 Ideals defined through obstructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      44
      4.1.1 Monadic stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      46
      4.1.2 Monadic dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         49
  4.2 Ideals defined through closure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     51
      4.2.1 Structurally sparse classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      51
      4.2.2 Sparsification conjecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      53

5 Outlook                                                                                                    55
1    Introduction
Arguably, the central theme of structural graph theory are duality theorems. Typically, they tie together
concepts of structure with concepts of non-structure, by stating that every graph is either fundamentally
structured, or contains an unstructured part.
    Concepts of structure are often expressed through various forms of graph decompositions, which ex-
plain how to break a graph at hand into simpler pieces. Among those, decompositions in the form of trees
are very common and useful, since they are capable of exposing a hidden hierarchical structure. However,
weaker forms of decompositions can be applied to graphs that are fundamentally not tree-like; examples
include covers or colorings. The general principle of using decompositions is of the local-to-global nature:
understanding the simpler pieces into which the studied graph is decomposed allows us to get a grasp
on its global structure. This local-to-global methodology is particularly applicable in the field of algorithm
design, where the understanding takes the form of an efficient algorithm solving a computational problem.
Namely, having understood the problem on the simpler pieces, we can piece together a solution for the
whole graph, for instance using dynamic programming.
    Concepts of non-structure typically take the form of concrete, complicated combinatorial objects that
are embedded in the graph. Such obstructions are difficult to break using the adopted notion of decom-
position, and therefore they witness the non-existence of decompositions with low values of relevant
parameters. In the algorithmic context, obstructions can be used for constructing lower bound reductions.
    With these intuitions in mind, a typical duality theorem in structural graph theory looks as follows:

            If a graph G does not contain any obstruction O, then it admits a decomposition D.

There are dozens of duality statements of this form present in the literature, differing by the considered
kinds of decompositions and obstructions. The common first step in designing such a duality theorem is
to fix a notion of embedding: in what way an obstruction can be contained in the studied graph? Having
understood the considered notion of embedding and the type of obstructions that we speak about, it often
follows what kind of decompositions should be dual to them. However, pinpointing this correspondence
in precise terms is the truly interesting essence of structural graph theory.
     Admittedly, the picture painted in the four paragraphs above may seem very vague and abstract. So let
us make it more concrete by taking the theory of Graph Minors as an example. Here, the underlying notion
of embedding is the minor order. Recall that a graph H is a minor of a graph G if one can map vertices
of H to disjoint connected subgraphs of G so that the adjacency relation is preserved in the following
sense: if vertices u and v are adjacent in H, then there is also an edge connecting the subgraphs of G
corresponding to u and v. Thus, this is an embedding notion that is fundamentally of topological nature:
one may imagine that every vertex of H can be “stretched” to a connected subgraph of G.
     It is therefore no surprise that adopting the minor order as the notion of embedding leads to a theory
full of duality theorems involving topology. The most well-known is the Kuratowski-Wagner Theorem [96,
135] that characterizes planar graphs as exactly those graphs that exclude K3,3 and K5 as minors. Here,
planarity — the existence of an embedding in the plane without crossings — could be liberally understood
as a form of decomposition, while finding K3,3 or K5 as a minor is an obstruction to planarity. The
theory of Graph Minors was developed by Robertson and Seymour in a monumental series of papers,
culminating in the proof of Wagner’s Conjecture [126]: there is no infinite anti-chain in the minor order on
finite graphs. Along the way, Robertson and Seymour proved a number of fundamental duality statements.
For instance, the Structure Theorem [125] is a generalization of Kuratowski-Wagner Theorem that explains
the structure in graphs excluding a fixed graph H as a minor. Namely, without going into technical details,
every such graph G can be decomposed into bags in a tree-like manner so that (i) the intersection of any
two neighboring bags is of bounded size, and (ii) except for a bounded number of aberrations, every bag


                                                      1
consists of a subgraph that can be embedded in a fixed surface. Another duality theorem in this spirit is
the Grid Theorem [123], which says that the decomposition above takes a very simple form when H is a
planar graph: simply, every bag is of constant size, implying that the whole graph has bounded treewidth.
    The adopted notion of embedding reflects the topological viewpoint on graphs, roughly regarding them
as topological spaces consisting of points joined by segments. Therefore, the obtained theory is naturally
applicable to algorithmic problems of topological character. For instance, Robertson and Seymour [124]
gave an Ok (n3 )-time1 algorithm for the Disjoint Paths problem: given a graph G with specified terminal
vertices s1 , . . . , sk , t1 , . . . , tk , decide whether there are vertex-disjoint paths P1 , . . . , Pk where Pi connects
si with ti . This is just one of very many examples of efficient algorithms that can be designed using
the combinatorial advances of the Graph Minors project. Presenting an overview of those advances and
applications would be worth a survey of its own. However, this is not the topic of this survey.
    Instead, let us point out that the topological viewpoint on graphs, exemplified by adopting the mi-
nor order as the basic embedding notion, makes sense in some real-life settings, while in many others it
does not. For instance, if the input graph models a transportation network, then stretching an edge into a
path can be just described as introducing waypoints on a road connection, and thus is very sensible. On
the other hand, if the graph is a social network, then the operation of replacing the friendship relation
between two people by a path of friendships is rather absurd.
    In this latter example, we rather view a graph as a database: it consists of a universe of objects that can
be pairwise in relation or not. The first association with databases that comes to mind are query languages:
formalisms for describing problems of selection of (tuples of) objects satisfying a certain property. What
would be then a query language suitable for graphs? Theoretical computer science has already answered
this question a long time ago, by considering various kinds of logic on graphs, and on other combinatorial
structures. Namely, logic provides a robust, flexible, and formal language for expressing properties.
    In this survey, we present an overview of an on-going multi-faceted project of understanding the land-
scape of structural graph theory from the point of view of logic. More precisely, we adopt First-Order
transductions — a notion of graph transformations definable in First-Order logic — as the basic notion of
embedding. Having done this, it is natural to investigate various decomposition and duality statements:
What does it mean that some obstruction cannot be logically embedded in a graph? What kind of decom-
positions can be expected assuming lack of such logically-defined obstructions? What can we say about the
structure of a graph assuming that it can be logically embedded into another, well-structured graph? Can
these tools be used to design efficient algorithms for computational problems connected to logic? It turns
out that asking these questions leads to a fascinating and still largely uncharted area of structural graph
theory. This area brings together multiple branches of mathematics and computer science, like classic
graph theory, algorithmics, discrete geometry, learning theory, and model theory (both finite and infinite).
    The goal of this survey is not to present a detailed description of all the corners of the area, nor to
delve into technical discussions or involved proofs. We rather aim to touch many different topics, in order
to highlight analogies, recurring themes, and concepts of a general nature. Therefore, while many works
were unfortunately left out from the discussion for the sake of brevity and of simplicity of the narrative,
we hope that this survey can serve as an invitation to various more specific subjects that the reader may
explore on their own.

Overview of the content. In Section 2, we recall all the basic notions and definitions, and in particular
we discuss the notion of transductions. Throughout this survey we mostly focus on First-Order logic FO,
but Monadic Second-Order logic MSO and its variants will also be considered.
   1
    For a parameter p, the Op (·) notation hides factors that may depend on p. Also, whenever a graph is clear from the context,
by n we denote the number of its vertices.




                                                               2
     In Section 3, we present concepts from more classic areas of structural graph theory, and we discuss
them from the adopted viewpoint of logic. The naming “classic” might be a bit misleading here, for we also
describe rather recent developments, for instance the theory of Sparsity of Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez
and the graph parameter twin-width.
     Next, in Section 4 we discuss concepts of more logical nature, defined using transductions. We start
with the heart of the theory: the notions of monadic dependence and monadic stability. We describe how
introducing these two notions organizes the whole landscape, present the recent advances on decompo-
sition tools for monadically stable and monadically dependent graph classes, and mention algorithmic
applications of these tools, particularly in the context of the model-checking problem for First-Order logic.
Second, we discuss structurally sparse classes — classes that can be transduced from classes of sparse graphs
— and give an overview of known structural results.
     Finally, in Section 5 we outline three research directions that we personally find particularly interesting.
     Figure 1 depicts all the main concepts that we are going to discuss, and relations between them. The
remainder of this survey can be regarded as a meticulous discussion of this figure.

                                    structurally               mon stable
    bnd treedepth                                     =                           =      bnd shrubdepth
                                   bnd treedepth             bnd shrubdepth


                                    structurally                mon stable
    bnd pathwidth                                     =                                bnd lin cliquewidth
                                  bnd pathwidth             bnd lin cliquewidth


                                    structurally               mon stable
    bnd treewidth                                     =                                  bnd cliquewidth
                                   bnd treewidth             bnd cliquewidth


                                    structurally
      minor-free
                                    minor-free


           bnd                     str bnd sparse               mon stable
    sparse twin-width
                                                      =                                  bnd twin-width
                                    twin-width               bnd twin-width


                                    structurally               mon stable
    bnd expansion                                                                         bnd flip-width
                                  bnd expansion               bnd flip-width


                                    structurally
    nowhere dense                                              mon stable                mon dependent
                                  nowhere dense


Figure 1: Major properties of graph classes discussed in this survey. All properties in the left-most column
are weakly sparse, all properties in the remaining three columns are FO ideals. Arrows represent implica-
tions between the properties.


Acknowledgements. The author would like to thank all his coauthors with whom he shared projects
on topics related to this survey. Special thanks are due to Szymon Toruńczyk, for years of common work
on Sparsity and on Density, and for thousands of hours of discussions.



                                                       3
2     Preliminaries
2.1   Graph theory
All graphs considered in this survey are finite, undirected, and simple (with no loops or parallel edges),
unless otherwise stated. We use standard graph-theoretic notation. In particular, for a graph G, by V (G)
and E(G) we denote the vertex set and the edge set of G, respectively. The distance (length of a shortest
path) between vertices u and v in G is denoted by distG (u, v), and the ball of radius r around u in G is
    r [u] := {v ∈ V (G) | dist (u, v) ⩽ r}. The superscript can be omitted if it is clear from the context.
BallG                         G



Classes and parameters. A graph class is just a set of graphs, typically infinite. Examples include planar
graphs — graphs embeddable in the plane without crossings — or subcubic graphs — graphs with maximum
degree at most 3. A graph class C is monotone if it is closed under taking subgraphs: if G ∈ C and H is a
subgraph of G, then also H ∈ C . Similarly, C is hereditary if it is closed under taking induced subgraphs.
    As the reader will find out soon, within the considered theory it is graph classes, not individual graphs,
that play the role of the most basic objects of study. Therefore, we will be also speaking about properties
of graph classes, which are just sets of graph classes. Here, an example could be the property of having
bounded degree: a graph class C has bounded degree if and only if there is a universal constant c ∈ N such
that every graph in C has maximum degree at most c. Thus, the class of subcubic graphs has bounded
degree, and so has also the class of graphs of maximum degree at most 10, but not the class of planar graphs.
    More generally, we will often use the following construction to define properties of graph classes. A
graph parameter is just a function π : Graphs → N, where by Graphs we denote the class of all graphs.
Then the property of having bounded π is defined as follows: C has bounded π if there exists a constant c
such that π(G) ⩽ c for every G ∈ C . We will also denote

                                            π(C ) := sup π(G),
                                                      G∈C

and then C has bounded π if and only if π(C ) is finite.
    An important instantiation of the principle described above is the definition of weakly sparse classes.
We say that a graph class C is weakly sparse if there exists t ∈ N such that no graph in C contains the
biclique Kt,t as a subgraph. Equivalently, if ω # (G) denotes the largest t such that G contains Kt,t as a
subgraph, then C is weakly sparse if and only if C has bounded ω # .

Minors. At several points we will also refer to the minor order on graphs, which is the standard notion
of an embedding for graphs that has a topological character. We say that a graph H is a minor of a graph
G if there is a mapping η, called the minor model, that maps every vertex u of H to a connected subgraph
η(u) of G so that subgraphs {η(u) : u ∈ V (H)} are pairwise vertex-disjoint and the adjacency relation is
preserved in the following sense: whenever u and v are adjacent in H, in G there must be an edge with
one endpoint in η(u) and the other in η(v). The subgraph η(u) will be often called the branch set of u. An
equivalent characterization is the following: H is a minor of G iff H can be obtained from G by a repeated
use of vertex deletion, edge deletion, and edge contraction (the operation of taking two adjacent vertices
u and v, and replacing them with a new vertex, adjacent to all the former neighbors of u or v).
     A subdivision of a graph G is a graph obtained from G by replacing every edge with a path (of any
length). We say that G contains H as a topological minor if G contains a subdivision of H as a subgraph.
It can be easily seen that if H is a topological minor of G, then H is also a minor of G, but the converse
implication does not hold: for instance, subcubic graphs contain all graphs as minors, but no subcubic
graph contains K5 as a topological minor. A d-subdivision of G is the graph obtained from G by replacing
every edge of G with a path of length d + 1 (thus, having d internal vertices).


                                                      4
2.2   Logic on graphs
Relational structures. In order to introduce logic on graphs, it will be convenient to ground the dis-
cussion in the more general framework of relational structures. A relational structure is nothing else than
a set, called the universe, equipped with one or more relations — sets of tuples of elements. To specify
what relations are present in a structure, we use the notion of a signature: a signature Σ is a set of predi-
cates (relation names), where every predicate R ∈ Σ comes with a prescribed integer arity(R) ∈ N. The
meaning is that R may speak about tuples of arity(R) elements. For instance, if arity(R) = 2 then R is a
binary predicate and signifies a relation between pairs of elements. And if arity(R) = 1, then R is a unary
predicate that applies to single elements, and thus R just selects a subset of elements of the universe. Given
a signature Σ, a Σ-structure A consists of a universe U (A) and, for each predicate R ∈ Σ, its interpretation
RA ⊆ U (A)arity(R) , which is just a set of arity(R)-tuples of elements. Note that the tuples are considered
ordered: for instance, if R is a binary predicate, then it may happen that (u, v) ∈ RA but (v, u) ∈  / RA .
    The formalism of relational structures can seem abstract at first glance, so let us substantiate it with
an example: the encoding of graphs. To view a graph G as a relational structure, we simply take the
universe to be the vertex set, and equip it with one binary relation adjG (·, ·) that selects those pairs of
vertices that are adjacent. Thus, the signature consists of one binary predicate adj. Note that a priori, we
could allow adjG (·, ·) to be not necessarily symmetric or irreflexive; this would be suitable for encoding
directed graphs, even possibly with loops. Therefore, when speaking about undirected simple graphs,
we will always assume that they are encoded as above with the relation adjG (·, ·) being symmetric and
irreflexive. This will be called the adjacency encoding of a graph.
    The point is that the formalism of relational structures allows us to robustly equip graphs with addi-
tional features. For example, we will commonly use the concept of colored graphs, which are just graphs
equipped with several highlighted vertex subsets, called colors. To model colored graphs as relational struc-
tures, we can simply extend the signature with several unary predicates, one for each color, and use those
predicates to mark the relevant subsets. Note that maybe slightly counter-intuitively, the colors are not
necessarily disjoint nor saturate the vertex set: one vertex can be of multiple colors at the same time, or
even of no color at all.
    Finally, with every structure A we can naturally associate a graph, called the Gaifman graph of A. The
vertex set of the Gaifman graph of A is the universe U (A), and two distinct elements u, v ∈ U (A) are
adjacent if and only if they appear together in some tuple in some relation in A. In other words, for every
tuple of every relation present in A, we put a clique on the elements present in this tuple.

First-Order logic. We may now introduce the First-Order logic FO on relational structures; this logic
applied to graphs is the main point of focus in this survey. Fix a signature Σ. We now describe the logic
FO[Σ] that speaks about Σ-structures. In this logic, we have variables for single elements of the universe,
and we can (i) test predicates on those variables, (ii) make new formulas from simpler formulas using
negation, conjunction, and disjunction, and (iii) introduce new variables using existential and universal
quantification. More formally, FO[Σ] consists of formulas defined inductively as follows:
    • For every predicate R ∈ Σ, say of arity k, there is an atomic formula R(x1 , . . . , xk ), where x1 , . . . , xk
      is any k-tuple of variables. Thus, if Σ is the signature of graphs, we can test adjacency of two vertices.
      There is also an atomic formula x = y that tests whether x and y are evaluated to the same element.
    • If α and β are formulas, then we can construct formulas ¬α, α ∧ β, and α ∨ β.
    • If α is a formula and y is a variable, then we can construct formulas ∃y α and ∀y α.
Note that thus, a formula may use some variables that are not bound by any quantifier. We call those free
variables and use the notation φ(x̄) to signify that x̄ is the tuple of free variables of φ. Thus, φ speaks
about properties of k-tuples of elements of the universe, where k is the length of x̄. A formula without
free variables is a sentence. Thus, a sentence just expresses some property of a Σ-structure.


                                                          5
    While the syntax of FO[Σ] is explained above, the semantics — how formulas are evaluated in structures
— is as expected. That is, if A is a structure, then:
    • for an atomic formula φ(x, y) = (x = y) and elements u, v ∈ U (A), we have that φ(u, v) holds
       in A iff u = v;
    • for an atomic formula R(x̄) and a tuple ū ∈ U (A)x̄ , we have that R(ū) holds in A iff ū ∈ RA ;
    • for a formula φ(x̄) = α(x̄) ∧ β(x̄) and a tuple ū ∈ U (A)x̄ , we have that φ(ū) holds in A iff both
       α(ū) and β(ū) hold, and similarly for negation and disjunction; and
    • for a formula φ(x̄) = ∃y α(x̄, y) and a tuple ū ∈ U (A)x̄ , we have that φ(ū) holds in A iff there is an
       element v such that α(ū, v) holds in A, and similarly for universal quantification.
Here, we use the notation ū ∈ U (A)x̄ : formally, we consider x̄ to be a set of variables, and then ū is an
evaluation of those variables in U (A), which is just a function from x̄ to the elements of the universe of
A. If φ(x̄) is a formula and ū ∈ U (A)x̄ is an evaluation of its free variables, then we write A |= φ(ū) to
express that φ(ū) holds in A.
    Let us make a few examples to make those abstract definitions more familiar for readers with less
experience with logic. In all examples, we assume the signature of (the adjacency encoding of) graphs,
consisting of one binary predicate adj, except for the last example, where we also use colors. More gen-
erally, throughout this article, whenever we speak about FO or any other logic without specifying the
signature, we always mean the signature of the adjacency encodings of graphs.
    Here is a formula with three free variables that expresses that three vertices form a triangle:

                            triangle(x, y, z) = adj(x, y) ∧ adj(y, z) ∧ adj(z, x).

And here is a sentence that states that a graph is triangle-free:

                                 triangleFree = ¬∃x ∃y ∃z triangle(x, y, z).

Next, here are formulas that express that the distance between a pair of vertices is at most 1 and at most 3,
respectively:

                       dist⩽1 (x, y) = (x = y) ∨ adj(x, y);
                       dist⩽3 (x, y) = ∃s ∃t dist⩽1 (x, s) ∧ dist⩽1 (s, t) ∧ dist⩽1 (t, y).

Finally, here is a sentence that works on graphs with two colors — red and blue, highlighted by unary
predicates Red and Blue, respectively — which states that the red vertices distance-3 dominate the blue
vertices. (That is, every blue vertex is at distance at most 3 from some red vertex.)

                      redDominatesBlue = ∀y Blue(y) ⇒ [∃x Red(x) ∧ dist⩽3 (x, y)] .

Note that we used implication, which can be expressed using disjunction and negation.

Monadic Second-Order logic. We now turn our attention to a more expressive logic: Monadic-Second-
Order logic MSO. The idea is that we extend First-Order logic with the possibility of quantifying over
subsets of elements, which effectively means introducing new unary predicates. More precisely, if Σ is a
signature, then MSO[Σ] extends FO[Σ] by the following constructs:
    • there are also variables for sets of elements, called monadic and denoted by convention by capital
      letters X, Y, Z, . . .;
    • there are atomic formulas of the form x ∈ X, where x is an element variable and X is a monadic
      variable, that check membership; and
    • we allow quantification over monadic variables as well: if α is a formula, then so are ∃X α and ∀X α.

                                                        6
The semantics of these constructs are as expected.
    MSO over the signature of the adjacency encoding of graphs is usually called MSO1 in the literature,
and in effect this boils down to extending FO on graphs by the possibility of quantifying over subsets of
vertices. The reader may have also come across the more expressive logic MSO2 , where we additionally
allow quantification over subsets of edges. This might be a bit confusing at first glance: there is only one
MSO over relational structures, but two different MSOs on graphs? The answer is actually quite simple:
these are not two different MSOs, but two different ways of encoding a graph as a relational structure.
Namely, besides the adjacency encoding, we can also consider the incidence encoding: the universe consists
of all the vertices and all the edges of the graph, there are two unary relations selecting the vertices and the
edges, respectively, and one binary incidence relation inc(·, ·) with the following meaning: for a vertex u
and an edge e, inc(u, e) holds iff u is an endpoint of e. Now, considering MSO on such relational structures
boils down to allowing quantification both over subsets of vertices and over subsets of edges in graphs.
    Let us look at some examples. Below is an MSO1 sentence that verifies whether a graph is 3-colorable.
It uses an auxiliary subformula that checks whether a subset of vertices is independent (that is, induces an
edgeless subgraph).
             ind(X) = ∀x ∀y (x ∈ X ∧ y ∈ X) ⇒ ¬adj(x, y);
                 3col = ∃X ∃Y ∃Z ind(X) ∧ ind(Y ) ∧ ind(Z) ∧ [ ∀x x ∈ X ∨ x ∈ Y ∨ x ∈ Z ] .
Next, we give an MSO2 sentence that verifies whether a graph is Hamiltonian (contains a Hamiltonian
cycle). Here, we use the following characterization: a Hamiltonian cycle is a subset of edges F that connects
the whole vertex set and every vertex is incident to exactly two vertices of F . In quantification, we use
shorthands x ∈ V , f ∈ E, X ⊆ V , and F ⊆ E to signify whether the quantification ranges over vertices,
edges, vertex subsets, or edge subsets. Also, x ∈   / X is a shorthand for ¬(x ∈ X), and x ̸= y for ¬(x = y).
deg2(x, F ) = ∃f ∈E ∃f ′ ∈E inc(x, f ) ∧ inc(x, f ′ ) ∧ (f ̸= f ′ ) ∧ ∀f ′′ ∈E inc(x, f ′′ ) ⇒ (f ′′ = f ∨ f ′′ = f ′ ) ;
                                                                                                                      

  conn(F ) = ∀X⊆V [(∃x∈V x ∈ X) ∧ (∃x∈V x ∈
                                          / X)] ⇒
                           [∃x∈V ∃y∈V ∃f ∈E x ∈ X ∧ y ∈
                                                      / X ∧ inc(x, f ) ∧ inc(y, f ) ∧ f ∈ F ] ;
       Ham = ∃F ⊆E [conn(F ) ∧ ∀x∈V deg2(x, F )] .
For readers familiar with methods of finite model theory, it is an easy exercise to use Ehrenfeucht-Fraı̈sse
games to prove that 3-colorability is not expressible in FO and Hamiltonicity is not expressible in MSO1 .
     We will sometimes also speak about logic CMSO, which extends MSO with modular counting by
allowing atomic formulas of the form |X| ≡ a mod m, where X is a monadic variable, m is a positive
integer, and a ∈ {0, 1, . . . , m − 1}. Thus, we may now check that a certain set is of odd size, or its size is
divisible by 3, etc. This naturally gives rise to logic CMSO1 and CMSO2 . As we will see, in some contexts
it is CMSO that appears to be the most natural choice of logic, rather than MSO.

Model-checking. Once we have understood what kind of logic on graphs we are going to consider,
we can also discuss relevant computational problems. Among those, probably the most important is the
model-checking problem, defined as follows.
Definition 1. Let L be a logic on graphs. In the model-checking problem for L, we are given a graph G
and a sentence φ of L, and the question is to decide whether G |= φ.
   Within this survey we will consider L ∈ {FO, MSO1 , MSO2 , CMSO1 , CMSO2 }, but of course the
problem can be stated for other logics as well.
   Since the problems of deciding whether the input graph is 3-colorable or Hamiltonian are NP-hard, the
model-checking problem for MSO1 and MSO2 is NP-hard already for fixed formulas of constant length.
The situation is a bit different for model-checking for FO, as it can be solved by brute-force in time nO(∥φ∥) ,

                                                           7
where by ∥φ∥ we denote the length of the sentence φ. Indeed, it suffices to process φ using a recursive
algorithm, and for every quantifier just branch into n subproblems, in each fixing a different evaluation
of the quantified variable. From the point of view of parameterized complexity, this places the model-
checking problem for FO parameterized by the sentence φ in complexity class XP: it can be solved in
polynomial time for every fixed value of the parameter. A natural question is whether the problem is
actually fixed-parameter tractable (or equivalently, belongs to the class FPT), that is, whether it can be
solved in time2 Oφ (nc ) for some universal constant c, independent of φ. It turns out that the model-
checking problem for FO is complete for the class AW[⋆], so it being solvable in fixed-parameter time would
yield FPT = AW[⋆] and trigger a collapse of a large part of the hierarchy of parameterized complexity
classes (comparable to the collapse P = PSPACE in the classic complexity theory). See [59, Section 8.6]
for a broader introduction to the topic.
     The discussion above shows that the model-checking problem for all the logics considered is very hard
on general graphs, at least from the perspective of parameterized algorithms. Therefore, we can consider
its restriction to various graph classes — that is, stipulate the input graph to come from a graph class C —
and ask how this affects the complexity. This leads us to the following central question.

       Characterize graph classes C for which the model-checking problem for FO restricted to C is
       fixed-parameter tractable. Also, give analogous characterizations for MSO1 and MSO2 .

     It appears that for MSO1 and MSO2 , the question above is for the most part understood. While, the
complete answer for FO is still lacking, the recent investigations have lead to an exciting theory, which
is still under development. Therefore, answering the question above should not really be regarded as the
ultimate goal, but rather as an excuse for developing a new part of structural graph theory, from which a
resolution will hopefully follow.

2.3    Transductions
Finally, we discuss transductions: the main embedding notion that will be of interest in this survey. We
focus on the case of FO first, and then discuss how the notion can be adapted to other considered logics.
    First, let us introduce a simpler notion of simple interpretations. Suppose φ(x, y) is a formula of FO
on graphs with two free variables. Then for a graph G, we can apply φ to the whole G and obtain a new
graph φ(G) defined as follows:
    • the vertex set of φ(G) is the same as that of G; and
    • two distinct vertices u, v ∈ V (G) are adjacent in φ(G) if and only if G |= φ(u, v) or G |= φ(v, u).
       (The disjunction is only to make the graph undirected.)
We say that φ(G) is interpreted in G using φ. Thus, a simple interpretation just changes the edge set, by
placing the new edges where the formula φ tells so. We can easily generalize this notion to relational
structures as follows:
    • a simple interpretation from Σ-structures to Γ-structures consists of one formula φR (x̄) ∈ FO[Σ]
       for each predicate R ∈ Γ, where x̄ is a tuple of variables of length arity(R); and
    • the tuples selected by φR (x̄) in the input Σ-structure form the relation R in the output Γ-structure.
    Let us see some examples. If φ(x, y) = ¬adj(x, y), then φ(G) is the complement of G: the graph
obtained from G by swapping all the edges with non-edges. Further, if φ(x, y) = dist⩽2 (x, y), the formula
checking whether the distance between x and y is at most 2, then φ(G) is the square of G: the graph
obtained from G by making all pairs of vertices at distance at most 2 adjacent.
   2
     In the formal definition of fixed-parameter tractability, it is usually assumed that the dependence of the running time on
the parameter is bounded by a computable function, which here would mean that the constant hidden in the Oφ (·) notation is
computable from φ. For simplicity, within this survey we brush such computability issues under the rug, as ultimately they play
a secondary role.


                                                              8
    The intuition is that the interpretation φ allows us to encode the graph φ(G) within G, which means
that, in a sense, the “logical space” of φ(G) embeds into the “logical space” of G. This intuition is sup-
ported by the following simple lemma: FO-definitions of properties of φ(G) can be translated back to
FO-definitions working on G.

Lemma 1 (Backwards Translation Lemma). Let φ(x, y) ∈ FO be a formula and ψ ∈ FO a sentence. Then
there is a sentence ψ[φ] ∈ FO such that for every graph G,

                                  G |= ψ[φ]    if and only if φ(G) |= ψ.

Proof. To obtain ψ[φ], it suffices to modify ψ by replacing every occurrence of the predicate adj(x, y) with
the formula φ(x, y) ∨ φ(y, x).

    We now proceed to the notion that is of main interest to us: transductions. A transduction T consists
of a set of colors C and a formula φ(x, y) of FO on C-colored graphs. (That is, the signature consists of
the binary predicate adj and a unary predicate for every color of C.) Applying T to a graph G yields the
set T(G) consisting of all graphs that can be obtained from G as follows:
     • coloring: add the colors of C to G in an arbitrary way, thus obtaining a C-colored graph G+ ;
     • interpretation: apply a simple interpretation using formula φ to G+ , thus obtaining an (uncolored)
       graph φ(G+ ); and
     • restriction: output an arbitrary induced subgraph of φ(G+ ).
Thus, T can be regarded as a nondeterministic mechanism that takes G on input, and gives any of the
graphs of T(G) on output. It should not really be surprising that the notion is nondeterministic in nature.
One graph may have multiple subgraphs, or induced subgraphs, or minors. So also it may yield multiple
different outputs under a transduction, which is a mechanism of transforming one graph into another.
    Now, transductions can be applied to classes of graphs, yielding new classes. More precisely, for a
graph class C and a transduction T, we define
                                                       [
                                             T(C ) :=      T(G).
                                                      G∈C

With this in mind, we can introduce the quasi-order defined by transductions.

Definition 2. We say that a graph class D is transducible from C if there exists a transduction T such that

                                                D ⊆ T(C ).

We also say that C transduces D, and we denote this by D ⊑FO C .

    The right way to read this definition is the following: every graph from D can be encoded in a colored
graph from C using a fixed FO-definable encoding mechanism. Indeed, the Backwards Translation Lemma
(Lemma 1) allows us to translate FO-definitions of properties of graphs from D to colored graphs from C .
Thus, the transductions are not really an embedding notion for single graphs, but rather for graph classes.
This fits well the premise that it is a graph class, and not a single graph, that is the main object of study.
    Given the notation, it is natural to expect that ⊑FO is a quasi-order, that is, a reflexive and transitive
relation on classes of graphs. Reflexivity is trivial, while transitivity follows from the compositionality of
transductions, which we argue next.

Lemma 2. A composition of two transductions is again a transduction.




                                                      9
Proof. Let (C, φ) and (D, ψ) be the two considered transductions; we may assume C ∩ D = ∅. It suffices
to take the transduction (C ∪ D ∪ {W }, ψ ′ ), where W is a new color not belonging to C ∪ D, and ψ ′ is
the formula obtained from ψ by restricting every quantification to the vertices of color W and replacing
every occurrence of the predicate adj(x, y) with the formula φ(x, y) ∨ φ(y, x). Here, the meaning of color
W is that it selects the set of vertices to which the first transduction decides to trim the vertex set.
    Finally, having a quasi-order allows us to define ideals, that is, downward-closed sets.
Definition 3. A property of graph classes Π is called an FO ideal if it is closed under transductions: for
every transduction T and graph class C ∈ Π, we also have T(C ) ∈ Π.
    We will discuss multiple concrete FO ideals throughout this survey. In fact, all concepts depicted in
Figure 1 except for the ones in the left-most column are FO ideals.
   Let us make an example to illustrate the abstract notions we have just introduced. The class of rook
graphs is defined as follows: a rook graph has vertex set {1, . . . , a} × {1, . . . , b} for some a, b ∈ N, and
two distinct vertices (i, j) and (i′ , j ′ ) are adjacent iff i = i′ or j = j ′ . We prove the following.
Lemma 3. The class of rook graphs transduces the class of all graphs.
Proof. We first argue that the class of all bipartite graphs can be transduced from the class of rook graphs.
Take any bipartite graph H, say with sides A and B with |A| = a and |B| = b. Consider the rook graph
G on vertex set {1, . . . , a + 1} × {1, . . . , b + 1}. We transduce H from G as follows (see Figure 2):
     • Highlight A′ = {1, . . . , a} × {b + 1} and B ′ = {a + 1} × {1, . . . , b} using two colors, A′ and B ′ ,
       respectively.
     • Arbitrarily enumerate A as {u1 , . . . , ua } and B as {v1 , . . . , vb }, and highlight the adjacency matrix
       of H within {1, . . . , a} × {1, . . . , b} using a color F . That is, include a vertex (i, j) in F if and only
       if ui vj is an edge in H.
     • Apply interpretation with a formula φ(x, y) = A′ (x) ∧ B ′ (y) ∧ ∃z [adj(x, z) ∧ adj(y, z) ∧ F (z)].
       That is, put a new edge between vertices x and y iff x is in A′ , y is in B ′ , and x and y have a common
       neighbor in F .
     • Output the subgraph induced by A′ ∪ B ′ . It is isomorphic to H.
Clearly, the above mechanism is captured by a transduction that uses a set of three colors C = {A′ , B ′ , F }
and formula φ for interpretation. The construction above shows that the image of this transduction on the
class of rook graphs contains all bipartite graphs.
     Now, the class of all graphs can be easily transduced from the class of bipartite graphs as follows: every
graph G can be transduced from its 1-subdivision (which is bipartite) by taking the square and removing
all the subdivision vertices. By Lemma 2, the composition of the two transductions described above is
again a transduction, and we are done.
    While the discussion above focuses on transducing graphs from graphs, we could easily extend the
definitions to capture also transductions from Σ-structures to Γ-structures, for any signatures Σ and Γ.
Then the first coloring step would add some unary predicates C to the structure in an arbitrary way, the
second interpretation step would apply an interpretation with input signature Σ∪C to output signature Γ,
and the last restriction step would output any induced substructure. Also, we could replace FO with
any other reasonable logic L, for instance MSO or CMSO, thus obtaining the notion of L-transductions
that use formulas of L for interpretation. (We follow the convention that when we discuss transductions
without specifying the logic, we mean FO-transductions.) We could also talk about MSO1 - or MSO2 -
transductions for graph classes, but in this context, for the sake of clarity, we will explicitly speak about
MSO-transductions that input or output the adjacency encodings or the incidence encodings of graphs.
When the encoding is not specified, we always mean the adjacency encoding.
    We conclude this section by making a few side remarks about transductions.

                                                         10
Figure 2: Transduction from the proof of Lemma 3. Left: a rook graph with colors A′ , B ′ , and F depicted
in red, yellow, and blue, respectively. Note that every row and every column is a clique, which is depicted
using gray ovals. Right: the transduced bipartite graph.


    • The choice of transductions as the basic notion of embedding should not be regarded as the only
      correct one. For instance, the notion of logical intepretations is commonly used in finite model
      theory. They are deterministic and, in particular, do not include the coloring step. One could imagine
      constructing a different theory by adopting a different concept of logical encodability of structures in
      structures. However, it seems that the notion of transductions described above leads to a particularly
      elegant structure theory.
    • Related to the above, readers with background in finite model theory could have been surprised that
      the last restriction step involves just taking an induced subgraph. In the standard definition of an
      interpretation, there would be another formula φdom (x) with one free variable, and the restriction
      step would trim the universe to those vertices that satisfy φdom . In our setting we do not really
      need this additional formula thanks to the coloring step: essentially, one can always guess the set of
      elements to which the universe will be restricted using an additional color.
    • Again, in finite model theory it is common to consider interpretations that interpret elements of the
      output structure in tuples of elements of the input structure, allowing a polynomial blow-up of the
      size of the universe. Interpretations used in our notion of transductions are one-dimensional, in the
      sense that elements of the output structure are interpreted in single elements of the input structure.
      We make this restriction, because allowing both two-dimensional interpretations and colorings at
      the same time would allow constructing a Cartesian product of a set followed by guessing the adja-
      cency matrix of any graph in this product, similarly as in the proof Lemma 3. This would make the
      class of all graphs transducible from edgeless graphs, making the notion trivial. A different sensi-
      ble choice would be to allow multi-dimensional interpretations and disallow colorings. We are not
      aware of work going in this direction on the grounds of structural graph theory.
    • It is indeed a limitation of our definition of transductions that they can only remove vertices, and
      are not capable of creating new ones. Therefore, sometimes it is assumed that transductions can also
      perform copying, as an additional step before coloring. This works as follows: at the very beginning,
      we replace the input graph G with the disjoint union of c copies of G, for some constant c, and copies
      of the same original vertex are bound by a new binary predicate copy(·, ·). This copied structure is
      then passed to the coloring step and further. Thus, transductions with copying can increase the size
      of the universe, but only by a constant multiplicative factor. In essence, a transduction with copying
      is almost the same as a transduction without copying that is provided on input the Cartesian product
      of the input graph G with the complete graph Kc . If we study transducibility from classes satisfying


                                                     11
        some property Π, and Π is closed under taking Cartesian products with constant-size complete
        graphs (that is, if C ∈ Π, then also C □Kc := {G□Kc : G ∈ C } ∈ Π for every c ∈ N), then the two
        notions of transducibility coincide. This will be the case in all the relevant statements presented in
        this survey, hence for simplicity we stick to transductions without copying.


3       Classic concepts
In this section we present more standard notions of structure in graphs, which in large part originate
from classic structural graph theory. However, we focus our discussion on model-theoretic properties. We
describe the concepts starting from the most restrictive, which in Figure 1 means starting from the top.

3.1     Star-like graphs: treedepth and shrubdepth
We start with parameters treedepth and shrubdepth, which, roughly speaking, measure star-likeness of a
graph, or its resemblance to a bounded-depth tree. Treedepth is the more classic notion that is suited for the
treatment of sparse graphs. The name treedepth was first used by Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez in [99],
the same notion actually appeared under different disguises well before that; see for instance the discussion
and references in [105, Section 6.1] and [119]. Shrubdepth is more general and captures star-likeness in
dense graphs. It was introduced by Ganian, Hliněný, Nešetřil, Obdržálek, and Ossona de Mendez in [71]3 .

3.1.1    Treedepth
The decomposition notion underlying treedepth is called an elimination forest, though other names, like
simply treedepth decomposition, can be also found in the literature. In the following, a rooted forest is a
forest where in every connected component we distinguish one root vertex; this naturally imposes an
ancestor/descendant relation on the vertices. The depth of a rooted forest is the maximum number of
vertices on a root-to-leaf path.
Definition 4. An elimination forest of a graph G is a rooted forest on the same vertex set as G, i.e. V (F ) =
V (G), such that for every edge uv of G, u and v are in the ancestor/descendant relation in F . The treedepth
of G, denoted td(G), is the minimum depth of an elimination forest of G.
    See Figure 3, left panel, for an example.
    Observe that in case G is connected, every elimination forest of G must in fact be a tree. Indeed,
otherwise there could be no edges of G between the different connected components of F . Therefore, in
this case we can speak about elimination trees.
    This observation leads to the following alternative, recursive definition of treedepth.
Lemma 4. For a graph G, we have
                     
                     1,
                                                         if G has one vertex;
           td(G) = max { td(C) : C is a component of G }, if G is disconnected; and
                     
                      1 + minu∈V (G) td(G − u),           otherwise.
                     

Proof. That td(G) = 1 when G has one vertex is obvious. To see that the treedepth of a disconnected
graph G is the maximum among the treedepth of its connected components C, note that on one hand, an
elimination forest of G can be obtained by taking the disjoint union of optimum-depth elimination forests
of the components C, and on the other hand, it is easy to see that the treedepth of a subgraph of G cannot
be larger than the treedepth of G.
    3
   In fact, shrubdepth was first defined in an earlier conference paper by Ganian, Hliněný, Nešetřil, Obdržálek, Ossona de
Mendez, and Ramadurai [72], on which the journal article [71] is largely based.


                                                              12
Figure 3: Left: A graph (in black) together with its elimination tree of depth 4 (light blue). Right: a graph
(in black) together with its tree-model of depth 3 that uses 3 labels. The leaves coincide with the vertices
of the graph, their labels are depicted with colors (yellow, red, or blue). The internal nodes are presented
as boxes containing those pairs of labels that are mapped by the corresponding function Mt to 1.

    Finally, suppose that G is connected and has more than one vertex. Then if F is an optimum-depth
elimination tree of G and u is the root of G, then F − u is an elimination forest of G − u and the depth
of F − u is one smaller than the depth of F ; this proves that 1 + minu∈V (G) td(G − u) ⩽ td(G). On the
other hand, if u is any vertex of G and F ′ is an elimination forest of G − u, then an elimination tree of G
of depth one larger than that of F ′ can be obtained by adding u to F ′ as the new root and making all the
former roots into children of u. This proves that 1 + minu∈V (G) td(G − u) ⩾ td(G).

   The alternation of min and max operators in Lemma 4 suggests a definition of treedepth through a
game, which we will call the radius-∞ Splitter Game. The game is played on a graph G, called the arena.
There are two players: Splitter and Connector. The game proceeds in rounds, where each round is as follows:
    • First, Connector picks any connected component C of the arena, and the game is restricted to this
      component. That is, the arena becomes C.
    • Then, Splitter removes any vertex from the arena.
The game finishes with Splitter’s win when the arena becomes empty. The goal of Splitter is to win the
game as quickly as possible, and the goal of Connector is to prevent this for as long as possible.
   A simple inductive argument based on Lemma 4 proves the following.
Lemma 5. For a graph G, td(G) is the minimum number of rounds needed for Splitter to win the radius-∞
Splitter game on G.
    The “radius-∞” prefix indicates that in this variant of the Splitter Game, Connector selects a connected
component, or equivalently, a subgraph induced by vertices reachable from some selected vertex by a path
of arbitrary length. As the reader might suspect, we will later consider also the radius-r Splitter Game,
where the moves of the Connector are more constrained: in every round, she picks a ball of radius r, and
the arena gets restricted to the subgraph induced by this ball. It turns out that this variant of Splitter Game
provides an extremely useful notion of a decomposition for general classes of sparse graphs (called nowhere
dense classes, see Section 3.5). Hence, the game-theoretic view on treedepth exemplified by Lemma 5 is
actually very consequential.
    We now turn our attention to obstructions dual to low-depth elimination forests, which turn out to
be very simple: they are just paths. More precisely, if by lp(G) we denote the number of vertices in the
longest path that is contained in G as a subgraph, then we have the following.
Lemma 6. For every graph G, we have log2 lp(G) ⩽ td(G) ⩽ lp(G).

                                                      13
Proof. The right inequality follows from the observation that every depth-first search forest of G is also
an elimination forest, and such a forest cannot have depth larger than d in the absence of paths on more
than d vertices. For the left inequality, it suffices to observe that the treedepth of a path on n vertices is at
least log2 (n + 1). This can be proved by giving a strategy for Connector in the radius-∞ Splitter Game on
a path: once Splitter breaks the current path into two subpaths by deleting one vertex, always select the
longer among the two subpaths.

     The proof of Lemma 6 provides a very simple approximation algorithm for treedepth: just run depth-
first search and output the obtained forest of the search; its depth is surely bounded by 2td(G) . More
                                                                                                 2
generally, the treedepth of a graph G can be computed exactly in fixed-parameter time 2O(td(G) ) · n [119].
                                                                            2
Obtaining a constant-factor approximation algorithm running in time 2o(td(G) ) ·nc , for any constant c ∈ N,
remains a notorious open problem.

3.1.2   Shrubdepth
We now move to shrubdepth and recall the definitions proposed by Ganian et al. [71]. The notion of decom-
position is provided by tree-models explained below. Readers familiar with cliquewidth (see Section 3.2.2)
should immediately recognize similarities with decompositions considered there, only here we stipulate
tree-models to have bounded depth.

Definition 5. A tree-model of a graph G consists of a finite set of labels Λ, a labelling λ : V (G) → Λ, a
rooted tree T whose leaf set is equal to the vertex set of G, and, for every non-leaf node t of T , a symmetric
function Mt : Λ × Λ → {0, 1} (that is, Mt (α, β) = Mt (β, α) for all α, β ∈ Λ). We require that for any
two distinct vertices u and v of G, we have

                      u and v are adjacent       if and only if     Mt (λ(u), λ(v)) = 1,

where t is the lowest common ancestor of u and v in T .

     See Figure 3, right panel, for an example.
     We remark that in [71], tree-models are defined slightly differently: in essence, it is required that
all functions Mt on each level of the tree are the same. It is not hard to prove that the two definitions
are equivalent in the sense that one variant of a tree-model can be transformed into the other so that the
number of labels increases to a function of the original number, but the depth is preserved exactly. This will
have no influence on our further discussion, so we will stick to the formulation presented in Definition 5,
as we find it more natural and closer to cliquewidth.
     With tree-models understood, we can define shrubdepth.

Definition 6. The shrubdepth of a graph class C is the least d ∈ N such that the following holds: there
is m ∈ N such that every graph in C admits a tree-model of depth at most d and using a label set of size
at most m. If no such integer exists, then we say that C has unbounded shrubdepth, and otherwise it has
bounded shrubdepth.

    A slightly confusing aspect of this definition is that shrubdepth is defined only for graph classes, and
not for individual graphs. The reason for this choice will become clear in a moment. Nevertheless, it is
instructive to think of tree-models as inherently biparametric objects: the two parameters governing the
complexity of a tree-model are the depth and the number of labels used. In the definition of shrubdepth,
the depth becomes the primary parameter of concern, while the number of labels serves a secondary role.




                                                       14
                         Figure 4: Applying a flip on a set A, depicted in yellow.


SC-depth and Flipper Game. It is possible to define graph parameters that are applicable to single
graphs, while being equivalent to shrubdepth in the following sense: they are bounded on the same classes
of graphs. One such parameter is SC-depth, where SC stands for subset complementation. SC-depth was
also introduced by Ganian et al. in [71].
    First, we describe the operation of applying a flip to a graph (this operation is also called subset com-
plementation or perturbation). Given a graph G and a set of vertices A, applying a flip on A in G results in
the graph G ⊕ A obtained from G by inverting the adjacency relation within A. That is, the vertex sets of
G and G ⊕ A are the same, and for every pair of distinct vertices u and v we have the following:
    • if u, v ∈ A, then u and v are adjacent in G ⊕ A iff they are not adjacent in G; and
    • otherwise, u and v are adjacent in G ⊕ A iff they are adjacent in G.
With this definition, the SC-depth of a graph is defined through a recurrence similar to that of Lemma 4.

Definition 7. For a graph G, the SC-depth of G, denoted by SCd(G), is defined as follows:

                                                                 if G has one vertex;
                      
                      0,
                      
          SCd(G) = max { SCd(C) : C is a component of G }, if G is disconnected; and
                                                                 otherwise.
                      
                        1 + minA⊆V (G) SCd(G ⊕ A),
                      

   Then we have the following.

Theorem 7 ([71]). A graph class has bounded shrubdepth if and only if it has bounded SC-depth.

    Observe that similarly to the characterization of Lemma 4, Definition 7 can be understood through a
game, which in this context we call the radius-∞ Flipper Game. Now, the players are called Flipper and
Keeper, and the game proceeds in round as follows:
     • First, Keeper picks a connected component and the arena gets restricted to this component. (So
       Keeper’s moves are exactly the same as Connector’s in the Splitter Game.)
     • Next, Flipper chooses a vertex subset A and applies a flip on A.
The game finishes once the arena is restricted to a single vertex. The goals of the players are the same. The
following statement is then obtained in exact analogy to Lemma 5.

Lemma 8. For a graph G, SCd(G) is the minimum number of rounds needed for Flipper to win the radius-∞
Flipper Game on G.

   Let us pause for a moment, because the reasoning presented above is a simple instantiation of a very
important general principle, which seems to permeate the whole theory. In essence, the definitions of
SC-depth and of the Flipper Game have been obtained by taking the definitions of treedepth and of the


                                                     15
Splitter Game, and replacing the concept of deleting a vertex with the concept of applying a flip. We will
see this idea applied repeatedly later on, for more complicated definitions: the flip operations seems to be
the right analogue of vertex deletion in the context of dense graphs, and by following this analogy we can
design structural concepts for dense graphs mirroring those working on sparse graphs.
    We remark that sometimes one assumes a slightly more general notion of a flip, where we are given
two vertex subsets A and B in a graph G, not necessarily disjoint, and the operation consists of inverting
the adjacency relation in A × B. This change is non-consequential for theory: these stronger flips can
model the standard flips described above by taking A = B, and any stronger flip can be emulated using
three standard flips: on A, on B, and on A ∪ B.
    Also, note that making a flip can be modelled by a transduction: there is a transduction that given G,
outputs all graphs that can be obtained from G by applying a flip. More generally, for every fixed k ∈ N,
there is a transduction Tk such that Tk (G) consists of all k-flips of G: graphs that can be obtained from
G by applying at most k flips. This may explain why the flip operation is so relevant in the constructed
structural theory based on transductions.

Model-theoretic aspects. Let us proceed with the discussion of the properties of shrubdepth. The fol-
lowing model-theoretic characterization was in fact the main motivation of Ganian et al. for the introduc-
tion of this notion: from the point of view of logic, classes of bounded shrubdepth are those encodable in
bounded-depth trees. (Here, we see rooted trees as binary structures over the signature consising of the
ancestor relation.)

Theorem 9 ([71]). Let C be a graph class. Then C has shrubdepth at most d if and only if C can be transduced
from the class of trees of depth at most d. In particular, C has bounded shrubdepth if and only if C can be
transduced from a class of trees of bounded depth.

     We note that in fact, in [71] Ganian et al. proved Theorem 9 for MSO and CMSO transductions, which
is a stronger result. Indeed, the right-to-left implication for (C)MSO transductions entails this implication
for FO transductions as well, while the left-to-right implication is anyway easy, as decoding the graph
from its tree-model of bounded depth and using a bounded number of labels can be easily done using an
FO transduction. This is connected to the collapse of MSO to FO on classes of bounded shrubdepth, see
Theorem 11.
     The equivalence provided by Theorem 9 together with compositionality of transductions (Lemma 2)
immediately implies the following.

Theorem 10. For every d ∈ N, classes of shrubdepth at most d form an FO ideal. In particular, classes of
bounded shrubdepth are an FO ideal as well.

    Theorem 10 explains the choices made in the definition of shrubdepth. Namely, behind shrubdepth
there is a hierarchy of strictly increasing FO ideals, and the depth parameter precisely pinpoints where are
the borders between those ideals. Thus, highlighting the depth of a tree-model as the primary parameter is
completely natural from the point of view of model-theoretic aspects of shrubdepth, even though it makes
the combinatorial definition a bit more complicated.
    Further, as proved by Gajarský and Hliněný [63], on classes of bounded shrubdepth the expressive
powers of FO and of MSO coincide, in the sense described below. This is essentially a consequence of this
collapse occurring in the setting of bounded-depth trees.

Theorem 11 ([63]). Let C be a class of bounded shrubdepth. Then for every sentence φ ∈ MSO1 , there exists
a sentence φ ∈ FO that is equivalent to φ on graphs from C :

                         G |= φ if and only if     G |= φ′ ,     for every G ∈ C .

                                                     16
    See also a different take on Theorem 11 by Chen and Flum [27], and an earlier work of Elberfeld,
Grohe, and Tantau on an analogous statement for classes of bounded treedepth [57]. As expected, there
the collapse applies also to MSO2 , not only MSO1 . In essence, Theorem 11 explains why in the context of
classes of bounded shrubdepth, it is equivalent to speak about FO- and MSO-transductions.

Relation to treedepth. As should be expected, shrubdepth generalizes treedepth, and restricting atten-
tion to sparse graphs projects classes of bounded shrubdepth to classes of bounded treedepth.

Theorem 12. Every class of bounded treedepth also has bounded shrubdepth. Conversely, every weakly sparse
class of bounded shrubdepth in fact has bounded treedepth.

Proof. The first statement is proved explicitly in [71]. The second statement follows from the result of
Galvin, Rival, and Sands [70] that weakly sparse classes containing arbitrarily long paths as subgraphs
also contain arbitrarily long paths as induced subgraphs (see also [5, 50, 83] for effective proofs), combined
with the facts that taking the hereditary closure of a class does not increase the shrubdepth and that the
class of paths has unbounded shrubdepth [71].

   The following model-theoretic characterization of treedepth is a consequence of combining Theorem 12
with the characterization of Theorem 9.

Theorem 13. A class of graphs C has bounded treedepth iff the incidence encodings of graphs from C can
be transduced from a class of trees of bounded depth.

Proof. Let C ′ be the class of Gaifman graphs of the incidence encodings of graphs from C . Note that C ′
consists just of 1-subdivisions of graphs from C .
     Suppose first that C has bounded treedepth. Then so does the class C ′ too, for applying a 1-subdivision
to a graph can increase its treedepth by at most 1. By Theorem 12, C ′ has bounded shrubdepth, so it can
be transduced from a class of trees of bounded depth, due to Theorem 9. Making a graph from C ′ into an
incidence encoding of a graph from C requires just highlighting the vertex set and the edge set using a
pair of colors, which is clearly a transduction.
     Suppose now that the incidence encodings of graphs from C can be transduced from a class of trees
of bounded depth. By dropping the predicates selecting vertices and edges, this means that C ′ also can be
transduced from a class of trees of bounded depth. So C ′ has bounded shrubdepth by Theorem 9. But since
C ′ is weakly sparse as well (it excludes K3,3 as a subgraph), by Theorem 12 we conclude that C ′ in fact has
bounded treedepth. As C ′ consists of 1-subdivisions of graphs from C , it is now easy to argue, for example
by noting that treedepth is a minor-monotone parameter, that C has bounded treedepth as well.

Obstructions. As we have seen in Lemma 6, treedepth admits very simple obstructions: paths as sub-
graphs. It would be tempting to conjecture that similar obstructions for shrubdepth should be paths as
induced subgraphs, but this is not the case. The following class of half-graphs contains no graphs with an
induced path on 5 vertices, and yet its shrubdepth is unbounded.

Definition 8. A half-graph of order n is a bipartite graph with sides {a1 , . . . , an } and {b1 , . . . , bn } such
that for all i, j ∈ {1, . . . , n},

                                 ai and bj are adjacent      if and only if i ⩽ j.


Lemma 14. The class of half-graphs has unbounded shrubdepth.



                                                        17
                                        a1    a2     a3    a4     a5




                                        b1    b2     b3     b4    b5

                                     Figure 5: A half-graph of order 5.

Proof. It is easy to transduce the class of paths from the class of half-graphs. As proved in [71], the class
of paths has unbounded shrubdepth. Since classes of bounded shrubdepth are an FO ideal (Theorem 10),
it follows that the class of half-graphs must have unbounded shrubdepth as well.

    The proof of Lemma 14 suggests that transducibility of long paths might be the real problem, and
not necessarily containing them as induced subgraphs. The following duality result of Ossona de Mendez,
Pilipczuk, and Siebertz [111] confirms this suspicion, and provides a characterization of shrubdepth through
logical obstructions.
Theorem 15 ([111]). A class of graphs C has bounded shrubdepth if and only if the class of all paths is not
transducible from C .
    However, there is actually interesting combinatorics behind induced subgraph obstructions for shrub-
depth. More precisely, Ganian et al. [71] used the classic result of Ding [41] to show that on every class of
bounded shrubdepth, the induced subgraph order is a well quasi-order. (Recall that this means that there
are no infinite antichains or descending chains.) From this we immediately get the following statement.
Theorem 16 ([71]). For every hereditary class C of bounded shrubdepth, there is a finite set of graphs F such
that for every graph G,

               G∈C      if and only if G contains no member of F as an induced subgraph.

Proof. It suffices to takes F to be the set of minimal, with respect to the induced subgraph order, graphs
that do not belong to C . Then F is finite, because F is an antichain contained in the class C ′ defined as
follows: a graph G belongs to C ′ iff one can remove one vertex from G to obtain a graph from C . Note
here that C ′ also has bounded shrubdepth.

   From this we immediately conclude that hereditary classes of bounded shrubdepth are FO-definable.
Corollary 17. For every hereditary class C of bounded shrubdepth there exists a sentence φC ∈ FO such
that for every graph G,
                                  G ∈ C if and only if G |= φC .
Proof. The sentence φC just expresses that the graph does not contain any member of F as an induced
subgraph, where F is the finite set of obstructions provided by Theorem 16. To check whether a graph
G contains some H ∈ F as an induced subgraph, just quantify the vertices of H existentially, and verify
their distinctness and suitable (non-)adjacencies.

    The shape of forbidden induced obstructions (members of F) is not really well-understood, even for
“canonical” classes of bounded shrubdepth such as graphs admitting tree-models of depth d and with m
labels, for fixed d, m ∈ N. The exception is the case of the class of graphs of treedepth at most d: it is
known that all minimal obstructions for this class have size at most dO(d) [26], but there exist obstructions
with 2d vertices [54]. Closing this asymptotic gap remains an interesting open problem.

                                                     18
                        Figure 6: A graph and its tree decomposition of width 2.

3.2     Path- and tree-like graphs: pathwidth, treewidth, and (linear) cliquewidth
We now proceed to describing path- and tree-like graphs, which in the sparse case are exemplified by the
boundedness of parameters pathwidth and treewidth, and in the dense case are similarly defined through
linear cliquewidth and cliquewidth, respectively. These notions have been extensively studied over the last
four decades and there exists a large body of literature describing their algorithmic, combinatorial, and
model-theoretic aspects. Therefore, we choose to restrict our description to a bare minimum that allows
the reader to correctly place classes of bounded pathwidth, treewidth, and (linear) cliquewidth within the
larger landscape.

3.2.1    Treewidth and pathwidth
Treewidth is probably the most well-known graph parameter measuring the structure of a graph. In its cur-
rent form, it was introduced by Robertson and Seymour in [122]. The underlying notion of decomposition
is called a tree decomposition.
Definition 9. Let G be a graph. A tree decomposition of G consists of a tree T and a bag function
bag : V (T ) → 2V (G) that maps every node of T to a subset of vertices of G. We require the following:
    • For each vertex u of G, the set of nodes x of T with u ∈ bag(x) is non-empty and connected in T .
    • For each edge uv of G, there exists a node x of T such that u, v ∈ bag(x).
The width of (T, bag) is the maximum bag size minus 1, that is, maxx∈V (T ) |bag(x)| − 1. The treewidth
of G, denoted tw(G), is the minimum width of a tree decomposition of G.
    See Figure 6 for an illustration.
    Over the years, tree decompositions turned out to be just the right abstraction for understanding what
it means for a graph to be decomposed into pieces using vertex separators. One convenient way to look
at the definition is as follows. For every vertex u of G, we “stretch” u to a non-empty subtree Tu of T

                                                    19
so that the adjacency relation is respected in the following sense: whenever u and v are adjacent, Tu and
Tv have a non-empty intersection. Then the bag of a node x ∈ V (T ) consists of all vertices u for which
the subtree Tu contains x. Thus, minimizing the width of a tree decomposition means minimizing the
maximum number of subtrees Tu that meet at a single node of T .
    The notion of a path decomposition and of pathwidth is defined in exactly the same way, except we
additionally require the tree T underlying the decomposition to be a path. The pathwidth of a graph G is
denoted pw(G). Pathwidth was introduced in [121].
    Clearly, we have tw(G) ⩽ pw(G) for every graph G, because every path decomposition is also a tree
decomposition. On the other hand, pathwidth is bounded by treedepth.

Lemma 18. For every graph G, we have pw(G) ⩽ td(G) − 1.

Proof. Let F be an elimination forest of G of depth td(G). Let u1 , . . . , un be the ordering of vertices of G
according to the pre-order in F , where we assume that for every vertex, its children in F are arbitrarily
ordered (and the roots are arbitrarily ordered as well). For every vertex ui , create a node xi with bag(xi )
consisting of ui and all its ancestors in F . It is now straightforward to verify that arranging the nodes
x1 , . . . , xn into a path in this order yields a path decomposition of G of width td(G) − 1.

    Hence, every graph class of bounded treedepth also has bounded pathwidth, and every graph class of
bounded pathwidth has also bounded treewidth.
    The initial interest in treewidth and pathwidth comes from graph theory, particularly the Graph Minors
project. The fundamental understanding of these parameters is delivered by two duality theorems below,
which intuitively explain that
     • each graph is either path-like (has bounded pathwidth) or branching (has a large tree minor); and
     • each graph is either tree-like (has bounded treewidth) or two-dimensional (has a large grid minor).
In the following statements, we say that a graph class C excludes some graph H as a minor if every member
of C excludes H as a minor. Similarly for topological minors.

Theorem 19 ([121]). A graph class C has bounded pathwidth if and only if C excludes some tree as a minor.

Theorem 20 ([123]). A graph class C has bounded treewidth if and only if C excludes some grid as a minor.

    It is easy to see that excluding some tree as a minor is equivalent to excluding some subcubic tree
(tree of maximum degree at most 3) as a topological minor, hence in Theorem 19 we could be equivalently
postulate that C excludes some subcubic tree as a topological minor. Similarly, excluding some grid as
a minor is equivalent to excluding some wall (see Figure 7) as a topological minor, hence in Theorem 20
we could equivalently speak about excluding walls as topological minors. Also, grids are planar graphs
and it is not hard to prove that every planar graph is a minor of some grid. Therefore, in Theorem 20
we could equivalently write that C excludes some planar graph as a minor. Note that this actually gives
a remarkable characterization of planar graphs: a graph is planar if and only if its exclusion as a minor
implies a bound on the treewidth.
    When it comes to logical aspects, probably the most important property of treewidth is that its bound-
edness allows efficient model-checking of MSO2 . This fact is known as Courcelle’s Theorem.

Theorem 21 ([29]). Let C be a graph class of bounded treewidth. Then there is an algorithm that given a
graph G ∈ C and a sentence φ ∈ MSO2 , verifies whether G |= φ in time OC ,φ (n).

    We remark that while Theorem 21 is stated above for graphs only, the result actually works for any
class C of relational structures, provided the Gaifman graphs of structures from C form a graph class of
bounded treewidth. Also, this is only a simple formulation that applies to decision problems. There are
multiple other variants of Courcelle’s Theorem, notably the optimization variant of Arnborg, Lagergren,

                                                      20
                                           Figure 7: A 4 × 4 wall.


and Seese [4]. Also, it has been investigated by Kreutzer and Tazari [94] that under relevant assump-
tions from parameterized complexity theory, the boundedness of treewidth is a necessary condition for
statements like Theorem 21 to hold; see [94] for a precise technical meaning of this claim.
    We postpone the discussion of the proof of Theorem 21 to the next section, where it will be explained
together with an analogous statement for cliquewidth.
    Let us point out one important aspect of Theorem 21. In the original formulation, Courcelle assumed
that the input graph G is given together with a tree decomposition of G of width k, where k is the constant
bound on the treewidth of graphs from C . However, if the input consists solely of the graph G, how to
compute such a tree decomposition efficiently? This is a highly non-trivial algorithmic problem that has
been thoroughly studied over the last 40 years. Let us mention three notable results in this line of research,
which on the technical level represent three different approaches to the problem:
    • Robertson and Seymour [124] gave a 4-approximation algorithm running in time O(8k · k 2 · n2 )
       (see [35, Section 7.6] for an implementation with this complexity). More precisely, the algorithm
       either certifies that tw(G) > k, or finds a tree decomposition of G of width at most 4k + 3.
                                                                                                         3
    • Bodlaender [10] gave an exact fixed-parameter algorithm for treewidth with running time 2O(k ) · n.
       That is, the algorithm either concludes that tw(G) > k or constructs a tree decomposition of width
       at most k.
    • Recently, Korhonen [88] gave a 2-approximation algorithm with running time 2O(k) · n.
In particular, by using either the algorithm of Bodlaender or that of Korhonen, in the context of Theo-
rem 21 we may assume the input graph is supplied with a tree decomposition of bounded width. We
invite the reader to the introductory sections of the recent works of Korhonen [88] and of Korhonen and
Lokshtanov [90] for more information on the literature on computing tree decompositions.

3.2.2   Cliquewidth and linear cliquewidth
Cliquewidth and linear cliquewidth are parameters analogous to treewidth and pathwidth, but suited for
measuring tree- and path-likeness of dense graphs. The term cliquewidth and the contemporary definition
were coined by Courcelle, Makowsky, Olariu, and Rotics in [32, 33], however the notion has deeper roots
in the work on (hyper)graph grammars done in the 90s, particularly in the work of Courcelle, Engelfriet,
and Rozenberg [31]. In fact, a definition very similar and functionally equivalent to cliquewidth, called
NLC-width, was introduced earlier by Wanke [136]. Among the notions closely related to cliquewidth,
we find the concept of modular-width proposed by Rao [118] the most compelling. The reason is that it
is combinatorially the simplest and nicely extracts the intuition while avoiding the need of introducing
notation related to graph grammars or labelled graphs. Therefore, we adopt this definition as our notion
of “cliquewidth”.



                                                     21
    First, we need a simple notion of diversity of a vertex subset. Let G be a graph and A be a subset of
vertices. We define the equivalence relation ∼A on A as follows: for u, v ∈ A, we have

                                  u ∼A v      if and only if     N (u) − A = N (v) − A.

In other words, u ∼A v if and only if u and v have the same neighbors outside of A. The diversity of A
is the number of equivalence classes of ∼A . Intuitively, if the diversity of A is at most k, then among the
vertices of A there are only k different “behaviors” with respect to the outside.
     We may now proceed to the definitions of modular-width4 and of linear modular-width.

Definition 10. Let G be a graph. A laminar decomposition5 of G is just a rooted binary tree T whose leaf
set is equal to the vertex set of G. For a node x of T , by LeavesT (x) we denote the set of leaves of T that are
descendants of x. (If x itself is a leaf, then LeavesT (x) = {x}.) The diversity of T is the maximum diversity
of LeavesT (x) among the nodes x of T . Similarly, if σ = (u1 , . . . , un ) is an ordering of the vertices of G,
then the diversity of σ is the maximum diversity of a prefix {u1 , . . . , ui } of σ.
     The modular-width of G, denoted mw(G), is the minimum diversity of a laminar decomposition of G.
The linear modular-width of G, denoted lmw(G), is the minimum diversity of an ordering of vertices of G.

    It is not hard to see that in the definition of linear modular-width, instead of speaking about vertex
orderings, we could equivalently consider laminar decompositions that are caterpillars: paths with single
leaves attached to every node. Thus, the linear modular-width of a graph is never smaller than its modular-
width. It is known that modular-width differs at most by a multiplicative factor of 2 from cliquewidth and
NLC-width [118, Theorem 7], and a similar fact also applies to linear modular-width, linear cliquewidth,
and linear NLC-width. Therefore, in this article we refrain from recalling the original definition of (linear)
cliquewidth, and we rely on (linear) modular-width instead. However, since “cliquewidth” is by now a very
widespread term, in the context of graph classes we will still speak about classes of bounded/unbounded
(linear) cliquewidth, noting that this is the same as classes of bounded/unbounded (linear) modular-width.

Comparison with other parameters. The relation between pathwidth and treewidth on one side, and
linear cliquewidth and cliquewidth on the other side, is as expected: the dense notions generalize the
sparse notions, and restricting attention to weakly sparse classes projects the dense notions to the sparse
notions. In Theorem 12, we have seen the same behavior for treedepth and shrubdepth.

Theorem 22 ([33]). Every class of bounded pathwidth also has bounded linear cliquewidth. Conversely, every
weakly sparse class of bounded linear cliquewidth in fact has bounded pathwidth.

Theorem 23 ([33]). Every class of bounded treewidth also has bounded cliquewidth. Conversely, every weakly
sparse class of bounded cliquewidth in fact has bounded treewidth.

   We note that Theorem 22 is not mentioned in [33], but can be proved using a similar argumentation as
Theorem 23, which is proved in [33].
   Next, it should not be a surprise that classes of bounded linear cliquewidth generalize classes of
bounded shrubdepth.

Theorem 24 ([71]). Every class of bounded shrubdepth also has bounded linear cliquewidth.
   4
      Another parameter with the name modular-width was introduced independently by Gajarský, Lampis, and Ordyniak [66],
but their variant is not functionally equivalent to cliquewidth. More precisely, the boundedness of the modular-width of Gajarský
et al. implies the boundedness of cliquewidth, but not vice versa.
    5
      The term laminar decomposition does not exist in the literature and was invented for the purpose of this survey.




                                                               22
Proof sketch. Let C be the class in question and suppose d, m ∈ N are such that every graph in C has a
tree-model of depth at most d and using at most m labels. Consider any G ∈ C and let (Λ, λ, T, (Mt )) be
such a tree-model. Let σ = (u1 , . . . , un ) be an ordering of the vertex set of G according to a pre-order in T ,
where in T we assume that the children of every node are ordered arbitrarily. (Recall here that the leaf set
of T coincides with the vertex set of G.) It is easy to verify that the diversity of σ is bounded by dm.

     Finally, we comment on the question of computing laminar decompositions of approximately optimum
width. For this task, it is convenient to consider a yet another parameter rankwidth, introduced by Oum
and Seymour [112]. We refrain here from introducing rankwidth formally; the only property that we need
is that it is functionally equivalent to modular-width as follows: for every graph G,

                                          rw(G) ⩽ mw(G) ⩽ 2rw(G) ,

where rw(G) denotes the rankwidth of G. Usually, the inequality as above is stated for cliquewidth instead
of modular-width, but the proof also works for modular-width and is even simpler. Also, in the proof one
even shows that exactly the same decomposition for one width notion works also for the other width
notion. Therefore, to approximately compute cliquewidth or modular-width, it is enough to approximate
rankwidth. For this, Oum and Seymour [112] gave a 2O(k) · n9 log n-time algorithm, which either certifies
that rw(G) > k, or finds a rank decomposition of width at most 3k + 1. A line of improvements of the
running time followed, culminating in the recent work of Korhonen and Sokołowski [91], who gave an
exact algorithm with running time Ok (n1+o(1) ) + O(m), where m is the edge count of the input graph.
We invite the reader to the introductory section of [91] for an overview of the relevant literature, but from
our perspective, the bottom line is the following.

Theorem 25 ([91]). Let C be a class of graphs of bounded cliquewidth. Then given G ∈ C , one can compute
a laminar decomposition of G of diversity bounded by a constant in time OC (n1+o(1) ) + O(m).

Model-theoretic aspects. First, cliquewidth enjoys the following analogue of Theorem 21 for MSO1 ,
proved by Courcelle, Makowsky, and Rotics [32].

Theorem 26 ([32]). Let C be a graph class of bounded cliquewidth. Then there is an algorithm that given a
graph G ∈ C and a sentence φ ∈ MSO1 , verifies whether G |= φ in time OC ,φ (n1+o(1) ) + O(m).

    Again, the original proof presented in [32] assumes that a suitable decomposition is provided on input;
then the algorithm runs in time linear in the size of this decomposition. The statement above is derived
by combining this with the algorithm of Korhonen and Sokołowski (Theorem 25). Similarly as in the case
of Theorem 21, the proof of Theorem 26 is robust and allows various variants, such as an optimization
variant; see [32] for details.
    The underlying reason behind Theorems 21 and 26 is the following model-theoretic characterization
of classes of bounded treewidth or cliquewidth as those MSO-transducible from the class of trees, and of
classes of bounded pathwidth or linear cliquewidth as those MSO-transducible from the class of paths.

Theorem 27. A class of graphs C has bounded cliquewidth if and only if C can be MSO-transduced from
the class of trees.

Theorem 28. A class of graphs C has bounded linear cliquewidth if and only if C can be MSO-transduced
from the class of paths.

Theorem 29. A class of graphs C has bounded treewidth if and only if the incidence encodings of graphs C
can be MSO-transduced from the class of trees.


                                                        23
Theorem 30. A class of graphs C has bounded pathwidth if and only if the incidence encodings of graphs C
can be MSO-transduced from the class of paths.
   Theorem 27 is explicitly proved in the book of Courcelle and Engelfriet as a part of [30, Corollary 7.38].
The same argumentation can be also applied to argue Theorem 28, see also [30, Theorem 7.47]. Theorems 29
and 30 can be then derived from Theorem 27 using the same argument as we did in the proof of Theorem 13,
except that we use Theorems 22 and 23 instead of Theorem 12.
   From Theorems 27 and 28 and Lemma 2 we immediately get the following.
Theorem 31. Classes of bounded cliquewidth as well as classes of bounded linear cliquewidth are both MSO
and FO ideals.
     With Theorems 27 and 29 explained, we can go back to Theorems 21 and 26 and sketch how they can be
proved. Consider the cliquewidth case for concreteness, that is, Theorem 26. Given a graph G belonging to
a class of bounded cliquewidth C , we can compute a laminar decomposition T of G of constant diversity,
using Theorem 25. What the proof of Theorem 27 tells us is that G can be in fact MSO-transduced from T .
This means that G can be interpreted, using an MSO interpretation, in some coloring T + of T . Recall that
our goal is to verify whether a given sentence φ ∈ MSO1 is satisfied in G. We can use now the Backwards
Translation Lemma (Lemma 1, or rather its analogue for MSO) to construct a sentence ψ over the signature
of T + such that G |= φ if and only if T + |= ψ. Thus, we effectively reduced model-checking MSO1 on
classes of bounded cliquewidth to model-checking MSO on classes of colored trees. The latter problem
can be solved in linear time using classic tree automata constructions. Namely, we translate ψ into a tree
automaton Aψ that is equivalent to ψ in the sense that Aψ accepts exactly those colored trees in which ψ
is satisfied. Then it suffices to run Aψ on T + . The reasoning for Theorem 21 is analogous.

Obstructions. It should be mentioned that there is an embedding notion, called vertex-minors, that in the
context of cliquewidth (or rather more suitably, rankwidth) serves the role analogous to that of the minor
order. In particular, Geelen, Kwon, McCarty, and Wollan [74] proved an analogue of Theorem 20: a class of
graphs has bounded cliquewidth if and only if it excludes a (suitably defined) grid as a vertex-minor. The
theory of vertex-minors is a fascinating topic with significant parallels to the theory of graph minors, see
a recent survey of Kim and Oum [86]. However, in this survey we focus on logical aspects, which at this
point seem to be somewhat orthogonal to the “philosophy” of vertex-minors (we comment more on this
in Section 5). Hence, we choose not to explore here the connections with the theory of vertex-minors.
    Regarding logical obstructions, the following fundamental duality result for cliquewidth was proved by
Courcelle and Oum [34] using a Grid Theorem for binary matroids due to Geelen, Gerards, and Whittle [73].
Theorem 32 ([34]). A class of graphs C has bounded cliquewidth if and only if the class of all graphs cannot
be CMSO-transduced from C .
    The left-to-right implication of Theorem 32 follows from the fact that classes of bounded cliquewidth
are even closed under CMSO-transductions. For the difficult right-to-left implication, the main work lies
is showing that if a class C has unbounded cliquewidth, then the class of all grids is CMSO-transducible
from C . Indeed, then one can easily see that the class of all graphs is MSO-transducible from the class of
grids by an argument similar to the one we used in Lemma 3.
    Note that in Theorem 32, the transduction uses the logic CMSO that is more expressive than MSO in
that it allows modular counting. This is used crucially in the proof: the reasoning relies on connections
with vertex-minors, and to express relevant properties it seems necessary to be able to check the parity of
the cardinalities of sets (thus, in fact, only counting modulo 2 is needed). Whether Theorem 32 holds also
for the weaker notion of MSO-transductions remains a curious open problem.
    An analogue of Theorem 32 for linear cliquewidth would be the following statement, which to the best
of our knowledge is at this point still open.

                                                     24
Conjecture 1. A class of graphs C has bounded linear cliquewidth if and only if the class of trees cannot be
CMSO-transduced from C .

    Finally, an analogue of Theorem 32 also holds for treewidth. As expected, one should simply replace
the adjacency encoding with the incidence encoding.

Theorem 33. A class of graphs C has bounded treewidth if and only if the class of all graphs cannot be
MSO-transduced from the incidence encodings of the graphs from C .

Proof sketch. On one hand, if C has bounded treewidth, then so does the class of 1-subdivisions of graphs
from C , which are Gaifman graphs of the incidence encodings of graphs from C . Hence, every class MSO-
transducible from those incidence encodings has bounded cliquewidth (Theorem 31). However, the class of
grids has unbounded cliquewidth, because it is weakly sparse and has unbounded treewidth (Theorem 23).
    On the other hand, if C has unbounded treewidth, then by Theorem 20, graphs from C contain arbi-
trarily large grids as minors. It is then not hard to transduce the class of all grids from C . Namely, given the
incidence encoding of a graph G that contains a minor model of a k × k grid, the transduction highlights
the edges relevant for this minor model using two colors — one for the spanning trees of branch sets and
one for the edges connecting the branch sets of vertices adjacent in the grid — and proceeds to encode
the adjacency relation of the grid using an MSO2 formula. As we mentioned before, an argument similar
to that used in the proof of Lemma 3 shows that the class of all graphs can be MSO-transduced from the
class of grids. Composing the two transductions sketched above gives an MSO-transduction that applied
to incidence encodings of graphs from C , yields all graphs.

3.3   Minor-free classes
We now proceed to the first concept of graphs that are not necessarily tree-like: minor-free graphs. This is
a highly explored topic within structural graph theory, thanks to the monumental Graph Minors project
developed by Robertson and Seymour, and the even larger body of works that were later built on top of it.
In this survey we only touch upon the tip of the iceberg and discuss the role of minor-free classes within
the larger logically-motivated perspective.
    Call a graph class C minor-free if there exists a graph H such that every graph in C excludes H
as a minor. For instance, planar graphs form a minor-free class, for they exclude both K5 and K3,3 as
minors [96, 135]. Observe that since every graph is a subgraph of some complete graph Kt , a graph class
is minor-free if and only if it excludes Kt as a minor, for some t ∈ N. Therefore, if we define the Hadwiger
number of a graph G as the largest t such that G contains Kt as a minor, then C is minor-free if and only
if C has bounded Hadwiger number.
    Arguably, the most important fact about minor-free graphs is the Graph Minors Theorem, proved by
Robertson and Seymour [126], which states that the minor order is a well quasi-ordering on finite graphs.
Recall that this means that in the minor order there are no infinite descending chains (which is trivial) and
no infinite antichains (which is highly non-trivial). From this it directly follows that minor-closed classes
(that is, classes closed under taking minors) can be characterized by finitely many forbidden minors. These
are often called minor obstructions.

Corollary 34. For every minor-closed class of graphs C , there exists a finite set of graphs F such that for
every graph G,

                 G∈C       if and only if   G does not contain any member of F as a minor.

Proof. It suffices to take as F the minor-minimal graphs that do not belong to C . They form an antichain
in the minor order, hence from the Graph Minors Theorem it follows that F is finite.

                                                       25
Figure 8: A somewhat artistic take on the decomposition provided by the Structure Theorem for minor-free
classes (Theorem 35). Figure by Felix Reidl. The author would like to thank Felix for allowing the usage of
this figure in this survey.


    Note that Corollary 34 does not provide any method for deriving the obstruction set F from the class C .
For instance, if C is the class of planar graphs then F = {K5 , K3,3 }, and a complete obstruction set is
known for the class of graphs embeddable in the projective plane [3, 75]. However, the full list is actually
unknown even for the class of graphs embeddable in the torus. There have been, however, studies of bounds
on the maximum sizes of minor obstructions for specific minor-closed classes of interest. Examples include
the classes of graphs of pathwidth at most k and of treewidth at most k [97], as well as graphs embeddable
in a fixed surface [128].
    Along the way to prove the Graph Minors Theorem, Robertson and Seymour introduced a large toolbox
of results for minor-free classes of graphs. Among those, we would like to highlight the so-called Structure
Theorem, which is a fundamental duality result explaining that graphs from minor-free classes can be
pieced together in a tree-like manner from graphs that are close to being embeddable in a fixed surface.

Theorem 35 (Structure Theorem for minor-free graphs, [125]). Let C be a minor-free class of graphs. Then
there exists a surface Σ and an integer k ∈ N such that every graph G ∈ C admits a tree decomposition
(T, bag) with the following properties:
    • the adhesion of (T, bag) is at most k; and
    • for every node x of T , the torso of bag(x) in G is k-almost embeddable in Σ.

   See Figure 8 for an illustration. Let us explain the undefined terms:
   • The adhesion of a tree decomposition (T, bag) is the maximum size of the intersection of any pair
     of adjacent bags, that is, maxxy∈E(T ) |bag(x) ∩ bag(y)|. Thus, the tree decomposition provided by
     Theorem 35 may have bags of arbitrarily large size, but the “interface” between any two adjacent
     bags is of constant size.
   • The torso of bag(x) is the graph obtained from G[bag(x)] by turning the intersection bag(x)∩bag(y)
     into a clique, for every neighbor y of x in T . Note that by the previous point, these cliques are of
     size at most k each.
   • By a surface we mean a compact 2-dimensional manifold without boundary. The notion of embed-
     ding is standard: vertices are mapped to distinct points, and edges are mapped to internally disjoint
     curves connecting corresponding endpoints.




                                                    26
     • We refrain from formally explaining the concept of k-almost embeddability, due to its technicality.
       In a nutshell, a graph is k-almost embeddable in a surface Σ if it is embeddable in Σ except that (a)
       at most k vertices, called apices, do not need to be embedded, and (b) in the embedding there might
       be some crossings, but they are confined to at most k disks called vortices, each inducing a subgraph
       of pathwidth at most k.
We remark that the existence of a tree decomposition like in Theorem 35 also witnesses that the graph in
question excludes some fixed graph H as a minor (where H depends on Σ and k), hence Theorem 35 can
be regarded as a duality theorem that characterizes minor-free classes through the existence of a suitable
decomposition. We also refer the reader to the work of Diestel, Kawarabayashi, Müller, and Wollan [40]
for a more contemporary exposition of the Structure Theorem.
    The tree decomposition provided by Theorem 35 is extremely useful in the context of algorithm de-
sign. Essentially, it allows lifting algorithmic results from the setting of surface-embedded graphs to the
setting of general minor-free classes, provided that (a) one can efficiently deal with the features introduced
by the “almost” aspect of the embedding, that is, with apices and vortices, and (b) the understanding of
almost-embeddable torsos can be pieced together along the tree decomposition, using for instance dynamic
programming. There are countless instantiations of this principle in the literature, but let us mention one
that is particularly relevant for us: the algorithm for model-checking FO on minor-free classes, due to
Flum and Grohe [58].

Theorem 36 ([58]). For every minor-free class of graphs C , there exists c ∈ N and an algorithm that given
a graph G ∈ C and a sentence φ ∈ FO, decides whether G |= φ in time OC ,φ (nc ).

     We remark that the original proof of Theorem 36 did not provide any explicit bound on the constant c.
Later developments that we will discuss in Section 3.5 generalized the result of Theorem 36 while providing
a linear fixed-parameter algorithm, that is, one with c = 1.
     The proof of Theorem 36, due to Flum and Grohe [58], relies on assembling tools established by Frick
and Grohe [60] and by Grohe [76] with the decomposition provided by Theorem 36. In summary, the whole
approach can be described as follows:
     • Use Gaifman’s Locality Theorem [61] to reduce deciding whether the given graph G satisfies the
       given sentence φ to understanding what FO sentences of bounded quantifier rank (i.e., maximum
       number of nested quantifiers) are satisfied in balls of bounded radius in G.
     • Graphs embeddable in a fixed surface Σ are known to have bounded local treewidth: the subgraph
       induced by any ball of radius r has treewidth bounded by OΣ (r). Therefore, balls of bounded radius
       in a surface-embedded graph can be understood using Courcelle’s Theorem (Theorem 21). This solves
       the case of graphs embeddable in a fixed surface.
     • Lift the argument from embeddable graphs to almost embeddable graphs by a careful treatment of
       apices and vortices. In fact, one shows that after deletion of the apices, almost embeddable graphs
       have bounded local treewidth, even in the presence of vortices.
     • Lift the argument from almost embeddable graphs to all graphs from the considered minor-free class
       C using dynamic programming on the decomposition provided by Theorem 36.

3.4   Twin-width and sparse twin-width
The notion of twin-width is relatively new, the parameter was proposed in 2020 by Bonnet, Kim, Thomassé,
and Watrigant [20]. However, the idea behind it is so simple, so fundamental, and fits the big picture so
well that it is indeed surprising that it was not discovered well before. In fact, an important inspiration
for Bonnet et al. was the work of Guillemot and Marx [80] on pattern-free permutations, which to a large
extent already introduced basic decomposition concepts that eventually became twin-width.



                                                     27
   The main point of twin-width is that it is a parameter that is suited for understanding the structure in
dense graphs, while not being restricted to tree-like graphs like cliquewidth. Before its introduction, there
was no robust parameter with this combination of features. Twin-width turned out to be particularly
robust from the logical perspective, as classes of bounded twin-width form an FO-ideal (Theorem 42).
Being naturally tailored to dense graphs, twin-width also has a sparse counterpart, sparse twin-width,
which appears to nicely fit into the hierarchy of properties of classes of sparse graphs.

3.4.1   Twin-width
The decomposition concept behind twin-width is called a contraction sequence. Intuitively, a contraction
sequence is a procedure that iteratively “folds” the graph while keeping a small amount of “error” or
“ambiguity” along the way; this amount of error is the width of the contraction sequence. We need a few
definitions to make this formal.
    Let G be a graph. Given two disjoint vertex subsets A and B, we say that the pair (A, B) is
    • complete if every vertex of A is adjacent to every vertex of B;
    • anti-complete if every vertex of A is non-adjacent to every vertex of B; and
    • impure if it is neither complete nor anti-complete.
Next, a partition of G is just a partition of the vertex set of G, that is, a family of non-empty, pairwise
disjoint subsets of V (G) that sums up to the whole V (G). Elements of a partition will be called parts. For
a partition P, we define the error graph err(G, P) as follows:
    • the vertices of err(G, P) are the parts of the partition P; and
    • two distinct parts A, B ∈ P are adjacent in err(G, P) if they form an impure pair.
The intuition is that for pure (complete or anti-complete) pairs of parts, the relation between them is
homogeneous and can be described by one bit: either there are all possible edges between the parts, or
no edges at all. Thus, adjacency in the error graph signifies ambiguity of the adjacency relation between
vertices of the parts.
    With these basic definitions in place, we can introduce contraction sequences and twin-width.
Definition 11. A contraction sequence of a graph G is a sequence of partitions Pn , . . . , P1 of G such that:
    • Pn is the discrete partition where every vertex is in its own singleton part;
    • P1 is the partition in which there is only one part comprising of all the vertices; and
    • for each i ∈ {n−1, n−2, . . . , 1}, Pi is obtained from Pi+1 by taking some pair of parts and merging
      them into one.
The width of the contraction sequence Pn , Pn−1 , . . . , P1 is the minimum integer d such that every error
graph err(G, Pi ), for i ∈ {n, . . . , 1}, has maximum degree at most d. The twin-width of G, denoted
tww(G), is the minimum width of a contraction sequence of G.
    See Figure 9 for an example of a contraction sequence. Note that in the definition, we chose to index
the partitions in the reverse way: from Pn to P1 . This is not only to have the nice property that |Pi | = i,
but also to indicate that in the proofs it is often useful to think about contraction sequences being reversed,
as procedures that “unfold” the whole graph from a single vertex.

Relation to other notions. On one hand, it is not hard to see that the boundedness of cliquewidth
implies the boundedness of twin-width.
Theorem 37. For every graph G, we have

                                         tww(G) ⩽ 2 · mw(G) − 1.

Consequently, every graph class of bounded cliquewidth also has bounded twin-width.

                                                      28
Figure 9: A contraction sequence of width 2 of a graph. The parts of the consecutive partitions are depicted
in blue, the edges of the error graph are depicted in red.


Proof sketch. Let T be a laminar decomposition of G of diversity k := mw(G). Let a front in T be a set of
nodes F such that every root-to-leaf path in G contains exactly one element of F . For a front F , we can
define a partition PF of G as follows: the parts of PF are the equivalence classes of all the equivalence
relations ∼LeavesT (x) , for x ∈ F . (Recall here the notation from the definition of diversity of a vertex
subset.) It is easy to see that if F is a front, then in the error graph err(G, PF ) all connected components
are of size at most k, for equivalence classes of different relations ∼LeavesT (x) always form pure pairs.
Therefore, err(G, PF ) in particular has maximum degree at most k − 1.
      We construct a contraction sequence of G in a bottom-up manner. At each point we keep a front F
and the current partition in the contraction sequence is PF . Initially, F is the set of all the leaves of T (this
corresponds to the discrete partition), and at the end F consists of only the root of T (this corresponds to
the partition with only one part). In each step of the construction, we find a node x that does not belong
to F but both its children y and z belong to F , and we replace y and z with x, thus obtaining a new front
F ′ ; this can be always done until F consists only of the root. It is not hard to see that in the contraction
sequence, this operation can be emulated by taking the at most 2k equivalence classes of ∼LeavesT (y) and
∼LeavesT (z) , and merging some of them to eventually obtain the equivalence classes of ∼LeavesT (x) . This
can be done by merging classes in pairs in any order. Since there are at most 2k classes involved in this
merging, the maximum degrees of the error graphs along the way never exceed 2k − 1.

     The proof of Theorem 37 actually shows that for graphs of bounded modular width (or equivalently,
cliquewidth), we can construct a contraction sequence where even every connected component of every
error graph is bounded in size. This has been observed by Bonnet, Kim, Reynald, and Thomassé in [18],
and in fact this is an exact characterization of classes of bounded cliquewidth. Similarly, the boundedness
of linear cliquewidth is equivalent to the possibility of constructing a contraction sequence where in every
error graph, the total number of edges is always bounded [18].
     On the other hand, it turns out that all minor-free classes actually have bounded twin-width.



                                                       29
Theorem 38 ([20]). Every minor-free class of graphs has bounded twin-width.

    Thus, the theory of twin-width also applies to classes of graphs that are not necessarily tree-like, for
instance to planar graphs. In fact, it is known that every planar graph has twin-width at most 8 [81], and
there are planar graphs of twin-width at least 7 [93].
    However, it turns out that not all classes of sparse graphs have bounded twin-width.

Theorem 39 ([15]). The class of subcubic graphs has unbounded twin-width.

    The known proof of Theorem 39, proposed by Bonnet, Geniet, Kim, Thomassé, and Watrigant [15],
is indirect and relies on asymptotic counting. Namely, in [15] Bonnet et al. proved that if a class of
graphs C has bounded twin-width, then the number of distinct graphs with vertex set {1, . . . , n} in C
is bounded by 2O(n) · n!. However, the number of distinct subcubic graphs with vertex set {1, . . . , n} is
        3
Ω((n!) 2 ). Constructing an explicit family of subcubic graphs of unbounded twin-width remains a curious
open problem. This question can be regarded as an excuse for developing tools for proving lower bounds
on the twin-width of graphs.

Ordered graphs and matrices. A key element of the theory of twin-width is the connection with ad-
jacency matrices. More precisely, it turns out that a graph has bounded twin-width if and only if its vertex
set can be ordered so that in this ordering, the adjacency matrix avoids certain complicated patterns. We
need a few more definitions to express this connection formally.
     A vertex ordering of a graph G is just a linear order ⩽ on the vertex set of G. Then, an ordered graph
is a pair (G, ⩽) where G is a graph and ⩽ is its vertex ordering. Call a set of vertices A convex in ⩽ if
u ⩽ v ⩽ w and u, w ∈ A entails also v ∈ A. Then a division of (G, ⩽) is a partition of V (G) into parts
that are convex in ⩽.
     For an ordered graph (G, ⩽), we can consider its adjacency matrix, which is just a {0, 1}-matrix M
indexed by vertices of G in the order ⩽: in the cell M [u, v] we put 1 if vertices u and v are adjacent, and 0
otherwise. For two convex sets A and B, the zone induced by A and B is the submatrix M [A, B] consisting
of cells that lie in rows corresponding to A and columns corresponding to B. We call a zone mixed if it
contains at least two unequal rows and at least two unequal columns. Equivalently, a zone is non-mixed
if either all its rows are equal or all its columns are equal.
     With these definitions in place, we can describe what adjacency matrices we consider complicated:
those that contain large mixed minors.

Definition 12. Let (G, ⩽) be an ordered graph and M be its adjacency matrix. A mixed minor of order k
in M is a pair of divisions (R, C) of (G, ⩽) such that
    • |R| = |C| = k, and
    • for every pair of parts A ∈ R and B ∈ C, the zone M [A, B] is mixed.
We define the mixed minor number, mix(G, ⩽), to be the largest order of a mixed minor in M .

    In the definition above, it is instructive to think of R and of C as divisions of the row set of M and of
the column set of M , respectively. Under this interpretation, a mixed minor in M is a partition of M into
a k × k grid of zones, each of them being mixed.
    The following result provides the fundamental connection between twin-width and mixed minors. In
essence, it says that the boundedness of twin-width is equivalent to the possibility of ordering the graph
so that the adjacency matrix avoids large mixed minors.

Theorem 40. Let G be a graph.
   • If tww(G) ⩽ d, then there exists a vertex ordering ⩽ of G such that mix(G, ⩽) ⩽ O(d).
                                                                                       O(k)
   • If there exists a vertex ordering ⩽ of G such that mix(G, ⩽) ⩽ k, then tww(G) ⩽ 22     .

                                                     30
     The proof of the first point of Theorem 40 is not very hard: one can imagine a contraction sequence
witnessing tww(G) ⩽ d as a tree T describing the structure of consecutive merges, and then for the vertex
ordering ⩽ one can take the pre-order of T restricted to the leaves (aka, vertices of G). The second point is
the interesting one. The proof relies on a deep result of Marcus and Tardos [98] which says the following:
if an n × n {0, 1}-matrix contains at least c(k) · n entries 1, where c(k) is a constant depending only
on k, then there is a pair of divisions (R, C) as in the definition of a mixed minor, just with every zone
containing at least one entry 1. With this result, in the proof of the second point of Theorem 40 one applies
a greedy procedure that constructs a contraction sequence. Marcus-Tardos Theorem is used to argue that
if the procedure gets stuck, then it is because it uncovered a large mixed minor.
     In a later work, Bonnet, Giocanti, Ossona de Mendez, Simon, Thomassé, and Toruńczyk [17] showed
that there is nothing special about the condition “at least two different rows and at least two different
columns” in the definition of a mixed zone. One could equivalently replace it with condition “at least k
different rows and at least k different columns”, and Theorem 40 would still hold (subject to changes in the
asymptotics of the bounds).

Model-theoretic aspects. Finally, we arrive at the key element of the discussion: the properties of twin-
width related to logic. First, as proved by Bonnet et al. [20] already in the first article on twin-width, FO
model-checking can be done efficiently on graphs provided with contraction sequences of constant width.

Theorem 41 ([20]). There is an algorithm that given a graph G, a contraction sequence of G of width at
most d, and a sentence φ ∈ FO, decides whether G |= φ in time Oφ,d (n).

     Note that Theorem 41 assumes that the input graph is supplied with a contraction sequence witnessing
a bound on the twin-width. Unfortunately, currently it is unknown whether the twin-width of a graph can
be approximated efficiently. An algorithmic statement that would match Theorem 41 would be the follow-
ing: there is a universal constant c ∈ N and an algorithm that given a graph G of twin-width d, computes
in time Od (nc ) a contraction sequence of G of width Od (1). If such a fixed-parameter approximation
algorithm existed, then combining it with Theorem 41 would prove that the FO model-checking problem
is fixed-parameter tractable when parameterized by the twin-width and the size of the input sentence. At
this point, it is even unknown whether an XP approximation algorithm exists for this task (that is, one
where c may depend on d).
     The algorithm of Theorem 41 applies a method of iterative aggregation of information. We process the
contraction sequence in order and at each point, say when considering partition Pi , we store information
about the behavior of every part A ∈ Pi with respect to parts that are close in the error graph err(G, Pi ).
It turns out that provided this “information about the behavior” is defined right, it can be updated upon
every consecutive merge in the contraction sequence. At the last, trivial partition we obtain the rele-
vant information about the whole graph, from which the satisfaction of the sentence in question can be
extracted. The original proof of [20] devised a combinatorial notion of shuffles to describe updating the rel-
evant information. In a later work, Gajarský, Pilipczuk, Przybyszewski, and Toruńczyk [68] reinterpreted
this approach using a more model-theoretic notion of (suitably defined) FO types.
     The same iterative aggregation approach underlying the proof of Theorem 41 can be used to argue
that applying a fixed FO transduction to a graph of bounded twin-width again yields a graph of bounded
twin-width. In other words, we have the following.

Theorem 42 ([20]). Classes of bounded twin-width are an FO ideal.

   Finally, it appears that the notion of twin-width explains very well the model-theoretic aspects of
ordered graphs; this topic was explored by Bonnet, Giocanti, Ossona de Mendez, Simon, Thomassé, and
Toruńczyk in [17]. Namely, we can understand ordered graphs as relational structures with two binary


                                                     31
relations: the adjacency relation and the order. The notion of twin-width can be very easily generalized
to binary relational structures (that is, with all relations of arity at most 2): simply, a pair A, B of disjoint
subsets of the universe is pure if and only if the relations holding between every a ∈ A and every b ∈ B
are the same. Thus, we may speak about the twin-width of different binary structures, such as directed
graphs, permutations (treated as pairs of linear orders), and ordered graphs. In the context of ordered
graphs, Bonnet et al. [17] proved the following duality result, which says that the boundedness of twin-
width exactly captures not being equivalent to all graphs.

Theorem 43 ([17]). A class of ordered graphs C has bounded twin-width if and only if the class of all graphs
cannot be transduced from C .

    Note here that from the class of all graphs one can transduce the class of all ordered graphs, and in
fact the class of all Σ-structures, for any finite signature Σ. This means that a class of ordered graphs C is
either restricted by the boundedness of twin-width, and can transduce only classes of bounded twin-width,
or is “all powerful” and can transduce any class of structures.
    The work of Bonnet et al. [17] includes many other interesting results about the twin-width of ordered
graphs. These include a fixed-parameter algorithm to approximate the twin-width of an ordered graph,
and a combinatorial characterization of classes of ordered graphs of bounded twin-width via exclusion of
certain forbidden patterns in their adjacency matrices. We invite the reader to [17] for more details.

3.4.2    Sparse twin-width
Finally, we also discuss the sparse counterpart of twin-width. The easiest way to define it is to use the
general principle: restrict attention to weakly sparse classes.

Definition 13. A class of graphs C has bounded sparse twin-width if it has bounded twin-width and is
weakly sparse.

    Note that maybe a bit counter-intuitively, we did not define any graph parameter “sparse twin-width”
whose boundedness might be in question. Though, a parameter that would suit the definition above could
be max(tww(G), ω # (G)), where recall that ω # (G) is the largest t ∈ N such that G contains Kt,t as a
subgraph. Also, note that every minor-free class C is both weakly sparse and, by Theorem 38, has bounded
twin-width, hence C also has bounded sparse twin-width.
    Classes of bounded sparse twin-width were introduced and investigated by Bonnet et al. in [15]. They
proved that there is an elegant characterization of those classes through adjacency matrices, analogous to
that of Theorem 40. The only element that needs to be replaced is the definition of a mixed minor. The idea
is that instead of considering mixed zones, we will consider simply non-empty zones, that is, zones that
contain at least one entry 1. Then a grid minor of order k in the adjacency matrix M of an ordered graph
(G, ⩽) is a pair of divisions (R, C) such that |R| = |C| = k and for every A ∈ R and B ∈ C, the zone
M [A, B] is non-empty; and the grid minor number of (G, ⩽), denoted grid(G, ⩽), is the largest order of a
grid minor in M . With these definitions, the said characterization reads a follows.

Theorem 44 ([15]). A class of graphs C has bounded sparse twin-width if and only if there exists an integer
k ∈ N such that with every graph G ∈ C one can associate a vertex ordering ⩽G satisfying grid(G, ⩽G ) ⩽ k.

3.5     Sparsity: bounded expansion and nowhere denseness
We arrive at the most general concepts of well-structured sparse graphs considered in this survey: notions
of classes of bounded expansion and of nowhere dense classes. These notions were first introduced and
studied by Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez in a series of articles [100, 101, 102, 103, 104]. Their vast potential


                                                       32
was very quickly recognized: multiple different authors joined in the investigation of the subject, and the
area has experienced a tremendous growth throughout the last 15 years. It became collectively known as
the field of Sparsity.
    We again touch upon only the most important topics in Sparsity, focusing on aspects connected with
logic, and particularly with the model-checking problem for FO. However, we still make a swift run
through all the vital characterizations of classes of bounded expansion and of nowhere dense classes. The
reason is two-fold:
     • These characterizations uncover different facets of the theory, showing that the concepts of bounded
       expansion and nowhere denseness are of fundamental nature. Each characterization brings along a
       technique, which can be applied both in the combinatorial and in the algorithmic context.
     • In Section 4, we will discuss multiple concepts of well-structuredness in dense graphs of model-
       theoretic origin, most importantly monadic stability and monadic dependence. It turns out that the
       combinatorial characterizations of these dense notions are often direct lifts of the characterizations
       of sparse notions from the world of Sparsity. Thus, a good understanding of the tools of Sparsity
       brings important intuition to the context of well-structured dense graphs.
For a broader and deeper overview of the theory of Sparsity, we refer an interested reader to the book
of Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [105], or to more contemporary and more compact lecture notes of
Pilipczuk, Pilipczuk, and Siebertz [113].

3.5.1   Definitions and intuitions
The motivation behind the notions of bounded expansion and of nowhere denseness can be in fact traced
back to the study of First-Order logic, FO. Namely, recall that in Theorem 36 we have seen that the model-
checking problem for FO can be solved in fixed-parameter time on every minor-free class of graphs. But
could minor-freeness be really the delimiting line for the complexity of this problem? FO is famously
local: it cannot really discover long connections between vertices. For instance, it is a standard exercise
in the methods of model theory such as compactness or Ehrenfeucht-Fraı̈sse games to show that there is
no FO formula φ(x, y) that would check whether x and y are in the same connected component of the
graph. Even distinguishing whether the distance between x and y is 2q + 1 or 2q + 2 cannot be done by
an FO formula of quantifier rank at most q (where the quantifier rank is the maximum number of nested
quantifiers). More generally, the powerful Gaifman’s Locality Theorem [61] (whose formal statement we
omit due to its technicality) explains that verifying the satisfaction of any FO sentence φ, say of quantifier
rank q, on a graph G can be reduced to understanding what FO-definable properties are satisfied in balls
of radius 2O(q) in G. The bottom line is: even if in G there was a minor model of a large clique, but whose
branch sets are of huge diameter, an FO sentence φ of bounded quantifier rank would be unable to detect
the presence of such a model.
    This discussion leads to the following hopeful idea: maybe, the tractability of FO model-checking
would be still maintained even if we excluded the existence of only local minor models? For this, we need
to understand what it means for a minor model to be local. This understanding is delivered through the
following definition; see Figure 10 for an illustration.

Definition 14. We say that a graph H is a depth-d minor of a graph G if there exists a minor model η of
H in G such that for every vertex u ∈ V (H), the branch set η(u) has radius at most d.

    Note that depth-0 minors are just subgraphs, while depth-∞ minors, where we only require that the
branch sets are connected, are just minors. Thus, the notion of bounded-depth minors serves as an inter-
polation between the subgraph order and the minor order.




                                                     33
                                 Figure 10: A depth-1 minor model of K5 .

    The idea is to consider classes of graphs that exclude complicated bounded-depth minors. There are two
natural ways to understand the term “complicated”: either we exclude dense graphs, or we exclude com-
plete graphs. These two ways lead to the definitions of bounded expansion and of nowhere denseness, re-
spectively. Recall here that for a graph parameter π and a graph class C , we denote π(C ) := supG∈C π(G).
Definition 15. For a graph G, the average degree of G is the quantity
                                         P
                                           u∈V (G) deg(u)        |E(G)|
                             avg(G) :=                      =2·          ,
                                              |V (G)|            |V (G)|
where deg(u) denotes the degree of vertex u. Then for a graph G and an integer d ∈ N, we define the
depth-d average degree as the maximum average degree among the depth-d minors of G:
                         ∇d (G) := max { avg(H) : H is a depth-d minor of G } .
We say that a graph class C has bounded expansion if ∇d (C ) is finite, for every d ∈ N.
Definition 16. For a graph G and an integer d ∈ N, we define the depth-d clique number of G as the
maximum order of a complete graph that is contained in G as a depth-d minor:
                             ωd (G) := max { t : Kt is a depth-d minor of G } .
We say that a graph class C is nowhere dense if ωd (C ) is finite, for every d ∈ N.
    Thus, bounded expansion and nowhere denseness are not defined by the boundedness of one pa-
rameter, as was the case for all the properties of graph classes considered in the previous sections, but
rather by simultaneous boundedness of a family of parameters: ∇0 , ∇1 , ∇2 , . . . for bounded expansion,
and ω0 , ω1 , ω2 , . . . for nowhere denseness. It is instructive to “unpack” what this actually means:
     • A graph class C has bounded expansion if and only if there is function c : N → N such that for every
       graph G ∈ C and a depth-d minor H of G, we have avg(H) ⩽ c(d).
     • A graph class C is nowhere dense if and only if there is a function t : N → N such that for every
       graph G ∈ C and d ∈ N, G does not contain Kt(d)+1 as a depth-d minor.
Thus, our definitions of sparsity are naturally gradated by the depth. Namely, when we look at larger and
larger depth d, we allow the existence of denser and denser graphs, or larger and larger cliques, as depth-d
minors; this is the meaning of functions c(d) and t(d), respectively. However, for every fixed d ∈ N, there
is a constant upper bound on the average degree, respectively the clique number, of graphs that can be
derived as depth-d minors of graphs from the class in question.

                                                     34
    Clearly, for every graph G and d ∈ N, we have ωd (G) ⩽ ∇d (G) + 1, because a complete graph on
t vertices has average degree t − 1. Hence, every class of bounded expansion is also nowhere dense. It
turns out that these two concepts are actually different: there exist classes that are nowhere dense but
have unbounded expansion. Admittedly, they are a bit artificial; below is an example. Recall here that the
girth of a graph G is the length of the shortest cycle in G.
Theorem 45 ([105, Example 5.1]). Let C be the class of all graphs G such that the girth of G is larger than
the maximum degree of G. Then C is nowhere dense, but does not have bounded expansion.
     Having understood the relation between bounded expansion and nowhere denseness, let us compare
these concepts with notions that we have already √seen before. First, it is known that every graph excluding
Kt as a minor has average degree bounded by O(t log t) [92]. Since every minor of a Kt -minor-free√graph
is also Kt -minor-free, independent of the depth of the minor model, we infer that ∇d (G) ⩽ O(t log t)
for every d ∈ N, provided G excludes Kt as a minor. In other words, the parameters ∇d (G) are universally
bounded by a constant independent of d. From this we conclude that every minor-free class of graphs has
bounded expansion.
     In fact, a stronger statement is true: even every class of bounded sparse twin-width has bounded
expansion. This was first proved by Bonnet et al. [15] using an indirect reasoning involving stability of
twin-width under transductions (Theorem 42). Later, Dreier, Gajarský, Jiang, Ossona de Mendez, and
Raymond [44] gave an elegant direct argument (see also the correction [45]).
Theorem 46 ([15, 44, 45]). Every class of bounded sparse twin-width has bounded expansion.
    However, the concept of bounded expansion is strictly more general than that of bounded sparse twin-
width. Recall that the class of subcubic graphs does not have bounded sparse twin-width (Theorem 39).
Yet, it is not hard to see that for every ∆ ∈ N, the class of graphs of maximum degree ∆ has bounded
expansion. Indeed, every depth-d minor of such a graph has maximum degree at most ∆ · (∆ − 1)d−1 ,
hence also average degree bounded by this quantity. More generally, every topological-minor-free class of
graphs also has bounded expansion. This follows from the results of Dvořák [51] relating parameters ∇d
with their topological-minor variants, combined with the bounds on the average degree in topological-
minor-free classes [11, 87]; see also [105, Corollary 4.1].
    Having placed bounded expansion and nowhere denseness within the big picture, we may now proceed
to describing the most important combinatorial characterizations of these concepts.

3.5.2   Characterizations: bounded expansion
Generalized coloring numbers. Generalized coloring numbers provide a decompositional viewpoint
on classes of bounded expansion (and on nowhere dense classes, see Theorem 53), which is extremely useful
when working with those concepts on the technical level. They were introduced by Kierstead and Young
in [85], but their applicability in the context of classes of bounded expansion was observed by Zhu [138].
    Usually one considers three variants of generalized coloring numbers: weak coloring number, strong
coloring number, and admissibility. All these are functionally equivalent, in the sense of being bounded by
a function of each other. For the sake of brevity, we discuss here only the weak coloring number, which
appears to be the most useful as a tool; a broader discussion can be found in [105, 113]. Roughly speaking,
the idea is that every graph from a fixed class of bounded expansion admits a vertex ordering that controls
short connections between vertices through constant-size local separators, called weak reachability sets.
The formal definitions are below, see also Figure 11 for an illustration.
Definition 17. Consider an ordered graph (G, ⩽) and a distance parameter d ∈ N. For two vertices u ⩽ v
of G, we say that u is weakly d-reachable from v if there is a path P with endpoints u and v and of length
at most d, such that every vertex w traversed by P satisfies u ⩽ w. (In other words, P is disallowed to

                                                    35
Figure 11: The blue path witnesses that the yellow vertex is weakly 6-reachable from the orange vertex.
Vertices to the left are smaller in ⩽.

travel through vertices smaller in ⩽ than the lower endpoint u.) We define the weak d-reachability set of v,
denoted WReachG,⩽d [v], as the set of all vertices u ⩽ v that are weakly d-reachable from v. Then the weak
d-coloring number of the ordered graph (G, ⩽) is the maximum size of a weak d-reachability set:

                                 wcold (G, ⩽) := max WReachG,⩽
                                                           d [v] .
                                                  v∈V (G)

Finally, the weak d-coloring number of a graph G is the minimum weak d-coloring number that can be
obtained by equipping G with a vertex ordering:

                     wcold (G) := min{ wcold (G, ⩽) : ⩽ is a vertex ordering of G }.

    To see why a vertex ordering ⩽ of a graph G with a small weak d-coloring number can be used to
control short connections G, consider the following observation: for any pair of vertices u, v, the set
Su,v := WReachG,⩽                    G,⩽
                   d [u] ∩ WReachd [v] intersects all paths of length at most d that connect u and v.
Indeed, for every such path P , the ⩽-smallest vertex of P belongs to Su,v . And the size of Su,v is bounded
by wcold (G, ⩽). Most of the applications of orderings with low weak coloring numbers are based on (often
quite involved) variations of this observation.
    Weak coloring numbers can be regarded as a generalization of the notion of degeneracy of a graph
to higher distances, where the degeneracy of a graph G is equal to wcol1 (G) − 1 (i.e., for every vertex
we measure the number of neighbors smaller in the ordering). It is known that the degeneracy is tightly
connected to the maximum average degree among subgraphs (see [113, Chapter 1]), hence one might
suspect that the weak coloring numbers are tightly connected to the parameters ∇d . And indeed, Zhu [138]
proved that the boundedness of all the parameters ∇d is equivalent to the boundedness of all the parameters
wcold . This yields the following characterization of the notion of bounded expansion.
Theorem 47 ([138]). A graph class C has bounded expansion if and only if wcold (C ) is finite for every d ∈ N.
    We remark that the proof of Theorem 47 can be made effective: there is an OC ,d (n)-time algorithm
that given G ∈ C and d ∈ N, outputs a vertex ordering ⩽ of G such that wcold (G, ⩽) ⩽ OC ,d (1) [52].
    Let us immediately give one concrete application of Theorem 47 that will be of relevance later: con-
struction of sparse neighborhood covers in classes of bounded expansion. Intuitively, a neighborhood cover
of a graph is a robust system of subgraphs that covers every local neighborhood; the notion comes from
the area of distributed algorithms.
Definition 18. Let G be a graph and d ∈ N. A distance-d neighborhood cover in G of radius r and overlap p
is a family F of vertex subsets of G with the following properties:
     • For every vertex u ∈ V (G), there exists F ∈ F such that BallG
                                                                    d [u] ⊆ F .
     • For every set F ∈ F, the induced subgraph G[F ] is connected and has radius at most r.
     • Every vertex v ∈ V (G) belongs to at most p elements of F.
    The parameters measuring the quality of a neighborhood cover are the radius r and the overlap p. It
turns out that in classes of bounded expansion, we can easily construct distance-d neighborhood covers of
radius 2d and constant overlap. The following construction is due to Grohe, Kreutzer, Rabinovich, Siebertz,
and Stavropoulous [78].

                                                     36
Theorem 48 ([78]). Let C be a class of bounded expansion and d ∈ N. Then every graph G ∈ C admits a
distance-d neighborhood cover of radius 2d and overlap OC ,d (1).

Proof sketch. Let ⩽ be a vertex ordering of G with wcol2d (G, ⩽) ⩽ wcol2d (C ) = OC ,d (1). Then it suffices
to construct a neighborhood cover F by taking the inverse weak reachability sets:

                             F := {{v ∈ V (G) | u ∈ WReachG,⩽
                                                          2d [v]} : u ∈ V (G)}.

It is not hard to verify that F defined in this way is a distance-d neighborhood cover of radius 2d and
overlap wcol2d (G, ⩽).

Low treedepth covers. We now describe the next characterization, through so-called low treedepth cov-
ers. It turns out that graphs from classes of bounded expansion can be robustly covered by graphs of low
treedepth so that every constant-size set of vertices is entirely covered by a single element of the cover.
This resembles, and is inspired by, the classic Baker’s technique from the area of approximation algorithms.

Theorem 49 ([100]). A class of graphs C has bounded expansion if and only if the following condition holds:
there is a function K : N → N and, for every graph G ∈ C and p ∈ N, a family F consisting of at most K(p)
vertex subsets of G such that:
    • for every A ∈ F, the induced subgraph G[A] has treedepth at most p; and
    • for every subset of vertices X ⊆ V (G) with |X| ⩽ p, there exists A ∈ F such that X ⊆ A.

    A family F satisfying the two conditions described in Theorem 49 is called a treedepth-p cover of G.
    We remark that in most of the literature, Theorem 49 is formulated so that it speaks about low treedepth
colorings, defined as follows. A treedepth-p coloring of a graph G is a coloring λ such that any collection of
i ⩽ p colors induces a graph of treedepth at most i; then bounded expansion classes can be characterized
by the existence of treedepth-p colorings using at most M (p) colors, for some function M : N → N. As
observed in [65], this definition is essentially equivalent to the notion of covers provided     by Theorem 49: on
one hand, a treedepth-p coloring with M colors yields a treedepth-p cover with M              elements by taking all
                                                                                            
                                                                                         p
                                                                                           6
collections of p colors, and on the other hand, a treedepth-p cover of size K yields a treedepth-p coloring
with 2K colors by assigning every intersection of the sets of the cover or their complements a different
color. We choose to state Theorem 49 in terms of covers, as we feel that this better expresses the character
of this notion in the applications.
    Theorem 49 was originally proved by Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [100] using transitive fraternal
augmentations, a notion similar in spirit to weak coloring numbers. However, an elegant proof that uses
weak coloring numbers directly was also found by Zhu [138]. His construction is actually very simple.
Given a graph G belonging to a bounded expansion class C , and p ∈ N, we first find a vertex ordering ⩽
of G such that wcol2p−1 (G, ⩽) ⩽ wcol2p−1 (C ) = OC ,p (1). Then, we apply a greedy coloring procedure
that processes the vertices of G in the order ⩽ and colors them using wcol2p−1 (G, ⩽) colors so that every
vertex u receives a color different from the other vertices of WReachG,⩽  2p−1
                                                                               [u]. It turns out that the coloring
of vertices of G constructed in this way is a treedepth-p coloring.
    Low treedepth covers are a very elegant tool that allows breaking a problem into first solving the
bounded-treedepth case, and then lifting the understanding to the bounded expansion case using covers.
Consider, for instance, the Subgraph Isomorphism problem: Given graphs G and H, we would like to
decide whether H is a subgraph of G. We are interested in the parameterized complexity of the problem
where p = |V (H)| is the parameter; thus we think of finding a small pattern graph H in a large host
graph G. First, if the graph G has treedepth at most d, then the problem can be solved in time Op,d (n)
   6
   The argument does not recover the fine bounds on the treedepth of subgraphs induced by i < p colors, but they are usually
immaterial in applications.


                                                            37
using standard dynamic programming techniques. Next, if we want to solve the problem on a graph G
that belongs to a fixed class of bounded expansion C , then we can first compute a treedepth-p cover F of
G with |F| = OC ,p (1) (this can be done in time OC ,p (n)), and then, for each F ∈ F, test whether G[F ]
contains H as a subgraph using the aforementioned dynamic programming approach. The properties of
the cover F ensure us that if H is a subgraph of G, then it is also a subgraph of G[F ] for some F ∈ F.
All in all, this gives an OC ,p (n)-time fixed-parameter algorithm for the Subgraph Isomorphism problem
on any class of bounded expansion C .
    The methodology sketched above can be lifted to solve also the model-checking problem for FO on
bounded expansion classes. We expand on this in Section 3.5.4.

Neighborhood complexity. Finally, we mention one more property of classes of bounded expansion,
this time expressed in terms of the complexity of set systems of neighborhoods that can be defined in them.
We need a few definitions.
    Let G be a graph, A be a subset of vertices of G, and d ∈ N be a distance parameter. The set system of
distance-d neighborhoods in A, denoted SdG (A), is the family of subsets of A constructed by including, for
every vertex u of G, the distance-d neighborhood of u in A: the subset of A consisting of all the vertices
that are at distance at most d from u. Formally,
                                           SdG (A) := { BallG
                                                            d [u] ∩ A : u ∈ V (G) }.

Note that if two or more vertices have the same distance-d neighborhood in A, we include this neighbor-
hood in SdG (A) only once. In other words, we are interested in the set system of all possible “traces” that
a radius-d ball can leave on A.
    Obviously, we always have |SdG (A)| ⩽ 2|A| , because there are that many subsets of A. This bound
clearly can be met in general graphs. It turns out that in classes of bounded expansion, there is a surpris-
ingly strong estimate on the size of SdG (A): we have even a linear bound. The following result was proved
by Reidl, Sánchez Villaamil, and Stavropoulous [120].
Theorem 50 ([120]). For every class of bounded expansion C , distance parameter d ∈ N, graph G ∈ C , and
subset of vertices A ⊆ V (G), we have
                                                     |SdG (A)| ⩽ OC ,d (|A|).
     Reidl et al. provide two proofs of Theorem 50. One relies on low treedepth colorings7 , and the other is
an intricate reasoning involving weak coloring numbers.
     A typical way to obtain upper bounds like the one in Theorem 50 would be to bound the VC dimen-
sion of the set system SdG (A) by some constant c = OC ,d (1), and then conclude from the Sauer-Shelah
Lemma [127, 129] that |SdG (A)| ⩽ |A|c . This indeed can be done (and the boundedness of the VC dimen-
sion of SdG (A) follows from Theorem 50), but the bound of Theorem 50 is stronger: it is linear instead
of just polynomial. Thus, from the point of view of the theory of VC dimension, set systems of balls in
bounded expansion classes have asymptotic growth much lower than what the standard Sauer-Shelah
Lemma would indicate.
     We note that the property expressed in Theorem 50, called linear neighborhood complexity, is not8
a characterization of bounded expansion. In fact, the property of having (almost) linear neighborhood
complexity is enjoyed by many ideals of classes of dense graphs, including classes of bounded twin-
width [14, 19, 117] and monadically stable classes [43], which we will discuss in Section 4.1. In general, the
set system viewpoint introduced by Theorem 50 appears to be very important in the constructed theory,
as it brings along many deep techniques from discrete geometry, particularly the theory of VC dimension.
   7
       More precisely, centered colorings, which is a closely related notion.
   8
       It is for monotone classes, see [120].


                                                                  38
3.5.3   Characterizations: nowhere denseness
We now proceed to nowhere dense graph classes. Recall that these are defined through the boundedness
of the parameters ωd , measuring the largest size of a complete graph contained as a depth-d minor. Note
that at first glance, it is not at all clear why such classes should consist of sparse graphs. This is in fact a
non-trivial statement, proved by Dvořák [51].
Theorem 51 ([51]). Let C be a nowhere dense class of graphs and ε > 0 be a positive real. Then for every
graph G ∈ C , we have
                                   |E(G)| ⩽ OC ,ε (|V (G)|1+ε ).
    Thus, the number of edges is almost linear in the number of vertices. This means that the average degree
is bounded subpolynomially: by OC ,ε (|V (G)|ε ) for any fixed ε > 0, but not necessarily by a constant.
In fact, there are nowhere dense classes where the average degree is unbounded; the class discussed in
Theorem 45 is one of them.
    Note that if for a class C and h ∈ N, by Minorsh (C ) we denote the class of all depth-h minors of graphs
from C , then C being nowhere dense entails that Minorsh (C ) is nowhere dense as well. Indeed, for every
d ∈ N we have ωd (Minorsh (C )) ⩽ ω2hd+h+d (C ), for one can easily see that a depth-d minor of a depth-h
minor is a depth-(2hd + h + d) minor. So from Theorem 51 we can immediately derive the following.
Corollary 52. Let C be a nowhere dense class of graphs, h ∈ N be a distance parameter, and ε > 0 be a
positive real. Then for every graph G ∈ C , we have

                                         ∇h (G) ⩽ OC ,h,ε (|V (G)|ε ).

    The bound on the average degrees in shallow minors provided by Corollary 52 can be used to lift all
the characterizations and properties mentioned in Section 3.5.2 from the setting of bounded expansion to
the setting of nowhere denseness. The statement below summarizes the counterparts of Theorems 47 to 50
for nowhere dense classes.
Theorem 53. Let C be a nowhere dense class of graphs, d, p ∈ N be parameters, and ε > 0 be a positive real.
Then for every graph G ∈ C , we have the following:
    • wcold (G) ⩽ OC ,d,ε (|V (G)|ε ).
    • G has a distance-d neighborhood cover of radius 2d and overlap OC ,d,ε (|V (G)|ε ).
    • G has a treedepth-p cover of size OC ,p,ε (|V (G)|ε ).
    • For every A ⊆ V (G), we have |SdG (A)| ⩽ OC ,d,ε (|A|1+ε ).
     To prove the first three points above, it suffices to inspect the proofs of Theorems 47 to 49 and verify that
the relevant quantities depend polynomially on the parameters ∇h (G). Indeed, then the OC ,h,ε (|V (G)|ε )
bound on ∇h (G), provided by Corollary 52, implies a bound of the same form on the quantity in question,
after rescaling ε. The proof of the last point — of the neighborhood complexity, proposed by Eickmeyer,
Giannopoulou, Kreutzer, Kwon, Pilipczuk, Rabinovich, and Siebertz [56] — is more complicated. The reason
is that the proof of Reidl et al. [120] produces factors exponential in parameters ∇h (G) (more precisely,
in the weak coloring numbers of G). In [56], tools from the theory of VC dimension were used to reduce
this exponential dependence to polynomial.
     All in all, as witnessed by Theorem 53, Corollary 52 can be used to obtain properties of nowhere dense
classes of quantitative nature, typically involving the not-so-elegant term OC ,d,ε (|V (G)|ε ). However, the
original definition is more of a qualitative nature, as it speaks about universal boundedness of parame-
ters ωd , and not about bounds of the form OC ,d,ε (|V (G)|ε ). We now present two other characterizations
of nowhere denseness of quantitative nature: through flatness (aka uniform quasi-wideness) and through
Splitter Game. These characterizations are of immense importance for the theory.

                                                       39
Flatness. The intuition expressed by flatness is the following: in a huge sparse graph there are many
vertices that are pairwise far from each other. This is not necessarily exactly true: consider a star. However,
it turns out that this intuition can be turned into an actual characterization of nowhere dense classes,
provided we allow deletion of a bounded number of vertices. Formally, we have the following definition.

Definition 19. A graph class C is flat if for every d ∈ N, there exists a constant sd ∈ N and a function
Nd : N → N such that the following condition holds. For every graph G ∈ C and a vertex subset A ⊆
V (G) with |A| > Nd (m) for some m ∈ N, there exist S ⊆ V (G) with |S| ⩽ sd and I ⊆ A − S with
|I| > m such that the vertices of I are pairwise at distance larger than d in the graph G − S.

    Observe that the condition is actually somewhat stronger than the intuition phrased above: we can
find a set I consisting of many pairwise far vertices not only in the whole graph G, but even within any
specified subset A, provided it is large enough. Note also that the bound sd on the number of vertices
allowed to be deleted does not depend on m, the requested lower bound on the size of I.
    Flatness in the exact form stated in Definition 19 was first used by Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez
in [103], but the notion has its roots in the earlier work of Atserias, Dawar, Grohe and Kolaitis [6, 7, 36,
37, 38] on preservation theorems; see also the discussion in [39]. In fact, one can argue that the notion
was described in the context of infinite graphs by Podewski and Ziegler [116] already in 1978. We remark
that Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [103], as well as a vast majority of the existing literature on Sparsity,
use the term uniform quasi-wideness instead of flatness. In this survey, we follow the recent trend of
using flatness instead, because otherwise naming suitable generalizations to dense graphs, discussed in
Section 4.1, would become cumbersome.
    At first glance, the nature of flatness seems to be very different than that of nowhere denseness. It is
therefore surprising that the notions actually coincide, as proved by Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [103].

Theorem 54 ([103]). A graph class is nowhere dense if and only if it is flat.

     The proof of Theorem 54 proceeds by induction on the distance parameter d and applies Ramsey’s
Theorem at each step. In fact, flatness itself can be regarded a property of Ramseyan nature. In applications,
it is typically used to find large better-structured objects within huge worse-structured objects.

Splitter Game. Finally, we describe the game characterization of nowhere denseness. This is provided by
the bounded-radius variant of the game for treedepth that we discussed in Section 3.1.1. Concretely, recall
that the game is played on a graph, called the arena, and there are two players: Splitter and Connector.
This time, there will be also a distance parameter d ∈ N; so we will speak about the radius-d Splitter Game.
In every round, first Connector selects any vertex u and the arena gets shrunk to the subgraph induced
by the radius-d ball around u. Then Splitter removes any vertex of his choice from the arena. The game
finishes with Splitter’s win when the arena gets empty, the goal of Splitter is to terminate the game in as
few rounds as possible, and Connector’s goal is the opposite.
    Thus, in this bounded-radius variant, in every round Connector is forced to “localize” the arena to a
ball of bounded radius. It turns out that with this amendment, the game exactly characterizes nowhere
dense classes, as proved by Grohe, Kreutzer, and Siebertz [79].

Theorem 55 ([79]). A graph class C is nowhere dense if and only if for every d ∈ N there exists k ∈ N such
that for every graph G ∈ C , Splitter can win the radius-d Splitter Game on G within at most k rounds.

    The proof of Theorem 55 proposes a simple, concrete strategy for Splitter, and uses the characterization
through flatness (Theorem 54) to argue that when deployed on a graph from a nowhere dense class, this
strategy will lead to a win within a bounded number of rounds. In particular, every next move of Splitter
in this strategy can be computed in linear time.

                                                      40
    On the combinatorial level, the game tree of the radius-d Splitter Game played on a graph G provides
a kind of a hierarchical decomposition of G into smaller and smaller “vicinities”, where the depth of the
decomposition is bounded by a constant — the length of the game. We will make this observation a bit more
precise in Section 3.5.4 when discussing the algorithm for model-checking FO on nowhere dense classes.

3.5.4   Model-checking
It turns out that the set of tools introduced for classes of bounded expansion and for nowhere dense classes
can be robustly applied to the algorithmic treatment of the FO model-checking problem. This was investi-
gated for bounded expansion classes by Dvořák, Král’, and Thomas in [55], and for nowhere dense classes
by Grohe, Kreutzer, and Siebertz in [79]. We now discuss these two results in order, as the approaches
differ significantly and both have their merits.

Classes of bounded expansion. The result of Dvořák et al. is the following.

Theorem 56 ([55]). For every class of bounded expansion C there is an algorithm that given an FO sentence φ
and a graph G ∈ C , decides whether G |= φ in time OC ,φ (n).

    A complexity remark is necessary here. The constant depending on C and φ hidden in the OC ,φ (·) no-
tation above ultimately depends on the parameter ∇d (C ), for some d depending (in a computable fashion)
on φ. Therefore, to adhere to the strict definition of fixed-parameter tractability and have this constant
depend in a computable way on φ, we need to assume that the function d 7→ ∇d (C ) can be upper-bounded
by a computable function. We call classes with this property of effectively bounded expansion, and fixed-
parameter tractability in the strict sense can be stated only for those classes. The same remark applies also
to the algorithms for nowhere dense classes (Theorem 58) and for monadically stable classes (Theorem 69).
    The original proof of Theorem 56 of Dvořák et al. relies on transitive fraternal augmentations, a no-
tion similar in spirit to weak coloring numbers. Later, the approach was reworked using low treedepth
covers to make it more modular, firstly by Grohe and Kreutzer [77] and then by Pilipczuk, Siebertz, and
Toruńczyk [114]. See also the works of Kazana and Segoufin [84] and of Toruńczyk [133] that focus on
generalizations relevant for problems with database motivations. In our description here, we follow the
presentation from [113, Chapter 3], which largely relies on [114].
    In all the works above, the main idea is to apply quantifier elimination: starting with the graph G and the
sentence φ, we iteratively enrich G with more information, and at the same time we simplify φ by removing
consecutive quantifiers. Eventually φ becomes very simple and its satisfaction can be tested directly. The
enrichment of G with more information can be regarded as a process of spreading information about
the existence of witnesses for certain formulas. This information spread is performed along orientations
of transitive fraternal augmentations in [55, 84], and along elimination forests of subgraphs induced by
elements of low treedepth covers in [77, 114, 133].
    The advantage of this approach is that it actually provides a much stronger result than just an algorithm
for model-checking. Namely, quantifier elimination can be applied to any formula, even with free variables,
to reduce it to an equivalent formula of a simple form, at the cost of adding more information to the graph.
We now explain the outcome of quantifier elimination using the terminology from [113, Chapter 3].
    The output of quantifier elimination will have the form of a so-called pointer structure, which is a notion
that is simple, but does not exactly fit within the framework of relational structures. Namely, the signature
Σ of a pointer structure consists of some unary predicates and some unary function symbols. A pointer
structure A consists of a universe U (A), a unary relation RA ⊆ U (A) for each unary predicate R ∈ Σ, and
a function f A : U (A) → U (A) for each function symbol f ∈ Σ. It is useful to think of those functions as
pointers, hence the name. Then in FO on pointer structures, we allow applying functions to variables. For
instance, we can write atomic formulas of the form R(f (x)) or f (g(x)) = g(f (y)). Note that in this way,

                                                      41
even if a formula φ(x̄) is quantifier-free (i.e., does not contain any quantifiers), it may speak not only about
the relations between the elements of x̄, but also between their images under application of functions. The
Gaifman graph of a pointer structure is defined naturally, by putting an edge between u and f A (u) for
every element u and function symbol f .
    We can now state the quantifier elimination result in full generality.
Theorem 57. Let C be a class of bounded expansion and φ(x̄) be an FO formula. Then there is a formula
φ(x̄)
b     and an OC ,φ (n)-time algorithm that given a graph G ∈ C , outputs a pointer structure G   b such that the
following conditions hold:
     • The universe of G b is the vertex set of G and the Gaifman graph of G  b is a subgraph of G. That is, for
       every vertex u and function f present in G, b either u = f (u) or u and f (u) are adjacent in G.
     • φ(x̄)
       b     is a quantifier-free FO formula over the signature of G.
                                                                    b
     • φ(x̄) selects in G exactly the same tuples as φ(x̄)
                                                      b     in G.
                                                               b That is, we have

                          G |= φ(ū) if and only if     b |= φ(ū)
                                                        G    b          for all ū ∈ V (G)x̄ .

    For readers with an algorithmic background, it may be instructive to think of the pointer structure
output by the algorithm of Theorem 57 as of a data structure for answering φ-queries on the input graph G.
Namely, after computing G b (which is done as preprocessing in fixed-parameter linear time), every query
of the form “Given ū ∈ V (G)x̄ , does G |= φ(ū)?” can be reduced to deciding whether G b |= φ(ū),
                                                                                               b     which
can be done in constant time: just follow the pointers and check relations.

Nowhere dense classes. The approach behind the proofs of Theorems 56 and 57 seems to fundamentally
fail in the nowhere dense case; or at least it is entirely unclear how to make it work. The reason is that
once the relevant parameters (outdegrees in appropriate orientations, weak coloring numbers, sizes of
low treedepth covers, etc.) are bounded by OC ,φ,ε (nε ) instead of by a constant, the bounds during the
quantifier elimination start to explode very quickly, yielding super-exponential functions already after a
few steps. Therefore, a different approach is needed. This approach was proposed by Grohe, Kreutzer, and
Siebertz [79], who proved the following result.
Theorem 58 ([79]). For every nowhere dense class of graphs C there is an algorithm that given an FO sentence
φ and a graph G ∈ C , decides whether G |= φ. The running time can be bounded by OC ,φ,ε (n1+ε ), for any
fixed ε > 0.
    The approach of Grohe et al. fundamentally relies on the characterization of nowhere dense classes
through the Splitter Game (Theorem 55). In fact, this characterization was devised with the proof of The-
orem 58 in mind. Let d ∈ N be a parameter depending on the input sentence φ (roughly, d is exponential
in the quantifier rank of φ) and consider the radius-d Splitter Game played on the input graph G. We
construct the game tree T assuming the fixed strategy of Splitter provided by Theorem 55. That is, nodes
of T correspond to positions in the game just before the next move of Splitter or Connector, and:
    • every node corresponding to a Splitter’s position (Splitter’s node) has exactly one child, in which the
      move suggested by the strategy is executed; and
    • every node corresponding to a Connector’s position (Connector’s node) has as many children as the
      number of vertices of the current arena, and in each child a different move of Connector is executed.
Note that T has depth bounded by k — the constant upper bound on the length of the game — but the
branching at each Connector’s node can be as high as n. Therefore, if we perform the construction just as
above, T may have as many as nk nodes and it is too large to be useful in any fixed-parameter algorithm.
    The idea is to make T significantly smaller by restricting the moves of Connector to playing, instead
of radius-d balls, elements of the distance-d neighborhood cover with radius 2d and overlap OC ,d,ε (nε )
provided by Theorem 53, second point. Observe that with such a restriction, Connector has still as much

                                                      42
freedom as she has in the standard radius-d game, because for every radius-d ball she can play an element
of the cover containing this ball. However, Splitter can still win within a bounded number of rounds, by
playing the strategy for the radius-2d game. The bound on the overlap of the neighborhood cover can be
used to argue that the whole game tree T has now size OC ,d,ε (n1+ε ), and it can be efficiently computed.
    Having computed T , the algorithm of Theorem 58 applies a bottom-up procedure that aggregates rel-
evant information about larger and larger parts of the graph (arenas corresponding to the nodes); this can
be viewed as a sort of dynamic programming. Namely, one uses locality of First-Order logic to argue that
the information about arena Gx at a node x can be compiled from the information about local neighbor-
hoods in Gx , which are exactly the arenas in the children of x. Once the information about the root of T
is computed, this is sufficient to answer whether G |= φ.
    This concludes the sketch of the proof of Theorem 58. We note that the reasoning applies directly to the
model-checking problem, and in particular does not provide any form of quantifier elimination. Obtaining
a suitable analogoue of Theorem 57 for nowhere dense classes remains open.
    Finally, we note that as observed by Dvořák et al. [55], no further generalization of Theorem 58 should
be expected on monotone (i.e., subgraph-closed) classes.

Theorem 59 ([55]). Let C be a class of graphs that is monotone and not nowhere dense. Then the model-
checking problem for FO on C is as hard as on general graphs, that is, AW[⋆]-hard.


4    New concepts
In Section 3 we have discussed a wide range of different concepts of structure in graphs. These concepts
were predominantly motivated by graph-theoretic considerations. However, it turned out that many of
them also possess good model-theoretic properties, witnessed by the existence of efficient algorithms for
the model-checking problem, or by closure properties with respect to transductions. In particular, we have
already discovered four FO ideals:
    • classes of bounded shrubdepth (Theorem 10);
    • classes of bounded linear cliquewidth (Theorem 31);
    • classes of bounded cliquewidth (Theorem 31); and
    • classes of bounded twin-width (Theorem 42).
If our goal is to construct a robust mathematical theory for describing the “First-Order complexity” of
graphs, arguably one should ground such a theory in notions that are fundamentally of logical nature.
In particular, the landscape presented so far has a gaping hole in that we have not seen suitable dense
analogues of the notions of bounded expansion and of nowhere denseness. Based on purely graph-theoretic
considerations, it is rather unclear how such notions should be constructed.
    So the proposition for a research programme is to:
    • adopt the notion of FO transductions as the basic embedding notion;
    • define relevant properties of graph classes using the transduction order, and in particular propose
       FO ideals that should correspond to classes of bounded expansion and to nowhere dense classes; and
    • understand these FO ideals on the grounds of graph theory, and develop decomposition tools for
       working with them.
In this section we describe the recent attempts to make first steps within this programme.
    As transductions give a quasi-order on graph classes, there are two natural ways to construct FO ideals:
    • Obstructions: If D is a graph class, then the set of all graph classes that do not transduce D is an
       FO ideal.
    • Closure: If Π is any set of graph classes, then the set comprising all graph classes that are transducible
       from any class belonging to Π is an FO ideal.



                                                      43
For the latter point, if we interpret Π as a property of graph classes, then classes transducible from classes
satisfying Π are called structurally Π. A typical example of this construction is closing a property of classes
of sparse graphs under transductions; so we may speak, for instance, about classes of structurally bounded
treewidth, structurally bounded expansion classes, structurally nowhere dense classes, etc. Moreover, note
that the intersection of any set of FO ideals is again an FO ideal.
    We divide our further discussion into two veins: ideals defined through obstructions, and ideals defined
through closure. However, the two viewpoints will often interleave.

4.1    Ideals defined through obstructions
The most obvious choice for an ideal defined by obstructions is to forbid transducibility of the class of
all graphs.

Definition 20. A graph class C is monadically dependent9 if the class of all graphs cannot be transduced
from C .

    To break this definition further, C is monadically dependent if for every fixed transduction T, T(C )
does not contain all graphs. In other, more intuitive words, there is no fixed FO-definable mechanism that
allows the encoding of all graphs in colored graphs from C . Note here that more and more complicated
transductions T may yield larger and larger sets T(C ), but the requirement is that none of them encom-
passes all graphs. On high level, this is similar to the gradation-by-distance character of the definition of
nowhere denseness (Definition 16). As we will see, this seems not to be a coincidence.
    Thus, monadic dependence is the weakest possible restriction that can be made in the theory of trans-
ductions. Indeed, every FO ideal that is not equal to all the graph classes must be contained in the ideal of
monadically dependent classes. For instance, classes of bounded twin-width are monadically dependent.
    In fact, we have already come across the notion of monadic dependence in disguise several times:
     • Lemma 3 proves that the class of rook graphs is not monadically dependent. Observe that thus, the
       reasoning may serve as a model-theoretic proof that rook graphs do not have bounded twin-width.
     • Naturally, the notion of monadic dependence can be defined for logics other than FO. Then The-
       orem 32 is equivalent to saying that a class of graphs C is monadically dependent with respect to
       the CMSO logic if and only if C has bounded cliquewidth. Brushing aside the slight fuzziness of
       the notion of MSO2 transductions, Theorem 29 can be interpreted as saying that a class of graphs C
       is monadically dependent with respect to the MSO2 logic if and only if C has bounded treewidth.
       This seems to be the most compelling formal explanation of the intuition that the boundedness of
       cliquewidth delimits the region of tractability of CMSO, and the boundedness of treewidth delimits
       the region of tractability of MSO2 .
     • Theorem 43 states that a class C of ordered graphs is monadically dependent if and only if C has
       bounded twin-width.
Thus, we already have a robust combinatorial understanding of monadically dependent classes with respect
to logics CMSO or MSO2 , or of ordered graphs; this understanding is delivered through suitable duality
theorems providing decompositions for those classes (tree decompositions, laminar decompositions, con-
traction sequences, etc.). The structural understanding of graph classes that are monadically dependent
with respect to FO is still quite incomplete, but we will present the recent advances in this direction in
Section 4.1.2.
    Next, it turns out that a very important FO ideal is obtained by forbidding transducibility of the class
of half-graphs (Definition 8).
   9
   The term monadically NIP classes is also often used in the literature, where NIP stands for Not the Independence Property.
Monadic dependence and monadic NIP are synonyms.


                                                             44
Definition 21. A graph class C is monadically stable if the class of all half-graphs cannot be transduced
from C .

    Obviously, every monadically stable graph class is also monadically dependent, but not vice-versa, as
witnessed by the class of half-graphs themselves. Also, as half-graphs have bounded linear cliquewidth,
the ideal of monadically stable classes does not contain the ideal of classes of bounded linear cliquewidth.
But it does contain the ideal of classes of bounded shrubdepth, thanks to Lemma 14. As we will see later,
monadically stable classes form an ideal that is in some sense orthogonal to the hierarchy of ideals defined
by shrubdepth, linear cliquewidth, cliquewidth, and twin-width.
    The reason why forbidding transducibility of half-graphs turns out to be a fundamental property is
that half-graphs are combinatorial encodings of linear orders. More formally, the classes of half-graphs
and of linear orders (treated as binary structures) can be transduced from each other, so monadic stability
can be equivalently defined through postulating non-transducibility of the class of linear orders. Thus,
the intuition is that graphs from a monadically stable class are fundamentally “orderless”: one cannot
FO-define in them any sizeable linear order, even if coloring vertices is allowed.
    Finally, let us mention that as proved by Nešetřil, Ossona de Mendez, Pilipczuk, Rabinovich, and
Siebertz [106], within the context of monadically dependent classes, monadic stability can be characterized
purely combinatorially, by exclusion of half-graphs as semi-induced subgraphs. Here, for a graph G and
a bipartite graph H, we say that G contains H as a semi-induced subgraph if there exist disjoint vertex
subsets A, B ⊆ V (G) such that the subgraph of G consisting of A, B, and all the edges with one endpoint
in A and second in B, is isomorphic to H. Then, Nešetřil et al. proved the following using arguments
inspired by the work of Baldwin and Shelah [8].

Theorem 60 ([106]). Let C be a monadically dependent class of graphs. Then C is monadically stable if and
only if C excludes some half-graph as a semi-induced subgraph.

Relation to nowhere denseness. Monadic dependence and monadic stability are concepts that were
first studied in model theory, particularly within the stability theory developed by Shelah [130]. See also
the books of Pillay [115] and of Tent and Ziegler [132] for an introduction to the area. There, typically
one considers dependence or stability of a single infinite model (in our understanding, an infinite graph),
rather than of classes of finite models, as we do in our theory. While there are ways of formally translating
results between the finite and the infinite setting (for instance, compactness, ultrafilters, or Łoś’ Theorem),
one can also try to understand how certain techniques work on infinite models, and then try to emulate
those techniques as purely combinatorial arguments in classes of finite models. Recent developments on
monadically stable and monadically dependent classes of graphs feature both these types of interactions.
     Related to the above, the adjective “monadic” in monadic stability and monadic dependence signifies
that we forbid interpretability of obstructions after adding arbitrary unary predicates to the structure. In
standard dependence or stability, one would consider interpretability of obstructions in the structure alone
(but also allow multi-dimensional interpretations). The theory of Shelah explains the role of stability in
model theory. The particular notion of monadic stability was studied by Baldwin and Shelah in [8], and
this work provides a wealth of inspiration for our theory.
     However, so far monadic stability and monadic dependence are just two abstract definitions, borrowed
from model theory. The surprising link between those notions and the concepts discussed previously is
delivered by the following result.

Theorem 61 ([2, 53, 116]). Every nowhere dense class is monadically stable. Moreover, every monadically
dependent class that is weakly sparse, is actually nowhere dense.




                                                      45
    Theorem 61 was proved in the infinite setting by Podewski and Ziegler [116] as early as in 1978, so
roughly 30 years before the introduction of the notion of nowhere denseness by Nešetřil and Ossona de
Mendez [104]. In fact, Podewski and Ziegler call (infinite) nowhere dense graphs superflat. Also, for their
proof they introduce a notion called property (⋆) that in our terms is equivalent to flatness (Definition 19).
They proved the equivalence of property (⋆) and superflatness, and derived Theorem 61 from there. The
applicability of the work of Podewski and Ziegler to the setting of nowhere dense classes of (finite) graphs
was observed by Adler and Adler [2], who proved Theorem 61 in the form above, except the collapse
of monadic dependence to nowhere denseness was stated only for monotone classes. That the collapse
occurs also for weakly sparse classes follows from a later work of Dvořák [53]. We also note that the
analogue of Theorem 61 for relational structures was proved recently by Braunfeld, Dawar, Eleftheriadis,
and Papadopoulos [22].
    Intuitively, Theorem 61 shows that nowhere denseness is a “shadow” of the more general notions of
monadic stability and monadic dependence, obtained by restricting attention to weakly sparse classes.
Therefore, one may suspect that many combinatorial and algorithmic results that hold for nowhere dense
classes, can be in fact lifted to monadically stable or monadically dependent classes. In particular, this leads
to the following conjecture.

Conjecture 2. The FO model-checking problem is fixed-parameter tractable on every monadically dependent
class of graphs. More precisely, for every monadically dependent class C there is a constant c ∈ N and an
algorithm that, given a graph G ∈ C and an FO sentence φ, decides whether G |= φ in time OC ,φ (nc ).

    In Conjecture 2, we allow the constant c to depend on the class C . However, one could envision, and
indeed expect, a stronger statement where c is a universal constant, independent of C .
    Conjecture 2 has emerged naturally in various forms after the dissemination of the work of Adler
and Adler [2]. The two earliest concrete mentions (with somewhat different formulations) are due to
Toruńczyk [1] and to Gajarský, Hliněný, Obdržálek, Lokshtanov, and Ramanujan [64].
    At the point of writing this survey, Conjecture 2 remains open and presents itself as the main algorith-
mic goal of the theory under development. In particular, it was recently confirmed for monadically stable
classes (Theorem 69). In the next two sections, we present a variety of structural tools for monadically
stable and monadically dependent classes that were developed recently. These were admittedly in large
part motivated by the work on Conjecture 2, but they also present a combinatorial understanding of those
classes that is interesting on its own.

4.1.1   Monadic stability
Characterizations. We start by presenting the toolbox for monadically stable classes, which arguably
already now provides a comprehensive combinatorial description. First, recall that in Section 3.5.3 we
have discussed two qualitative characterizations of nowhere denseness: through flatness and through the
Splitter Game. It turns out that both these concepts can be lifted to characterizations of monadically stable
classes, and the key to this is the principle that we have already seen in Section 3.1.1 in the context of
treedepth and shrubdepth: replace the operation of vertex deletion with the operation of applying a flip.
    Recall that a k-flip of a graph G is any graph G′ that can be obtained from G by applying at most k flip
operations, that is, operations of replacing the adjacency relation on a vertex subset with its complement.
Then the lift of the notion of flatness reads as follows.

Definition 22. A graph class C is flip-flat if for every d ∈ N, there exists a constant kd ∈ N and a
function Nd : N → N such that the following condition holds. For every graph G ∈ C and a vertex subset
A ⊆ V (G) with |A| > Nd (m) for some m ∈ N, there exist a kd -flip G′ of G and a subset I ⊆ A with
|I| > m such that the vertices of I are pairwise at distance larger than d in G′ .


                                                      46
    Note that flip-flatness is a purely combinatorial notion, there is no logic involved in the definition. Yet,
as proved by Dreier, Mählmann, Siebertz, and Toruńczyk [48], this notion exactly characterizes monadi-
cally stable classes.
Theorem 62 ([48]). A graph class is monadically stable if and only if it is flip-flat.
    On high level, the proof of Theorem 62 follows the inductive template of the proof of Theorem 54.
Yet, it is far more involved and relies on tools borrowed from model theory, in particular the concept of
indiscernible sequences.
    Next, we have already seen how the Splitter Game can be lifted: in Section 3.1.2 we have discussed
the radius-∞ Flipper Game that exactly characterizes the graph parameter SC-depth, which in turn is
functionally equivalent to shrubdepth, in the sense of being bounded on the same graph classes. Then we
can consider the radius-d variant of the Flipper Game with the following rules:
     • In every round, first Keeper restricts the arena to the subgraph induced by a radius-d ball around a
       vertex of her choice, and the Flipper applies a flip of his choice.
     • The game ends with Flipper’s victory once the arena becomes a single vertex.
     • Flipper’s goal is to win in as few rounds as possible, and Keeper’s goal is to avoid losing for as long
       as possible.
Again, Gajarský, Ohlmann, Mählmann, McCarty, Pilipczuk, Przybyszewski, Siebertz, Sokołowski, and
Toruńczyk [67] proved that this purely combinatorial game can be used to characterize monadic stability.
Theorem 63 ([67]). A graph class C is monadically stable if and only if for every d ∈ N there exists k ∈ N
such that for every graph G ∈ C , Flipper can win the radius-d Flipper Game on G within at most k rounds.
     For the difficult direction of Theorem 63 (from monadic stability to the existence of a strategy), Gajarský
et al. actually gave two proofs. The first one is non-constructive, relies on model-theoretic methods, and has
the advantage of providing certain combinatorial obstructions to monadic stability, called rocket patterns.
The second one is more direct, and in particular it provides a concrete strategy for Flipper, in which every
next move can be computed in time OC ,d (n2 ).

Model-checking. Recall that Splitter Game was the key decompositional tool used by Grohe et al. [79] to
prove fixed-parameter tractability of FO model-checking on nowhere dense classes (Theorem 58). How-
ever, one more ingredient was needed to trim the game tree: sparse neighborhood covers. It turns out
that these also exist in monadically stable classes, as proved by Dreier, Eleftheriadis, Mählmann, McCarty,
Pilipczuk, and Toruńczyk [43] in the statement below. However, we need to slightly relax the require-
ments: we say that a neighborhood cover F of a graph G has weak radius r if for every F ∈ F there exists
u ∈ V (G) such that F ⊆ BallG r [u]. In other, informal words, the distances witnessing the locality of F are
measured in the whole graph G instead of the induced subgraph G[F ], and in particular we do not even
require G[F ] to be connected.
Theorem 64 ([43]). Let C be a monadically stable class of graphs, d ∈ N be a distance parameter, and ε > 0
be a positive real. Then every graph G ∈ C admits a neighborhood cover of weak radius 2d and overlap
OC ,d,ε (nε ), where n = |V (G)|. Moreover, such a neighborhood cover can be computed in time OC ,d,ε (n4+ε ).
    Recall that in the nowhere dense case, the existence of sparse neighborhood covers was an easy conse-
quence of the bounds on weak coloring numbers (see Theorem 48 and the discussion around Theorem 53).
This approach is currently not available in the monadically stable case, due to the lack of a robust analogue
of weak coloring numbers; developing such an analogue is a notorious open problem. Therefore, in their
proof of Theorem 64, Dreier et al. took a very different route. We briefly explain this route now, as it brings
another set of interesting tools to the picture.
    The first step is to prove that monadically stable classes enjoy almost linear neighborhood complexity.

                                                       47
Theorem 65 ([43]). For every monadically stable graph class C , distance parameter d ∈ N, positive real
ε > 0, graph G ∈ C , and a subset of vertices A ⊆ V (G), we have

                                                 |SdG (A)| ⩽ OC ,ε,d (|A|1+ε ).

    Note that in the proof of Theorem 65 it suffices to consider the case d = 1, for the operation of taking
the dth power of a graph is a transduction, hence the class of dth powers of graphs from a monadically
stable class C is again monadically stable. The proof of Theorem 65 in [43] makes this assumption, and
essentially provides a reduction to the nowhere dense case (Theorem 53, last point). This reduction relies
both on sampling methods from discrete geometry, and on a model-theoretic characterization of stability
through the notion of branching index.
    The next step is to apply a result of Welzl [137] on orderings with low crossing number. To introduce
this result, we need a few definitions. Consider a set system S = (U, F), where U is a universe and F is a
family of subsets of U . The set system dual to S is the set sytem S ⋆ = (F, U ⋆ ), where the universe is the
family F and for every u ∈ U we introduce u⋆ := {F ∈ F | u ∈ F } ⊆ F; then U ⋆ := {u⋆ : u ∈ U }. Next,
for a subset X ⊆ U , by S|X we denote the set system (X, FX := {F ∩ X : F ∈ F}). Then for a function
π : N → N, we say that S has growth π if |FX | ⩽ π(|X|), for all X ⊆ U . Observe that Theorem 65 implies
that, in the notation from the statement, the set system (V (G), {BallG                                    10
                                                                          d [u] : u ∈ V (G)}) has growth
OC ,ε,d (t1+ε ), and also note that this set system is self-dual.
    Next, we define the crossing number of an ordering of the universe with respect to a set system.
Intuitively, an ordering with a low crossing number provides a very basic decomposition for a set system,
in which every set can be decomposed into a small number of intervals.
Definition 23. Let S = (F, U ) be a set system and let ⩽ be an ordering of U . The crossing number of
⩽ with respect to F is the least k ∈ N such that for every set F ∈ F, there are at most k pairs u, v of
elements of U such that u and v are consecutive in ⩽ and exactly one of them belongs to F . (Note that
this implies that F can be written as the union of ⌈k/2⌉ sets that are convex in ⩽.)
    With these definitions, the result of Welzl reads as follows. Intuitively, it says that having low growth
allows one to construct orderings with low crossing number, where almost linear growth implies subpoly-
nomial crossing number.
Theorem 66 ([137]). Let S = (U, F) be a set system and suppose S ⋆ has growth O(td ), for some real d > 1.
Then there is an ordering ⩽ of U whose crossing number with respect to F is bounded by O(|U |1−1/d log |U |).
Moreover, such an ordering can be computed in time O((|U | + |F|)3+d ).
       Thus, by combining Theorem 65 with Theorem 66 we immediately obtain the following.
Theorem 67 ([43]). For every monadically stable graph class C , distance parameter d ∈ N, positive real
ε > 0, and a graph G ∈ C , there exists an vertex ordering ⩽ of G such that every radius-d ball BallG    d [u],
                                                    ε
u ∈ V (G), can be written as the union of OC ,ε,d (n ) sets that are convex in ⩽, where n = |V (G)|. Moreover,
such a vertex ordering can be computed in time OC ,d,ε (n4+ε ).
    The final touch is a simple greedy procedure that constructs a neighborhood cover based on a vertex
ordering with low crossing number with respect to the family of balls. This procedure is described by the
following statement.
Theorem 68 ([43]). Let G be a graph, d ∈ N be a distance parameter, and ⩽ be a vertex ordering of G
such that the crossing number of ⩽ with respect to the family of radius-d balls {BallG
                                                                                     d [u] : u ∈ V (G)} is at
most k. Then G admits a distance-d neighborhood of weak radius 2d and overlap k + 1, which moreover can
be computed from G and ⩽ in time O(n3 ).
  10
       More formally, has growth π(t) for some function π(t) ∈ OC ,ε,d (t1+ε ).


                                                                48
Proof sketch. A set I ⊆ V (G) that is convex in ⩽ shall be called an interval. An interval I is compact if
there exists u ∈ V (G) such that I ⊆ BallG  d [u].
    The idea is to greedily partition V (G) into compact intervals along the ordering ⩽. More precisely, we
construct a partition I of V (G) into compact intervals as follows:
    • Start with I := ∅ and B := V (G). B will always be a suffix of ⩽.
    • As long as B is not empty, let I be the longest compact interval that is a prefix of B. Remove I from
       B and add I to I.
Now, let F := {BallG  d [I] : I ∈ I}, where we denote Balld [I] :=
                                                            G
                                                                       u∈I Balld [u]. That F is a distance-d
                                                                                G
                                                                     S
neighborhood cover of weak radius 2d follows directly from the construction. Moreover, the bound on
the crossing number of ⩽ with respect to the family of radius-d balls, together with the maximality of
the intervals I extracted in the construction of I, can be used to argue that the overlap of F is bounded
by k + 1. We leave the easy details as an exercise for the reader.

    Now, combining Theorem 67 with Theorem 68 gives distance-d neighborhood covers of weak radius
2d and overlap OC ,d,ε (nε ), computable in time OC ,d,ε (n4+ε ), for any monadically stable class C and pa-
rameters d, ε. This proves Theorem 64.
    Now that both Theorems 63 and 64 are established, we have suitable analogues of all the tools that were
needed in the nowhere dense case to prove Theorem 58. And indeed Dreier, Mählmann, and Siebertz [47]
showed that the reasoning from the proof of Theorem 58 can be suitably lifted to the setting of the Flipper
Game, which completes the proof of fixed-parameter tractability of FO model-checking on monadically
stable classes.

Theorem 69 ([43, 47, 67]). For every monadically stable class of graphs C there is an algorithm that given an
FO sentence φ and a graph G ∈ C , decides whether G |= φ. The running time can be bounded by OC ,ε (n6+ε ),
for any fixed ε > 0.

    Note that we chose to attribute Theorem 69 to all the three articles [43, 47, 67], as all of them contributed
with major tools needed in the proof. The result was reported in the last article [43], because chronologi-
cally, sparse neighborhood covers were the last piece of the puzzle missing. The earlier wrap-up provided
by Dreier, Mählmann, and Siebertz in [47] assumed the existence of sparse neighborhood covers, and ac-
tually showed a method for efficiently approximating them (thereby reducing the need of finding them to
proving their existence). This method is interesting on its own and relies on rounding a linear relaxation
of the natural IP formulation of the problem; see [47] for details.
     The Welzl orders, that is, orderings with low crossing number provided by Theorem 66, served as a cru-
cial ingredient of the proof of Theorem 64. Their role in the whole theory seems to be far more significant,
but is not yet fully understood at this point. Nevertheless, the combination of Theorems 66 and 68 provides
a very transparent reduction of the task of (algorithmically) finding sparse neighborhood covers to proving
almost linear neighborhood complexity. Note that this reduction can be also applied in the monadically
dependent case.

4.1.2   Monadic dependence
Compared to the monadically stable classes discussed in Section 4.1.1, monadically dependent classes are
much more poorly understood. However, the recent work of Dreier, Mählmann, and Toruńczyk [49] sheds
some light on their structural properties. In this section we briefly describe their findings.
    On the positive side, Dreier et al. managed to characterize monadically dependent classes as those the
enjoy the property of flip-breakability, defined as follows.



                                                       49
Definition 24. A graph class C is flip-breakable if for every d ∈ N, there exists a constant kd ∈ N and a
function Nd : N → N such that the following condition holds. For every graph G ∈ C and a vertex subset
A ⊆ V (G) with |A| > Nd (m) for some m ∈ N, there exist a kd -flip G′ of G and two subsets B, C ⊆ A
with |B| > m and |C| > m, such that for every b ∈ B and c ∈ C, the distance between b and c in G′ is
larger than d.

Theorem 70 ([49]). A graph class is monadically dependent if and only if it is flip-breakable.

     Flip-breakability can be understood as a certain “balanced separator lemma” for monadically dependent
classes, with the following caveats:
     • the separator takes the form of applying a kd -flip to the given graph G; and
     • the separator destroys only short cross-connections between two sizeable subsets, B and C.
In this vein, it is instructive to compare flip-breakability to flip-flatness (Definition 22). In flip-breakability,
the separator (flip) destroys short paths connecting a vertex of B and a vertex of C, for two sizeable subsets
B and C of A; so a biclique of connections is destroyed. In flip-flatness, we find a sizeable subset I of A
such that the separator (flip) destroys all the short paths between all the pairs of vertices from I; so a
clique of connections is destroyed. The latter is a stronger property, and indeed monadic stability is more
restrictive than monadic dependence.
     While the characterization through flip-breakability of Theorem 70 might suggest the existence of
global decompositions for graphs from monadically dependent classes, no such decompositions have been
described so far. We also note that one can consider also a definition of breakability that is analogous
to flip-breakability, just with flips replaced with vertex deletions. Indeed, Dreier et al. proved that, as
expected, this notion of breakability exactly characterizes nowhere dense classes.
     On the negative side, Dreier et al. proved that classes that are monadically independent (i.e., not monad-
ically dependent) can be characterized by the existence of certain combinatorial obstructions in the form
of induced subgraphs of k-flips, for a constant k. More precisely, for any distance parameter d ∈ N, they
considered four families of patterns:
     • star d-crossings;
     • clique d-crossings;
     • half-graph d-crossings; and
     • comparability grids.
A star d-crossing of order n is just the d-subdivision of the biclique Kn,n . Clique d-crossings and half-
graph d-crossings are minor variations of such subdivisions, obtained by altering the adjacencies near the
principal vertices by introducing either cliques or half-graphs; see [49] for details. Comparability grids are
a special family that can be seen as a product of two half-graphs: the comparability grid of order n has
vertex set {1, . . . , n} × {1, . . . , n}, and two distinct vertices (a, b) and (a′ , b′ ) are adjacent if and only if
(a − a′ )(b − b′ ) ⩾ 0.
     Assuming d ⩾ 1, each of the families of patterns described above forms a sequence of larger and larger
grid-like structures from which the class of all graphs can be transduced, similarly as it was done in the
proof of Lemma 3 for rook graphs. Therefore, if a class C transduces any of these families of patterns, then
C is automatically monadically independent. However, it turns out that any monadically independent
class in fact contains one of those families in a very simple way: as induced subgraphs under a k-flip, for
a constant k.

Theorem 71 ([49]). Let C be a monadically independent graph class. Then at least one of the following
assertions holds:
    • For some k, d ⩾ 1, every star d-crossing is an induced subgraph of a k-flip of a graph from C .
    • For some k, d ⩾ 1, every clique d-crossing is an induced subgraph of a k-flip of a graph from C .
    • For some k, d ⩾ 1, every half-graph d-crossing is an induced subgraph of a k-flip of a graph from C .

                                                          50
      • For some k ∈ N, every comparability grid is an induced subgraph of a k-flip of a graph from C .

    Using the fact that the patterns found by Theorem 71 are induced subgraphs of k-flips, Dreier et al.
were able to derive a complexity lower bound analogous to Theorem 72: as far as hereditary graph classes
are concerned, no tractability of FO model-checking should be expected beyond monadic dependence.

Theorem 72 ([49]). Let C be a class of graphs that is hereditary and monadically independent. Then the
model-checking problem for FO on C is as hard as on general graphs.

    Finally, we remark that in their study of monadically stable classes, Dreier et al. [43] obtained a similar
characterization for those classes. Not surprisingly, the class of half-graphs enters the scene as one of
the families of forbidden patterns. Then half-graph d-crossings and comparability grids are no longer
necessary, as they contain arbitrarily large induced half-graphs.

Theorem 73 ([43]). Let C be a graph class that is not monadically stable. Then one of the following asser-
tions holds:
    • For some k, d ⩾ 1, every star d-crossing is an induced subgraph of a k-flip of a graph from C .
    • For some k, d ⩾ 1, every clique d-crossing is an induced subgraph of a k-flip of a graph from C .
    • For some k ∈ N, every half-graph is an induced subgraph of a k-flip of a graph from C .

4.2     Ideals defined through closure
We now proceed to the other side of the coin: analyzing the structure in FO ideals defined by closing graph
properties under transductions. More formally, recall that if Π is a property of graph classes, then we say
that a graph class C is structurally Π if C can be transduced from a class enjoying Π. Thus, classes that
are structurally Π form an FO ideal, and it is natural to ask for an understanding of the structure of graphs
that are structurally Π. We will typically be interested in Π ranging over classic properties of classes of
sparse graphs, such as classes of bounded treewidth, bounded expansion classes, or nowhere dense classes.

4.2.1    Structurally sparse classes
The chronologically first result in this direction was delivered by Gajarský, Hliněný, Obdržálek, Loksh-
tanov, and Ramanujan [64], who characterized classes of structurally bounded maximum degree. It turns
out that these are just classes of bounded maximum degree obfuscated by a bounded number of flips.

Theorem 74 ([64]). A class of graphs C has structurally bounded maximum degree if and only if there exists
k ∈ N and a class D of bounded maximum degree such that every graph in C is a k-flip of a graph in D.

    The proof of Theorem 74 is not too difficult, but it introduced important technical methods for working
with transductions, connected to locality of First-Order logic. More precisely, the idea of the proof (even
though it is not that explicit in [64]) is to show that every transduction can be decomposed into a local
part that can introduce new edges only between vertices that are close to each other in the graph, and a
long-distance part that essentially can just apply some flips between vertices that are far from each other.
This methodology turned out to be important in later works, see for instance [13, 24, 62].
    Next, a significant amount of work has been devoted to understanding structurally bounded expansion
classes. Recall that in Theorem 49, classes of bounded expansion were characterized as those that admit low
treedepth covers. Gajarský, Kreutzer, Nešetřil, Ossona de Mendez, Pilipczuk, Siebertz, and Toruńczyk [65]
proved that classes of structurally bounded expansion can be characterized by the existence of low shrub-
depth covers in the following sense.



                                                      51
Theorem 75 ([65]). A class of graphs C has structurally bounded expansion if and only if the following
condition holds: for every p ∈ N, there is a constant Kp ∈ N and a graph class Dp of bounded shrubdepth
such that for every graph G ∈ C , there is a family F of subsets of V (G) with |F| ⩽ Kp such that:
    • for every F ∈ F, we have G[F ] ∈ Dp ; and
    • for every subset of vertices X ⊆ V (G) with |X| ⩽ p, there exists F ∈ F such that X ⊆ F .
    A family F satisfying the two conditions above will be called a p-cover of G captured by Dp .
    Further structural characterizations of structurally bounded expansion classes were proposed by Dreier
in [42] (through lacon-, shrub-, and parity-decompositions), and by Dreier, Gajarský, Kiefer, Pilipczuk, and
Toruńczyk in [46] (through bushes). Roughly speaking, all those characterizations have a similar spirit:
they show that if C is a class of structurally bounded expansion, then for every graph G ∈ C one can find
a sparse graph HG such that (i) G can be transduced from HG using a concrete, very simple transduction,
and (ii) the class {HG : G ∈ C } has bounded expansion. Actually, without going into technical details, the
characterization of Theorem 75 can be also understood in this way. Thus, all the results mentioned above
have both a decompositional character — HG may serve as a sparse skeleton of a decomposition in which
G can be encoded — and a normalization character — they show that if C can be transduced from a class
of bounded expansion, then C can be transduced from a very specific class of bounded expansion using a
very specific transduction.
    Due to the technical character of the characterizations discussed above, in this survey we refrain from
giving their precise description. An interested reader is invited to the works [42, 46].
    Finally, inspired by the characterization of structurally bounded expansion classes through bushes,
Dreier et al. [46] proved a decomposition result for structurally nowhere dense classes that involves a
related notion of quasi-bushes. This result turned out to be somewhat important in the later works, hence
we present quasi-bushes in full formality.
Definition 25. A quasi-bush B consists of
    • a rooted tree T ;
    • a finite set of labels Λ;
    • a labeling λ : Leaves(T ) → Λ, where Leaves(T ) is the set of leaves of T ;
    • a set D of arcs called pointers, each with tail in a leaf of T and head in an internal vertex of T ; and
    • a labeling λD : D → 2Λ .
We require that for each leaf u ∈ Leaves(T ), there is a pointer (u, r), where r is the root of T . The depth
of B is the depth of T .
    A quasi-bush B represents the graph G(B) defined as follows:
    • The vertex set of G(B) is Leaves(T ).
    • For two distinct u, v ∈ Leaves(T ), let x be the deepest (furthest from the root) ancestor of u such
      that (v, x) ∈ D, and y be the deepest ancestor of v such that (u, y) ∈ D. Then u and v are adjacent
      in G(B) if and only if λ(u) ∈ λD (v, x) and λ(v) ∈ λD (u, y).
    The reader may think of a quasi-bush as of a structure similar to a tree-model (which we have seen in
the context of shrubdepth, Definition 5), except that besides the bounded-depth tree there is also a net of
pointers that provide additional information across different branches.
    It is not hard to see that as long as a quasi-bush B has constant depth, the graph G(B) represented
by B can be transduced from B (where B is suitably represented as a relational structure). Indeed, the
mechanism of finding the lowest ancestor of one given vertex that has a point from another given vertex,
and reading the label of this pointer, can be clearly expressed in FO.
    We need one more definition. We say that a graph class C is almost nowhere dense if it satisfies the
conclusion of Corollary 52; that is,
                     ∇h (G) ⩽ OC ,h,ε (|V (G)|ε )      for every G ∈ C , h ∈ N, ε > 0.

                                                     52
Thus, almost nowhere dense classes satisfy the qualitative properties described in Theorem 53 (except the
last point, the neighborhood complexity), but not necessarily the quantitative properties such as flatness
or short termination of the Splitter Game.
    With all these definitions, we can finally state the result of Dreier et al.

Theorem 76 ([46]). Let C be a structurally nowhere dense class of graphs. Then there exists a class of quasi-
bushes B such that
    • the quasi-bushes from B have bounded depth (there is h such that each B ∈ B has depth at most h);
    • the class of Gaifman graphs of the quasi-bushes from B is almost nowhere dense; and
    • for every G ∈ C , there is a quasi-bush B ∈ B such that G = G(B).

    Dreier et al. used this result to show that structurally nowhere dense classes admit low shrubdepth
covers of size OC ,p,ε (nε ). This gives the expected generalization of the characterization of Theorem 75 to
the setting of structurally nowhere dense classes.

Theorem 77 ([46]). Let C be a structurally nowhere dense class of graphs. Then for every p ∈ N, there is
a graph class Dp of bounded shrubdepth such that for every graph G ∈ C and ε > 0, G admits a p-cover
governed by Dp of size OC ,p,ε (|V (G)|ε ).

4.2.2   Sparsification conjecture
In Section 4.2.1, we have discussed that in many classes of graphs that are structurally sparse — can be
transduced from classes of well-behaved sparse graphs — one can find and describe the structure through
various decomposition statements. Another question is the following: How do those classes fit into the
large picture? How do they relate to the FO ideals that were discussed before, such as monadically stable
classes or classes of bounded twin-width or cliquewidth?
    To make the discussion more concrete, let us consider the FO ideal of structurally nowhere dense
graph classes. Observe that since every nowhere dense class is monadically stable (Theorem 61), also
every structurally nowhere dense class is monadically stable, for monadic stability is closed under applying
transductions. Hence, structurally nowhere dense classes are a subset of monadically stable classes. Could
those notions actually coincide? This is the question asked in the following Sparsification Conjecture.

Conjecture 3 (Sparsification Conjecture). Every monadically stable graph class is structurally nowhere dense.

    Thus, on a more intuitive level, Conjecture 3 postulates that graphs from any monadically stable class C
are just “sparse graphs in disguise” in the following sense: For any graph G ∈ C one can find a “skeleton”
graph HG so that G can be encoded in HG using a fixed FO-definable mechanism (formally, G can be
transduced from HG ) and graphs HG are sparse (formally, the class {HG : G ∈ C } is nowhere dense).
    Similarly as Conjecture 2, also Conjecture 3 had circulated in various forms in the community before
being codified in published literature. The first concrete mention known to the author is due to Ossona de
Mendez [110].
    Very recently, major progress towards Conjecture 3 was made by Braunfeld, Nešetřil, Ossona de
Mendez, and Siebertz [23]. Namely, they used the characterization of monadically stable classes through
the Flipper Game [67] together with a structural understanding of the sparse neighborhood covers de-
veloped in [43] to prove that monadically stable classes admit almost nowhere dense quasi-bushes. This
generalizes Theorem 76 from the structurally nowhere dense case to the monadically stable case.

Theorem 78 ([23]). Let C be a monadically stable class of graphs. Then there exists a class of quasi-bushes
B such that
   • the quasi-bushes from B have bounded depth;


                                                     53
    • the class of Gaifman graphs of the quasi-bushes from B is almost nowhere dense; and
    • for every G ∈ C , there is a quasi-bush B ∈ B such that G = G(B).

    Recall that decoding a graph from a quasi-bush representing it can be done by an FO transduction.
Therefore, Theorem 78 falls short of confirming Conjecture 3 by providing a class of quasi-bushes that
is only almost nowhere dense, instead of being actually nowhere dense. Strengthening Theorem 78 by
making (the Gaifman graphs of) B nowhere dense would imply Conjecture 3.
    Let us note that similarly to Theorem 76, it can be derived from Theorem 78 that monadically stable
classes admit low shrubdepth covers of a subpolynomial size; this generalizes Theorem 77.

Theorem 79 ([23]). Let C be a monadically stable class of graphs. Then for every p ∈ N, there is a graph
class Dp of bounded shrubdepth such that for every graph G ∈ C and ε > 0, G admits a p-cover governed
by Dp of size OC ,p,ε (|V (G)|ε ).

    Sparsification Conjecture, as stated in Conjecture 3, concerns only structurally nowhere dense classes.
However, similar questions can be asked also about more restrictive properties of classes of sparse graphs.
Consider, for instance, classes of structurally bounded treewidth, that is, classes transducible from classes
of bounded treewidth. On one hand, boundedness of treewidth implies monadic stability, hence classes
of structurally bounded treewidth are monadically stable. On the other hand, boundedness of treewidth
implies boundedness of cliquewidth (Theorem 23) and classes of bounded cliquewidth form an FO ideal
(Theorem 31), hence classes of structurally bounded treewidth have bounded cliquewidth. But are those
two constraints exhaustive, that is, does every monadically stable class of bounded cliquewidth actually
have structurally bounded treewidth? Same question can be asked about other properties of classes of
sparse graphs, such as classes of bounded treedepth, pathwidth, or sparse twin-width.
    The answer for treedepth is trivial: classes of bounded shrubdepth are monadically stable (Lemma 14)
and can be FO-transduced from trees of bounded height (Theorem 9), hence the property of having struc-
turally bounded treedepth coincides with the property of having bounded shrubdepth, which in turn im-
plies monadic stability. Somewhat surprisingly, for pathwidth, treewidth, and sparse twin-width, the an-
swer also turns out to be positive, but in a highly non-trivial way. The following results were proven
in order by Nešetřil, Ossona de Mendez, Rabinovich and Siebertz [107], by Nešetřil, Ossona de Mendez,
Pilipczuk, Rabinovich, and Siebertz [106], and by Gajarský, Pilipczuk, and Toruńczyk [69].

Theorem 80 ([107]). A class of graphs has structurally bounded pathwidth if and only if it is edge-stable and
has bounded linear cliquewidth.

Theorem 81 ([106]). A class of graphs has structurally bounded treewidth if and only if it is edge-stable and
has bounded cliquewidth.

Theorem 82 ([69]). A class of graphs has structurally bounded sparse twin-width if and only if it is edge-
stable and has bounded twin-width.

   Recall here that a class C is edge-stable if C excludes some half-graph as a semi-induced subgraph.
Thus, in general edge-stability is a weaker assumption than monadic stability, but the notions coincide
under the assumption of monadic dependence (Theorem 60). Hence, the appearance of this weaker as-
sumption in Theorems 80 to 82 should not come as a surprise.
   We remark that in fact, the proofs of Theorems 80 to 82 provide a significantly stronger assertion.
Taking Theorem 82 as an example, the argument shows the following: For any edge-stable class C of
bounded twin-width, with every graph G ∈ C one can associate a graph HG so that
   • HG can be transduced from (G, ⩽), where ⩽ is a vertex ordering witnessing a bound on the twin-
      width of G in the sense of Theorem 40;


                                                     54
    • G can be transduced back from HG ; and
    • the class {HG : G ∈ C } has bounded sparse twin-width.
Thus, one may think of HG as of a sparse “decomposition” of G that on one hand can be computed from
(G, ⩽) by means of a transduction, and on the other hand, encodes G so that G can be decoded from HG
by means of a transduction. Similar statements can be extracted from the proofs of Theorems 80 and 8111 .
    The proof of Theorem 80 relies on Simon’s Factorization Theorem [95, 131]: a Ramseyan tool originating
in the theory of formal languages. This tool allows one to break a given linear laminar decomposition
of bounded diversity into smaller and smaller subdecompositions in a hierarchical way so that (i) the
hierarchy has a bounded depth, and (ii) each break in the hierarchy is in some sense very well-behaved.
Then suitable transductions are constructed by an induction on the depth of the hierarchy. The proof of
Theorem 81 follows a similar path, but uses the tree version of Simon’s Factorization, due to Colcombet [28],
and is far more technical. Finally, the proof of Theorem 82 is quite different, and relies on an induction
on (roughly speaking) the largest order of a half-graph that can be found as a semi-induced subgraph,
combined with a delicate analysis of a contraction sequence witnessing the bound on twin-width. Thus,
this argument shows that tools related to Simon’s Factorization are not really necessary for obtaining
results of the form of Theorems 80 to 82.


5        Outlook
Within the discussion presented in Sections 3 and 4 we mentioned a number of concrete open problems.
Particularly, Conjectures 2 and 3 are two questions that serve as the motivation for a large part of research
in the area. In this concluding section, we would like to highlight three particular directions that were not
explicitly mentioned before, but deserve a closer look.

Obstructions for (linear) cliquewidth. Recall that through Theorem 15, Ossona de Mendez, Pilipczuk,
and Siebertz [111] gave an obstruction characterization of classes of bounded shrubdepth: these are exactly
classes that do not transduce the class of all paths. Observe that this implies the following:

         Classes of bounded shrubdepth are the largest FO ideal Π such that every weakly sparse class
         belonging to Π has bounded treedepth.

This formulation is remarkable for the following reason: it enables us to recover the notion of having
bounded shrubdepth purely from the notion of having bounded treedepth, thus turning a sparse notion
(treedepth) into an analogous dense notion (shrubdepth).
    In [69], Gajarský, Pilipczuk, and Toruńczyk conjectured that the same recipe can be applied to re-
cover linear cliquewidth from pathwidth, and cliquewidth from treewidth. That is, they hypothesized that
classes of bounded cliquewidth are the largest FO ideal whose intersection with weakly sparse classes are
classes of bounded treewidth; and the same for linear cliquewidth and pathwidth. As noted in [69], these
hypotheses are equivalent to the following conjectures about obstruction characterizations of classes of
bounded (linear) cliquewidth.

Conjecture 4 ([69]). A class of graphs C has unbounded linear cliquewidth if and only if C transduces a
class D that contains some subdivision of every binary tree.

Conjecture 5 ([69]). A class of graphs C has unbounded cliquewidth if and only if C transduces a class D
that contains some subdivision of every wall.
    11
     In fact, such statements also follow from the statement for twin-width discussed here. This is because classes of bounded
(linear) cliquewidth form FO ideals (Theorem 31), hence assuming C has bounded (linear) cliquewidth, the class {HG : G ∈ C }
will have bounded pathwidth/treewidth.


                                                             55
    Recall that a wall is the subcubic grid-like structure presented in Figure 7.
    It is instructive to compare Conjectures 4 and 5 with Conjecture 1 and Theorem 32. In short, Conjec-
tures 4 and 5 are much stronger statements, because they concern the more restrictive notion of FO trans-
ductions, instead of MSO or CMSO transductions. Indeed, a positive resolution of Conjecture 4 would
immediately imply Conjecture 1, and a positive resolution of Conjecture 5 would strengthen Theorem 32
by replacing CMSO transductions with MSO transductions.
    It seems that Conjectures 4 and 5 are much closer in spirit to the search for a characterization of
classes of bounded treewidth through induced subgraph obstructions. This question has recently been
actively researched within the structural graph theory community, see for instance [12, 89] and references
therein. Though, Conjectures 4 and 5 might be significantly easier to answer, as they concern the more
relaxed FO transduction quasi-order, instead of the extremely rigid induced subgraph order.

Flip-width and dense analogues of sparse notions. Throughout this survey, we have seen multiple
dense analogues of sparse notions: shrubdepth is a dense analogue of treedepth, cliquewidth is a dense
analogue of treewidth, and monadic dependence is a dense analogue of nowhere denseness. However, for
some sparse notions, their dense analogues are so far only partially understood, or not understood at all.
     The most important example here are classes of bounded expansion, for which we only discussed their
closure under transductions (structurally bounded expansion classes), but no analogue on the “monadically
dependent level” was mentioned. Such an analogue was very recently proposed by Toruńczyk [134] in the
form of classes of bounded flip-width.
     The idea of Toruńczyk is to take inspiration from the classic Cops & Robber Game that character-
izes treewidth, and vary the rules to define a hierarchy of graph parameters that on one hand generalize
cliquewidth, and on the other hand are bounded on classes of bounded expansion. The proposed game,
which for the purpose of this survey we will call the distance-d Flip-width Game, is a variation of the Flip-
per Game that we discussed in Section 4.1.1. There are two players, Flipper and Runner. Besides the fixed
distance parameter d ∈ N, there is an additional parameter k ∈ N that signifies the strength of Flipper.
(Roughly, k corresponds to the number of cops in the Cops & Robber Game.) The game is played in rounds
on a graph G. The arena after the ith round will be denoted by Gi , and Gi will always be a k-flip of G;
initially we set G0 := G. Also, Runner always stands on some vertex of the graph. By ui we denote the
Runner’s position after the ith round, and we let Runner choose u0 arbitrarily before the game begins.
With this setup, the ith round of the game (i ⩾ 1) proceeds as follows:
     • Flipper announces the next graph Gi that has to be a k-flip12 of G.
     • Runner moves from ui−1 to any vertex ui of her choice such that the distance between ui and ui−1
       in Gi−1 is at most d.
The game finishes with Flipper’s victory once ui becomes isolated in the graph Gi . The goal of Runner
is to avoid losing indefinitely. Thus, compared to the Flipper Game considered in Section 4.1.1, there is
no bound on the duration of the game, but Flipper’s flips do not “stack up”: in every round he needs to
propose a new set of k flips, while the flips applied in the previous round get forgotten.
     With this definition of the game, we may define a graph parameter distance-d flip-width, denoted
fwd (G), as the minimum k ∈ N such that Flipper may win the distance-d Flip-width Game on G when
given strength k. Then we say that a graph class C has bounded flip-width if C has bounded distance-d
flip-width for every d ∈ N; that is, fwd (C ) is finite for every d ∈ N.
     As proved by Toruńczyk, this notion seems to perfectly fit into the place of the analogue of bounded
expansion on the monadically dependent level. Precisely, we have the following.

Theorem 83 ([134]). The following assertions hold:
  12
     In [134], Toruńczyk uses bipartite flips defined by two vertex subsets, instead of simple flips defined by one vertex subset
that we adopted as the main definition here. This is an immaterial detail.


                                                               56
       • Classes of bounded flip-width form an FO-ideal. In particular, every class of bounded flip-width is
         monadically dependent.
       • Every class of bounded twin-width also has bounded flip-width.
       • Every class of bounded expansion has bounded flip-width. Moreover, every weakly sparse class of
         bounded flip-width in fact has bounded expansion.

     Moreover, in [134] it is shown that the distance-∞ variant of the game (where the Runner may move
within a connected component of Gi−1 ) exactly characterizes classes of bounded cliquewidth. Also, the
variant of the game where the operation of applying a flip is replaced by the operation of isolating a vertex
(i.e., removing all edges adjacent to it) characterizes classes of bounded expansion.
     While the concept of flip-width seems to fit the large picture surprisingly well, it has certain limitations
which show that there is more to be understood. Most importantly, classes of bounded flip-width are so
far only defined through the existence of strategies in the Flip-width Games, which provides only a loose
grasp on their structural properties. In particular, the following questions are open:
      • It is unknown whether the FO model-checking problem can be solved in fixed-parameter time on
        classes of bounded flip-width, even under the assumption of being provided suitable Flipper’s strate-
        gies through oracles.
      • It is unknown whether edge-stable classes of bounded flip-width coincide with classes of structurally
        bounded expansion.
      • It is unknown whether classes of bounded flip-width are χ-bounded13 . This property is known to
        hold both for classes of bounded twin-width [16] and for structurally bounded expansion classes
        (this follows easily from Theorem 75).
In order to answer these and other related questions, it seems necessary to develop some form of a global,
static decomposition for classes of bounded flip-width. No such decomposition is known at this point.
     We note that in [134], Toruńczyk asked a number of other interesting questions concerning flip-width,
particularly about combinatorial obstructions. We refer the reader to [134] for details.
     Besides classes of bounded expansion, the other sparse concept for which we do not have a robust
dense analogue are minor-free classes. Here, the author is not aware of any work on structurally minor-
free classes, nor of any propositions for dense analogues on the monadically dependent level (that is, fitting
between classes of bounded cliquewidth and classes of bounded twin-width). In the context of structural
graph theory, the notion of vertex-minors seems to provide a good dense analogue of the minor order, but
unfortunately this notion does not seem to fit well our theory here. The reason is that forbidding a vertex-
minor does not entail monadic dependence. A classic example here is the class of circle graphs (intersection
graphs of chords of a circle), which are defined through forbidding vertex-minors [21], but are monadically
independent [82]. There is a notion of shallow vertex-minors introduced by Nešetřil, Ossona de Mendez, and
Siebertz [109], which can be used to give obstruction characterizations for structurally bounded expansion
classes [109] as well as, as shown very recently by Buffière, Kim, and Ossona de Mendez [25], monadically
stable and monadically dependent classes. However, so far it is unclear whether the notion of vertex-
minors, without any constraints on the depth, can be combined with the theory of monadically dependent
graph classes in any meaningful way.

Fine understanding of the transduction order. Finally, recall that due to the compositionality of
FO transductions (Lemma 2), the relation of transducibility ⊑FO forms a quasi-order on graph classes.
While the coarser quasi-order given by MSO transducibility is largely understood thanks to the work of
  13
    A class C is χ-bounded if there is a function f : N → N such that χ(G) ⩽ f (ω(G)) for each G ∈ C , where χ(G) and ω(G)
denote the chromatic number and the clique number of G, respectively.




                                                           57
Blumensath and Courcelle [9], the FO transducibility quasi-order appears to be much more complex. A
wealth of insight has been provided by the recent work of Braunfeld, Nešetřil, Ossona de Mendez, and
Siebertz [24, 108], but there is still much to be explored and understood.
    Particularly, we are currently lacking robust tools for proving negative results: that some graph class
D cannot be transduced from another graph class C . This applies even to very basic graph classes, studied
through and through from the point of view of graph theory. A particular setting that we would like to
propose here is that of graphs embeddable in a fixed surface.
    As in Section 3.3, by a surface we mean a compact 2-dimensional manifold Σ without boundary, and
we consider the standard notion of embedding: vertices of a graph are mapped to distinct points of the
surface, and edges are mapped to internally-disjoint curves connecting respective endpoints. Recall that
the Classification Theorem for Closed Surfaces states that every surface is homeomorphic to one of the
following surfaces:
     • the sphere;
     • the surface Σk×T obtained from the sphere by gluing in k ⩾ 1 handles; and
     • the surface Σℓ×P obtained from the sphere by gluing in ℓ ⩾ 1 crosscaps.
We also write Σ0×T = Σ0×P for the sphere. These surfaces are pairwise non-homeomorphic, but
     • if 0 ⩽ k ⩽ k ′ , then every graph embeddable in Σk×T is also embeddable in Σk′ ×T ;
     • if 0 ⩽ ℓ ⩽ ℓ′ , then every graph embeddable in Σℓ×P is also embeddable in Σℓ′ ×P ; and
     • if 0 ⩽ k, then every graph embeddable in Σk×T is also embeddable in Σ(2k+1)×P .
More generally, we write Σ ≼ Γ if every graph embeddable in Σ is also embeddable in Γ. By EΣ we denote
the class of graphs embeddable in surface Σ.
    It is unclear how the classes EΣ for different surfaces Σ relate to each other in the FO transduction
quasi-order, besides the obvious inclusion of classes following from the partial order ≼ on the surfaces.
We conjecture that no more transducibility relations are present between those classes.

Conjecture 6. Let Σ and Γ be surfaces such that Σ ̸≼ Γ. Then EΣ ̸⊑FO EΓ .

     Conjecture 6 is not known to hold even when Σ is a torus and Γ is a sphere. In this simple setting,
the question boils down to the following: Is the class of toroidal graphs transducible from the class of
planar graphs?
     To address this question, one could first focus on a very specific form of a transduction, namely taking
congested shallow minors. Here, we say that a graph H is a congestion-c depth-d minor of G if there is a
congestion-c depth-d minor model of H in G, which is a mapping η satisfying the following:
     • for every vertex u ∈ V (H), η(u) is a connected subgraph of G of radius at most d;
     • for every edge uv ∈ E(G), either η(u) and η(v) share a vertex, or there is an edge of G with one
       endpoint in η(u) and second in η(v); and
     • every vertex w ∈ V (G) belongs to at most c subgraphs η(u), for u ∈ V (H).
It is not hard to prove that for every class C of bounded expansion and constants c, d ∈ N, there is a
transduction TC ,c,d (with copying) such that TC ,c,d (C ) contains all congestion-c depth-d minors of C .
It seems that general transductions between classes of sparse graphs cannot do much more than taking
congested shallow minors, hence it makes sense to focus on this purely combinatorial operation first. Thus,
based on joint discussions with Jakub Gajarský and Szymon Toruńczyk, we pose the following question
as a potential stepping stone towards Conjecture 6.

Conjecture 7. There is no constant k ∈ N with the following property: every toroidal graph is a congestion-k
depth-k minor of a planar graph.




                                                     58
References
 [1] Open problems from the workshop on algorithms, logic and structure, University of War-
     wick, 2016. Available online at https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/maths/people/
     staff/danielkral/alglogstr/openproblems.pdf.

 [2] H. Adler and I. Adler. Interpreting nowhere dense graph classes as a classical notion of model theory.
     European Journal of Combinatorics, 36:322–330, 2014.

 [3] D. Archdeacon. A Kuratowski theorem for the projective plane. Journal of Graph Theory, 5(3):243–
     246, 1981.

 [4] S. Arnborg, J. Lagergren, and D. Seese. Easy problems for tree-decomposable graphs. Journal of
     Algorithms, 12(2):308–340, 1991.

 [5] A. Atminas, V. V. Lozin, and I. Razgon. Linear time algorithm for computing a small biclique in
     graphs without long induced paths. In 13th Scandinavian Symposium and Workshops on Algorithm
     Theory, SWAT 2012, volume 7357 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 142–152. Springer, 2012.

 [6] A. Atserias, A. Dawar, and M. Grohe. Preservation under extensions on well-behaved finite struc-
     tures. SIAM Journal on Computing, 38(4):1364–1381, 2008.

 [7] A. Atserias, A. Dawar, and P. G. Kolaitis. On preservation under homomorphisms and unions of
     conjunctive queries. Journal of the ACM, 53(2):208–237, 2006.

 [8] J. T. Baldwin and S. Shelah. Second-order quantifiers and the complexity of theories. Notre Dame
     Journal of Formal Logic, 26(3):229–303, 1985.

 [9] A. Blumensath and B. Courcelle. On the Monadic Second-Order transduction hierarchy. Logical
     Methods in Computer Science, 6(2), 2010.

[10] H. L. Bodlaender. A linear-time algorithm for finding tree-decompositions of small treewidth. SIAM
     Journal on Computing, 25(6):1305–1317, 1996.

[11] B. Bollobás and A. Thomason. Proof of a conjecture of Mader, Erdös and Hajnal on topological
     complete subgraphs. European Journal of Combinatorics, 19(8):883–887, 1998.

[12] M. Bonamy, É. Bonnet, H. Déprés, L. Esperet, C. Geniet, C. Hilaire, S. Thomassé, and A. Wesolek.
     Sparse graphs with bounded induced cycle packing number have logarithmic treewidth. Journal of
     Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 167:215–249, 2024.

[13] É. Bonnet, J. Dreier, J. Gajarský, S. Kreutzer, N. Mählmann, P. Simon, and Sz. Toruńczyk. Model
     checking on interpretations of classes of bounded local cliquewidth. In 37th Annual ACM/IEEE
     Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2022, pages 54:1–54:13. ACM, 2022.

[14] É. Bonnet, F. Foucaud, T. Lehtilä, and A. Parreau. Neighbourhood complexity of graphs of bounded
     twin-width. European Journal of Combinatorics, 115:103772, 2024.

[15] É. Bonnet, C. Geniet, E. J. Kim, S. Thomassé, and R. Watrigant. Twin-width II: small classes. In 32nd
     ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2021, pages 1977–1996. SIAM, 2021.




                                                    59
[16] É. Bonnet, C. Geniet, E. J. Kim, S. Thomassé, and R. Watrigant. Twin-width III: Max Independent
     Set, Min Dominating Set, and Coloring. In 48th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages,
     and Programming, ICALP 2021, volume 198 of LIPIcs, pages 35:1–35:20. Schloss Dagstuhl — Leibniz-
     Zentrum für Informatik, 2021.

[17] É. Bonnet, U. Giocanti, P. Ossona de Mendez, P. Simon, S. Thomassé, and Sz. Toruńczyk. Twin-width
     IV: Ordered graphs and matrices. Journal of the ACM, 71(3):21, 2024.

[18] É. Bonnet, E. J. Kim, A. Reinald, and S. Thomassé. Twin-width VI: the lens of contraction sequences.
     In 33rd ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2022, pages 1036–1056. SIAM, 2022.

[19] É. Bonnet, E. J. Kim, A. Reinald, S. Thomassé, and R. Watrigant. Twin-width and polynomial kernels.
     Algorithmica, 84(11):3300–3337, 2022.

[20] É. Bonnet, E. J. Kim, S. Thomassé, and R. Watrigant. Twin-width I: Tractable FO Model Checking.
     Journal of the ACM, 69(1):3:1–3:46, 2022.

[21] A. Bouchet. Circle graph obstructions. Journal of Combinatoral Theory, Series B, 60(1):107–144, 1994.

[22] S. Braunfeld, A. Dawar, I. Eleftheriadis, and A. Papadopoulos. Monadic NIP in monotone classes
     of relational structures. In 50th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Program-
     ming, ICALP 2023, volume 261 of LIPIcs, pages 119:1–119:18. Schloss Dagstuhl — Leibniz-Zentrum
     für Informatik, 2023.

[23] S. Braunfeld, J. Nešetřil, P. Ossona de Mendez, and S. Siebertz. Decomposition horizons: from graph
     sparsity to model-theoretic dividing lines. CoRR, abs/2209.11229, 2022.

[24] S. Braunfeld, J. Nešetřil, P. Ossona de Mendez, and S. Siebertz. On the first-order transduction
     quasiorder of hereditary classes of graphs. CoRR, abs/2208.14412, 2022.

[25] H. Buffière, E. Kim, and P. Ossona de Mendez. Shallow vertex minors, stability, and dependence.
     Innovations in Graph Theory, 1:87–112, 2024.

[26] J. Chen, W. Czerwiński, Y. Disser, A. E. Feldmann, D. Hermelin, W. Nadara, Ma. Pilipczuk,
     Mi. Pilipczuk, M. Sorge, B. Wróblewski, and A. Zych-Pawlewicz. Efficient fully dynamic elimi-
     nation forests with applications to detecting long paths and cycles. In 32nd ACM-SIAM Symposium
     on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2021, pages 796–809. SIAM, 2021.

[27] Y. Chen and J. Flum. FO-definability of shrub-depth. In 28th EACSL Annual Conference on Computer
     Science Logic, CSL 2020, volume 152 of LIPIcs, pages 15:1–15:16. Schloss Dagstuhl — Leibniz-Zentrum
     für Informatik, 2020.

[28] T. Colcombet. A combinatorial theorem for trees. In 34th International Colloquium on Automata,
     Languages and Programming, ICALP 2007, volume 4596 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
     901–912. Springer, 2007.

[29] B. Courcelle. The Monadic Second-Order logic of graphs. I. Recognizable sets of finite graphs. In-
     formation and Computation, 85(1):12–75, 1990.

[30] B. Courcelle and J. Engelfriet. Graph Structure and Monadic Second-Order Logic — A Language-
     Theoretic Approach, volume 138 of Encyclopedia of mathematics and its applications. Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press, 2012.


                                                   60
[31] B. Courcelle, J. Engelfriet, and G. Rozenberg. Handle-rewriting hypergraph grammars. Journal of
     Computer and System Sciences, 46(2):218–270, 1993.

[32] B. Courcelle, J. A. Makowsky, and U. Rotics. Linear time solvable optimization problems on graphs
     of bounded clique-width. Theory of Computing Systems, 33(2):125–150, 2000.

[33] B. Courcelle and S. Olariu. Upper bounds to the clique width of graphs. Discrete Applied Mathematics,
     101(1-3):77–114, 2000.

[34] B. Courcelle and S. Oum. Vertex-minors, monadic second-order logic, and a conjecture by Seese.
     Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 97(1):91–126, 2007.

[35] M. Cygan, F. V. Fomin, Ł. Kowalik, D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, Ma. Pilipczuk, Mi. Pilipczuk, and
     S. Saurabh. Parameterized Algorithms. Springer, 2015.

[36] A. Dawar. Finite model theory on tame classes of structures. In 32nd International Symposium on
     Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science 2007, MFCS 2007, volume 4708 of Lecture Notes in
     Computer Science, pages 2–12. Springer, 2007.

[37] A. Dawar. Homomorphism preservation on quasi-wide classes. Journal of Computer and System
     Sciences, 76(5):324–332, 2010.

[38] A. Dawar. Corrigendum to ”Homomorphism preservation on quasi-wide classes” [J. Comput. Syst.
     Sci. 76 (5) (2010) 324-332]. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 145:103553, 2024.

[39] A. Dawar and S. Kreutzer. Domination problems in nowhere-dense classes. In 29th IARCS Annual
     Conference on Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science, FSTTCS 2009,
     volume 4 of LIPIcs, pages 157–168. Schloss Dagstuhl — Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2009.

[40] R. Diestel, K. Kawarabayashi, T. Müller, and P. Wollan. On the excluded minor structure theorem
     for graphs of large tree-width. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 102(6):1189–1210, 2012.

[41] G. Ding. Subgraphs and well-quasi-ordering. Journal of Graph Theory, 16(5):489–502, 1992.

[42] J. Dreier. Lacon-, shrub- and parity-decompositions: Characterizing transductions of bounded ex-
     pansion classes. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 19(2), 2023.

[43] J. Dreier, I. Eleftheriadis, N. Mählmann, R. McCarty, Mi. Pilipczuk, and Sz. Toruńczyk. First-Order
     model checking on monadically stable graph classes. In 65th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations
     of Computer Science, FOCS 2024, pages 21–30. IEEE, 2024.

[44] J. Dreier, J. Gajarský, Y. Jiang, P. Ossona de Mendez, and J. Raymond. Twin-width and generalized
     coloring numbers. Discrete Mathematics, 345(3):112746, 2022.

[45] J. Dreier, J. Gajarský, Y. Jiang, P. Ossona de Mendez, and J. Raymond. Corrigendum to ”Twin-width
     and generalized coloring numbers” [Discrete Math. 345 (3) (2022) 112746]. Discrete Mathematics,
     347(1):113750, 2024.

[46] J. Dreier, J. Gajarský, S. Kiefer, Mi. Pilipczuk, and Sz. Toruńczyk. Treelike decompositions for trans-
     ductions of sparse graphs. In 37th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS
     2022, pages 31:1–31:14. ACM, 2022.




                                                     61
[47] J. Dreier, N. Mählmann, and S. Siebertz. First-Order model checking on structurally sparse graph
     classes. In 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2023, pages 567–580. ACM,
     2023.
[48] J. Dreier, N. Mählmann, S. Siebertz, and Sz. Toruńczyk. Indiscernibles and flatness in monadically
     stable and monadically NIP classes. In 50th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
     Programming, ICALP 2023, volume 261 of LIPIcs, pages 125:1–125:18. Schloss Dagstuhl — Leibniz-
     Zentrum für Informatik, 2023.
[49] J. Dreier, N. Mählmann, and Sz. Toruńczyk. Flip-breakability: A combinatorial dichotomy for monad-
     ically dependent graph classes. In 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2024,
     pages 1550–1560. ACM, 2024.
[50] J. Duron, L. Esperet, and J.-F. Raymond. Long induced paths in sparse graphs and graphs with
     forbidden patterns. CoRR, abs/2411.08685, 2024.
[51] Z. Dvořák. Asymptotical structure of combinatorial objects. PhD thesis, Charles University, Faculty
     of Mathematics and Physics, 2007.
[52] Z. Dvořák. Constant-factor approximation of the domination number in sparse graphs. European
     Journal of Combinatorics, 34(5):833–840, 2013.
[53] Z. Dvořák. Induced subdivisions and bounded expansion. European Journal of Combinatorics,
     69:143–148, 2018.
[54] Z. Dvořák, A. C. Giannopoulou, and D. M. Thilikos. Forbidden graphs for tree-depth. European
     Journal of Combinatorics, 33(5):969–979, 2012.
[55] Z. Dvořák, D. Král’, and R. Thomas. Testing first-order properties for subclasses of sparse graphs.
     Journal of the ACM, 60(5):36:1–36:24, 2013.
[56] K. Eickmeyer, A. C. Giannopoulou, S. Kreutzer, O. Kwon, Mi. Pilipczuk, R. Rabinovich, and
     S. Siebertz. Neighborhood complexity and kernelization for nowhere dense classes of graphs. In
     44th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2017, volume 80 of
     LIPIcs, pages 63:1–63:14. Schloss Dagstuhl — Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2017.
[57] Mi. Elberfeld, M. Grohe, and T. Tantau. Where First-Order and Monadic Second-Order logic coincide.
     ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, 17(4):25, 2016.
[58] J. Flum and M. Grohe. Fixed-parameter tractability, definability, and model-checking. SIAM Journal
     on Computing, 31(1):113–145, 2001.
[59] J. Flum and M. Grohe. Parameterized Complexity Theory. Texts in Theoretical Computer Science. An
     EATCS Series. Springer, 2006.
[60] M. Frick and M. Grohe. Deciding first-order properties of locally tree-decomposable structures.
     Journal of the ACM, 48(6):1184–1206, 2001.
[61] H. Gaifman. On local and non-local properties. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics,
     107:105–135, 1982.
[62] J. Gajarský, M. Gorsky, and S. Kreutzer. Differential games, locality, and model checking for FO
     logic of graphs. In 30th EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic, CSL 2022, volume 216
     of LIPIcs, pages 22:1–22:18. Schloss Dagstuhl — Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.

                                                   62
[63] J. Gajarský and P. Hliněný. Kernelizing MSO properties of trees of fixed height, and some conse-
     quences. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 11(1), 2015.

[64] J. Gajarský, P. Hliněný, J. Obdržálek, D. Lokshtanov, and M. S. Ramanujan. A new perspective on FO
     model checking of dense graph classes. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, 21(4):28:1–28:23,
     2020.

[65] J. Gajarský, S. Kreutzer, J. Nešetřil, P. Ossona de Mendez, Mi. Pilipczuk, S. Siebertz, and
     Sz. Toruńczyk. First-order interpretations of bounded expansion classes. ACM Transactions on
     Computational Logic, 21(4):29:1–29:41, 2020.

[66] J. Gajarský, M. Lampis, and S. Ordyniak. Parameterized algorithms for modular-width. In 8th
     International Symposium Parameterized and Exact Computation, IPEC 2013, volume 8246 of Lecture
     Notes in Computer Science, pages 163–176. Springer, 2013.

[67] J. Gajarský, N. Mählmann, R. McCarty, P. Ohlmann, Mi. Pilipczuk, W. Przybyszewski, S. Siebertz,
     M. Sokołowski, and Sz. Toruńczyk. Flipper games for monadically stable graph classes. In 50th
     International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2023, volume 261 of
     LIPIcs, pages 128:1–128:16. Schloss Dagstuhl — Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023.

[68] J. Gajarský, Mi. Pilipczuk, W. Przybyszewski, and Sz. Toruńczyk. Twin-width and types. In 49th
     International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2022, volume 229 of
     LIPIcs, pages 123:1–123:21. Schloss Dagstuhl — Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.

[69] J. Gajarský, Mi. Pilipczuk, and Sz. Toruńczyk. Stable graphs of bounded twin-width. In 37th Annual
     ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2022, pages 39:1–39:12. ACM, 2022.

[70] F. Galvin, I. Rival, and B. Sands. A Ramsey-type theorem for traceable graphs. Journal of Combina-
     torial Theory, Series B, 33(1):7–16, 1982.

[71] R. Ganian, P. Hliněný, J. Nešetřil, J. Obdržálek, and P. Ossona de Mendez. Shrub-depth: Capturing
     height of dense graphs. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 15(1), 2019.

[72] R. Ganian, P. Hliněný, J. Nešetřil, J. Obdržálek, P. Ossona de Mendez, and R. Ramadurai. When trees
     grow low: Shrubs and fast MSO1 . In 37th International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of
     Computer Science 2012, MFCS 2012, volume 7464 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 419–430.
     Springer, 2012.

[73] J. Geelen, B. Gerards, and G. Whittle. Excluding a planar graph from GF(q)-representable matroids.
     Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 97(6):971–998, 2007.

[74] J. Geelen, O. Kwon, R. McCarty, and P. Wollan. The Grid Theorem for vertex-minors. Journal of
     Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 158(Part):93–116, 2023.

[75] H. H. Glover, J. P. Huneke, and C. S. Wang. 103 graphs that are irreducible for the projective plane.
     Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 27(3):332–370, 1979.

[76] M. Grohe. Local tree-width, excluded minors, and approximation algorithms. Combinatorica,
     23(4):613–632, 2003.

[77] M. Grohe and S. Kreutzer. Methods for algorithmic meta theorems. Model Theoretic Methods in Finite
     Combinatorics, 558:181–206, 2011.


                                                     63
[78] M. Grohe, S. Kreutzer, R. Rabinovich, S. Siebertz, and K. S. Stavropoulos. Coloring and covering
     nowhere dense graphs. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 32(4):2467–2481, 2018.

[79] M. Grohe, S. Kreutzer, and S. Siebertz. Deciding first-order properties of nowhere dense graphs.
     Journal of the ACM, 64(3):17:1–17:32, 2017.

[80] S. Guillemot and D. Marx. Finding small patterns in permutations in linear time. In 25th Annual
     ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2014, pages 82–101. SIAM, 2014.

[81] P. Hliněný and J. Jedelský. Twin-width of planar graphs is at most 8, and at most 6 when bipartite
     planar. In 50th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2023,
     volume 261 of LIPIcs, pages 75:1–75:18. Schloss Dagstuhl — Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023.

[82] P. Hliněný, F. Pokrývka, and B. Roy. FO model checking on geometric graphs. Computational
     Geometry, 78:1–19, 2019.

[83] Z. Hunter, A. Milojević, B. Sudakov, and I. Tomon. Long induced paths in Ks,s -free graphs. CoRR,
     abs/2411.19173, 2024.

[84] W. Kazana and L. Segoufin. First-order queries on classes of structures with bounded expansion.
     Logical Methods in Computer Science, 16(1), 2020.

[85] H. A. Kierstead and D. Yang. Orderings on graphs and game coloring number. Order, 20(3):255–264,
     2003.

[86] D. Kim and S. Oum. Vertex-minors of graphs: A survey. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 351:54–73,
     2024.

[87] J. Komlós and E. Szemerédi. Topological cliques in graphs. Combinatorics, Probability and Computing,
     3:247–256, 1994.

[88] T. Korhonen. A single-exponential time 2-approximation algorithm for treewidth. In 62nd IEEE
     Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2021, pages 184–192. IEEE, 2021.

[89] T. Korhonen. Grid induced minor theorem for graphs of small degree. Journal of Combinatorial
     Theory, Series B, 160:206–214, 2023.

[90] T. Korhonen and D. Lokshtanov. An improved parameterized algorithm for treewidth. In 55th Annual
     ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2023, pages 528–541. ACM, 2023.

[91] T. Korhonen and M. Sokołowski. Almost-linear time parameterized algorithm for rankwidth via
     dynamic rankwidth. In 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2024, pages
     1538–1549. ACM, 2024.

[92] A. V. Kostochka. Lower bound of the Hadwiger number of graphs by their average degree. Combi-
     natorics, 4(4):307–316, 1984.

[93] D. Král’ and A. Lamaison. Planar graph with twin-width seven. European Journal of Combinatorics,
     In press:103749, 2023.

[94] S. Kreutzer and S. Tazari. Lower bounds for the complexity of Monadic Second-Order logic. In 25th
     Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2010, pages 189–198. IEEE Computer
     Society, 2010.


                                                   64
 [95] M. Kufleitner. The height of factorization forests. In 33rd International Symposium on Mathematical
      Foundations of Computer Science, MFCS 2008, volume 5162 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
      443–454. Springer, 2008.

 [96] K. Kuratowski. Sur le problème des courbes gauches en topologie. Fundamenta Mathematicae,
      15:271–283, 1930. In French.

 [97] J. Lagergren. Upper bounds on the size of obstructions and intertwines. Journal of Combinatorial
      Theory, Series B, 73(1):7–40, 1998.

 [98] A. Marcus and G. Tardos. Excluded permutation matrices and the Stanley-Wilf conjecture. Journal
      of Combinatorial Theory, Series A, 107(1):153–160, 2004.

 [99] J. Nešetřil and P. Ossona de Mendez. Tree-depth, subgraph coloring and homomorphism bounds.
      European Journal of Combinatorics, 27(6):1022–1041, 2006.

[100] J. Nešetřil and P. Ossona de Mendez. Grad and classes with bounded expansion I. Decompositions.
      European Journal of Combinatorics, 29(3):760–776, 2008.

[101] J. Nešetřil and P. Ossona de Mendez. Grad and classes with bounded expansion II. Algorithmic
      aspects. European Journal of Combinatorics, 29(3):777–791, 2008.

[102] J. Nešetřil and P. Ossona de Mendez. Grad and classes with bounded expansion III. Restricted graph
      homomorphism dualities. European Journal of Combinatorics, 29(4):1012–1024, 2008.

[103] J. Nešetřil and P. Ossona de Mendez. First order properties on nowhere dense structures. Journal of
      Symbolic Logic, 75(3):868–887, 2010.

[104] J. Nešetřil and P. Ossona de Mendez. On nowhere dense graphs. European Journal of Combinatorics,
      32(4):600–617, 2011.

[105] J. Nešetřil and P. Ossona de Mendez. Sparsity — Graphs, Structures, and Algorithms, volume 28 of
      Algorithms and combinatorics. Springer, 2012.

[106] J. Nešetřil, P. Ossona de Mendez, Mi. Pilipczuk, R. Rabinovich, and S. Siebertz. Rankwidth meets
      stability. In 32nd ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2021, pages 2014–2033. SIAM,
      2021.

[107] J. Nešetřil, P. Ossona de Mendez, R. Rabinovich, and S. Siebertz. Classes of graphs with low com-
      plexity: The case of classes with bounded linear rankwidth. European Journal of Combinatorics,
      91:103223, 2021.

[108] J. Nešetřil, P. Ossona de Mendez, and S. Siebertz. Structural properties of the First-Order transduction
      quasiorder. In 30th EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic, CSL 2022, volume 216 of
      LIPIcs, pages 31:1–31:16. Schloss Dagstuhl — Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.

[109] J. Nešetřil, P. Ossona de Mendez, and S. Siebertz. Modulo-counting first-order logic on bounded
      expansion classes. Discrete Mathematics, 347(8):113700, 2024.

[110] P. Ossona de Mendez. First-Order transductions of graphs (invited talk). In 38th International Sym-
      posium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS 2021, volume 187 of LIPIcs, pages 2:1–2:7.
      Schloss Dagstuhl — Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021.



                                                      65
[111] P. Ossona de Mendez, Mi. Pilipczuk, and S. Siebertz. Transducing paths in graph classes with un-
      bounded shrubdepth. European Journal of Combinatorics, In Press:103660, 2022.

[112] S. Oum and P. D. Seymour. Approximating clique-width and branch-width. Journal of Combinatorial
      Theory, Series B, 96(4):514–528, 2006.

[113] Ma. Pilipczuk, Mi. Pilipczuk, and S. Siebertz. Lecture notes for the course “Sparsity” given at Faculty
      of Mathematics, Informatics, and Mechanics of the University of Warsaw, Winter semesters 2017/18
      and 2019/20. Available online at https://www.mimuw.edu.pl/ mp248287/sparsity2.

[114] Mi. Pilipczuk, S. Siebertz, and Sz. Toruńczyk. Parameterized circuit complexity of model-checking
      on sparse structures. In 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2018,
      pages 789–798. ACM, 2018.

[115] A. Pillay. Introduction to Stability Theory. Dover Books on Mathematics. Dover Publications, 2008.

[116] K.-P. Podewski and M. Ziegler. Stable graphs. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 100(2):101–107, 1978.

[117] W. Przybyszewski. Distal combinatorial tools for graphs of bounded twin-width. In 38th Annual
      ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2023, pages 1–13. IEEE, 2023.

[118] M. Rao. Clique-width of graphs defined by one-vertex extensions.                Discrete Mathematics,
      308(24):6157–6165, 2008.

[119] F. Reidl, P. Rossmanith, F. Sánchez Villaamil, and S. Sikdar. A faster parameterized algorithm for
      treedepth. In 41st International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2014,
      volume 8572 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 931–942. Springer, 2014.

[120] F. Reidl, F. Sánchez Villaamil, and K. S. Stavropoulos. Characterising bounded expansion by neigh-
      bourhood complexity. European Journal of Combinatorics, 75:152–168, 2019.

[121] N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour. Graph Minors. I. Excluding a forest. Journal of Combinatorial
      Theory, Series B, 35(1):39–61, 1983.

[122] N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour. Graph Minors. II. Algorithmic aspects of tree-width. Journal of
      Algorithms, 7(3):309–322, 1986.

[123] N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour. Graph Minors. V. Excluding a planar graph. Journal of Combina-
      torial Theory, Series B, 41(1):92–114, 1986.

[124] N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour. Graph Minors. XIII. The Disjoint Paths problem. Journal of Com-
      binatorial Theory, Series B, 63(1):65–110, 1995.

[125] N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour. Graph Minors. XVI. Excluding a non-planar graph. Journal of
      Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 89(1):43–76, 2003.

[126] N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour. Graph Minors. XX. Wagner’s conjecture. Journal of Combinatorial
      Theory, Series B, 92(2):325–357, 2004.

[127] N. Sauer. On the density of families of sets. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A, 13(1):145–147,
      1972.

[128] P. D. Seymour. A bound on the excluded minors for a surface, 1993. Unpublished manuscript,
      available at https://web.math.princeton.edu/ pds/papers/surfacebound/bound.pdf.

                                                     66
[129] S. Shelah. A combinatorial problem; stability and order for models and theories in infinitary lan-
      guages. Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 41(1):247–261, 1972.

[130] S. Shelah. Classification theory: and the number of non-isomorphic models. Elsevier, 1990.

[131] I. Simon. Factorization forests of finite height. Theoretical Computer Science, 72(1):65–94, 1990.

[132] K. Tent and M. Ziegler. A Course in Model Theory. Lecture Notes in Logic. Cambridge University
      Press, 2012.

[133] Sz. Toruńczyk. Aggregate queries on sparse databases. In 39th ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI Sym-
      posium on Principles of Database Systems, PODS 2020, pages 427–443. ACM, 2020.

[134] Sz. Toruńczyk. Flip-width: Cops and Robber on dense graphs. In 64th IEEE Annual Symposium on
      Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2023, pages 663–700. IEEE, 2023.

[135] K. Wagner. Über eine Eigenschaft der ebenen Komplexe. Mathematische Annalen, 114:570–590, 1937.
      In German.

[136] E. Wanke. k-NLC graphs and polynomial algorithms. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 54(2-3):251–266,
      1994.

[137] E. Welzl. Partition trees for triangle counting and other range searching problems. In 4th Annual
      Symposium on Computational Geometry, SoCG 1988, pages 23–33. ACM, 1988.

[138] X. Zhu. Colouring graphs with bounded generalized colouring number. Discrete Mathematics,
      309(18):5562–5568, 2009.




                                                     67
