                                                       Faster Fully-Dynamic Minimum Spanning Forest

                                                               Jacob Holm∗, Eva Rotenberg†, and Christian Wulff-Nilsen‡

                                                             Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen
arXiv:1407.6832v1 [cs.DS] 25 Jul 2014




                                                                                            Abstract
                                                  We give a new data structure for the fully-dynamic minimum spanning forest problem in simple
                                              graphs. Edge updates are supported in O (log4 n/ log log n) amortized time per operation, improving the
                                              O (log4 n) amortized bound of Holm et al. (STOC ’98, JACM ’01). We assume the Word-RAM model
                                              with standard instructions.


                                        1 Introduction
                                        A dynamic graph problem is that of maintaining a dynamic graph on n vertices where edges may be inserted
                                        or deleted and possibly where queries regarding properties of the graph are supported. We call the dynamic
                                        problem decremental resp. incremental if edges can only be deleted resp. inserted, and fully dynamic if both
                                        edge insertions and deletions are supported.
                                            We consider the fully-dynamic minimum spanning forest (MSF) problem which is to maintain a state
                                        for each edge of whether it belongs to the current MSF or not. After an edge update, at most one edge
                                        becomes a new tree edge in the MSF and at most one edge becomes a non-tree edge and a data structure
                                        needs to output which edge changes state, if any.
                                                                                                                                               √
                                            Dynamic MSF was first studied by Frederickson [3] who achieved a worst-case update time of O ( m)
                                        where m is the number of edges at the time of the update. This was later improved by Eppstein et al. [2]
                                               √
                                        to O ( n) using the sparsification technique. Henzinger and King made a data structure with amortized
                                                         √
                                        update time O ( 3 n log n). Holm et al. [8] dramatically improved this amortized bound to O (log4 n). All
                                        these bounds are for simple graphs (no parallel edges), but any MSF structure can be extended to general
                                        graphs via a simple reduction that adds O (log m) to the update time. In the following we will assume all
                                        graphs are simple unless otherwise stated.
                                            We show how to support updates in O (log4 n/ log log n) amortized time, improving the bound by Holm
                                        et al. To obtain this bound, we assume the RAM model of computation with standard instructions. More
                                        generally, our time bound per update can be written as
                                                                                                            
                                                                                    log4 n sort(logc n, n2 )
                                                                              O             ·                  ,
                                                                                  log log n      logc n

                                        for some constant c > 0, where sort(k, r) is the time for sorting k natural numbers with values in the range
                                        from 0 to r. Equivalenty, sort(k, r)/k is the operation time of a priority queue. Thus, the update time of
                                          ∗ jh@poplar.dk
                                          † roden@diku.dk
                                          ‡ koolooz@di.ku.dk, http://www.diku.dk/
                                                                                     e koolooz/.



                                                                                                   0
our structure depends on the model of computation, and the choice of the priority queue that our structure
uses as a building block. The following table shows both deterministic and randomized variants of the data
structure differing only in the choice of priority queue.



                                       Deterministic                           Randomized
                                                √              √
 RAM w. AC0                            O (log4 n log log log n/ log log n)     O (log4 n log log log n/ log log n)
 RAM, AC0 , O (1) multiplication       O (log4 n log log log n/ log log n)     O (log4 n/ log log n)

  Table 1: Our update time, depending on the choice of priority queue from [1, 4, 10, 12], see Section 1.1




1.1 Related Work
Holm et al. [8] gave a deterministic data structure for decremental MSF with O (log2 n) amortized update
time. Combining this with a slightly modified version of a reduction from fully-dynamic to decremental
MSF of Henzinger and King [5], they obtained their O (log4 n) bound for fully-dynamic MSF. A somewhat
related problem to dynamic MSF is fully-dynamic connectivity. Here a data structure needs to support
insertion and deletion of edges as well as connectivity queries between vertex pairs. The problem was first
                                                   √
studied by Frederickson [3] who obtained O ( m) update time O (1) query time data structure. Update
                              √
time was improved to O ( n) by Eppstein et al. [2]. Henzinger and King [6] obtained expected O (log3 n)
amortized update time and query time O (log n/ log log n). Henzinger and Thorup [7] improved update time
to O (log2 n) with a clever sampling technique. A deterministic structure with the same bounds was given
by Holm et al. [8]. Thorup [11] achieved an expected amortized update-time of O (log n(log log n)3 ) and
query time O (log n/ log log log n), using randomization. Wulff-Nilsen [13] gave a deterministic, amortized
O (log2 n/ log log n) update-time data structure with O (log n/ log log n) query time. An Ω(log n) lower bound
on the operation time for fully-dynamic connectivity and MSF was given by Pǎtraşcu and Demaine [9].
    As indicated above, priority queues are essential to our data structure. Equivalently, we rely on the
ability to efficiently sort l = logc n elements from [n2 ] where c is a constant. Expressed as a function of l, the
elements lie in the range 0 . . . 2w − 1, where w = 2l 1/c . To sort quickly, we rely on w > l. In the RAM-model
                                                                            √
with AC0 instructions, Raman [10] gave a deterministic bound of O (l log l log log l). Using randomization,
Thorup [12] improved this to O (l log log l). The same time bounds were achieved without randomization, if
assuming constant time multiplication, by Han [4]. Andersson et al. [1] achieve optimal O (l) sorting time,
using randomization, and assuming O (1) time multiplication; their algorithm requires w ≫ log2+ε l for some
constant ε, which in our case is satisfied as w > l 1/c .

1.2 Idea and paper outline
Since the data structures of Holm et al. [8] for decremental MSF and fully dynamic connectivity are essen-
tially the same, the question arises of whether the O (log2 n/ log log n) fully-dynamic connectivity structure
in [13] can be directly translated to an improved O (log2 n/ log log n) decremental MSF structure. If that
were the case, we could immediately use the reduction from fully-dynamic to decremental MSF in [8] to
obtain an O (log4 n/ log log n) bound for fully-dynamic MSF. Unfortunately, that is not the case as the data
structure in [13] relies on a shortcutting system which can not be easily adapted to decremental MSF. In-
stead, we make a different analysis of the reduction from decremental to fully dynamic MSF (Section 2)


                                                         1
which surprisingly shows how a slightly slower decremental MSF structure than that in [8] can in fact lead
to a slightly faster fully dynamic MSF!
    A modified version of the dynamic connectivity structure by Wulff-Nilsen [13] with O (log2 n) update
time is described in Section 3. It is shown in Section 3.3 how to modify it to a simple decremental MSF
structure with the same performance. We then show how to speed up a certain part of this decremental MSF
structure in Section 4. The main idea is to extend it with a non-trivial shortcutting system involving fast
priority queues in order to speed up the search for replacement edges. This system is the main technical
contribution of the paper. We conclude Section 4 by showing that this data structure for decremental MSF
speeds up fully-dynamic MSF.


2 Reduction to decremental MSF
In this section, we present a different analysis of the reduction from decremental MSF to fully dynamic MSF
from [8] based on the construction from [5]. The main difference is that in our analysis, we do not insist on
all edges being deleted in the decremental MSF problem.

Lemma 1. Suppose we have a decremental (deletions-only) MSF data structure that for a connected simple
graph with n vertices and m edges has a total worst-case running time for the construction and the first d
deletions of O (tc m +tr d), where tc and tr are non-decreasing functions of n. Then there exists a fully dynamic
MSF data structure for simple graphs on n vertices with amortized update time O (log3 n+tc log2 n+tr log n).

Proof. Let G be the fully dynamic simple graph with n vertices and up to m = O (n2 ) edges. We now describe
the fully dynamic data structure to maintain the MSF F of G.
     Keep track of an array of at most ⌈lg m⌉ ≤ ⌈2 lg n⌉ decremental graphs Ai with non-tree edge count
|Ai | ≤ 2i (we call this the edge-count invariant). Each Ai corresponds to a (not necessarily connected)
subgraph of G, where tree paths in G may be represented by single edges. We use the decremental MSF
data structure for each component of each Ai , and maintain the invariant that each non-tree edge of G is a
non-tree edge of some Ai (we call this the non-tree edge invariant).
     When an edge e is inserted, we use a top-tree over F to determine whether e becomes a tree-edge,
possibly replacing some edge e′ in which case e′ is identified by the top-tree. The insert operation may
create a new non-tree edge e′′ , in which case we must initialize e′′ in a new decremental structure, in order
to maintain the non-tree edge invariant. To make sure the edge-count invariant is maintained, we may have
to collapse decremental structures A1 , . . . , A j to create a new A j , for some j. In general, let D be a (possibly
                                                                                                               S
singleton) set of inserted edges. Choose minimally j such that we can construct A j from D ∪ F ∪ i≤ j Ai
without breaking the edge-count invariant. When constructing A j from the set, we keep all non-tree edges,
but may introduce super-edges instead of tree paths (see [8] for details). The total number of edges in the
resulting A j is at most 5 times the number of non-tree edges, and each component of A j contains at least one
non-tree edge. The time to find the vertices and edges to put into A j is O (log n) per non-tree edge. Since j
                                                                                                        S
was chosen minimally, each collapse ensures that at least 2 j−1 non-tree edges come from D ∪ i< j Ai . So if
we associate 10(tc + log n)(⌈2 lg n⌉ − i) credits with each non-tree edge in Ai , the construction of A j can be
                                                          S
paid for by the non-tree edges that came from D ∪ i< j Ai . Thus, when an edge is inserted, it must be given
O (log2 n + tc log n) credits for the amortisation.
     Upon an edge deletion, delete(e), ask each decremental structure containing e for a replacement edge. It
follows from the non-tree edge invariant that the cheapest of the edges returned is the desired replacement
edge. Since there are O (log n) decremental structures, each with ≤ n vertices, the time for this operation
is O (log2 n + tr log n) plus the time paid for by credits on the edges. However, the up to ⌈2 lg n⌉ returned
replacement-candidate edges have now become tree-edges in their respective decremental structures, possi-
bly violating the non-tree edge invariant, as only one of them joins F. To make sure the non-tree edge invari-

                                                          2
ant holds, a decremental structure with the returned edges is created. That is, these edges play the role of D in
the insert description above. Each reinitialized edge must be given O (log2 n+tc log n) credits, and there were
O (log n) replacement candidates, yielding an amortized deletion time of O (log3 n + tc log2 n + tr log n).
    The following corollary is crucial in obtaining our improvement for fully-dynamic MSF. It shows that
to obtain a faster data structure for this problem by reduction to decremental MSF, it actually suffices with a
decremental MSF structure which is slower than that in [8] in the case where all edges end up being deleted.
                                                                        2
                                                            log n
Corollary 2. Given a decremental MSF structure with tc = ε log log n and tr = log
                                                                                  2+ε
                                                                                      n where ε < 1 is a
                                                                                                      4
constant, the reduction gives a fully dynamic MSF structure with amortized update time O ( logloglog n ).


3 Simple Data Structures for Dynamic Connectivity and Decremental MSF
In this section, we give a description of the fully-dynamic connectivity data structure in [13] (which is based
on an earlier structure of Thorup [11]) except that shortcuts are omitted and a spanning forest is maintained.
We will modify it in Section 3.3 to support decremental MSF.
    Let G = (V, E) denote the dynamic graph. The data structure maintains, for each edge e ∈ E, a level ℓ(e)
which is an integer between 0 and ℓmax = ⌊log n⌋. As we shall see, the level of an edge e starts at 0 and can
only increase over time and for the amortization, we can view ℓmax − ℓ(e) as the amount of credits left on e.
    For 0 ≤ i ≤ ℓmax , let Ei denote the set of edges of E with level at least i and let Gi = (V, Ei ). The
(connected) components of Gi are level i clusters or just clusters. The following invariant is maintained:

Invariant: For each i, any level i cluster spans at most ⌊n/2i ⌋ vertices.

    Consider a level i cluster C. By contracting all edges of Ei+1 in C, we get a connected multigraph of
level i-edges where vertices correspond to level (i + 1) clusters contained in C. Our data structure maintains
a spanning tree of this multigraph. The union of spanning trees over all clusters is a spanning forest of G.
    The data structure maintains a cluster forest of G which is a forest C of rooted trees where a node u at
level i is a level i cluster C(u). Roots of C are components of G = G0 and leaves of C are vertices of G. A
level i-node u which is not a leaf has as children the level (i + 1) nodes v for which C(v) ⊆ C(u). In addition
to C , the data structure maintains n(u) for each node u ∈ C denoting the number of vertices of G contained
in C(u) (equivalently, the number of leaves in the subtree of C rooted at u).

3.1 Handling insertions and deletions
When a new edge e = (u, v) is inserted into G, it is given level 0 and C is updated by merging the roots ru
and rv corresponding to the components of G containing u and v, respectively. The new root inherits the
children of both ru and rv . If ru 6= rv , e becomes a tree edge in the new level 0 cluster. Otherwise, e becomes
a non-tree edge.
    Deleting an edge e = (u, v) is more involved. If e is not a tree edge, no structural changes occur in C .
Otherwise, let i = ℓ(e). The deletion of e splits a spanning tree of a level i cluster C into two subtrees, Tu
containing u (inside some level i + 1-cluster) and Tv containing v. One of these trees, say Tu , contains at most
half the vertices (in V ) of C. For each level i edge in Tu , we increase its level to i + 1. In C , this amounts to
merging all nodes corresponding to level i + 1 clusters in Tu into one node, w; see Figure 1(a) and (b). By
the choice of Tu , this does not violate the invariant.
    Next, we search through (non-tree) level i edges incident to C(w) in some arbitrary order until some
edge is found which connects C(w) and Tv (if any). For all visited level i edges which did not reconnect
the two trees, their level is increased to i + 1, thereby paying for them being visited. If a replacement edge


                                                         3
                                      p′′                        p′′                      p′′
               Level i − 1


               Level i                   p                           p                      p         p′


               Level i + 1    u1    u2       u3   u4    u1           w    u4        u1           u4        w


               Level i + 2
                             v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6 v7      v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6 v7        v1           v7 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6

                                     (a)                         (b)                      (c)

Figure 1: (a): Part of C before the merge. (b): Level i + 1 nodes u2 and u3 are merged into a new level i + 1
node w. (c): A replacement level i edge was not found so w is given a new parent p′ which becomes the
sibling of p.

                                             Th (u)          u                  Tl (u)

                                                                               top tree




Figure 2: The structure of local tree L(u) of a node u in C , from [13]. In Th (u), rank trees are black and the
rank path and roots of rank trees are grey. In Tl (u), the buffer tree is grey, top and bottom trees are white,
and rank trees are black.

(a, b) was found, no more structural changes occur in C and (a, b) becomes a new tree edge. Otherwise, w
is removed from its parent p (corresponding to C) and a new level level i node p′ is created having w as its
single child and having p as sibling; see Figure 1(b) and (c). This has the effect of splitting C = C(p) into
two smaller level i clusters. The same procedure is now repeated recursively at level i − 1 where we try to
reconnect the two trees of level i − 1 edges containing the new level i clusters C(p) and C(p′ ), respectively.
If level 0 is reached and no replacement edge was found, a component of G is split in two.

3.2 Local trees
To guide the search for level i tree/non-tree edges, we first modify C to a forest CL of binary trees. This is
done by inserting, for each non-leaf node u ∈ C , a binary local tree L(u) between u and its children; see
Figure 2. To describe the structure of L(u), we first need to define heavy and light children of u. A child v
of u in C is heavy if n(v) ≥ n(u)/ logεh n, where εh > 0 is a constant that we may pick as small as we like.
Otherwise, v is light.
    The root of L(u) has two children, one rooted at heavy tree Th (u) and the other rooted at light tree Tl (u).
The leaves of Th (u) resp. Tl (u) are the heavy resp. light children of u. Before describing the structure of
these trees, let us associate a rank rank(v) ← ⌊log n(v)⌋ to each node v in C .
    Tree Th (u) is formed by initially regarding each heavy child of u as a trivial rooted tree with a single
node and repeatedly pairing roots r1 and r2 of trees with the same rank, creating a new tree with a root r of
rank rank(r) = rank(r1 ) + 1 and with children r1 and r2 . When the process stops, the remaining rooted trees,
called rank trees, all have distincts ranks and they are attached as children to a rooted rank path P such that
children with larger rank are closer to the root of P than children of smaller rank. We define the rank of a
node on the rank path to be the larger of the ranks of its children.


                                                                 4
    Tree Tl (u) is more involved. Its leaves are the light children of u and they are divided into groups each
having size at most logα n, where α is a constant that we may pick as large as we like. The nodes in each
group are kept as leaves in a balanced binary search tree (BBST) ordered by n(v)-values. One of these
trees is the buffer tree and the others are bottom trees. We define the rank of each bottom tree root as the
maximum rank of its leaves and we pair them up into rank trees exactly as we did when forming Th (u).
However, instead of attaching the rank tree roots to a rank path, we instead keep them as leaves of a BBST
called the top tree, where again the ordering is by rank. We also have the buffer tree root as a child of the
top tree and we regard it as having smaller rank than all the other leaves.
    It was shown in [13] that CL has height O ( ε1h log n). Refer to nodes of CL belonging to C as cluster nodes.

Merging local trees We need to support the merge of local trees L(u) and L(v) in CL corresponding to a
merge of cluster nodes u and v into a new node w. First, we merge the buffer trees of L(u) and L(v) into a
new BBST Tb by adding the leaves of the smaller tree to the larger tree. Heavy trees Th (u) and Th (v) have
their rank paths removed and leaves that should be light in L(w) are removed from Th (u) and Th (v) and
added as leaves of Tb . For each leaf removed from Th (u) and Th (v), we remove their ancestor rank nodes.
We end up with subtrees of the original rank trees in Th (u) and Th (v) and these subtrees are paired up as
before and attached to a new rank path for Th (w). Tree Tb becomes a buffer tree in Tl (w) if its number of
leaves does not exceed logα n; otherwise, it becomes a bottom tree in Tl (w), leaving an empty buffer tree.
Rank trees in Tl (u) and Tl (v) are stripped off from their top trees and paired up into new rank trees as before
(here we include Tb if it became a bottom tree) and these are attached as leaves to a new top tree for Tl (w).
    In the above merge, let p be the parent of u and v in C . In CL , we need to delete u and v as leaves of
L(p) and to add w as a new leaf of L(p). We shall only describe the deletion of u as v is handled in the same
manner. We consider four cases depending on which part of L(p) u belongs to:

    • If u is a leaf in the buffer tree of Tl (p), we delete it with a standard BBST operation in that tree.

    • If u is a leaf in a bottom tree B of Tl (p), a similar BBST update happens in B. Additionally we update
      the max rank of leaves in B as this rank is associated with the root of B. If the maximum does not
      decrease, no further updates are needed. Otherwise, we remove all ancestor rank nodes of B in Tl (u′ ),
      pair the resulting rank trees as before and attach them as leaves of the top tree.

    • If u is a leaf in Th (p), we remove it and its ancestor rank nodes in Th (p), pair up the resulting rank
      trees and attach them to a new rank path for Th (p).

To add w as a new leaf of L(p), we only have two cases. If w is a heavy node, we regard it as a trivial rank
tree, delete the rank path of Th (p), repeatedly pair up the rank trees (including w) and reattach them with a
new rank path to form the updated Th (p). If instead w is a light node, we add it to the buffer tree of Tl (p)
(which may be turned into a bottom tree, as described above).

Handling cluster splits What remains is to describe the updates to local trees after splitting a level i cluster
in two. Let w, p, and p′ be defined as in the previous subsection and let p′′ be the parent of p and p′ in C
(Figure 1(b) and (c)). Creating L(p′ ) is trivial as p′ has only the single child w in C and attaching p′ as a leaf
of L(p′′ ) is done as above. The removal of w from L(p) decreases n(p) which may cause some light children
of p in C to become heavy. In CL , each corresponding leaf of Tl (p) is removed and added to Th (p) and L(p)
is updated accordingly as described above. Since n(p) decreases, p might change from being a heavy child
of p′′ to being a light child. If so, we move it from Th (p′′ ) to the buffer tree of Tl (p′′ ), as described above.




                                                         5
Bitmaps Having modified C into the forest CL of binary trees, we add bitmaps to nodes of CL to guide
the search for level i edges. More precisely, each node u ∈ CL is associated with two bitmaps tree(u) and
nontree(u), where the ith bit of tree(u) (nontree(u)) is 1 iff there is at least one level i tree (non-tree) edge
incident to a leaf in the subtree of CL rooted at u. Since CL is binary, these bitmaps enable us to identify a level
i tree/non-tree edge incident to a cluster C(u) by traversing a path down from u in CL in time proportional to
its length by backtracking when bitmaps with ith bit 0 are encountered. When a level i tree edge is removed
(which happens if it is deleted from G or has its level increased), then for each of its endpoints u, we set
tree(u)[i] = 0 and update the bitmaps for all ancestors v of u in CL bottom-up by taking the logical ’or’ of
the tree-bitmaps of its children. A similar update is done to nontree-bitmaps if u is a non-tree edge. When
inserting a level i tree/non-tree edge, bitmaps are updated in a similar manner.

3.3 Supporting decremental MSF
We can convert the above fully dynamical connectivity structure to a decremental MSF structure by using a
trick from [8]. For decremental MSF, we can assume that the initial graph is simple and connected and that
all weights are distinct and belong to {0, 1, . . . , n2 } by doing an initial comparison sort and then working
on ranks of weights instead. All edges start at level 0 and we initialize the spanning forest to the MSF.
When searching through the level i non-tree edges incident to C(w) as in Section 3.1, we do so in order of
increasing weight. We support this by letting each node of CL contain the weight of the cheapest level i-edge
below it, for each i. To find the cheapest non-tree edge with an endpoint in C(w) we can follow the cheapest
level i weight down from w in CL until we reach a leaf x and then take the cheapest level i-edge incident to x.
As shown in [8], this small modification to the connectivity structure suffices to support decremental MSF.

Performance Finding the initial MSF can be done in O (m + n log n) time using Prim’s algorithm with
Fibonacci heaps. We split the time complexity analysis for the rest of the above data structure into three
parts: searching for edges down from C(w) in CL to identify a cheapest level i-edge incident to a leaf x,
maintaining the edge weights associated with nodes of CL , and making structural changes to CL .
    To analyze the time for the first part, note that since CL has height O (log n), searching down from C(w)
to x takes O (log n) time. In order to efficiently identify the cheapest level i-edge incident to such a leaf x,
we extend the data structure by letting x have an O (log n) array of doubly-chained lists of edges, so let Ei (x)
be the list of level i non-tree edges adjacent to w in order of increasing weight. The cheapest level i-edge
incident to x is then the first edge of Ei (x) and can thus be found in O (1) time. When increasing the level of
an edge e = (x, y) from i to i + 1, it is not a replacement edge, and is therefore the cheapest level i non-tree
edge adjacent to any vertex in its component. In particular it is the cheapest level i non-edge incident to x
and y and is therefore at the start of Ei (x) and Ei (y). Furthermore, (as shown in [8]) it is costlier than all
other edges that have been moved to level i + 1 earlier so when we move it all we need to do is put it at the
end of Ei+1 (x) and Ei+1 (y) to keep them sorted. This takes O (1) time.
    We have shown how the cheapest non-tree edge incident to C(w) can be found in O (log n) time. Main-
taining edge weights associated with nodes of CL can also be done in O (log n) time since for each edge
level change (or the deletion of an edge), only the weights along the leaf-to-root paths in CL from the end-
points of the edge need to be updated. It remains to bound the time for structural changes to CL . It was
shown in [13] that by picking constant εh sufficiently small and constant α sufficiently large (see defini-
tions in Section 3.2), this takes amortized O (log n/ log log n) time per edge level change plus an additional
O (log2 n/ log log n) worst-case time per edge deletion.
    We conclude from the above that the total time to build our decremental MSF structure on a simple
connected graph with n vertices and m edges, and then deleting d edges is O (m log2 n + d log2 n). In the next
section, we give a variant of this data structure where exactly the same structural changes occur in CL but
where the time to search for edges is sped up using a new shortcutting system together with fast priority

                                                         6
queues. Since structural changes take a total of O (m log2 n/ log log n + d log2 n/ log log n) time, these will
not be the bottleneck so we ignore them in the time analysis in the next section. Also, the structure in [13]
can identify the parent cluster node of a cluster in O (log n/ log log n) time so we shall also ignore this cost.


4 Faster Data Structure for Dynamic MSF
In this section, we present our new data structure for decremental MSF. Assume that the initial graph is
connected. If not, we maintain the data structure separately for each component. The total time bound is
O (m log2 n/ log log n + d log2+ε n) for a constant ε < 1, where the initial graph has m edges and n vertices
and where d edges are deleted in total. By Corollary 2, this suffices in order to achieve O (log4 n/ log log n)
update time for fully-dynamic MSF.
    A bottleneck of the simple data structure for decremental MSF presented in Section 3.3 is moving up
and down trees of CL . The data structure identifies level i-edges incident to a level (i + 1)-cluster C(u) in
order of increasing weight by moving down CL from node u, always picking the child (or children) with the
cheapest level i-edge below it. When a leaf is reached, the cheapest level i-edge e incident to it is traversed.
If both endpoints of e were identified in the downward search then we do not need an upwards search. If
only one endpoint was identified then we do an upwards search in CL from the other endpoint until reaching
the node for a level (i + 1)-cluster. Each upwards search can trivially be done in O (log n) time as this is
a bound on the height of trees in CL . We claim that this is actually fast enough. To see why, note that we
only do an upwards search when a reconnecting edge is found. At most one reconnecting edge is found per
edge deleted so we can in fact afford to spend O (log2+ε n) time on the upwards search. In the following,
we can thus restrict our attention to speeding up downward searches. It suffices to get a search time of
O (log n/ log log n) since for every two downward searches, we either increase the level of an edge or we find
a reconnecting edge.

4.1 A downwards shortcutting system
We use a downwards shortcutting system with fast min priority queues to speed up downward searches.
Certain nodes of CL are augmented with min priority queues keyed on edge weights. Since we may assume
that edge weights are in the range {0, 1, . . . , n2 }, we can use fast integer priority queues. In the following,
we assume constant time for each queue operation. As mentioned in the introduction, a less efficient queue
will slow down the performance of our data structure by a factor equal to its operation time.
    The nodes of CL with associated priority queues are referred to as queue nodes. The following types of
nodes are queue nodes (εq is a small constant to be chosen later):

   1. cluster nodes whose level is divisible by i⌈εq log log n⌉ for an integer i,

   2. heavy tree nodes u with a parent v in CL such that rank(u) ≤ i⌈εq log log n⌉ < rank(v) for an integer i,

   3. rank nodes of light trees whose rank is divisible by ⌈εq log log n⌉,

   4. roots and leaves of buffer, bottom, and top trees.

    Each queue node u (excluding leaves of CL ) is associated with an array whose ith entry points to a min-
queue Qi (u), for each level i. If u is a proper ancestor of a level i-node, Qi (u) is empty. Otherwise, for each
nearest descending queue node v of u in CL , Qi (u) contains the node v with associated key k denoting the
weight of the cheapest level i-edge incident to a leaf of CL below v.




                                                        7
Traversing the shortcutting system The priority queues associated with queue nodes induce our down-
wards shortcutting system in CL . To see how, consider a level (i + 1)-cluster C(u). To identify the cheapest
level i-edge e incident to C(u), assume first that u is a queue node. Then a minimum element in Qi (u) is a
node v below u with e incident to C(v). We refer to (u, v) as a shortcut. Whereas our simple data structure
would traverse the path from u down to v in CL , our new data structure can use the shortcut (u, v) to jump
directly from u to v within the time it takes to obtain the minimum element in Qi (u). At v, we identify a
minimum element w in Qi (v) and jump directly to this node along (v, w). This shortcut traversal continues
until a leaf of CL is reached, and e is identified as one of the edges incident to this leaf. If both endpoints of
e are below u in CL , one of the queues contains two distinct minimum elements v and v′ , corresponding to
where the paths down to the endpoints of e branch out. In this case, we search down from both v and v′ .
    Now assume that u is not a queue node. Then all nearest descending queue nodes v of u are visited
and for each of them the minimum element in Qi (v) is identified and its associated key ki (v). The search
procedure described above is then applied to each of the at most two nodes v with minimum key ki (v).

Performance Let us analyze the time for the search procedure just described. The following lemma
bounds the time to identify the nearest descending queue nodes.

Lemma 3. The set of nearest descending queue nodes of a cluster node can be found in O (log3εq n) time.

Proof. Let u be a cluster node and let T be the subtree of CL rooted at u whose leaves are queue nodes and
whose non-leaf nodes are not. It suffices to show that |T | = O(log3εq n). Note that since roots of light trees
are queue nodes, all non-leaf nodes of T except possibly u belong to heavy trees. Consider a root-to-leaf
path P in T . Since ranks go strictly down along rank paths and along root-to-leaf paths in rank trees, at most
⌈εq log log n⌉ edges of P are contained in rank trees or rank paths. Since levels of cluster nodes go strictly
down along P, there are at most ⌈εq log log n⌉ cluster nodes on P that are not queue nodes. A traversal of P
through a heavy tree encounters at most two edges not belonging to the rank path or a rank tree. Hence P
contains at most 3⌈εq log log n⌉ edges. Since CL is binary, |T | = O(log3εq n).

    If our initial node u is not a queue node, we can thus in O (log3εq n) time find all nearest descending
queue nodes of u and among these obtain the at most two nodes v with smallest key in Qi (v).
    Now, assume that the initial node u is a queue node and consider the shortcut path P of queue nodes from
u to a leaf that the procedure visits. The number of visited queue nodes of type 1 is clearly O (log n/(εq log log n)).
Since ranks of nodes along P cannot increase and since the difference in rank between two consecutive rank
nodes on P is at least ⌈εq log log n⌉, the number of queue nodes of type 2 or 3 is also O (log n/(εq log log n)).
Finally, since the rank difference between a cluster node u and any leaf in Tl (u) is Ω( ε1h log log n) (see [13]),
P contains only O (log n/(εh log log n)) queue nodes of type 4. Given our downwards shortcutting system,
the cheapest level i-edge incident to C(u) can thus be found in O (log3εq n + ( ε1h + ε1q ) log n/ log log n) time.
Below we show how to maintain this system efficiently under changes to CL .

4.2 Dealing with non-topological changes
Two types of changes occur in CL : topological changes when cluster nodes are merged or split and non-
topological changes when an edge increases its level or is removed and information about which edges are
the cheapest below a cluster node needs to be updated. We start with the non-topological changes.
    Suppose a level i-edge e disappears, either because it is deleted or because its level is increased to i + 1.
Then we need to update priority queues of queue nodes accordingly. If ℓ(e) increases then the two downward
paths identified with our shortcutting system contain all the queue nodes whose level i-queues need to be
updated. For each endpoint x of e, we traverse each of these paths bottom-up. Let u be the current non-leaf
node in one of these traversals and let v be its predecessor. Note that the key of v in Qi (u) equals the weight

                                                        8
w(e) of e. We increase this key to the key for the minimum element in Qi (v) (or remove v from Qi (u) if
Qi (v) is empty). Otherwise we stop as no queue nodes above u need updates. As each queue update takes
O (1) time, total time is bounded by the number O (( ε1h + ε1q ) log n/ log log n) of queue nodes considered.
      We also need to update priority queues for level (i + 1)-edges since e has its level increased to i + 1.
Note that all the queue nodes that need to be updated belong to the two downward paths traversed. Again,
we traverse each path bottom-up. Let u be the current non-leaf node in one of the traversals and let v be its
predecessor. If v is not present in Qi+1 (u), we add it with key w(e). Otherwise, if the key of v in Qi+1 (u) is
greater than w(e), we decrease it to w(e). In both cases, we then proceed upwards. Otherwise, we stop since
no queues above u need updates. Total time to update level (i + 1)-queues is O (( ε1h + ε1q ) log n/ log log n).
      It remains to consider the case where e disappears because it was deleted. Then we identify all the
queue nodes above e that need to be updated by traversing the leaf-to-root paths in CL for the endpoints
of e. The queue nodes visited have their queue nodes updated as described above. Since CL has height
O ( ε1h log n), total time is O ( ε1h log n + ( ε1h + ε1q ) log n/ log log n). This completes the description of how to
deal with non-topological changes.

4.3 Dealing with topological changes
Now, we describe how to maintain queues under topological changes to CL . We will assume that deleting
a shortcut is free as it is paid for when the shortcut is formed. In our analysis for bounding the total time
to form shortcuts, we shall use the accounting method; during the course of the algorithm, credits will be
associated with certain parts of CL and each credit can pay for a constant amount of work. Denote by
smax = logα n the maximum number of leaves of a buffer tree. The following invariants are maintained:

    • Each leaf of a heavy tree contains (2 + log smax ) log n credits (heavy tree invariant),

    • Each leaf of a buffer tree contains (2 + log smax − log s) log n credits where s is the number of leaves
      in the tree (buffer tree invariant).

    • Each leaf of a bottom tree contains 1 credit (bottom tree invariant).

Lemma 4. A buffer tree with s1 leaves contains more credits than a buffer tree with s2 < s1 leaves.

Proof. The function f (x) = x(2 + log smax − log x) is monotonically increasing on [1, smax ] since f ′ (x) =
2 + log smax − log x − 1/ ln 2 > log smax − log x ≥ 0 for all x ∈ [1, smax ].

Recall that εh was introduced when defining heavy and light children. We observe that initially, all edges of
the decremental MSF structure have level 0 and because of our assumption that the initial graph is connected,
C consists of a single root r with each vertex of the graph as a child, implying that CL is the single local tree
L(r). This local tree contains at most logεh n leaves in the heavy tree and a single buffer tree with at most
smax leaves. Furthermore, there are at most n bottom tree leaves. By Lemma 4, the initial amount of credits
required is at most logεh n(2 + log smax ) log n + 2smax log n + n.

4.3.1   Merging cluster nodes
The general type of change to C during the deletion of a level i-tree edge was described in Section 3.1 and
the corresponding updates to local trees in CL was described in Section 3.2. The first step is to merge all
level (i+ 1) clusters on the smaller component of the split level i-tree (Figure 1(a) and (b)). We now describe
how to update shortcuts accordingly. For now, assume that only two level (i + 1) clusters C(u) and C(v) are
merged into a new level (i + 1) cluster C(w). We later extend this to the merge of an arbitrary number of
clusters. It may be helpful to consult Figure 2 in the following.


                                                          9
Shortcuts through the heavy tree We say that a shortcut (x, y) goes through a node z ∈ CL if x is an
ancestor of z and y is a descendant of z (where possibly x = z or y = z). In the new local tree L(w), we obtain
all shortcuts through nodes of Th (w) in a bottom-up manner. Note that queue nodes in the subtrees of CL
rooted at leaves of Th (w) need not be updated. For each queue node a ∈ Th (w), assume that all queues of
its nearest descending queue nodes have been constructed. Then for each level j, we construct Q j (a) in a
brute-force manner by visiting all nearest descending queue nodes b of a and for each of them adding the
cheapest node of Q j (b) to Q j (a). By Lemma 3, this takes O (log3εq n) time for each j, giving a total time
of O (log1+3εq n) to construct the queues associated with a. Since Th (w) has size O (logεh n), total time to
construct all shortcuts through nodes of Th (w) is O (log1+3εq +εh n) which over all levels is O (log2+3εq +εh n).
Adding (2 + log smax ) log n credits to each leaf of Th (w) is dominated by the cost to construct shortcuts.

Shortcuts through the light tree Next we describe how to form shortcuts through Tl (w). Let Bu resp. Bv
be the buffer trees of u and v, respectively, before the merge. The leaves of the buffer tree Bw of w is the union
of leaves of Bu and Bv as well as possibly some leaves from Th (u) and Th (v). For now, assume that we obtain
Bw simply as the union of Bu and Bv , and that Bu and Bv together has at most smax leaves. Let ru resp. rw be the
roots of Bu resp. Bw . Assume w.l.o.g. that the number su of leaves of Bu is smaller than the number of leaves
of Bv . Tree Bw is formed by adding each leaf of Bu to Bv one by one. As each leaf l is added to Bv , we also
add shortcuts of the form (ru , l) to Bv . Total time to add all shortcuts is O (su log n). To see that we can afford
this, observe that the leaves from Bv will not require more credits when added to Bw since Bw contains at
least as many leaves as Bv . Before the merge, Bu has cu = (2 + log smax − log su ) log n credits per leaf. Since
Bw has at least 2su leaves, each of its leaves requires at most (2 + log smax − log(2su )) log n = cu − log n
credits so spending log n credits per leaf of Bu pays for the O (su log n) time spent on the merge.
     If Bu and Bv together have more than smax leaves, we do the same but the result is a new bottom tree. By
definition, Bu and Bv each contain at most smax leaves before the merge so there is at least 1 credit left on
each leaf of Bw after the merge. Hence, the bottom tree invariant is satisfied for the new bottom tree.
     Above we assumed that Bw was simply the union of Bu and Bv . Now assume that in addition it contains
leaves from Th (u) and Th (v). By our heavy tree invariant, each such leaf has (2 + log smax ) log n credits.
After having merged Bu and Bv , consider adding these leaves one by one, regarding each of them as a trivial
buffer tree with s = 1 leaf. Then it has the amount of credits required by the buffer tree invariant so the same
analysis as above shows that the credits on each leaf can pay for all the required updates.
     The remaining shortcuts through L(w) that we need to form are those incident to a top tree node or to a
rank node in Tl (w). We use the same analysis as by Thorup [11] and Wulff-Nilsen [13]: note that a bottom
tree B does not cause changes to the rank tree above it unless the rank of its root changes. Since this rank is
the maximum rank of leaves in B, and since this maximum can only decrease (we never add new leaves to B
and ranks of existing leaves cannot increase), B causes at most log n changes to the at most log n rank nodes
above it. By our bottom tree invariant, each bottom tree initially has at least logα n credits. Since we are
free to pick constant α as large as we like, we may assume that each rank node update in Tl (w) (including
top tree leaves excluding the root of the buffer tree) can be paid for by logβ n credits where β is a constant
(growing with α) that can be picked as large as we like. Recall that a rank node a in Tl (w) is a queue node if
its rank is divisible by ⌈εq log log n⌉ so the number of its nearest descending queue nodes is at most 2 logεq n.
Using a similar analysis as for the heavy tree, we can build all queues for a in O (log1+εq n) time which can
be paid for by the logβ n credits on a, for sufficiently big β.
     The only new shortcuts not accounted for above are those ending in the root of the top tree and the root
of the buffer tree of Tl (w). There are at most 2 log n of these and they can be formed in O (log n) time.
     Above, we have shown how to update our shortcutting system within the desired time bound when
exactly two clusters are merged. It is straightforward to extend this to an arbitrary number of clusters. To
see this, note that all clusters are merged into a single cluster w so we only get a single heavy tree Th (w) in


                                                         10
the end. Updating shortcuts through Th (w) and assigning credits to its leaves is done as above. We need to
merge multiple buffer trees as well as adding leaves from heavy trees as leaves of buffer trees. Exactly the
same analysis as above carries through if we simply view these merges pairwise.

Shortcuts for the parent cluster Having updated all the shortcuts through L(w), what remains is to update
shortcuts through L(p) where p is the parent of w in C . The topological changes occuring in L(p) consist
of deletions of leaves corresponding to the clusters merged into w, and the addition of a single new leaf,
namely w. Deleting a leaf from a bottom tree is free since it only requires deleting shortcuts from the root
of the bottom tree to the deleted leaf and shortcut deletions have zero cost. Deleting leaves from Th (p) may
cause topological changes to this tree but only shortcuts through Th (p) are affected and these are found as
above. Finally, consider deletions of leaves from the buffer tree B p of Tl (p). By Lemma 4, the amount of
credits in B p cannot increase by these deletions and since deletions of shortcuts is free, updating shortcuts
through B p is free as well. Finally, computing shortcuts through w takes O (log n) time as argued above.

4.3.2   Splitting cluster nodes
Above we have shown how to efficiently maintain the shortcutting system when a set of level (i + 1) clusters
are merged into one cluster, C(w). If a replacement level i-edge was found, no more topological changes
happen to CL so assume such an edge was not found. Then w needs to be removed as a child of its parent
cluster p and added as a child of a new cluster node p′ which becomes the sibling of p (Figure 1(b) and (c)).
The removal of w decreases n(p) which may result in some leaves of Tl (p) becoming leaves of Th (p). Note
that this happens for at most logεh n leaves so we can pay for updating all shortcuts through L(p) using the
same arguments as above. The only remaining shortcuts that need to be found are those through L(p′ ). As
this tree contains only a single leaf, namely w, these shortcuts can be found in O (log n) time. Finally, since
n(p) is decreased, it may need to be moved from Th (p′′ ) to Tl (p′′ ) where p′′ is its parent in C . Updating
shortcuts accordingly does not increase the overall time bound.

4.3.3   Performance
At initialization, we pay O (m + n log n) for finding the MSF and O (logεh n(2 + log smax ) log n + 2smax log n +
n) for the initial amount of credits. The latter is O (n) since εh is constant. For each edge level increase,
we pay O (log3εq n + ( ε1h + ε1q ) log n/ log log n) for searching for the edge and for making non-topological
changes to CL . Hence an edge pays a total of O (log1+3εq n + ( ε1h + ε1q ) log2 n/ log log n) for this over all its
level increases. For each edge deletion, we pay O (log1+3εq +εh n) per level for topological changes to CL ,
giving a total cost of O (log2+3εq +εh n) over all levels. It follows from these calculations that if d edges are
deleted, total cost is O (m(log1+3εq n + ( ε1h + ε1q ) log2 n/ log log n) + d log2+3εq +εh n). Picking constants εh < 21
and εq < 16 , our main result follows from Corollary 2.

Theorem 5. There is a data structure for fully-dynamic minimum spanning tree which supports updates in
O (log4 n/ log log n) amortized time, assuming the RAM model with standard instructions.

Acknowledgments
We thank Mikkel Thorup for fruitful discussions.




                                                          11
References
 [1] Arne Andersson, Torben Hagerup, Stefan Nilsson, and Rajeev Raman, Sorting in linear time?, Journal
     of Computer and System Sciences 57 (1998), no. 1, 74–93, See also STOC’95.

 [2] David Eppstein, Zvi Galil, Giuseppe F. Italiano, and Amnon Nissenzweig, Sparsification - a technique
     for speeding up dynamic graph algorithms, J. ACM 44 (1997), no. 5, 669–696.

 [3] Greg N. Frederickson, Data structures for on-line updating of minimum spanning trees, with applica-
     tions, SIAM Journal on Computing 14 (1985), no. 4, 781–798, See also STOC’83.

 [4] Yijie Han, Deterministic sorting in O(n log log n) time and linear space, Journal of Algorithms 50
     (2004), no. 1, 96–105, See also STOC’02.

 [5] Monika Rauch Henzinger and Valerie King, Fully dynamic 2-edge connectivity algorithm in polylog-
     arithmic time per operation, 1997.

 [6]           , Randomized fully dynamic graph algorithms with polylogarithmic time per operation, Journal
       of the ACM 46 (1999), no. 4, 502–516, See also STOC’95.

 [7] Monika Rauch Henzinger and Mikkel Thorup, Sampling to provide or to bound: With applications to
     fully dynamic graph algorithms, Random Structures and Algorithms 11 (1997), no. 4, 369–379, See
     also ICALP’96.

 [8] Jacob Holm, Kristian de Lichtenberg, and Mikkel Thorup, Poly-logarithmic deterministic fully-
     dynamic algorithms for connectivity, minimum spanning tree, 2-edge, and biconnectivity, Journal of
     the ACM 48 (2001), no. 4, 723–760, See also STOC’98.

 [9] Mihai Pǎtraşcu and Erik D. Demaine, Lower bounds for dynamic connectivity, Proc. 36th ACM Sym-
     posium on Theory of Computing (STOC), 2004, pp. 546–553.

[10] Rajeev Raman, Fast algorithms for shortest paths and sorting, 1996.

[11] Mikkel Thorup, Near-optimal fully-dynamic graph connectivity, Proc. 32nd ACM Symposium on The-
     ory of Computing (STOC), 2000, pp. 343–350.

[12]          , Randomized sorting in O(n log log n) time and linear space using addition, shift, and bit-wise
       boolean operations, Journal of Algorithms 42 (2002), no. 2, 205–230, See also SODA’97.

[13] Christian Wulff-Nilsen, Faster deterministic fully-dynamic graph connectivity, SODA, 2013,
     pp. 1757–1769.




                                                      12
