                                                                Dynamic Connectivity with Expected
                                                              Polylogarithmic Worst-Case Update Time
                                                              Simon Meierhans∗                 Maximilian Probst Gutenberg∗
                                                                 ETH Zurich                            ETH Zurich
                                                             mesimon@inf.ethz.ch               maximilian.probst@inf.ethz.ch
arXiv:2510.08297v1 [cs.DS] 9 Oct 2025




                                                                                           Abstract
                                                   Whether a graph G = (V, E) is connected is arguably its most fundamental property. Nat-
                                                urally, connectivity was the first characteristic studied for dynamic graphs, i.e. graphs that
                                                undergo edge insertions and deletions. While connectivity algorithms with polylogarithmic
                                                amortized update time have been known since the 90s, achieving worst-case guarantees has
                                                proven more elusive.
                                                   Two recent breakthroughs have made important progress on this question: (1) Kapron,
                                                King and Mountjoy [SODA’13; Best Paper] gave a Monte-Carlo algorithm with polylogarithmic
                                                worst-case update time, and (2) Nanongkai, Saranurak and Wulff-Nilsen [STOC’17, FOCS’17]
                                                obtained a Las-Vegas data structure, however, with subpolynomial worst-case update time.
                                                Their algorithm was subsequently de-randomized [FOCS’20].
                                                   In this article, we present a new dynamic connectivity algorithm based on the popular
                                                core graph framework that maintains a hierarchy interleaving vertex and edge sparsification.
                                                Previous dynamic implementations of the core graph framework required subpolynomial update
                                                time. In contrast, we show how to implement it for dynamic connectivity with polylogarithmic
                                                expected worst-case update time.
                                                   We further show that the algorithm can be de-randomized efficiently: a deterministic static
                                                algorithm for computing a connectivity edge-sparsifier of low congestion in time T (m) · m on an
                                                m-edge graph yields a deterministic dynamic connectivity algorithm with O(T  e (m)) worst-case
                                                update time. Via current state-of-the-art algorithms [STOC’24], we obtain T (m) = mo(1) and
                                                recover deterministic subpolynomial worst-case update time.


                                        1       Introduction
                                        The fully-dynamic connectivity problem is one of the most central problems on dynamic graphs. In
                                        its most basic form, it asks to maintain whether a dynamic graph is connected. This has been the
                                        first problem on dynamic graphs that has been studied, and continues to be researched extensively
                                        [SP75, CH78, Har82, Fre85, HK95, HdLT01, Tho00, PT07, KKM13, WN13, Wan15, GKKT15,
                                        NS17, WN17, NSWN17, CGL+ 20, GRST21, HHK+ 23].
                                             Many techniques that later found broad application in (dynamic) graph algorithms were de-
                                        veloped in the context of connectivity. These include reductions from general to sparse graphs
                                        [Fre85, EGIN97], topology-trees and top trees [Fre97, AHLT05], reductions from fully-dynamic to
                                            ∗
                                            The research leading to these results has received funding from grant no. 200021 204787 of the Swiss National
                                        Science Foundation. Simon Meierhans is supported by a Google PhD Fellowship.


                                                                                               1
decremental graphs [HK95, HdLT01], the emergency planning setting [PT07], and most recently
the development of expander pruning techniques [WN17, NS17, NSWN17, SW19].
    Although deterministic algorithms with amortized polylogarithmic update time were developed
in the 90s [HK95, HdLT01], turning amortized into worst-case bounds has proven much more
challenging. To date, finding a deterministic algorithm with polylogarithmic worst-case update
time remains a major open problem.
The Kapron-King-Mountjoy algorithm. In 2013, Kapron, King, and Mountjoy [KKM13]
presented a breakthrough algorithm that maintains a spanning tree of a dynamic graph with worst-
case polylogarithmic update time—an achievement that was awarded the SODA’13 best paper
award. Their algorithm maintains a spanning tree, and whenever a tree edge gets deleted, it re-
connects the tree with another edge crossing this cut as long as such an edge exists. If there is
exactly one edge left in the cut after the deletion, the authors show that this edge can be found via
a simple bit trick. Then, they show that adequately sub-sampling the graph reduces to this case.
Although this step is algorithmically simple, the analysis is highly non-trivial.
    This elegant algorithm has two major drawbacks:

   • Monte-Carlo property: Sub-sampling only works with high probability, and if the algo-
     rithm fails to recover an edge, it is impossible to know if we got very unlucky or if the graph
     is truly disconnected. Thus, the algorithm is only correct with high probability.

   • Oblivious adversary assumption: the algorithm only succeeds if updates are independent
     of the internal state of the algorithm. This means, in particular, that an adversary with access
     to the underlying spanning tree can foil the algorithm.

The Nanongkai-Saranurak-Wulff-Nilsen Algorithm. In 2017, Nanongkai, Saranurak and
Wulff-Nilsen [NSWN17], building on [WN17, NS17], presented a Las-Vegas algorithm for maintain-
ing a minimum spanning tree that was subsequently de-randomized in [CGL+ 20]. Their algorithm is
based on expander graph contractions, and combines them with ideas that date back to [Fre85]. To
dynamically maintain expander graphs, they developed expander pruning. The ensuing expander
framework was highly influential in both static and dynamic algorithms, and expander pruning has
among others led to breakthrough algorithms for computing expander decompositions [SW19], and
is heavily used in the currently fastest and arguably simplest algorithm for solving decremental and
static minimum-cost flow [vdBCK+ 24].
    While this algorithm addresses the drawbacks of the [KKM13]-algorithm, it again has two major
drawbacks:

   • Subpolynomial Overhead: The framework from [NSWN17] seems to inherently incur
     subpolynomial worst-case update times. Even with optimal static subroutines, the algorithm
     cannot achieve polylogarithmic worst-case bounds.

   • Algorithmic Complexity: The framework is technically intricate, and its de-randomization
     via [CGL+ 20] only further exacerbates this fact.

While the algorithmic complexity may not be inherent – recent work [GRST21] achieves similar
results with greater simplicity and smaller subpolynomial factors – the subpolynomial overhead
appears fundamental to their contraction-based approach.



                                                 2
Our Contribution. We present the first Las-Vegas algorithm for the dynamic connectivity prob-
lem with polylogarithmic worst-case time.

Theorem 1.1. There is an algorithm that dynamically maintains a maximal spanning forest of a
dynamic graph G with polylogarithmic expected worst-case update time. The algorithmic guarantees
hold against an adaptive adversary1 with access to the maximal spanning forest.2

    Our algorithm is both conceptually simple and natural for dynamic connectivity.3 The key
technical contribution is implementing the highly influential dynamic core graph framework – which
also underlies state-of-the-art algorithms for maintaining distances [CKL+ 22, KMPG24, KMZ25],
electrical voltages [CGH+ 20], and cuts [vdBCK+ 24] – with only polylogarithmic overhead. While
connectivity is arguably simpler than these problems, we believe our techniques can inspire progress
on other dynamic graph problems.
    Although our algorithm remains randomized, it outlines a clear path to the ultimate goal:
a deterministic algorithm for fully-dynamic connectivity with polylogarithmic worst-case update
time. We show that a fast deterministic algorithm for computing connectivity sparsifiers with low
congestion yields such a result.

Definition 1.2 (Graph Embedding). For graph G = (V, E) and subgraph H = (V, E ′ ) ⊆ G, we
say ΠG7→H is an embedding if each edge e = (u, v) ∈ E is mapped to a uv-path ΠG7→H (e) in H.
We define the congestion of an edge e′ ∈ H to be the number of paths ΠG7→H (e) that contain e′ ,.
The congestion of ΠG7→H is defined to be the maximal congestion achieved by any e′ ∈ H.

Theorem 1.3. Let G = (V, E) be an m-edge graph. Given an algorithm A that given G computes
in deterministic time T (m) · m a subgraph H ⊆ G with O(n)
                                                      e    edges along with an embedding ΠG7→H
                      m
of congestion T (m) · n . Then, there is a deterministic algorithm for the dynamic connectivity
problem on a graph with m edges with worst-case update time O(T
                                                             e (m)).

     Theorem 1.3 gives a clear path towards an efficient deterministic algorithm. While currently,
there is not even a randomized algorithm achieving polylogarithmic T (m), it is relatively straight-
forward to achieve subpolynomial T (m) using expander embedding techniques implemented via
efficient shortest path data structures (see [CKL+ 22, VDBCK+ 23, CKGS23, KMPG24, KMZ25]).
Thus, we retrieve a deterministic dynamic connectivity algorithm with subpolynomial worst-case
update time.
     We point out that the maximal spanning forest maintained by our algorithm only undergoes at
most 2 edge updates per update to G and thus changes can be outputted explicitly. Our algorithm
also works against a non-oblivious adversary, i.e. an adversary that has access to the entire internal
state of the algorithm including its random bits. Finally, we remark that by the black box reduction
from [BFH21], the polylogarithmic expected worst-case update time could be transformed into an
update time that is polylogarithmic with high probability.
   1
      In fact, our algorithm is non-oblivious, i.e., it works even against an adversary that has access to the entire state
of the algorithm, including its random bits.
    2
      Our algorithm explicitly outputs changes to the spanning forest and ensures that it undergoes at most 2 edge
updates per update to G.
    3
      We remark that any algorithm maintaining a spanning forest can be used to maintain a (1 + ϵ) approximate
minimum spanning tree of a weighted graph G = (V, E, w) with an additional multiplicative overhead of log(U )/ϵ in
the update time where w(e) ∈ [1, U ] (See Corollary 3.17).



                                                            3
1.1    Overview
The Dynamic Core Graph Framework. The dynamic core graph framework solves graph
problems by maintaining a hierarchy that alternates between two types of sparsification: vertex-
sparsifiers (called core graphs) and edge-sparsifiers.
     Consider an input graph G with n vertices and m = O(n)
                                                          e     edges. Then, one cannot substantially
reduce the number of edges in G without compromising important graph properties. Instead, the
framework selects a forest F consisting of n/κ components for some parameter κ, then contracts
these components in G to reduce the vertex count to n/κ. The graph after contraction is called
a core graph and denoted by C(G, F ). While C(G, F ) does not necessarily reduce the number of
edges, edge sparsification can now aim to reduce the edge count to O(n/κ).
                                                                       e
     The central challenge in implementing this framework is finding a forest F such that the core
graph C(G, F ) either preserves the desired property from G or allows efficient extraction of this
property. When dynamizing this approach, the time to update C(G, F ) after an update to G
typically scales polynomially in κ. It is therefore desirable to choose κ small and iterate the vertex
and edge sparsification process until the problem size becomes small. This yields a hierarchy with
Λ = Θ(logκ m) levels.
     The key challenge in maintaining such a hierarchy dynamically is using core graphs and edge
sparsifiers that can be maintained with small recourse. That is, for some small parameter τ , each
insertion or deletion to graph G should cause at most τ changes in C(G, F ) and its sparsifier. Since
core graphs and their edge sparsifiers operate on top of each other, recourse multiplies across levels.
Previous approaches obtained a total recourse bound of at most τ O(Λ) across the hierarchy for each
update to G.
     Previous algorithms choose subpolynomial κ (i.e., κ = mo(1) ) and typically achieve τ = O(1),
                                                                                                 e
resulting in subpolynomial overhead. In contrast, we need polylogarithmic κ (i.e., κ = O(1)), which
                                                                                          e
yields subpolynomial (or larger) recourse bounds unless the recourse per level is at most one,
i.e., τ ≤ 1! This requires highly efficient algorithms combined with extremely careful analysis.

Formal Definition of the Dynamic Core Graph Framework. Given a graph G = (V, E),
its core graph with respect to a spanning forest F ⊆ G is the graph C(G, F ) obtained from G
by contracting the tree components in F into single vertices and removing self-loops. An edge
sparsifier H ⊆ G is a graph that preserves some property of G while being substantially sparser.
Typically, for G having n vertices, one aims for H to have only O(n)e       edges.
    The core graph framework maintains a hierarchy G0 , H0 , G1 , H1 , . . . , G
                                                      b    b    b  b           bΛ , H
                                                                                    b Λ (for Λ = Θ(logκ n)).
The graph G  b 0 is the input graph G. For i ≥ 0, H   b i is an edge sparsifier of G     b i , and for i > 0,
Gi = C(Hi−1 , Fi ) is the core graph of Hi−1 obtained by contracting along the tree components of
 b        b                               b
some forest Fi .
    This completes the formal description of the core graph framework. Before proceeding, we note
an important subtlety: deletion of an edge from a forest Fi splits one of its components into two,
resulting in a vertex split of the corresponding vertex in Gb i (and H
                                                                     b i ). Thus, besides handling edge
updates, one must also control recourse for such vertex splits.

Connectivity in the Core Graph Framework. While connectivity is arguably the simplest
graph property to maintain, we believe this problem provides an excellent testbed for refining
current techniques. We first outline a static version of our algorithm:



                                                     4
    • Implementing the core graphs: To form the core graphs, we find forests Fi in the graphs
      Hb i−1 such that each component consists of at most κ vertices.4 In our algorithm, we choose
      κ = O(1)
            e    since an edge deletion to Fi might require investigating an entire component of Fi
      to update G b i . Since contractions preserve connectivity, the forest Fi serves as a certificate for
      the connectivity of vertices contracted into super-vertices in G  bi .

    • Implementing the edge sparsification: We first find a ϕ-expander decomposition of G
                                                                                        bi ,
      which is a vertex partition X1 , X2 , . . . , Xη such that:

         1. for each 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ η, Gb i [Xℓ ] is a ϕ-expander meaning for every cut (S, Xℓ \ S), |E(S, Xℓ \
            S)| ≥ ϕ · min{volGbi (S), volGbi (Xℓ \ S)}, and
                                                                  b i [Xℓ ] is q · ϕ · m for some
         2. the number of edges not in any such expander subgraph G
            q = O(1).
                e

      We choose ϕ such that q · ϕ · m ≤ m/4, which can be achieved with ϕ = Ω(1). e     Then, we let H  bi
      be the graph obtained from these edges, and add for each expander graph Gi [Xℓ ] a spanning
                                                                                      b
      tree Tℓ . This effectively reduces the number of edges in H b i by a factor of 2, i.e., H
                                                                                              b i consists
      of less than half the number of edges in Hb i−1 .
      Clearly, the connectivity on expanders is preserved in H b i by the spanning trees Tℓ , and the
      remaining connectivity information is simply added to Hb i . Thus, Hb i preserves the connectivity
      information of Gi .
                       b

We interleave the above vertex sparsification and edge sparsification and, if G is connected, obtain a
hierarchy where GbΛ = H b Λ consists of only polylogarithmically many vertices for some Λ = O(log m).
Both core graphs and edge sparsification can be implemented in O(m)   e     randomized time via the
classic techniques of Frederickson [Fre85] and the seminal result on expander decompositions from
[SW19].

Controlling the Recourse in the Dynamic Algorithm. We next outline how to dynamize the
algorithm above. As mentioned, the key challenge is controlling the recourse across the hierarchy.
Recall that we cannot afford recourse per level larger than 1, as this would result in unacceptable
blow-up over the levels. However, since edge insertions do not affect the connectivity certificates
(i.e., the forests) of higher levels in the hierarchy, we can essentially ignore insertions and add them
only to the top level graph G   bΛ .
     On the other hand, an edge deletion might indeed require us to restore some connectivity
information. There are three possible scenarios for how the deletion of an edge e can affect a level
i in the hierarchy:

   1. if e is in Fi , the deletion results in a vertex split of a vertex in G
                                                                            b i (and H
                                                                                     b i ).

   2. if e is in H
                 b i , then it can be processed as an edge deletion to our edge sparsifier.

   3. if e is in neither, then we can ignore the effect of removing e as no certificate at a higher level
      requires it.
   4
     This is slightly imprecise, we rather aim for each component to be incident to at most κ volume with respect to
H
b i−1 .



                                                         5
    We show that in both of the first two cases, we can compensate for the deletion of e by adding
only O(1)
       e    new edges to Hb i . Note that adding edges can be treated like edge insertions and thus
effectively ignored and forwarded to the highest level of the hierarchy.
    Of course, once we have added many edges to G        b Λ (and Hb Λ ), these graphs are no longer of
polylogarithmic size. This can be mitigated by rebuilding graphs at level i and higher every 2i
steps and factoring in edges that have been inserted since the last rebuild. Our approach achieves
O(1)
 e    worst-case update time under the assumption that edge deletions result at each level in adding
at most O(1)
          e    edges to the sparsifier H
                                       b i . To do so, we distribute the computation of a rebuild over
sufficiently many updates.

Dynamic Edge Sparsification. It remains to describe how to dynamize our edge sparsification
procedure. Recall that we only have to react to vertex splits/edge deletions.
    Let us first discuss how to deal with the more standard update of an edge deletion: when an
edge e is deleted from an expander graph G[Xb ℓ ], we apply expander pruning techniques to prune out
a set Pℓ ⊆ Xℓ of volume O(1) such that Gi [Xℓ \ Pℓ ] is still a Ω(1)-expander.
                           e                b                      e             We rely on the recent
new expander pruning algorithm from [MGS25] that allows us to process many edge deletions to
the expander while growing Pi only O(1) e    in volume at each step.5
    Since the added volume to Pℓ is in O(1), e       we can afford to simply add all edges incident to
Pℓ to Hi (only one of the expander graphs can contain the deleted edge e). We are almost done
       b
restoring the invariants from initialization. However, we still have to deal with the case that Tℓ
might be no longer spanning Xℓ \ Pℓ but instead only be a forest (for technical reasons, we delete
edges incident to Pℓ from Tℓ , however, crucially, we do not remove them from H      b i ). In this case,
let C be the smallest connected component of the forest, then we have from the expander property
that a Ω(1)-fraction
        e             of the edges incident to C leave C. We use random sampling to find such an
edge and add it to Tbi and H b i . We then repeat this procedure until Tℓ is spanning again.
    Finally, the case of a vertex split can be handled similarly: by carefully constructing our hier-
archy, we can ensure that each vertex in G    b i is incident to at most O(1)
                                                                         e    edges. We then simulate
a vertex split by removing all incident edges to the vertex and then re-inserting the two result-
ing vertices with all their edges. This process can be simulated with an additional blow-up by a
O(1)-factor
 e           in the recourse in terms of insertions.

Putting It All Together. Let us briefly review the algorithm: we have given an implementation
of the dynamic core graph framework where we obtain extremely tight control over the recourse
by only passing edge deletions up the hierarchy to be processed and by collecting O(1)
                                                                                   e     new edges
to be inserted to potentially recover connectivity and adding them only to the top level graph. To
keep graphs small across the hierarchy, we use periodic rebuilds.
    In our discussion, we have omitted many details to highlight the main conceptual ideas. The
reader is referred to Section 3 for rigorous definitions and proofs.

De-randomization of the dynamic connectivity data structure. Finally, let us briefly
sketch how to obtain a deterministic data structure by following the same framework. Assume
that edge sparsifier H
                     b i can be computed along with an embedding Π b b from G
                                                                    Gi 7→Hi
                                                                                b i into H
                                                                                         b i with
congestion α (see Definition 1.2). Consider the following dynamic update strategy: whenever an
   5
   The seminal work in [SW19] achieves this guarantee only via amortization; some steps might not grow Pi at all,
some grow it significantly. It is crucial for our algorithm to have worst-case guarantees.


                                                       6
edge e is deleted from H  b i , find all edges e′ from G  b i with e ∈ Π b b (e′ ) and simply add them to
                                                                           Gi 7→Hi
Hb i . Clearly, the algorithm only adds at most α edges at each level. And, clearly, H              b i preserves
                                       b                                        ′
the connectivity information of Gi at all times: for every edge e in Gi , either there still is an
                                                                                       b
explicit path between its endpoints in H    b i , or the edge e′ is itself in H b i . For α = O(1)
                                                                                              e    and assuming
such a sparsifier Hi along with an embedding can be computed in deterministic near-linear time,
                    b
this yields a deterministic dynamic connectivity algorithm with polylogarithmic worst-case update
time.
      We give a more detailed discussion of the reduction and other approaches towards efficient
de-randomization in Section 3.7.


2     Preliminaries
Misc.      We let [n] = 1, . . . , n, and [n]0 = 0, . . . , n.

Graphs.       We let G = (V, E) denote a graph with vertex set V and edge set E ⊆ V × V . For
            P degG (v) denote the number of edges adjacent to vertex v and for any A ⊆ V , we let
v ∈ V , we let
volG (A) = a∈A degG (a) denote the volume of A.
                                          def
    For A, B ⊆ V , we let E(A, B) = {(u, v) ∈ E : u ∈ A ∧ v ∈ B} be the set of edges with one
endpoint in A and one endpoint in B. For A ⊂ V , we let G[A] denote the induced subgraph on
A, i.e. G[A] = (A, E(A, A)). For notational convenience, we sometimes write G ∪ E ′ instead of
(V, E ∪ E ′ ) and G \ E ′ instead of (V, E \ E ′ ).
    In a graph G = (V, E), we call a vertex set ∅ ⊂ A ⊆ V connected (in G) if E(B, A \ B) ̸= ∅
for all B such that ∅ ⊊ B ⊊ A. If additionally E(A, V \ A) = ∅, the we refer to A as a connected
component of G. We call the partition of the vertex set into such components the connected
components of G.

Trees and Forests. We call a graph G = (V, E) a tree if it is connected and has exactly |V | − 1
edges. We call a collections of trees a forest. We usually use T and F to refer to graphs that are
trees and forests respectively.
     We call a forest F a spanning forest of G if they share the same vertex set and F ⊆ G and say
it is a maximal spanning forest if F and G additionally share the same connected components.

Dynamic Graphs. A dynamic graph G is a graph whose vertex and edge sets change over time.
Formally, we define such a dynamic graph as a tuple of sequences ((G(i) )i∈[T ]0 , (U (i) )i∈[T ] ). Then,
the entry G(0) refers to the intitial graph, and G(i) is obtained by applying the update sequence
U (i) to G(i−1) . An update sequence U (i) may contain updates of the following types.

    1. Edge Insertion: Adds a new edge to the edge set of the graph.

    2. Edge Deletion: Deletes an edge from the edge set of the graph.

    3. Vertex Split: Replaces a vertex v in the graph with two new vertices v ′ and v ′′ . Every edge
       incident to v becomes incident to either v ′ or v ′′ .




                                                          7
3     Dynamic Maximal Spanning Forest via Core Graphs
In this section, we describe how to maintain a maximal spanning forest of a graph with only
polylogarithmic update time.

Theorem 3.1. Assume to be given an edge-dynamic graph G = (V, E), initially consisting of m
edges undergoing a sequence of at most m edge insertions/deletions. Then, there is a data structure
with initialization time O(m)
                         e    that explicitly maintains an edge-dynamic forest F ⊆ G at any step
with worst-case update time O(1)
                            e     (holding w.h.p.), such that F remains a maximal spanning forest
of G at all times.

    Note that Theorem 1.1 claims expected worst case update time instead of polylogarithmic
worst-case update time. These guarantees are equivalent up to polylogarithmic loss in efficiency by
a black box reduction from [BFH21].
    By standard reductions (See [Fre85]), we assume w.l.o.g. that the input graph G = (V, E) has
maximum degree 3 at all times. To further simplify the exposition, we first describe a version of
our algorithm that achieves the guarantees in Theorem 3.1 with amortized update time O(1).e     We
discuss a de-amortization of our algorithm via standard techniques in Section 3.5.

3.1   The Main Algorithm
Our algorithm maintains a hierarchy of core graphs. We start by giving the definition.

Definition 3.2 (Core Graph). Given a graph G = (V, E) and a spanning forest F we let C(G, F )
denote the graph obtained from G via contracting the tree components in F into single vertices and
removing self-loops.

Remark 3.3. When C(G, F ) is clear from context, we denote for each vertex u ∈ V , by u          b the
image of u under the contraction operation. For each edge e = (u, v) ∈ E, we denote by eb either
the edge (b          b ̸= vb or an empty pointer ⊥ for u
          u, vb) for u                                 b = vb. We also say that u is in the pre-image
of u
   b and e is in the pre-image of eb.

    Observe that for core graph C(G, F ) and F ⊆ G, we have that for every u, v ∈ V , u and v are
                   b and vb are connected in C(G, F ). This directly follows because the contracted
connected in G iff u
components are connected, which is certified by the corresponding tree. We exploit this fact (often
implicitly) throughout.
    As in previous dynamic algorithms that employed core graphs, the key to efficiency of our data
structure is that whenever we take a core graph, the underlying forest F has each tree T in F
incident to small volume. We make this constraint qualitative and say F is κ-shattering if the
volume incident to each tree is at most κ.

Definition 3.4 (Shattering Forest). Given graphs G = (V, E) and H ⊆ G, we call a forest F ⊆ G
consisting of trees T1 , . . . , Tη a κ-shattering forest with respect to H if volH (V (Ti )) ≤ κ for all
i ∈ 1, . . . , η and V (G) = V (F ).

     Our data structure maintains a hierarchy over Λ+1 layers for Λ = ⌈log2 m⌉+4. At initialization
and after every update, we update the hierarchy one layer after another in increasing order of i,
i.e. we process layer i before processing layer i + 1. We let time t refer to the number of updates to
G processed, that is, initialization takes place at time 0, and the processing after the t-th update

                                                   8
                                                         def 
to t takes place at time t. We define for 0 ≤ i ≤ Λ, xi = 2Λ−i−3 . Then, we re-initialize layer i
                                                                    

at every time step t divisible by xi .
    We let F0 = (V, ∅), G
                        b 0 = G, H
                                 b 0 = G, H0 = G at all times. At time t, at each layer i = 1, . . . , Λ,
the data structure maintains:
   1. Fi : A spanning forest with Fi ⊆ Fi−1 ∪ Hi−1 . We distinguish as follows:
         • If t is divisible by xi : Fi is re-initialized to be κ-shattering forest w.r.t. Hi−1 where
              def
           κ = 8 · 108.
         • Otherwise: if at time t an edge e is deleted from G, we also remove e from Fi (to ensure
           Fi ⊆ Fi−1 ∪ Hi−1 ). Otherwise, Fi is not updated.
      b i : The current core graph C(Fi ∪ Hi−1 , Fi ).
   2. G

   3. H
      b i : A connectivity sparsifier of G                            bi ⊆ G
                                           b i at all times. That is, H    b i and u, v ∈ V b are connected
                                                                                           Hi
      H
      b i iff they are connected in G b i . Again, we distinguish as follows:

         • If t is divisible by xi : we rebuild H
                                                b i to be of size at most O(|V b |).
                                                                              Hi
         • Otherwise: after every update to G, Hi−1 ∪ Fi is updated before updating H            b i . For every
           insertion of edge e = (u, v) to Hi−1 ∪ Fi , we add the edge eb = (b                    b ̸= vb (w.r.t.
                                                                                  u, vb) to Hi if u
                                                                                            b
           Gb i ). Further, we will show that there is at most one deletion to Hi−1 ∪ Fi per update to
           G at a later stage.
           If such an edge deletion occurs, say edge e = (u, v) is deleted from Hi−1 ∪ Fi . Let
           bOLD , vbOLD refer to u, v in the graph G
           u                                          b i before processing at time t, and u      bNEW , vbNEW
                                                  bOLD = vbOLD .
           after. In particular, if e ∈ Fi , then u
           Then, we simlate that u     bOLD and vbOLD are deleted from H  b i , identify a set of edges ∆E    bi
           that ensures that upon being added, Hi \ {bb      u, vb} ∪ ∆Ei is a connectivity sparsifier of
                                                                        b
           Gb i \ {buNEW , vbNEW } and finally add to H                 bNEW , vbNEW along with all their
                                                       b i the vertices u
           edges incident in G       b 7→ vbOLD ?
                                bi . u
                            b i , that is Hi = (V, {e | eb ∈ E(H
   4. Hi : The pre-image of H                                  b i )}).
    We update each of these components in the order that they are listed. We observe that every
forest Fi ⊆ G. Further, our algorithm maintains the following key invariant for the hierarchy, whose
proof is deferred to Section 3.4.
Invariant 3.5. For any layer i ∈ [Λ], we have
             (#connected components in Fi ) ≤ (#connected components in G) + 2Λ−i−1 .
    We let FΛ be the spanning forest that our algorithm outputs. By Invariant 3.5 and FΛ ⊆ G,
FΛ is a maximal spanning forest of G.
    We store each forest Fi in a link-cut tree data structure with worst-case update time O(log2 n)
[DSST86]. This link-cut tree data structure additionally guarantees that a copy of the whole data
structure can be made in worst-case time O(log2 n).6
    We give the missing implementation details in the sections below and then analyze the main
data structure, which yields Theorem 3.1.
   6
    This data structure falls into the more general category of persistent data structures [DSST86]. The copying is
then emulated by storing differences to the moment that data structure was copied.


                                                        9
3.2    Implementing the Re-initialization of Fi
Below, F[ v, x] 7→ Fi−1 [v, x]

The re-initialization procedure. Recall that Fi is re-initialized to be a κ-shattering forest
w.r.t. Hi−1 . Let us now describe the precise procedure: We let Ei be the set of edges in Fi−1 that
are incident to an endpoint of an edge in EHi−1 . The algorithm first computes the branch free set
Bi of VEi in Fi−1 , i.e. Bi is the set of all vertices in VEi and all vertices v ∈ V for which there
exist three vertices x, y, z ∈ VEi in the component of v such that Fi−1 [v, x], Fi−1 [v, y], Fi−1 [v, z] are
pairwise disjoint. Then, it constructs the graph A    bi = C(Fi−1 ∪ Hi−1 , Fi−1 \ Bi ) where Fi−1 \ Bi
denotes the forest Fi−1 where all edges incident to Bi are removed (See Figure 1). The reason for
not directly computing a shattering forest of H   b i−1 is that it does not have sufficiently bounded
degree.




Figure 1: The black edges form a tree of Fi−1 , and the dashed red edges are in Hi−1 . Then, the
(red) endpoints of the edges in Hi−1 are included in the branch free set Bi . Finally, the blue vertices
are added to Bi , such that the paths between adjacent vertices in Bi become disjoint. The green
shaded parts are contracted to obtain graph A  bi . The graph inherits maximum degree 3 from G.

    We then take an arbitrary maximal spanning forest Fbi of Abi . For each component Tb in Fbi of
size at least κ, we invoke the algorithm in Lemma 3.6 below with parameter κ/9. We let Ebi be the
set of all edges returned by these procedures.

Lemma 3.6 (see [Fre85], Lemma 1). For an n-vertex connected tree T with maximum degree 3,
and a positive integer z such that n ≥ 3z − 2, there is an algorithm that runs in time O(n) and
returns a set E ′ ⊆ E(T ) such that each connected component in T \ E ′ contains at least z and at
most 3z − 2 vertices.

   For components of size less than κ, we compute an arbitrary spanning tree. Finally, we let Fi
consist of the union formed by the pre-image of Fbi \ E
                                                      bi and forest Fi−1 \ B.

Analysis.    Let us briefly analyze the re-initialization procedure.

Claim 3.7. After re-initialization, Fi is κ-shattering with respect to Hi−1 . For every connected
component C of G, the forest Fi [C] is either a tree, or it consists of at most 108
                                                                                 κ · |EHi−1 [C] | compo-
nents. Finally, |EAbi | ≤ 5 · |EHi−1 |.

Proof. By construction, we have for each u ∈ Bi that u  b in core graph A  bi have u = ub. Since
V (EHi−1 ) ⊆ Bi , we have that every super-vertex u
                                                  b in Ai stemming from contraction of a non-
                                                        b
singleton set U is spanned by some tree TU ⊆ Fi−1 that is not incident to any edge in Hi−1 .



                                                    10
     We next prove that Ai has maximum degree 3 and thus the assumption of Lemma 3.6 is satisfied
for Fbi ⊆ A
          bi : we first note that vertices u        b with u  b = u for some u ∈ V have maximum degree 3 since
Fi−1 ∪ Hi−1 ⊆ G and G having maximum degree 3. Further observe that each u                   b stemming from the
contraction of a non-singleton set U has at most 2 edges leaving in Fi−1 . Otherwise, we can find
for each subtree T1 , T2 , . . . , Tk for k ≥ 3 dangling from these edges at least one vertex b1 , b2 , . . . , bk
from Bi in the respective subtree which implies that for some vertex u ∈ U , the intersection of
paths Fi−1 [b1 , b2 ], Fi−1 [b2 , b3 ], Fi−1 [b1 , b3 ] is u and thus u is a branching vertex. But since Bi ∩ U is
empty, this yields a contradiction.
     Next, fix any connected component C of G. We use the well-known fact that the branch
free set Bi ∩ C of set |VEHi−1 [C] | is at most twice as large as the underlying set, i.e. |Bi ∩ C| ≤
2 · |VE
      Hi−1 [C]
              | ≤ 4 · |EHi−1[C]
                                  |. It follows that, for C    b being the connected component C after applying
the same contractions that produced Ai , we have |VAi [C] b | ≤ 12 · |EHi−1 [C] | since there are no edges
between vertices u b stemming from the contraction of non-singleton sets and the vertices u     b stemming
from singleton sets have maximum degree 3. This yields, by Lemma 3.6, that Fbi [C] \ E           bi [C] is κ-
shattering w.r.t. the graph A bi (each cluster has at most 3κ/9 − 2 < κ/3 vertices, each of degree at
most 3) and that there are at most |VAi |/(κ/9) ≤ 108 κ · |EHi | connected components.
    It then remains that ’uncontracting’ the vertices u   b stemming from non-singleton sets U in
Fi [C] \ Ei [C] such that the trees TU spanning U are added again, does not connect any vertices
 b       b
in Bi ∩ C, but also does not create additional components. Thus, Fi [C] is κ-shattering w.r.t.
Hi−1 [C] ⊆ Fi−1 [C] ∪ Hi−1 [C] and the number of components is again at most 108       κ · |EHi [C] |.
    Finally, the number of edges from Fi−1 that are in A  bi can be bounded because contracting the
paths between vertices in the branch free sets yields trees with at most 2 · |EHi−1 | vertices, and
therefore also edges. For every such contracted path, we add at most 2 edges to A        bi . Therefore, the
total number of edges in Ai is bounded by 5 · |EHi−1 | as desired.
                           b

                                                                               e H |).
Claim 3.8. The algorithm to re-initialize forest Fi can be implemented in time O(|E i−1


Proof. Let us follow the insights used in Claim 3.7. We can find the set Bi of branching vertices
in time O(|Bi | log n) by slightly augmenting the link-cut tree data structure on Fi−1 (for details,
see [vdBCK+ 24]). Thus, we can construct the graph A                             e H ||). Comput-
                                                          bi explicitly in time O(|E
                                                                                      i−1
                                                              e H |) as does the procedure from
ing a maximal spanning forest of Fbi statically takes time O(|E      i−1

Lemma 3.6 to compute edge set E                                           e H |) by making a copy
                                   bi . We can then construct Fi in time O(|E
                                                                                i−1
of Fi−1 (using persistence), removing all edges incident to vertices in Bi , and adding the pre-images
of all edges in Fbi \ E
                      bi .


3.3    Implementing the Connectivity Sparsifier H
                                                b i of G
                                                       bi
In this section, we describe how to maintain connectivity sparsifiers H
                                                                      b i of G
                                                                             b i with the required
guarantees.

Expanders and Expander Decompositions. Expanders have been crucial in many previous
connectivity data structures [PT07, NS17, WN17, NSWN17] and we also heavily employ them in
our construction. We state a seminal result in the area.




                                                       11
Definition 3.9 (Expander Decomposition). For a graph G and some set A ⊆ V , we let volG (A) =
P                                                                              |E(A,V \A)|
   a∈A degG (a) denote the volume of A. We then call G a ϕ-expander if volG (A) ≥ ϕ for every
set A ⊃ ∅ such that volG (A) ≤ volG (V )/2.
    We say a partition X1 , . . . , Xη of the vertex set V is a ϕ-expander decomposition of quality q if

   1. |{(u, v) ∈ E(Xi , Xj ) : i ̸= j}| ≤ q · ϕ · m and

   2. G[Xi ] is a ϕ-expander for all 1 ≤ i ≤ η.

Theorem 3.10 (Expander Decomposition, See Theorem 1.2 in [SW19]). Given a graph G = (V, E)
with m edges and n vertices, and a parameter ϕ, there is a randomized
                                                                       algorithm
                                                                                   that computes a
                                                3               m log4 m
ϕ-expander decomposition of quality γexp = O(log m) in time O       ϕ      . The algorithm succeeds
w.h.p.

    It is well-known that expanders are relatively robust to updates, meaning that most of the
expander remains well-connected, and efficient algorithms exist to uncover these well-connected
parts by pruning small parts that are potentially poorly connected. Here, we use a very recent
result that achieves O(1)
                     e    worst-case update times and recourse.

Theorem 3.11 (Worst-Case Pruning, See Theorem 1.3 in [MGS25]). Given a ϕ-expander G =
                                                     ϕm
(V, E) with n vertices and m edges undergoing up to γprune edge deletions for γprune = O(1),
                                                                                       e     there
                                                                                      ϕ
is an algorithm that explicitly maintains a set A such that G[V \ A] remains a γprune   - expander.
Every deletions/vertex split is processed in time γprune /ϕ and the set A grows by at most γprune /ϕ2
                                                           2

vertices after each update.

The Connectivity Sparsifier.            Equipped with these tools we are now ready to describe the
algorithm to maintain H
                      bi:

      • If t is divisible by xi : We re-compute H   b i as follows. We first compute a ϕsparse -expander
        decomposition X1 , X2 , . . . , Xη of the current graph G b i for ϕsparse = 1/(20γexp ) = Θ(1)
                                                                                                  e    where
        γexp is the quality parameter in Theorem 3.10. It then initializes a data structure Pj on each
        ϕsparse -expander D bj = G b i [Xj ].

        Finally, we compute a spanning tree Tbj for each expander D    b j and re-initialize H
                                                                                             b i as the
        union of all trees Tbj and the set of edges crossing between expanders, i.e. the set {(u, v) ∈
        EGbi (Xj , Xk ) | j ̸= k}.7

      • Otherwise: As already mentioned previously, we will show that at every time step t, Hi−1 ∪ Fi
        undergoes at most one edge deletion.
        Let us now describe how to update H  b i such that it is again a connectivity sparsifier of G
                                                                                                    bi .
        We first handle the edge deletion to Hi−1 ∪ Fi (if it occurs):

           – Let e = (u, v) be the edge that is deleted. For each zb ∈ {b    uOLD , vbOLD } (for e ∈ Fi ,
             u
             b OLD = vbOLD ), we do the following: we first remove all edges incident to zb from Hbi.
  7
    If the graph D
                 b j is disconnected, we restart the entire data structure. This only happens when the expander
decomposition algorithm from Theorem 3.10 fails.



                                                      12
            If there is a graph Db j as described above that contains zb, then we also remove all incident
            edges to zb from Dj and inform the pruning data structure Pj . If no such graph D
                              b                                                                         b j exists,
            we do nothing in this step. Otherwise, if the data structure Pj received the maximum
            number of updates already, we add D      b j to H b i and then set D  b j to be the empty graph.
            Otherwise, let ∆A be the set of vertices outputted by Pj due to the updates caused.
            Clearly, zb ∈ ∆A. Add all edges incident to ∆A in D        b j to Hb i (if e ∈ Fi , replace ub = vb by
            the new vertices u b and vb resulting from the vertex split and move the edges incident to
            b to the right endpoint). Additionally, add 2 · γprune · κ/ϕsparse edges from D
            u                                                                                       bj \ H
                                                                                                         b i to H
                                                                                                                bi
            (as long as such edges exist).
            Then, induce the tree Tbj and the graph D      b j on vertex set V b \ ∆A. After inducing, the
                                                                                 Dj
            tree Tbj is potentially a forest. To remedy this, while there are components C1 , C2 , . . . , Cν
            for ν ≥ 2, take the smallest such connected component, say C1 , and sample uniformly
            at random an edge incident to C1 in D       b j until an edge fb is found that leaves C1 . Add
            the edge fb to Tbj and H  b j and repeat the process.8
            Finally, add the new projections u   bNEW , vbNEW back into H     b i together with their incident
            edges (now potentially with different endpoints).

       Then, we handle the set of edge insertions to Hi−1 ∪ Fi :

         – For every edge e inserted, if eb = ⊥, we do nothing; otherwise we add eb to H
                                                                                       bi.

Analysis.      Again, let us analyze the procedures.

Claim 3.12. At all times H
                         b i remains a connectivity sparsifier of G
                                                                  bi .

Proof. For the re-initialization procedure, correctness follows immediately since spanning trees are
clearly connectivity sparsifiers of connected graphs.
    In our update procedure, we have that insertions to Hi−1 ∪ Fi are added to H     b i if they are added
to Gi , and thus connectivity is preserved.
    b
    Let us now analyze the deletion of an edge (u, v) ∈ Hi−1 ∪ Fi : we first delete the images of
endpoints u   bOLD , vbOLD with all their incident edges from Hb i . Then, we prune some vertices from
graphs D b j , add the edges incident to the pruned vertex set to H  b i and then add the (fixed) tree Tbj
to Hi for each affected graph.
    b
    But this implies that H   b i consists of spanning trees of connected components formed by each
Dj and all remaining edges in G
 b                                   b i by the end of the update. Thus, clearly, H b i is a connectivity
sparsifier of H b i at any time.

Claim 3.13. At each time t divisible by xi , graph Hi consists of at most 108   κ · |EHi−1 | + 2γexp ·
ϕsparse · |EHi−1 | edges. At each time t not divisible by xi , Hi undergoes at most one edge deletion
and at most 4i · κ2 · γprune /ϕ2sparse edge insertions.

Proof. At each time t divisible by xi , layer i is rebuilt. Let us first bound the number of edges it
contains after a rebuild.
   8
    If re-connecting takes time ≫ O(log n) · γprune /ϕsparse , we re-start the whole data structure. We show that this
only happens with probability 1/nC for some large constant C.




                                                         13
    By Claim 3.7, we have |EAbi | ≤ 5·|EHi−1 |. We directly obtain |EGbi | ≤ |EAbi | ≤ 5·|EHi−1 |. We first
bound the number of edges between expander components Xj in the expander decomposition. By
Theorem 3.10, the total number of such edges is bounded by ϕsparse |EGbi | ≤ 5 · γexp · ϕsparse · |EHi−1 |.
All other edges in H b i are part of spanning trees Tbj of expander components Xj . We notice that
singleton compoents do not contribute any edges. Therefore, the total number of such edges is at
most 108κ |EHi−1 |. This concludes the proof of the first part of the claim.
    If the update at time t is an insertion, then Hi undergoes at most one insertion and no deletions.
Therefore, we focus on edge deletions. Since Hi ⊆ G, a deletion to G clearly only causes one deletion
to Hi .
    Recall that after every deletion, each layer j ≤ i outputs a set of edges ∆E     bj , and Hi is updated
                         S
by adding the edge set j≤i ∆Ej . We first bound the size of the set ∆E      bj for every j. If both mapped
endpoints of the edge are not contained in some graph D     b k at this layer, the set is empty. Otherwise,
let us assume that the data structure Pk has not yet processed the maximum number of updates.
In that case simulating the edge deletion/vertex split on D    b k takes at most κ/3 edge deletions to Pk .
Each of these will cause up to κγprune /ϕ2sparse edges to enter the set ∆Ej by Theorem 3.11. Finally
another κ2γprune /ϕsparse arbitrary edges are added. Afterwards, the tree Tbk is repaired. Since there
are at most κγprune /ϕ2sparse edge deletions to Tbk , this adds at most κγprune /ϕ2sparse extra edges.
    Finally, we observe that whenever Pk processed the maximum amount of deletions, the extra
edges added in each previous step ensure that every edge incident to Dk is already in the graph
Hk .
    In this proof, we ignored failures. Whenever such a failure occurs with probability 1/nC for
some large constant C, we re-start the whole algorithm and therefore t is re-set to 0.

Claim 3.14. The re-initialization of H                                            e H |) with
                                     b i and Hi can be implemented to run in time O(|E
                                                                                        i−1

high probability. For every other update, the algorithm requires expected time O(1) to update H
                                                                                e             bi
and Hi .
                                              e H |) by Claim 3.8. Then, we compute an
Proof. We first compute the tree Fi in time O(|E    i−1

expander decomposition of the resulting core graph A                                  e H |)
                                                    bi . This graph contains at most O(|E
                                                                                            i−1
edges by Claim 3.7. Therefore, the runtime of computing said expander decomposition follows
from ϕsparse = Ω(1)
               e     and Theorem 3.10. Finally, we initialize the pruning data structures on the
                                              e H |) by Theorem 3.11. This concludes the
expander components, which takes total time O(|E     i−1
runtime analysis of the re-initialization.
   We analyze the time spend with pruning and recomputing trees separately.
   • The pruning data structure takes total time O(1)
                                                 e     to prune at most κ edges by Theorem 3.11
     and the definition of our algorithm, where we use that κ = O(1).
                                                                 e

   • The sampling procedure succeeds with probability γprune /ϕsparse = Ω(1).
                                                                            e       Therefore, the
     expected update time follows directly from the fact that the total number of new edges added
     to the tree is at most 4κ2 · γprune /ϕ2sparse = O(1).
                                                     e

All other operations can be implemented in time O(1).
                                                e

3.4    Analyzing the Main Algorithm
To analyze the correctness of our algorithm, we first prove the main invariant.

                                                    14
Proof of Invariant 3.5. We first observe that for i = 0, we have F0 = (V, ∅) for every t, and therefore
the number of connected components in F0 [C] is |C| = |C|/20 as desired.
   We then strengthen the invariant for i > 0 to enable our proof.
   • Strengthened Invariant: For every layer i ≥ 0 and time t, we have

         (#connected components in Fi ) ≤ (#connected components in G) + 2Λ−i−2 + (t − ti ).
      where ti denotes the largest timestamp such that ti ≤ t and xi is divisible by ti .
We prove the strengthened invariant by induction on i and t.
    For t = 0 and i = 0 we have F0 = (V, ∅), and thus the number of connected components in F0
is |V | ≤ 2Λ−2 as desired. Then, we fix some timestamp t and layer i, and assume the strengthened
invariant holds for all pairs layers j and timesteps t′ such that either j < i and t′ ≤ t or t′ < t.
There are two cases to consider.
   • xi is divisible by t: In this case, the layer i gets rebuilt. By the induction hypothesis, we
     have that Fi−1 contains at most 2Λ−i−1 more components than G because t − ti−1 ≤ 2Λ−i−2
     throughout by the definition of our algorithm. Therefore, the claim follows from Claim 3.7
     since κ = 8 · 108.
   • Otherwise: In this case, we invoke the induction hypothesis for t − 1 and i.
      If the update is an edge deletion, then this can cause the number of connected components
      in Fi to go up by at most one. Therefore the strengthened invariant follows directly.
      If the update is an edge insertion, we distinguish two cases. Either the endpoints were already
      in the same connected component at time t − 1. In this case, the strengthened invariant
      follows by induction since the forest Fi remains unchanged. Or the edge insertions connects
      two previously disconnected components C1 and C2 . Then we have that the total number of
      connected components of Fi remains the same, but the number of connected components in
      G decreases by exactly one. Therefore, the invariant again follows.
We finally observe that t − ti ≤ 2Λ−i−3 . Therefore, the strengthened invariant implies the desired
invariant.

Lemma 3.15. The amortized update time is O(1).
                                         e

Proof. We first prove that |EHi | = O(x
                                      e i ) by induction. For our proof, we again work with a
strengthened invariant.
    • Strengthened Invariant: |EHi | ≤ 4i · κ2 · γprune /ϕ2sparse 2Λ−i + (t − ti ) , where ti denotes the
                                                                                  

      largest timestamp such that ti ≤ t and xi is divisible by ti .
For i = 0, the claim follows for every t ≤ m since |EH0 | ≤ m ≤ 2Λ where we recall that x0 > m
and therefore the layer 0 never gets rebuilt. Then, we again fix some timestamp t and layer i, and
assume the strengthened invariant holds for all pairs layers j and timestamps t′ such that either
j < i and t′ ≤ t or t′ < t.
   • xi is divisible by t: In this case, the layer i gets rebuilt. By the induction hypothesis, we
     have that Hi−1 contains at most 4(i − 1) · κ2 · γprune /ϕ2sparse (2Λ−i−1 + 2Λ−i−2 ) edges because
     t − ti−1 ≤ 2Λ−i−2 throughout by the definition of our algorithm. Therefore, the invariant
     follows from Claim 3.13 since κ = 8 · 108 and ϕsparse = 1/(20γexp ).

                                                   15
   • Otherwise: In this case, we invoke the induction hypothesis for t − 1 and i. If the update is
     an edge deletion, then this can cause the number of connected components in Fi to go up by
     at most one. Then, the invariant directly follows from Claim 3.13.

Finally, we observe that the invariant implies |EHi | = O(x    e i ) by our choice of parameters and
Theorem 3.11. Therefore, the claim directly follows because layer i gets re-initialized after xi time
steps, and the cost of re-initialization of layer i is O(H
                                                       e i−1 ) = O(x
                                                                 e i ) Lemma 3.15. All other updates
take worst-case time O(1) by Lemma 3.15, so the total update time follows by summing over the
                        e
Λ = O(log m) layers.
    Finally, failures happen with sufficiently low probability to amortize away a full rebuild.

Theorem 3.1. Assume to be given an edge-dynamic graph G = (V, E), initially consisting of m
edges undergoing a sequence of at most m edge insertions/deletions. Then, there is a data structure
with initialization time O(m)
                         e    that explicitly maintains an edge-dynamic forest F ⊆ G at any step
with worst-case update time O(1)
                            e     (holding w.h.p.), such that F remains a maximal spanning forest
of G at all times.

Proof. Follows directly from Invariant 3.5 and Lemma 3.15.

3.5   De-amortization
As presented, our algorithm only achieves amortized update times. This deficit is remedied via
standard de-amortization techniques.
    We observe that the only amortized part in the update time bound is the re-initialization, which
happens in regular intervals. This allows pre-computing such re-initializations in the background
and swapping them in at the opportune moment to obtain an algorithm with worst-case update
times.
    We remark that this technique heavily relies on pointer switching. Concretely, the algorithm
cannot output changes to the forest explicitly, and instead provide query access to the forest.
However, in Section 3.6, we provide a black-box reduction that shows that such an algorithm
suffices to maintain an explicit tree.

3.6   Maintaining an Explicit Forest
In this section, we provide a simple reduction from explicit to implicit forest maintenance.

Lemma 3.16. Assume to be given a worst-case O(1) e   update time dynamic connectivity algorithm
that provides query access to a maximal spanning forest. Then, there is a worst-case O(1)
                                                                                     e    update
time dynamic connectivity algorithm that explicitly maintains a maximum spanning forest via at
most 2 updates per step.

Proof. The algorithm initially computes an explicit maximal spanning forest F . In the following,
we let F ′ denote the implicitly maintained forest which we query. We assume that both are stored
in link-cut tree data structures [DSST86].
    Whenever an edge is inserted, the algorithm first checks if it crosses tree components in F . If
so, it adds it to F .
    Whenever an edge (u, v) is deleted from F , the algorithm checks if u and v are in the same
component in F ′ . If so, it needs to repair the tree F . To do so, it sets x ← u, y ← v. Then, it uses

                                                  16
the link-cut tree to obtain the midpoint z of the path F ′ [x, y]. It then checks if z is in the same
components as u in F . If so, we set x ← z. Otherwise, we set y ← z. We continue until the edge
(x, y) is in F ′ . Then, we add this edge to F .
    This procedure terminates in O(1)e    steps since the length of the path is halved in every step.
Furthermore, x is always in the same component of F as u, and y is always in the same component
as v. Therefore, the edge (x, y) repairs the tree in F as desired.
    Other updates do not affect the connected components of the graph.

   Similarly to Lemma 3.16, we can also obtain an algorithm that maintains a (1 + ϵ) approximate
minimum spanning tree for a graph with edge weights in [1, U ].

Corollary 3.17. Assume to be given a worst-case O(1)
                                                   e    update time dynamic connectivity algorithm
that provides query access to a maximal spanning forest. Then, there is a worst-case O(log(U
                                                                                      e        )/ϵ)
update time algorithm that explicitly maintains a (1 + ϵ) minimum spanning forest of a weighted
graph G with edge weights in [1, U ] via at most 2 updates per step.

Proof. For i = 0, . . . , k = O(log(U/ϵ)), let Gi be the subgraph of G that only contains edges with
weight at most (1 + ϵ)i .
    We then maintain an explicit spanning forest for each of the graphs Gi . We observe that the
connected components of Gi contain the connected components for Gj whenever j < i. We say an
edge has level i if Gi is the first graph in which it appears.
    We then maintain a minimum level spanning tree, i.e. a spanning tree of minimum total level.
Whenever an edge (u, v) of level i in that tree gets deleted, we first check if the corresponding
spanning forest got repaired. Otherwise, we search for the lowest level j > i such that u and v are
in the same forest and locate a repairing edge via binary search as in the proof of Lemma 3.16.
    When a new edge is inserted, we search for the highest level edge in the cycle formed by the
maintained approximate minimum spanning tree and the edge via the same technique. If this level
is higher than the level of the newly inserted edge, then we replace it in the tree.
    This procedure clearly maintains a minimum level spanning tree and can be implemented to
run in time O(k).
             e
    The claim follows since for every edge e in the tree, there is no edge of with weight < w(e)/(1+ϵ)
that connects the tree components after deleting the edge e.

3.7   A path towards De-randomization
The connectivity sparsifier is the only randomized part of our algorithm. There, randomness is used
to quickly compute an expander decomposition, and to maintain a spanning tree of an expander
graph.
    The broadest path towards de-randomizing this algorithm is to provide a connectivity sparsifier
H ⊆ G of G with an explicit embedding ΠG7→H from G to H (see Definition 1.2). Such an
embedding maps each edge e = (u, v) that is present in G to a uv-path ΠG7→H (e) in H, and ensures
that every edge in H appears on at most α·|EG |/|EH | such paths for some parameter α. The ability
to statically compute such a sparsifier suffices, because it can be maintained by simply adding all
edges whose embedding paths are broken to the sparsifier. More precisely, given an edge e from G
is deleted, then we add to H all edges e′ where e ∈ ΠG7→H (e′ ).
    The algorithm only adds at most α · |EG |/|EH | edges to H by definition of α. Since we ensure
for each graph Gb i in the hierarchy that |E(G
                                             b i )| = O(|V
                                                      e    (G
                                                            b i )|), i.e. the number of edges exceeds the


                                                   17
number of vertices by at most a polylogarithmic factor, we only add for each level O(α)   e     edges to
the hierarchy across all levels.
     Further, H preserves the connectivity information of G at all times: for every edge e′ in G,
either there still is an explicit path between its endpoints in H, or the edge e′ is itself in H. Thus,
it is simple to show by induction on the levels that the connectivity algorithm remains correct.
     Via the same analysis as in previous sections, we derive that the new algorithm runs in worst-
case update time O(α  e + T (m)) where T (m) · m is the runtime of the algorithm that statically
computes sparsifier and embedding. For α = O(T (m)), this yields Theorem 1.3.
     A sparsifier as described above along with a low-congest embedding can be obtained rather
directly via edge-decremental APSP [KMPG24, KMZ25] using ideas similar to [CKL+ 22, CKGS23],
but the total time incurred by these data structures is currently m1+o(1) instead of O(m)  e     for any
m edge graph. This yields an immediate de-randomization of our algorithm with subpolynomial
worst-case update time.
     Another plausible way toward deterministic algorithms is to de-randomize the components
of our algorithm more directly. A fundamental stepping stone would be the development of a
deterministic near-linear time algorithm to compute expander decompositions. The current state-
of-the-art algorithm takes time m1+o(1) . In developing such an algorithm, one can also hope to
derive techniques that allow us to route more efficiently in expander graphs. Most concretely,
interpreting each edge in G as a commodity that has to be embedded into H, computing an
embedding boils down to solving a k-commodity routing problem for k = Θ(n).  e      Recent techniques
       +                                                               1+ϵ
[HHL 24] can solve such problems approximately in time O((m + k) ) for arbitrarily small ϵ > 0.
                                                             e


Acknowledgments
We thank Yu-Cheng Yeh and the anonymous reviewers for comments that improved the presentation
of this article.




                                                  18
4    References
[AHLT05]    Stephen Alstrup, Jacob Holm, Kristian De Lichtenberg, and Mikkel Thorup. Main-
            taining information in fully dynamic trees with top trees. ACM Trans. Algorithms,
            1(2):243–264, October 2005. 1

[BFH21]     Aaron Bernstein, Sebastian Forster, and Monika Henzinger. A deamortization ap-
            proach for dynamic spanner and dynamic maximal matching. ACM Transactions
            on Algorithms (TALG), 17(4):1–51, 2021. 3, 8

[CGH+ 20]   Li Chen, Gramoz Goranci, Monika Henzinger, Richard Peng, and Thatchaphol Sara-
            nurak. Fast dynamic cuts, distances and effective resistances via vertex sparsifiers. In
            2020 IEEE 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
            pages 1135–1146. IEEE, 2020. 3

[CGL+ 20]   Julia Chuzhoy, Yu Gao, Jason Li, Danupon Nanongkai, Richard Peng, and
            Thatchaphol Saranurak. A deterministic algorithm for balanced cut with appli-
            cations to dynamic connectivity, flows, and beyond. In 2020 IEEE 61st Annual
            Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 1158–1167. IEEE,
            2020. 1, 2

[CH78]      Francis Chin and David Houck. Algorithms for updating minimal spanning trees.
            Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 16(3):333–344, 1978. 1

[CKGS23]    Li Chen, Rasmus Kyng, Maximilian Probst Gutenberg, and Sushant Sachdeva. A
            simple framework for finding balanced sparse cuts via apsp. In Symposium on Sim-
            plicity in Algorithms (SOSA), pages 42–55. SIAM, 2023. 3, 18

[CKL+ 22]   Li Chen, Rasmus Kyng, Yang P. Liu, Richard Peng, Maximilian Probst Gutenberg,
            and Sushant Sachdeva. Maximum flow and minimum-cost flow in almost-linear
            time. In 2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
            (FOCS), pages 612–623, 2022. 3, 18

[DSST86]    James R Driscoll, Neil Sarnak, Daniel Dominic Sleator, and Robert Endre Tarjan.
            Making data structures persistent. In Proceedings of the eighteenth annual ACM
            symposium on Theory of computing, pages 109–121, 1986. 9, 16

[EGIN97]    David Eppstein, Zvi Galil, Giuseppe F. Italiano, and Amnon Nissenzweig. Spar-
            sification—a technique for speeding up dynamic graph algorithms. J. ACM,
            44(5):669–696, September 1997. 1

[Fre85]     Greg N Frederickson. Data structures for on-line updating of minimum spanning
            trees, with applications. SIAM Journal on Computing, 14(4):781–798, 1985. 1, 2, 5,
            8, 10

[Fre97]     Greg N. Frederickson. Ambivalent data structures for dynamic 2-edge-connectivity
            and k smallest spanning trees. SIAM Journal on Computing, 26(2):484–538, 1997.
            1



                                               19
[GKKT15]    David Gibb, Bruce Kapron, Valerie King, and Nolan Thorn. Dynamic graph con-
            nectivity with improved worst case update time and sublinear space, 2015. 1

[GRST21]    Gramoz Goranci, Harald Räcke, Thatchaphol Saranurak, and Zihan Tan. The ex-
            pander hierarchy and its applications to dynamic graph algorithms. In Proceedings of
            the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 2212–2228.
            SIAM, 2021. 1, 2

[Har82]     Dov Harel. On line maintenance of the connected components of dynamic graphs.
            Unpublished manuscript, 5:95–97, 1982. 1

[HdLT01]    Jacob Holm, Kristian de Lichtenberg, and Mikkel Thorup. Poly-logarithmic deter-
            ministic fully-dynamic algorithms for connectivity, minimum spanning tree, 2-edge,
            and biconnectivity. J. ACM, 48(4):723–760, July 2001. 1, 2

[HHK+ 23]   Shang-En Huang, Dawei Huang, Tsvi Kopelowitz, Seth Pettie, and Mikkel Thorup.
            Fully dynamic connectivity in o(log n(log log n)2 ) amortized expected time. Theo-
            retiCS, Volume 2, May 2023. 1

[HHL+ 24]   Bernhard Haeupler, D Ellis Hershkowitz, Jason Li, Antti Roeyskoe, and Thatchaphol
            Saranurak. Low-step multi-commodity flow emulators. In Proceedings of the 56th
            Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 71–82, 2024. 18

[HK95]      Monika Rauch Henzinger and Valerie King. Randomized dynamic graph algorithms
            with polylogarithmic time per operation. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh
            Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’95, page 519–527, New
            York, NY, USA, 1995. Association for Computing Machinery. 1, 2

[KKM13]     Bruce M Kapron, Valerie King, and Ben Mountjoy. Dynamic graph connectivity in
            polylogarithmic worst case time. In Proceedings of the twenty-fourth annual ACM-
            SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, pages 1131–1142. SIAM, 2013. 1, 2

[KMPG24]    Rasmus Kyng, Simon Meierhans, and Maximilian Probst Gutenberg. A dynamic
            shortest paths toolbox: Low-congestion vertex sparsifiers and their applications. In
            Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC
            2024, page 1174–1183, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Ma-
            chinery. 3, 18

[KMZ25]     Rasmus Kyng, Simon Meierhans, and Gernot Zöcklein. Bootstrapping Dynamic
            APSP via Sparsification. In Anne Benoit, Haim Kaplan, Sebastian Wild, and Grze-
            gorz Herman, editors, 33rd Annual European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA 2025),
            volume 351 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages
            113:1–113:15, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2025. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für
            Informatik. 3, 18

[MGS25]     Simon Meierhans, Maximilian Probst Gutenberg, and Thatchaphol Saranurak. Ex-
            pander pruning with polylogarithmic worst-case recourse and update time. In
            Proceedings of the 2026 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
            (SODA), 2025. 6, 12

                                             20
[NS17]       Danupon Nanongkai and Thatchaphol Saranurak. Dynamic spanning forest with
             worst-case update time: adaptive, las vegas, and o(n1/2 − ϵ)-time. In Proceedings of
             the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2017,
             page 1122–1129, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.
             1, 2, 11
[NSWN17]     Danupon Nanongkai, Thatchaphol Saranurak, and Christian Wulff-Nilsen. Dynamic
             minimum spanning forest with subpolynomial worst-case update time. In 2017 IEEE
             58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 950–
             961, 2017. 1, 2, 11
[PT07]       Mihai Patrascu and Mikkel Thorup. Planning for fast connectivity updates. In 48th
             Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS’07), pages
             263–271. IEEE, 2007. 1, 2, 11
[SP75]       Philip M. Spira and A Pan. On finding and updating spanning trees and shortest
             paths. SIAM Journal on Computing, 4(3):375–380, 1975. 1
[SW19]       Thatchaphol Saranurak and Di Wang. Expander Decomposition and Pruning:
             Faster, Stronger, and Simpler, pages 2616–2635. 2019. 2, 5, 6, 12
[Tho00]      Mikkel Thorup. Near-optimal fully-dynamic graph connectivity. In Proceedings of
             the thirty-second annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 343–350,
             2000. 1
[VDBCK+ 23] Jan Van Den Brand, Li Chen, Rasmus Kyng, Yang P Liu, Richard Peng, Maxi-
            milian Probst Gutenberg, Sushant Sachdeva, and Aaron Sidford. A deterministic
            almost-linear time algorithm for minimum-cost flow. In 2023 IEEE 64th Annual
            Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 503–514. IEEE,
            2023. 3
[vdBCK+ 24] Jan van den Brand, Li Chen, Rasmus Kyng, Yang P. Liu, Simon Meierhans, Maxi-
            milian Probst Gutenberg, and Sushant Sachdeva. Almost-Linear Time Algorithms
            for Decremental Graphs: Min-Cost Flow and More via Duality . In 2024 IEEE 65th
            Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 2010–2032,
            Los Alamitos, CA, USA, October 2024. IEEE Computer Society. 2, 3, 11
[Wan15]      Zhengyu Wang. An improved randomized data structure for dynamic graph connec-
             tivity, 2015. 1
[WN13]       Christian Wulff-Nilsen. Faster deterministic fully-dynamic graph connectivity. In
             Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Al-
             gorithms, SODA ’13, page 1757–1769, USA, 2013. Society for Industrial and Applied
             Mathematics. 1
[WN17]       Christian Wulff-Nilsen. Fully-dynamic minimum spanning forest with improved
             worst-case update time. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Sym-
             posium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2017, page 1130–1143, New York, NY,
             USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery. 1, 2, 11


                                              21
