                    A Randomized Linear-Time Algorithm
                      to Find Minimum Spanning Trees
       David R. Karger              Philip N. Kleiny                   Robert E. Tarjanz
               MIT                   Brown University                  Princeton University

                                                                  and NEC Research Institute


                                              July 7, 1994




                                                Abstract
           We present a randomized linear-time algorithm to nd a minimum spanning tree in
       a connected graph with edge weights. The algorithm uses random sampling in combina-
       tion with a recently discovered linear-time algorithm for verifying a minimum spanning
       tree. Our computational model is a unit-cost random-access machine with the restric-
       tion that the only operations allowed on edge weights are binary comparisons.

1 Introduction
We consider the problem of nding a minimum spanning tree in a connected graph with
real-valued edge weights. This problem has a long and rich history; the rst fully-realized
algorithm was devised by Boruvka in the 1920's [2]. An informative survey paper by Graham
and Hell [12] describes the history of the problem up to 1985. In the last two decades faster
   0
     c 1995 by the Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Permission to make digital or hard copies
of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for pro t or direct commercial advantage and that copies show this notice on the
 rst page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation. Copyrights for components of this work
owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers, to redistribute to lists, or to use any component of this work in other works,
requires prior speci c permission and/or a fee. Permissions may be requested from Publications Dept, ACM
Inc., 1515 Broadway, New York, NY 10036 USA, fax +1 (212) 869-0481, or permissions@acm.org.
    Laboratory for Computer Science, MIT, 545 Technology Square, Cambridge, MA 02138. Work done at
Stanford University, supported by a Hertz Foundation Graduate Fellowship, by NSF Grant CCR-9010517,
and NSF Young Investigator Award CCR-9357849, with matching grants from IBM, Mitsubishi, the Schlum-
berger Foundation, the Shell Foundation, and the Xerox Corporation.
   y Department of Computer Science, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912-1910. Research partially
supported by an NSF PYI award, CCR-9157620, together with PYI matching funds from Thinking Machines
Corporation, Xerox Corporation, and Honeywell Corporation. Additional support provided by DARPA
Contract No. N00014-91-J-4052, ARPA Order No. 8225, and by the NEC Research Institute, Princeton,
NJ.
   z
     Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ and the NEC Research Institute,
Princeton, NJ. Research at Princeton University partially supported by the National Science Foundation,
Grant No. CCR-89-20505; the Oce of Naval Research, Contract No. N0014-91-J-1463; and DIMACS
(Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science), a National Science and Technology
Center, Grant No. NSF-STC88-09648.
and faster algorithms were found, the fastest being an algorithm of Gabow, Galil, and
Spencer [10] (see also [11]), with a running time of O(m log (m; n)) on a graph of n
vertices and m edges. Here (m; n) = minfi j log(i) n  m=ng.
    This and earlier algorithms used as a computational model the sequential unit-cost
random-access machine with the restriction that the only operations allowed on the edge
weights are binary comparisons. Fredman and Willard [9] considered a more powerful model
that allows bit manipulation of the binary representations of the edge weights. In this model
they were able to devise a linear-time algorithm. Still, the question of whether a linear-time
algorithm exists for the restricted random-access model remained open.
    A problem related to nding minimum spanning trees is that of verifying that a given
spanning tree is minimum. Tarjan [22] gave a veri cation algorithm running in O(m (m; n))
time, where is a functional inverse of Ackerman's function. Later, Komlos [19] showed
that a minimum spanning tree can be veri ed in O(m) binary comparisons of edge weights,
but with nonlinear overhead to decide which comparisons to make. Dixon, Rauch and
Tarjan [7] combined these algorithms with a table lookup technique to obtain an O(m)-
time veri cation algorithm. King [17] recently obtained a simpler O(m)-time veri cation
algorithm that combines ideas of Boruvka, Komlos, and Dixon, Rauch, and Tarjan.
    In this paper we describe a randomized algorithm for nding a minimum spanning tree.
It runs in O(m) time with high probability in the restricted random-access model. The
algorithm is a modi cation of one proposed by Karger [13, 15], who obtained a time bound
of O(n log n + m). The O(m) time bound is due to Klein and Tarjan [18]. The present
paper is a revision of [18] that includes a tightened high-probability complexity analysis.
Section 2 presents the random-sampling result that is the key to the O(m) bound. Section
3 presents our algorithm, and Section 4 contains its analysis. Section 5 includes some nal
remarks. This section ends with some preliminaries.
1.1 Preliminaries
Our algorithm actually solves the slightly more general problem of nding a minimum
spanning forest in a possibly disconnected graph. We assume that the input graph has no
isolated vertices (vertices without incident edges).
    If edge weights are not distinct, we can make them distinct by numbering the edges and
breaking weight-ties according to the numbers. We therefore assume for simplicity that
all edge weights are distinct. This assumption ensures that the minimum spanning tree is
unique. The following properties are also well-known and correspond respectively to the
red rule and the blue rule in [23].
Cycle property: For any cycle C in a graph, the heaviest edge in C does not appear in
    the minimum spanning forest.
Cut property: For any proper nonempty subset X of the vertices, the lightest edge with
    exactly one endpoint in X belongs to the minimum spanning forest.
    Unlike most algorithms for nding a minimum spanning forest, our algorithm makes use
of each property in a fundamental way.


                                              2
2 A Sampling Lemma
Our algorithm relies on a random-sampling step to discard edges that cannot be in the
minimum spanning tree. The e ectiveness of this step is shown by a lemma that we present
below. We need a little terminology. Let G be a graph with weighted edges. We denote by
w(x; y ) the weight of edge fx; y g. If F is a forest in G, we denote by F (x; y ) the path (if
any) connecting x and y in F , and by wF (x; y ) the maximum weight of an edge on F (x; y ),
with the convention that wF (x; y ) = 1 if x and y are not connected in F . We say an edge
fx; yg is F -heavy if w(x; y) > wF (x; y), and F -light otherwise. Note that the edges of F are
all F -light. For any forest F , no F -heavy edge can be in the minimum spanning forest of
G. This is a consequence of the cycle property. Given a forest F in G, the F -heavy edges of
G can be computed in time linear in the number of edges of G, using an adaptation of the
veri cation algorithm of Dixon, Rauch, and Tarjan (page 1188 in [7] describes the changes
needed in the algorithm) or of that of King.
Lemma 1 Let H be a subgraph obtained from G by including each edge independently with
probability p, and let F be the minimum spanning forest of H . The expected number of
F -light edges in G is at most n=p where n is the number of vertices of G.
Proof. We describe a way to construct the sample graph H and its minimum spanning
tree F simultaneously. The computation is a variant of Kruskal's minimum spanning tree
algorithm [20]. Begin with H and F empty. Process the edges in increasing order by weight.
To process an edge e, rst test whether both endpoints of e are in the same connected
component of F . If so, e is F -heavy, because every edge currently in F is lighter than e.
Next, ip a coin that has probability p of coming up heads. Include the edge e in H if and
only if the coin comes up heads. Finally, if e is in H and is F -light, add e to the forest F .
    The forest F produced by this computation is the forest that would be produced by
Kruskal's algorithm applied to the edges in H , and is therefore exactly the minimum span-
ning forest of H . An edge e that is F -heavy when it is processed remains F -heavy until
the end of the computation, since F never loses edges. Similarly, an edge e that is F -light
when processed remains F -light, since only edges heavier than e are added to F after e is
processed. Our goal is to show that the number of F -light edges is probably small.
    When processing an edge e, we know whether e is F -heavy before ipping a coin for e.
Suppose for purposes of exposition we ip a penny for e if e is F -heavy and a nickel if it
is not. The penny- ips are irrelevant to our analysis; the corresponding edges are F -heavy
regardless of whether or not they are included in H . We therefore consider only the nickel-
  ips and the corresponding edges. For each such edge, if the nickel comes up heads, the
edge is placed in F . The size of F is at most n 1. Thus at most n 1 nickel-tosses have
come up heads by the end of the computation.
    Now imagine that we continue ipping nickels until n 1 heads have occured, and let
Y be the total number of nickels ipped. Then Y is an upper bound on the number of
F -light edges. The distribution of Y is exactly the negative binomial distribution with
parameters n 1 and p [8]. The expectation of a random variable that has a negative
binomial distribution is (n 1)=p [8]. It follows that the expected number of F -light edges
is at most (n 1)=p.
Remark. The above proof actually shows that the number of F -light edges is stochastically
dominated by a variable with a negative binomial distribution.
                                              3
Remark. Lemma 1 directly generalizes to matroids. See [15].
3 The Algorithm
The minimum spanning forest algorithm intermeshes steps of Boruvka's algorithm, called
Boruvka steps, with random-sampling steps. Each Boruvka step reduces the number of
vertices by at least a factor of two; each random-sampling step discards enough edges to
reduce the density (ratio of edges to vertices) to a xed constant with high probability.
    The algorithm is recursive. It generates two subproblems, but with high probability the
total size of these subproblems is at most a constant fraction less than one of the size of the
original problem. This fact is the basis for the probabilistic linear bound on the running
time of the algorithm.
    We begin by describing a Boruvka step.
Boruvka Step. For each vertex, select the minimum-weight edge incident to the vertex.
Contract all the selected edges, replacing by a single vertex each connected component
de ned by the selected edges and deleting all resulting isolated vertices, loops (edges both
of whose endpoints are the same), and all but the lowest-weight edge among each set of
multiple edges.
    A Boruvka step reduces the number of vertices by at least a factor of two.
    Now we describe the minimum spanning forest algorithm. If the graph is empty, return
an empty forest. Otherwise, proceed as follows.
Step 1. Apply two successive Boruvka steps to the graph, thereby reducing the number of
vertices by at least a factor of four.
Step 2. In the contracted graph, choose a subgraph H by selecting each edge independently
with probability 1/2. Apply the algorithm recursively to H , producing a minimum spanning
forest F of H . Find all the F -heavy edges (both those in H and those not in H ) and delete
them.
Step 3. Apply the algorithm recursively to the remaining graph to compute a spanning
forest F 0 . Return those edges contracted in Step 1 together with the edges of F 0 .
    We prove the correctness of the algorithm by induction. By the cut property, every edge
contracted during Step 1 is in the minimum spanning forest. Hence the remaining edges of
the minimum spanning forest of the original graph form a minimum spanning forest of the
contracted graph. It remains to show that the recursive call in Step 3 nds the minimum
spanning forest of the contracted graph.
    By the cycle property, the edges deleted in Step 2 do not belong to the minimum spanning
forest. By the inductive hypothesis, the minimum spanning forest of the remaining graph
is correctly determined in the recursive call of Step 3.
Remark. Our algorithm can be viewed as an instance of the generalized greedy algorithm
presented in [23], from which its correctness follows immediately.




                                              4
4 Analysis of the Algorithm
We begin our analysis by making some observations about the worst-case behavior of the
algorithm. Then we show that the expected running time of the algorithm is linear, by
applying Lemma 1 and the linearity of expectations. Finally, we show that the algorithm
runs in linear time with all but exponentially small probability, by developing a global
version of the analysis in the proof of Lemma 1 and using a Cherno bound [1, 4, 21].
    Consider a single invocation of the algorithm. The total time spent in Steps 1{3, ex-
cluding the time spent on recursive subproblems, is linear in the number of edges: Step 1 is
just two steps of Boruvka's algorithm, which takes linear time using straightforward graph-
algorithmic techniques, and Step 2 takes linear time using the modi ed Dixon-Rauch-Tarjan
veri cation algorithm, as noted in Section 2. The total running time is thus bounded by a
constant factor times the total number of edges in the original problem and in all recursive
subproblems. Thus our objective is to estimate this total number of edges.
    Suppose the algorithm is initially applied to a graph with n vertices and m edges.
Since the graph contains no isolated vertices, m  n=2. Each invocation of the algorithm
generates at most two recursive subproblems. Consider the entire binary tree of recursive
subproblems. The root is the initial problem. For a particular problem, we call the rst
recursive subproblem, occuring in Step 2, the left child of the parent problem, and the
second recursive subproblem, occuring in Step 3, the right child. At depth d, the tree of
subproblems has at most 2d nodes, each a problem on a graphPof at most n=4P         d vertices. Thus
the depth of the tree is at most log4 n, and there are at most d=0 2 n=4 = 1
                                                                   1     d    d
                                                                                      d=0 n=2 = 2n
                                                                                              d
vertices total in the original problem and all subproblems.
Theorem 1 The worst-case running time of the minimum-spanning-forest algorithm is
O(minfn2; m log ng), the same as the bound for Boruvka's algorithm.
Proof. We estimate the worst-case total number of edges in two di erent ways. First, since
there are no multiple edges in any subproblem, a subproblem at depth d contains at most
(n=4d )2=2 edges. Summing over all subproblems gives an O(n2) bound on the total number
of edges. Second, consider the left and right children of some parent problem. Suppose the
parent problem is on a graph of v vertices. Every edge in the parent problem ends up in
exactly one of the children (the left if it is selected in Step 2, the right if it is not), with the
exception of the edges in the minimum spanning forest F of the sample graph H , which
end up in both subproblems, and the edges that are removed in Step 1, which end up in
no subproblem. If v 0 is the number of vertices in the graph after Step 1, then F contains
v 0 1  v=4 edges. Since at least v=2 edges are removed in Step 1, the total number of edges
in the left and right subproblems is at most the number of edges in the parent problem.
    It follows that the total number of edges in all subproblems at any single recursive depth
d is at most m. Since the number of di erent depths is O(log n), the total number of edges
in all recursive subproblems is O(m log n).
Theorem 2 The expected running time of the minimum spanning forest algorithm is O(m).
Proof. Our analysis relies on a partition of the recursion tree into left paths. Each such
path consists of either the root or a right child and all nodes reachable from this node
through a path of left children. Consider a parent problem on a graph of X edges, and let
Y be the number of edges in its left child. Since each edge in the parent problem is either

                                                 5
removed in Step 1 or has a chance of 21 of being selected in Step 2, E [Y jX = k]  k=2. It
follows by linearity of expectation that E [Y ]  E [X ]=2. That is, the expected number of
edges in a left subproblem is at most half the expected number of edges in its parent. It
follows that, if the expected number of edges in a problem is k, then the sum of the expected
numbersPof edges in every subproblem along the left path descending from the problem is
at most 1  i=0 k=2 = 2k.
                   i
    Thus the expected total number of edges is bounded by twice the sum of m and the
expected total number of edges in all right subproblems. By Lemma 1, the expected number
of edges in a right subproblem is at most twice the number of vertices Pd=1in 2the subproblem.
Since the total number of vertices in all right subproblems is at most 1        d 1 n=4d = n=2,
the expected number of edges in the original problem and all subproblems is at most 2m + n.

Theorem 3 The minimum spanning forest algorithm runs in O(m) time with probability
1 e    (m ) .
Proof. We obtain the high-probability result by applying a global version of the analysis in
the proof of Lemma 1. We rst bound the total number of edges in all right subproblems.
These are exactly the edges that are found to be F -light in Step 2 of the parent problems.
Referring back to the proof of Lemma 1, let us consider the nickel-tosses corresponding to
these edges. Each nickel that comes up heads corresponds to an edge in a spanning forest
in a right subproblem. The total number of edges in all such spanning forests in all right
subproblems is at most the number of vertices in all such subproblems, which in turn is at
most n=2 as shown in the proof of Theorem 2. Thus n=2 is an upper bound on the total
number of heads in nickel- ips. The probability that there are more than 3m F -light edges
is at most the probability that fewer than n=2 heads occur in a sequence of 3m nickel-tosses.
By a Cherno bound [1, 4, 21], this probability is e (m) since m  n=2.
    We now consider the edges in left subproblems. The edges in a left subproblem are
obtained from the parent problem by sampling; i.e., a coin is tossed for each edge in the
parent problem not deleted in Step 1, and the edge is copied to the subproblem if the coin
comes up heads and is not copied if the coin comes up tails. To put it another way, an edge
in the root or in a right subproblem gives rise to a sequence of copies in left subproblems,
each copy resulting from a coin- ip coming up heads. The sequence ends if a coin- ip comes
up tails. The number of occurrences of tails is at most the number of sequences, which in
turn is at most the number m0 of edges in the root problem and in all right subproblems.
The total number of edges in all these sequences is equal to the total number of heads,
which in turn is at most the total number of coin-tosses. Hence the probability that this
number of edges exceeds 3m0 is the probability that at most m0 tails occur in a sequence of
more than 3m0 coin-tosses. Since m0  m, this probability is e (m) by a Cherno bound.
    Combining this with the previous high-probability bound of O(m) on m0 , we nd that
the total number of edges in the original problem and in all subproblems is O(m) with
probability 1 e (m) .




                                              6
5 Remarks
In work with Richard Cole [5], Klein and Tarjan have adapted the randomized algorithm to
run in parallel. The parallel algorithm does linear expected work and runs in O(log n 2log n)
expected time on a CRCW PRAM [16]. This is the rst parallel algorithm for minimum
spanning trees that does linear work. In contrast, Karger [13] gives an algorithm running
on an EREW PRAM that requires O(log n) time and m= log n + n1+ processors for any
constant  > 0. Also, Cole and Vishkin [6] give an algorithm running on a CRCW PRAM
that requires O(log n) time on O((n + m) log log n= log n) processors.
   Among remaining open problems, we note especially the following three:
  1. Is there a deterministic linear-time minimum spanning tree algorithm in the restricted
     random-access model?
  2. Can randomization or some other technique be used to simplify the linear-time veri-
       cation algorithm?
  3. Can randomization be used fruitfully to solve other network optimization problems,
     such as the shortest-path problem? Randomization has already proved valuable in
     solving the maximum- ow [3] and minimum-cut [14] problems.

Acknowledgments
We thank Rajeev Motwani, Satish Rao, and David Zuckerman for fruitful discussions.

References
 [1] N. Alon and J. H. Spencer, The Probabilistic Method, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New
     York, N. Y., 1992, p. 223.
 [2] O. Boruvka, \O jistem problemu minimalnim, Praca Moravske Prirodovedecke
     Spolecnosti 3, 1926, pp. 37-58. (In Czech.)
 [3] J. Cheriyan, T. Hagerup, and K. Mehlhorn, \Can a maximum ow be computed in
     O(nm) time?", Proc. 17th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
     Programming, published as Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 443, Springer-
     Verlag, New York, 1990, pp. 235-248.
 [4] H. Cherno , \A measure of the asymptotic eciency for tests of a hypothesis based
     on the sum of observations," Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 23, 1952, pp. 493{509.
 [5] R. Cole, P. N. Klein, and R. E. Tarjan, \A linear-work parallel algorithm for nding
     minimum spanning trees," to appear in Proc., 6th Symposium on Parallel Algorithms
     and Architectures, 1994.
 [6] R. Cole and U. Vishkin, \Approximate and exact parallel scheduling with applications
     to list, tree, and graph problems," Proc. 27th Annual IEEE Symp. on Foundations of
     Computer Science, Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 1986, pp. 478-491.

                                             7
 [7] B. Dixon, M. Rauch, and R. E. Tarjan, \Veri cation and sensitivity analysis of mini-
     mum spanning trees in linear time," SIAM J. on Computing 21, 1992, pp. 1184-1192.
 [8] W. Feller. An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, volume 1. John
     Wiley and Sons, 3rd edition, 1968.
 [9] M. Fredman and D. E. Willard, \Trans-dichotomous algorithms for minimum spanning
     trees and shortest paths," Proc. 31st Annual IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer
     Science, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 1990, pp. 719-725.
[10] H. N. Gabow, Z. Galil, and T. H. Spencer, \Ecient implementation of graph algo-
     rithms using contraction," Proc. 25th Annual IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer
     Science, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 1984, pp. 347-357.
[11] H. N. Gabow, Z. Galil, T. Spencer, and R. E. Tarjan, \Ecient algorithms for nding
     minimum spanning trees in undirected and directed graphs," Combinatorica 6, 1986,
     pp. 109-122.
[12] R. L. Graham and P. Hell, \On the history of the minimum spanning tree problem,"
     Annals of the History of Computing 7, 1985, pp. 43-57.
[13] D. R. Karger, \Approximating, verifying, and constructing minimum spanning forests,"
     manuscript, 1992.
[14] D. R. Karger, \Global min-cuts in RNC and other rami cations of a simple mincut
     algorithm," Proc. 4th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, Associ-
     ation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, and Society for Industrial and Applied
     Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 1993, pp. 21-30.
[15] D. R. Karger, \Random sampling in matroids, with applications to graph connectivity
     and minimum spanning trees," Proc. 34st Annual IEEE Symp. on Foundations of
     Computer Science, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 1993, pp. 84-93.
[16] R. M. Karp and V. Ramachandran, \A survey of parallel algorithms for shared-memory
     machines," Chapter 17 in Handbook of Theoretical Computer Science, Volume A: Al-
     gorithms and Complexity J. van Leeuwen, ed., MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1990,
     pp. 869{941.
[17] V. King, \A simpler minimum spanning tree veri cation algorithm," manuscript, 1993.
[18] Philip N. Klein and Robert E. Tarjan, \A linear-time algorithm for nding minimum
     spanning trees," Proceedings of the 26th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
     1994, pp. 9{15 .
[19] J. Komlos, \Linear veri cation for spanning trees," Combinatorica 5, 1985, pp. 57-65.
[20] J. B. Kruskal, \On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the traveling salesman
     problem," Proc. Amer. Math Soc. 7, 1956, pp. 48-50.


                                            8
[21] P. Raghavan, \Lecture Notes on Randomized Algorithms," Research Report RC 15340
     (#68237), Computer Science/Mathematics IBM Research Division, T.J. Watson Re-
     search Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, 1990, p. 54.
[22] R. E. Tarjan, \Applications of path compression on balanced trees," J. Assoc. Comput.
     Mach. 26, 1979, pp. 690-715.
[23] R. E. Tarjan, Data Structures and Network Algorithms, Chapter 6, Society for Indus-
     trial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, 1983.




                                            9
