                        Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity, Report No. 45 (2026)




  Using Hardness vs Randomness to Design Low-Space Algorithms
                             Edward Pyne∗                            Roei Tell†
                                 MIT                            University of Toronto
                            epyne@mit.edu                      roei@cs.toronto.edu
                                                 March 30, 2026


                                                        Abstract
          Can we use “hardness vs randomness” techniques to design low-space algorithms? This text surveys
      a sequence of recent works showing ways to do that. These works designed algorithms for certified deran-
      domization and for catalytic computation (which work unconditionally), derandomization and isolation
      algorithms from remarkably mild assumptions, and “win-win” pairs of algorithms that, for every input,
      solve either derandomization or another important problem (e.g., s-t connectivity) on the input.
          Underlying these constructions are new, specialized “hardness vs randomness” tools for the setting
      of low-space algorithms. We describe these technical tools, most notably constructions of pseudorandom
      generators whose reconstruction algorithm (i.e., the security reduction) is a deterministic low-space al-
      gorithm. We also explain a key part of obtaining deterministic reconstruction, which is deterministic
      transformations of distinguishers to bit-predictors.
          We pose a host of open questions that explore new ways of using hardness vs randomness to design
      low-space algorithms. These questions address problems in derandomization, catalytic computation,
      explicit constructions, learning algorithms, and more.




  ∗ Supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship.
   † Supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grant RGPIN-2024-

04490.


                                                           1
                                                                                                             ISSN 1433-8092
Contents

1 Hardness vs Randomness when Memory is Scarce                                                                  2

2 Exploiting the Logspace Setting: Deterministic Reconstruction                                                 3

3 New Low-Space Algorithms                                                                                      5
  3.1 Certified Derandomization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     5
  3.2 Catalytic algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5
  3.3 Win-win pairs of algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     6
  3.4 Derandomization and isolation: BPL = L using hardness vs randomness? . . . . . . . . . . . .              8

4 Technical Tools                                                                                          11
  4.1 Deterministic reconstruction via deterministic D2P . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
  4.2 Deterministic D2P for restricted distinguisher classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
  4.3 New reconstructive targeted generators for the logspace setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

5 Open Problems                                                                                              22
  5.1 Algorithms using hardness vs randomness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
  5.2 Distinguish-to-predict . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
  5.3 Generators for the logspace setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

A Alternative proofs for classical theorems using D2P                                                          30




                                                       1
1     Hardness vs Randomness when Memory is Scarce
One of the most influential techniques in theoretical computer science is the “hardness vs randomness”
paradigm. Originating in cryptography [BM84, Yao82], this technique transforms lemons into lemonade:
It takes hard problems, which no efficient algorithm can solve, and uses them to design algorithms for
other problems. Perhaps the most well-known example is the Nisan-Wigderson generator [NW94], which
(combined with additional tools by Impagliazzo and Wigderson [IW97]) yields the following textbook result:
Theorem 1.1 ([IW97]). If E = TIME[2O(n) ] has a problem hard for circuits of size 2.01·n on all input
lengths, then there is a deterministic polytime algorithm that, given a circuit D : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}, estimates
E[D] up to an additive error of 1/n.
    Since the problem of estimating the expectation of a given circuit is complete for prBPP, the conclusion
in Theorem 1.1 implies that prBPP = prP.
    Over the three decades since the underlying tools were developed, they have been used to design other
types of algorithms. And most notably, many of the algorithms designed using these tools are unconditional,
i.e. do not actually need to start from a hardness assumption! Among other things, hardness vs random-
ness tools have been used to unconditionally obtain constructions of randomness extractors, condensers,
and expander graphs [Tre01, ISW00, TSUZ07], learning algorithms [CIKK16], pseudodeterministic explicit
constructions [CLO+ 23], circuit lower bounds [CLL25], and worst-case to average-case reductions [Hir23].

Can we design low-space algorithms using hardness vs randomness? Early on, Klivans and van
Melkebeek [KvM02] showed that hardness vs randomness tools can be adapted to yield low-space algorithms.
In particular, under a stronger hardness assumption than in Theorem 1.1 – a hard problem in SPACE[O(n)]
rather than only in E ⊇ SPACE[O(n)] – the concluded algorithm can run in logarithmic space:
Theorem 1.2 ([KvM02]). If SPACE[O(n)] has a problem hard for circuits of size 2.01·n on all input lengths,
then there is a deterministic logspace algorithm that, given a circuit D : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} that can be evaluated
in space O(log n), estimates E[D] up to an additive error of 1/n.
    Theorem 1.2, however, had less follow-ups compared to Theorem 1.1. In fact, we are not aware of any
work prior to 2023 that used hardness vs randomness to design logspace algorithms. Why is this?
    One explanation is that we didn’t know how to exploit the fact that when designing low-space algorithms,
we are usually trying to solve potentially easier problems, compared to the conclusion of Theorems 1.1 and 1.2.
The untapped potential is that when tackling easier problems, one may hope to weaken the hardness as-
sumption, in which case (using the many existing ideas) we could eventually obtain unconditional algorithms.
For example, consider the problem of derandomizing probabilistic logspace machines. This problem reduces
to estimating the expectation of a Read-Once Branching Program (ROBP),1 a weak computational model
for which exponential lower bounds are well-known (see, e.g., [BHST87]). However, past applications of
hardness vs randomness to this problem made little use of this fact (see [DT23, Section 1.1]).

The good news. The main focus of this text is a sequence of recent works [DT23,PRZ23,DPT24,LPT24,
DPTW25, PT25] that used hardness vs randomness tools to design low-space algorithms for important
problems – including derandomization, s-t connectivity, function composition, and catalytic computation –
where some of these algorithms work unconditionally and others work under mild assumptions.
    A key bottleneck to get through was resolving the issue above, i.e. figuring out that there is a critical
feature of what we call “the logspace setting” (i.e., of various relaxed problems that we try to solve using
logspace algorithms) that hardness to randomness tools can exploit.2 Another facilitator of these works is
recent developments in hardness vs randomness more generally (i.e., for algorithms that aren’t necessarily
low-space; see, e.g., the survey [CT23]), and in particular a sequence of new technical tools for the time-
bounded setting, which the works above migrated and adapted to obtain new space-bounded tools.
   1 This is because the procedure B (·) obtained by fixing an input x to the machine (i.e., B takes the randomness r as its
                                      x                                                         x
input) is an ROBP.
   2 For the special case of derandomizing probabilistic logspace machines (i.e., trying to prove BPL = L), the technical proof

of this is simple and accessible – we encourage readers to check out Sections 4.1.2 and 4.2.1!



                                                              2
What’s in this text?           The goal of this survey is to explain three things:
    1. How to exploit the logspace setting. In Section 2 we will present the main new technical feature
       of hardness vs randomness tools that can be obtained in the logspace setting (and also possibly beyond
       that), which is called deterministic reconstruction.

    2. The new algorithms. In Section 3, we present low-space algorithms from recent years that use hard-
       ness vs randomness, and in particular that exploit deterministic reconstruction. Specifically, we will
       mention certified derandomization, catalytic algorithms, win-win pairs of algorithms (for s-t connec-
       tivity and for efficient copmosition), and derandomization of BPL from remarkably weak assumptions.
    3. Underlying technical tools: New reconstructive generators. Finally, in Section 4, we explain
       how to achieve deterministic reconstruction: first in the special case of trying to prove BPL = L, and
       then for several other problems mentioned above. We will introduce a concept called distinguish-to-
       predict transformations, and describe some new pseudorandom generators in more detail.
   In Section 5 we suggest a host of interesting and potentially tractable open problems, which explore new
ways of using hardness vs randomness to design low-space algorithms.
   Finally, an extra goodie of these developments is elegant proofs for several classical results, which use the
concepts introduced above; we present these proofs in Appendix A.


2     Exploiting the Logspace Setting: Deterministic Reconstruction
To explain the new feature of hardness vs randomness tools that can be achieved in the logspace setting, let
us recall how these tools work. The “recipe” behind them looks roughly like the following.

A hardness vs randomness recipe. There is a string f ∈ {0, 1}T , which we call the hard string, that
we hope (or assume) is a truth table that cannot be computed by circuits of size s ≪ T .3 We give f to a
deterministic algorithm GEN that has the following behavior. Given a circuit D, the algorithm GENf (D)
outputs an estimate for E[D]. If this estimate is good (say, within an additive factor of 1/6 of the true expec-
tation), then we solved an interesting problem (i.e., deterministically estimated D’s acceptance probability).
Otherwise, the proofs of correctness show that there exists a circuit C with the following properties:
    • The size of C is less than s, and C makes queries to D.
    • The truth-table of C D is f .

Thus, if GENf fails to estimate E[D] well, and D is a small circuit (of size less than s), then there exists a
small circuit for f , namely C D . So assuming f has no size-s circuits, the derandomization must succeed.

The complexity of reconstruction. The recipe above shows that when GEN fails, f can be compressed,
to the form of a small circuit. Being able to compress a given string f is potentially useful, but:
                                Where does this circuit C come from? Can we find it?

To formalize this question, we extend our recipe to a pair of algorithms (GEN, REC).
    • The generator GENf (D) works as before, but if it does a bad job...
    • ... the reconstruction algorithm RECf (D) prints a small circuit C such that C D computes f .4
   3 By which we mean there is no size-s circuit C that, given j ∈ [T ], outputs f . If there is such a circuit C, we say its truth
                                                                                  j
table is f , or that it computes f .
   4 In cryptography the reconstruction algorithm is usually called “the security reduction”.




                                                                3
In [NW94, IW97], the reconstruction REC is non-explicit and inefficient. However, it was quickly real-
ized [IW98] that in certain settings we can also design efficient, probabilistic reconstruction algorithms; for
example, recent works showed that this is true when f is computable by uniform low-depth circuits (this
line-of-work is often referred to as “uniform hardness vs randomness”; see, e.g., [IW98,TV07,CT21a,CRT22]).
    The complexity of the reconstruction REC turns out to be more important than how it may initially seem.
This is because the recipe above is used in non-obvious ways, some of which yield unconditional algorithms.
Indeed, in these applications REC plays several roles in disguise; for example:
  1. When the recipe is used for conditional results in the straightforward way (as in, say, [NW94, IW97,
     IW98, KvM02, CT21a]), the complexity of REC determines the hardness assumption.
  2. The recipe can be instantiated with an intentionally faulty GEN (i.e., in a setting where GEN is guar-
     anteed to fail), in which case REC is the actual algorithm, and it unconditionally works. In this case,
     the complexity of REC is the complexity of the final algorithm (see, e.g., [TSUZ07, CIKK16, Hir23]).
  3. The recipe can also be instantiated with both GEN and REC trying to solve the same problem (!). In
     this case, the guarantee that at least one of them works means that we can unconditionally solve the
     problem, and the complexity of our algorithm is the worst of both worlds (i.e., the maximum among
     the complexity of GEN and of REC; see, e.g., [ISW00, CLO+ 23, CLL25]).
    An important open problem is extending the class of functions for which we can get an efficient proba-
bilistic REC (see, e.g., open problems in [CT21a, CTW23]). We will now ask about another direction.

Can we hope for a generator with deterministic reconstruction? That is, can we hope to design
(GEN, REC) such that for every f , whenever the generator GENf (D) fails, the reconstruction RECf (D)
efficiently and deterministically compresses f to a small circuit?
     This is not a pipe dream: such a construction trivially exists if prBPP = prP (because then there is
GEN that simply ignores f and estimates E[D] correctly). However, for general D’s, this might be too
good to be proved at the moment, since it would imply that prBPP = prZPP. It is instructive to see why.
Consider an algorithm that gets input D and wants to estimate E[D]. Given (GEN, REC) with deterministic
reconstruction, the algorithm can generate a random f , run RECf (D), and if RECf (D) fails to print a circuit
for f , the algorithm uses GENf (D) to estimate E[D]. Indeed, whenever REC fails, the algorithm can be
certain that GENf (D) succeeds, and REC fails for most f ’s, since they are incompressible.5
     Thus, deterministic reconstruction isn’t just a way of transforming hypothesized hardness into randomness
– it is also unconditional derandomization by itself (for a relevant class of D’s).

     The main technical discovery opening the door for the recent line-of-works, from [PRZ23], is that
     for restricted classes of D’s that arise when studying problems in the logspace setting, we can
     design (GEN, REC) whose reconstruction REC is deterministic. Moreover, both GEN and REC can
     be logspace algorithms, i.e. running in deterministic space O(log |f |).

    In fact, there are by now several constructions of generators with deterministic reconstruction for re-
stricted classes of D’s. We survey some known constructions and explain which classes of D’s they work for
in Section 4. For now, we encourage the reader to think of the simplest case, which is when D is a Read-Once
Branching Program (ROBP); as mentioned in Section 1, ROBPs arise when trying to prove BPL = L.
Remark 2.1. In the recipe above, we may also allow f to be a hard string that depends on D (and some
generators presented in this survey will do so). In this setting it is more convenient to think of both D = Dx
and f = f (x) as functions of an input x. That is, GENf gets input x tries to estimate E[Dx ] by computing
f (x); and if it fails, a reconstruction RECf (x) computes f (x) too efficiently (even a small circuit whose
truth-table is f (x)). This type of generator was introduced by Goldreich [Gol11a, Gol11c], who called it a
targeted generator (where x is the “target”). We elaborate on this in Section 4.3.
  5 In fact, a slightly more general notion of “deterministic reconstruction” is equivalent to prBPP = prZPP; see [LPT24].




                                                             4
3     New Low-Space Algorithms
Now we have our deterministic reconstruction hammer, what nails can we hit with it? We first cover a
straightforward application that we call certified derandomization. However, as is usually the case with
hardness to randomness, there are many non-obvious applications which we will cover subsequently. As we
go, we provide forward pointers to the technical tools (i.e., to the generators and reconstruction algorithms
presented in Section 4) required for each application.

3.1     Certified Derandomization
Recall that Theorem 1.2 states that, assuming SPACE[O(n)] is hard for circuits of size 2.01·n , then BPL = L.
But what if the assumption is false? In that case, the derandomized algorithm for BPL will fail silently: it
will still return a value, but this value has no correctness guarantee. With deterministic reconstruction, we
can do better:

Theorem 3.1 ([PRZ23]). Let Lhard ∈ SPACE[O(n)]. For every ε > 0 and L ∈ BPL there is a deterministic
logspace algorithm A that on input x ∈ {0, 1}n , either:
    1. Prints Lx .
    2. Outputs “I cannot produce an output because the hardness assumption is false”, followed by a circuit
                    ′
       C of size 2εn for Lhard on inputs of size n′ = Θ(log n).
    We briefly sketch how this is a consequence of deterministic reconstruction. We try to use GENf to
derandomize the BPL machine on x, where f is the truth-table of Lhard on n′ -bit inputs. But before trusting
the output of GENf , we first determine if RECf outputs a small circuit for f , and if so we return that circuit;
otherwise, we use the output of GENf to derandomize as usual. If the hardness assumption is true, no such
small circuit exists, and hence the former situation will never occur, and hence our algorithm will always
derandomize L in logspace. But if we are wrong and there is such a small circuit, we either get a certificate
of this fact (i.e., the circuit that RECf produces), or are guaranteed that GENf works nonetheless!
    This result has something of a “win-win” favor (either we derandomize or we get a small circuit for f ),
which will come up again in subsequent results.

3.2     Catalytic algorithms
How valuable is a full memory? In the setting of catalytic algorithms, we augment a standard logspace
algorithm with a much larger catalytic space. This space has an arbitrary initial configuration, which can be
edited during the computation but must be restored to the initial configuration at the end of the computation.
Introduced in 2014 by Buhrman et. al. [BCK+ 14], the model has played a central role in recent breakthrough
results, such as the Tree Evaluation
                           √          algorithm of Cook and Mertz [CM20,CM23] and the simulation of time-T
computation in space Õ( T ) by Williams [Wil25a].
    A main technique to build catalytic algorithms (i.e., algorithms that utilize catalytic space) was dubbed
“compress or random” by Mertz [Mer23]. This technique starts with some dense property P of strings that
is useful for designing an algorithm (e.g., being a hard truth-table). For the catalytic algorithm, if the initial
content τ of its catalytic tape satisfies P, the algorithm can just use τ . However, if τ ∈
                                                                                          / P, then the contents
τ of the catalytic space lies in some small set of strings (i.e., the complement of P), and hence the content
τ is – at least information-theoretically – compressible! If we could algorithmically compress τ in this case,
we would unconditionally design an algorithm by a win-win analysis: either the good property holds, or we
free up a large amount of space and solve the problem by brute force.
    But how do we implement this technique? The main challenge is that we need a deterministic, low-space
algorithm that compresses τ when τ is bad. Indeed, now comes the punch-line – this is exactly what deter-
ministic reconstruction provides! Hence, hardness vs randomness tools with deterministic reconstructions
are useful for designing catalytic algorithms.




                                                        5
Two algorithms, and a possibility. First, a basic open problem about probabilistic logspace is search-
to-decision reductions. Specifically, an algorithm for the decision problem of derandomization (i.e., decide
whether E[D] is high or low) is currently not known to imply an algorithm of similar space complexity for
the corresponding search problem (i.e., print a distribution that is pseudorandom for D).
    For catalytic algorithms, however, this was recently proved to be true – indeed, using “compress or
random” with a generator that has deterministic reconstruction. In particular, recall that CL denotes the
class of problems solvable with logarithmic space and polynomial catalytic space; then:
Theorem 3.2 (Informal, see Theorem 5.4 [LPT24]). Let D be a class of circuits evaluable in CL, and
suppose that there is a CL algorithm that estimates E[D] for D ∈ D up to additive error 1/10n. Then there
is a CL algorithm that, given D, prints a distribution that (1/3)-fools D.

   A second catalytic algorithm using this technique simulates BPL in CL. This result was already shown in
the first paper about catalytic computing [BCK+ 14], relying on algebraic techniques and on the somewhat
indirect route “BPL ⊆ logspace-uniform-TC1 ⊆ CL”. A more direct algorithm simulating BPL in CL was
recently shown, using “compress or random” and a generator with deterministic reconstruction.
Theorem 3.3 ([BCK+ 14], an alternative proof in [DPT24]). We have that BPL ⊆ CL.

    Another alternative proof of Theorem 3.3 follows from the fact, proved recently in [Pyn24, CLMP24,
KMPS25], that randomized catalytic space coincides with deterministic catalytic space (i.e., that CBPL =
CL; the last of these works even showed that non-deterministic catalytic algorithms can be simulated by
deterministic ones). The original algorithm in [CLMP24] was, indeed, a “compress-or-random” algorithm
using a generator with deterministic reconstruction. However, in subsequent work [KMPS25] a simpler
algorithm was shown, using a compression technique that does not involve hardness-vs-randomness.
    We believe that deterministic reconstruction still has a major role to play in catalytic algorithms, because
it gives a highly generic compression technique. We suggest this as an open problem in Section 5.

3.3     Win-win pairs of algorithms
As mentioned in Section 2, hardness vs randomness can turn lemons into lemonade, by turning the non-
existence of efficient algorithms for one problem into an efficient algorithm for another problem.
    Interestingly, recent works [DPTW25,PT25] go further than that, by showing an “instance-wise” win-win
between derandomization and two fundamental problems in space complexity. Specifically, they showed that
for every fixed input x, either we can derandomize BPL on x, or we can solve a fundamental problem in space
complexity on x (i.e., much more efficiently than the best currently known algorithm for that problem).

3.3.1   Graph connectivity
First, consider the problem of s-t-connectivity, where we are given a directed graph G = (V, E) on n vertices
and two vertices s, t, and need to decide if there is a path from s to t.
   This problem is complete for nondeterministic logspace (NL), and can be solved in space O(log2 n) via
                                                                                        2
the famous result of Savitch [Sav70]. However, Savitch’s algorithm runs in time 2O(log n) ≫ poly(n). The
problem can also be solved in time O(n2 ) and space O(n), via a simple Breadth First Search. But what
about a time and space efficient solution? Whether such an algorithm exists is wide open!           √
   A result of Barnes et. al. [BBRS98] solves s-t-connectivity in polynomial time and space O(n/2 log n ) =
o(n), but even the following is up in the air:
Question 3.4. Is there a constant ε > 0 and an s-t-connectivity algorithm running in simultaneous time
    1−ε
nlog n and space n1−ε ?
    In a restricted computational model that captures all known s-t-connectivity algorithms, an algorithm
with these parameters matching Question 3.4 is known not to exist [CR80, Poo93, LZPC05]. However, this
restriced model does not capture general algorithms (cf., e.g., the difference between [CMW+ 12] and [CM23]).




                                                       6
A win-win pair of algorithms. If one is pessimistic, and believes that there isn’t an algorithm as
in Question 3.4, what does that imply? A natural hope is to use randomness vs randomness to build a useful
algorithm from this hardness. Classical hardness vs randomness yields non-uniform circuits (or, in some
settings, probabilistic algorithms), but with deterministic reconstruction we can do better.
    Specifically, a recent result of [DPTW25] ties together s-t connectivity with the problem of estimating
random walk probabilities (which is complete for BPL): For every given graph G, at least one of these
problems can be solved on G much more efficiently than the best currently known algorithm.
Theorem 3.5 ([DPTW25, Theorem 1]). There are algorithms A1 , A2 such that for every graph G on n
vertices, one of the following holds:
    • A1 (G) solves s-t connectivity in G in polynomial time and polylogarithmic space.

    • A2 (G) estimates length-n random walk probabilities in G in non-deterministic logspace.6
Moreover, both algorithms report if they fail to compute the desired answer, and do not exceed their resource
bounds in any case.

How is deterministic reconstruction used? The use of deterministic reconstruction in the proof of The-
orem 3.5 is not straightforward, and proceeds roughly as follows. Consider the following algorithm for com-
puting s-t-connectivity in small time and space. First, compute all 1-step connectivity information (i.e. for
every vertex pair u, v, decide if there exists a 1-step path from u to v), and write this down in a matrix
M1 ∈ {0, 1}n×n . But rather than storing M1 on the worktape using n2 bits, try to compress M1 to a circuit
C1 of size polylog(n). If this compression step fails, abort. Otherwise, compute the 2-step connectivity
information M2 (which is easy to do given M1 ), delete C1 , and compress M2 into C2 . After n iterations, we
obtain a compressed encoding of Mn , which holds the connectivity information of the graph.
    But what compression algorithm can we use? The key idea of [DPTW25] is to use a deterministic recon-
struction algorithm REC as our compression algorithm in each iteration i, with f = Mi as the hard string.
When the compression fails it must be the case GENMi succeeds in estimating random walk probabilities.
Since we can produce each matrix Mi in NL, either all the compression algorithms work (and we solve
connectivity quickly and in low space) or we obtain a nondeterministic derandomization of walks on G.
    In [DPTW25, PT25] they showed that this approach can be instantiated in a more general way, yielding
a new targeted generator for the logspace setting. We elaborate on this in Section 4.3.

A win-win for complexity classes. Theorem 3.5 gives a pair of algorithms such that, for every input
G, at least one of these algorithms works. Working in a scaled-up regime and with different parameters (but
with the same fundamental idea), in [DPTW25] they deduced a win-win for classical complexity classes.
Theorem 3.6 ([DPTW25, Theorem 2]). For every constant ε > 0, at least one of the following holds:
                         h    2−ε
                                        i
  • NSPACE [n] ⊆ i.o.TISP 2O(n ) , nO(1) .

    • BPSPACE[n] ⊆ SPACE O(n1+ε ) .
                                

   Note that the second case in Theorem 3.6 does better than a simple scale-up of the second case in The-
orem 3.5, because the simulation of BPSPACE (i.e., the derandomization) does not use non-determinism.

3.3.2    Composing low-space algorithms
Consider the following fundamental question: what is the complexity of composing low-space algorithms?
(Jumping ahead, we will explain how this question was recently attacked using hardness vs randomness.)
   Given a function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n computable in time T ≥ n and S = O(log n), there are two basic
ways to compute the function x → f (f (x)). First, a naive strategy: compute y = f (x), store it in the
   6 The estimation is up to an additive 1/ poly(n) error. The algorithm runs in logspace, makes non-deterministic guesses, and

either declares fail if the guess sequence is bad, or outputs a single canonical matrix only depends on the graph G, or outputs
a special symbol ⊥ indicating that A2 does not succeed on G (in which case A1 succeeds on G).



                                                              7
workspace, then compute f (y). This method runs in time O(T ), but space at least n ≫ S due to needing
to store y. This space overhead means that essentially every low-space algorithm in theoretical computer
science makes use of a second option, coined “emulative composition” by Goldreich [Gol08], or “composition
of space-bounded algorithms”. Here, we begin to compute f (y), and each time the algorithm queries a bit
of y, we recompute it on the fly. This reduces the space to O(S), but quadratically blows up the time,
i.e. to T 2 instead of T . One may also interpolate between the two methods using sub-quadratic time and
super-logarithmic space, as long as the time-space product is at least Õ(T 2 · S) (see [PT25, Proposition 4.1]).
    A seemingly natural question is whether we can get the best of both worlds. That is, can we compose
algorithms in low space without paying a significant time overhead? It turns out that for linear time
algorithms, i.e. T (n) = O(n), the answer is unconditionally no:
Theorem 3.7 ([Wil25b], appearing in [PT25, Theorem 1.2]). There is a length-preserving function f :
{0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}∗ computable in simultaneous linear time and logspace, where any algorithm computing
x → f (f (x)) must have time-space product at least n1.33 .
   Thus, for linear time, composition incurs an unavoidable time-space overhead. An obvious next step is to
ask if this lower bound holds also for large polynomial time bounds T . In [PT25] they showed that proving
such a statement implies average-case derandomization of logspace:

Theorem 3.8 ([PT25, Theorem 1.3]). Suppose that there is δ > 0 such that for every polynomial T (n) and
constant ε > 0 the following holds. There is a function f computable in time T and space O(log n) such
that any algorithm computing f (f (x)) successfully on an ε-fraction of inputs x ∈ {0, 1}n requires time-space
product T 1+δ .7 Then BPL ⊆ ∩ε>0 avgε L.

   Theorem 3.8 was also extended in [PT25] to the setting of composing f for k times (i.e., asking whether
low-space algorithms require time T Ω(k) ), and to the scaled-up setting, in which we focus on worst-case
composition and derandomization (rather than average-case).

A word about the technique. The strategy for proving Theorem 3.8 is to again construct a win-win
pair of algorithms A1 and A2 , as follows: For every x, either A1 (x) outputs f (f (x)) in small time and space,
or A2 (x) simulates the (predetermined) BPL machine on input x.
    The algorithms are designed in similar fashion to the win-win pair in Theorem 3.5, except that the
generator now does not use the i-step connectivity matrices (for i = 1, ..., n) as a source of hardness,
but instead uses the strings f (x), f (f (x)), ... obtained by repeatedly computing f . (Indeed, in the version
in Theorem 3.8 it uses the two strings f (x) and f (f (x)), and when considering hardness of k-wise composition,
it uses f (i) (x) for i = 1, ..., k). The main challenge comes in the reconstruction argument: whenever the
generator fails, we want to compute the last layer f (k) (x) using near-linear time and polylogarithmic space.
The technical tools described so far don’t seem to suffice for this purpose, since the reconstruction runs
in large poly(T ) time. In [PT25] they showed a new (GEN, REC) pair (i.e., a generator and deterministic
reconstruction) wherein REC runs in near-linear time and polylogarithmic space, and is also read-once over
its input (i.e., reads its input in streaming fashion, bit-by-bit in order), which is another feature needed to
avoid time blow-ups when implementing the idea above. This is described in detail in Section 4.3.2.

3.4     Derandomization and isolation: BPL = L using hardness vs randomness?
The question of BPL = L has been studied for decades via combinatorial constructions of pseudorandom
generators for ROBPs and related models (see, e.g., the surveys [Sak96, Hoz22]). Can we instead attack this
question using hardness vs randomness? The suggestion in [DPT24] is as follows:

      Reduce BPL = L (or relaxed versions of it) to lower bounds that are so weak that we can
      unconditionally prove them.
   7 In this statement we refer to the runtime of both f (x) and f (f (x)) as a function T = T (n) of the length of the input

x ∈ {0, 1}n to the composition. We could alternatively describe f1 as running in time T and outputting T bits, and describe
f2 as running in linear time (in T ).




                                                             8
   Their idea was to rely on deterministic reconstruction to reduce derandomization to lower bounds for
uniform, deterministic algorithms, and in particular for classes of weak uniform deterministic circuits, in
which case proving these lower bounds seems tractable. (For context, recall that versions of BPP = P are
known to follow from certain hardness for uniform probabilistic algorithms [IW98, TV07, CT21a, LP22].)

3.4.1     Derandomization from remarkably weak lower bounds
We present two appealing instantiations of this approach, from [DPT24] and [PT25] (improving on a prior re-
sult from [DPTW25]), which reduce a relaxed version of BPL = L to remarkably weak hardness assumptions.
The conclusions below will be derandomization of linear space (rather than logspace), and the assumptions
will be extensions of unconditionally known lower bounds.
Theorem 3.9 ([DPT24, Theorem 2]). Suppose that SPACE[O(n)] is hard for SPACE[C·n]-uniform (TC0 )ROBP
circuits of size 2ε·n ,8 for some ε > 0 and all C > 1. Then, BPSPACE[O(n)] ⊆ i.o.SPACE[O(n)].

    The assumption in Theorem 3.9 “almost” follows from a simple diagonalization argument, where the only
problem is that the circuit in the lower bound is printed by an algorithm using space C · n, whereas the upper
bound uses space c · n, where c < C. This obstacle is not insurmountable. In fact, a scaled-down version
of the hypothesis in Theorem 3.9 (referring to logspace and to polynomial-sized circuits) is unconditionally
known, using the techniques of Santhanam and Williams [SW13] (see [DPT24, Proposition 1.2]). Thus,
scaling up the known lower bound would suffice to prove that BPSPACE[O(n)] ⊆ i.o.SPACE[O(n)].9
Theorem 3.10 ([PT25, Theorem 1.6]). There is c > 1 such that the following holds. Suppose that the
following is true:
        There is an algorithm that gets input 1n , runs in space O(log n), and outputs a list of n-bit
        strings fn,1 , ..., fn,m such that every deterministic uniform one-pass streaming algorithm that
        runs in space (log n)c and time nc fails to compress fn,i to size polylog(n), for some i.10
Then, BPSPACE[n] ⊆ SPACE[O(n)].
    The assumption in Theorem 3.10 is appealing because it refers to a very weak computational model,
and in particular, because the reduction of derandomization to a lower bound does not incur overhead
in the computational model. To see this, recall that deterministic uniform one-pass streaming algorithms
are essentially equivalent to uniform deterministic ROBPs.11 Thus, Theorem 3.10 reduces estimating the
acceptance probability of ROBPs to a lower bound for ROBPs (and moreover, for uniform deterministic
ROBPs). This is particularly striking, because exponential lower bounds for ROBPs, even non-uniform
ones, have been well-known for decades (see, e.g., [BHST87]). The lower bound needed in Theorem 3.10
differs from what is known because it refers to hardness of compressing an explicit string (by ROBPs of
size quasipolynomial in the string’s length), rather than to hardness of computing an explicit function (by
ROBPs of size that is smaller than the function’s truth-table).
    Technically, at a high level the two results use hardness vs randomness in the straightforward way (i.e.,
the hardness assumption is that the reconstruction algorithm fails), and the main challenge is obtaining
very efficient reconstruction algorithms. For example, in Theorem 3.10 the reconstruction algorithm is a
small uniform deterministic ROBP (which tries to compress the fn,i ’s), rather than a general algorithm. The
underlying technical tools are presented in Sections 4.1 and 4.2.2.
    8 The notation (TC0 )ROBP refers to TC0 circuits with oracle access to ROBPs, where the size bound 2ε·n accounts for the

total description size of the circuit and of the ROBP together.
    9 A variation on Theorem 3.9 was shown in [PT25, Theorem 7.10], in which the circuits in the lower bound are only of

polynomial size (rather than size 2ε·n ), but they are general circuits (rather than (TC0 )ROBP circuits).
   10 The notion of “compressing” here means outputting a machine M of size polylog(n) that gets input i ∈ [n], runs in space

polylog(n) and time poly(n), and outputs (fn )i .
   11 The main difference between the two is that for uniform ROBPs it is more natural to specify their uniformity (e.g., the ROBP

is logspace-uniform), whereas for streaming algorithms it is more natural to specify their computational complexity (e.g., the
algorithm runs in polynomial time). The technical result in [PT25] refers to a model in which both restrictions simultaneously
apply: as an ROBP it is logspace-uniform, and as a streaming algorithm its running time is at most nc .




                                                                9
3.4.2     Derandomization with minimal memory footprint
The hardness to randomness paradigm allows us to deduce derandomization, but what is the precise cost of
derandomization? Recall that classical conditional results [NW94, IW97] transform any randomized linear
time algorithm into a deterministic algorithm running in time that is polynomial but that may be very large
(i.e., nc for an unspecified constant c ≫ 1).
    Doron et al. [DMOZ22] posed the question of whether it is possible to simulate all randomized algorithms
while incurring minimal time overhead; ideally, we want to incur no time overhead at all. Their work and
follow-ups [CT21b, CT21a, SV22, BCT25] showed that, under strong hardness assumption, derandomization
with very small time overhead is indeed possible.12
    What about derandomizing with minimal space overhead? This question was posed in [DT23], which
asked whether we can simulate probabilistic algorithms running in space S by deterministic algorithms
running in space c · S for c ≥ 1 that is as small as possible (ideally c ≈ 1).
    Loosely speaking, their original work deduced this with c ≈ 2 under two assumptions: very efficient cryp-
tographic PRGs, and the existence of a logspace algorithm printing strings that are hard to probabilistically
compress.13 Subsequently, in [DPTW25] they showed that these assumptions can be replaced by a single,
non-cryptographic hardness assumption, for uniform deterministic machines.
Theorem 3.11 (Informal, see Theorem 5 [DPTW25]). Assume for every C there exists a function f mapping
n bits to n2 bits that is computable in space (C + 1) · log(n), but no deterministic, low-space algorithm R can
achieve the following. On input x, R print a machine M of description size O(n) where M runs in space
C · log(n) and prints f (x). Then, for any S(n) = Ω(log n) and constant ε > 0,
                                            BPSPACE[S] ⊆ SPACE[(2 + ε) · S].
    The high-level proof approach for Theorem 3.11 is similar to that underlying Theorems 3.9 and 3.10,
but the technical details are considerably more complicated, since this result needs to get a generator
that is computable with essentially no space overhead, while still maintaining a deterministic reconstruction.
In [DPTW25] they showed this by composing a reconstructive generator with the Forbes-Kelley PRG [FK18],
and building a specialized deterministic reconstruction for the latter; see Section 4.2.2 for details.

3.4.3     Isolation from remarkably weak lower bounds
Finally, consider the question of making nondeterministic algorithms unambiguous, i.e. having at most a
single convincing witness. In the setting of time-bounded algorithms, the well-known result of Valiant and
Varizani [VV86] gives a randomized reduction from NP to prUP (recall UP is the class of problems with a
single valid witness for every YES instance, and prUP is the corresponding class of promise problems). How-
ever, assuming NP ̸⊂ P/ poly, there is no deterministic algorithm that reduces NP to prUP by “isolating”
witnesses, i.e. by mapping circuits with many satisfying assignments to circuits that reject all but exactly
one of these assignments [DKvMW13].
    Perhaps surprisingly, in the setting of space-bounded algorithms there is evidence that we can determin-
istically turn all nondeterministic algorithms into unambiguous ones, given by Wigderson, Gál, Allender,
Reinhardt, and Zhou:
Theorem 3.12 ([Wig94, GW96, RA00, ARZ99]). Suppose that SPACE[O(n)] is hard for circuits of size 2εn
on all input lengths, for some ε > 0. Then NL = UL.
    Just as in space-bounded derandomization, there has been progress on resolving this question uncondi-
tionally, with the state of the art due to van-Melkebeek and Prakriya [vMP19] establishing that NL ⊆ UL3/2 .
    From the perspective of hardness-to-randomness results, we are again in the situation of assuming a
large hammer to attack a possibly smaller nail (cf., Theorem 1.2). Can we do better? And again, using
deterministic reconstruction, in [DPTW25, PT25] they showed that the answer is yes:14
  12 Specifically, these works conditionally deduced worst-case derandomization with a multiplicative time overhead of n (i.e.,

simulating probabilistic time T (n) in deterministic time n · T (n)) and strong average-case derandomization with essentially no
time overhead (i.e., simulating probabilistic time T (n) in deterministic time nε ·T (n) over all efficiently samplable distributions).
  13 The second assumption can be replaced by strong circuit lower bounds (see [DT23, Theorem 2]. Their work also deduced

derandomization with c ≈ 1 under even stronger assumptions, referring to catalytic computation (see [DT23, Section 1.4]).
  14 The precise statement below does not appear in either [DPTW25] or [PT25], but it can be derived by combining [PT25,

Theorem 5.1] with [DPTW25, Theorem 4.11].


                                                                  10
Theorem 3.13 ([DPTW25, PT25]). There is a constant c > 1 such that the following holds. Suppose there
exists a constant ε > 0 such that USPACE[n] is hard for USPACE[cn]-uniform circuits of size nc with oracle
access to USPACE[εcn]. Then, NSPACE[n] ⊆ USPACE[Oε (n)].
    Technically, rather than a pair (GEN, REC) with deterministic reconstruction for a distinguisher related
to fooling ROBPs, we have a pair (GEN, REC) with deterministic reconstruction for a distinguisher that
checks if a certain condition related to the “path-isolation lemma” from [RA00] holds. In particular, the
distinguisher checks if a weight function W : E → [nc ] on the edges of a graph G has the property that all
shortest paths are unique. The works [LPT24, DPTW25, PT25] constructed a deterministic reconstruction
for this distinguisher; see explanation in Sections 4.1 and 4.2.2.


4     Technical Tools
At a high level, in this section we will present two technical tools, both consisting of a deterministic logspace
generator and a deterministic logspace (or polylogspace) reconstruction algorithm. The results presented
in Section 3 rely on these tools, or on variations on these tools that will be mentioned in the text below.

Hardness of compressing a string. In Section 4.1 we describe a pair (GEN, REC) of a generator and
reconstruction algorithm, which follow the explanation in Section 2. Specifically, both algorithms get access
to a string f , and whenever GENf (D) fails, RECf (D) compresses f to a small circuit.
    Then, in Section 4.2 we expand on a key technical part in this construction (and other similar construc-
tions), which is Distinguish to Predict transformations for restricted classes of distinguishers.

Hardness of computing a function. In Section 4.3 we describe a targeted generator and a corresponding
reconstruction algorithm, which follow the explanation in Remark 2.1. Specifically, the generator will be
based on a function f (·), and for every input x such that GENf (x) fails, the reconstruction RECf (x) computes
f (x) using less resources than the naive algorithm for f . The construction of these algorithms will use the
(GEN, REC) pair presented before that in Section 4.1.

4.1     Deterministic reconstruction via deterministic D2P
The current state-of-the-art for deterministic logspace (GEN, REC) that rely on hardness of compressing a
string is the following.
Theorem 4.1 ([PT25, Theorem 5.1]; informal). Let D be a class of procedures such that there is an efficient
distinguish-to-predict transform for D.15 There are two algorithms (GEN, REC) that for every f ∈ {0, 1}N
and every M ≤ N Ω(1) satisfy the following:
    • GEN(f ) runs in space O(log N ) and outputs ℓ < log(N ) lists of M -bit strings.
    • Fix any D : {0, 1}M → {0, 1} in D that is a (1/M )-distinguisher for each of the ℓ lists that GEN(f )
      outputs. Then, RECD (f ) runs in deterministic space O(log N ) + polylog(M ) and prints a circuit C of
      size poly(M ) such that the truth-table of C D is f .
   The high-level observation opening the door to Theorem 4.1, from the first paper studying deterministic
reconstruction [PRZ23], is that in almost all known generator constructions (e.g., in [NW94, SU05, Uma03]),
the reconstruction algorithm can be divided into two steps (see Figure 1):16

    1. Transforming the distinguisher D into a predictor P (we will define this notion in Section 4.1.2).
    2. Using a predictor P , constructing a circuit C such that the truth-table of C P is f .17
   15 We will define distinguish-to-predict transforms in Section 4.1.2. For Theorem 4.1, we need is the transform to be computable

in deterministic logspace, and for the predictors that it outputs to be evaluable in logspace (see Remark 4.7).
   16 An exception is generators with non-deterministic reconstruction, which have been useful for studying hardness vs random-

ness for AM and for superfast derandomization (see, e.g., [Sip88, MV05, SU07, DMOZ22, CT21b]).
   17 In Theorem 4.1 we “promised” that REC outputs C D whose truth-table is f , whereas this step yields C P whose truth-table

is f . In known arguments P is easily evaluable given D, and hence the difference between C D and C P is immaterial.


                                                                11
Figure 1: The high-level structure of most known reconstruction procedures, along with the parameters
obtained when using the known derandomized reconstruction for the SU generator and for the NW generator.


    The two steps above often work with a list of candidate predictors, in the following sense: The first step
transforms D into a list of functions P1 , ..., PL , one of which is a predictor; and the second step also works
given access to such a list, in which case it outputs C Pi for some Pi .
    In classical constructions, both steps are probabilistic. Generally speaking, the first step follows a classical
easy argument of Yao [Yao82], and most of the technical work is devoted to the second step. For example,
in the classical construction of [NW94, STV01], the second step consists of hard-wiring partial truth-tables
according to a combinatorial design, and then using a decoder of an underlying locally list-decodable error-
correcting code (for a standard description, see e.g. [AB09, Chapter 19.6]).
    It turns out that for several known generators, we can derandomize the second step in a generic way,
which doesn’t rely on any properties of D; this takes technical work, but does not have much conceptual
innovation. We will therefore start in Section 4.1.1 by describing this more generic second step, and then
in Section 4.1.2 describe the first step, which is the main interesting bottleneck.

A key difference from the time-bounded setting: Derandomizing algorithms with two-sided
error. Note that in Theorem 4.1 the generator outputs ℓ lists, and (assuming that the reconstruction fails)
the guarantee is only that one of the lists is pseudorandom. A-priori, we don’t know which of the ℓ lists is the
pseudorandom one, so we might take the union of the lists to yield a hitting-set generator (and derandomize
algorithms with one-sided error). However, using deterministic reconstruction, we can do better.
    In the special case of trying to prove that BPL = L, one trick is to rely on the fact that fooling a BPL
machine reduces to “hitting” the set of good seeds for Nisan’s PRG; in other words, derandomizing logspace
algorithms with two-sided error reduces to a “hitting” problem (see Section 4.2.2 for details).
    A more general approach is to observe that the derandomization algorithm can also run the reconstruction
algorithm! (Indeed, this is because the latter is deterministic.) That is, the derandomization algorithm can
compute each of the ℓ output lists of the generator, and then run the reconstruction algorithm REC on each
list to see if REC succeeds; whenever REC fails, the list must be pseudorandom. See, e.g., Section 4.3.2.

Known variants of Theorem 4.1. Parameter-wise, Theorem 4.1 is not optimal (see open problems
in Section 5.3). However, we know how to do better in certain special cases. Let us mention two examples:
   • The output length and reconstruction size are large: When the output length is M = N Ω(1)
     and the reconstructed circuit C may be of large size poly(M ) = N Ω(1) , we can get REC that runs in
     space O(log N ) and outputs C that is a TC0 circuit, rather than a general circuit. Moreover, in this
     case GEN also outputs a single list rather than ℓ lists. (See [DPT24, Theorem 7.4], following [PRZ23].)

   • The distinguisher is an ROBP: When D is the class of ROBPs of polynomial width, we can get
     REC that runs in space O(log N ) and outputs C that is of size polylog(M ), rather than poly(M ). We
     will describe the proof idea in Section 4.2.2. (This result isn’t explicitly stated in prior works, and it
     follows by combining [PT25, Theorem 5.1] with [DPTW25, Theorem 4.8].)



                                                        12
   Another known alternative to Theorem 4.1 has REC that runs in near-linear time N 1+ε and reads f in
read-once fashion (i.e., bit-by-bit in order); the downside then is that this REC runs in slightly larger space
polylog(N ), and it outputs a small low-space machine that computes j 7→ fj in time poly(|f |), rather than
a small circuit (see [PT25, Theorem 2.4]). We will explain this and describe the proof idea in Section 4.3.2.
Remark 4.2. We do not know of any inherent reason to divide reconstruction arguments into the two steps
above. In fact, there is evidence that the first step is an overkill,18 and this step increases the runtime of
REC at least quadratically (see [LPT24, Appendix B]). The latter runtime overhead is an instance of what is
often called “the hybrid argument barrier” (see. e.g., [FSUV13,SV22]), and indeed the known reconstruction
procedures that bypass this barrier do not involve the first step (see [DMOZ22, CT21b], following [Sip88]).

4.1.1    The second (generic) step
There are two known classical generators whose “second step” of reconstruction can be generically made
deterministic and low-space:
    • The Shaltiel-Umans generator [SU05] (with a modification from [CLO+ 23]): In [DPTW25,PT25]
      they showed that for any output length M ≤ N Ω(1) , the second reconstruction step can be implemented
      in deterministic space O(log N ) + polylog(M ). This is used to prove of Theorem 4.1.
    • The Nisan-Wigderson generator [NW94] (combined with a locally list-decodable code [STV01]):
      In [PRZ23] they showed that when the output length is M = N Ω(1) ,19 the second reconstruction step
      can be implemented in deterministic space O(log N ). In [DPT24] they showed that (using a suitable
      code) we can in addition get the second step to output a TC0 circuit. This matches the special case
      of Theorem 4.1 with M = N Ω(1) that was mentioned after the theorem’s statement.
   We briefly explain the proof ideas, starting with the simpler case of the NW reconstruction. The de-
randomization of the second step for this reconstruction replaces uniform random choices by pseudorandom
choices output by an averaging sampler (i.e., a seeded randomness extractor; see [Gol11b]).
Example 4.3. One step in the reconstruction argument of the NW generator is local list-decoding of an
underlying error-correcting code, which is usually chosen to be the Reed-Muller code concatenated with the
Hadamard code. The decoding algorithm in [STV01] for the Reed-Muller code chooses a random degree-3
curve in Fm , where the parameters are chosen such that |F|m = poly(N ). Choosing a curve can be done
using O(log N ) coins, since we just need to choose three points in Fm to specify the curve.
    However, the basic reconstruction only succeeds with probability 1/ poly(M ), so this step is indepen-
dently repeated poly(M ) times, resulting in high overall randomness complexity. In [PRZ23], instead
of using poly(M ) independent choices, they use a logspace-computable sampler Samp : {0, 1}O(log N ) →
                 poly(M )
 {0, 1}O(log N )           with accuracy 1/ poly(M ); that is, they choose coins r ∈ {0, 1}O(log N ) for the sam-
pler, and enumerate over the choices given by Samp(r) instead of over independent choices.
    For the SU reconstruction, considerably more technical work went into derandomizing the second step.
The idea above of replacing independent choices by samplers was used, in some cases with a special type of
sampler called a “curve sampler” and a specific construction by Guo [Guo13].
    But unlike the case of the NW reconstruction, black-box replacement of independent choices by samplers is
not enough here, and some parts of the reconstruction procedure needed to be refined (see [DPTW25, Section
2.1.3]). The reconstruction also does not a-priori run in low space,20 and this required an additional idea
(see [PT25, Section 2.2.3]). A self-contained proof appears in [PT25, Section 5].
  18 This is since derandomizing a reconstruction argument in general is equivalent to prBPP = prZPP, whereas derandomizing

the first step is equivalent to prBPP = prP; see Section 4.1.2.
  19 This parameter setting is the typical one when using the NW generator, since this generator is not optimal when M = N o(1) .

Specifically, the NW generator has seed length ℓ = O((log N )2 / log(M )), which in our terminology means that GENf (D) runs in
time at least 2ℓ . Generators with seed length O(log N ) were constructed by Shaltiel and Umans [SU05] and by Umans [Uma03].
  20 In [DPTW25] the reconstruction is presented as a probabilistic algorithm using O(log N ) coins and space O(log N ). The

best known way to transform this algorithm into a deterministic algorithm, from [PT25], pays an an extra factor of polylog(M ).




                                                               13
4.1.2     The first step: Distinguish-to-Predict (D2P) transforms
In the previous section we established that (for some generators) the second step can be executed in deter-
ministic logspace, and this didn’t rely on any properties of D. Specifically, the procedures above just need
black-box access to a predictor, so all we need now is a way to transform D into a predictor.

        The main technical bottleneck is the first step, i.e. transforming a distinguisher to a predictor.
        Known derandomizations of this step use the structure of D, and extending them to broader
        classes of D’s is the key towards getting derandomized reconstruction in more settings.

    We will define this precisely using a more general notion of a predictor than the standard one. Instead
of allowing only “next-bit” predictors, we will also allow “previous-bit” predictors, and more generally:
Definition 4.4 (predictor). For a distribution w over {0, 1}M , we say P : {0, 1}m → {0, 1} is a δ-predictor
for w if there is an interval I ⊆ [M ] where |I| = m and a bit j ∈ [M ] \ I where
                                                                         1
                                                  E [P (wI ) = wj ] ≥      + δ.
                                                w∼w                      2
We say P is a next-bit-predictor if I = {1, . . . , m − 1}, and a previous-bit-predictor if I = {m + 1, . . . , M }.
Definition 4.5 (D2P). An ε-distinguish to δ-predict transform for a class C of circuits is an algorithm that
takes as input an M -bit C ∈ C and outputs a set of procedures P1 , ..., PL , where each Pj is a function
{0, 1}i → {0, 1} for some i ≤ M , such that the following holds. For every distribution w such that C is an
ε-distinguisher for w, there is j ∈ [L] such that Pj is a δ-predictor for w.
   The requirement in Definition 4.5 that a single set P1 , ..., PL works for all distributions w is not obvious.
A relaxed requirement, wherein the algorithm may take w as input, also makes sense (see [LPT24, Appendix
C.2]). We focus on the stronger notion, because most of the D2Ps from recent years satisfy it.
Remark 4.6. Note that a useful property of a predictor P is that, given access to w, we can efficiently verify
how well it predicts the relevant bit. This stands in contrast to distinguishers, since there is no obvious way
to check if D is a distinguisher for w (since a priori we do not know the value Er∈{0,1}M [D(r)]).
Remark 4.7. When using a D2P transform to construct a logspace reconstruction algorithm, we also need
that the predictors given by the D2P will be evaluable in logspace. That is, we need a logspace algorithm
that gets i ∈ [L] and input w and oracle access to D, and outputs Pi (w). This is important because the
second step of the reconstruction (from Section 4.1) makes queries to the candidate predictors.

D2P for general circuits. The textbook lemma by Yao [Yao82] yields a probabilistic algorithm that gets
a general circuit D, and for every fixed w, whp outputs a D2P transform that works for w.
Proposition 4.8 ([Yao82]). Suppose D : {0, 1}M → {0, 1} is a ε-distinguisher for w. Then, with probability
at least 1/ poly(M ) over choice of i ∈ [M ] and z ∈ {0, 1}M −i and b ∈ {0, 1}, the algorithm P : {0, 1}i → {0, 1}
defined as P (w) = D(w ◦ z) ⊕ b is an (ε/M )-next-bit-predictor for w.21
    It is not a-priori clear that for all D’s there even exists, non-explicitly, a single small set of predictors
                                                                                                M
that works for every w (for which D is a distinguisher). This is because there can be 2Ω(2 ) distributions
for which D is a distinguisher,22 so naive probabilistic arguments yield exponentially many predictors.
    Nevertheless, the claim is true. The proof from [LPT24] does not use a standard probabilistic-method
argument, and instead uses a specific (non-explicit) construction of predictors.
Theorem 4.9 ([LPT24, Theorem B.1]). For every D : {0, 1}M → {0, 1} there are L = O(M 2 ) candidate pre-
dictors P1 , ..., PL such that the following holds. For every distribution w for which D is a (1/3)-distinguisher
there is j ∈ [L] such that PjD is an 1/O(M )-predictor for w.
  21 By repeating the algorithm in Proposition 4.8 for L = poly(M ) times, we obtain a random set of P , ..., P such that for
                                                                                                            1     L
any w, with high probability over choice of Pj ’s one of them is a predictor for w. The same argument establishes that with
probability 1/ poly(M ) over i, z it holds that P (w) = D(z ◦ w) ⊕ b is an (ε/M )-previous-bit-predictor for w.
  22 To see this, consider an unbiased D, and a collection of uniform distributions over subsets of {0, 1}M on which the expected

value of D differs from 1/2.


                                                               14
                          Figure 2: Visual depiction of the proof of Theorem 4.12.


    In a gist, the predictors in Theorem 4.9 use a (non-explicit) CAPP algorithm to estimate the expectation
of certain auxiliary circuits. This is similar to an argument of Goldreich [Gol11a, Appendix A].
    In particular, assuming that there is an efficient CAPP algorithm, we obtain a deterministic D2P transform
for general circuits. In fact, deterministic D2P turns out to be equivalent to general derandomization!
Theorem 4.10 ([LPT24, Theorem 1.5]). There exists a deterministic polynomial-time (1/3)-distinguish to
(1/ poly(M ))-predict transform for general circuits if and only if prBPP = prP.
   This result is not encouraging, since it indicates that constructing D2P transforms for general circuits
may be too challenging at the moment. There is even worse news: For any typical circuit class C, a
non-trivial D2P transform for C implies that NEXP is hard for C. Specifically, an ε-distinguish to (2−o(M ) )-
predict transform for C that runs in time 2M /M ω(1) and outputs 2o(M ) predictors (where ε > 0 is a small
universal constant) implies non-trivial derandomization for C (see [LPT24, Appendix B.2]). Using Williams’
algorithmic method [Wil10], such derandomization yields a problem in NEXP that is hard for C-circuits.

4.2     Deterministic D2P for restricted distinguisher classes
To make progress, we turn our attention to D2P for restricted classes of distinguishers, for which lower
bounds in NEXP are either known or seem feasible to prove. We also consider D2P transforms for specific
useful function classes D that don’t correspond to classical circuit classes.

4.2.1   Deterministic D2P for ROBPs
In the special case of ROBPs, there is a logspace deterministic D2P, and moreover, the latest known proof
of this is simple! Let’s recall the definition of ROBPs:
Definition 4.11 (ROBP). An ROBP B : {0, 1}M → {0, 1} consists of M + 1 layers, where each layer i ∈ [M ]
is labeled with a distinct input variable xji . Each node in layer i has two outgoing edges to layer i+1, labeled
with 0 and 1. The first layer has a “start” node s and each node in the last layer is labeled with an output
value. The ROBP computes a function by starting from s and iterating through the layers i = 1, ..., M ,
reading the value v of the corresponding input bit xji , and following the edge labeled with v to the next
layer. The maximal number of nodes in any layer is the main complexity parameter, called the width.

Theorem 4.12 ([PRZ23,DPT24], following [Nis92,CH22,GRZ23]). There is a deterministic logspace (1/M )-
distinguish to (1/ poly(M ))-predict transform for ROBPs of width W . The algorithm outputs poly(M, W )
predictors, each of which is also an ROBP.
Proof. Here we finally use a special property of the distinguisher class, and a remarkably simple one. Let
D : {0, 1}M → {0, 1} be the given ROBP, and consider some (unknown) distribution w over {0, 1}M .


                                                       15
  Figure 3: The high-level structure of the reconstruction procedure when using the generator Nis ◦ GEN.


    By Proposition 4.8 and Footnote 21, for some i ∈ [M ] and z ∈ {0, 1}i−1 and b ∈ {0, 1}, the function
Pi,z,b (w) = D(z ◦ w) ⊕ b is a previous-bit-predictor for w. We can enumerate over i ∈ [M ] (as we are allowed
to output a list of predictors), but enumerating over all z ∈ {0, 1}i−1 is infeasible.
    The key observation is that for any z, the residual function Dz (w) = D(z ◦ w) is a sub-ROBP of D.
Specifically, after fixing the first i − 1 bits to z, the residual function Dz (w) is the ROBP obtained by starting
from a node v = vz in layer i − 1 (i.e., the node vz we reach by walking on D according to z) and then
processing the input w ∈ {0, 1}M −(i−1) . Hence, instead of enumerating over all z’s, it’s enough to enumerate
over all v’s in layer i − 1, of which there are only at most W . See Figure 2 for a visual depiction.
    The algorithm outputs the set of 2M · W predictors obtained by enumerating all choices of i ∈ [M ] and
v ∈ [W ] and b ∈ {0, 1}, and outputting Pi,v,b (w) = Dv (w) ⊕ b.

Remark 4.13. The only property of ROBPs that this result exploits is that fixing a prefix of the input to
a given ROBP D yields one of at most W sub-ROBPs of D.
    Having a D2P for ROBPs is already useful, since BPL = L reduces to estimating the expected value
of a given ROBP (in logspace). Using Theorem 4.12 and the derandomized logspace algorithms mentioned
in Section 4.1.1, we can get a simpler version of Theorem 4.1 in which C is of size poly(M, log N ) rather
than polylog(M N ). This was used in the proofs of Theorems 3.1 and 3.3.

4.2.2   Deterministic D2P beyond ROBPs
After the statement of Theorem 4.1, we mentioned that in the special case of ROBPs we can get an improved
reconstruction algorithm, which runs in space O(log N ) and outputs a circuit C of size polylog(M ) (rather
than poly(M )). Let us explain the idea for doing so, which will naturally lead us to consider D2P transforms
for distinguishers beyond ROBPs.

Composing the generator with Nisan’s PRG. Recall that we want a generator that outputs M bits
and fools ROBPs. We will instantiate the generator GEN with output length M ′ = polylog(M ), and then
compose it with an unconditional PRG that stretches M ′ bits to M bits and fools ROBPs. Specifically, for
the “outer” PRG we will use the classical generator of Nisan [Nis92]. That is, the final generator is Nis◦GEN.
   The point of doing this is that when this composed generator fails (which means that GEN failed, because
Nis works unconditionally), the reconstruction REC outputs C of size poly(M ′ ) = polylog(M ), and runs in
space O(log N ) + polylog(M ′ ) = O(log N ). The disadvantage, however, is that the distinguisher for the inner
generator now isn’t the ROBP D, but rather Nisan’s PRG composed with D; that is, we need GEN to fool
the distinguisher D′ (w) = Nis(D(w)). This is not an ROBP anymore, and hence the crucial bottleneck in
the construction of (GEN, REC) – the D2P algorithm from Theorem 4.12 – does not work anymore.
   Fortunately, this can be handled! The first observation is that, inspecting the construction of Nis, for
derandomization it suffices to find a good key for a pairwise-independent hash function, which is of description
                                                                                      ′
length M ′ = polylog(N ). Moreover, the function TNis,D that gets input k ∈ {0, 1}M and decides whether or
not k is a good key for D can be implemented in logspace (this is essentially the argument in [Nis94]; for an
explanation, see [DPTW25, Section 4.1]). Thus, the distinguisher for GEN is now TNis,D .



                                                        16
Theorem 4.14 ([DPTW25]). There is a deterministic logspace (1/2)-distinguish to (1/ poly(M ′ ))-predict
transform for the class of TNis,D ’s obtained from ROBPs D : {0, 1}M → {0, 1} of width poly(M ). The
algorithm outputs poly(M ′ ) predictors, each of which is computable in logspace.
Proof idea. Recall that Theorem 4.10 reduces D2P to prBPP = prP. Its proof shows something more
specific: For any fixed D : {0, 1}M → {0, 1}, the proof gives a set of efficient predictors P1 , ..., PL that work
when given oracle access to a function that gets z ∈ {0, 1}i<M and estimates Ez∈{0,1}M −i [D(y ◦ z)]. In
other words, to predict any distribution w (that D distinguishes from uniform), it suffices to estimate the
acceptance probability of D when fixing a prefix of its input bits to a given y. For general circuits, this
“prefix-CAPP” problem is equivalent to CAPP and hence complete for prBPP; however, in the current special
we can use a trick to solve it.
                                                              2
    Let us go back to TNis,D , which takes k ∈ {0, 1}O(log N ) and decides if it is good for D. In Nisan’s proof,
k is partitioned into ℓ = log(N ) blocks of size O(log N ), and k is good if and only if each block is good (for
some notion of “good block” that we intentionally gloss over here).23 Moreover, given a prefix of i ≤ ℓ blocks
in k, we can test in logspace whether all the i blocks are good.
    Now let us look at the task we need to solve in order to construct a predictor. We are given a prefix y
for a potential key k, and for simplicity let us assume that this is a prefix of blocks (i.e., the prefix not does
end mid-block). We need to decide Ez [TNis,D (y ◦ z)]. The key observation is that there are only two cases:
    • If there is a block in the given prefix that is not good, then k = y ◦ z will not be good, no matter the
      suffix z. Hence Ez [TNis,D (y ◦ z)] = 0.
    • If all blocks are good, then the proof in [Nis94] shows that a random suffix z yields a good k = y ◦ z,
      with very high probability. Hence, Ez [TNis,D (y ◦ z)] ≈ 1.

   Thus, to estimate Ez [TNis,D (y◦z)] = 0 it suffices to check if all blocks in the given y are good, which we can
indeed do in deterministic logspace. The D2P outputs the set of predictors from the proof of Theorem 4.10,
with the required estimation task performed as above.
   To recap, the proof of Theorem 4.14 relied on a reduction from the proof of Theorem 4.10, and the
main property used in the proof of Theorem 4.14 was a “polarization” effect: for any prefix y, either the
acceptance probability over a random z is zero or it is very high. Moreover, we can efficiently distinguish
between the two cases. Many known D2P transforms rely on similar “polarization” effects.

Fooling any-order branching programs by composing with the Forbes-Kelley PRG. For deran-
domization with minimal memory footprint (as in Theorem 3.11), we’d like both GEN and REC to incur
almost no space overhead. In [DT23] they showed how to get GEN that adds essentially no space overhead,
but this relies on one modification: instead of considering a distinguisher D that is an ROBP, we now need
to consider D that is an Any Order Branching-Program (AOBP). For a definition see, e.g., [FK18, CLTW23],
though knowing the precise definition is not crucial when reading the current text. Unfortunately, the Nisan
generator that we constructed a D2P transform for provably does not fool this model [Tzu09]!
    To get a hyper-efficient GEN along with REC that deterministically compresses to size polylog(M ), the
idea in [DPT24] was to replace Nisan’s PRG with an unconditional PRG for AOBPs that can be evaluated
in extremely low space, and such that there is a D2P for the composition of this PRG with an AOBP. It
turns out that a modification of the Forbes-Kelley PRG [FK18] satisfies all these properties.

Theorem 4.15 (informal; see [DPTW25, Section 4.3]). For any ε > 0, there is a deterministic algorithm
                                                                                                  ε
that gets as input an AOBP D : {0, 1}M → {0, 1} of size M and a distribution w over {0, 1}M for which
D ◦ F K is a (1/10)-distinguisher,24 runs in time poly(M, |w|) and space O(M ε + log |w|), and outputs a
(1/M O(ε) )-predictor P for w. The predictor can be evaluated in space (1 + O(ε)) · log(M ) with access to D.
    Observe that Theorem 4.15 achieves the more relaxed notion of D2P that was mentioned after Def-
inition 4.5. At a high-level, the proof of Theorem 4.15 uses a “polarization” idea similar to the proof
  23 To be more accurate, in the original proof this is not an “if and only if”, since some k’s happen to be good even if not all

blocks are good. However, for our purposes we modify the definition of “a good k” to mean that all blocks are good.
  24 The version of the Forbes-Kelley PRG from [DPTW25] stretches M ε bits to M bits.




                                                               17
of Theorem 4.14, but significantly more technical work is needed to carry it through, along with modifi-
cations to the original FK generator. See [DPTW25, Sections 2.3.1 and 4.3] for a proof description. The
resulting (GEN, REC) pair is implicit in the proof presented in [DPTW25, Section 6.4].

Path isolation by composing with the van Melkebeek and Prakriya PRG. There is also a deter-
ministic D2P for a completely different type of distinguisher, which doesn’t arise from ROBPs/AOBPs.
    Recall that in Section 3.4.3 we mentioned a result from [LPT24,DPTW25,PT25] deducing NSPACE[n] ⊆
USPACE[O(n)] from lower bounds for USPACE[O(n)]-uniform circuits. As mentioned there, that result is
based on a generator that produces weight assignments for the edges a given graph, where the distinguisher
D(W ) checks whether or not the weight assignment W induces unique shortest paths in the graph. Getting
deterministic USPACE[O(n)]-reconstruction for this generator calls for designing a deterministic D2P for D.
    Reinhardt and Allender [RA00] showed that D can be implemented in unambiguous logspace (i.e., in
UL, which in the parameter above gives a USPACE[O(n)] algorithm), but their algorithm does not seem at
all like an ROBP/AOBP. Fortunately, in [LPT24] they still showed a D2P for it. Their idea was to mimic
the proof of Theorem 4.14: They reduced D2P to solving a “prefix-CAPP” problem for D, observed that to
solve the latter it suffices to check whether the given prefix violates a condition related to D, and relied on
the algorithm of [RA00] for D to decide the latter. Details appear in [LPT24, Section 2.2].

4.3     New reconstructive targeted generators for the logspace setting
We now design a generator and reconstruction based on hardness of computing a function f (x), rather than
of compressing a fixed string f . That is, we fix a uniformly computable function x 7→ f (x), and both the
generator and the reconstruction will get input x. Intuitively, the generator tries uses the computation of
f (x) as a source of hardness (which it can convert to pseudorandomness).
    The technical tool that we will rely on is a targeted PRG, as introduced by Goldreich [Gol11a, Gol11c].
This is a generator that gets input x and tries to fool efficient uniform algorithms that also receive the
same input x (i.e., rather than trying to fool all small non-uniform circuits, as in classical PRGs). The
reconstruction algorithm also gets x, and if the generator fails, then the reconstruction manages to compute
x 7→ f (x) “too efficiently”. We stress that the analysis is now performed instance-wise, for every fixed input
x. That is, if x 7→ f (x) is hard to compute on x specifically, then the generator with x produces a distribution
that is pseudorandom for uniform algorithms that get access to this specific x.
    We also note that the reconstruction in this setting does not get oracle access to a hard string anymore
(let alone oracle access to f ). The reconstruction simply gets x and tries to compute f (x).

A concrete targeted generator. The generator below, from [PT25] (following [DPTW25]), is based on
the supposed hardness of composing low-space algorithms “for free”, i.e. without a significant overhead
either in the running time or in the space complexity (see Section 3.3.2 for an exposition of this topic).
Specifically, fix an arbitrary f0 computable in logspace and large polynomial time T . The result below gives
a pair of algorithms that, on every input, either compute the k-fold composition of f0 in near-linear time
T 1+ε and polylogarithmic space, or derandomize BPL in space O(k · log(n)).25
Theorem 4.16 (win-win pair of algorithms for derandomization and composition; [PT25], following [DPTW25]).
Let L ∈ BPL, let ε > 0, and let T be a sufficiently large polynomial. Fix a length-preserving f0 computable in
logspace and linear time, and k = k(n). Then, there are two algorithms A, B such that for every x ∈ {0, 1}n ,
at least one of the following holds:
                 (k)
   • A(x̄) = f0 (x̄) in time T 1+ε and space polylog(n), where x̄ = x0T −n .
   • B(x) = L(x) in space O(k · log(n)).
    In terms of hardness vs randomness, Theorem 4.16 can be parsed as follows: if computing k-wise compo-
sition is infeasible in near-linear time and low space, then we can derandomize BPL. We will explain below
how the generator’s construction can yield not only Theorem 3.8 but also Theorem 3.5.
  25 To capture a more general setting, the result models f as a linear-time function mapping T bits to T bits, and pads the

input x to be of length T . Other models work just as well, e.g. considering an initial function mapping n bits to T bits and
then k − 1 length-preserving functions.


                                                             18
    Figure 4: A boostrapping system based on repeated composition of a logspace-computable function.


   For notational convenience, in the rest of the section we write f (x) = f0 (x), and note that the hard
function on which the generator is based is x 7→ f (k) (x).

4.3.1    A bootstrapping system for low-space algorithms
The main technical challenge is that the reconstruction algorithm now gets input x and does not have
query access to f (k) (x). In particular, it is not a-priori clear how to utilize classical generators, whose
reconstruction algorithms need query access to f (k) (x). The construction underlying Theorem 4.16, which
handles this challenge, is an adaptation of the generator by Chen and Tell [CT21a] (using ideas from [IW98]).
     The generator is given input x ∈ {0, 1}n , and for simplicity let us abuse the notation and use x to also
denote the padded T -bit version x0T −n . Consider the sequence of strings f (1) (x) = f (x), f (2) (x) = f (f (x)), ...
and so on until f (k) (x). Note that this sequence of strings is “downward self-reducible”, in the sense that
f (i) (x) is computable in logspace from f (i−1) (x). See Figure 4.
     The targeted generator applies the generator GEN from Theorem 4.1 to each of the strings f (i) (x), and
obtains a sequence of lists L(i) = GEN(f (i) (x)).26 The hope is that at least one of those lists will be
pseudorandom for the BPL machine with the same input x. Indeed, assume that this is not the case. Then,
the deterministic reconstruction algorithm REC from Theorem 4.1 runs in logspace and builds a small circuit
C1 (of size polylog(M ) ≤ polylog(T )) whose truth-table is f (1) (x), as long as REC can make queries to the
bits of f (1) (x). The key point is that we can compute answers to these queries in logspace, due to downward
self-reducibility and since we have x; that is, when REC queries f (1) (x) at location i, we compute the answer
by running the logspace algorithm that computes f (1) (x) = f (x) from x. Continuing this further, at each
iteration i we have a circuit C (i) of size polylog(T ) whose truth-table is f (i) (x), and REC builds a small
circuit C (i+1) whose truth-table is f (i+1) (x), using C (i) and downward self-reducibility to answer queries
to f (i+1) (x). (And after the iteration C (i) is discarded.) Note that we use the assumption that the BPL
machine with x is a distinguisher for each list L(i) (since we want REC to succeed on each f (i) (x)).
     After k iterations the reconstruction algorithm obtained a small circuit C (k) whose truth-table contains
the output f (k) (x), so it can evaluate this circuit to compute f (k) (x). This reconstruction runs in time
poly(T ), rather than T 1+ε as promised in Theorem 4.16; in Section 4.3.2 we will explain how to improve the
running time. But the space complexity of the reconstruction is polylogarithmic as we wanted, so as long
as f (k) (x) is hard to compute in time poly(T ) and space polylog(T ), one of the output lists of the targeted
generator fools the BPL machine with x.
Remark 4.17. The targeted generator above outputs k lists L(1) , ..., L(k) , hoping that at least one of them
will be pseudorandom. In fact, inspecting things more closely, each L(i) is, in itself, a sequence of ℓ < log(T )
lists (because L(i) = GEN(f (i) (x)), and GEN outputs ℓ lists), and if the reconstruction fails, then only one
 26 To get the statement of Theorem 4.16 specifically, we assume that T is a large enough polynomial so that the output length

M = T Ω(1) suffices to derandomize the BPL machine for L.



                                                             19
list inside one L(i) is guaranteed to be pseudorandom. In other words, the construction above is of a targeted
“somewhere-PRG”, rather than a targeted PRG. Fortunately, as explained in the beginning of Section 4.1,
in the logspace setting we can often still use such an object to derandomize algorithms with two-sided error.

A win-win pair of algorithms for s-t connectivity. The construction above also suffices to prove The-
orem 3.5, using one additional observation. Specifically, in this case the function f will be matrix squar-
ing, and the generator uses k = O(log n) compositions to compute the transitive closure of the graph.
The proof described above works as-is, and the only problem is that the generator’s complexity is now
O(k · log(n)) = O(log2 (n)) (which is not useful for derandomization of BPL, as derandomization in space
O(log3/2 (n)) is already known unconditionally [SZ99]).
    The observation in [DPTW25] is that in this special case, we can compute each entry of f (i) (x) (for any
i ∈ [k]) in NL, since computing such an entry reduces to a connectivity question in a graph. Hence, the
generator is computable in non-deterministic logspace rather than only deterministic space O(k · log(n)), and
the win-win pair of algorithms either solves s-t connectivity or derandomizes BPL in NL.

4.3.2   Faster reconstruction: The Tree-PRG
The construction described in Section 4.3.1 is essentially from [DPTW25], and the missing piece in the proof
of Theorem 4.16 is to get reconstruction in time T 1+ε rather than poly(T ). A targeted generator with such
reconstruction was shown in [PT25], using an additional construction on top of the one from Section 4.3.1.

Where is the problem, and what do we need? To explain the idea, observe that the poly(T ) time
overhead in reconstruction comes from two sources, both of them occurring when running the reconstruction
algorithm REC from Theorem 4.1 (i.e., that compresses f (i+1) (x) at each layer i + 1):
  1. The running time of REC is a large polynomial poly(T ).

  2. Whenever REC tries to read a bit of its input f (i+1) (x), we run the downward self-reducibility algorithm
     DSR (answering its queries using C (i) ) and discard all but the relevant output bit. That is, we compute
     REC(DSR(C (i) )) using emulative composition, incurring a quadratic time overhead (at least).
     To handle the first problem, we need reconstruction that runs in near-linear time T 1+ε instead of time
poly(T ). To handle the second problem, the observation in [PT25] is that if REC would have been read-once
(i.e., if REC would read its input f (i+1) (x) bit-by-bit, in order, making only a single pass overall), then
this problem would disappear. This is because we could run REC, and whenever it needs the next bit of
f (i+1) (x) = DSR(C (i) ), we would run DSR from its current state until it produces the next bit, then “freeze”
the execution of DSR and store its state until REC needs the subsequent bit.
     A (GEN, REC) with reconstruction satisfying both conditions was shown in [PT25]. Specifically, they
showed the following incomparable alternative to Theorem 4.1, which was mentioned after its statement:

Theorem 4.18 ([PT25, Theorem 2.4]). There are algorithms (GEN, REC) such that for every ε > 0 and
every f ∈ {0, 1}N and M ≤ N Ωε (1) satisfy the following:
  1. GEN(f ) runs in space O(log N ) and outputs ℓ < log(N ) lists of M -bit strings.
  2. Fix any ROBP D : {0, 1}M → {0, 1} that is a (1/M )-distinguisher for each of the ℓ lists that GEN(f )
                         D
     outputs. Then, REC (f ) runs in time N 1+ε and space polylog(N ), reads f in read-once fashion, and
     prints a polylog(N )-size oracle machine A such that AD describes f . (Specifically, given j ∈ [N ], the
     machine AD (j) runs in space polylog(N ) and time poly(N ) and outputs fj .)
   We will be using Theorem 4.18 with N = T = |f (i) (x)|, and stated it with the notation N to facilitate
a comparison with Theorem 4.1. Indeed, the two improvements over the latter are that REC is faster and
read-once, as we needed. The price we pay is that REC uses space polylog(N ), rather than O(log N ); and
that the compressed representation of f is not a small circuit, but rather a small oracle machine whose
running time is larger than |f |.



                                                      20
Read-once reconstruction: A generic transformation. In [PT25] they showed a generic transforma-
tion of reconstructive generators into reconstructive generators whose reconstruction is read-once. Specifi-
cally, starting from (GEN, REC), consider the generator whose output lists consist of

                          GEN(f≤1 ), GEN(f≤2 ), GEN(f≤3 ), ..., GEN(f≤i ), ..., GEN(f ),

where f≤i is the i-bit prefix of f (padded to length N ). In words, the new generator applies GEN to each
prefix of f , and its output collection of lists is the union of the lists output by GEN for all prefixes.
   How does this yield a read-once reconstruction? The new reconstruction algorithm works iteratively. For
i = 1, ..., N , it stores a small circuit whose truth-table is f≤i (the base case i = 1 is trivial). Then it reads
the next bit fi+1 , at which point it has all the information needed to answer queries to f≤i+1 . It thus runs
REC(f≤i+1 ) to obtain a small circuit for f≤i+1 , and continues to the next iteration. See [PT25, Section 6.1].
Remark 4.19. Since the new reconstruction needs to evaluate the stored circuit at each iteration, it now
uses space polylog(M ) ≤ polylog(N ) rather than only O(log N ). This seemingly matches the parameters
in Theorem 4.18, but since later on we will construct a generator that needs to compute the output of this
read-once reconstruction (and we want the generator to run in space O(log N )), the current space complexity
is not good enough. For simplicity, let us pretend that so far the reconstruction uses space O(log N ).27

Near-linear time reconstruction: Another generic transformation. Let us assume from now on
that (GEN, REC) are such that REC is read-once, but runs in large polynomial time. Recall that these
(GEN, REC) originate from the Shaltiel-Umans PRG [SU07], so an obvious attempt would be to directly
optimize the latter’s reconstruction. However, this strikes us as challenging to solve directly, since this
reconstruction algorithm is involved and repeatedly composes “heavy” pseudorandom primitives.
    Instead, to handle this large runtime (i.e., the problem in Item 1 above), the idea in [PT25] is to never
run GEN or REC on strings of length N – only on shorter strings, of length, say, M . In this case the runtime
overhead of REC is poly(M ) ≤ N 1+ε , where the inequality holds if N is a large enough polynomial in M .
    The construction of GEN is visually depicted in Figure 5. In words, the generator GEN splits f into
chunks of length M , and applies GEN to each chunk to obtain a sequence of output lists. It then runs the
original reconstruction REC on each chunk j ∈ [N/M ], to obtain a circuit C (j) of size polylog(M ) whose
truth-table is, supposedly, the j th chunk (indeed, REC may fail to output a valid circuit, but we can treat
its output as a string of the relevant length nonetheless). Note that this crucially uses the fact that REC is
a deterministic logspace algorithm (because we want GEN to also be a deterministic low-space algorithm).
Concatenating the outputs of REC on all N/M chunks, we obtain a new string f (1) ∈ [(N/M ) · polylog(M )].
Now GEN recurses, splitting f (1) into chunks of length M , applying GEN to each chunk to obtain a sequence
of output lists, and using REC to compress f (1) to f (2) of length Õ(N/M 2 ), and so on.
    After constantly many iterations (so that the final step is applied to one remaining M -bit chunk), the
generator GEN accumulated output lists of GEN from chunks in each layer, and it outputs the set of all these
lists. Observe that the new generator can be computed in space O(log N ), using emulative composition (i.e.,
the standard DFS-style simulation of circuits) to compute each chunk in each layer.28
    Indeed, it is instructive to imagine this construction as a constant-depth tree, wherein each node is labeled
by a polylog(M )-size circuit and has fan-in M . The reconstruction REC will output a machine that has the
label of the tree’s root hard-wired, and that – when given index i ∈ [N ] – computes the labels of the nodes
along path in the tree, and finally outputs the ith bit of f . Computing the labels along the path is done by
repeatedly evaluating each label; that is, each label is a polylog(M )-sized circuit whose truth-table is the
next M -bit chunk, which contains the next label.
    The only missing piece is explaining how REC computes the label of the root (to hard-wire it into the
machine above). At a high-level, it does so using emulative composition (i.e., the DFS-style algorithm,
similarly to the generator), but to prevent a polynomial runtime overhead, it crucially uses the fact that
  27 In [PT25] they handle this problem by showing two reconstruction algorithms, one that is read-once and runs in space

polylog(N ) and time poly(N ), and another that is not read-once and runs in space O(log N ), such that both algorithms
produce the same output. The generator will use the latter.
  28 This statement assumes, for simplicity, that the reconstruction (which the generator needs to compute) runs in space

O(log N ). As stated in Remark 4.19, in [PT25] they show a second reconstruction algorithm which produces the same output
as the one described above, and runs in space O(log N ) (but is not read-once, which is a feature the generator does not need).



                                                              21
                                  Figure 5: Visual depiction of the tree-PRG.


REC at each layer is read-once. Specifically, REC runs REC on the M -bit chunk that yields the root’s label,
providing REC virtual access to this chunk; the latter virtual access is provided by running REC and providing
it virtual access to the chunks below it, and so on. The crucial point is that at each level, REC reads the
relevant chunk bit-by-bit, in order; hence, at any given moment REC only needs one path in the tree, and
each path is only used once. Using the idea of computing the composition of a read-once f with a low-space
g in near-linear time, by continuously storing the state of g (as described after Theorem 4.18), this procedure
can be implemented in space polylog(N ) and time N · poly(M ) = N 1+ε . See [PT25, Section 6.2] for details.


5     Open Problems
The big open problem that recent results suggest is to design more low-space algorithms using hardness vs
randomness. In this section we suggest several interesting algorithmic problems that may be tackled using
hardness vs randomness, as well as open problems related to improving the technical machinery underlying
hardness vs randomness in the small-space setting.

5.1    Algorithms using hardness vs randomness
Of course, the grandparent of the open algorithmic problems in this setting is to actually resolve that pesky
5-decades old question of derandomizing logspace. To make things (potentially) easier, we also raise the
question of an average-case or scaled-up result:

Problem 1. Prove that BPL = L (or BPL ⊆ avgL or BPSPACE[O(n)] = SPACE[O(n)]) using hardness vs
randomness; that is, reduce the problem to lower bounds that we can unconditionally prove.
    As a more modest step along this direction:
Problem 2. Reduce BPL = L (or BPL ⊆ avgL or BPSPACE[O(n)] = SPACE[O(n)]) to lower bounds that
are weaker than the ones in Theorems 3.9 and 3.10.

     As explained in Section 3.2, a main technique for building catalytic algorithms is “compress or random”,
in which the catalytic tape is either useful or can be compressed. Since deterministic reconstruction provides
a generic way to compress strings that are not good (i.e., that are not useful for fooling certain distinguishers),
it is an obvious tool for generalizing “compress or random” to broader settings.

Problem 3. Design catalytic algorithms for interesting problems, in particular general problems (e.g.,
simulating classes of algorithms), using “compress or random” and deterministic reconstruction.



                                                        22
    Hardness vs randomness tools were recently used by Chen et al. [CLO+ 23] to construct pseudodetermin-
istic algorithms that (unconditionally) solve a broad class of explicit construction problems. The reason their
algorithm is only pseudodeterminsitic, rather than deterministic, is that the reconstruction algorithm that
they use is randomized. Given that in the logspace setting we have deterministic reconstruction algorithms,
a natural direction is to try and use the same approach to design unconditional deterministic algorithms for
explicit construction problems in the logspace setting.
Problem 4. Design new deterministic algorithms for interesting explicit construction problems, by
leveraging hardness vs randomness with deterministic reconstruction.
    Another unconditional algorithm using hardness vs randomness was shown by Carmosino et al. [CIKK16].
Loosely speaking, they instantiated a PRG that is intentionally faulty and can be broken, and deduced that
the reconstruction unconditionally works. In their setting the reconstruction is a probabilistic learning
algorithm, and indeed, they obtained a probabilistic learning algorithm for AC0 [⊕]. A natural direction is to
try and use the same approach with deterministic reconstruction (which can be cast as a learning algorithm,
cf. Theorem 4.1) to design unconditional deterministic learning algorithms for interesting classes.
Problem 5. Obtain deterministic learning algorithms for interesting function classes, by leveraging
hardness vs randomness with deterministic reconstruction.
    The assumption that composing low-space algorithms requires significant overhead in time or in space
(i.e., the hypothesis in Theorem 3.8) looks natural, but should we believe that it is true? Remarkably,
there is very little complexity-theoretic evidence that this assumption is true (as well as the corresponding
assumption for k-wise composition, which was mentioned after Theorem 3.8). We believe that it is an
important problem to establish complexity-theoretical foundations for this assumption.
Problem 6. Show that lower bounds on composing low-space algorithms (as in Theorem 3.8, or similar
lower bounds) follow from natural and/or well-studied assumptions.

5.2    Distinguish-to-predict
As explained in Section 4.2, the key to extending deterministic reconstruction to broader settings is designing
distinguish-to-predict transformations for more distinguishers.
    Recent works constructed D2P transformations for ROBPs [PRZ23, DPT24], for ROBPs composed with
certain PRGs for logspace [DPTW25], and for tests related to the isolation lemma [LPT24]. As demonstrated
by the D2P for the path-isolation lemma, it can be useful to consider specific types of distinguishers, which
do not necessarily conform to classical complexity classes. We pose designing deterministic D2P for new
types of distinguishers as an important and general open problem.
Problem 7. Construct a D2P transform for new types of distinguishers, and obtain (using the already
available tools) generators with deterministic reconstruction for such distinguishers.

    In the opposite direction, recall that for general circuits D, a D2P transform for D yields derandomization
of D, i.e. an algorithm estimating E[D] (see Theorem 4.10). This result was not an obstacle for the
works surveyed in this text, since constructing a D2P transform only yields a polynomial-time algorithm for
estimating E[D] rather than a logspace algorithm, even if the D2P transform runs in logspace. The bottleneck
in the proof is a construction of an unpredictable distribution by Goldreich and Wigderson [GW00], which
uses large space (and is highly sequential).

Problem 8. Show a reduction of estimating E[D] for a given circuit D to constructing a D2P transform for
D such that the reduction incurs as little complexity overhead as possible.
   Another interesting open problem is to expand the reach of D2P by allowing more general notions of
“predictor”. Indeed, most predictors considered in the literature are next-bit-predictors, but list-predictors
over large alphabets have been used extensively in the past (as one example see, e.g., [TZS06]), and replacing
next-bit-predictors with previous-bit-predictors has been useful for constructing D2P for ROBPs.



                                                      23
Problem 9. Is it easier to construct D2P transforms if we allow more general notions of predictors that can
still be useful, such as list-predictors over non-binary alphabets (with a small list) or predict-one-out-of-k-
symbols (for a small k)?
    A specific interesting notion of a bit-predictor allows the predictor access to all bits except the one it
tries to predict (cf., Definition 4.4). Interestingly, the polynomial-time algorithm of [GW00] that constructs
an unpredictable distribution (for a given collection of predictors) does not work as-is with this more general
definition of predictors (see Theorem A.4). There is a natural ZPP algorithm for this problem (guess a ran-
dom distribution and verify all predictors do not achieve good advantage). Can we construct a deterministic
polynomial-time algorithm, or would such an algorithm imply some breakthrough?
Problem 10. Give a polytime algorithm (or evidence that such an algorithm would imply new results)
for the following problem: Given a collection of poly(n) predictors Pi : {0, 1}n−1 → {0, 1}, each of which
attempts to predict a bit ji , output a distribution S that is (1/n)-unpredictable to all of them.
    Lastly, perhaps the most important open problem in this context is to design reconstruction algorithms
without D2P. As explained in Remark 4.2, relying on D2P in the reconstruction causes an inherent runtime
overhead (which is an instance of the hybrid argument barrier), and there is concrete evidence that D2P is
an overkill for reconstruction (since deterministic reconstruction is equivalent to prZPP = prBPP, whereas
deterministic D2P is equivalent to the stronger prBPP = P). Remarkably, known reconstruction algorithms
all fall into two camps: algorithms that use D2P, or algorithms that use non-determinism (e.g., as in [Sip88,
MV05, SU07, DMOZ22, CT21b]). Can we design a reconstruction algorithm that avoids both pitfalls?
Problem 11. Build a reconstructive pseudorandom generator whose reconstruction does not rely on non-
determinism or on a D2P transformation.

5.3     Generators for the logspace setting
In addition, we call for improving the main part of the hardness vs randomness framework in the logspace set-
ting: designing better pseudorandom generators and reconstruction arguments. There are several directions
that strike us as tractable and that are likely to have applications.
    First, consider the targeted generator in Theorem 4.16, which is based on hardness of composing low-
space algorithms. Can we design a targeted generator based on other types of hard functions, ideally more
general function classes or more relaxed types of hardness?

Problem 12. Design a targeted generator that works in logspace and whose reconstruction works in deter-
ministic logspace (or polylogspace), based on additional types of hard functions, beyond k-wise compositions
of low-space algorithms for a small k.
   A core technical component in the targeted generator constructions is the (GEN, REC) pair of Theo-
rem 4.18, or alternatively the (GEN, REC) pair of Theorem 4.1, both of which are based on hardness of
compressing a string. We believe that these two tools can be improved in a few ways.
   First, the space complexity of the two reconstruction procedures is sub-optimal, i.e. polylog(N ) and
O(log N ) + polylog(M ), respectively. This is because these two results rely on the SU PRG, and their
reconstruction uses a derandomized version of the SU reconstruction with space complexity is O(log N ) +
polylog(M ).29 Given that [PRZ23, DPT24] showed a deterministic reconstruction for the NW PRG using
space O(log N ), it seems plausible that the reconstruction for the SU PRG can also be made to run in such
space. (This is important because the NW PRG is suitable mostly when the output length is M = N Ω(1) ,
and the SU PRG is suitable more generally for any M ≤ N Ω(1) ; see Footnote 19.)
Problem 13. Improve the reconstruction algorithm for the SU generator so that it runs in space O(log N )
when given access to a predictor. Alternatively, present another (GEN, REC) pair achieving the parameters
as Theorem 4.1 but with reconstruction that runs in space O(log N ) when given access to a predictor.
  29 In Theorem 4.18 the reconstruction incurs an additional overhead due to the tree compression procedure described in Sec-

tion 4.3.2.




                                                             24
    Secondly, the generator in Theorems 4.1 and 4.18 is a somewhere-PRG, rather than a PRG. As explained
in Section 4.1, this disadvantage does not affect the specific results in this survey, since for the problems
considered in this survey there are ways around it. However, it would be ideal to have a pseudorandom
generator with deterministic reconstruction (and optimal parameters, unlike NW), rather than only a hitting-
set generator. The natural candidate is the PRG by Umans [Uma03], which is a refinement of the SU
generator and thus its reconstruction may be amenable to similar derandomization techniques.
Problem 14. Derandomize the reconstruction procedure of Umans’ [Uma03] PRG (i.e., the reconstruction
parts that follow the D2P transform).
    Another possible improvement is to have a reconstruction algorithm that compresses the hard string to an
oracle circuit from a weak circuit class. Indeed, classical non-uniform reconstruction arguments do yield weak
circuits (e.g., TC0 circuits, and this is true even in the logspace setting [DT23]), as does the deterministic
reconstruction for the NW generator in [PRZ23]. However, the reconstruction arguments in Theorems 4.1
and 4.18 have no such guarantee. One concrete goal to shoot for is having a procedure from a class that is
evaluable in logspace, either a circuit from a weak class or a Turing machine running in logspace.
Problem 15. Improve Theorems 4.1 and 4.18 such that the output of the reconstruction algorithm can be
evaluated in space O(log N ).
    A related improvement, which is specific to Theorem 4.18, refers to the fact that the reconstruction in
that result outputs an oracle machine A such that AD computes f , but evaluating the machine with input
j to produce fj takes time t ≫ |f |. This stands in contrast to standard reconstruction arguments (e.g.,
in [NW94, SU07], or their deterministic counterparts in [PRZ23, DPT24, DPTW25, PT25]), which output a
circuit C of size |C| ≪ |f | such that C D computes f .
Problem 16. Improve Theorem 4.18 such that the reconstruction algorithm outputs a circuit C of size
poly(M, log(N )).
   A last open problem may have applications when considering derandomization with overhead that is
simultaneously minimal in both time and space. In the results mentioned in Section 3.4.2, the generator
has very low space consumption, but it may be slow, and ditto for the reconstruction. In Theorems 4.16
and 4.18 the reconstruction’s running time is optimized to be essentially linear, but the generator may still
be slow (i.e., GEN runs in time poly(|f |) for some large unspecified polynomial). Is this improvable?
Problem 17. Improve Theorem 4.18 such that GEN runs in time |f |1+ε .


References
[AB09]        Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. Computational complexity: A modern approach. Cambridge
              University Press, Cambridge, 2009.
[ACR98]       Alexander E. Andreev, Andrea E. F. Clementi, and José D. P. Rolim. A new general deran-
              domization method. Journal of the ACM, 45(1):179–213, 1998.
[ACRT99]      Alexander E. Andreev, Andrea E. F. Clementi, José D. P. Rolim, and Luca Trevisan. Weak
              random sources, hitting sets, and BPP simulations. SIAM J. Comput., 28(6):2103–2116, 1999.
[ARZ99]       Eric Allender, Klaus Reinhardt, and Shiyu Zhou. Isolation, matching, and counting uniform
              and nonuniform upper bounds. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 59(2):164–181, 1999.
[BBRS98]      Greg Barnes, Jonathan F. Buss, Walter L. Ruzzo, and Baruch Schieber. A sublinear space,
              polynomial time algorithm for directed s-t connectivity. SIAM J. Comput., 27(5):1273–1282,
              1998.
[BCK+ 14]     Harry Buhrman, Richard Cleve, Michal Koucký, Bruno Loff, and Florian Speelman. Comput-
              ing with a full memory: catalytic space. In Proc. 46 Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
              Computing (STOC), pages 857–866, 2014.


                                                     25
[BCT25]     Marshall Ball, Lijie Chen, and Roei Tell. Towards free lunch derandomization from neces-
            sary assumptions (and owfs). In Srikanth Srinivasan, editor, 40th Computational Complexity
            Conference, CCC 2025, Toronto, Canada, August 5-8, 2025, volume 339 of LIPIcs, pages
            31:1–31:20. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025.
[BF99]      Harry Buhrman and Lance Fortnow. One-sided versus two-sided error in probabilistic compu-
            tation. In Proc. 16th Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS), pages
            100–109, 1999.
[BHST87]    László Babai, Péter Hajnal, Endre Szemerédi, and György Turán. A lower bound for read-
            once-only branching programs. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 35(2):153–162,
            1987.

[BM84]      Manuel Blum and Silvio Micali. How to generate cryptographically strong sequences of pseudo-
            random bits. SIAM Journal on Computing, 13(4):850–864, 1984.
[CH22]      Kuan Cheng and William M. Hoza. Hitting sets give two-sided derandomization of small space.
            Theory Comput., 18:1–32, 2022.

[CIKK16]    Marco L. Carmosino, Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets, and Antonina Kolokolova.
            Learning algorithms from natural proofs. In Ran Raz, editor, 31st Conference on Computa-
            tional Complexity, CCC 2016, Tokyo, Japan, May 29 - June 1, 2016, volume 50 of LIPIcs,
            pages 10:1–10:24. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2016.
[CLL25]     Lijie Chen, Jiatu Li, and Jingxun Liang. Maximum circuit lower bounds for exponential-time
            Arthur Merlin. In Proc. 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC),
            pages 1348–1358, [2025] ©2025.
[CLMP24]    James Cook, Jiatu Li, Ian Mertz, and Edward Pyne. The structure of catalytic space: Captur-
            ing randomness and time via compression. Electron. Colloquium Comput. Complex., TR24-106,
            2024.

[CLO+ 23]   Lijie Chen, Zhenjian Lu, Igor Carboni Oliveira, Hanlin Ren, and Rahul Santhanam.
            Polynomial-time pseudodeterministic construction of primes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15140,
            2023.
[CLTW23]    Lijie Chen, Xin Lyu, Avishay Tal, and Hongxun Wu.          New PRGs for unbounded-
            width/adaptive-order read-once branching programs. In Proc. 50 International Colloquium
            on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), volume 261 of LIPIcs, pages 39:1–39:20.
            Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023.
[CM20]      James Cook and Ian Mertz. Catalytic approaches to the tree evaluation problem. In Proccedings
            of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2020, pages
            752–760. ACM, 2020.

[CM23]      James Cook and Ian Mertz. Tree evaluation is in space o(log n · log log n). Electron. Colloquium
            Comput. Complex., TR23-174, 2023.
[CMW+ 12]   Stephen A. Cook, Pierre McKenzie, Dustin Wehr, Mark Braverman, and Rahul Santhanam.
            Pebbles and branching programs for tree evaluation. ACM Trans. Comput. Theory, 3(2):4:1–
            4:43, 2012.
[CR80]      Stephen A. Cook and Charles Rackoff. Space lower bounds for maze threadability on restricted
            machines. SIAM J. Comput., 9(3):636–652, 1980.
[CRT22]     Lijie Chen, Ron D. Rothblum, and Roei Tell. Unstructured hardness to average-case random-
            ness. In Proc. 63rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
            pages 429–437, 2022.



                                                   26
[CT21a]      Lijie Chen and Roei Tell. Hardness vs randomness, revised: Uniform, non-black-box, and
             instance-wise. In Proc. 62nd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
             (FOCS), pages 125–136, 2021.
[CT21b]      Lijie Chen and Roei Tell. Simple and fast derandomization from very hard functions: Elim-
             inating randomness at almost no cost. In Proc. 53st Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
             Computing (STOC), pages 283–291, 2021.
[CT23]       Lijie Chen and Roei Tell. Guest column: New ways of studying the BPP = P conjecture.
             ACM SIGACT News, 54(2):44–69, 2023.
[CTW23]      Lijie Chen, Roei Tell, and Ryan Williams. Derandomization vs refutation: A unified framework
             for characterizing derandomization. In Proc. 64 Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of
             Computer Science (FOCS), 2023. To appear.
[DKvMW13] Holger Dell, Valentine Kabanets, Dieter van Melkebeek, and Osamu Watanabe. Is Valiant-
          Vazirani’s isolation probability improvable? Computational Complexity, 22(2):345–383, 2013.
[DMOZ22]     Dean Doron, Dana Moshkovitz, Justin Oh, and David Zuckerman. Nearly optimal pseudoran-
             domness from hardness. Journal of the ACM, 69(6):1–55, 2022.
[DPT24]      Dean Doron, Edward Pyne, and Roei Tell. Opening up the distinguisher: A hardness to
             randomness approach for BPL = L that uses properties of BPL. In Proc. 56th Annual ACM
             Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), 2024.

[DPTW25]     Dean Doron, Edward Pyne, Roei Tell, and Ryan Williams. When connectivity is hard, random
             walks are easy with non-determinism. In Proc. 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
             Computing (STOC), 2025.
[DT23]       Dean Doron and Roei Tell. Derandomization with minimal memory footprint. In Proc. 38
             Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC). Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-
             Zentrum für Informatik, 2023.
[FK18]       Michael A. Forbes and Zander Kelley. Pseudorandom generators for read-once branching
             programs, in any order. In Proc. 59th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer
             Science (FOCS), pages 946–955, 2018.
[FSUV13]     Bill Fefferman, Ronen Shaltiel, Christopher Umans, and Emanuele Viola. On beating the
             hybrid argument. Theory of Computing, 9:809–843, 2013.
[Gol08]      Oded Goldreich. Computational Complexity: A Conceptual Perspective. Cambridge University
             Press, New York, NY, USA, 2008.
[Gol11a]     Oded Goldreich. In a world of P = BPP. In Studies in Complexity and Cryptography. Miscel-
             lanea on the Interplay Randomness and Computation, pages 191–232, 2011.
[Gol11b]     Oded Goldreich. A sample of samplers: A computational perspective on sampling. In Oded
             Goldreich, editor, Studies in Complexity and Cryptography. Miscellanea on the Interplay be-
             tween Randomness and Computation, volume 6650 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
             pages 302–332. Springer, 2011.

[Gol11c]     Oded Goldreich. Two comments on targeted canonical derandomizers. Electronic Colloquium
             on Computational Complexity: ECCC, 2011.
[GRZ23]      Uma Girish, Ran Raz, and Wei Zhan. Is untrusted randomness helpful? In Proc. 14 Conference
             on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science (ITCS), volume 251 of LIPIcs, pages 56:1–
             56:18, 2023.




                                                   27
[Guo13]    Zeyu Guo. Randomness-efficient curve samplers. In Approximation, Randomization, and
           Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques (APPROX/RANDOM), pages 575–
           590. Springer, 2013.
[GVW11]    Oded Goldreich, Salil Vadhan, and Avi Wigderson. Simplified derandomization of BPP using
           a hitting set generator. In Studies in complexity and cryptography, volume 6650 of Lecture
           Notes in Computer Science, pages 59–67. Springer, Heidelberg, 2011.
[GW96]     Anna Gál and Avi Wigderson. Boolean complexity classes vs. their arithmetic analogs. Random
           Struct. Algorithms, 9(1-2):99–111, 1996.
[GW00]     Oded Goldreich and Avi Wigderson. On pseudorandomness with respect to deterministic
           observers. Electron. Colloquium Comput. Complex., TR00-056, 2000.
[GZ11]     Oded Goldreich and David Zuckerman. Another proof that BP P ⊆ P H (and more). In
           Oded Goldreich, editor, Studies in Complexity and Cryptography. Miscellanea on the Interplay
           between Randomness and Computation, volume 6650 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
           pages 40–53. Springer, 2011.
[Hir23]    Shuichi Hirahara. Non-black-box worst-case to average-case reductions within N P . SIAM
           Journal on Computing, 52(6):FOCS18–349–FOCS18–382, 2023.
[Hoz22]    William M. Hoza. Recent progress on derandomizing space-bounded computation. Bull.
           EATCS, 138, 2022.
[ISW00]    Russell Impagliazzo, Ronen Shaltiel, and Avi Wigderson. Extractors and pseudo-random
           generators with optimal seed length. In Proc. 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
           Computing (STOC), pages 1–10, 2000.
[IW97]     Russell Impagliazzo and Avi Wigderson. P = BPP if E requires exponential circuits: deran-
           domizing the XOR lemma. In Proc. 29th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
           (STOC), pages 220–229, 1997.
[IW98]     Russell Impagliazzo and Avi Wigderson. Randomness vs. time: De-randomization under a
           uniform assumption. In Proc. 39th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer
           Science (FOCS), pages 734–743, 1998.
[KMPS25]   Michal Koucký, Ian Mertz, Edward Pyne, and Sasha Sami. Collapsing catalytic classes. CoRR,
           abs/2504.08444, 2025.
[KvM02]    Adam R. Klivans and Dieter van Melkebeek. Graph nonisomorphism has subexponential
           size proofs unless the polynomial-time hierarchy collapses. SIAM Journal on Computing,
           31(5):1501–1526, 2002.
[Lau83]    Clemens Lautemann. BPP and the polynomial hierarchy. Information Processing Letters,
           17(4):215–217, 1983.
[LP22]     Yanyi Liu and Rafael Pass. Characterizing derandomization through hardness of levin-
           kolmogorov complexity. In Proc. 37 Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity
           (CCC), 2022.
[LPT24]    Jiatu Li, Edward Pyne, and Roei Tell. Distinguishing, predicting, and certifying: On the long
           reach of partial notions of pseudorandomness, 2024.
[LZPC05]   Pinyan Lu, Jialin Zhang, Chung Keung Poon, and Jin-yi Cai. Simulating undirected st-
           connectivity algorithms on uniform JAGs and NNJAGs. In Proceedings of 16th International
           Symposium on Algorithms and Computation (ISAAC), volume 3827 of Lecture Notes in Com-
           puter Science, pages 767–776. Springer, 2005.
[Mer23]    Ian Mertz. Reusing space: Techniques and open problems. Bulletin of EATCS, 141(3), 2023.


                                                 28
[MV05]    Peter Bro Miltersen and N. V. Vinodchandran. Derandomizing Arthur-Merlin games using
          hitting sets. Computational Complexity, 14(3):256–279, 2005.
[Nis92]   Noam Nisan. Pseudorandom generators for space-bounded computation. Combinatorica,
          12(4):449–461, 1992.
[Nis94]   Noam Nisan. RL ⊆ SC. Computational Complexity, 4:1–11, 1994.
[NW94]    Noam Nisan and Avi Wigderson. Hardness vs. randomness. Journal of Computer and System
          Sciences, 49(2):149–167, 1994.
[Poo93]   Chung Keung Poon. Space bounds for graph connectivity problems on node-named jags and
          node-ordered jags. In 34th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
          pages 218–227. IEEE Computer Society, 1993.
[PRZ23]   Edward Pyne, Ran Raz, and Wei Zhan. Certified hardness vs. randomness for log-space. In
          64th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2023, 2023.
[PT25]    Edward Pyne and Roei Tell. Composing low-space algorithms. Electronic Colloquium on
          Computational Complexity: ECCC, 2025.
[Pyn24]   Edward Pyne. Derandomizing logspace with a small shared hard drive. In Proc. 39th Annual
          IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), pages 4:1–4:20, 2024.
[RA00]    Klaus Reinhardt and Eric Allender. Making nondeterminism unambiguous. SIAM J. Comput.,
          29(4):1118–1131, 2000.
[RS98]    Alexander Russell and Ravi Sundaram. Symmetric alternation captures BPP. Comput. Com-
          plex., 7(2):152–162, 1998.
[Sak96]   Michael E. Saks. Randomization and derandomization in space bounded computation. In
          Steven Homer and Jin-Yi Cai, editors, Proceedings of the Eleveth Annual IEEE Conference on
          Computational Complexity, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, May 24-27, 1996, pages 128–
          149. IEEE Computer Society, 1996.
[Sav70]   Walter J. Savitch. Relationships between nondeterministic and deterministic tape complexities.
          Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 4:177–192, 1970.
[Sip83]   Michael Sipser. A complexity theoretic approach to randomness. In Proc. 15th Annual ACM
          Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 330–335, 1983.
[Sip88]   Michael Sipser. Expanders, randomness, or time versus space. Journal of Computer and System
          Sciences, 36(3):379–383, 1988.
[STV01]   Madhu Sudan, Luca Trevisan, and Salil Vadhan. Pseudorandom generators without the XOR
          lemma. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 62(2):236–266, 2001.
[SU05]    Ronen Shaltiel and Christopher Umans. Simple extractors for all min-entropies and a new
          pseudorandom generator. Journal of the ACM, 52(2):172–216, 2005.
[SU07]    Ronen Shaltiel and Christopher Umans. Low-end uniform hardness vs. randomness tradeoffs
          for AM. In Proc. 39th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages
          430–439, 2007.
[SV22]    Ronen Shaltiel and Emanuele Viola. On hardness assumptions needed for “extreme high-
          end” PRGs and fast derandomization. In Proc. 13 Conference on Innovations in Theoretical
          Computer Science (ITCS), 2022.
[SW13]    Rahul Santhanam and R. Ryan Williams. On medium-uniformity and circuit lower bounds.
          In Proc. 28th Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), pages 15–23.
          IEEE, 2013.


                                                29
[SZ99]        Michael E. Saks and Shiyu Zhou. BPH SPACE[S] ⊆ DSPACE[S 3/2 ]. Journal of Computer and
              System Sciences, 58(2):376–403, 1999.
[Tre01]       Luca Trevisan. Extractors and pseudorandom generators. Journal of the ACM, 48(4):860–879,
              2001.
[TSUZ07]      Amnon Ta-Shma, Christopher Umans, and David Zuckerman. Lossless condensers, unbalanced
              expanders, and extractors. Combinatorica, 27(2):213–240, 2007.
[TV07]        Luca Trevisan and Salil Vadhan. Pseudorandomness and average-case complexity via uniform
              reductions. Computational Complexity, 16(4):331–364, 2007.
[TZS06]       Amnon Ta-Shma, David Zuckerman, and Shmuel Safra. Extractors from Reed-Muller codes.
              Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 72(5):786–812, 2006.
[Tzu09]       Yoav Tzur. Notions of weak pseudorandomness and GF(2n )-polynomials. Master’s thesis,
              Weizmann Institute of Science, 2009.
[Uma03]       Christopher Umans. Pseudo-random generators for all hardnesses. Journal of Computer and
              System Sciences, 67(2):419–440, 2003.
[vMP19]       Dieter van Melkebeek and Gautam Prakriya. Derandomizing isolation in space-bounded set-
              tings. SIAM J. Comput., 48(3):979–1021, 2019.
[VV86]        Leslie G. Valiant and Vijay V. Vazirani. NP is as easy as detecting unique solutions. Theor.
              Comput. Sci., 47(3):85–93, 1986.
[Wig94]       Avi Wigderson. nl/poly ⊆ ⊕l/poly. In Proc. 9th Conf. Structure in Complexity Theory, 1994.
[Wil10]       Ryan Williams. Improving exhaustive search implies superpolynomial lower bounds. In Proc.
              42nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 231–240, 2010.
[Wil25a]      R. Ryan Williams. Simulating time with square-root space. In Michal Koucký and Nikhil
              Bansal, editors, Proceedings of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
              STOC 2025, Prague, Czechia, June 23-27, 2025, pages 13–23. ACM, 2025.
[Wil25b]      Ryan Williams. Personal communication, 2025.
[Yao82]       Andrew C. Yao. Theory and application of trapdoor functions. In Proc. 23rd Annual IEEE
              Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 80–91, 1982.


A        Alternative proofs for classical theorems using D2P
The notion of D2P gives some nice proofs of previously known results. We cover two proofs from [LPT24]:
how can we estimate the expectation of a circuit in the polynomial hierarchy, and how can we solve deran-
domization of algorithms with two-sided error using only hitting sets?

Derandomizing with games. The strongest known simulation of BPP in the polynomial-time hierarchy,
first due to Russell and Sundaram [RS98] (following [Sip83,Lau83]), asserts that BPP ⊆ S2 P. The delightful
class S2 P is a subclass of Σ2 P ∩ Π2 P, where the ∃ and ∀ players can ignore each other:
Definition A.1. A language L ∈ S2 P if there is a polynomial-time algorithm V (x, g0 , g1 ) (called the verifier)
and a polynomial p(n) such that:
    • For x ∈ L, there exists g1 ∈ {0, 1}p(n) (i.e. the strategy of the YES-player) such that for every g0 ∈
      {0, 1}p(n) (i.e. the strategy of the NO-player), V (x, g0 , g1 ) = 1.
    • For x ∈/ L, there exists g0 ∈ {0, 1}p(n) (i.e. the strategy of the NO-player) such that for every g1 ∈
            p(n)
      {0, 1}     (i.e. the strategy of the YES-player), V (x, g0 , g1 ) = 0.


                                                       30
Theorem A.2. There is a S2 P protocol to estimate E[D] ± (1/3) for a circuit D.
Proof Sketch. We want strategies for both players that ensure the other cannot convince the verifier that
the expectation differs from the true value.
    Lets assign Player 1 the job of giving a distribution S that approximates the expectation for every small
circuit (which in particular includes the circuit D given to both players). But of course, Player 1 can lie
and give a distribution that does not approximate E[D]. How can Player 2 make sure that no distribution
that misleads on the value of E[D] sneaks through? By giving a valid D2P transformation for D! If P1 gives
a distribution S with no small predictors (which exists via a simple counting argument), no matter what
predictors P2 writes down, S will be accepted and used to estimate E[D], and since a distribution with no
small predictors has no small distinguishers either, that estimate will be accurate. On the other hand, if P2
gives a valid D2P transform for D, by the definition of D2P transformation any distribution S ′ that is not
predicted must do a good job estimating E[D]. Since a distribution S with no small predictors and a valid
D2P transform for D always exist, both players can ignore each other.

Hitting sets imply derandomization of algorithms with two-sided error. A similar construction
gives a new proof that one-sided derandomization implies two-sided derandomization. Recall that in one-
sided derandomization we are given a circuit D : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} and asked to distinguish between E[D] = 0
and E[D] ≥ 1/2. The analogue of a pseudorandom generator (resp., pseudorandom set) in this regime is
known as a hitting set generator (reps., hitting set):
Definition A.3. For a class of circuits D on n bits, a hitting set H ⊆ {0, 1}n for D has the property that
for all D ∈ D with E[D] ≥ 1/2, there is y ∈ H where D(y) = 1.
   While hitting sets are not obviously capable of giving two-sided derandomization, classical results show
that they do [Sip83,Lau83,ACR98,ACRT99,BF99,GZ11,GVW11]. In [LPT24] they showed that using D2P,
we can get a new, relatively simple proof for this fact.
   To do so, they use an algorithm of Goldreich and Widgerson [GW00] (slightly generalized in [LPT24])
that gets a collection of next-bit predictors on {0, 1}n (which we can think of as a D2P transform for D),
runs in deterministic polynomial time, and outputs a distribution S that is unpredictable to all of them:
Theorem A.4 (Informal, see [GW00] and Lemma 4.2 [LPT24]). There is a deterministic polytime algorithm
that given a collection of next-bit-predictors P1 , . . . , Ppoly(n) over {0, 1}n , outputs a distribution S of size at
most n5 such that no Pi is a (1/3n)-predictor for S.
   We can then use Theorem A.4 to prove the result.
Theorem A.5. Suppose there is an hitting set for circuits of size n on n input bits that can be constructed in
time poly(n). Then there is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a circuit D : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}, estimates
E[D] to additive error 1/3.
Proof Sketch. We will show that using H, we can produce a D2P transform P = (P1 , . . . , Pt ) for D that is se-
cure against all distributions of size at most n5 , in the sense that every small distribution that D distinguishes
from random is predicted by some P ∈ P. We then produce a distribution S that is unpredictable to all
these predictors via Theorem A.4, and use that distribution to estimate E[D]. Since the D2P transformation
is secure, this estimate must be accurate. Details follow.
    Let w be an arbitrary distribution of size n5 , and suppose D is a (1/3)-distinguisher for w. By Proposi-
tion 4.8, a random string z, b, j of length O(n)
                                             e      has the property that the function

                                         P(z,b,j) (x<j ) = D(x<j ◦ z≥j ) ⊕ b

is a (1/3n)-predictor for w, with probability ρ = 1/ poly(n). Moreover, there is a circuit TESTD,w (y, b, j)
        e 6 ) that checks if the string (z, b, j) creates such a good predictor. We may assume by a standard
of size O(n
                                                      e 6 ) circuits with expectation at least ρ, so if we consider
error reduction that the hitting set H hits all size-O(n
the collection of predictors obtained by enumerating all elements of the hitting set

                                              P = {Py=(z,b,j) : y ∈ H}


                                                          31
there must be some P ∈ P where P is a (1/3n)-predictor for w. Thus, for every bad distribution of size at
most n5 , there is P ∈ P that is a (1/3n)-predictor, and there are |H| = poly(n) total such predictors.
    We invoke the algorithm of Theorem A.4 on this collection P. The distribution S we receive as output
is of size n5 and (1/3n)-unpredictable to all P ∈ P, so it must be the case that

                                           E [D(y)] − E[D] ≤ 1/3
                                          y∈S


and we can return Ey∈S [D(y)] as our estimate.
    A related proof idea implies that white-box one-sided derandomization (i.e. an algorithm that given D
returns if E[D] = 0 or E[D] ≥ 1/2, with no correctness guarantees otherwise) likewise implies two-sided
derandomization. Unfortunately, like all other proofs of this fact, if the non-black-box derandomization runs
in time T (n) ≫ poly(n), the corresponding two-sided derandomization runs in time T (T (n)) ≫ T . For full
results, see [LPT24, Theorem A.2].




                                                                               ECCC                          ISSN 1433-8092
                                                     32
                                                                               https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il
