                                         An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem
                                         ANDREI KROKHIN, Durham University, UK
arXiv:2208.13538v1 [cs.CC] 29 Aug 2022



                                         JAKUB OPRŠAL, Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Austria
                                         The study of the complexity of the constraint satisfaction problem (CSP), centred around the Feder-Vardi
                                         Dichotomy Conjecture, has been very prominent in the last two decades. After a long concerted eﬀort and
                                         many partial results, the Dichotomy Conjecture has been proved in 2017 independently by Bulatov and Zhuk.
                                         At about the same time, a vast generalisation of CSP, called promise CSP, has started to gain prominence. In
                                         this survey, we explain the importance of promise CSP and highlight many new very interesting features that
                                         the study of promise CSP has brought to light. The complexity classiﬁcation quest for the promise CSP is wide
                                         open, and we argue that, despite the promise CSP being more general, this quest is rather more accessible to
                                         a wide range of researchers than the dichotomy-led study of the CSP has been.

                                         1   INTRODUCTION
                                         What kind of inherent mathematical structure makes a computational problem tractable, i.e., polynomial-
                                         time solvable (assuming P ≠ NP)? Finding a general answer to this question is one of the fundamen-
                                         tal goals of theoretical computer science. The constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) and its variants
                                         are extensively used towards this ambitious goal for two reasons: on the one hand, the CSP frame-
                                         work is very general and includes a wide variety of computational problems, and on the other
                                         hand, this framework has very rich mathematical structure providing an excellent laboratory both
                                         for complexity classiﬁcation methods and for algorithmic techniques.
                                            In this section we informally discuss the CSP and the promise CSP (PCSP), which is the main
                                         subject of this survey. Formal deﬁnitions and more technical aspects can be found in subsequent
                                         sections.
                                            The (decision version of the) CSP can be deﬁned in several equivalent ways. One way is to deﬁne
                                         it as the problem of deciding the existence of a homomorphism from one ﬁnite relational structure
                                         (for example, a digraph) to another. We focus on the so-called non-uniform CSP — when the target
                                         structure A is ﬁxed (and is often called a template or a constraint language). The problem, denoted
                                         CSP(A), becomes the problem of deciding whether an input structure I homomorphically maps to
                                         A (we write I → A). Problems of this form include 𝑘-Sat, graph 𝑘-colouring, and solving systems
                                         of linear equations over a ﬁxed ﬁnite ﬁeld.
                                            A major line of research in CSP focuses on identifying tractable cases and understanding the
                                         mathematical structure enabling tractability [see Krokhin and Živný 2017]. Feder and Vardi [1998]
                                         conjectured that for each relational structure A, the problem CSP(A) is either tractable (i.e., in P),
                                         or NP-complete, i.e., it cannot be NP-intermediate. Due to its very impressive scope, this CSP
                                         Dichotomy Conjecture has been widely considered one of the most important open problems in
                                         theoretical computer science. It inspired a very active research programme in the last 25 years,
                                         which culminated in two independent proofs of the conjecture in 2017, one by Bulatov [2017] and
                                         the other by Zhuk [2017, 2020]. The key part of both proofs are polynomial-time algorithms for the
                                         tractable cases, which heavily exploit structural properties of ﬁnite universal algebras associated
                                         with instances of the problem.
                                            Approximation provides a natural way of coping with NP-hardness. One natural approximation
                                         version of the graph 𝑘-colouring problem is the approximate graph colouring problem, where one
                                         needs to ﬁnd a 𝑐-colouring for a given 𝑘-colourable graph, for 𝑐 ≥ 𝑘. This problem is very stub-
                                         born — it is believed to be NP-hard for all constants 3 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 𝑐, but, despite being studied for more
                                         than 45 years [Garey and Johnson 1976], the progress towards proving this has been very limited.
                                         Even for 𝑘 = 3, the best NP-hardness result (without making additional assumptions) has recently
                                         This survey appeared in ACM SIGLOG News, Volume 9, Issue 3, July 2022, pp 30–59, doi:10.1145/3559736.3559740.
2                                                                      Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


been improved from 𝑐 = 4 [Khanna et al. 2000; Guruswami and Khanna 2004] to 𝑐 = 5 [Bulín et al.
2019; Barto et al. 2021b], while the best (in terms of 𝑐) polynomial-time algorithm for colouring
a 3-colourable graph with 𝑛 vertices uses about 𝑛 0.199 colours [Kawarabayashi and Thorup 2017].
The huge gap between best known negative and positive results shows that we are far from under-
standing the mathematical nature of this problem. We note that, by additionally assuming diﬀerent
(perfect-completeness) variants of the Unique Games Conjecture, NP-hardness of all approximate
graph colouring problems (with 𝑘 ≥ 3) was proved in [Braverman et al. 2022; Dinur et al. 2009;
Guruswami and Sandeep 2020a], but further in this survey we focus on results that do not make
any complexity assumptions other than P ≠ NP.
   Given the success of the research programme aimed at the CSP Dichotomy Conjecture, it was
suggested in [Austrin et al. 2017; Brakensiek and Guruswami 2016, 2021] that perhaps progress
on approximate graph colouring and similar problems can be made by looking at a more general
picture, using the CSP paradigm. This naturally led to the following formulation: ﬁx not just one
relational structure A, but also another structure B such that A → B. Then, given an input structure
I with a promise that I → A, the goal is to ﬁnd a homomorphism from I to B (which must exist
because I → A → B). Note that a homomorphism to A is promised to exist, but is not given as
a part of input. This promise problem is denoted PCSP(A, B) and is called a promise CSP. When
A = K𝑘 and B = K𝑐 are the complete graphs on 𝑘 and 𝑐 (resp.) vertices, PCSP(A, B) is precisely
the approximate graph colouring problem. The assumption A → B is necessary for the problem
to make sense. The problem deﬁned above is a search problem. The standard decision problem
associated with it is to distinguish input structures I such that I → A from those satisfying I 9 B.
   Let us make a few easy, but important, observations:
    • When A = B, the decision version of the problem PCSP(A, A) is precisely CSP(A). Thus the
      PCSP framework generalises the CSP framework.
    • The decision version is always reducible to the search version (simply run the search algo-
      rithm and then verify its output — if the algorithm crashes or the output is wrong, then we
      cannot have I → A), but it is open whether the two versions are always equivalent.
    • Both decision and search PCSP(A, B) are in P if at least one of CSP(A) and CSP(B) is in P.
      This is because tractable decision CSPs have a tractable search problem, as can be shown by
      a simple self-reduction trick [see, e.g., Bulatov et al. 2005].
   Problems PCSP(A, B) can be viewed as approximation versions of CSP(A) on satisﬁable in-
stances, where approximation is understood in a qualitative way (i.e., relaxing constraints, as op-
posed to allowing to violate some of the constraints). The quest to classify the complexity of prob-
lems of the form PCSP(A, B) can also be seen the following way. Fix a structure A such that CSP(A)
is NP-complete. What are the structures B such that PCSP(A, B) is in P? What are the structures
B such that PCSP(A, B) is in NP-hard? What mathematical properties of the structures determine
the complexity?
   A diﬀerent way to view PCSP(A, B) is as CSP(B) with restricted inputs (for decision problems,
we can view it as either CSP(A) or CSP(B) restricted to inputs where the two answers agree). This
means that not only the classiﬁcation problem with respect to P or NP-hardness, but many other
questions that have been studied for CSPs (e.g., classiﬁcation with respect to other complexity
classes or with respect to deﬁnability in various logics) make perfect sense for PCSPs, possibly
with a minor adjustment.
   The so-called algebraic approach was the key tool in attacking the CSP Dichotomy Conjecture
and related problems. This approach has two layers. The ﬁrst layer is the framework of polymor-
phisms. They are simple combinatorial objects — for example, a polymorphism of a graph G is
simply a homomorphism from a direct power of G to G. Polymorphisms are known to control
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                     3


gadget reductions between CSPs (as we discuss in detail later). The second, much more advanced,
layer is the structural theory of universal algebra. A complete translation of the CSP Dichotomy
Conjecture into universal algebra allowed the whole universal algebraic community to contribute
to the progress on the conjecture, which eventually lead to enormous progress both in CSP and in
universal algebra itself. This theory suited the dichotomy problem so well that it enabled fantas-
tic progress, but, on the other hand, it became so dominant in the theory of CSP that it possibly
prevented some mathematical ideas from being developed and some researchers from trying to
work in this direction. We will try to argue that the study of PCSP can facilitate new ideas and
connections that have been overlooked so far.
   The structural theory of universal algebras does not seem to be applicable for PCSPs, but poly-
morphisms still are. Say, for graphs, they can now be thought of as homomorphisms from a direct
power of one graph G to another graph H. So, one needs to get more creative in using polymor-
phisms. Roughly, there are three general ways to use polymorphisms for PCSPs (which we discuss
in detail in Sections 3–5, respectively):
    • When polymorphisms of a PCSP are rich enough, they can be used as rounding procedures
      in polynomial-time algorithms. One relaxes a given PCSP instance in some way, solves the
      relaxation, and then rounds the relaxed solution by applying appropriate (for the relaxation)
      polymorphisms.
    • Polymorphisms provide a convenient tool for characterising the existence of speciﬁc types
      of reductions between PCSPs. That is, one PCSP reduces to another PCSP by a speciﬁc type
      of reduction (say, a gadget reduction) if and only if the polymorphisms of the involved PCSPs
      are related in a certain way.
    • If polymorphisms of a PCSP are limited enough, this can be used directly to construct NP-
      hardness proofs for the PCSP.
The three general guidelines described above are far from being fully formed. There is much to
be developed here: what exactly “rich enough” and “limited enough” should mean (and whether
there is a gap between them), what useful types of reductions can characterised in this way, and
so on.
  The study of PCSPs brought to light many new aspects that were not present in the study of
CSPs. Here we give a (non-exhaustive) list of such aspects.
    • The dichotomy-led study of CSPs sometimes received criticism for not including speciﬁc
      problems of wide interest whose complexity was open. The extension to PCSP includes such
      problems, the most prominent one being approximate graph colouring.
    • When the dichotomy-led study of CSPs started in the 1990s, the Feder-Vardi conjecture was
      supported by two important special cases that were fully classiﬁed by then: the Boolean case
      [Schaefer 1978] and the graph homomorphism case (also known as 𝐻 -colouring) [Hell and Nešetřil
      1990]. For PCSPs, even these two cases (i.e., when both A and B are two-element structures
      and when both A and B are undirected graphs, respectively) are currently wide open. In
      particular, as tempting as it might be, we cannot now conjecture a dichotomy for PCSPs
      because we simply do not have enough evidence.
    • Already after a few years of research, unexpected connections with new areas appeared, such
      as the connection with algebraic topology [Krokhin et al. 2020], which appears to play a sig-
      niﬁcant role in approximate graph colouring and probably beyond. Other examples include
      matrix analysis [Ciardo and Živný 2022a] and Boolean function analysis [Brakensiek et al.
      2021]. There is a clear feeling that more new connections will show up because the study of
      PCSPs seems to be open to contributions from many diﬀerent communities.
4                                                                                      Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


      • Already on the existing evidence, new reductions and new algorithms that were overlooked
        in the study of CSPs can become quite important. This can possibly lead to a new simpler
        proof of the Feder-Vardi conjecture.
      • For each CSP, the decision and the search problems are always equivalent [Bulatov et al.
        2005]. For PCSPs, there is always a reduction from decision to search, but the other direction
        is open. In fact, the design of eﬃcient search algorithms for PCSPs appears to bring brand
        new challenges [see, e.g., Brakensiek et al. 2020].
      • The study of inﬁnite-domain CSP (i.e., CSP(A) when the template A is inﬁnite) has been de-
        veloping over the last 20 years [Bodirsky 2021], using the algebraic approach as well as model
        theory and Ramsey theory. The transfer of methods and results between the inﬁnite-domain
        and ﬁnite-domain cases has so far been mainly from latter to the former. The framework of
        (ﬁnite-domain) PCSPs appears to require transfer in the other direction too.

2 BASIC NOTIONS AND EXAMPLES
In this section, we explain the basics of the theory of promise CSPs and show a few key examples.
Throughout the paper, we write [𝑛] for the set {1, 2, . . . , 𝑛}.

2.1    CSPs and PCSPs
We deﬁne CSP as a homomorphism problem for ﬁnite relational structures.
   Deﬁnition 2.1. A (relational) structure is a tuple A = (𝐴; 𝑅1A, . . . , 𝑅𝑙A ) where each 𝑅𝑖A ⊆ 𝐴ar(𝑅𝑖 ) is
a relation on 𝐴 of arity ar(𝑅𝑖 ) ≥ 1. We say that A is ﬁnite if its domain 𝐴 is ﬁnite. We assume that
structures are ﬁnite, unless speciﬁed otherwise. Two structures A and B are called similar if they
have the same number of relations and the arities of corresponding relations coincide.
    For example, a (directed) graph is relational structure with one binary relation. Any two graphs
are similar structures.
    We often use a single letter instead of 𝑅𝑖 to denote a relation of a structure, e.g., 𝑆 A would
denote a relation of A, the corresponding relation in a similar structure B, would be denoted by
𝑆 B . Throughout the paper we denote the domains of structures A, B, K𝑛 and so on by 𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐾𝑛 , etc.,
respectively.
  Deﬁnition 2.2. For two similar relational structures A and B, a homomorphism from A to B is
a map ℎ : 𝐴 → 𝐵 such that, for each 𝑖, if (𝑎 1 , . . . , 𝑎 ar(𝑅𝑖 ) ) ∈ 𝑅𝑖A , then (ℎ(𝑎 1 ), . . . , ℎ(𝑎 ar(𝑅𝑖 ) )) ∈ 𝑅𝑖B .
We write ℎ : A → B to denote this, and simply A → B to denote that a homomorphism from A to
B exists. In the latter case, we also say that A maps homomorphically to B.
   We deﬁned CSP(B) in the introduction as a homomorphism problem, i.e., given a structure
I similar to B, decide if I → B. There are two other standard ways to deﬁne CSP(B), all are
equivalent. One of them views the domain of I as a set of variables, the domain of B as possible
values for these variables, and every tuple v in a relation 𝑅 I in I gives rise to a constraint (v, 𝑅 B ),
postulating that the tuple of values for v must be in the relation 𝑅 B . The question is then whether
there is an assignment of values to the variables that satisﬁes all constraints. We will often use this
variables-constraints view alongside the homomorphism view. The other way formalises CSP as
the problem of satisﬁability of primitive-positive (or pp-, for short) formulas in B [for more details,
see Barto et al. 2017].
   It is well-known and easy to see that if a CSP(B) is NP-complete for some B (say, graph 3-
colouring), there is no polynomial time algorithm that would ﬁnd a homomorphism I → B given
the promise that such a homomorphism exists (e.g., it is NP-hard to ﬁnd a 3-colouring of a graph
even when you know that it exists). The promise CSP asks whether ﬁnding a homomorphism
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                             5


becomes easier if we relax our goal (e.g., we ask to colour a 3-colourable graph with 6 colours).
Formally, promise CSP is deﬁned as follows.
  Deﬁnition 2.3. Given two relational structures A, B such that A → B, the search version of
promise CSP with template (A, B) is, given an input structure I that is promised to map homomor-
phically to A, ﬁnd a homomorphism ℎ : I → B.
  The decision promise CSP with template (A, B) as above is, given an input structure I similar to
A and B, output yes if I → A, and no if I 9 B. The promise here is that the input falls into one of
the two categories.
   Both of the search and the decision versions are often denoted by the same symbol PCSP(A, B),
and sometimes not so much attention is given to the distinction between them. Throughout the
survey, we do not specify which version (decision or search) is being discussed whenever the
results apply to both versions. When the distinction between search and decision is signiﬁcant,
we comment on it.
  Let us give some examples of the problems of the form PCSP(A, B) which are proper promise
problems, i.e., not of the form CSP(A). Note that the interesting ones consists of templates (A, B)
where both CSP(A) and CSP(B) are NP-complete.
   Example 2.4 ((2 + 𝜀)-Sat). (2 + 𝜀)-Sat is a collective name for a family of promise versions of
(2𝑘 + 1)-Sat problems, where 𝑘 ≥ 1. Loosely speaking the goal is to ﬁnd a satisfying assignment to
a (2𝑘 + 1)-Sat instance being promised that there is an assignment that satisﬁes at least 𝑘 literals
in each clause. Formally, the template is the following pair of relational structures:
                              A𝑘 = ({0, 1}; {𝑡 ∈ {0, 1}2𝑘+1 | Ham(𝑡) ≥ 𝑘}, ≠2 ),
                              B𝑘 = ({0, 1}; {𝑡 ∈ {0, 1}2𝑘+1 | Ham(𝑡) ≥ 1}, ≠2 ).
Here, Ham denotes the Hamming weight of the tuple, and ≠2 the binary inequality relation on
{0, 1} (which is there to capture negative literals in clauses). The problems PCSP(A𝑘 , B𝑘 ) were
proved to be NP-hard in [Austrin et al. 2017], where also the general framework of PCSPs and the
name promise constraint satisfaction problem were introduced.
   Example 2.5 (Promise 1-in-3-Sat). One notable example of a promise CSP is the promise version
of monotone 1-in-3-Sat. Generally, the problem is given a satisﬁable instance of monotone 1-in-3-
Sat, ﬁnd a solution in some other structure B with a ternary (symmetric) relation 𝑅 B . This is the
problem PCSP(T, B) where
                                   T = ({0, 1}; {(1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 0, 1)}).
What are the structures B for which PCSP(T, B) is tractable (respectively, NP-hard)? This question
in this generality was posed in [Barto et al. 2021b], and partially answered in [Barto et al. 2021a].
   Consider the case when B = H2 is the Boolean ternary not-all-equal structure, i.e., H2 =
({0, 1}; {(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) | not (𝑥 = 𝑦 = 𝑧)}). Then CSP(H2 ) is the Not-All-Equal-Sat problem. PCSP(T, H2 )
provides a range of interesting new features not found in CSPs: for example, even though CSP(T)
and CSP(H2 ) are (well-known) NP-hard problems, the problem PCSP(T, H2 ) was shown to be in
P in [Brakensiek and Guruswami 2021], along with a range of similar problems. We will discuss
several other interesting properties of PCSP(T, H2 ) later in this survey.
   Example 2.6 (Approximate graph colouring). Probably the most famous example of promise con-
straint satisfaction problem is the approximate graph colouring that we already mentioned in the
introduction. The problem is to ﬁnd, for ﬁxed 𝑐 ≥ 𝑘, a 𝑐-colouring of a given 𝑘-colourable graph.
The template of this PCSP is a pair of cliques, (K𝑘 , K𝑐 ), where K𝑛 = ({0, . . . , 𝑛 − 1}; ≠𝑛 ). The prob-
lem has been conjectured to be NP-hard for any ﬁxed 3 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 𝑐, but this is still open in many cases.
6                                                                                Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


The current state-of-the-art for NP-hardness is 𝑐 = 2𝑘 − 1 for 𝑘 = 3, 4, 5 [Barto et al. 2021b] and
      𝑘 
𝑐 = ⌊𝑘/2⌋ −1 for 𝑘 ≥ 5 [Krokhin et al. 2020]. Some unconditional results about the applicability of
speciﬁc algorithms for approximate graph colouring can be found in [Atserias and Dalmau 2022;
Ciardo and Živný 2022b].
   Example 2.7 (Approximate graph homomorphism). Approximate graph homomorphism is a nat-
ural generalisation of approximate graph colouring, it is the PCSP where the template consists
of two (undirected) graphs. We note that CSP(H) for a ﬁxed (undirected) graph H is often called
H-colouring. A well-known result by Hell and Nešetřil [1990] states that H-colouring is solvable in
polynomial time if H is bipartite or has a loop, and it is NP-complete otherwise. Brakensiek and Guruswami
[2021] conjectured that the Hell-Nešetřil dichotomy extends to the promise problem, i.e., that
PCSP(G, H) is NP-hard for any non-bipartite loopless undirected G, H with G → H. It is not
hard to see that it is suﬃcient to prove this conjecture for all cases where G is an odd cycle and
H is a 𝑐-clique with 𝑐 ≥ 3. The case G = C2𝑘+1 (odd cycle), H = K3 has been shown to be NP-hard
in [Krokhin et al. 2020]. If we consider directed graphs as well, then, extending a similar result
for CSPs [Feder and Vardi 1998], it was shown in [Brakensiek and Guruswami 2021] that every
problem PCSP(A, B) is polynomial-time equivalent to PCSP(G, H) for suitable digraphs G, H.
  Example 2.8 (Approximate hypergraph colouring). This problem is similar to Example 2.6, but
uses the “not-all-equal” relation
                       NAE𝑘 = {0, . . . , 𝑘 − 1}3 \ {(𝑎, 𝑎, 𝑎) | 𝑎 ∈ {0, . . . , 𝑘 − 1}}
instead of ≠𝑘 , and similarly for 𝑐, i.e., we are talking about PCSP(H𝑘 , H𝑐 ) where H𝑛 = ({0, . . . , 𝑛 −
1}; NAE𝑛 ). Note that H2 is the template of NAE-Sat as in Example 2.5. A colouring of a hypergraph
is an assignment of colours to its vertices that leaves no hyperedge monochromatic. Thus, in (the
search variant of) this problem one needs to ﬁnd a 𝑐-colouring for a given 𝑘-colourable 3-uniform
hypergraph. This problem has been proved to be NP-hard for any ﬁxed 2 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 𝑐 [Dinur et al.
2005]. Some variants of this problem that involve rainbow or strong versions of hypergraph colour-
ing, have been studied [Austrin et al. 2020; Brakensiek and Guruswami 2016; Guruswami and Lee
2017; Guruswami and Sandeep 2020b], but full classiﬁcations are still open there.

2.2   A theory of gadget reductions
We will brieﬂy outline a general theory of promise CSPs, that is based on the inﬂuential ‘alge-
braic approach to CSP’ pioneered by Jeavons et al. [1997] and Bulatov et al. [2005] (see [Barto et al.
2017] for a gentle introduction). The core story of the algebraic approach to CSP is an abstraction
from the concrete CSP template A to an algebraic structure, denoted by Pol(A) and called poly-
morphisms of A, assigned to it. The main theorem then asserts that the complexity of CSP(A)
(up to log-space reductions) only depends on the algebraic properties of Pol(A). The situation for
promise CSP is similar: there is a natural generalisation of polymorphisms to the promise setting,
but the polymorphisms do not form an algebra or a clone, but a weaker structure that is called a
minion. The core thesis is still valid — the complexity of PCSP(A, B) only depends on the prop-
erties of polymorphisms from A to B, up to log-space reductions. We will deﬁne the notion of
polymorphism and minion below together with a precise statement from which the above thesis
immediately follows.
2.2.1 Gadgets and the scope of the theory. Often the algebraic theory investigates certain construc-
tions 𝛾 (so-called pp-interpretations, pp-constructions, or pp-powers, we refer to [Barto et al. 2017,
Section 3] for deﬁnitions of these notions) of the template B that allow for eﬃcient complexity
reduction from CSP(𝛾 (B)) to CSP(B). Here, we would like to focus more on the transformation
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                                      7


(of instances) used in the reduction, as opposed to transformation of the template. We discuss the
connection with pp-powers near the end of this subsection.
   Formally, by a reduction from problem 𝐴 to problem 𝐵 we mean an eﬃciently computable func-
tion 𝜙 from instances of problem 𝐴 to instances of problem 𝐵 such that a solution to an instance 𝐼
can be reconstructed from a solution to the instance 𝜙 (𝐼 ), e.g., if both 𝐴 and 𝐵 are promise decision
problems, we require that 𝜙 maps yes instances of 𝐴 to yes instances of 𝐵 and no instances of 𝐴 to
no instances of 𝐵. For search problems, we moreover require an eﬃciently computable function
from solutions of 𝜙 (𝐼 ) to solutions of 𝐼 .
   A gadget replacement (or local replacement) is a much used technique for constructing reduc-
tions in complexity theory, where each basic unit of an instance is replaced by a diﬀerent structure
in a uniform way. Gadget reductions used in (promise) CSP are precisely this type of reductions,
but with a more formal notion of a gadget.
   We now give formal deﬁnitions of gadgets and gadget reductions that we will use. Let us remark
that these deﬁnitions can be equally well expressed using pp-formulas.
   For a gadget reduction from CSP(A) to CSP(B), we need the following data:
     • a structure G similar to B, to be used as a gadget for variables, and
     • a structure G𝑅 for each (𝑘-ary) relational symbol 𝑅 of A, with ﬁxed homomorphisms 𝑒𝑅,𝑖 : G →
       G𝑅 (1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘), to be used as a gadget for constraints involving 𝑅.
   Deﬁnition 2.9 (Gadget replacement). Assuming the data as above, let I be an instance of CSP(A),
i.e., a structure similar to A. We deﬁne a gadget replacement as the following construction applied
to I, resulting in a structure 𝜙 (I) similar to B.
      • For each element 𝑣 ∈ 𝐼 , introduce into 𝜙 (I) a copy of G denoted by G𝑣 . We denote the
        elements of G𝑣 by 𝑔𝑣 where 𝑔 ∈ 𝐺.
      • For each constraint of I, i.e., each relational symbol 𝑅 say of arity 𝑘 and all (𝑣 1 , . . . , 𝑣 𝑘 ) ∈ 𝑅 I ,
        we introduce into 𝜙 (I) a copy of G𝑅 denoted by G𝑅𝑣1,...,𝑣𝑘 and its elements by 𝑔𝑅;𝑣1,...,𝑣𝑘 . And
        for each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘], we identify the image of G𝑣𝑖 under 𝑒𝑅,𝑖 with its image in G𝑅𝑣1,...,𝑣𝑘 , i.e., the
        elements 𝑔𝑣𝑖 with 𝑒𝑅,𝑖 (𝑔)𝑅;𝑣1,...,𝑣𝑘 for each 𝑔 ∈ G.
   It is well-known that such a gadget replacement can be computed in log-space.
   Example 2.10. Let us show a simple gadget replacement from digraphs to digraphs. We use the
following gadgets where we use the notation P𝑛 = ({0, . . . , 𝑛}; {(𝑖, 𝑖 + 1) | 𝑖 < 𝑛) for a path of
length 𝑛: G = P1 , and G𝐸 = P2 with the homomorphisms 𝑒𝐸,𝑖 that map P1 to the ﬁrst and second
edge of P2 for 𝑖 = 1, 2 respectively. Graphically, they are represented as
                                                          G

                                                   𝑒𝐸,1        𝑒𝐸,2

                                                          G𝐸
The gadget replacement deﬁned by this gadget then replaces each vertex of the input graph with
an edge, and if 𝑢 is connected to 𝑣 by an edge, the endpoint of the new edge 𝑢 is identiﬁed with the
starting point of 𝑣. For example, we get that 𝜙 (P1 ) = P2 , i.e., the path with two vertices becomes a
path with two edges as we would expect, but also, more generally, 𝜙 (P𝑛 ) = P𝑛+1 for all 𝑛 ≥ 1. See
Fig. 1 for more examples of applying this gadget replacement.
  In many previous papers, e.g., [Barto et al. 2021b, 2017], pp-powers as constructions on the tem-
plates have much more prominence than gadget replacements. We include them in this survey to
8                                                                                        Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


                                                                             2                              2
                          0        1               0       1
         I:                                                                                     3                   1

                                                                        0            1              4           0
                                                       0                                                1       0
       𝜙 (I) :            0        1                                    0            1
                                                                                               2
                                                       1                         2                      3       4

                            Fig. 1. An example of gadget replacement (Example 2.10)


show the connection between the two, and that they are in fact two diﬀerent points of view on
the same concept.
  We deﬁne a pp-power using the same data as a gadget reduction, i.e., structures G, G𝑅 ’s, and
homomorphisms 𝑒𝑅,𝑖 ’s. The corresponding pp-power 𝜌 of a structure B′ similar to B (and hence to
G, and G𝑅 ’s) is then deﬁned as follows:
    • the domain of 𝜌 (B′) is the set hom(G, B′ ) of all homomorphisms 𝑝 : G → B′ , and
                       ′
    • a relation 𝑅 𝜌 (B ) of arity 𝑘 is the set
                                    {(𝑓 ◦ 𝑒𝑅,1 , . . . , 𝑓 ◦ 𝑒𝑅,𝑘 ) | 𝑓 : G𝐸 → B′ }.
It is not hard to see that this deﬁnition gives (up to homomorphic equivalence1 ) the same structures
as the pp-powers deﬁned in [Barto et al. 2018, 2017] using the language of logic.
    The key relation between these two constructions is that for each I and B′ , we have that I →
𝜌 (B′) if and only if 𝜙 (I) → B′ . This relation is called adjunction, and it is enough to prove that 𝜙
is a reduction from CSP(𝜌 (B)) to CSP(B), and also from PCSP(A, 𝜌 (B)) to PCSP(𝜙 (A), B)) — the
proof is straightforward and can be found in [Krokhin et al. 2020, Section 4.2].
2.2.2 Polymorphisms. In this subsection, we deﬁne and explain some intuition about one of the
key notions of the characterisation of gadget reductions: polymorphisms of the template. Loosely
speaking, a polymorphism is homomorphism from a power (which we deﬁne below) of one struc-
ture to another (from one part of the template to the other). An intuition why polymorphisms mat-
ter comes from the observation that whenever there is a valid gadget reduction from PCSP(A, A′ )
to PCSP(B, B′ ) then a speciﬁc gadget reduction that uses powers of B (which powers are used and
how they interact depends on the structure A) will give a reduction as well.
   Deﬁnition 2.11. The 𝑛-th power of B, denoted by B𝑛 , is a structure similar to B with the universe
is 𝐵𝑛 , the set of all 𝑛-ary tuples of elements of B, and relations deﬁned as follows. For each 𝑘-ary
                               𝑛
relation 𝑅 B , the relation 𝑅 B is the set of all tuples of the form (r1 , . . . , r𝑘 ) where (r1 (𝑖), . . . , r𝑘 (𝑖)) ∈
𝑅 B for each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] (here, r(𝑖) denotes the 𝑖-th entry of r).
   Another way to describe the relations of the 𝑛-th power of B is: Consider all 𝑘 × 𝑛-matrices
                                                  𝑛
whose columns are tuples in 𝑅 B . The relation 𝑅 B consists of all 𝑘-tuples of rows of such matrices
                                                                   𝑛
(keeping the order, so each matrix corresponds to one tuple in 𝑅 B ), where each row is interpreted
as an 𝑛-tuple of elements of 𝐵.
   Polymorphisms are then simply functions that satisfy these power gadgets in the following
sense.
1 Two structures are homomorphically equivalent if they are homomorphic to each other.
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                                                 9


  Deﬁnition 2.12. Let (B, B′ ) be a PCSP template.2 A polymorphism from B to B′ of arity 𝑛 is
a homomorphism 𝑓 : B𝑛 → B′ . We also simply say that any such 𝑓 is a polymorphism of the
template (B, B′ ).
  We denote the set of all such 𝑛-ary polymorphisms by Pol (𝑛) (B, B′ ), and the set of all polymor-
phisms of arity 𝑛 ≥ 1 by Pol(B, B′ ). Also, we write Pol(B) for Pol(B, B).
   In other words, a function 𝑓 : 𝐵𝑛 → 𝐵 ′ is an 𝑛-ary polymorphism from B to B′ if, for every (say,
𝑘-ary) relation symbol 𝑅 the following holds: For every 𝑘 × 𝑛 matrix 𝑀 with entries from 𝐵 such
that each column of 𝑀 is a tuple in 𝑅 B , if we apply 𝑓 to each row of 𝑀 (treated as a tuple) then we
                                                 ′
obtain a column representing a tuple from 𝑅 B .
   These polymorphisms naturally generalise polymorphisms of a single structure that were used
in the algebraic approach to CSP [see, e.g., Barto et al. 2017, Section 4].
  Example 2.13. Recall Example 2.6. For any 𝑛 ≥ 1, the 𝑛-ary functions from Pol(K𝑘 , K𝑐 ) are simply
the 𝑐-colourings of K𝑛𝑘 , the 𝑛-th direct (or tensor) power of K𝑘 .
2.2.3 Minors, minions, and minion homomorphisms. We would like to highlight the absence of
algebras from this ‘algebraic approach to promise CSP’, which makes this name a bit of a misnomer.
The key property of algebras, or clones, that is missing in polymorphisms of PCSP templates is that
the set Pol(A, B) is not closed under composition — for example, if 𝑓 and 𝑔 are polymorphisms from
A to B of arities 3 and 2 respectively, then the function ℎ deﬁned by ℎ(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑤, 𝑧) = 𝑓 (𝑔(𝑥, 𝑤), 𝑦, 𝑧)
is not necessarily a polymorphism (as it would be if A = B). In general, the composition is not
even well-deﬁned! This means that, as far as we can see now, most of fundamental results from
universal algebra do not apply in PCSP, and often there is no possibility of adapting such methods
from the classical CSP. In PCSP, we have to work with much weaker structure on polymorphisms.
This weaker structure is called a minion and it is obtained from the fact that polymorphisms are
always closed under taking minors.
  Deﬁnition 2.14. An 𝑛-ary function 𝑓 : 𝐴𝑛 → 𝐵 is called a minor of an 𝑚-ary function 𝑔 : 𝐴𝑚 → 𝐵
given by a map 𝜋 : [𝑚] → [𝑛] if
                                         𝑓 (𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥𝑛 ) = 𝑔(𝑥 𝜋 (1) , . . . , 𝑥 𝜋 (𝑚) )
for all 𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥𝑛 ∈ 𝐴. We will use notation 𝑔𝜋 for 𝑔(𝑥 𝜋 (1) , . . . , 𝑥 𝜋 (𝑚) ) and write 𝑓 = 𝑔𝜋 .
  Alternatively, one can say that 𝑓 is a minor of 𝑔 if it is obtained from 𝑔 by identifying variables,
permuting variables, and introducing dummy variables. The classes of functions that are closed
under this operations are called (function) minions.
  Deﬁnition 2.15. A function minion M on a pair of sets (𝐴, 𝐵) is a non-empty subset of {𝑓 : 𝐴𝑛 →
𝐵 | 𝑛 ≥ 1} that is closed under taking minors. For ﬁxed 𝑛 ≥ 1, let M (𝑛) denote the set of 𝑛-ary
functions from M .3 Unless stated otherwise, we assume that all minions are deﬁned on ﬁnite sets.
   It is very easy to check that Pol(A, B) is a minion for any PCSP template (A, B). One speciﬁc
minion that is used much, especially in hardness proofs, is the minion P𝐴 of all projections on a
set 𝐴, where an 𝑛-ary 𝑖-th projection (a.k.a. dictator) on 𝐴 is the operation 𝑝𝑛𝑖 (𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥𝑛 ) = 𝑥𝑖 . Let
us denote the minion P {0,1} simply by P, it is easy to see that P is isomorphic to any minion
P𝐴 with |𝐴| ≥ 2. It is also well-known [see, e.g., Barto et al. 2017] and easy to check directly that
2 We could also deﬁne polymorphisms between any pair of similar structures, but it is not hard to observe that there are

none, unless there is a homomorphism between the two structures.
3 If 𝐴 = ∅, we still require that functions in M have a well-deﬁned arity, i.e., in this case M is an inﬁnite set that contains

one function of each arity.
10                                                                                         Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


P = Pol(A) where A is the structure such that CSP(A) is 3-Sat (i.e., 𝐴 = {0, 1} and the relations
𝑅𝑖A , 0 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 3, are deﬁned by 3-clauses with 𝑖 negated variables, respectively).
   We remark that each polymorphism minion Pol(A, B) naturally carries a topological structure
(see [Krokhin et al. 2020] for details). This is a potentially powerful tool for investigating the com-
plexity of PCSPs, but the study of this direction is still at its infancy.
   The existence of gadget reductions can be characterised in terms of minion homomorphisms
between the polymorphism minions of the involved templates, we present this characterisation in
the next subsection. A minion homomorphism is the natural notion of a structure preserving map
between minions: the structure of a minion is given by the minor taking operations.
  Deﬁnition 2.16. Let M and N be two minions (not necessarily on the same pairs of sets). A map-
ping 𝜉 : M → N is called a minion homomorphism if
  (1) it preserves arities, i.e., ar(𝑔) = ar(𝜉 (𝑔)) for all 𝑔 ∈ M , and
  (2) it preserves taking minors, i.e., for each 𝜋 : [𝑚] → [𝑛] and each 𝑔 ∈ M (𝑚) we have
                                                  𝜉 (𝑔) 𝜋 = 𝜉 (𝑔𝜋 ).
  We note that item (1) is required in order for (2) to make sense, otherwise 𝜉 (𝑔𝜋 ) and 𝜉 (𝑔) couldn’t
form a minor using 𝜋.
    Example 2.17. Let us start with a trivial example. For each minion M , there is a minion homo-
morphisms 𝜉 : P → M deﬁned as follows. Fix ℎ ∈ M (1) which exists since M is non-empty. And
deﬁne 𝜉 (𝑝𝑛𝑖 ) : 𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥𝑛 ↦→ ℎ(𝑥𝑖 ). Clearly, 𝜉 (𝑝𝑛𝑖 ) ∈ M (𝑛) since M is closed under taking minors.
It is not hard to check that 𝜉 also preserves minor relations.
   Example 2.18. There is a minion homomorphism from Pol(K3, K4 ) to the minion P. This minion
homomorphism is built on the following combinatorial statement proved in [Brakensiek and Guruswami
2016, Lemma 3.4]: for each (say, 𝑛-ary) 𝑓 ∈ Pol(K3, K4 ), there exist 𝑡 ∈ 𝐾4 (we will call any such 𝑡
a trash colour), a coordinate 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛], and a map 𝛼 : 𝐾3 → 𝐾4 such that
                                           𝑓 (𝑎 1 , . . . , 𝑎𝑛 ) ∈ {𝑡, 𝛼 (𝑎𝑖 )}
for all 𝑎 1 , . . . , 𝑎𝑛 ∈ 𝐾3 . In other words, if we erase the value 𝑡 from the table of 𝑓 then the remaining
partial function depends only on 𝑥𝑖 . Moreover, it is shown in [Brakensiek and Guruswami 2016,
Lemma 3.9], that while the trash colour 𝑡 is not necessarily unique, the coordinate 𝑖 is. We deﬁne
𝜉 : Pol(K3 , K4 ) → P by mapping each 𝑛-ary 𝑓 to 𝑝𝑛𝑖 for the 𝑖 that satisﬁes the above. One can
check that this is indeed a minion homomorphism (see [Barto et al. 2021b, Example 2.22] for more
details).
   Minor conditions are systems of special functional equations (height-1 identities, in the language
of universal algebra) that can be satisﬁed in a minion, and they are useful to show that there is no
minion homomorphism from one minion to another. A minor condition is a collection of ﬁnitely
many minor identities which are formal expressions of the form:
                                    𝑓 (𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥𝑛 ) ≈ 𝑔(𝑥 𝜋 (1) , . . . , 𝑥 𝜋 (𝑚) )                              (1)
or 𝑓 ≈ 𝑔𝜋 for short. We use the symbol ≈ to emphasize that this is an equation rather than an
equality of two functions. In particular, the variables in this equation are the function symbols (and
the 𝑥𝑖 ’s are implicitly assumed to be universally quantiﬁed). We say that identity (1) is satisﬁed in
a set of functions from 𝐴 to 𝐵 if this set has two speciﬁc functions 𝑓 and 𝑔 that make this equation
an equality of functions, i.e., 𝑓 (𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥𝑛 ) = 𝑔(𝑥 𝜋 (1) , . . . , 𝑥 𝜋 (𝑚) ) for all 𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥𝑛 ∈ 𝐴.
   A minor condition is then said to be satisﬁed in a minion M if for each function symbol appear-
ing in it, there is a function in M of the corresponding arity, such that this collection of functions
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                                  11


satisfy all the identities in the condition. It is easy to see that a minion homomorphism preserves
satisfaction of minor conditions in the sense that if 𝜉 : M → N is a minion homomorphism, then
all minor conditions satisﬁed in M are also satisﬁed in N . The converse is also true for poly-
morphism minions of ﬁnite PCSP templates, i.e., if every minor condition satisﬁed in M is also
satisﬁed in N then there is a minion homomorphism from M to N [Barto et al. 2021b, Theorem
4.12(1)–(3)].
   Example 2.19. A commonly appearing minor condition is the following collection of three minor
identities which is called (ternary) weak near unanimity:
                                                𝑠 (𝑥,𝑦) ≈ 𝑛(𝑥, 𝑥, 𝑦)
                                                𝑠 (𝑥,𝑦) ≈ 𝑛(𝑥,𝑦, 𝑥)
                                                𝑠 (𝑥,𝑦) ≈ 𝑛(𝑦, 𝑥, 𝑥)
  This minor condition is then satisﬁed in Pol(K3, K6 ). In order to show that we present 𝑠 ∈
Pol (2) (K3, K6 ) and 𝑛 ∈ Pol (3) (K3, K6 ): 𝑠 (𝑥,𝑦) = 𝑥 for 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1, 2}.
                                 (
                                   𝑎       if 𝑎 appears at least twice among 𝑥,𝑦, 𝑧, and
                    𝑛(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) =
                                   𝑥 + 3 otherwise.
It is not hard to check that both 𝑠 and 𝑛 are polymorphisms of the given template, and that they
indeed satisfy all the identities above.
   We can also show that this minor condition is not satisﬁed in Pol(H2 , H𝑘 ) for any 𝑘 ≥ 2, where
the structures H𝑘 are from Example 2.8. Indeed, if 𝑠, 𝑛 ∈ Pol(H2 , H𝑘 ) would satisfy such a condition,
we would get that
                                    𝑛(0, 0, 1) = 𝑛(0, 1, 0) = 𝑛(1, 0, 0) = 𝑠 (0, 1).
which contradicts that 𝑛 is a polymorphism. To see this, consider the 3 × 3 matrix whose columns
(0, 0, 1), (0, 1, 0), (1, 0, 0) are in the relation of H2 . Applying 𝑛 to the three rows of this matrix,
which are also (0, 0, 1), (0, 1, 0), (1, 0, 0) results in the constant tuple (𝑠 (0, 1), 𝑠 (0, 1), 𝑠 (0, 1)) which
is not in the relation of H𝑘 for any 𝑘.
   Consequently, this shows that there is no minion homomorphism from Pol(K3, K6 ) to Pol(H2, H𝑘 )
for any 𝑘 ≥ 2.
   Some minor conditions are useless for the above purpose since they are satisﬁes in all minions
(or, equivalently, in the minion P of projections), we call such conditions trivial. An example of
such condition would be a condition obtained from the ternary weak near unanimity by omitting
any of the three identities. We remark that the problem of deciding triviality of minor condition is
a diﬀerent formulation of the Label Cover problem. Moreover, every problem PCSP(A, B) is equiv-
alent to the problem of distinguishing minor conditions that are trivial from those not satisﬁed
in Pol(A, B). We refer to [Barto et al. 2021b, Section 3] for a detailed exposition of the connection
between PCSPs, minor conditions, and Label Cover.
   Finally, let us brieﬂy mention abstract minions which are getting more and more popular in
the literature [e.g., Brakensiek et al. 2020; Ciardo and Živný 2022a,b]. In short, an abstract minion
is to a function minion what a group is to a permutation group. In long, abstract minion M is a
collection of arbitrary non-empty sets {M (𝑛) | 𝑛 ≥ 1} with a well-deﬁned minor-taking operations,
i.e., maps (·) 𝜋 : M (𝑛) → M (𝑚) for each 𝜋 : [𝑛] → [𝑚] that satisfy the (obvious) relations: (𝑔𝜋 )𝜎 =
𝑔𝜎◦𝜋 and 𝑔id = 𝑔 if id is the identity. A minion homomorphism between such minions is deﬁned
in the same way as in Deﬁnition 2.16 with the diﬀerence that the symbols 𝑔𝜋 are interpreted as
the minor taking operation of the corresponding minion applied to the corresponding element 𝑔.
In the language of category theory, an abstract minion is the same as a functor from the category
12                                                                                    Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


of non-empty ﬁnite sets to the category of non-empty sets, and a minion homomorphism is the
same as a natural transformation between two functors. We note that every abstract minion can
be represented as a function minion on sets (𝐴, 𝐵) where 𝐴 is countable (and 𝐵 is also countable
if M (𝑛) is countable for all 𝑛).
2.2.4 Characterisation of gadget reductions. The following theorem is the result of a long line of
gradual improvements and generalisations. Starting with [Jeavons et al. 1997] which introduced
the notion of polymorphisms for CSPs, followed by [Bulatov et al. 2005; Barto et al. 2018] which
further reﬁned the statement for CSPs, [Barto et al. 2021b] which generalised the scope to PCSPs,
and [Krokhin et al. 2020] which mentioned the converse implication (1)→(2) that has received
very little attention before.
  Theorem 2.20. Let (A, A′ ) and (B, B′ ) be two PCSP templates. Then the following two statements
are equivalent:
  (1) PCSP(A, A′) is reducible to PCSP(B, B′ ) by a gadget reduction (and hence in log-space),
  (2) there is a minion homomorphism Pol(B, B′ ) → Pol(A, A′ ).
   Since polymorphisms of PCSP templates are not closed under composition, unlike polymor-
phisms of CSP templates, much of the structural theory of universal algebra is not applicable in
the promise setting. On the other hand, since the above theorem is a direct generalisation of the
corresponding result for CSPs [Barto et al. 2018], every statement about PCSPs applies to CSPs as
well, and therefore the study of PCSPs brings new insights into understanding CSPs as well.
   One key concept that is useful for proving Theorem 2.20, but also in diﬀerent settings, is a notion
of the free structure. It stems from the observation that if we ﬁx A, B, and B′ , there is always a
structure A′ such that PCSP(A, A′ ) reduces to PCSP(B, B′ ) by a gadget reduction. Moreover, there
is a universal such structure (i.e., it maps homomorphically to any suitable A′ ), and this universal
structure depends only on A and the polymorphisms from B to B′ . It is called the free structure of
Pol(B, B′ ) generated by A and denoted by FPol(B,B′) (A) in [Barto et al. 2021b, Section 4.1] to which
we refer to for an explicit construction, formal deﬁnitions, and other useful properties [see, in
particular, Barto et al. 2021b, Theorem 4.12].
   Example 2.21 (3- vs 5-colouring). Recall the approximate (hyper)graph colouring problems from
Examples 2.6 and 2.8. There is a gadget reduction from hypergraph colouring PCSP(H2, H27,480 ) to
graph colouring PCSP(K3, K5 ).4 This can be shown by arguing that every minor condition satisﬁed
in Pol(K3, K5 ) is also satisﬁed in Pol(H2 , H27,480 ), and hence there is a minion homomorphism from
Pol(K3, K5 ) to Pol(H2 , H27,480 ).
   Alternatively, using the claim in the previous paragraph, we could argue that PCSP(H2, F) re-
duces to PCSP(K3 , K5 ), where F is the free structure of Pol(K3, K5 ) generated by H2 , and that
F → H27,480 — this is the essence of the proof presented in [Barto et al. 2021b, Section 6].
   One can also directly prove that the “universal gadgets” give a desired reduction from PCSP(H2 , H27,480 )
to graph colouring PCSP(K3, K5 ), see [Bulín et al. 2019, Section 4] that contains a self-contained
(one-page) proof of this.

3 “RICH ENOUGH” POLYMORPHISMS, ROUNDING, AND TRACTABILITY
Currently, there is essentially one way to prove tractability of a problem PCSP(A, B), which goes
as follows. Assume that we have a structure S (for sandwich) such that A → S → B. It is easy to
see that any algorithm solving CSP(S) also solves the decision version of PCSP(A, B) — indeed,
for any input I, if I 9 S then I 9 A and if I → S then I → B. We can even allow S to be an
4 The number 27, 480 is the number of binary polymorphisms from K
                                                                    3 to K5 which was given by a computer calculation.
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                         13


inﬁnite structure (i.e., have an inﬁnite domain) — but the instances of S are still ﬁnite — in fact,
every instance of PCSP(A, B) is also an instance of CSP(S). So, if this CSP(S) is tractable, then so is
PCSP(A, B). We remark, though, that many existing tractability proofs for PCSPs do not construct
S explicitly. We will initially focus on decision PCSPs in this section, and brieﬂy discuss search
PCSPs at the end of the section.
   Example 3.1. Consider PCSP(T, H2 ) from Example 2.5. Let S be the structure whose domain is
Z and whose only relation is {(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) ∈ Z3 | 𝑥 + 𝑦 + 𝑧 = 1}. It is easy to see that T → S → H2 .
Indeed the ﬁrst homomorphism is simply a (set-theoretic) inclusion, while the second one maps
all negative integers to 0 and the rest to 1. The problem CSP(S) amounts to solving linear systems
over integers and thus belongs to P [Kannan and Bachem 1979]. It follows that PCSP(T, H2 ) is in
P. There are other choices for S that work for this particular PCSP.
    Some tractable problems PCSP(A, B) can be explained by the existence of a tractable sandwich
CSP with a ﬁnite template S, but the size of the smallest possible sandwich structure S can be
arbitrarily large [Kazda et al. 2022] even when the sizes of domains of A and B are ﬁxed. However,
there exist tractable PCSPs where tractable sandwich structures S exist, but are all necessarily
inﬁnite. One speciﬁc example is PCSP(T, H2 ) from the example above — it is shown in [Barto et al.
2021b, Section 8] that CSP(C) is NP-complete for every ﬁnite structure C with T → C → H2 .
    It is an open question whether every tractable problem PCSP(A, B) sandwiches a tractable
CSP(S), possibly with inﬁnite S, and whether, for every PCSP(A, B) with this property, such a
structure S can always be chosen to satisfy special nice properties. It is not even clear what such
nice properties should be.
    In all known cases, such an inﬁnite sandwich structure S captures the possible outputs of solv-
ing a (polynomial-time solvable) relaxation of instances of CSP(A), and then appropriate polymor-
phisms in Pol(A, B) provide a rounding procedure for this relaxation. The prime examples of this
pattern are the basic linear programming (BLP) relaxation and the aﬃne integer programming
(AIP) relaxation, which we now introduce.
    Let I be an instance of CSP(A) and consider the following (standard) 0-1 integer linear program
equivalent to this instance. The variables in the program are 𝜇 𝑣 (𝑎) for every 𝑣 ∈ 𝐼 and 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴, and
𝜇v,𝑅 (a) for every relational symbol 𝑅, every v ∈ 𝑅 I and a ∈ 𝑅 A . The intended meaning is that
𝜇 𝑣 (𝑎) = 1 if and only if 𝑣 is assigned 𝑎 and that 𝜇v,𝑅 (a) = 1 if and only if v is assigned a. We will
write v(𝑖) or a(𝑖) for the 𝑖-th coordinate of the corresponding tuple. The equations in the program
are
                         Õ
                              𝜇 𝑣 (𝑎) = 1                                           𝑣 ∈ 𝐼,           (2)
                            𝑎 ∈𝐴
                         Õ
                                  𝜇v,𝑅 (a) = 1                                     v ∈ 𝑅 I,         (3)
                         a∈𝑅 A
                      Õ
                                  𝜇v,𝑅 (a) = 𝜇v(𝑖) (𝑎)         𝑎 ∈ 𝐴, v ∈ 𝑅 I, 𝑖 ∈ [ar(𝑅)].         (4)
                  a∈𝑅 A ,a(𝑖)=𝑎

   If we relax the above program and allow all variables to take values in the interval [0, 1], we
obtain an instance of the linear programming feasibility problem that we denote by BLPA (I). If we
instead allow all variables to take arbitrary integer values, we obtain a system of linear equations
over integers that we denote by AIPA (I). It is known that both linear programming feasibility and
systems of linear equations over integers can be solved in polynomial time.
   It is obvious that if I → A then both BLPA (I) and AIPA (I) have solutions. We say that BLP
(respectively, AIP) solves PCSP(A, B) if we have I → B whenever BLPA (I) (respectively, AIPA (I))
14                                                                                                Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


has a solution. What are the PCSPs solvable by BLP or by AIP? We explain this in some detail for
BLP, the case of AIP is similar.
   Given a solution to BLPA (I), how can we round it to a homomorphism from I to B? It is not hard
to see that rational-valued solutions to BLPA (I) precisely correspond to homomorphisms from I
to an (inﬁnite) structure S, which depends on A, constructed as follows. The domain of S is the
set of all rational probability distributions over 𝐴, i.e., all solutions to the equation 𝑎 ∈𝐴 𝑥𝑎 = 1
                                                                                                         Í
(cf. equation (2)) in non-negative rational numbers. A tuple t of such probability distributions is
in a relation 𝑅 S if there is a rational probability distribution 𝛾 over 𝑅 A such that, for all 𝑖, the
𝑖-th marginal of 𝛾 is the 𝑖-th component in t (cf. equations (3) and (4)). The problem CSP(S) is
a subproblem of the LP feasibility problem and so is tractable. To use this structure S to prove
tractability of PCSP(A, B) for some B, we need to have A → S → B. It is easy to see that we have
A → S, by mapping each element in 𝐴 to the distribution assigning probability 1 to that element.
For 𝑛 ≥ 1, let S𝑛 be the (ﬁnite) substructure of S whose domain consists of all probability distri-
butions where the probability of each element is ℓ/𝑛 for some ℓ ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 𝑛}. By compactness,
we have that S → B if and only if S𝑛 → B for all 𝑛. It is not hard to see that homomorphisms
from S𝑛 to B are in 1-to-1 correspondence with 𝑛-ary polymorphisms 𝑓 ∈ Pol(A, B) such that
𝑓 (𝑥 1 , . . . , 𝑥𝑛 ) = 𝑓 (𝑥 𝜋 (1) , . . . , 𝑥 𝜋 (𝑛) ) for all permutations 𝜋 of [𝑛] (and all values of the variables).
Such functions are called symmetric. To summarise this discussion, we have the following result
(where we add condition (3) for completeness).
     Theorem 3.2 ([Barto et al. 2021b]). For any PCSP template (A, B), the following are equivalent:
     (1) BLP solves PCSP(A, B),
     (2) Pol(A, B) contains symmetric functions of all arities, and
     (3) there isÍa minion homomorphism from Qconv to Pol(A, B), where Qconv is the minion { 𝑛𝑖=1 𝛼𝑖 𝑥𝑖 |
                                                                                            Í
         𝑛 ≥ 1, 𝑛𝑖=1 𝛼𝑖 = 1, 𝛼𝑖 ∈ [0, 1] for all 𝑖} of functions on Q.
    So, if BLPA (I) has a solution then we have I → S, and then, since I is ﬁnite, I → S𝑛 for some 𝑛 that
is polynomially bounded in the size of I. Then one can say that an 𝑛-ary symmetric polymorphism
from A to B provides a rounding I → S𝑛 → B. Thus, if Pol(A, B) is “rich enough”, here in the sense
that it contains symmetric functions of all arities, then the decision version of PCSP(A, B) is in P.
    A similar reasoning works for AIP in place of BLP (in fact, Example 3.1 can be seen as an applica-
tion of AIP). The "rounding" polymorphisms that naturally appear in this case have the following
properties (think 𝑥 1 − 𝑥 2 + 𝑥 3 − . . . − 𝑥 2𝑛 + 𝑥 2𝑛+1 ). Say that a function 𝑓 : 𝐴2𝑛+1 → 𝐵 is alternating
if it is parity-symmetric, that is,
                                   𝑓 (𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 2𝑛+1 ) = 𝑓 (𝑥 𝜋 (1) , . . . , 𝑥 𝜋 (2𝑛+1) )                              (5)
for all permutations 𝜋 of [2𝑛 + 1] that preserve parity (i.e., map odd numbers to odd and even to
even), and additionally, 𝑓 satisﬁes the following cancellation law:
                                 𝑓 (𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 2𝑛−1, 𝑦, 𝑦) = 𝑓 (𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 2𝑛−1, 𝑧, 𝑧).                              (6)
     Theorem 3.3 ([Barto et al. 2021b]). For any PCSP template (A, B), the following are equivalent:
     (1) AIP solves PCSP(A, B),
     (2) Pol(A, B) contains alternating functions of all odd arities, and
     (3) there is a minion homomorphism from Zaﬀ to Pol(A, B), where Zaﬀ is the minion { 𝑛𝑖=1 𝛼𝑖 𝑥𝑖 |
                                                                                         Í
                Í𝑛
         𝑛 ≥ 1, 𝑖=1 𝛼𝑖 = 1, 𝛼𝑖 ∈ Z for all 𝑖} of functions on Z.
   We remark that AIP was not studied in the dichotomy-led research on CSPs, so the potential of
this algorithm as a subroutine in eﬃcient algorithms for (P)CSPs and its relationship to other al-
gorithms for CSPs [e.g., Bulatov and Dalmau 2006; Idziak et al. 2010] are currently not understood
well.
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                       15


   One particular way to combine BLP and AIP was considered in [Brakensiek et al. 2020]. Roughly,
this combined algorithm ﬁrst solves BLPA (I) and, if solvable, it ﬁnds a special solution 𝑠 for it (a
relative interior point in the rational polytope of solutions). Then it strengthens AIPA (I) by adding
equations 𝑥 = 0, where 𝑥 is any variable that is equal to 0 in 𝑠. Finally, it solves this modiﬁed
AIPA (I). The algorithm rejects if either of BLPA (I) and the modiﬁed AIPA (I) has no solution and
accepts otherwise. This algorithm, called BLP+AIP, can also be seen as going via an appropriate
sandwich structure S, and the power of BLP+AIP can also be characterised via polymorphisms.
Several closely related characterisations were given in [Brakensiek et al. 2020], one of them is as
follows.

  Theorem 3.4 ([Brakensiek et al. 2020]). BLP+AIP solves PCSP(A, B) if and only if Pol(A, B)
contains parity-symmetric functions of all odd arities.

   Theorem 3.4 also has an equivalent third condition similar to Theorems 3.2 and 3.3. It involves
an abstract minion Mconv+aﬀ whose deﬁnition, though quite simple, is a bit too lengthy for this
survey. See [Brakensiek et al. 2020] for details.
   Using Theorem 3.4 and the description of tractable cases of Boolean CSPs [see, e.g., Barto et al.
2017], it is easy to see that BLP+AIP solves all these tractable cases. However, there are simple
examples of non-Boolean CSPs that are not solvable by this algorithm [see Brakensiek et al. 2020].
One can generalise BLP, AIP, and BLP+AIP to hierarchies such as the Sherali-Adams hierarchy for
linear programming (see, e.g., [Ciardo and Živný 2022a,b] for some initial studies of applying such
hierarchies for PCSPs). It is open whether using (some ﬁnite level of) such hierarchies gives an
algorithm that can solve all tractable decision PCSPs (or even all tractable CSPs).
   Another interesting new aspect of PCSPs concerns the number of polymorphisms that are suf-
ﬁcient to guarantee tractability. It is known that the tractable CSPs can be characterised by the
presence of a single polymorphism of arity 4 [see, e.g., Barto et al. 2017], but all theorems in this
section use inﬁnite sequences of polymorphisms. This is not a coincidence, since in PCSP one
cannot compose polymorphisms, and, in particular, one cannot produce useful polymorphisms of
large arities from those of smaller arities. Moreover, it follows from [Barto and Kozik 2022] that,
for any ﬁnite family 𝐹 of (multi-variable) functions from 𝐴 to 𝐵, there is an NP-hard problem
PCSP(A, B) with 𝐹 ⊆ Pol(A, B) (see also Corollary 4.4 and the discussion below it). This appears
to suggest that tractable PCSPs require inﬁnite CSP algorithms, such as BLP or AIP. The nature of
polynomial-time algorithms that solve all tractable CSPs [Bulatov 2017; Zhuk 2017, 2020] is very ﬁ-
nite. Does all this suggest that there are (potentially simpler) inﬁnite-ﬂavoured eﬃcient algorithms
for PCSPs, which, in particular, can solve all tractable CSPs?

3.1 Tractability of search PCSPs
Let us now discuss tractability for search PCSPs. When search is concerned, there is a diﬀerence
between CSP and PCSP. As mentioned before, the search version of any tractable decision CSP is
tractable, but this reduction from search to decision works only for PCSPs that sandwich a tractable
CSP(S) with ﬁnite S. Indeed, if A → S → B then, for any instance I of PCSP(A, B), we can solve I
as an instance of the search problem for CSP(S) and use a pre-computed homomorphism S → B.
However, when inﬁnite sandwich structures S must be used, then we need to be able to eﬃciently
compute both a homomorphism ℎ from an input structure I to S and a homomorphism from the
substructure ℎ(I) of S to B (i.e., both solve the relaxation and round the obtained solution). In
this case, eﬃcient search algorithms are currently known only for very few PCSPs, where the
underlying (speciﬁc) polymorphisms can be easily evaluated to provide eﬃcient rounding [see,
e.g., Brakensiek and Guruswami 2021].
16                                                                       Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


   If we want to use (say, symmetric) polymorphisms as rounding for the search version of PCSP(A, B),
we need to be able to evaluate them eﬃciently. More speciﬁcally, we need a sequence of polymor-
phisms 𝑓𝑛 ∈ Pol(A, B) such that each 𝑓𝑛 is 𝑛-ary, and one can compute the value of 𝑓𝑛 on a given
tuple in time polynomial in 𝑛. One possible obstacle for this, though, is that the application of poly-
morphisms as rounding procedures for BLP+AIP in [Brakensiek et al. 2020] uses polymorphisms
whose arity can be exponential in the size of the instance. It is currently not clear whether this
obstacle is inherent (at least, for some cases) or can always be avoided by using polymorphisms
in a suitable way. In general, however, the study of eﬃcient polymorphisms, i.e., those that can be
eﬃciently evaluated, is a new, wide open, and interesting direction.

3.2    Some open questions and directions
To ﬁnish this section, let us mention several open questions and directions. While many of the
questions and directions below are general, partial answers and new examples would be of con-
siderable interest because we currently see only a small part of the complexity landscape in PCSP.
This comment applies also to the lists of questions and directions in Sections 4.3 and 5.3.

      • The tractable problem PCSP(T, H2 ) from Examples 2.5 and 3.1 has the properties that both
        structures are Boolean (i.e., have domain {0, 1}) and all their relations are symmetric (i.e.,
        invariant under all permutations of coordinates). All tractable PCSPs with these properties
        have been described in [Brakensiek and Guruswami 2021; Ficak et al. 2019], they all either
        admit a tractable ﬁnite sandwich or can be solved by BLP or AIP. Find other interesting
        examples of tractable Boolean (or indeed non-Boolean) PCSPs.
      • Fix your favourite NP-hard problem of the form CSP(A) and describe all tractable problems
        PCSP(A, B). (One can loosely call this describing tractable qualitative approximations to
        CSP(A)).
      • Find new interesting polynomial-time algorithms that can solve (some new) PCSPs.
      • Is it true that every tractable problem PCSP(A, B) sandwiches a (possibly inﬁnite) tractable
        CSP(S)?
      • Whenever PCSP(A, B) sandwiches a tractable CSP(S), where S is inﬁnite, can S always be
        chosen to satisfy special nice properties?
      • What are the PCSPs that admit a ﬁnite sandwich structure with tractable CSP? (Such PCSPs
        are called ﬁnitely tractable by Asimi and Barto [2021]).
      • Are there other natural relaxations (and the corresponding structures and families of poly-
        morphisms) that can be used to provide eﬃcient algorithms for PCSPs? Can families of poly-
        morphisms that play an important role in CSP (such as cyclic polymorphisms, [see Barto et al.
        2017]) suggest new relaxations (for which they can provide rounding)?
      • Can every tractable CSP (or even PCSP) be solved by combining BLP and AIP (possibly using
        some appropriate ﬁnite level of Sherali-Adams-like hierarchies)?
      • Is it true that the search version of PCSP(A, B) is tractable whenever the decision version
        is?
      • Is the search problem tractable for the PCSPs satisfying the conditions from Theorems 3.2–
        3.4?
      • Can a problem PCSP(A, B) have an eﬃcient search algorithm, even in the presence of sym-
        metric polymorphisms of all arities, that is “oblivious” to the underlying polymorphisms?
        [Brakensiek et al. 2020]
      • Is it true that when a search PCSP is tractable, this can always be explained by families of
        polymorphisms that can be evaluated in polynomial time?
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                          17


    • While we focus here mostly on the computational complexity of PCSPs, there was much re-
      search into descriptive complexity of CSPs, i.e., expressibility of problems CSP(A) in various
      logics [see, e.g., Bulatov et al. 2008; Atserias et al. 2009]. Many questions in this direction are
      wide open for PCSPs.
    • The two basic polynomial-time algorithms used to solve CSPs are the bounded-width algo-
      rithm [Barto and Kozik 2014] and the few subpowers algorithm [Bulatov and Dalmau 2006;
      Idziak et al. 2010]. Both use composition of polymorphisms — the former in its correctness
      proof and the latter in the actual algorithm. Are there “composition-free” algorithms that
      can replace them (i.e., solve the same CSPs)?

4   REDUCTIONS THAT GO BEYOND GADGET REPLACEMENTS
In the general algebraic theory of CSP, it was suﬃcient to group and compare CSPs by the gadget
reductions (described in Section 2.2), so that two CSPs that are reducible to each other by gadget
reductions are considered essentially the same. Moreover, it follows from the CSP Dichotomy The-
orem [Bulatov 2017; Zhuk 2020] that (unless P = NP) a CSP is NP-hard if and only if 3-Sat reduces
to it via a gadget reduction. Of course, one can still use gadget reductions to reduce from 3-Sat
(or any other NP-hard CSP) to PCSPs — however, there are NP-hard PCSPs whose NP-hardness
provably cannot be shown by a gadget reduction from an NP-hard CSP. Examples of this include
the (2 + 𝜀)-Sat problem from Example 2.4, and all the state of the art results on approximate graph
colouring from Example 2.6. Hardness arguments for these examples rely on ad hoc reductions
from problems that are proven NP-hard by diﬀerent methods, typically by reducing from the Gap
Label Cover problem, which is NP-hard by the PCP theorem and the Parallel Repetition Theorem
[Arora et al. 1998; Arora and Safra 1998; Raz 1998]. This frequent use of ad hoc reductions was
one reason why [Barto et al. 2021b] called for an extension of the algebraic approach with more
reductions. Such reductions would provide a coarser grouping of PCSPs than the one provided
by gadget replacement, where more PCSPs are considered essentially the same (than what is pro-
vided by Theorem 2.20). Obviously, this could expand the scope of tractability results. Moreover,
we would like to have a general theory for PCSPs, where (as many as possible) hardness results are
explained in a uniform way, ideally via reductions of some regular type (which ideally would be
characterised in a similar way gadget reductions are characterised by polymorphisms) and from
as few problems as possible (ideally just from 3-Sat). This section outlines a few of the recent
advances in that direction.
   A common feature of the new reductions described in this subsection is that they are, surpris-
ingly, pp-powers (recall Section 2.2.1) — which is a construction that is eﬃciently computable but,
when studying gadget reductions, is applied to the template rather than to an instance.

4.1 The arc-graph reduction and adjunctions
A reduction between PCSPs that provably goes beyond gadget replacements has been used in
[Krokhin et al. 2020] to improve hardness results for approximate graph colouring. This reduction
transforms a digraph into its arc-graph, which is deﬁned as follows. For a digraph G, its arc-graph
𝛿 (G) is the digraph whose vertices are the edges of G, and whose edges are pairs of edges of G
forming a 2-path:
                        𝛿 (G) = (𝐸 G ; {((𝑥,𝑦), (𝑧, 𝑤)) | (𝑥,𝑦), (𝑧, 𝑤) ∈ 𝐸 G, 𝑦 = 𝑧}).
It is known that, for any digraphs G, H, we have 𝛿 (G) → H if and only if G → 𝛿𝑅 (H), where
the transformation 𝛿𝑅 can be described in a few ways. For example, we can set 𝛿𝑅 (H) to be the
digraph whose vertices are all subsets of 𝐻 , and there is an edge from a subset 𝑈 to a subset 𝑉
if there is 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 such that (𝑢, 𝑣) ∈ 𝐸 H for all 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 . It is not hard to check that 𝛿 is a reduction
18                                                                                   Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


from PCSP(G, 𝛿𝑅 (H) to PCSP(𝛿 (G), H) whenever both PCSPs are deﬁned, i.e., when 𝛿 (G) → H
and G → 𝛿𝑅 (H).
   This reduction can be used to reduce from PCSP(K𝑏 (𝑘) , K𝑏 (𝑐) ) to PCSP(K𝑘 , K𝑐 ) for any 𝑘, 𝑐 ≥ 4
                   𝑘 
where 𝑏 (𝑘) = ⌊𝑘/2⌋    . Starting with a result of Huang [2013], a repeated application of this reduc-
tion has led to a considerable improvement in state-of-the-art NP-hardness results for approximate
graph colouring [Krokhin et al. 2020]. We will discuss this in more detail in Section 5.2.
   The arc-graph reduction falls into a wider scheme of reductions that are described by adjunctions,
which is a notion from category theory. Two transformations 𝛾 and 𝜔 are said to be adjoint if, for
all structures A and B,
                                  𝛾 (A) → B if and only if A → 𝜔 (B),                                           (7)
assuming that 𝛾 transforms A to a structure similar to B and 𝜔 transforms B to a structure similar
to A. In this case 𝛾 is called a left adjoint to 𝜔, and 𝜔 a right adjoint to 𝛾. Another example of
adjunction is when 𝛾 is a gadget replacement, and 𝜔 the corresponding pp-power, as we described
in Section 2.2.1. As it is known from the algebraic approach, in this case 𝛾 gives an eﬃciently com-
putable reduction from CSP(𝜔 (A)) to CSP(A) for each relational structure A (to which 𝜔 can be
applied). This in fact generalises to arbitrary adjunctions (naturally, from the computational com-
plexity perspective, we are only interested in cases where 𝛾 is eﬃciently computable), and to PCSPs:
any eﬃciently computable left adjoint 𝛾 to 𝜔 can be used as a reduction from PCSP(B, 𝜔 (A′)) to
PCSP(𝛾 (B), A′ ) [Krokhin et al. 2020]. More information on the use of adjunctions in PCSP (and
more examples) can be found in [Krokhin et al. 2020].
   We remark that it is currently not known how (or whether) reductions given by adjunctions,
even in the special case of the arc-graph reduction, can be characterised in terms of polymorphisms
of the involved templates.

4.2 Generalising minion homomorphisms
We brieﬂy outline the core results of a recent paper by Barto and Kozik [2022] that describes a
reduction between PCSPs that is more general than gadget reductions and gives a suﬃcient con-
dition for the existence of this reduction from PCSP(A, A′ ) to PCSP(B, B′ ) that is weaker than
the existence of minion homomorphism from Pol(B, B′ ) to Pol(A, A′ ). Moreover, this suﬃcient
condition is still expressed in terms of the two polymorphism minions. This result goes towards
the general goal described in the beginning of this section. In particular, it allows one to to show
NP-hardness of some PCSPs by a regular type of reduction from 3-Sat through the use of poly-
morphisms. This covers several NP-hardness results, e.g., those from Examples 2.4, 2.7, and 2.8,
where original proofs relied on Gap Label Cover and the PCP theorem.
   We formulate a simpliﬁed version of the reduction used in [Barto and Kozik 2022] — while
formally, this formulation is diﬀerent, it can be shown that if there is a reduction according to
[Barto and Kozik 2022] between two PCSPs, then the reduction described here also works. We use
                𝑋
the notation ≤𝑘     for the set of all at most 𝑘-element non-empty subsets of 𝑋 . And we reﬁne a
deﬁnition of a power of a structure to allow sets for exponents; the structure B𝑋 is isomorphic to
B |𝑋 | .

  Deﬁnition 4.1. Let 𝑋 be a set and B a relational structure, we deﬁne the 𝑋 -th power of B denoted
                                𝑋
by B𝑋 as the structure (𝐵𝑋 ; 𝑅 B , . . . ) where 𝐵𝑋 is the set of all functions from 𝑋 to 𝐵, and
                       𝑋
                    𝑅 B = {(𝑏 1, . . . , 𝑏𝑘 ) | (𝑏 1 (𝑥), . . . , 𝑏𝑘 (𝑥)) ∈ 𝑅 B for all 𝑥 ∈ 𝑋 }

for each 𝑘-ary relational symbol 𝑅 of B.
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                                19


  We now give a concise description of the reduction which we will call here, for the lack of better
name, 𝑘-reduction. Assume that we are reducing from PCSP(A, A′) to PCSP(B, B′ ), and ﬁx a (large
enough) positive integer 𝑘. Intuitively, the reduction is very similar to a gadget replacement with
the key diﬀerence that we consider each set of at most 𝑘 variables at a time as one unit replaced
by one gadget — each of these gadgets is a power of B as deﬁned above.
  Let I be an instance of PCSP(A, A′ ), we construct an instance 𝜙 (I) as follows. For a subset
𝐾 ⊆ 𝐼 , let I[𝐾] denote the (induced) substructure of I with domain 𝐾 obtained by removing all
tuples containing elements not from 𝐾 from all relations in I.
                     𝐼 
    • For each 𝐾 ∈ ≤𝑘    , let F𝐾 be the set of all homomorphisms from I[𝐾] to A. For each such 𝐾,
      introduce into 𝜙 (I) a copy of B F𝐾 .
                            𝐼
    • For each 𝐿 ⊂ 𝐾 ∈ ≤𝑘      , there is a natural map from F𝐾 to F𝐿 that maps ℎ to its restriction ℎ|𝐿 .
      We identify each element 𝑏 of B F𝐿 with the element 𝑏 𝐾 of B F𝐾 deﬁned as 𝑏 𝐾 (ℎ) = 𝑏 (ℎ|𝐿 ).
It is not hard to see that this transformation 𝜙 can be computed in log-space. When is this trans-
formation a reduction from PCSP(A, A′ ) to PCSP(B, B′ )? Barto and Kozik [2022] provide a partial
answer to this question. We also note that they only claim that their reduction is polynomial time
since in order to provide a log-space reduction between search problems, we need to provide an
eﬃcient way to reconstruct a solution for I from a solution 𝜙 (I). Theorem 4.3 below only asserts
that if there is a solution to 𝜙 (I) then there is also a solution to I, but it is not obvious whether it
can be computed in log-space.
   We remark that 𝑘-reduction is also closely connected with Sherali-Adams (SA) hierarchy [see
Sherali and Adams 1990; Ciardo and Živný 2022b] in the following sense. First, SA can be essen-
tially viewed as a reduction from a CSP to linear programming. Naturally, this reduction is diﬀerent
from the basic linear programming relaxation. Namely, the diﬀerence lies in the fact that the 𝑘-th
level of SA considers 𝑘 variables at the same time in very much the same way as in the deﬁnition
above. A diﬀerence from the above construction is in the step where the sets F𝐾 are converted into
a gadget (B F𝐾 above): SA uses a more eﬃcient gadget consisting of all probability distributions on
F𝐾 . This consequently also alters the identiﬁcation step (second item above).
   Barto and Kozik [2022] introduce a generalisation of minion homomorphisms that is a suﬃcient
condition for the existence of a 𝑘-reduction for some 𝑘. The simpler version of the new homomor-
phism is the so-called 𝑑-homomorphism which is a mapping that assigns to each function from
Pol(B, B′ ) a list of at most 𝑑 candidates from Pol(A, A′ ) of the same arity, such that, for each mi-
nor relation 𝑓 = 𝑔𝜋 , there is a choice of candidates, 𝑓 ′ from image of 𝑓 and 𝑔 ′ from the image of
𝑔, that satisfy the same minor relation 𝑓 ′ = (𝑔 ′ ) 𝜋 . (The standard minion homomorphism is thus
a 1-homomorphism.) This notion further generalises to (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphisms deﬁned below; a
𝑑-homomorphism is a (𝑑, 1)-homomorphism. Loosely speaking, a 𝑑-homomorphism forces us to
weakly satisfy each minor relation, while a (1, 𝑟 )-homomorphism does not require that each minor
relation is satisﬁed, but at least one that from each chain of 𝑟 minor relations. A precise deﬁnition
that combines both these behaviours is given below.
  Deﬁnition 4.2. Fix a minion M , a chain of minors in M of length 𝑟 is a sequence 𝑡 0 , . . . , 𝑡𝑟 ∈ M
                                                                  𝜋
together with functions 𝜋𝑖,𝑗 for 0 ≤ 𝑖 < 𝑗 ≤ 𝑟 , such that 𝑡 𝑗 = 𝑡𝑖 𝑖,𝑗 for all 𝑖 < 𝑗 and 𝜋𝑖,𝑘 = 𝜋𝑖,𝑗 ◦ 𝜋 𝑗,𝑘 ,
for all 𝑖 < 𝑗 < 𝑘.
  Let M and N be two minions. A (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism from M to N is a mapping 𝜉 that
assigns to each element of M a non-empty subset of N of size at most 𝑑 such that
   (1) for all 𝑓 ∈ M , every 𝑔 ∈ 𝜉 (𝑓 ) has the same arity as 𝑓 .
   (2) for each chain of minors in M as above, there exist 𝑖 < 𝑗 and 𝑔𝑖 ∈ 𝜉 (𝑡𝑖 ), 𝑔 𝑗 ∈ 𝜉 (𝑡 𝑗 ) such that
              𝜋
       𝑔 𝑗 = 𝑔𝑖 𝑖,𝑗 .
20                                                                                               Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


   Note that, in a chain of minors, the maps 𝜋𝑖,𝑗 are determined by 𝜋𝑖,𝑖+1 since all others are obtained
by composition. So, one way to create such a chain is to start with 𝑡 0 and to iteratively take a minor
         𝜋
𝑡𝑖+1 = 𝑡𝑖 𝑖,𝑖+1 .
   Often a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism can be given by providing 𝑟 partial 𝑑-homomorphisms that cover
the whole minion M . More precisely, assume that M = M1 ∪ · · · ∪ M𝑟 where each M𝑖 is not
necessarily a minion, and that we have maps 𝜉𝑖 : M𝑖 → N that are partial 𝑑-homomorphisms, i.e.,
they satisfy the conditions (1) and (2) in Deﬁnition 4.2 for every chain of minors of length 1 that
is contained in the same M𝑖 . Then there is a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism 𝜉 : M → N which is deﬁned
by taking the union of 𝜉𝑖 ’s and breaking ties arbitrarily whenever some of 𝜉𝑖 ’s disagree. This is
a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism, since, for every chain of minors 𝑡 0, . . . , 𝑡𝑟 , there will be some 𝑠 such that
some 𝑡𝑖 and 𝑡 𝑗 belong to the same M𝑠 and 𝜉 (𝑡𝑖 ) = 𝜉𝑠 (𝑡𝑖 ) and 𝜉 (𝑡 𝑗 ) = 𝜉𝑠 (𝑡 𝑗 ).
  Theorem 4.3 ([Barto and Kozik 2022, Theorem 5.1]). Let (A, A′ ) and (B, B′ ) be two PCSP tem-
plates. If there is a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism from Pol(B, B′ ) to Pol(A, A′ ), then there exists 𝑘 such that
PCSP(A, A′ ) reduces to PCSP(B, B′ ) by the 𝑘-reduction.
     One important consequence of the above theorem (Corollary 4.4 below) is that polymorphisms
of a bounded arity (or, more generally, of bounded essential arity) have no inﬂuence on the complex-
ity of a PCSP. In particular, one cannot make any conclusions about the complexity of PCSP(A, A′ )
solely on the basis of the presence of any single ﬁnite set of functions in the polymorphism min-
ion Pol(A, A′). A coordinate 𝑖 of a function 𝑓 : 𝐴𝑛 → 𝐴 ′ is called inessential if, for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] and
𝑎 1 , . . . , 𝑎𝑛 , 𝑎𝑖′ ∈ 𝐴, we have 𝑓 (𝑎 1 , . . . , 𝑎𝑖 , . . . , 𝑎𝑛 ) = 𝑓 (𝑎 1 , . . . , 𝑎𝑖′, . . . , 𝑎𝑛 ). Otherwise, the coordinate 𝑖
is called essential. The number of essential coordinates of a function is called its essential arity.
     Corollary 4.4. Fix any number 𝑚 ≥ 1. If there is a partial minion homomorphism
                                                      𝜉 : B → Pol(A, A′)
where B ⊆ Pol(B, B′ ) is the set of all polymorphisms of essential arity at least 𝑚 then PCSP(A, A′ )
is reducible to PCSP(B, B′ ) by 𝑘-reduction for some 𝑘.
   By partial minion homomorphism in the above theorem, we mean that minors 𝑓 = 𝑔𝜋 are
preserved for all functions 𝑓 , 𝑔 ∈ B.
   As a special case of Corollary 4.4, consider the situation when 𝐴 = 𝐵, 𝐴 ′ = 𝐵 ′ and Pol(A, A′ )
and Pol(B, B′ ) have the same functions of essential arity at least 𝑚, for some 𝑚, (but there is
assumption on functions of essential arity less than 𝑚 in the two minions). Then Corollary 4.4
implies that PCSP(A, A′ ) and PCSP(B, B′ ) are reducible to each other.
   The proof of Corollary 4.4 is straightforward, we can extend the partial homomorphism 𝜉 to
a full 𝑑-homomorphism, where 𝑑 is the number of 𝑚-ary functions in Pol(A, A′ ). To deﬁne the
extension, map any 𝑛-ary function 𝑓 ∈ Pol(B, B′ ) of essential arity less then 𝑚 to the set of all
𝑛-ary functions in Pol(A, A′ ) whose set of essential coordinates is contained in the set of essential
coordinates of 𝑓 . It is not hard to check that this indeed gives a 𝑑-homomorphism from Pol(B, B′ )
to Pol(A, A′ ), and one can apply Theorem 4.3.
   An argument similar to the one before Theorem 4.3 gives the following.
  Corollary 4.5. Let A = Pol(A, A′ ) and B = Pol(B, B′ ) If there is 𝑟 and a collection of 𝑟 partial
                                                                                           Ð −1
minion 𝑑-homomorphism 𝜉𝑖 : B𝑖 → A where B𝑖 ⊆ B for each 𝑖 = 0, . . . , 𝑟 − 1, and B = 𝑟𝑖=0      B𝑖
then PCSP(A, A′ ) is reducible to PCSP(B, B′ ) by 𝑘-reduction for some 𝑘.
  One open question relating (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphisms with the arc-graph reduction is whether
there is a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism for some 𝑑 and 𝑟 from Pol(𝛿G, H) to Pol(G, 𝛿𝑅 H) for any digraphs
G and H. We know that the arc-graph reduction is a reduction between the corresponding PCSPs.
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                      21


In fact, it is possible to show using the construction 𝛿𝑅 that 3-reduction also provides such a re-
duction in this case. Nevertheless, it is not clear that the suﬃcient condition from Theorem 4.3 is
satisﬁed in this case. If it is not, this would mean that (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphisms are not necessary for
𝑘-reduction to work.
   We are far from understanding reductions (beyond gadget reductions) in many ways: Is 𝑘-
reduction suﬃcient to build a strong enough general theory for PCSPs? Is there a characterisation
when a 𝑘-reduction is an actual reduction from one PCSP to another in terms of the polymor-
phism minions of the two templates? Would a more general reduction be more open to such a
characterisation?

4.3     Some open questions and directions
      • Find a class of reductions between PCSPs that is strong enough (say, to cover more than
        gadget reductions) together with a characterisation when such a reduction is applicable.
      • Can reductions given by adjunctions be described in terms of polymorphisms? The special
        case of the arc-graph construction is a good place to start.
      • Is (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism also a necessary condition for the existence of a 𝑘-reduction? If
        not, ﬁnd a more general (polymorphism-based) condition that would be both suﬃcient and
        necessary for such reductions.
      • Is there a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism for some 𝑑 and 𝑟 from Pol(𝛿G, H) to Pol(G, 𝛿𝑅 H) for all (or
        some interesting) digraphs G and H?
      • It is known [Krokhin et al. 2020] that each minion of polymorphisms carries a topological
        structure. Investigate how this topological structure can be used to provide more reductions
        between PCSPs.

5     “LIMITED ENOUGH” POLYMORPHISMS AND NP-HARDNESS
For CSPs, we know exactly which problems CSP(B) are NP-hard (assuming P ≠ NP), by [Bulatov
2017; Zhuk 2017, 2020]. In fact, the hardness part of the CSP Dichotomy Theorem is easy and has
long been known [Bulatov et al. 2005]. One way to characterise the NP-hard CSPs is as follows
[Barto et al. 2018]. Recall the minion P of all projections on {0, 1} from Section 2.2.3. Then the
NP-complete CSPs are the problems CSP(B) such that there exists a minion homomorphism from
Pol(B) to P. Since, as we mentioned in Section 2.2.3, P is the polymorphism minion of the
structure corresponding to 3-Sat, this means that every NP-hard CSP(B) admits a gadget reduction
from 3-Sat (unless P = NP). Since every projection of a given arity 𝑛 is uniquely determined by
one of its coordinates, the existence of such a minion homomorphism means exactly that, for each
function 𝑓 in Pol(B), one can select one “important” coordinate 𝑖 𝑓 in such a way that if 𝑓 = 𝑔𝜋
then 𝑖 𝑓 = 𝜋 (𝑖𝑔 ).
   For PCSPs, the situation is more complicated, since, as mentioned before, there are many NP-
hard PCSPs whose polymorphism minion does not admits a minion homomorphism to P (and
hence there is no gadget reduction from 3-Sat). In fact, there is some belief [Brakensiek and Guruswami
2021] that, unlike for CSPs, understanding hardness in PCSPs will be at least as diﬃcult as under-
standing tractability (regardless of the question about the existence of dichotomy for PCSPs).

5.1 Proving NP-hardness results via polymorphisms
A prevalent (so far) use of Theorem 4.3 to prove NP-hardness of PCSPs is to show a reduction from
3-Sat, i.e., with A = A′ being the template of 3-Sat, and hence Pol(A, A′ ) = P.
  Corollary 5.1. Let (B, B′ ) be a PCSP template. If, for some ﬁxed 𝑑, 𝑟 ≥ 1, there is a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-
homomorphism from Pol(B, B′ ) to P then PCSP(B, B′ ) is NP-hard.
22                                                                              Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


   Corollary 5.1 for the case 𝑟 = 1 was proved in [Barto et al. 2021b] (the core of the argument
appeared in [Austrin et al. 2017]) and for the case 𝑑 = 1 and arbitrary 𝑟 in [Brandts et al. 2021], but
both of these results predate [Barto and Kozik 2022] and their original proofs relied on the PCP
theorem.
   Let us spell out what the condition in the above corollary says. Fix a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism
𝜉 : Pol(B, B′ ) → P. If 𝑓 is an 𝑛-ary function in Pol(B, B′ ) then 𝜉 (𝑓 ) is a non-empty collection
of (at most) 𝑑 projections 𝑝𝑛𝑠1 , . . . , 𝑝𝑛𝑠𝑑 of arity 𝑛, where 1 ≤ 𝑠 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛 for each 𝑗 . In other words, 𝜉
can be viewed as selecting a set sel(𝑓 ) = {𝑠 1 , . . . , 𝑠𝑑 } ⊆ [𝑛] of (at most) 𝑑 “special” coordinates
                                                                                                        𝜋
in 𝑓 . Now assume that we have a chain of minors 𝑡 0 , . . . , 𝑡𝑟 ∈ Pol(B, B′ ) such that 𝑡 𝑗 = 𝑡𝑖 𝑖,𝑗 , for
each 𝑖 < 𝑗 , where 𝜋𝑖,𝑘 = 𝜋𝑖,𝑗 ◦ 𝜋 𝑗,𝑘 , for all 𝑖 < 𝑗 < 𝑘. Then there must exist 𝑖 < 𝑗 such that
sel(𝑡 𝑗 ) ∩ 𝜋𝑖,𝑗 (sel(𝑡𝑖 )) ≠ ∅. In other words, it cannot be that, for all 𝑖, 𝑗 , the image under 𝜋𝑖,𝑗 of the
“special” coordinates in 𝑡𝑖 does not contain any “special” coordinates of 𝑡 𝑗 .
   Informally, the fact that one can identify a bounded number of special coordinates in every
polymorphism (in a coordinated way) shows that these polymorphisms are in some way “lopsided”,
and so Pol(B, B′ ) is “limited enough”. To contrast this intuition with “rich enough” polymorphisms
from Section 3, let us explain why there cannot be a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism from Pol(B, B′ ) to P if
Pol(B, B′ ) contains symmetric functions of all arities. Indeed, assume such a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism
𝜉 exists for some 𝑑, 𝑟 . Choose any symmetric function 𝑡 0 of arity 𝑑 · (𝑟 + 1) in Pol(B, B′ ) and let
𝑆 = 𝑠𝑒𝑙 (𝑡 0 ) be the set of (at most) 𝑑 special coordinates of 𝑡 0 selected by 𝜉. Choose a permutation
𝜋 on [𝑑 · (𝑟 + 1)] so that 𝑆 intersects none of the sets 𝜋 (𝑆), 𝜋 2 (𝑆), . . . , 𝜋 𝑑 (𝑟 +1)−1 (𝑆), clearly this
                                                                               𝑖
can be done. Consider the chain of minors 𝑡 0, . . . , 𝑡𝑟 where 𝑡𝑖 = 𝑡 0𝜋 (and so 𝜋𝑖,𝑗 = 𝜋 𝑗−𝑖 for all
𝑖 < 𝑗 ). Note that we have 𝑡 0 = 𝑡 1 = . . . = 𝑡𝑟 , since 𝑡 0 is symmetric, but 𝑆 = sel(𝑡 𝑗 ) is disjoint from
𝜋𝑖,𝑗 (sel(𝑡𝑖 )) = 𝜋 𝑗−𝑖 (𝑆) for all 𝑖 < 𝑗 , by the choice of 𝜋.
   Let us now discuss how Corollary 5.1 is applied. Naturally, it is all about selecting special sets of
coordinates in polymorphisms. How exactly to select the special variables for a given application
is the creative part.
   Let’s start with the case 𝑟 = 1. In this case we want to select, for each polymorphism 𝑓 , a set
sel(𝑓 ) of (at most) 𝑑 “special” coordinates in such a way that, for every minor relation 𝑡 1 = 𝑡 0𝜋 in
Pol(B, B′ ), the set of special coordinates in 𝑡 0 , after applying 𝜋, i.e., 𝜋 (sel(𝑡 0 )), shares at least one
element with the set sel(𝑡 1 ).
    Example 5.2. Assume that we can prove that each 𝑓 ∈ Pol(B, B′ ) has at least one and at most
𝑑 essential variables (which means that the values of the remaining, non-essential, variables have
no eﬀect on the output of 𝑓 ). We can set sel(𝑓 ) to be the set of essential variables of 𝑓 . In this case
it is easy to check that if 𝑡 1 = 𝑡 0𝜋 then sel(𝑡 1 ) and 𝜋 (sel(𝑡 0 )) can never be disjoint. This reasoning
was used, for example, in [Austrin et al. 2017] to prove NP-hardness of (2 + 𝜀)-Sat problems (see
Example 2.4) — though via the PCP theorem.
   The case 𝑟 = 1 can be applicable even when polymorphisms have an unbounded number of
essential variables — the special variables can be selected on the basis of some other property, as
in Example 2.18 or in the following example.
  Example 5.3. Let C2𝑘+1 be an undirected cycle with 2𝑘 + 1 nodes, 𝑘 ≥ 1, and let K3 be a 3-clique.
The approximate graph homomorphism problem PCSP(C2𝑘+1 , K3 ) (recall Example 2.7) has been
proved NP-hard in [Krokhin et al. 2020] by applying Corollary 5.1 as follows. One can associate a
topological space to every graph. The space associated with an odd cycle is a circle, and the space
associated with the 𝑛-th power of an odd cycle is an 𝑛-torus. Furthermore, any graph homomor-
phism 𝑓 , and hence also a polymorphism, induces a continuous map 𝑓ˆ between the corresponding
spaces, hence we assign to a polymorphism 𝑓 : C𝑛2𝑘+1 → K3 a continuous map 𝑓ˆ from 𝑛-torus to
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                                23


the circle. Observing that the main topological invariant of a continuous map from a circle to itself
is its degree (or winding number), one can then prove, roughly, that 𝑓ˆ will have a bounded number
of coordinates with non-zero degree. These coordinates are then chosen to form the set sel(𝑓 ), and
one can prove that sel(𝑡 1 ) ∩ 𝜋 (sel(𝑡 0 )) ≠ ∅ holds whenever 𝑡 1 = 𝑡 0𝜋 .
   The previous example is a rare (so far) case when the analysis of polymorphisms in a hardness
proof for PCSP is performed not by direct combinatorics, but instead by ﬁrst mapping them by
a minion homomorphism to a diﬀerent abstract minion, where the behaviour of their images is
easier to understand. It would be of signiﬁcant interest to ﬁnd more examples of hardness of proofs
of this sort, where the target abstract minion can be of topological or of some other nature.
   Now let us discuss applications of Corollary 5.1 with 𝑟 > 1. One useful pattern is provided in
the following example, taken from [Brandts et al. 2021], where it is applied to prove NP-hardness
of certain generalisations of (2 + 𝜀)-Sat to non-Boolean domains.
  Example 5.4. Assume that we can deﬁne the notion of a set of coordinates, called smug sets in
[Brandts et al. 2021], for functions in Pol(B, B′ ) so that the following conditions are satisﬁed:
    • every 𝑓 ∈ Pol(B, B′ ) has a smug set consisting of at most 𝑑 coordinates;
    • no function in Pol(B, B′ ) can have more than 𝑟 pairwise disjoint smug sets;
    • if 𝑓 = 𝑔𝜋 for some 𝑔, 𝑓 ∈ Pol(B, B′ ) then the 𝜋-preimage of any smug set in 𝑓 is a smug set
      in 𝑔.
Then, for any 𝑓 ∈ Pol(B, B′ ), we can set sel(𝑓 ) to be an arbitrary smug set of variables of size at
most 𝑑 in it. This does not in general guarantee that sel(𝑡 1 ) ∩ 𝜋 (sel(𝑡 0 )) ≠ ∅ whenever 𝑡 1 = 𝑡 0𝜋 .
However, the last two conditions in the deﬁnition of a smug set imply that, for any chain of minors
𝑡 0 , . . . , 𝑡𝑟 ∈ Pol(B, B′ ), it is impossible that sel(𝑡 𝑗 ) ∩ 𝜋𝑖,𝑗 (sel(𝑡𝑖 )) = ∅ for all 𝑖 < 𝑗 .
  Another useful pattern of applying Corollary 5.1 with 𝑟 > 1 is when functions in Pol(B, B′ ) can
be shown to exhibit 𝑟 diﬀerent types of behaviour, so that Pol(B, B′ ) can be divided into 𝑟 (not
necessarily disjoint) types, where the deﬁnition of sel(𝑓 ) depends on the type of a polymorphism,
and one can show that sel(𝑔) ∩ 𝜋 (sel(𝑓 )) ≠ ∅ holds whenever 𝑔 = 𝑓 𝜋 and 𝑔 and 𝑓 are of the same
type. This can also be described as representing Pol(B, B′ ) as Pol(B, B′ ) = M1 ∪ · · · ∪ M𝑟 , and
providing partial 𝑑-homomorphisms 𝜉𝑖 : M𝑖 → P (see Deﬁnition 4.2 and the discussion after it).
   Example 5.5. A few simple applications of the above pattern can be found in [Barto et al. 2021a],
where it is applied to problems PCSP(T, B) (as in Example 2.5) with B being a structure with domain
{0, 1, 2}. For example, consider the case when the relation of B consists of triples (0, 0, 1), (0, 0, 2), (1, 1, 2)
and all triples obtained from them by permuting coordinates. For a function 𝑓 : {0, 1}𝑛 → {0, 1, 2},
call a set 𝑋 of coordinates of 𝑓 a 2-set if 𝑓 evaluates to 2 whenever all variables in 𝑋 are equal to 1.
Also, deﬁne 𝐸 (𝑓 ) to be the set of all coordinates 𝑖 such that 𝑓 (x𝑖 ) ≠ 0, where x𝑖 is the tuple where
1 appears only in position 𝑖. It is shown in [Barto et al. 2021a] that each 𝑓 ∈ Pol(T, B) has at least
one of the following properties: 𝑓 has a 2-set 𝑋 of size at most 2 or the set 𝐸 (𝑓 ) has size at most 5.
Whichever case applies for each 𝑓 , select the corresponding set, 𝑋 or 𝐸 (𝑓 ), to be sel(𝑓 ), breaking
ties arbitrarily when there is any choice. Thus, we have Pol(T, B) = M1 ∪ M2 , where M𝑖 consists
all functions 𝑓 ∈ Pol(T, B) such that sel(𝑓 ) is deﬁned by the ﬁrst or by the second property above.
It is then shown that this provides partial 5-homomorphisms from each M𝑖 to P, and hence a
(5, 2)-homomorphism from Pol(T, B) to P.
  NP-hardness results for various Boolean PCSPs that can be obtained by using Corollary 5.1 (even
though the original proofs are not always presented that way) can be found in [Brakensiek and Guruswami
2021; Brakensiek et al. 2021; Brandts and Živný 2021; Ficak et al. 2019].
24                                                                      Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


5.2 Hardness of PCSPs from Gap Label Cover
NP-hardness of the Gap Label Cover problem is the starting point of many hardness proofs in
inapproximability. Many hardness results for graph and hypergraph colouring were obtained via
ad hoc reductions from Gap Label Cover, and will discuss some of them here (see [Barto et al. 2021b,
Section 5] for more details). We remark that one advantage of hardness proofs via Corollary 5.1
(or similar), as compared with reductions from Gap Label Cover is that the reduction itself is not
ad hoc, and thus is more suitable for building a general theory.
   We start with two examples where the original hardness proofs used Gap Label Cover, but
subsequently new proofs via Corollary 5.1 were found.
   Example 5.6. Recall the hypergraph colouring problem PCSP(H𝑘 , H𝑐 ) from Example 2.8. It was
proved in [Dinur et al. 2005] that PCSP(H𝑘 , H𝑐 ) is NP-hard for all 2 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 𝑐, by using a reduc-
tion from a multi-layered version of Gap Label Cover. It was then shown in [Barto et al. 2021b,
Section 5.3] how the proof from [Dinur et al. 2005] can be directly translated into the language of
polymorphisms. Wrochna [2022] reﬁned this to provide a short combinatorial proof that there is a
way to select special coordinates in functions from Pol(H2, H𝑐 ) that gives a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism
from Pol(H2, H𝑐 ) to P for appropriately chosen 𝑑 and 𝑟 , so this hardness result can now also be
explained by using Corollary 5.1.
  Example 5.7. Recall Example 2.21. For any 𝑘 ≥ 3, the problem PCSP(K𝑘 , K2𝑘−1 ) has been proved
NP-hard in [Barto et al. 2021b] by providing a minion homomorphism from Pol(K𝑘 , K2𝑘−1 ) to
Pol(H2, H𝑐 ), where 𝑐 is the number of binary functions in Pol(K𝑘 , K2𝑘−1 ). From the previous ex-
ample, there is a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism from Pol(H2 , H𝑐 ) to P, for some 𝑑, 𝑟 . It is easy to check
that a composition of a minion homomorphism with a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism is again a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-
homomorphism, so we conclude that there is a (𝑑, 𝑟 )-homomorphism from Pol(K𝑘 , K2𝑘−1 ) to P.
  Let us now discuss hardness results for approximate graph colouring that have not been ex-
plained via polymorphisms so far. Notably, all state-of-the-art NP-hardness results for Pol(K𝑘 , K𝑐 )
with 6 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 𝑐 are in this category.
   Example 5.8. The strongest known NP-hardness results for PCSP(K𝑘 , K𝑐 ) with 𝑘 = 3, 4, 5 are
those from the previous example, with 𝑐 = 2𝑘 − 1. In [Huang 2013], it was proved, by a reduction
                                                                       1/3
from Gap Label Cover, that PCSP(K𝑘 , K𝑐 ) is NP-hard for 𝑐 = 2Ω (𝑘 ) and 𝑘 large enough. By
starting from Huang’s result and repeatedly applying the arc-graph reduction (see Section 4.1), it
                                                                                           𝑘 
was shown in [Krokhin et al. 2020] that PCSP(K𝑘 , K𝑐 ) is NP-hard for all 𝑘 ≥ 4 and 𝑐 = ⌊𝑘/2⌋    −1
(which coincides with 2𝑘 − 1 for 𝑘 = 5 and is the strongest known result for 𝑘 ≥ 6). We note
that neither Huang’s result nor the arc-graph reduction currently have an explanation in terms of
polymorphisms.
    Another result from [Krokhin et al. 2020] obtained by using the arc-digraph construction is that
it is enough to prove NP-hardness of PCSP(K𝑘 , K𝑐 ) for some ﬁxed 𝑘 ≥ 3 and all 𝑐 ≥ 𝑘, the same
will then follow for all 3 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 𝑐.
   Other examples of NP-hardness results that were obtained by ad hoc reductions from Gap Label
Cover (and cannot currently be explained in terms of polymorphisms) include results on rainbow
vs. normal and strong vs. normal hypergraph colouring, see references in Example 2.8.

5.3    Some open questions and directions
      • At the moment, Corollary 5.1 is the most general known formalisation of what it means for
        a PCSP to have “limited enough” polymorphisms (to guarantee NP-hardness). Find other
        (incomparable or more general) formalisations.
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                                           25


    • We mentioned symmetric Boolean PCSPs in Section 3.2. All such PCSPs that are not tractable
      are NP-hard [Brakensiek and Guruswami 2021; Ficak et al. 2019]. Find other interesting ex-
      amples of NP-hard Boolean (or non-Boolean) PCSPs.
    • Which of the problems PCSP(T, B) from Example 2.5 are NP-hard? Speciﬁcally, solve this
      for the case B = LO𝑘 whose domain is {0, 1, . . . , 𝑘 − 1}, 𝑘 ≥ 3, and the relation consists of
      all tuples (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) that have a unique maximal element (or, in other words, if two of 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧
      are equal then the third element is larger than the two equal ones). See [Barto et al. 2021a;
      Nakajima and Živný 2022] for related results.
    • Pick your favourite structure A with NP-hard CSP(A) and describe all NP-hard problems
      PCSP(A, B). More generally, classify the complexity of PCSP(A, B) depending on B.
    • Recall that a smooth digraph is one that has neither sources nor sinks (in other words,
      each vertex has positive in- and out-degrees). See [Barto et al. 2017, 2009] for an explicit
      description of smooth digraphs G with tractable (NP-hard, resp.) CSP(G). Generalising the
      Brakensiek-Guruswami conjecture from Example 2.7, are all problems PCSP(G, H) NP-hard
      when G and H are smooth digraphs with NP-hard CSPs?
    • Further develop the topology-based approach mentioned in Example 5.3 to attack the approx-
      imate graph colouring problem (and possibly other PCSPs such as variants of hypergraph
      colouring mentioned in Example 2.8).
    • Topology has been applied in hardness proofs for PCSPs in diﬀerent ways: combinatorial
      analysis via Borsuk-Ulam-style theorems [Austrin et al. 2020; Dinur et al. 2005] and topolog-
      ical analysis of polymorphisms [Krokhin et al. 2020]. Investigate whether there is a common
      pattern behind these applications.
    • In the introduction, we mentioned that the truth of some NP-hardness conjectures (related to
      variants of unique games) is known to imply NP-hardness of all approximate graph colouring
      problems. Are the reverse implications true for approximate graph colouring (or some other
      PCSPs)?
    • Investigate logical inexpressibility for PCSPs (see [Atserias and Dalmau 2022] for the ﬁrst
      example of work in this direction).

REFERENCES
Sanjeev Arora, Carsten Lund, Rajeev Motwani, Madhu Sudan, and Mario Szegedy. 1998. Proof veriﬁcation and the hardness
   of approximation problems. J. ACM 45, 3 (1998), 501–555.
Sanjeev Arora and Shmuel Safra. 1998. Probabilistic Checking of Proofs: A New Characterization of NP. J. ACM 45, 1 (Jan.
   1998), 70–122. https://doi.org/10.1145/273865.273901
Kristina Asimi and Libor Barto. 2021. Finitely Tractable Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problems. In 46th International
   Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science, MFCS 2021 (LIPIcs). Dagstuhl, Germany, 11:1–11:16.
   https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.MFCS.2021.11
Albert Atserias, Andrei A. Bulatov, and Anuj Dawar. 2009. Aﬃne systems of equations and counting inﬁnitary logic. Theor.
   Comput. Sci. 410, 18 (2009), 1666–1683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2008.12.049
Albert Atserias and Víctor Dalmau. 2022. Promise Constraint Satisfaction and Width. In Proc. ACM-SIAM Symposium on
   Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2022. 1129–1153. https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611977073.48
Per Austrin, Amey Bhangale, and Aditya Potukuchi. 2020. Improved Inapproximability of Rainbow Coloring. In Proc.
   ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2020. 1479–1495. https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611975994.90
   arXiv:1810.02784
Per Austrin, Venkatesan Guruswami, and Johan Håstad. 2017. (2 + 𝜀)-Sat Is NP-hard. SIAM J. Comput. 46, 5 (2017), 1554–
   1573. https://doi.org/10.1137/15M1006507
Libor Barto, Diego Battistelli, and Kevin M. Berg. 2021a. Symmetric Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problems: Beyond the
   Boolean Case. In Symp. on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS 2021 (LIPIcs). Schloss Dagstuhl–LZI, Dagstuhl,
   Germany, 10:1–10:16. https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2021.10
Libor Barto, Jakub Bulín, Andrei Krokhin, and Jakub Opršal. 2021b. Algebraic Approach to Promise Constraint Satisfaction.
   J. ACM 68, 4, Article 28 (Aug. 2021), 66 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3457606
26                                                                                     Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal


Libor Barto and Marcin Kozik. 2014. Constraint Satisfaction Problems Solvable by Local Consistency Methods. J. ACM 61,
    1 (Jan. 2014), 3:1–3:19. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556646
Libor Barto and Marcin Kozik. 2022.              Combinatorial Gap Theorem and Reductions between Promise CSPs.
    In Proc. ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2022. SIAM, Virtual Conference, 1204–1220.
    https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611977073.50
Libor Barto, Marcin Kozik, and Todd Niven. 2009. The CSP Dichotomy Holds for Digraphs with No Sources and
    No Sinks (A Positive Answer to a Conjecture of Bang-Jensen and Hell). SIAM J. Comput. 38, 5 (2009), 1782–1802.
    https://doi.org/10.1137/070708093
Libor Barto, Andrei Krokhin, and Ross Willard. 2017. Polymorphisms, and How to Use Them, 1–44. In Krokhin and Živný
    [Krokhin and Živný 2017]. https://doi.org/10.4230/DFU.Vol7.15301.1
Libor Barto, Jakub Opršal, and Michael Pinsker. 2018. The wonderland of reﬂections. Israel Journal of Mathematics 223, 1
    (Feb 2018), 363–398. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11856-017-1621-9
Manuel Bodirsky. 2021.          Complexity of Inﬁnite-Domain Constraint Satisfaction.     Cambridge University Press.
    https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107337534
Joshua Brakensiek and Venkatesan Guruswami. 2016. New Hardness Results for Graph and Hypergraph Colorings. In
    Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC 2016) (LIPIcs, Vol. 50), Ran Raz (Ed.). Schloss Dagstuhl–LZI, Dagstuhl,
    Germany, 14:1–14:27. https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2016.14
Joshua Brakensiek and Venkatesan Guruswami. 2021. Promise Constraint Satisfaction: Algebraic Structure and a Symmet-
    ric Boolean Dichotomy. SIAM J. Comput. 50, 6 (2021), 1663–1700. https://doi.org/10.1137/19M128212X
Joshua Brakensiek, Venkatesan Guruswami, and Sai Sandeep. 2021. Conditional Dichotomy of Boolean Ordered
    Promise CSPs. In 48th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2021. 37:1–37:15.
    https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2021.37
Joshua Brakensiek, Venkatesan Guruswami, Marcin Wrochna, and Stanislav Živný. 2020.                 The Power of the
    Combined Basic LP and Aﬃne Relaxation for Promise CSPs.                 SIAM J. Comput. 49, 6 (2020), 1232–1248.
    https://doi.org/10.1137/20M1312745 arXiv:1907.04383v3
Alex Brandts, Marcin Wrochna, and Stanislav Živný. 2021. The Complexity of Promise SAT on Non-Boolean Domains.
    ACM Trans. Comput. Theory 13, 4 (2021), 26:1–26:20. https://doi.org/10.1145/3470867
Alex Brandts and Stanislav Živný. 2021. Beyond PCSP(1-in-3, NAE). In 48th International Colloquium on Automata, Lan-
    guages, and Programming, ICALP 2021. 121:1–121:14. https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2021.121
Mark Braverman, Subhash Khot, Noam Lifshitz, and Dor Minzer. 2022. An Invariance Principle for the Multi-
    slice, with Applications. In IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2021. 228–236.
    https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS52979.2021.00030
Andrei Bulatov, Peter Jeavons, and Andrei Krokhin. 2005. Classifying the Complexity of Constraints Using Finite Algebras.
    SIAM J. Comput. 34, 3 (March 2005), 720–742. https://doi.org/10.1137/S0097539700376676
Andrei A. Bulatov. 2017. A Dichotomy Theorem for Nonuniform CSPs. In IEEE 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
    Computer Science, FOCS 2017. 319–330. https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2017.37
Andrei A. Bulatov and Víctor Dalmau. 2006. A Simple Algorithm for Mal’tsev Constraints. SIAM J. Comput. 36, 1 (2006),
    16–27. https://doi.org/10.1137/050628957
Andrei A. Bulatov, Andrei Krokhin, and Benoit Larose. 2008.             Dualities for Constraint Satisfaction Problems.
    In Complexity of Constraints: An Overview of Current Research Themes. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 93–124.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-92800-3_5
Jakub Bulín, Andrei Krokhin, and Jakub Opršal. 2019. Algebraic Approach to Promise Constraint Satisfaction. In Proc.
    of the 51st Annual ACM-SIGACT Symposium on the Theory of Computing, STOC 2019. ACM, New York, USA, 602–613.
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3313276.3316300
Lorenzo Ciardo and Stanislav Živný. 2022a. CLAP: A New Algorithm for Promise CSPs. In Proc. ACM-SIAM Symposium on
    Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2022. 1057–1068. https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611977073.46
Lorenzo Ciardo and Stanislav Živný. 2022b. The Sherali-Adams Hierarchy for Promise CSPs through Tensors. (2022).
    https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.02478 arXiv:2203.02478
Irit Dinur, Elchanan Mossel, and Oded Regev. 2009. Conditional Hardness for Approximate Coloring. SIAM J. Comput. 39,
    3 (2009), 843–873. https://doi.org/10.1137/07068062X
Irit Dinur, Oded Regev, and Cliﬀord Smyth. 2005. The Hardness of 3-Uniform Hypergraph Coloring. Combinatorica 25, 5
    (Sept. 2005), 519–535. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00493-005-0032-4
Tomás Feder and Moshe Y. Vardi. 1998.              The Computational Structure of Monotone Monadic SNP and Con-
    straint Satisfaction: A Study Through Datalog and Group Theory. SIAM J. Comput. 28, 1 (Feb. 1998), 57–104.
    https://doi.org/10.1137/S0097539794266766
Miron Ficak, Marcin Kozik, Miroslav Olšák, and Szymon Stankiewicz. 2019. Dichotomy for Symmetric Boolean PCSPs.
    In 46th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2019 (LIPIcs, Vol. 132). Schloss
An Invitation to the Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem                                                             27


   Dagstuhl–LZI, Dagstuhl, Germany, 57:1–57:12. https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2019.57 arXiv:1904.12424
M. R. Garey and David S. Johnson. 1976. The Complexity of Near-Optimal Graph Coloring. J. ACM 23, 1 (1976), 43–49.
   https://doi.org/10.1145/321921.321926
Venkatesan Guruswami and Sanjeev Khanna. 2004. On the Hardness of 4-Coloring a 3-Colorable Graph. SIAM Journal on
   Discrete Mathematics 18, 1 (2004), 30–40. https://doi.org/10.1137/S0895480100376794
Venkatesan Guruswami and Euiwoong Lee. 2017. Strong inapproximability results on balanced rainbow-colorable hyper-
   graphs. Combinatorica (14 Dec. 2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00493-016-3383-0
Venkatesan Guruswami and Sai Sandeep. 2020a. 𝑑-To-1 Hardness of Coloring 3-Colorable Graphs with 𝑂 (1) Colors. In
   47th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2020 (LIPIcs). Schloss Dagstuhl–LZI,
   Dagstuhl, Germany, 62:1–62:12. https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2020.62
Venkatesan Guruswami and Sai Sandeep. 2020b. Rainbow Coloring Hardness via Low Sensitivity Polymorphisms. SIAM J.
   Discrete Math. 34, 1 (2020), 520–537. https://doi.org/10.1137/19M127731X
Pavol Hell and Jaroslav Nešetřil. 1990. On the complexity of 𝐻 -coloring. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B 48, 1 (1990), 92–110.
Sangxia Huang. 2013. Improved Hardness of Approximating Chromatic Number. In APPROX 2013 & RANDOM 2013.
   Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 233–243. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40328-_17
Paweł M. Idziak, Petar Marković, Ralph McKenzie, Matthew Valeriote, and Ross Willard. 2010. Tractability and Learnability
   Arising from Algebras with Few Subpowers. SIAM J. Comput. 39, 7 (2010), 3023–3037. https://doi.org/10.1137/090775646
Peter Jeavons, David Cohen, and Marc Gyssens. 1997. Closure Properties of Constraints. J. ACM 44, 4 (July 1997), 527–548.
   https://doi.org/10.1145/263867.263489
Ravindran Kannan and Achim Bachem. 1979. Polynomial Algorithms for Computing the Smith and Hermite Normal Forms
   of an Integer Matrix. SIAM J. Comput. 8, 4 (1979), 499–507. https://doi.org/10.1137/0208040
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi and Mikkel Thorup. 2017. Coloring 3-Colorable Graphs with Less than 𝑛1/5 Colors. J. ACM 64, 1
   (2017), 4:1–4:23. https://doi.org/10.1145/3001582
Alexandr Kazda, Peter Mayr, and Dmitriy Zhuk. 2022. Small Promise CSPs that reduce to large CSPs. Logical Methods in
   Computer Science 18 (Aug. 2022). Issue 3. https://doi.org/10.46298/lmcs-18(3:25)2022 arXiv:2109.07924
Sanjeev Khanna, Nathan Linial, and Shmuel Safra. 2000. On the Hardness of Approximating the Chromatic Number.
   Combinatorica 20, 3 (01 Mar 2000), 393–415. https://doi.org/10.1007/s004930070013
Andrei Krokhin, Jakub Opršal, Marcin Wrochna, and Stanislav Živný. 2020. Topology and adjunction in promise constraint
   satisfaction. (2020). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2003.11351 arXiv:2003.11351
Andrei Krokhin and Stanislav Živný (Eds.). 2017. The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability.
   Schloss Dagstuhl – LZI.
Tamio-Vesa Nakajima and Stanislav Živný. 2022.                Linearly ordered colourings of hypergraphs.            (2022).
   https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.05628 arXiv:2204.05628
Ran Raz. 1998.              A Parallel Repetition Theorem.               SIAM J. Comput. 27, 3 (1998), 763–803.
   https://doi.org/10.1137/S0097539795280895
Thomas J. Schaefer. 1978. The Complexity of Satisﬁability Problems. In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM Symposium
   on Theory of Computing (STOC ’78). ACM, New York, USA, 216–226. https://doi.org/10.1145/800133.804350
Hanif D. Sherali and Warren P. Adams. 1990. A Hierarchy of Relaxations Between the Continuous and Con-
   vex Hull Representations for Zero-One Programming Problems. SIAM J. Discret. Math. 3, 3 (1990), 411–430.
   https://doi.org/10.1137/0403036
Marcin Wrochna. 2022.                  A note on hardness of promise hypergraph colouring.                           (2022).
   https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.14719 arXiv:2205.14719
Dmitriy Zhuk. 2017. A Proof of CSP Dichotomy Conjecture. In 2017 IEEE 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
   Computer Science (FOCS). 331–342. https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2017.38
Dmitriy Zhuk. 2020.        A Proof of the CSP Dichotomy Conjecture.             J. ACM 67, 5 (Aug. 2020), 30:1–30:78.
   https://doi.org/10.1145/3402029
