                                         Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for
                                         monochromatic cliques
                                         Demian Banakh # Ñ
                                         Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland
                                         Doctoral School of Exact and Natural Sciences, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland

                                         Alexey Barsukov # Ñ
                                         Department of Algebra, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Prague, Czechia

                                         Tamio-Vesa Nakajima # Ñ
                                         Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics, Philipps University, Marburg, Hesse, Germany
arXiv:2605.09815v1 [cs.CC] 10 May 2026




                                               Abstract
                                         The logic MMSNP is a well-studied fragment of Existential Second-Order logic that, from a
                                         computational perspective, captures finite-domain Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs) modulo
                                         polynomial-time reductions. At the same time, MMSNP contains many problems that are expressible
                                         as 𝜔-categorical CSPs but not as finite-domain ones.
                                             We initiate the study of Promise MMSNP (PMMSNP), a promise analogue of MMSNP. We
                                         show that every PMMSNP problem is poly-time equivalent to a (finite-domain) Promise CSP
                                         (PCSP), thereby extending the classical MMSNP–CSP correspondence to the promise setting. We
                                         then investigate the complexity of PMMSNPs arising from forbidding monochromatic cliques, a
                                         class encompassing promise graph colouring problems. For this class, we obtain a full complexity
                                         classification conditional on the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture, a recently proposed perfect-completeness
                                         surrogate of the Unique Games Conjecture.
                                              As a key intermediate step which may be of independent interest, we prove that it is NP-hard,
                                         under the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture, to properly colour a uniform hypergraph even if it is promised
                                         to admit a colouring satisfying a certain technical condition called reconfigurability. This proof is
                                         an extension of the recent work of Braverman, Khot, Lifshitz and Minzer (Adv. Math. 2025). To
                                         illustrate the broad applicability of this theorem, we show that it implies most of the linearly-ordered
                                         colouring conjecture of Barto, Battistelli, and Berg (STACS 2021).

                                         2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Constraint and logic programming;
                                         Theory of computation → Problems, reductions and completeness; Theory of computation → Com-
                                         plexity theory and logic; Mathematics of computing → Combinatorics; Mathematics of computing
                                         → Graph theory

                                         Keywords and phrases Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problem, MMSNP, Approximation Al-
                                         gorithms, Rainbow Colouring

                                         Funding Demian Banakh: This research was funded in whole or in part by the National Science
                                         Centre, Poland under the Weave-UNISONO call in the Weave programme 2021/03/Y/ST6/00171
                                         and the Polish National Agency for Academic Exchange under Zawacka programme. For the purpose
                                         of Open Access, the author has applied a CC-BY public copyright licence to any Author Accepted
                                         Manuscript (AAM) version arising from this submission.
                                         Alexey Barsukov: Funded by the European Union (ERC, POCOCOP, 101071674). Views and
                                         opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of
                                         the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European
                                         Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.

                                         Acknowledgements We would like to thank Andrei Krokhin and Amey Bhangale for useful discussions
                                         and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable suggestions. Furthermore, we sincerely thank the
                                         organisers of the 2025 CSP World Congress, where this project was initiated.
2   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


     1       Introduction

    Monotone Monadic SNP (MMSNP) is a large fragment of Existential Second-Order Logic
    (ESO) introduced by Feder and Vardi [33], with the goal of having a P vs. NP-complete
    dichotomy (whereas the whole logic ESO contains NP-intermediate problems assuming
    P ≠ NP [32, 50]). Fixing a language 𝜎 consisting of relational symbols 𝑅1 , . . . , 𝑅 𝑘 , an
    MMSNP formula is an existential second-order formula of the form

         Φ = ∃𝑀1 . . . 𝑀𝑐 ∀𝑥1 . . . 𝑥 𝑛 𝜙(𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑛 ),

    which additionally satisfies the following syntactic restrictions:
    Monotone: every 𝜎-atom 𝑅𝑖 (. . . ) within 𝜙 has an odd number of nested negations before it.
    Monadic: every relation among 𝑀1 , . . . , 𝑀𝑐 is unary i.e. it is a set.
    No inequality: the quantifier-free part 𝜙 does not contain = or ≠.

    ▶ Example 1. The sentence

                                   ( 𝐴(𝑥) ∨ 𝐵(𝑥))
                          ©                              ª
                          ­               ∧              ®
                          ­                              ®
                          ­
                          ­      (¬𝐴(𝑥)   ∨ ¬𝐵(𝑥))       ®
                                                         ®
         Φ = ∃𝐴, 𝐵 ∀𝑥, 𝑦 ­­               ∧              ®
                                                         ®
                          ­ ( 𝐴(𝑥) ∧ 𝐴(𝑦)) ⇒ ¬𝐸 (𝑥, 𝑦) ®
                          ­                              ®
                          ­
                          ­               ∧              ®
                                                         ®
                          « (𝐵(𝑥)  ∧  𝐵(𝑦)) ⇒ ¬𝐸  (𝑥, 𝑦) ¬

    is in MMSNP. In this case, 𝜎 = {𝐸 } has one binary relation symbol, so relational 𝜎-structures
    are directed graphs. For a digraph G, note that G ⊨ Φ (read G models Φ, or Φ is satisfied in
    G) if and only if we can partition the vertex set 𝐺 of G into two sets 𝐴, 𝐵 so that there is no
    edge between vertices from the same set i.e. when G is 2-colourable.

        As illustrated by Example 1, there is a natural relation between MMSNP satisfiability and
    Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs). For a relational 𝜎-structure A = ( 𝐴; 𝑅1A , . . . , 𝑅 A  𝑘 ),
    CSP(A) is a computational problem, where we are given a finite 𝜎-structure I = (𝐼; 𝑅1I , . . . , 𝑅 I𝑘 )
    and must decide the existence of a mapping ℎ : 𝐼 → 𝐴 that preserves every relation 𝑅𝑖 ∈ 𝜎.
    Such a mapping is called a homomorphism and is denoted by ℎ : I → A. Whenever | 𝐴| < ∞,
    we are able to construct, similarly to Example 1, a sentence Φ in MMSNP such that I → A
    if and only if I ⊨ Φ, for every input I.
        Feder and Vardi showed that, although MMSNP is strictly more expressive than finite-
    domain CSP, for every MMSNP sentence Φ there exists a finite relational structure A such
    that MMSNP(Φ) is equivalent to CSP(A) under randomised poly-time reductions; they also
    conjectured a P vs. NP-complete dichotomy for both classes. These reductions were later
    derandomised by Kun [49].
        The conjecture of Feder and Vardi about CSPs inspired an active research programme.
    It culminated two decades later, when Bulatov and Zhuk independently proved that CSPs
    admit a P vs. NP-complete dichotomy, using algebraic tools [25, 60, 61]. This automatically
    implied a similar dichotomy for MMSNPs. Shortly thereafter, Bodirsky, Madelaine, and
    Mottet [14,15] showed that the complexity of MMSNP problems also depends on the algebraic
    properties of corresponding (𝜔-categorical) CSPs, thus confirming the conjecture of Bodirsky
    and Pinsker [17] on MMSNP problems.
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                            3




   Figure 1 Template F3(2) for 2-colouring a graph avoiding monochromatic triangles


The logic of forbidden patterns
Despite the fact that MMSNP is defined in terms of syntactic restrictions applied to ESO
sentences, it has an equivalent “combinatorial” definition called forbidden pattern problems [52].
Each such problem is described by a finite family F of (element-)coloured connected relational
structures (F, 𝑓 ) called forbidden patterns, where the mapping 𝑓 : 𝐹 → [𝑐] stands for a
colouring of the elements of F with 𝑐-many colours, for some 𝑐 ∈ N. For a given relational
structure I, the question is to decide whether the elements of I are colourable in such a
way that there is no (colour respecting) homomorphism from a forbidden pattern of F . A
coloured structure that avoids a homomorphism from a forbidden pattern to itself is called
F -free. For example, the problem of 2-colouring a graph so as to avoid all monochromatic
triangles belongs to MMSNP; a drawing of the family F for this problem can be found
in Figure 1. Every forbidden pattern problem is clearly in MMSNP and every problem in
MMSNP is a finite union of forbidden pattern problems [52, Corollary 13]. Taking into
account this equivalence and that the problems studied in this paper are much easier to
formulate in the framework of forbidden patterns, we will stick to this notation further on.
So, we also denote by MMSNP(F ) the forbidden pattern problem associated with F .

MMSNP and finite CSP
As mentioned above, Feder and Vardi [33] demonstrated that each MMSNP is equivalent to
some finite-domain CSP. In fact, their construction is quite straightforward. They define the
CSP template as follows: the domain is the set [𝑐] of colours used in F ; every forbidden
pattern (F, 𝑓 ) ∈ F yields an |𝐹 |-ary relation in the template that consists of all colourings
𝑔 : 𝐹 → [𝑐] that do not belong to F . The reduction from MMSNP(F ) to this CSP then
follows in a natural way: given I, we produce I′ — an instance of our CSP — by listing, for
each forbidden pattern (F, 𝑓 ) ∈ F , all homomorphisms from F to I.

▶ Example 2 (No monochromatic triangle). Suppose that there are just two colours: 𝑏, 𝑟;
and that F3(2) consists of two copies of K3 — one is coloured fully in 𝑏, the other fully in 𝑟
(cf. Figure 1). The 𝜎-structure associated with F3(2) has domain {𝑏, 𝑟 } and one symmetric
ternary relation {𝑏, 𝑟 }3 \ {(𝑏, 𝑏, 𝑏), (𝑟, 𝑟, 𝑟)}; thus the corresponding CSP template is just the
ternary Not All Equal relation (NAE3 ). The reduction from our MMSNP to the corresponding
CSP simply applies this constraint to every triangle (and every loop) in the input graph.

    The reduction in the opposite direction relies on the Sparse Incomparability Lemma which
states that, for every finite 𝜎-structure B and ℓ > 1, the complexity of CSP(B) remains the
same even after restricting the input to structures without cycles of length < ℓ.

MMSNP and infinite CSP
Some sentences in MMSNP describe problems that are not finite-domain CSPs: for example,
the triangle-free property can be expressed in MMSNP but there are triangle-free graphs
4   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


    with arbitrarily high chromatic number. (Hence no finite CSP has as Yes instances precisely
    the set of finite triangle-free graphs.) The whole class of CSPs of 𝜔-categorical structures is
    too large: it contains even coNP-complete and coNP-intermediate problems [11].1 On the
    other hand, many natural families of infinite-domain CSPs exhibit a P vs. NP-complete
    dichotomy: reducts of (Q, <) [12], reducts of homogeneous graphs [16], reducts of the random
    poset [46], reducts of the random tournament [55]. All these classes fall into the scope of the
    family of reducts of finitely bounded homogeneous structures.
        For CSPs of these structures, Bodirsky and Pinsker conjectured a P vs. NP-complete
    dichotomy with a similar universal algebraic characterisation as for finite-domain CSPs,
    see [17]. The name for this class of structures comes from the way they are created. It starts
    from a finite family F of structures, called the bounds and the class Forbemb (F ) of finite
    structures that have no substructure from F . The class Forbemb (F ) is supposed to have the
    amalgamation property: for every B1 , B2 in Forbemb (F ) that have a common substructure A
    witnessed by embeddings 𝑒 𝑖 : A ↩→ B𝑖 (for 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2}), there is a structure C in Forbemb (F )
    and embeddings 𝑓𝑖 : B𝑖 ↩→ C (for 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2}) such that 𝑓1 ◦ 𝑒 1 = 𝑓2 ◦ 𝑒 2 . Then, using Fraïssé’s
    Theorem [40, Section 6.1], we inductively construct a countably infinite structure H (called the
    Fraïssé-limit of Forbemb (F )), whose finite substructures are exactly those from Forbemb (F )
    and which is homogeneous: every isomorphism between finite substructures of H extends to
    an automorphism of H. The final structure, called a (first-order) reduct of H, is obtained from
    H by adding new first-order definable relations and then forgetting some relations. Note that
    structures whose CSPs capture MMSNP problems are constructed similarly: for instance, the
    class Forbemb (F3(2) ) of coloured graphs without monochromatic triangles (Figure 1) already
    has the amalgamation property. So, it is not surprising that every MMSNP problem is
    equivalent to a finite union of CSPs of finitely bounded homogeneous structures [14, 15], and,
    as it was mentioned, a dichotomy for them is the special case of the conjecture of Bodirsky
    and Pinsker.
        In spite of this natural connection of MMSNP to infinite-domain CSPs, our techniques in
    this paper will be concerned solely with finite-domain relational structures.

    Recolouring and containment
    In their paper [33], Feder and Vardi showed that containment for problems in MMSNP is
    decidable. (By containment, we mean deciding whether all Yes instances of one problem are
    also Yes instances of the other problem.) For two families F1 and F2 of forbidden patterns,
    the containment (of the corresponding MMSNP problems) is characterised by the existence
    of a mapping 𝑟 : [𝑐 1 ] → [𝑐 2 ] between the sets of colours that lifts up to a mapping from
    Forbhom (F1 ) to Forbhom (F2 ) [51], where Forbhom (F ) is the set of finite vertex-coloured
    structures that do not admit a homomorphism from any member of F . Such a mapping is
    called a recolouring. We write F1 → F2 if a recolouring from F1 to F2 exists.

    Promise MMSNP
    In this paper, we initiate the study of a promise problem variant of MMSNP, inspired by
    the development of Promise CSP. Namely, a Promise MMSNP (PMMSNP) over a pair of
    MMSNP templates F , G such that F → G asks to distinguish whether the input structure
    admits an F -free colouring, or not even a G-free one. We let PMMSNP(F , G) denote this


    1   However, the question whether there are 𝜔-categorical structures whose CSP is NP-intermediate is still
        open [10].
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                          5


problem. Note that the fact that F → G implies that the Yes and No instances of this
problem are disjoint. Taking into account that every MMSNP is a union of 𝜔-categorical
CSPs, our research can be considered as the first step towards understanding the complexity
of Promise CSPs of countably infinite structures.
    We prove that every Promise MMSNP is poly-time equivalent to a Promise CSP defined
by a suitable pair of finite structures. Recall that for a promise structure A and a target
structure B such that A → B, PCSP(A, B) is a problem in which, given a structure I, the
goal is to distinguish whether I → A or I ̸→ B. Here as well, the fact that A → B ensures
that the Yes and No instances are disjoint.

▶ Theorem 3. If F → G, then there exist finite structures S → T such that PMMSNP(F , G)
and PCSP(S, T) are poly-time equivalent.

    This is a direct analogue of the MMSNP–CSP correspondence of Feder and Vardi in
the promise realm. The PCSP complexity landscape remains largely unresolved, despite
significant progress, and even simple subclasses, like Boolean PCSPs or Approximate Graph
Colouring, are not known to admit a full complexity classification. Therefore the dichotomy
for all PMMSNPs is most likely out of reach for now. For that reason, we restrict our
attention to certain particular types of families F and G.

Monochromatic cliques
Consider the naturally arising graph colouring problem of the following form: given a graph
G, decide whether there is a 𝑐-colouring of G that avoids monochromatic 𝑘-cliques. This
problem is readily seen to be an MMSNP, where the forbidden patterns are monochromatic
𝑘-cliques, coloured with one of 𝑐 colours; we denote such a family with F𝑘(𝑐) . This problem
is NP-hard when 𝑐, 𝑘 ≥ 2 and max{𝑐, 𝑘 } > 2, along the lines of Example 2; and it is in P
otherwise.
     Such problems also exist in the graph theory under the name of K 𝑘 -free colouring [27].
The K 𝑘 -free chromatic number 𝜒𝑘 (G) of a graph G is the minimum number 𝑐 such that
G has a 𝑐-colouring avoiding a monochromatic 𝑘-clique. The computational complexity of
K 𝑘 -free colouring has already been studied; for example, in [42], the authors prove that
MMSNP(F3(𝑐) ) is NP-complete, for every 𝑐 ≥ 2.
     We note that the problem F𝑘(𝑐) cannot be expressed as a finite-domain CSP if 𝑘 > 2.
Indeed, for any finite graph H, there exists a graph with girth greater than 𝑘 and chromatic
number greater than that of H (by [31]). Any 𝑐-colouring of this graph is F𝑘(𝑐) -free, but it
does not admit a homomorphism to H.
     On the other hand, it is very easy to construct the infinite-domain CSP templates for
such problems. Clearly, the class of finite F𝑘(𝑐) -free coloured graphs has the amalgamation
property, so there is no need to add any new relations, because the Fraïssé-limit of this
class is already a finitely bounded homogeneous structure. The graph H 𝑘(𝑐) such that
CSP(H 𝑘(𝑐) ) = MMSNP(F𝑘(𝑐) ) is obtained from 𝑐-many disjoint copies of the universal K 𝑘 -free
graph by connecting every two vertices from distinct copies with an edge. So, the problems
that forbid monochromatic cliques are among the tamest MMSNP problems that are not
finite-domain CSPs.
     In the second part of the paper, we investigate the complexity of the promise version of
these graph colouring problems, that is, Promise MMSNPs over a pair of families F𝑘(𝑐) and
Fℓ(𝑑) . In this case, the following two types of relations will often appear in the corresponding
PCSP templates obtained from Theorem 3: first, for integers 0 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ ℓ, the ℓ-ary relation
6   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques

                                                       Í
    𝑘-in-ℓ consists of all tuples 𝑎 ∈ {0, 1}ℓ for which 𝑖 𝑎 𝑖 = 𝑘. Also, the Not All Equal relation
    NAE𝑟(𝑑) ⊆ [𝑑] 𝑟 consists of all non-constant tuples;2 a tuple 𝑎 is constant if 𝑎 𝑖 = 𝑎 𝑗 for all 𝑖, 𝑗.
        The following example illustrates that PMMSNPs over forbidden monochromatic cliques
    include non-trivial interesting problems in which the promise turns an otherwise NP-complete
    MMSNP problem into an efficiently solvable one.
    ▶ Example 4. Let us consider the PMMSNP problem with template (F3(2) , F4(2) ). In this
    problem, we are given a graph 𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸) and must decide whether it has a 2-colouring
    that avoids monochromatic triangles, or not even a 2-colouring that avoids monochromatic
    4-cliques. We will show that something slightly more strict is possible: if we assume the
    input graph has a 2-colouring avoiding all monochromatic triangles, we will find a 2-colouring
    avoiding all monochromatic 4-cliques. (Thus, if our algorithm successfully outputs a 2-
    colouring avoiding all monochromatic 4-cliques we may answer Yes, otherwise we must answer
    No.)
        To do this, construct a 4-uniform hypergraph whose vertices coincide with the vertices of
    𝐺, and whose hyperedges are given by the 4-cliques of 𝐺. Call this hypergraph 𝐻 = (𝑉, 𝐸 ′ ).3
    The condition that 𝐺 has a 2-colouring avoiding all monochromatic triangles implies that
    there exists a 2-colouring 𝑐 : 𝑉 → {0, 1} of 𝐻 that, for every (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) ∈ 𝐸 ′ , colours half
    of 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡 with 0 and the other half with 1. We must output a colouring 𝑑 : 𝑉 → {0, 1}
    that leaves no edge of 𝐻 monochromatic. This is just the problem PCSP(2-in-4, NAE4 ),
    well-known from the PCSP literature, which admits a poly-time solution via the Affine
    Integer Programming (AIP) relaxation [18]. Let us quickly present this algorithm.
        By assumption, there exists 𝑐 : 𝑉 → {0, 1} such that

         ∀(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) ∈ 𝐸 ′ :   𝑐(𝑥) + 𝑐(𝑦) + 𝑐(𝑧) + 𝑐(𝑡) = 2.                                       (1)

    Of course, it is NP-hard to find this mapping; however, it is possible to solve the system of
    equations in (1) over Z, by computing the Smith normal form [41]; suppose 𝑐˜ is our solution.
    Now, consider any edge (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡). It is not possible that all of 𝑐˜(𝑥), 𝑐˜(𝑦), 𝑐˜(𝑧), 𝑐˜(𝑡) are ≤ 0
    (or else the sum would be ≤ 0 < 2); nor is it possible that all are > 0 (or else the sum would
    be at least 4 > 2). Hence, if we set 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 to 1 or 0 depending on whether 𝑐˜(𝑣) ≥ 1 or 𝑐˜(𝑣) ≤ 0,
    we can find the desired solution in NAE4 .

    Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture
    The Promise MMSNPs over F𝑘(𝑐) , Fℓ(𝑑) include the notorious Approximate Graph Colouring
    (take 𝑘 = ℓ = 2) which can be viewed as a PCSP over two cliques. For example, PCSP(K3 , K6 )
    is equivalent to PMMSNP(F2(3) , F2(6) ). The best known hardness results for the Approximate
                                         √
    Graph Colouring include 𝑐 vs. Θ(2𝑐 / 𝑐) for any 𝑐 ≥ 4 by [48], and 𝑐 vs. 2𝑐 − 1 by [8] for any
    𝑐 ≥ 3. Therefore, an unconditional complexity classification for our PMMSNPs is currently
    out of reach.
        However, under additional inapproximability assumptions, further progress on the Ap-
    proximate Graph Colouring problem has been achieved. Assuming the 𝑑-to-1 Conjecture
    of [43], NP-hardness was proved for all PCSP(K𝑐 , K𝑑 ) such that 3 ≤ 𝑐 ≤ 𝑑 in [29, 39].
    Later, [22] suggested a substantially different hardness proof under the recently proposed
    Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture [23]. Outside of the Approximate Graph Colouring, the Rich 2-to-1
    Conjecture was the basis of several hardness results for Boolean PCSPs [4, 20]. These (and


    2   We sometimes omit the superscript (𝑑) if the domain is clear from the context.
    3   Note that triangles in 𝐺 that belong to no 4-clique do not affect 𝐻.
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                          7


other) conjectures provide a way to bypass the limitations of the unconditional sources of
hardness, and make progress on various open inapproximability problems in order to better
understand their underlying mathematical structure, which could, in turn, lead to new,
stronger, unconditional sources of hardness in the future.
     Let us briefly introduce the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture now (for the formal definition, see
Section 5). The (perhaps) more famous Unique Games Conjecture of Khot [43] states that
it is NP-hard to even approximately solve an almost satisfiable instance of Unique Games
(equivalently, a CSP instance in which each constraint is a bijection). This conjecture has
inspired numerous influential results on hardness of inapproximability of various computa-
tional problems [44, 45]. On the other hand, it is trivial to solve a satisfiable instance of
Unique Games, therefore this conjecture has no use in tackling so called perfect completeness
approximation problems, that is, problems of finding an approximate solution to satisfiable
instances. The Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture was proposed in 2021 by [23] to overcome this issue.
Namely, it states that it is NP-hard to approximately solve a satisfiable instance of Rich
2-to-1 Games (equivalently, a CSP instance in which each constraint is a 2-to-1 function with
an extra regularity property imposed). On almost satisfiable instances, the authors of [23]
proved that this conjecture is equivalent to the Unique Games Conjecture, which makes it a
perfect-completeness surrogate of the UGC.

Our contributions
We view the contributions of this paper as twofold. Firstly, a classification (resulting in a
dichotomy) of all Promise MMSNP problems over forbidden monochromatic cliques.

▶ Theorem 5. Let 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, ℓ be positive integers such that F𝑘(𝑐) → Fℓ(𝑑) . Then
   ℓ ≥ 𝑐(𝑘 − 1) and PMMSNP(F𝑘(𝑐) , Fℓ(𝑑) ) is solvable in polynomial time via AIP, or
   ℓ < 𝑐(𝑘 − 1) and PMMSNP(F𝑘(𝑐) , Fℓ(𝑑) ) is NP-hard, assuming the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture.

    As the first step towards Theorem 5, we establish that every Promise MMSNP of interest
is poly-time equivalent to a certain finite-domain Promise CSP in which both the promise and
the target templates have a single, symmetric relation. The PCSPs of this form are readily
seen to be expressible as certain promise hypergraph colouring problems. For concreteness,
we deal with relations over a universe [𝑐] that consist of all tuples of length ℓ in which each
                                                                       (𝑐)                 (2)
𝑎 ∈ [𝑐] appears less than 𝑘 times. Such a relation is denoted with 𝑅 𝑘:ℓ   . For example, 𝑅3:3 is
the ternary Not All Equal relation. Consequently, we show that every promise MMSNP over
two monochromatic clique families is poly-time equivalent to a PCSP defined by a pair of
relations of this form.

▶ Lemma 6 (Special case of Theorem 3). Let 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, ℓ be positive integers. If F𝑘(𝑐) → Fℓ(𝑑) ,
then the problems PMMSNP(F𝑘(𝑐) , Fℓ(𝑑) ) and PCSP(𝑅 𝑘:ℓ
                                                      (𝑐)    (𝑑)
                                                          , 𝑅ℓ:ℓ ) are poly-time equivalent.

   Thus, the desired dichotomy (Theorem 5) amounts to classifying all PCSPs of this form.

▶ Corollary 7. Let 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, ℓ be positive integers such that F𝑘(𝑐) → Fℓ(𝑑) . Then
                               (𝑐)
   ℓ ≥ 𝑐(𝑘 − 1) and PCSP(𝑅 𝑘:ℓ     , NAEℓ(𝑑) ) is solvable in polynomial time via AIP, or
   ℓ < 𝑐(𝑘 − 1) and PCSP(𝑅 𝑘:ℓ , NAEℓ(𝑑) ) is NP-hard, assuming the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture.
                               (𝑐)


    In fact, we will demonstrate that the complexity of a PCSP(𝑅, NAEℓ ) is governed by
certain connectivity properties of the left-hand side relation. To formalize this notion, let us
call a relation reconfigurable if any of its members can be obtained from any other member
by modifying one coordinate at a time without leaving the relation at any point.
8   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


        In particular, we prove the following hardness result for PCSPs, which is the technical
    core and the second contribution of this paper. Let NAE𝑟(𝑑) denote the 𝑟-ary Not All Equal
    relation on 𝑑 elements.

    ▶ Theorem 8. Let ∅ ≠ 𝑅 ⊆ 𝐴𝑟 be a symmetric4 reconfigurable5 relation of arity 𝑟 ≥ 2. For
    any 𝑑 such that 𝑅 → NAE𝑟(𝑑) , the problem PCSP(𝑅, NAE𝑟(𝑑) ) is NP-hard, assuming the Rich
    2-to-1 Conjecture.

        It is an extension of the work of [22]: they proved this theorem in the special case of
    𝑅 = {(𝑎, 𝑏) ∈ {1, 2, 3} | 𝑎 ≠ 𝑏}, which coincides with the Approximate Graph Colouring. It
    is worth noting that their proof in fact covers Theorem 8 for 𝑟 = 2, although the authors
    do not mention it explicitly. As a side note, a symmetric 𝑅 ⊆ 𝐴2 (where every value in 𝐴
    appears in 𝑅) is reconfigurable if and only if the (undirected) graph ( 𝐴; 𝑅) is connected and
    not bipartite [48]. Thus, the Brakensiek-Guruswami conjecture [18], which postulates that
    PCSP(𝐺, 𝐻) is NP-hard whenever 𝐺 is not bipartite and 𝐻 is loopless, already follows from
    the case 𝑟 = 2 of Theorem 8, assuming the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture.
        In the language of [2], Theorem 8 states that symmetric reconfigurable relations are
    promise-useless — the extra information about the input instance that they provide does
    not help to find even a 𝑑-colouring that leaves no edge monochromatic (and hence cannot
    help us find a solution to any nontrivial hypergraph colouring problem). This result builds,
    albeit conditionally, on the hardness results of [28] (where they study PCSP templates of
    the form (𝑅, NAE3 ) such that no tuple in 𝑅 is injective) and [21] (where they study PCSP
    templates of the form (𝑘-in-ℓ ∪ 𝑆, NAEℓ(2) ) for some relation 𝑆 over {0, 1}).
        Besides, the notion of reconfigurability in Theorem 8 hints towards its topological nature
    — we elaborate on this question in the Conclusions. It is interesting to note that this notion
    has appeared before in the Fourier-analytical research as well, e.g. Mossel [54] considers a
    relation connected if it is reconfigurable.
        To illustrate the power of Theorem 8, we give an example from the world of approximate
    hypergraph colouring. Given a hypergraph 𝐻 = (𝑉, 𝐸), a Linearly Ordered (LO) 𝑐-colouring
    is an assignment 𝑉 → [𝑐] to the vertices of 𝐻, such that in every hyperedge of 𝐻, its
    maximum colour appears exactly once. Quite some work has been done on the hardness of
    approximate LO colouring in uniform hypergraphs [7, 47, 56, 57]; for now, let us focus on
    the case of 3-uniform hypergraphs. For the following, let (3, 𝑐, 𝑑)-approximate LO colouring
    denote the problem of distinguishing whether a 3-uniform hypergraph is LO 𝑐-colourable, or
    not even LO 𝑑-colourable. The state-of-the-art hardness result is the following.

    ▶ Theorem 9 (Simple reduction from [47]). (3, 𝑐, 𝑐 + 1)-approximate LO colouring is NP-hard
    for 𝑐 ≥ 2.

       Theorem 8 completes the picture for 𝑐 ≥ 3, under the Rich 2-to-1 conjecture. Since the
    template corresponding to LO 𝑐-colouring a 3-uniform hypergraph with 𝑐 ≥ 3 colours is
    reconfigurable (cf. Figure 2), we deduce:

    ▶ Corollary 10. (3, 𝑐, 𝑑)-approximate LO colouring is NP-hard for all 3 ≤ 𝑐 ≤ 𝑑, assuming
    the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture.

       This confirms (except for the case 𝑐 = 2) the conjecture of Barto, Battistelli and Berg [7]
    on approximate LO colouring of 3-uniform hypergraphs, under the Rich 2-to-1 conjecture.


    4   A relation is symmetric if it is closed under permutations of coordinates.
    5   In fact, the reconfigurability assumption can be relaxed (see Section 5).
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                                   9


                            121


                                           123


                            131                223        113
                                        132

                                  232              213                   112

                                        321      322
                            231                           312


                                           311


                            211

    Figure 2 Reconfiguration graph for LO3 . The tuple (𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐) will be rendered 𝑎𝑏𝑐 for compactness.



We also remark that there is an essential link between a topological proof of the hardness
of (3, 3, 4)-approximate LO colouring [35] and our proof here: the reconfigurability is an
essential implication of [35].
   It is worth noting that (4, 𝑐, 𝑑)-approximate LO colouring was recently shown to be
unconditionally NP-hard for all 3 ≤ 𝑐 ≤ 𝑑 by [56].



Related work

We shall mention some previous work in the context of Theorem 8: it consists in various
rainbow/balanced hypergraph colouring inapproximability results; we will use the PCSP
parlance for clarity.
                            (𝑐)    (𝑑)
    Observe that PCSP(𝑅ℓ:ℓ      , 𝑅ℓ:ℓ ) is just the approximate non-monochromatic hypergraph
colouring problem. This problem serves as one of the key sources of hardness for PCSPs in
general: see [8], which proves that a PCSP is NP-hard by gadget reduction from this problem
if and only if it fails to admit an Olšák polymorphism, a condition which can be checked
algorithmically; through this condition they were able to prove hardness of the approximate
graph colouring PCSP(K𝑐 , K2𝑐−1 ) for 𝑐 ≥ 3.
   In Table 1, we summarize existing hardness results for several regimes of promise hyper-
graph colouring that are subsumed, albeit conditionally, by this work. Finally, PCSPs of our
form were mentioned in [59] as Balanced Hypergraph Colouring problems.



6 This conjecture, which is, in some sense, a hypergraph generalisation of the “fish-shaped” conjecture of
  Dinur et al. [29], was proposed in [19].
7 They prove it only for even 𝑐 and 𝑑 = 2, but with slight modifications to their proof, it is possible to

  generalise it to any 𝑐, 𝑑 ≥ 2.
10   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


         Table 1 A summary of hypergraph colouring hardness results. These results only hold for choices
     of parameters where the PCSP template is valid, i.e. only when A → B for PCSP(A, B).


                        Problem                 Parameters            Assumptions        Reference
                          (𝑐)    (𝑑)
                    PCSP(𝑅ℓ:ℓ , 𝑅ℓ:ℓ )      ℓ ≥ 3 and 𝑑 ≥ 𝑐 ≥ 2            —              [30, 56]
                         (ℓ+1)    (𝑑)
                   PCSP(𝑅3:ℓ   , 𝑅ℓ:ℓ )            ℓ, 𝑑 ≥ 3         V Label Cover6          [19]
                       (𝑐)       (𝑑)
                 PCSP(𝑅𝑞+𝑐:𝑐𝑞 , 𝑅𝑐𝑞:𝑐𝑞 )          𝑞, 𝑐, 𝑑 ≥ 2              —                [37]
                       (𝑐)       (𝑑)
                 PCSP(𝑅𝑞+𝑑:𝑐𝑞 , 𝑅𝑐𝑞:𝑐𝑞 )          𝑞, 𝑐, 𝑑 ≥ 2              —                [38]7
                           (𝑐)    (𝑑)
                    PCSP(𝑅 𝑘:ℓ , 𝑅ℓ:ℓ )       2 ≤ ℓ < 𝑐(𝑘 − 1)         Rich 2-to-1       This work



      2      Preliminaries
     Notation
     We write [𝑛] for the set {1, . . . , 𝑛} and N for the set of positive integers. Given a set 𝐴, any
     element of 𝐴𝑛 is an 𝑛-ary tuple. A tuple 𝑥 ∈ 𝐴𝑛 can be treated as a function 𝑥 : [𝑛] → 𝐴.
     Conversely, we sometimes treat any function from a finite set to 𝐴 as a tuple, implicitly
     enumerating the elements of this finite set. The 𝑖-th entry of a tuple 𝑥 ∈ 𝐴𝑛 is denoted by 𝑥𝑖 .
         A (constraint) language is a set 𝜎 whose every member 𝑅 ∈ 𝜎, called a relation symbol, is
     assigned a positive integer ar(𝑅), called the arity of 𝑅. For 𝜎 = {𝑅1 , . . . , 𝑅𝑛 }, a (relational)
     𝜎-structure is a tuple A = ( 𝐴, 𝑅1A , . . . , 𝑅 A                                ar(𝑅𝑖 ) , for each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘].
                                                     𝑘 ), where 𝐴 is a set and 𝑅𝑖 ⊆ 𝐴
                                                                                A

     The set 𝐴 is called the domain of A and, for every 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘], 𝑅𝑖 is called the interpretation of
                                                                             A

     𝑅𝑖 in A or simply a relation. In this paper, all structures are to be assumed finite, unless
     stated otherwise.
         For two 𝜎-structures A and B, a homomorphism from A to B is a map ℎ : A → B that
     preserves relations.

     MMSNP
     Let 𝜏 be a fixed language and F be a finite family of pairs (F, 𝑓 ), where F is a finite 𝜏-
     structure, and 𝑓 : 𝐹 → [𝑐] for some 𝑐 ∈ N. The set [𝑐] is called the colour set of F and each
     (F, 𝑓 ) ∈ F is called a forbidden pattern of F .
         A 𝑐-expansion (or a 𝑐-colouring) of a 𝜏-structure I is a pair (I, 𝑔) where 𝑔 : 𝐼 → [𝑐]. If
     the number of colours is not important, we will just write an expansion (or a colouring).
     Conversely, the reduct of (I, 𝑔) is the 𝜏-structure I.
         We say that an expansion (I, 𝑔) is F -free if every (F, 𝑓 ) ∈ F and every homomorphism ℎ
     from F to I satisfies 𝑓 ≠ 𝑔 ◦ ℎ.

     ▶ Definition 11 (MMSNP). Let 𝜏 be a constraint language. For a finite family F of forbidden
     patterns over 𝜏, the problem MMSNP(F ) comes in two flavours:
     (decision) given a 𝜏-structure I, output Yes if I has an F -free expansion, and output No
         otherwise;
     (search) given a 𝜏-structure I, output an F -free expansion.
     The decision MMSNP is poly-time equivalent to the search MMSNP: it follows from the
     poly-time equivalence of MMSNP and precoloured MMSNP [15, Corollary 6.10]. For the sake
     of brevity, we will write F instead of MMSNP(F ) to denote the decision problem associated
     with F .
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                       11


   Let (I, 𝑔) be a 𝑐-expansion of I. Given a mapping 𝑟 : [𝑐] → [𝑑], any 𝑑-expansion (I, ℎ)
that satisfies 𝑟 ◦ 𝑔 = ℎ is called an 𝑟-preimage of (I, 𝑔).
   Let F and G be two families of forbidden patterns over the same constraint language
with colour sets [𝑐] and [𝑑], respectively. A mapping 𝑟 : [𝑐] → [𝑑] is a recolouring from F
to G, if no forbidden pattern of G has a F -free 𝑟-preimage. We write F → G if there is a
recolouring from F to G.

▶ Definition 12 (PMMSNP). Let 𝜏 be a constraint language. For finite families of forbidden
patterns F and G over 𝜏 such that F → G, the problem PMMSNP(F , G) comes in two
flavours:
(decision) given a 𝜏-structure I, output Yes if I has an F -free expansion, and output No if I
    even does not have a G-free expansion;
(search) given a 𝜏-structure I promised to have an F -free expansion, output a G-free expan-
    sion of I.

CSP
It was already mentioned that every problem in MMSNP is poly-time equivalent to a
Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP) [33].

▶ Definition 13. Let 𝜎 be a constraint language. For a 𝜎-structure B, the problem CSP(B)
comes in two flavours:
(decision) given a 𝜎-structure I, output Yes if I → B, and output No if I ̸→ B;
(search) given a 𝜎-structure I, output a homomorphism from I to B.
The decision CSP is poly-time equivalent to the search CSP [24, Corollary 4.9].

▶ Definition 14 (PCSP). Let 𝜎 be a relational language. For any two 𝜎-structures A and B
such that A → B, the problem PCSP(A, B) comes in two flavours:
(decision) given a 𝜎-structure I, output Yes if I → A, and output No if I ̸→ B;
(search) given a 𝜎-structure I promised to admit a homomorphism to A, output a homo-
   morphism from I to B.
The search PCSP is at least as hard as the decision PCSP, however the converse is not known.
We provide algorithms for the search version, and proofs of hardness for the decision version.
   “Sandwiching” is a trivial reduction technique between PCSPs:

▶ Observation 15 (See [8,18]). If A → B → C → D, then PCSP(A, D) reduces to PCSP(B, C)
in poly-time.

    In the case B = C, the problem PCSP(B, C) is just a CSP, namely CSP(B) = CSP(C).
    If 𝑅 ⊆ 𝐴𝑟 and 𝑆 ⊆ 𝐵𝑟 , we sometimes abuse the notation and write PCSP(𝑅, 𝑆) in place
of PCSP(( 𝐴; 𝑅), (𝐵; 𝑆)) for convenience.


 3     Equivalence with PCSP
In this section, we show that the problem PMMSNP(F , G) is poly-time equivalent to some
finite-domain PCSP. The reductions generalise the ones of Feder and Vardi [33], where the
finite-domain CSP encoded all valid colourings of the reducts of the forbidden structures.
However, in the promise setting, the two MMSNP sentences could have different sets of
reducts, so applying Feder and Vardi’s reduction to each MMSNP sentence would give two
finite structures over different constraint languages. We resolve this issue.
12   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


     ▶ Theorem 3. If F → G, then there exist finite structures S → T such that PMMSNP(F , G)
     and PCSP(S, T) are poly-time equivalent.

         We first argue that F and G can be assumed to be in certain normal form. A structure F
     is biconnected if for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝐹, the substructure of F induced on 𝐹 \ {𝑥} is not isomorphic
     to the disjoint union of two structures. A family F is in normal form if every F ∈ F is
     biconnected and if F is closed under taking quotients, i.e., identifying any two elements in
     any F ∈ F results in a structure from F . The following result allows us to assume the normal
     form without loss of generality.

     ▶ Lemma 16 (Proposition 3.3 and Lemma 4.4 in [15]). Every MMSNP problem is a finite
     disjunction of MMSNP problems in normal form.

        Further in this section, let F = F1 ∨ · · · ∨ F𝑚 and G = G1 ∨ · · · ∨ G𝑛 be two disjunctions
     of MMSNPs in normal form such that F → G. Denote the colour set of each F𝑖 (resp. G 𝑗 )
     by [𝑐 𝑖 ] (resp. [𝑑 𝑗 ]) for some 𝑐 𝑖 ∈ N (resp. 𝑑 𝑗 ∈ N).

     ▶ Observation 17. For every 𝑖 ∈ [𝑚] there is 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] such that F𝑖 → G 𝑗 .

         We shall define S and T via a generalisation of the construction given in the Introduction.
     Let 𝜏 be the language of both F and G. For each 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛], let G ∗𝑗 denote the set of all reducts
     of forbidden patterns in G 𝑗 ; for each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑚], define F𝑖∗ similarly. Denote by 𝜎 the language
     which contains, for every 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] and every G ∈ G ∗𝑗 , a |𝐺 |-ary symbol 𝑅G . We also expand 𝜎
     with an auxiliary binary symbol ∼. This will be the constraint language of both S and T.
         Fix 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]; let T 𝑗 be the 𝜎-structure with domain [𝑑 𝑗 ], where
                                            T
         for every G ∈ G ∗𝑗 , the relation 𝑅G𝑗 := 𝑡 : 𝐺 → [𝑑 𝑗 ] | (G, 𝑡) ∉ G 𝑗 ;
                                                 
                                                                            T
         for every 𝑗 ′ ∈ [𝑛] \ { 𝑗 } and every G ∈ G ∗𝑗 ′ , the relations 𝑅G𝑗 := [𝑑 𝑗 ] 𝐺 and ∼T 𝑗 := [𝑑 𝑗 ] 2 are
         full.

        Fix 𝑖 ∈ [𝑚]; by Observation 17, F𝑖 → G 𝑗 for some 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]. Let S𝑖 be the 𝜎-structure with
     domain [𝑐 𝑖 ], where

        for every G ∈ G ∗𝑗 , the relation 𝑅G
                                           S𝑖
                                              := {𝑠 : 𝐺 → [𝑐 𝑖 ] | (G, 𝑠) is F𝑖 -free};
        for every 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] \ { 𝑗 } and every G ∈ G ∗𝑗 ′ , the relations 𝑅G
                     ′                                                    S𝑖
                                                                             := [𝑐 𝑖 ] 𝐺 and ∼S𝑖 := [𝑐 𝑖 ] 2 are
        full.
     Finally, we define S := S1 ⊔· · ·⊔S𝑚 and T := T1 ⊔· · ·⊔T𝑛 , where ⊔ stands for the disjoint union.
     We will argue that PMMSNP(F , G) is poly-time equivalent to PCSP(S, T), concluding the
     proof of Theorem 3.

     ▷ Claim 18. PMMSNP(F , G) poly-time reduces to PCSP(S, T).

     Proof. Given an instance of PMMSNP(F , G) — a 𝜏-structure X — we construct an instance
     of PCSP(S, T) — a 𝜎-structure which we denote by 𝜎(X). Namely, let 𝜎(X) be the structure
     with the same domain as X in which every relation 𝑅G𝜎 (X) := Hom(G, X) is defined as the set
     of all homomorphisms from G to X. The relation ∼ 𝜎 (X) := 𝑋 2 is full.
         If X is a Yes instance of MMSNP(F ), then there is 𝑠 : 𝑋 → [𝑐 𝑖 ] for some 𝑖 ∈ [𝑚] such that
     (X, 𝑠) is F𝑖 -free. It follows from the construction of 𝜎(X) and S𝑖 that 𝑠 is a homomorphism
     from 𝜎(X) to S𝑖 .
         Conversely, if ℎ : 𝑋 → 𝑇 is a homomorphism from 𝜎(X) to T, then the image of ℎ is
     contained in some T 𝑗 , as ∼ 𝜎 (X) = 𝑋 2 . It follows from the construction of 𝜎(X) that ℎ colours
     every copy of every G ∈ G 𝑗 in an allowed way, so (X, ℎ) is G-free.                             ◀
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                                      13


    For the converse reduction, we make use of the Sparse Incomparability Lemma which
allows us to assume no short cycles in structures on input to PCSP(S, T). We say that S has
girth > 𝑘 if for any choice of ℓ ≤ 𝑘 relational tuples 𝑠1 , . . . , 𝑠ℓ of arities 𝑟 1 , . . . , 𝑟 ℓ in S, the
                                                                         Í
total number of elements appearing in the tuples is greater than ℓ𝑖=1 (𝑟 𝑖 − 1). That is, 𝑘 or
fewer relational tuples never form a cycle.

▶ Lemma 19 (Sparse Incomparability Lemma [33, 49]). Let 𝜎 be a finite relational language,
and 𝑘, 𝑡 ∈ N. For every 𝜎-structure I there exists a poly-time constructible 𝜎-structure I′ with
girth > 𝑘 such that for every 𝜎-structure T of size < 𝑡 the equivalence I → T ⇔ I′ → T holds.
Moreover, I′ → I.

    Furthermore, we can assume that input structures are connected, i.e. not isomorphic to
a disjoint union of two structures. To see why this is the case, observe that A ⊔ B → S if
and only if A → S and B → S. This implies that we can solve a disconnected instance of
PCSP(S, T) by solving its every connected component. This means that I → S if and only if
I → S𝑖 , for some 𝑖 ∈ [𝑚], and similarly I → T ⇔ I → T 𝑗 , for some 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]. Since ∼T 𝑗 = 𝑇 𝑗2 is
full, we can also assume that ∼I = 𝐼 2 is full.

▷ Claim 20. PCSP(S, T) poly-time reduces to PMMSNP(F , G).

Proof. Given an instance of PCSP(S, T) — a 𝜎-structure I — we construct an instance of
PMMSNP(F , G) — a 𝜏-structure which we denote by 𝜏(I).
    We first obtain I′ by applying Lemma 19 with parameters 𝑘 > max{|𝐺 | | G ∈ F1 ∪ · · · ∪
                                                                                         ′
F𝑚 ∪ G1 ∪ · · · ∪ G𝑛 } and 𝑡 > max{|𝑆|, |𝑇 |} and also taking the auxiliary relation ∼I = 𝐼 ′2 to
be full. Denote by 𝜏(I) the 𝜏-structure with the same domain as I′ which is obtained by
replacing every 𝑡 ∈ 𝑅G  I′ with a copy of G induced on 𝑡, for every G ∈ G ∗ . Since all F and
                                                                             𝑗              𝑖
G 𝑗 are in normal form and since I′ has large girth, every pair F𝑖 → G 𝑗 has the following
property: if there is a colouring 𝑠 of 𝜏(I) that leaves every copy of G F𝑖 -free (resp. G 𝑗 -free)
for each G ∈ G ∗𝑗 , then (𝜏(I), 𝑠) is F𝑖 -free (resp. G 𝑗 -free).
    If I → S𝑖 , then also I′ → I → S𝑖 by Lemma 19. If ℎ is a homomorphism from I′ to S𝑖 ,
then it colours all the copies of structures from G ∗𝑗 in 𝜏(I) such that each of them is F𝑖 -free,
where 𝑗 is witnessing the containment F𝑖 → G 𝑗 . This implies that (𝜏(I), ℎ) is F𝑖 -free, and
𝜏(I) is a Yes instance of MMSNP(F ).
    Conversely, if 𝜏(I) is a Yes instance of MMSNP(G), then 𝜏(I) has a G 𝑗 -free expansion for
some 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛], witnessed by 𝑠 : 𝐼 ′ → [𝑑 𝑗 ]. Since every copy of G in 𝜏(I) is G 𝑗 -free, for each
G ∈ G ∗𝑗 , the same mapping 𝑠 is a homomorphism from I′ to T 𝑗 . By Lemma 19, we then have
I → T 𝑗 → T.                                                                                    ◀

     This concludes the proof of PMMSNP–PCSP correspondence.


 4      Forbidding monochromatic cliques

In this section we provide a complete complexity classification for Promise MMSNPs defined
by forbidding monochromatic cliques. Recall that F𝑘(𝑐) denotes the family of all 𝑘-cliques
such that every two vertices in the same clique have the same colour out of {1, . . . , 𝑐}.

▶ Theorem 5. Let 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, ℓ be positive integers such that F𝑘(𝑐) → Fℓ(𝑑) . Then
     ℓ ≥ 𝑐(𝑘 − 1) and PMMSNP(F𝑘(𝑐) , Fℓ(𝑑) ) is solvable in polynomial time via AIP, or
     ℓ < 𝑐(𝑘 − 1) and PMMSNP(F𝑘(𝑐) , Fℓ(𝑑) ) is NP-hard, assuming the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture.
14   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


         Theorem 3 asserts that we can study Promise CSPs defined by suitable relations instead
                                                                        (𝑐)
     of Promise MMSNPs. Concretely, for 𝑐, 𝑘, ℓ ≥ 1, let 𝑅 𝑘:ℓ              ⊆ [𝑐] ℓ be the relation consisting of
                                                                                                (𝑑)
     all tuples (𝑎 1 , . . . , 𝑎 ℓ ) such that ∀𝑎 ∈ [𝑐] : |{𝑖 : 𝑎 𝑖 = 𝑎}| < 𝑘. Observe that 𝑅ℓ:ℓ    is isomorphic
     to NAEℓ(𝑑) .
         Theorem 3 applied to (F𝑘(𝑐) , Fℓ(𝑑) ) provides the structures S and T. Following the
     construction in Section 3 (in fact, even the reasoning similar to Example 4 suffices), the
                                                                             (𝑐)         (𝑑)
     reader may verify that these structures correspond to 𝑅 𝑘:ℓ                  and 𝑅ℓ:ℓ   respectively — the
     extra ∼ relation is full in both structures, and can be safely discarded without affecting the
     complexity of PCSP(S, T).

     ▶ Lemma 6 (Special case of Theorem 3). Let 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, ℓ be positive integers. If F𝑘(𝑐) → Fℓ(𝑑) ,
     then the problems PMMSNP(F𝑘(𝑐) , Fℓ(𝑑) ) and PCSP(𝑅 𝑘:ℓ
                                                           (𝑐)    (𝑑)
                                                               , 𝑅ℓ:ℓ ) are poly-time equivalent.

         The rest of this section is organized as follows. First, we want to characterise the
     containment F𝑘(𝑐) → Fℓ(𝑑) in terms of the relation between the numbers 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, and ℓ. Next,
     the proof of the tractability part of the dichotomy is presented. Finally, we prove the hardness
     part, which is incidentally the most technical part: it requires a basic introduction to Fourier
     analysis and related notions.

     Understanding containment
     ▶ Lemma 21. Let 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, ℓ be positive integers. Then F𝑘(𝑐) → Fℓ(𝑑) if and only if 𝑘 ≤
     ⌈ℓ/⌈𝑐/𝑑⌉⌉.

     We call this inequality the containment condition for 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, ℓ.

     Proof. Suppose that 𝑘 ≤ ⌈ℓ/⌈𝑐/𝑑⌉⌉. Fix any mapping 𝑟 : [𝑐] → [𝑑] such that |𝑟 −1 (𝑖)| ∈
     {⌊𝑐/𝑑⌋, ⌈𝑐/𝑑⌉} for every 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑]. Every 𝑟-preimage of every monochromatic Kℓ contains at
     least ⌈ℓ/⌈𝑐/𝑑⌉⌉ vertices of the same colour, so it contains a monochromatic copy of K 𝑘 , which
     implies that 𝑟 is a recolouring.
         For the opposite direction, let 𝑟 : [𝑐] → [𝑑] be an arbitrary recolouring from F𝑘(𝑐) to
     Fℓ(𝑑) . By the pigeonhole principle, there must exist 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑] such that |𝑟 −1 (𝑖)| ≥ ⌈𝑐/𝑑⌉. Every
     𝑟-preimage of (Kℓ , 𝑣 ↦→ 𝑖) ∈ Fℓ(𝑑) contains
         at least ⌈ℓ/⌈𝑐/𝑑⌉⌉ vertices of the same colour, and
         a monochromatic copy of K 𝑘 , since 𝑟 is a recolouring.
     Consequently 𝑘 ≤ ⌈ℓ/⌈𝑐/𝑑⌉⌉.                                                                    ◀

         In particular, observe that if 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, ℓ > 0 satisfy the containment condition, then 𝑘 ≤ ℓ.

     Tractability
     We shall prove the first part of Theorem 5.

     ▶ Theorem 22. Let 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, ℓ be positive integers satisfying the containment condition such
     that ℓ ≥ 𝑐(𝑘 − 1). Then PMMSNP(F𝑘(𝑐) , Fℓ(𝑑) ) is in P.
                                                            (𝑐)    (𝑑)
     Proof. By Lemma 6, it suffices to prove that PCSP(𝑅 𝑘:ℓ    , 𝑅ℓ:ℓ ) is in P. If ℓ > 𝑐(𝑘 − 1), then
     the left-hand side relation is empty, so the problem is trivially tractable. Similarly if 𝑑 = 1,
     then the right-hand side relation is empty, so the problem is yet again trivial. Thus assume
     that ℓ = 𝑐(𝑘 − 1) and 𝑑 ≥ 2. We will argue that
           (𝑐)
         𝑅 𝑘:ℓ → (𝑘 − 1)-in-ℓ → NAEℓ(2) → 𝑅ℓ:ℓ
                                           (𝑑)
                                               .
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                             15


Then, tractability follows by Observation 15 from the tractability of
                              
   PCSP (𝑘 − 1)-in-ℓ, NAEℓ(2) ,

which, in turn, follows from the techniques of [18], namely AIP. Let us therefore show the
required homomorphisms.
  (𝒄 )                                                                     (𝑐)
𝑹𝒌:ℓ   → (𝒌 − 1)-in-ℓ. Since ℓ = 𝑐(𝑘 − 1), it follows that each tuple of 𝑅 𝑘:ℓ consists of exactly
     𝑘 − 1 appearances of each of the 𝑐 colours in our domain. Mapping one fixed colour to 1
    and the rest to 0 gives rise to a homomorphism to (𝑘 − 1)-in-ℓ.
                                                                                       (𝑑)
NAEℓ(2) → 𝑹ℓ:ℓ(𝒅)
                  . Mapping 0 and 1 to any two distinct colours in the domain of 𝑅ℓ:ℓ      suffices.
    (Such colours exist as 𝑑 ≥ 2.)                                                               ◀

Hardness
For the second part of Theorem 5, we prove the following.
▶ Theorem 23. Let 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, ℓ be positive integers satisfying the containment condition such that
ℓ < 𝑐(𝑘 − 1). Then PMMSNP(F𝑘(𝑐) , Fℓ(𝑑) ) is NP-hard, assuming the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture.
    Braverman et al. [22] recently presented a yet different proof of conditional hardness for
PCSP(K3 , Kℓ ) using their analysis of the invariance principle for multi-slices, and reducing
from the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture.8 We follow their approach to derive hardness for the PCSPs
of the following form:
▶ Theorem 8. Let ∅ ≠ 𝑅 ⊆ 𝐴𝑟 be a symmetric9 reconfigurable10 relation of arity 𝑟 ≥ 2. For
any 𝑑 such that 𝑅 → NAE𝑟(𝑑) , the problem PCSP(𝑅, NAE𝑟(𝑑) ) is NP-hard, assuming the Rich
2-to-1 Conjecture.
   The proof of this result is rather technical, so we will first show how it implies Theorem 23,
and then devote the remaining part of this paper to proving Theorem 8.

Proof of Theorem 23. Fix 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, ℓ such that ℓ < 𝑐(𝑘 − 1). First, note that by the contain-
ment condition
       &    '
         ℓ
   𝑘 ≤  𝑐  ≤ ℓ,
          𝑑

hence ℓ < 𝑐(𝑘 − 1) ≤ 𝑐(ℓ − 1). This means that 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑘, ℓ ≥ 2.
                                                     (𝑐)    (𝑑)
    By Lemma 6, it suffices to show that PCSP(𝑅 𝑘:ℓ      , 𝑅ℓ:ℓ ) is NP-hard, assuming the Rich
2-to-1 Conjecture. We are going to apply Theorem 8.
               (𝑐)
    Let 𝑅 := 𝑅 𝑘:ℓ which is a symmetric relation of arity ℓ. Since ⌈ℓ/𝑐⌉ ≤ 1 + ℓ/𝑐 < 𝑘, it is
non-empty.
    Recall that 𝑅 consists of all tuples of length ℓ, using only elements in [𝑐], where every
element appears less than 𝑘 times. If we start from some arbitrary tuple of 𝑅, and replace
(one of) the most frequent colours with (one of) the least frequent colours, we can reach any
tuple where each colour appears either ⌊ℓ/𝑐⌋ or ⌈ℓ/𝑐⌉ times. This implies that every tuple in
𝑅 can be reconfigured to the uniquely chosen “almost balanced” tuple in 𝑅.
                                                                                   (𝑑)
    Therefore 𝑅 ≠ ∅ is a symmetric reconfigurable relation. On the other hand, 𝑅ℓ:ℓ    = NAEℓ(𝑑) .
We conclude the proof by applying Theorem 8.                                                  ◀

8  Earlier, Guruswami and Sandeep [39] proved this under the weaker 𝑑-to-1 Conjecture. However, we
   were not able to extend their techniques to our setting.
9 A relation is symmetric if it is closed under permutations of coordinates.
10 In fact, the reconfigurability assumption can be relaxed (see Section 5).
16   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


      5      PCSP hardness

     This section is devoted to the proof of Theorem 8. As mentioned earlier, it is a special
     case of a more general hardness result that we prove. More precisely, the reconfigurability
     shall be relaxed to connectedness of Braverman, Khot, Lifshitz, and Minzer [22]; we call it
     BKLM-connectedness for clarity.11

     ▶ Definition 24 (Based on [22]). Given a relation 𝑅 ⊆ 𝐴𝑟 and 1 ≤ 𝑖 < 𝑟, we define G𝑖𝑅 to be
     the bipartite graph whose left side consists of all prefixes of tuples in 𝑅 of length 𝑖, whose
     right side consists of all suffixes of tuples in 𝑅 of length 𝑟 − 𝑖, and where a prefix and a suffix
     are connected if they form a tuple in 𝑅 together.


     ▶ Theorem 25. Let ∅ ≠ 𝑅 ⊆ 𝐴𝑟 be a symmetric BKLM-connected relation of arity 𝑟 ≥ 2.
     For any 𝑑 such that 𝑅 → NAE𝑟(𝑑) , the problem PCSP(𝑅, NAE𝑟(𝑑) ) is NP-hard, assuming the
     Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture.

        Let us first argue that Theorem 8 indeed follows from Theorem 25. This amounts to
     proving that symmetric reconfigurable relations are BKLM-connected.

     ▶ Proposition 26. Let 𝑅 ⊆ 𝐴𝑟 be a symmetric reconfigurable relation. Then 𝑅 is BKLM-
     connected.

     Proof. Fix 1 ≤ 𝑖 < 𝑟, and consider the bipartite graph G𝑖𝑅 . Since this graph has no isolated
     vertices by construction, it is connected if and only if its line graph 12 is connected.
         Consider now the reconfiguration graph of 𝑅: the vertices of this graph are the tuples of
     𝑅; two tuples are connected whenever they differ in precisely one coordinate. Clearly, the
     reconfiguration graph is a subgraph of the line graph of G𝑖𝑅 , and they have the same vertex
     sets. Since the former is connected by the assumption, the latter must be connected as well,
     which concludes the argument.                                                               ◀

         The proof of Theorem 25 follows the strategy of [22] through which its authors proved
     hardness of Approximate Graph Colouring, assuming the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture. Its nature
     is heavily analytical; in particular, it relies on the invariance principle on multislice domains
     developed in the same paper.
         The rest of this section is organized as follows. First we define the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture,
     the source of hardness for our PCSPs. Then we introduce the necessary notions from the
     Fourier analysis. Finally, we present the proof of Theorem 25.


     Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture
     We will have to concede the CSP formulation of the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture, used in the
     Introduction, in favour of the more commonly used Label Cover one. For the following, a
     map 𝜋 : [2𝑛] → [𝑛] is called 2-to-1 if |𝜋 −1 (𝑖)| = 2 for each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛].


     11 To be precise, their definition of connectedness is less restrictive, but the semantics of connectivity

       remains the same.
     12 The line graph of G 𝑅 has as vertices the edges of G 𝑅 (i.e. tuples of 𝑅), and two edges are connected
                           𝑖                                𝑖
       whenever one of their endpoints coincides (i.e. two tuples are connected if they agree on the prefix or on
       the suffix).
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                                 17


▶ Definition 27 (Rich 2-to-1 Label Cover). A Rich 2-to-1 Label Cover instance is a tuple
(𝑈 ∪ 𝑉, 𝐸, [2𝑛], [𝑛], {𝜋𝑒 } 𝑒∈𝐸 ), where (𝑈 ∪ 𝑉, 𝐸) form a bi-regular bipartite graph, and each
𝜋𝑒 : [2𝑛] → [𝑛] is a 2-to-1 map. Furthermore, for every fixed 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈, if we sample 𝑣 from
the neighbourhood of 𝑢 uniformly at random, then the function 𝜋𝑢𝑣 is uniformly distributed
among the set of 2-to-1 maps [2𝑛] → [𝑛] (this property is called richness).13
    A labelling for this instance is an assignment 𝑐 which sends 𝑈 to [2𝑛] and 𝑉 to [𝑛]. The
value of the labelling is the probability that 𝑐(𝑣) = 𝜋𝑢𝑣 (𝑐(𝑢)) for (𝑢, 𝑣) sampled uniformly at
random from 𝐸. The value of the instance is the maximum value of any labelling.
▶ Conjecture 28 (Rich 2-to-1 conjecture [23]). For every 𝜀 > 0 there exists a large enough
𝑛 such that it is NP-hard to decide whether a Rich 2-to-1 Label Cover instance (𝑈 ∪
𝑉, 𝐸, [2𝑛], [𝑛], {𝜋𝑒 } 𝑒∈𝐸 ) has value 1, or value < 𝜀.
   For a tuple 𝑥 ∈ 𝐴𝑛 and a map 𝜋 : [2𝑛] → [𝑛], the pullback of 𝑥 along 𝜋 is the tuple
𝑦 ∈ 𝐴2𝑛 such that 𝑦 𝑗 = 𝑥 𝜋 ( 𝑗 ) for all 𝑗 ∈ [2𝑛]. We will usually denote this tuple by 𝜋 −1 (𝑥),
abusing the notation.
   Conversely, for a function 𝑓 on 2𝑛 variables and a map 𝜋 : [2𝑛] → [𝑛], we denote by 𝑓 𝜋
the 𝑛-ary function 𝑔 defined by pulling back its input and passing to 𝑓 , that is,
    𝑔(𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑛 ) = 𝑓 (𝑥 𝜋 (1) , . . . , 𝑥 𝜋 (2𝑛) ).
                                            𝜋
In this case, we also write 𝑓 −
                              → 𝑔. This operation is known as a minor in PCSP literature.

Informal overview of Theorem 25
Let us preface this overview by emphasizing that our proof is largely based on the proof
of [22, Theorem 6.7]; in particular, the reduction [22, Section 6.2], the completeness proof [22,
Section 6.3], and a part of the soundness proof [22, Section 6.4] are followed verbatim, with
a few simplifications. Due to this, and the lack of space, we only present a proof sketch here,
deferring some technical details to the Appendix.
▶ Theorem 25. Let ∅ ≠ 𝑅 ⊆ 𝐴𝑟 be a symmetric BKLM-connected relation of arity 𝑟 ≥ 2.
For any 𝑑 such that 𝑅 → NAE𝑟(𝑑) , the problem PCSP(𝑅, NAE𝑟(𝑑) ) is NP-hard, assuming the
Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture.
     We will assume that each 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴 can be extended to a tuple (𝑎, 𝑎 2 , . . . , 𝑎 𝑟 ) ∈ 𝑅; otherwise
such 𝑎 can be removed from 𝐴 without affecting the complexity of the PCSP in question.
Throughout the proof, 𝑟, 𝑑, and | 𝐴| are treated as constants.
     In order to prove Theorem 25, we shall reduce from the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture (see Con-
jecture 28), transforming Rich 2-to-1 Label Cover instances into instances of PCSP(𝑅, NAE𝑟 ),
i.e., 𝑟-uniform hypergraphs. Fix the value of 𝑛 obtained from Conjecture 28 for a small 𝜀 > 0
that we shall define later. Let Φ = (𝑈 ∪ 𝑉, 𝐸, [2𝑛], [𝑛], {𝜋𝑒 } 𝑒∈𝐸 ) be a Rich 2-to-1 Label Cover
instance. Let us recall the standard Long Code transformation (see e.g. [8]): each vertex
𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 is replaced with a copy of 𝐴2𝑛 (called the cloud of 𝑢), each 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 is replaced with a
copy of 𝐴𝑛 (the cloud of 𝑣); every edge (𝑢, 𝑣) ∈ 𝐸 commands identification of all pairs of
tuples 𝑥 ∈ 𝐴2𝑛 and 𝑦 ∈ 𝐴𝑛 in the clouds of 𝑢 and 𝑣 such that 𝑥 = 𝜋𝑢𝑣     −1 (𝑦); additionally, some

hyperedges are added, which we discuss later.
     Our transformation differs from the above only in the use of a “shorter” code: instead of
the whole Cartesian power of 𝐴, we are content with a certain subset of it, called multislice.


13 In other words, if one fixes any 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 and considers the maps 𝜋 associated with the edges incident to
                                                                  𝑒
  𝑢, every 2-to-1 map appears equally often.
18   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques

                                                                                       Í
     ▶ Definition 29 (Multislice). For any 𝑛 ∈ N and # ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑛} 𝐴 such that 𝑎 #𝑎 = 𝑛, let
     S# be the subset of 𝐴𝑛 consisting of all tuples in which each 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴 appears exactly #𝑎 times.
     By 2# we denote the tuple (2#𝑎 ) 𝑎 ∈ {0, . . . , 2𝑛} 𝐴. If #𝑎 ≥ 𝛼 · 𝑛 for all 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴, then we call
     the tuple # 𝛼-balanced.
         The Long Code reduction framework further stipulates that, for any 𝑣 1 , . . . , 𝑣 𝑟 ∈ 𝑉 with
     a common neighbour 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 and any 𝑦 (1) , . . . , 𝑦 (𝑟 ) from the respective clouds, a hyperedge
     (𝑦 (1) , . . . , 𝑦 (𝑟 ) ) is added whenever (𝜋𝑢𝑣
                                                    −1 (𝑦 (1) ) , . . . , 𝜋 −1 (𝑦 (𝑟 ) ) ) ∈ 𝑅 for all 𝑖 ∈ [2𝑛]. Since our
                                                      1        𝑖             𝑢𝑣𝑟           𝑖
     domain is stripped down to a union of multislices, not all of these hyperedges exist — we
     only add some of them. To be precise, let Ω be a probability distribution over 𝑅. We define
     the relation 𝜇Ω         𝑛 as the following set
                                                   14

                                       𝑟
                                        Ö               n                                      o             
            (𝑥 (1) , . . . , 𝑥 (𝑟 ) ) ∈   𝐴2𝑛 : ∀𝑎 ∈ 𝑅. 𝑗 : (𝑥 (1) 𝑗    , . . . , 𝑥 (𝑟 )
                                                                                    𝑗    ) = 𝑎   = 2𝑛 · Ω(𝑎)   .
                                  𝑖=1

     Intuitively, one can think of all 𝑟 × 2𝑛 matrices in which the frequency of each column 𝑎
     is proportional to Ω(𝑎). Indeed, the uniform distribution over the set 𝜇Ω                    𝑛 is designed to
     “simulate” Ω2𝑛 .
         Observe that 𝜇Ω   𝑛 is, in fact, a relation over a product of 𝑟 multislices. Now, we only
     include those hyperedges which satisfy (𝜋𝑢𝑣   −1 (𝑦 (1) ), . . . , 𝜋 −1 (𝑦 (𝑟 ) )) ∈ 𝜇 Ω .
                                                      1                  𝑢𝑣𝑟                𝑛
         The reduction is summarized concisely in the following paragraph. We will make use of
     marginal distributions: Given a distribution Ω over 𝐴1 ×· · ·× 𝐴𝑟 , its marginal distribution to 𝑖 ∈
                                                          Í
     [𝑟] is a distribution Ω𝑖 over 𝐴𝑖 defined as Ω𝑖 (𝑎) = 𝑎1 ∈ 𝐴1 ,...,𝑎𝑟 ∈ 𝐴𝑟 Ω(𝑎 1 , . . . , 𝑎 𝑖−1 , 𝑎, 𝑎 𝑖+1 , . . . , 𝑎 𝑟 )
     for each 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴𝑖 .

     Reduction
     Let Φ = (𝑈 ∪ 𝑉, 𝐸, [2𝑛], [𝑛], {𝜋𝑒 } 𝑒∈𝐸 ) be a Rich 2-to-1 Label Cover instance. The reduction
     produces an instance of PCSP(𝑅, NAE𝑟(𝑑) ), that is, an 𝑟-uniform hypergraph 𝐻. Let Ω be
     the uniform distribution over 𝑅; to simplify the presentation of the proof, we shall assume
     that 𝑛 · Ω(𝑎) ∈ N for every 𝑎 ∈ 𝑅 (this is not necessarily the case, but it suffices to tweak the
     distribution Ω just slightly — we defer the technical details to the Appendix).
         Denote by 𝜌 := Ω𝑖 the marginal distribution of Ω to any coordinate 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟] (they are all
     equal as Ω is uniform over a symmetric relation). Put # = (𝑛 · 𝜌(𝑎)) 𝑎 ∈ N 𝐴 and note that #
     is 𝛼-balanced for 𝛼 := min 𝑎∈ 𝑅 Ω(𝑎) = 1/|𝑅| > 0.
         We replace each vertex 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 with a copy of the multislice S#, and represent its elements
     as pairs (𝑣, 𝑦) where 𝑦 ∈ S#. All these pairs form the set of vertices 𝑉 (𝐻). One could also
     add multislices arising from the vertices 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 to 𝑉 (𝐻), but they will be rendered redundant
     by the following paragraph anyway.
         We define the relation ∼ on 𝑉 (𝐻) by (𝑣, 𝑦) ∼ (𝑣 ′ , 𝑦 ′ ) if there is a common neighbour
     𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 of 𝑣 and 𝑣 ′ , and a tuple 𝑥 ∈ S2# such that 𝑥 = 𝜋𝑢,𝑣                −1 (𝑦) = 𝜋 −1 (𝑦 ′ ). We extend ∼
                                                                                          𝑢,𝑣 ′
     to an equivalence relation on 𝑉 (𝐻), which, abusing notation, we also denote by ∼. In the
     hypergraph 𝐻, we identify all vertices in the same equivalence class of ∼, which can be done
     in logarithmic space [58].
         For every 𝑣 1 , . . . , 𝑣 𝑟 ∈ 𝑉 with a common neighbour 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 and every (𝑦 (1) , . . . , 𝑦 (𝑟 ) ) such
     that (𝜋𝑢𝑣  −1 (𝑦 (1) ), . . . , 𝜋 −1 (𝑦 (𝑟 ) )) ∈ 𝜇 Ω , add to 𝐻 the hyperedge over
                   1                   𝑢𝑣𝑟               𝑛
                                          
           𝑣 1 , 𝑦 (1) , . . . , 𝑣 𝑟 , 𝑦 (𝑟 ) .


     14 Of course, this requires that 2𝑛 · Ω(𝑎) ∈ Z for any 𝑎 ∈ 𝑅.
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                                                                19


▷ Claim 30 (Completeness). If Φ (Label Cover instance) has a perfect labelling, then 𝐻 → 𝑅.
Proof. Let 𝑠 : 𝑈 → [2𝑛] and 𝑠′ : 𝑉 → [𝑛] be labellings that satisfy all the constraints of Φ.
We define the assignment ℎ : 𝑉 (𝐻) → 𝐴 as ℎ(𝑣, 𝑦) = 𝑦 𝑠′ (𝑣) .
   We will argue that ℎ is a homomorphism from 𝐻 to 𝑅. Indeed, consider a hyperedge

    (𝑣 1 , 𝑦 (1) ), . . . , (𝑣 𝑟 , 𝑦 (𝑟 ) ).

witnessed by a common neighbour 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈. It suffices to prove that
                                                                              
     ℎ(𝑣 1 , 𝑦 (1) ), . . . , ℎ(𝑣 𝑟 , 𝑦 (𝑟 ) ) = 𝑦 𝑠(1)                 (𝑟 )
                                                     ′ (𝑣 ) , . . . , 𝑦 𝑠 ′ (𝑣 )
                                                         1                    𝑟
                                                                                   ∈ 𝑅.

Thanks to the equivalence constraints ∼, the right-hand side tuple is exactly
                                                        
      −1     (1)                     −1     (𝑟 )
     𝜋𝑢𝑣1
          (𝑦     ) 𝑠 (𝑢) , . . . , 𝜋 𝑢𝑣𝑟
                                         (𝑦      ) 𝑠 (𝑢)


which belongs to 𝑅 by the definition of 𝜇Ω
                                         𝑛.                                                                                           ◀

Soundness
This part is much more complicated than completeness. To spell it out, given a NAE𝑟(𝑑) -
colouring of the hypergraph, we ought to construct a labelling of the original Label Cover
instance with a superconstant value. Historically, Fourier analysis has been central in
constructing such a labelling. Let us review some standard probabilistic notation commonly
used in Fourier-analytic arguments.
    For a function 𝑓 : 𝑋 → R and a distribution Ω over 𝑋, we denote by EΩ [ 𝑓 ] the expectation
of 𝑓 (𝑥) when 𝑥 is sampled from Ω (which we denote by 𝑥 ∼ Ω). When we write E𝑋 [ 𝑓 ] or
E[ 𝑓 ], the uniform distribution over 𝑋 (the domain of 𝑓 ) is assumed implicitly. By Ω𝑛 we
denote the 𝑛-fold tensor power of Ω, that is, the distribution over 𝑋 𝑛 such that the measure
                        Î
Ω𝑛 (𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑛 ) = 𝑛𝑗=1 Ω(𝑥 𝑗 ).
    Cartesian powers and multislices are connected via the following lifting operator, which
is a Markov operator of a certain coupling defined in [22]. Given #   Í
                                                                          ∈ N 𝐴, there exists an
operator 𝑇 that maps any function 𝑓 : S# → R to a function 𝑇 𝑓 : 𝐴 #𝑎 → R that satisfies
                                                                        𝑎



     E [ 𝑓 ] = E𝑛 [𝑇 𝑓 ]
    S#              𝜌
                   Í
where 𝑛 = 𝑎 #𝑎 and 𝜌 is a distribution over 𝐴 such that the measure of each 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴 is
proportional to #𝑎 .
    The soundness proof amounts to analysing the properties of functions satisfying, in expect-
ation, 𝑓 (𝑥 1 ) 𝑓 (𝑥 2 ) · · · 𝑓 (𝑥𝑟 ) ≈ 0: note that the equality holds for any hyperedge (𝑥 1 , . . . , 𝑥𝑟 )
whenever 𝑓 is an indicator function of any fixed colour in a NAE𝑟 -colouring. The invariance
principle for multislices by [22] argues that these lifting operators preserve products, up to a
negligible error. To be precise, here and later we will denote negligible errors by 𝑜(1) — a
real number that can be pushed arbitrarily close to 0 by taking 𝑛 large enough (the semantics
of 𝑛 will always be clear from the context).
                                                                  (1)      (𝑟 )
▶ Theorem 31 (Corollary of [22, Theorem 1.11]). Let # , . . . , # ∈ N 𝐴 such that 𝑎 #𝑎(𝑖) =
                                                                                              Í
𝑛 for each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟]. Let Ω be a distribution over 𝐴                       := Ω
                                                            n ; denote 𝜇 𝜇 𝑛 . oIf the support of Ω is a
                                                             𝑟
                                                                                                (𝑖)                   𝑟
symmetric BKLM-connected relation, then any                                         𝑓𝑖 : S#           → [0, 1]              satisfy
                                                                                                                      𝑖=1
                                " 𝑟            #                                  " 𝑟                    #
                                 Ö                                                 Ö
               E                      𝑓𝑖 (𝑥 (𝑖) ) −              E                      𝑇𝑖 𝑓𝑖 (𝑥 (𝑖) )       = 𝑜(1)
     ( 𝑥 (1) ,..., 𝑥 (𝑟 ) )∼𝜇   𝑖=1                   ( 𝑥 (1) ,..., 𝑥 (𝑟 ) )∼Ω𝑛   𝑖=1
20   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


                                                   (𝑖)
     where 𝑇𝑖 is the lifting operator for # .
     Roughly speaking, if 𝑓 is a NAE𝑟 -colouring of the hypergraph, then 𝑇 𝑓 may be thought of as
     an almost NAE𝑟 -colouring of a hypergraph that we would obtain by applying the full Long
     Code transformation to the Label Cover instance.
        Mossel [54] proved the powerful noise inequalities, from which we conclude these almost
     NAE𝑟 -colourings necessarily possess a coordinate with significant low-degree influence. For a
     function 𝑔 : 𝐴𝑛 → R and a distribution 𝜌 over 𝐴, the degree-𝑘 influence of 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛], denoted
     by Inf ≤𝑗 𝑘 [𝑔; 𝜌], is a number in [0, 1] which (intuitively) measures how important the 𝑗-th
     input is to the output of 𝑔. The precise definition of this notion will not be important to us.
     We state a specialization of Mossel’s result, tailored to our purposes:
     ▶ Theorem 32 (Corollary of [54, Proposition 6.4]). Let Ω be a distribution over 𝐴𝑟 whose
     support is a symmetric BKLM-connected relation of arity 𝑟 ≥ 2 and size ≥ 2.
        For all 𝛿 > 0 there exist 𝜏, 𝑘 > 0 such that if 𝑔 : 𝐴𝑛 → [0, 1] with E 𝑥∼Ω𝑖𝑛 [𝑔(𝑥)] ≥ 𝛿 for
     each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟], and
                       " 𝑟        #
                        Ö
                              (𝑖)
               E           𝑔(𝑥 ) = 𝑜(1)
         ( 𝑥 (1) ,...,𝑥 (𝑟 ) )∼Ω𝑛   𝑖=1

     then

         max max Inf ≤𝑗 𝑘 [𝑔; Ω𝑖 ] > 𝜏.
         𝑖 ∈ [𝑟 ] 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]

     For completeness, its proof is provided in the Appendix.
        The coordinates with significant low-degree influence give rise to a labelling of the original
                                                                                           Í
     Label Cover instance via the following result. We will say that 𝛽 > 0 is #-valid if 𝛽· 𝑎 #𝑎 ∈ N.

                                                                                            Í
     ▶ Lemma 33 (See [22, Section 6.4]). Let 𝜏, 𝑘, 𝛼 > 0 and # ∈ N 𝐴 be 𝛼-balanced with 𝑎 #𝑎
     sufficiently large. For any sufficiently small #-valid 𝛽 > 0, we can assign to every function
     𝑔 : S# → [0, 1] a coordinate 𝑑 𝑔 ∈ [𝑛] in such a way that any 𝑓 : S2# → [0, 1] satisfies

          max Inf ≤𝑗 𝑘 [𝑇 𝑓 ; 𝜌] > 𝜏 =⇒
                                                             
                                         Pr      𝜋( 𝑗) = 𝑑 𝑓 𝜋 ≥ 𝐶 = 𝐶 (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜏, 𝑘)
         𝑗 ∈ [2𝑛]                            2-to-1 𝜋

     where 𝑇 and 𝜌 are the lifting operator and the distribution associated with #.
     Roughly speaking, the conclusion says that, if one assigns 𝑗 to the vertex 𝑢, and 𝑑 𝑓 𝜋𝑢𝑣 to
     each neighbour 𝑣 of 𝑢, then a constant fraction of the edges incident to 𝑢 will be satisfied.
        We provide a concise summary of the soundness proof below.
     ▷ Claim 34 (Soundness). If 𝐻 → NAE𝑟(𝑑) , then there exists a labelling of Φ (Label Cover
     instance) with a value > 𝜀.
     Proof. Since 𝐻 → NAE𝑟(𝑑) , there is a subset of 𝑉 (𝐻) of fractional size at least 1/𝑑 that does
     not induce any hyperedge in 𝐻; let 𝑓 : 𝑉 (𝐻) → {0, 1} be its indicator function. In other
     words E[ 𝑓 ] ≥ 1/𝑑, and for every hyperedge (𝑦 (1) , . . . , 𝑦 (𝑟 ) ) we have 𝑓 (𝑦n (1) ) · . . . · 𝑓 (𝑦 (𝑟o) ) = 0.
        For each 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉, let 𝑓𝑣 : S# → {0, 1} be 𝑓 restricted to the domain (𝑣, 𝑦) | 𝑦 ∈ S# . For
     each 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈, the equality constraints (the equivalence ∼) give rise to a function 𝑓𝑢 : S2# →
                          𝜋𝑢𝑣
     {0, 1} such that 𝑓𝑢 −−−→ 𝑓𝑣 for any neighbour 𝑣 of 𝑢. By the regularity of (𝑈 ∪ 𝑉, 𝐸) and
     richness, we have

            E E[ 𝑓𝑢 ] ≥ 1/𝑑.
         𝑢∈𝑈
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                          21


Denote 𝛿 := 1/(2𝑑). By an averaging argument, we obtain a set Good ⊆ 𝑈 of fractional size
at least 𝛿 such that E[ 𝑓𝑢 ] ≥ 𝛿 for each 𝑢 ∈ Good.
    Fix 𝑢 ∈ Good. The equality constraints ensure that, sampling (𝑥 (1) , . . . , 𝑥 (𝑟 ) ) ∈ 𝜇Ω
                                                                                              𝑛
uniformly at random, we have
      " 𝑟             #
       Ö
    E      𝑓𝑢 (𝑥 (𝑖) ) = 0.
          𝑖=1

We apply Theorem 31 (the invariance principle) to { 𝑓𝑢 }𝑟𝑖=1 , and obtain
                " 𝑟            #
                 Ö
                           (𝑖)
         E          𝑇 𝑓𝑢 (𝑥 ) = 𝑜(1)
     ( 𝑥 (1) ,...,𝑥 (𝑟 ) )∼Ω2𝑛   𝑖=1

where 𝑇 is the lifting operator for 2#. By the Markov properties of 𝑇, we have

       E [𝑇 𝑓𝑢 (𝑥)] = E [ 𝑓𝑢 ] ≥ 𝛿.
     𝑥∼𝜌2𝑛                       S2#

Applying the noise inequality Theorem 32 to 𝑇 𝑓𝑢 , we obtain 𝜏, 𝑘 > 0 such that

     max Inf ≤𝑗 𝑘 [𝑇 𝑓𝑢 ; 𝜌] > 𝜏.
     𝑗 ∈ [2𝑛]

Assign to 𝑢 any label 𝑗 that maximises the expression above; to the vertices 𝑢 ′ ∈ 𝑈 \ Good
assign arbitrary labels.
     We now want to appeal to Lemma 33 in order to label the vertices in 𝑉. Fix any sufficiently
small #-valid 𝛽. To each 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 assign the label 𝑑 𝑓𝑣 obtained from Lemma 33.
     We shall argue that the value of this labelling is greater than 𝜀, which would conclude
the proof. Fix 𝑢 ∈ Good and its label 𝑗. For a random neighbour 𝑣 of 𝑢, by the richness
of the instance, the constraint 𝜋𝑢𝑣 is distributed uniformly among all 2-to-1 maps, and
     𝜋𝑢𝑣
 𝑓𝑢 −−−→ 𝑓𝑣 . By Lemma 33, we get that 𝜋𝑢𝑣 ( 𝑗) is the label assigned to 𝑣 with probability at
least 𝐶 (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜏, 𝑘). Thus, by the biregularity and the richness of Φ, the probability that our
labelling satisfies a uniformly random edge (𝑢, 𝑣) is at least
     |Good|
            · 𝐶 (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜏, 𝑘) ≥ 𝛿 · 𝐶 (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜏, 𝑘)
       |𝑈|
so it suffices to pick 𝜀 < 𝛿 · 𝐶 (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜏, 𝑘).
    The dependency of various parameters used in the soundness proof on one another is
a delicate matter, so we shall elaborate. First of all, note that 𝑛 can be assumed to be
sufficiently large as long as 𝜀 > 0 is allowed to be chosen arbitrarily small. Recall that we
treat 𝐴, 𝑟, 𝑅, and 𝑑 as constants. Therefore, 𝛼 and 𝛿 are also constants. Then 𝜏 and 𝑘 are
obtained from Theorem 32. We find a suitable sufficiently small 𝛽 > 0, and pick 𝜀 > 0 small
enough so that 𝜀 ≤ 𝛿 · 𝐶 (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜏, 𝑘). Finally, for this 𝜀 the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture gives 𝑛. It
remains to note that we must ensure that 𝛽𝑛 ∈ N: we can change 𝛽 slightly to arrange that
without breaking other dependencies. To see how, after fixing the upper-bound 𝐵 on 𝛽, take
𝜀 > 0 extremely tiny, which forces 𝑛 to be extremely large. Now note that there exists ℓ ∈ N
such that 𝐵/2 ≤ ℓ/𝑛 ≤ 𝐵. It suffices to take 𝛽 = ℓ/𝑛.                                          ◀

 6        Conclusions
In the present paper, we initiated the study of Promise MMSNP problems. For the most
fundamental case, forbidding monochromatic cliques, we obtained a complexity dichotomy
22   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


     under the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture. This class of problems includes the notorious Approximate
     Graph Colouring, which are not yet known to admit an unconditional hardness proof. Never-
     theless, some special cases of our Promise MMSNPs do follow from existing unconditional
     hardness results: for example, if the forbidden cliques only use 2 colours, the hardness can
     be derived from the dichotomy for symmetric Boolean PCSPs by [34].
         The hardness of the Approximate Graph Colouring was also obtained by [39] from
     the weaker 𝑑-to-1 Conjecture of Khot [43]. Hence the most natural question is whether
     “richness” is necessary for the Promise MMSNPs studied in this paper. In other words, do
     Promise MMSNPs over forbidden monochromatic cliques admit the dichotomy under the
     2-to-1 Conjecture?
          These Promise MMSNPs are tightly connected with certain balanced hypergraph colouring
     problems. More concretely, consider PCSP(𝑅, NAE𝑟 ) where 𝑅 constitutes the promise
     colouring. If the promise colouring is perfectly balanced, that is, each colour appears the
     same number of times in every hyperedge, then a proper (NAE𝑟 ) colouring can be computed
     efficiently (see [37]). For multiple special cases, this was proved to be the only tractable case,
     e.g., [37, 38]. Our result can also be viewed as another special case where a perfect balance
     of the colours characterises tractability.
         There are also some interesting connections with the topological approach to PCSPs. Some
     of the previous results on rainbow-free colouring of hypergraphs are based on topological
     combinatorics [1]; while our approach is Fourier-analytic, the notion of reconfigurability is
     (perhaps unsurprisingly, given the name) in some sense topological. Indeed, many of the
     recent applications of topology in (P)CSPs [3, 35, 48, 53] have used hom-complexes, a vast
     generalisation of the reconfiguration graph. (It is worth noting that our Theorem 8 implies
     all the hardness results that we know of that follow via the topological approach to PCSP,
     although under the additional hypothesis of the Rich 2-to-1 conjecture.) Such connections
     between topological and Fourier-analytic approaches to PCSP have been noticed before,
     e.g. a connection between the work of [48] and Fourier analysis via winding numbers due to
     Mottet (personal communication). Finding a principled reason why these connections appear
     may be worth investigating.
         Besides the forbidden vertex-coloured patterns, there has been some research on the
     edge-coloured ones. It would be interesting to obtain similar results for promise problems
     of forbidden monochromatic cliques of the latter type as well. The forbidden edge-coloured
     patterns give rise to a larger than MMSNP fragment of Existential Second-Order Logic
     called GMSNP, see [9]. Unlike MMSNP, the computational dichotomy for GMSNP remains
     unresolved; however, it lies within the scope of the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture as well as
     MMSNP [13]. Recently, the containment problem for two GMSNP formulas was shown to be
     decidable, and also dependent on the existence of a recolouring [6]. Deciding whether a given
     graph has an edge 2-colouring that avoids monochromatic triangles is a classic NP-complete
     problem [36]. It remains NP-hard for an arbitrary (fixed) clique size [26], and for an arbitrary
     (fixed) number of colours [5]. Nevertheless, its promise extensions present new obstacles,
     compared to the vertex-coloured cliques. In particular,

        Characterising the existence of a recolouring must depend on the Ramsey numbers, which
        are very hard to compute.

        The associated finite-domain PCSPs are no longer symmetric: the full symmetric group
        acting with permutations on the edge set of a clique does not always map the edges of a
        subclique to the edges of a subclique.
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                            23


     References
 1    Per Austrin, Amey Bhangale, and Aditya Potukuchi. Improved Inapproximability of Rainbow
      Coloring. In Shuchi Chawla, editor, Proceedings of the 2020 ACM-SIAM Symposium on
     Discrete Algorithms (SODA), page 1479–1495. SIAM, January 2020. arXiv:1810.02784,
      doi:10.1137/1.9781611975994.90.
 2    Per Austrin, Johan Håstad, and Björn Martinsson. On the Usefulness of Promises. In
      Kasper Green Larsen and Barna Saha, editors, Proceedings of the 2026 Annual ACM-SIAM
     Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), page 6332–6378. SIAM, January 2026. arXiv:
      2511.21450, doi:10.1137/1.9781611978971.228.
 3    Sergey Avvakumov, Marek Filakovský, Jakub Oprsal, Gianluca Tasinato, and Uli Wagner.
      Hardness of 4-Colouring 𝐺-Colourable Graphs. In Michal Koucký and Nikhil Bansal, editors,
     Proceedings of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’25, page
     72–83. ACM, June 2025. doi:10.1145/3717823.3718154.
 4    Demian Banakh and Katzper Michno. Boolean PCSPs through the lens of Fourier Analysis,
     2026. arXiv:2604.22742, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2604.22742.
 5    Alexey Barsukov, Antoine Mottet, and Davide Perinti. Edge-coloring problems with forbidden
      patterns and planted colors, 2026. arXiv:2507.19000, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2507.19000.
 6    Alexey Barsukov, Michael Pinsker, and Jakub Rydval. Containment for Guarded Monotone
      Strict NP. In 52nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming
     (ICALP 2025), volume 334 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages
     140:1–140:20, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2025. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
      doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2025.140.
 7    Libor Barto, Diego Battistelli, and Kevin M. Berg. Symmetric Promise Constraint Satisfaction
      Problems: Beyond the Boolean Case. In 38th International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects
     of Computer Science (STACS 2021), volume 187 of Leibniz International Proceedings in
     Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 10:1–10:16, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2021. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-
      Zentrum für Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2021.10.
 8    Libor Barto, Jakub Bulín, Andrei Krokhin, and Jakub Opršal. Algebraic Approach to Promise
      Constraint Satisfaction. Journal of the ACM, 68(4), July 2021. doi:10.1145/3457606.
 9    Meghyn Bienvenu, Balder Ten Cate, Carsten Lutz, and Frank Wolter. Ontology-Based Data
     Access: A Study through Disjunctive Datalog, CSP, and MMSNP. ACM Trans. Database
     Syst., 39(4):33:1–33:44, December 2014. doi:10.1145/2661643.
10    Manuel Bodirsky. Complexity of infinite-domain constraint satisfaction, volume 52 of Lecture
     Notes in Logic. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; Association for Symbolic Logic,
      Ithaca, NY, 2021. doi:10.1017/9781107337534.
11    Manuel Bodirsky and Martin Grohe. Non-dichotomies in Constraint Satisfaction Complexity. In
      Luca Aceto, Ivan Damgård, Leslie Ann Goldberg, Magnús M. Halldórsson, Anna Ingólfsdóttir,
      and Igor Walukiewicz, editors, Automata, Languages and Programming, pages 184–196, Berlin,
      Heidelberg, 2008. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-70583-3_16.
12    Manuel Bodirsky and Jan Kára. The complexity of temporal constraint satisfaction problems.
     J. ACM, 57(2):9:1–9:41, January 2010. doi:10.1145/1667053.1667058.
13    Manuel Bodirsky, Simon Knäuer, and Florian Starke. ASNP: a tame fragment of existential
      second-order logic. In Beyond the horizon of computability, volume 12098 of Lecture Notes in
     Comput. Sci., pages 149–162. Springer, Cham, 2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-51466-2_13.
14    Manuel Bodirsky, Florent Madelaine, and Antoine Mottet. A universal-algebraic proof of the
      complexity dichotomy for Monotone Monadic SNP. In Anuj Dawar and Erich Grädel, editors,
     Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS
     ’18, page 105–114. ACM, July 2018. doi:10.1145/3209108.3209156.
15    Manuel Bodirsky, Florent Madelaine, and Antoine Mottet. A proof of the algebraic tractability
      conjecture for monotone monadic SNP. SIAM J. Comput., 50(4):1359–1409, 2021. doi:
     10.1137/19M128466X.
24   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


     16   Manuel Bodirsky, Barnaby Martin, Michael Pinsker, and András Pongrácz. Constraint
          satisfaction problems for reducts of homogeneous graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 48(4):1224–1264,
          2019. doi:10.1137/16M1082974.
     17   Manuel Bodirsky, Michael Pinsker, and András Pongrácz. Projective clone homomorphisms.
          J. Symb. Log., 86(1):148–161, 2021. doi:10.1017/jsl.2019.23.
     18   Joshua Brakensiek and Venkatesan Guruswami. Promise constraint satisfaction: Algebraic
          structure and a symmetric boolean dichotomy. SIAM Journal on Computing, 50(6):1663–1700,
          2021. doi:10.1137/19M128212X.
     19   Joshua Brakensiek and Venkatesan Guruswami. The quest for strong inapproximability
          results with perfect completeness. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 17(3):27:1–27:35, 2021. doi:
          10.1145/3459668.
     20   Joshua Brakensiek, Venkatesan Guruswami, and Sai Sandeep. Conditional Dichotomy of
          Boolean Ordered Promise CSPs. TheoretiCS, 2, January 2023. doi:10.46298/theoretics.
          23.2.
     21   Alex Brandts and Stanislav Živný. Beyond PCSP(1-in-3, NAE). Inform. and Comput., 289,
          November 2022. doi:10.1016/j.ic.2022.104954.
     22   Mark Braverman, Subhash Khot, Noam Lifshitz, and Dor Minzer. An invariance principle
          for the multi-slice, with applications. Adv. Math., 480:Paper No. 110460, 80, 2025. doi:
          10.1016/j.aim.2025.110460.
     23   Mark Braverman, Subhash Khot, and Dor Minzer. On Rich 2-to-1 Games. In 12th Innovations
          in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2021), volume 185 of Leibniz International
          Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 27:1–27:20, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2021. Schloss
          Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2021.27.
     24   Andrei Bulatov, Peter Jeavons, and Andrei Krokhin. Classifying the complexity of con-
          straints using finite algebras. SIAM J. Comput., 34(3):720–742, 2005. doi:10.1137/
          S0097539700376676.
     25   Andrei A. Bulatov. A Dichotomy Theorem for Nonuniform CSPs. In Chris Umans, editor,
          2017 IEEE 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), page
          319–330. IEEE, October 2017. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2017.37.
     26   Stefan A. Burr. On the computational complexity of Ramsey-type problems. In Mathematics
          of Ramsey theory, volume 5 of Algorithms Combin., pages 46–52. Springer, 1990. doi:
          10.1007/978-3-642-72905-8_5.
     27   Maria Chudnovsky, Linda Cook, James Davies, and Sang-il Oum. Reuniting 𝜒-boundedness
          with polynomial 𝜒-boundedness. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B, 176:30–73, 2026. doi:10.1016/j.
          jctb.2025.08.002.
     28   Lorenzo Ciardo, Marcin Kozik, Andrei Krokhin, Tamio-Vesa Nakajima, and Stanislav Živný.
          1-in-3 vs. not-all-equal: Dichotomy of a broken promise. ACM Trans. Comput. Logic, 26(2),
          April 2025. doi:10.1145/3719007.
     29   Irit Dinur, Elchanan Mossel, and Oded Regev. Conditional hardness for approximate coloring.
          SIAM Journal on Computing, 39(3):843–873, 2009. doi:10.1137/07068062X.
     30   Irit Dinur, Oded Regev, and Clifford Smyth. The hardness of 3-uniform hypergraph coloring.
          Combinatorica, 25(5):519–535, 2005. doi:10.1007/s00493-005-0032-4.
     31   P. Erdős. Graph theory and probability. Canadian J. Math., 11:34–38, 1959. doi:10.4153/
          CJM-1959-003-9.
     32   Ronald Fagin. Generalized first-order spectra and polynomial-time recognizable sets. In
          Complexity of computation (Proc. SIAM-AMS Sympos., New York, 1973), volume Vol. VII of
          SIAM-AMS Proc., pages 43–73. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1974.
     33   Tomás Feder and Moshe Y. Vardi. The computational structure of monotone monadic SNP
          and constraint satisfaction: A study through datalog and group theory. SIAM J. Comput.,
          28(1):57–104, 1998. doi:10.1137/S0097539794266766.
     34   Miron Ficak, Marcin Kozik, Miroslav Olšák, and Szymon Stankiewicz. Dichotomy for Sym-
          metric Boolean PCSPs. In 46th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                          25


     Programming (ICALP 2019), volume 132 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
     (LIPIcs), pages 57:1–57:12, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2019. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für
     Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2019.57.
35   Marek Filakovský, Tamio-Vesa Nakajima, Jakub Opršal, Gianluca Tasinato, and Uli Wagner.
     Hardness of linearly ordered 4-colouring of 3-colourable 3-uniform hypergraphs. ACM Trans.
     Comput. Theory, 18(2), May 2026. doi:10.1145/3779121.
36   Michael R. Garey and David S. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory
     of NP-Completeness. A Series of Books in the Mathematical Sciences. W. H. Freeman, 1979.
     A guide to the theory of NP-completeness.
37   Venkatesan Guruswami and Euiwoong Lee. Strong inapproximability results on bal-
     anced rainbow-colorable hypergraphs. Combinatorica, 38(3):547–599, 2018. doi:10.1007/
     s00493-016-3383-0.
38   Venkatesan Guruswami and Rishi Saket. Hardness of Rainbow Coloring Hypergraphs. In
     Satya V. Lokam and R. Ramanujam, editors, 37th IARCS Annual Conference on Foundations
     of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science (FSTTCS 2017), volume 93 of
     LIPIcs, pages 33:1–33:15, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2017. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
     Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.FSTTCS.2017.33.
39   Venkatesan Guruswami and Sai Sandeep. d-To-1 Hardness of Coloring 3-Colorable Graphs with
     O(1) Colors. In 47th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming
     (ICALP 2020), volume 168 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages
     62:1–62:12, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2020. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
     doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2020.62.
40   Wilfrid Hodges. A shorter model theory. Cambridge University Press, 1997.
41   Ravindran Kannan and Achim Bachem. Polynomial algorithms for computing the smith and
     hermite normal forms of an integer matrix. SIAM Journal on Computing, 8(4):499–507, 1979.
     doi:10.1137/0208040.
42   Michał Karpiński and Krzysztof Piecuch. On vertex coloring without monochromatic triangles.
     In Computer science—theory and applications, volume 10846 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci.,
     pages 220–231. Springer, Cham, 2018. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-90530-3_19.
43   Subhash Khot. On the power of unique 2-prover 1-round games. In Proceedings of the
     Thiry-Fourth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’02, pages 767–775.
     ACM, 2002. doi:10.1145/509907.510017.
44   Subhash Khot, Guy Kindler, Elchanan Mossel, and Ryan O’Donnell. Optimal Inapproximability
     Results for MAX-CUT and Other 2-Variable CSPs? SIAM J. Comput., 37(1):319–357, January
     2007. doi:10.1137/S0097539705447372.
45   Subhash Khot and Oded Regev. Vertex cover might be hard to approximate to within 2 − 𝜀.
     J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 74(3):335–349, 2008. doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2007.06.019.
46   Michael Kompatscher and Trung Van Pham. A complexity dichotomy for poset constraint
     satisfaction. J. Appl. Logics, 5(8):1663–1695, 2018. URL: https://www.collegepublications.
     co.uk/downloads/ifcolog00028.pdf, arXiv:1603.00082.
47   Andrei Krokhin and Danny Vagnozzi. Approximating 1-in-3 SAT by linearly ordered hyper-
     graph 3-colouring is NP-hard, 2025. arXiv:2508.14606, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2508.14606.
48   Andrei A. Krokhin, Jakub Oprsal, Marcin Wrochna, and Stanislav Živný. Topology and
     Adjunction in Promise Constraint Satisfaction. SIAM J. Comput., 52(1):38–79, 2023. doi:
     10.1137/20M1378223.
49   Gábor Kun. Constraints, MMSNP and expander relational structures. Comb., 33(3):335–347,
     2013. doi:10.1007/s00493-013-2405-4.
50   Richard E. Ladner. On the structure of polynomial time reducibility. J. ACM, 22(1):155–171,
     1975. doi:10.1145/321864.321877.
51   Florent Madelaine. On the Containment of Forbidden Patterns Problems. In David Cohen,
     editor, Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming – CP 2010, volume 6308 of Lecture
26   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


            Notes in Computer Science, page 345–359. Springer, 2010. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-15396-9_
            29.
     52     Florent Madelaine and Iain A. Stewart. Constraint satisfaction, logic and forbidden patterns.
            SIAM J. Comput., 37(1):132–163, January 2007. doi:10.1137/050634840.
     53     Sebastian Meyer and Jakub Opršal. A topological proof of the Hell-Nešetřil dichotomy. In Yossi
            Azar and Debmalya Panigrahi, editors, Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
            on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), page 4507–4519. SIAM, January 2025. arXiv:2409.12627,
            doi:10.1137/1.9781611978322.154.
     54     Elchanan Mossel. Gaussian bounds for noise correlation of functions. Geometric and Functional
            Analysis, 19(6):1713–1756, March 2010. doi:10.1007/s00039-010-0047-x.
     55     Antoine Mottet and Michael Pinsker. Smooth approximations: an algebraic approach to
            CSPs over finitely bounded homogeneous structures. J. ACM, 71(5):36:1–36:47, 2024. doi:
            10.1145/3689207.
     56     Tamio-Vesa Nakajima, Zephyr Verwimp, Marcin Wrochna, and Stanislav Živný. Complexity of
            Approximate Conflict-Free, Linearly-Ordered, and Nonmonochromatic Hypergraph Colourings.
            In 52nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2025),
            volume 334 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 169:1–169:10,
            Dagstuhl, Germany, 2025. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. doi:10.4230/
            LIPIcs.ICALP.2025.169.
     57     Tamio-Vesa Nakajima and Stanislav Živný. Linearly ordered colourings of hypergraphs. ACM
            Trans. Comput. Theory, 14(3–4), February 2023. doi:10.1145/3570909.
     58     Omer Reingold. Undirected connectivity in log-space. J. ACM, 55(4), September 2008.
            doi:10.1145/1391289.1391291.
     59     Sai Sandeep. Almost optimal inapproximability of multidimensional packing problems. In
            2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages
            245–256. IEEE, 2021. arXiv:2101.02854, doi:10.1109/FOCS52979.2021.00033.
     60     Dmitriy Zhuk. A Proof of CSP Dichotomy Conjecture. In Chris Umans, editor, 2017 IEEE
            58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 331–342. IEEE,
            October 2017. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2017.38.
     61     Dmitriy Zhuk. A proof of the CSP dichotomy conjecture. J. ACM, 67(5):30:1–30:78, 2020.
            doi:10.1145/3402029.


      A       Noise inequalities
     Correlation plays an important role in our analysis. For a distribution Ω over 𝐴 × 𝐵, it is
     denoted by 𝜌( 𝐴, 𝐵; Ω) ∈ [0, 1]. We will not define it formally here; the intuition behind
     𝜌( 𝐴, 𝐵; Ω) is that it measures the correlation between the first and second coordinates of Ω.
         The reason BKLM-connected relations are interesting is due to the following correlation
     bound that they provide:

     ▶ Lemma 35 (Lemma 2.9 in [54]). Let Ω be a distribution over 𝐴 × 𝐵 whose support forms a
     connected bipartite graph. Then 𝜌( 𝐴, 𝐵; Ω) < 1.

          For a distribution Ω over 𝐴1 × · · · × 𝐴𝑟 , its correlation vector 𝜌 ∈ [0, 1] 𝑟 −1 is defined as

          𝜌𝑖 = 𝜌( 𝐴1 × · · · × 𝐴𝑖 , 𝐴𝑖+1 × · · · × 𝐴𝑟 ; Ω)

     where Ω is treated as a binary distribution over ( 𝐴1 × · · · × 𝐴𝑖 ) × ( 𝐴𝑖+1 × · · · × 𝐴𝑟 ).
        Finally, we need Gaussian stability measures. Let N be the distribution function of a
     standard Gaussian. We define for 𝜌, 𝜇, 𝜈 ∈ [0, 1]

          Γ𝜌 (𝜇, 𝜈) = Pr 𝑋 ≤ N −1 (𝜇), 𝑌 ≥ N −1 (1 − 𝜈)
                                                       
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                                                    27


where (𝑋, 𝑌 ) are 𝜌-correlated15 Gaussian variables. Note that Γ𝜌 is an increasing function in
𝜇 and 𝜈. The only fact needed about Γ𝜌 is the following.

▶ Observation 36 (See [29]). If 𝜇 > 0 and 𝜌 < 1, then Γ𝜌 (𝜇, 𝜇) > 0.

The definition of Γ is extended to more than 2 variables in a recursive way. Namely, given
𝜌 ∈ [0, 1] 𝑟 −1 and 𝜇 ∈ [0, 1] 𝑟 for 𝑟 ≥ 3 we define
                                                                         
      Γ𝜌 (𝜇1 , . . . , 𝜇𝑟 ) := Γ𝜌1 𝜇1 , Γ𝜌2 ,...,𝜌𝑟 −1 (𝜇2 , . . . , 𝜇𝑟 ) .



▶ Observation 37. If 𝜇1 , . . . , 𝜇𝑟 > 0 and 𝜌1 , . . . , 𝜌𝑟 −1 < 1, then Γ𝜌 (𝜇1 , . . . , 𝜇𝑟 ) > 0.

Proof. We prove it by induction. For the base case 𝑟 = 2, recall from Observation 36 that

      Γ𝜌 (𝜇1 , 𝜇2 ) ≥ Γ𝜌 (𝜇, 𝜇) > 0

where 𝜇 := min{𝜇1 , 𝜇2 } > 0. For the inductive step, we have
                                                                         
      Γ𝜌 (𝜇1 , . . . , 𝜇𝑟 ) := Γ𝜌1 𝜇1 , Γ𝜌2 ,...,𝜌𝑟 −1 (𝜇2 , . . . , 𝜇𝑟 ) > 0

because Γ𝜌2 ,...,𝜌𝑟 −1 (𝜇2 , . . . , 𝜇𝑟 ) > 0 by the inductive assumption.                                                ◀

   Theorem 32 follows from the powerful noise inequalities discovered by Mossel [54], which
we state here for completeness.
                                                                                                      Î𝑟
▶ Theorem 38 (Proposition 6.4 in [54]). Let Ω be a distribution over                                   𝑖=1 𝐴𝑖 such that

                                     1
    𝛼 :=           min    Ω(𝑎) ≤
              𝑎∈supp(P)              2

and
                                         !
                            Ö
      𝜌 := max 𝜌 𝐴 𝑗 ,             𝐴𝑖 ; Ω < 1.
                   𝑗
                            𝑖≠ 𝑗

For every 𝜀 > 0 there exists 𝜏 > 0 such that if 𝑓𝑖 : 𝐴𝑖𝑛 → [0, 1] for 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟] satisfy

    Inf ≤log(1/𝜏
        𝑗
                 )/log(1/𝛼)
                            [ 𝑓𝑖 ; Ω𝑖 ] ≤ 𝜏

for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟] and 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛], then
                                                                        " 𝑟                     #
                                                                           Ö
                                                                                        (𝑖)
      Γ𝜌 E𝑛 [ 𝑓1 ], . . . , E𝑛 [ 𝑓𝑟 ] − 𝜀 ≤              E                      𝑓𝑖 (𝑥         )
              Ω1           Ω𝑟                  ( 𝑥 (1) ,...,𝑥 (𝑟 ) )∼Ω𝑛   𝑖=1

where Ω𝑖 denotes the marginal distribution of Ω to 𝑖.

    We are in a position to prove Theorem 32. We state it again, for the reader’s convenience.



15 The exact definition of 𝜌-correlated variables is not important here; we refer the curious reader to [54].
28   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


     ▶ Theorem 32 (Corollary of [54, Proposition 6.4]). Let Ω be a distribution over 𝐴𝑟 whose
     support is a symmetric BKLM-connected relation of arity 𝑟 ≥ 2 and size ≥ 2.
        For all 𝛿 > 0 there exist 𝜏, 𝑘 > 0 such that if 𝑔 : 𝐴𝑛 → [0, 1] with E 𝑥∼Ω𝑖𝑛 [𝑔(𝑥)] ≥ 𝛿 for
     each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟], and
                       " 𝑟        #
                        Ö
                              (𝑖)
               E           𝑔(𝑥 ) = 𝑜(1)
          ( 𝑥 (1) ,...,𝑥 (𝑟 ) )∼Ω𝑛    𝑖=1

     then

          max max Inf ≤𝑗 𝑘 [𝑔; Ω𝑖 ] > 𝜏.
          𝑖 ∈ [𝑟 ] 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]

     Proof of Theorem 32. We apply Theorem 38 with 𝐴1 = · · · = 𝐴𝑟 = 𝐴 and 𝑓1 = · · · = 𝑓𝑟 = 𝑔.
        Clearly 𝛼, the minimum probability of any atom in Ω, satisfies 𝛼 ≤ 1/2. Since the support
     of Ω is BKLM-connected and symmetric, we deduce from Lemma 35 that the correlation
                        !
               Ö
         𝜌 𝐴𝑗,    𝐴𝑖 ; Ω = 𝜌 < 1
                     𝑖≠ 𝑗

     for any 𝑗 ∈ [𝑟]. Hence the assumptions of Theorem 38 are satisfied.
         We will argue, by contraposition, that it is possible to find 𝜀 > 0 small enough so that
                                                 " 𝑟         #
                                                    Ö
         Γ𝜌 E [𝑔], . . . , E [𝑔] − 𝜀 >    E             𝑔(𝑥 𝑖 ) = 𝑜(1).
                Ω1                   Ω𝑟     ( 𝑥 (1) ,..., 𝑥 (𝑟 ) )∼Ω𝑛   𝑖=1

     Then Theorem 38 gives us 𝜏 > 0, we define 𝑘 = log(1/𝜏)/log(1/𝛼), and that would conclude
     the proof.
         Since the support of Ω is BKLM-connected, we know from Lemma 35 that 𝜌 ∈ [0, 1) 𝑟 −1 .
     It suffices to note that Γ𝜌 (E1 [𝑔], . . . , E𝑟 [𝑔]) > 0 by Observation 37.            ◀


      B         Full proof of the hardness theorem
     ▶ Theorem 25. Let ∅ ≠ 𝑅 ⊆ 𝐴𝑟 be a symmetric BKLM-connected relation of arity 𝑟 ≥ 2.
     For any 𝑑 such that 𝑅 → NAE𝑟(𝑑) , the problem PCSP(𝑅, NAE𝑟(𝑑) ) is NP-hard, assuming the
     Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture.

         We will assume that each 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴 can be extended to a tuple (𝑎, 𝑎 2 , . . . , 𝑎 𝑟 ) ∈ 𝑅; otherwise
     we can remove such 𝑎 from 𝐴 without affecting the complexity of the PCSP in question.
     Throughout the proof, 𝑟, 𝑑, and | 𝐴| are treated as constants. We use the standard Big-O
     notation to describe asymptotic bounds: for example, writing 𝑓 (𝑛) = O (𝑔(𝑛)) means that
     𝑓 (𝑛) is upper-bounded by a constant times 𝑔(𝑛) for all sufficiently large 𝑛. Similarly, writing
     𝑓 (𝑛) = 𝑜(1) means that 𝑓 (𝑛) → 0 as 𝑛 → ∞.

     Reduction
     We reduce from the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture (see Conjecture 28) to our PCSP. Let Φ =
     (𝑈 ∪ 𝑉, 𝐸, [2𝑛], [𝑛], {𝜋𝑒 } 𝑒∈𝐸 ) be a Rich 2-to-1 Label Cover instance. The reduction will
     produce an instance of PCSP(𝑅, NAE𝑟(𝑑) ), that is, an 𝑟-uniform hypergraph 𝐻. Let 𝜔 be the
     uniform distribution over 𝑅. We can always find a distribution Ω over 𝑅 which
     1. has the same support as 𝜔,
     2. satisfies 𝑛 · Ω(𝑎) ∈ Z for every 𝑎 ∈ 𝑅, and
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                                        29


3. is 𝑂 (1/𝑛2 )-close in KL-divergence16 to 𝜔.
In particular, the product distributions Ω2𝑛 and 𝜔2𝑛 are O (1/𝑛)-close√︁ in KL-divergence, and
by Pinsker’s inequality the statistical distance17 between them is O ( 1/𝑛) = 𝑜(1). We denote
𝛼 := min 𝑎∈ 𝑅 𝜔(𝑎)/2 > 0; provided 𝑛 is sufficiently large, we have that min 𝑎∈𝑅 Ω(𝑎) ≥ 𝛼.
    For each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟], denote by Ω𝑖 the marginal distribution of Ω to the 𝑖-th coordinate. Put
    (𝑖)                                                         (𝑖)
#         = (𝑛 · Ω𝑖 (𝑎)) 𝑎 ∈ N 𝐴; note that each #                    is 𝛼-balanced.
                                                                                                (𝑖)
    We replace each vertex 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 with copies of the multislices S# for each 𝑖 = 1 . . . 𝑟. We
                                                             (𝑖)
represent these as triples (𝑣, 𝑖, 𝑥) where 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟] and 𝑥 ∈ S# . All these triples form the set
of vertices 𝑉 (𝐻).

Folding
We define the relation ∼ on 𝑉 (𝐻) by (𝑣, 𝑖, 𝑥) ∼ (𝑣 ′ , 𝑖 ′ , 𝑥 ′ ) if there is a common neighbour
                                                                                   ( 𝑗)
                                                                          −1 (𝑥) = 𝜋 −1 (𝑥 ′ ).
𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 of 𝑣 and 𝑣 ′ , index 𝑗 ∈ [𝑟], and a tuple 𝑦 ∈ S2# such that 𝑦 = 𝜋𝑢,𝑣          𝑢,𝑣 ′
We extend ∼ to an equivalence relation on 𝑉 (𝐻), which, abusing notation, we also denote
by ∼. In the hypergraph 𝐻, we will identify all vertices in the same equivalence class of ∼,
which can be done in logarithmic space [58].

Hyperedges
Recall the definition of
                           𝑟
                            Ö               n                            o           
     Ω      (1)        (𝑟 )     2𝑛                  (1)           (𝑟 )
   𝜇 𝑛 = (𝑥 , . . . , 𝑥 ) ∈   𝐴    : ∀𝑎 ∈ 𝑅. 𝑗 : (𝑥 𝑗 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑗 ) = 𝑎 = 2𝑛 · Ω(𝑎) ,
                                              𝑖=1

                                (𝑖)
and observe that 𝜇Ω
                      Î𝑟
                  𝑛 ⊆   𝑖=1 S2# . The hyperedges of 𝐻 are described by the following
sampling procedure. Sample 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 and (𝑥 (1) , . . . , 𝑥 (𝑟 ) ) ∈ 𝜇Ω
                                                                  𝑛 , both uniformly at random. For
                                                                                                            (𝑖)
each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟], sample a neighbour 𝑣 𝑖 of 𝑢 conditioned on 𝑥 (𝑖) = 𝜋𝑢𝑣
                                                                  −1 (𝑦 (𝑖) ) for some 𝑦 (𝑖) ∈ S# .
                                                                    𝑖
Add the hyperedge over

      (𝑣 1 , 1, 𝑦 (1) ), . . . , (𝑣 𝑟 , 𝑟, 𝑦 (𝑟 ) ).

Reduction correctness
▷ Claim 39 (Completeness). If Φ (Label Cover instance) has a solution, then 𝐻 → 𝑅.
Proof. Let 𝑠 : 𝑈 → [2𝑛] and 𝑠′ : 𝑉 → [𝑛] be labellings that satisfy all the constraints of Φ.
We define the assignment ℎ : 𝑉 (𝐻) → 𝐴 as ℎ(𝑣, 𝑖, 𝑦) = 𝑦 𝑠′ (𝑣) .
   We will argue that ℎ is a homomorphism from 𝐻 to 𝑅. Indeed, consider a hyperedge

      (𝑣 1 , 1, 𝑦 (1) ), . . . , (𝑣 𝑟 , 𝑟, 𝑦 (𝑟 ) )

witnessed by a common neighbour 𝑢. It suffices to prove that
                                                                                    
     ℎ(𝑣 1 , 1, 𝑦 (1) ), . . . , ℎ(𝑣 𝑟 , 𝑟, 𝑦 (𝑟 ) ) = 𝑦 𝑠(1)                 (𝑟 )
                                                           ′ (𝑣 ) , . . . , 𝑦 𝑠 ′ (𝑣 )
                                                               1                    𝑟
                                                                                         ∈ 𝑅.


16 Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence is an information-theoretic measure of difference between distribution;

   it measures how much an approximating distribution (Ω in our case) is different from the true distribution
   (𝜔 in our case).
17 The statistical distance is given by 1 Í          2𝑛       2𝑛 (𝑠) |. Pinsker’s inequality (ignoring constant
                                        2   𝑠∈𝑅 2𝑛 |Ω (𝑠) − 𝜔
   factors) states that the statistical distance between two distributions is at most of the order of the
   square root of the KL-divergence between the two distributions.
30   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


     Thanks to the equivalence constraints ∼, the right-hand side tuple is exactly
                                                            
           −1
          𝜋𝑢𝑣1
               (𝑦 (1) ) 𝑠 (𝑢) , . . . , 𝜋𝑢𝑣
                                         −1
                                           𝑟
                                             (𝑦 (𝑟 ) ) 𝑠 (𝑢)

     which belongs to 𝑅 by the definition of 𝜇Ω
                                              𝑛.                                                      ◀

     ▷ Claim 40 (Soundness). If 𝐻 → NAE𝑟(𝑑) , then there exists a labelling of Φ (Label Cover
     instance) with a value > 𝜀.

     Proof. Since 𝐻 → NAE𝑟(𝑑) , there is a subset of 𝑉 (𝐻) of fractional size at least 1/𝑑 that does
     not induce any hyperedge in 𝐻; let 𝑓 : 𝑉 (𝐻) → {0, 1} be its indicator function. In other
     words,

                 E          [ 𝑓 (𝑣, 𝑖, 𝑦)] ≥ 1/𝑑,
         (𝑣,𝑖,𝑦) ∈𝑉 (𝐻 )


     and for every hyperedge (𝑦 (1) , . . . , 𝑦 (𝑟 ) ) we have
         𝑟
         Ö           
               𝑓 𝑦 (𝑖) = 0.
         𝑖=1

                                                            (𝑖)
         For each 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 and 𝑖 o∈ [𝑟], let 𝑓𝑣,𝑖 : S#               → {0, 1} be 𝑓 restricted to the domain
                                           (𝑖)                                        (𝑖)
     n
      (𝑣, 𝑖, 𝑦) | 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟], 𝑦 ∈ S# . Fix 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈. For all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟] and all 𝑥 ∈ S2# , the projections
     of 𝑥 along 𝜋𝑢𝑣 for neighbours 𝑣 of 𝑢 get the same value in [𝑑] by the homomorphism, due
     to the equality constraints (equivalence ∼). Therefore, we may think that this value is also
                                                                                             (𝑖)
     given to the “imaginary” vertex (𝑢, 𝑖, 𝑥), and thus think of a function 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 : S2# → {0, 1}.
                                                             𝜋𝑢𝑣
     In particular, for any 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 and 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟], we have 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 −−−→ 𝑓𝑣,𝑖 for any neighbour 𝑣 of 𝑢.
        By the regularity of (𝑈 ∪ 𝑉, 𝐸) and richness, these functions also satisfy

          E      E E[ 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 ] ≥ 1/𝑑.
         𝑢∈𝑈 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟 ]

     Denote 𝛿 := 1/(2𝑑). By an averaging argument, we obtain a set Good ⊆ 𝑈 of fractional size
     at least 𝛿 such that

         ∀𝑢 ∈ Good : E E[ 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 ] ≥ 𝛿.
                                𝑖 ∈ [𝑟 ]


        Fix 𝑢 ∈ Good. The equality constraints ensure that, sampling (𝑥 (1) , . . . , 𝑥 (𝑟 ) ) ∈ 𝜇Ω
                                                                                                  𝑛
     uniformly at random, we have
          " 𝑟             #
           Ö
                      (𝑖)
        E      𝑓𝑢,𝑖 (𝑥 ) = 0.
               𝑖=1

     We apply Theorem 31 (the invariance principle) to { 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 }𝑟𝑖=1 , and obtain
                     " 𝑟               #
                      Ö
                                   (𝑖)
              E          𝑇𝑖 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 (𝑥 ) = 𝑜(1)
         ( 𝑥 (1) ,...,𝑥 (𝑟 ) )∼Ω2𝑛   𝑖=1

                                                    (𝑖)
     where 𝑇𝑖 is the lifting operator for # . We now want to define a single function in order to
     appeal to Theorem 32.
        Let 𝑔𝑢 : 𝐴2𝑛 → {0, 1} be defined as follows: given 𝑥 ∈ 𝐴2𝑛 , we guess 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟] such that 𝑥
     was sampled from Ω2𝑛   𝑖 , and output 𝑇𝑖 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 (𝑥). We claim that this guess is successful except
D. Banakh, A. Barsukov, and T.-V. Nakajima                                                          31


with probability 𝑜(1): first, there is a constant Δ > 0 such that the total variation distance
between any Ω𝑖 and Ω𝑖 ′ is at least Δ unless the two distributions are identical. Thus, for
sufficiently large 𝑛, the distributions Ω2𝑛        2𝑛
                                          𝑖 and Ω𝑖 ′ are either identical, or 1 − 𝑜(1) far. For
any 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟], we obtain that

         E [𝑔𝑢 (𝑥)] ≥                                (statistical closeness of 𝜔 and Ω)
       𝑥∼𝜔𝑖2𝑛

   ≥ E [𝑔𝑢 (𝑥)] − 𝑜(1) ≥                                                 (guess of 𝑔𝑢 )
       𝑥∼Ω2𝑛
          𝑖

   ≥ E [𝑇𝑖 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 (𝑥)] − 2𝑜(1) =                                     (Markov operator)
       𝑥∼Ω2𝑛
          𝑖

   =     E [ 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 ] − 2𝑜(1).
               (𝑖)
       S2#

Since E𝑖 E[ 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 ] ≥ 𝛿, there must exist 𝑖 such that

                      𝛿          𝛿
       E [𝑔𝑢 (𝑥)] ≥     − 2𝑜(1) ≥ .
    𝑥∼𝜔𝑖2𝑛            𝑟          2𝑟

Observe that 𝜔1 = · · · = 𝜔𝑟 as 𝜔 is a uniform distribution over a symmetric relation, thus
the inequality above holds for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟]. By the statistical closeness of 𝜔 and Ω again, we
conclude that
                      𝛿           𝛿
       E [𝑔𝑢 (𝑥)] ≥      − 𝑜(1) ≥
    𝑥∼Ω2𝑛
       𝑖
                      2𝑟          4𝑟

for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟]. Applying the noise inequality Theorem 32 to 𝑔𝑢 , we obtain 𝜏, 𝑘 > 0 and 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟]
such that

    max Inf ≤𝑗 𝑘 𝑔𝑢 ; Ω2𝑛
                         
                       𝑖    > 𝜏.
    𝑗 ∈ [2𝑛]


Under Ω2𝑛
       𝑖 the distributions of 𝑔𝑢 and 𝑇𝑖 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 are statistically close, thus

    max Inf ≤𝑗 𝑘 𝑇𝑖 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 ; Ω2𝑛
                              
                            𝑖    > 𝜏 − 𝑜(1) > 𝜏/2.
    𝑗 ∈ [2𝑛]

Assign to 𝑢 any label 𝑗 that maximises the expression above (for some 𝑖); to the vertices
𝑢 ′ ∈ 𝑈 \ Good assign arbitrary labels.
     We now want to appeal to Lemma 33 in order to label the vertices in 𝑉. Fix any sufficiently
                  (𝑖)
small 𝛽 that is # -valid for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟]. To each 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 assign a label uniformly at random
                                                                             (𝑖)
out of the 𝑟 coordinates 𝑑 𝑓𝑣,𝑖 obtained from Lemma 33 applied to # for 𝑖 = 1..𝑟.
   We shall argue that the value of this labelling is greater than 𝜀, which would conclude
the proof. Fix 𝑢 ∈ Good and its label 𝑗 ∈ [2𝑛], along with 𝑖 ∈ [𝑟] that witnesses it. For a
random neighbour 𝑣 of 𝑢, by the richness of the instance, the constraint 𝜋𝑢𝑣 is distributed
                                             𝜋𝑢𝑣
uniformly among all 2-to-1 maps, and 𝑓𝑢,𝑖 −−−→ 𝑓𝑣,𝑖 . By Lemma 33, we get that 𝜋𝑢𝑣 ( 𝑗) = 𝑑 𝑓𝑣,𝑖
with probability at least 𝐶 (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜏, 𝑘). In particular, 𝜋𝑢𝑣 ( 𝑗) is the label assigned to 𝑣 with
probability at least 𝐶 (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜏, 𝑘)/𝑟. Thus, by the biregularity of Φ, the probability that our
labelling satisfies a uniformly random edge (𝑢, 𝑣) is at least

    |Good| 𝐶 (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜏, 𝑘)     𝐶 (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜏, 𝑘)
          ·               ≥𝛿·                ,
      |𝑈|        𝑟                  𝑟

so it suffices to pick 𝜀 < 𝐶 (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜏, 𝑘)/𝑟.
32   Towards infinite PCSP: a dichotomy for monochromatic cliques


         The dependency of various parameters used in the soundness proof on one another is
     a delicate matter, so we shall elaborate. First of all, note that 𝑛 can be assumed to be
     sufficiently large as long as 𝜀 > 0 is allowed to be chosen arbitrarily small. Recall that we
     treat 𝐴, 𝑟, 𝑅, and 𝑑 as constants. Therefore, 𝛼 and 𝛿 are also constants. Then 𝜏 and 𝑘 are
     obtained from Theorem 32. We find a suitable sufficiently small 𝛽 > 0, and pick 𝜀 > 0 small
     enough so that 𝜀 ≤ 𝛿 · 𝐶 (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜏, 𝑘)/𝑟, that is, the expected fraction of satisfied constraints.
     Finally, for this 𝜀 the Rich 2-to-1 Conjecture gives 𝑛. It remains to note that we must ensure
     that 𝛽𝑛 ∈ N: we can change 𝛽 slightly to arrange that without breaking other dependencies.
     To see how, after fixing the upper-bound 𝐵 on 𝛽, take 𝜀 > 0 extremely tiny, which forces 𝑛
     to be extremely large. Now note that there exists ℓ ∈ N such that 𝐵/2 ≤ ℓ/𝑛 ≤ 𝐵. It suffices
     to take 𝛽 = ℓ/𝑛.                                                                              ◀
