                                         Distributed Quantum Advantage in
                                         Locally Checkable Labeling Problems1

                                         Alkida Balliu · Gran Sasso Science Institute
                                         Filippo Casagrande · Gran Sasso Science Institute
                                         Francesco d’Amore · Gran Sasso Science Institute
                                         Massimo Equi · Aalto University
                                         Barbara Keller · Aalto University
                                         Henrik Lievonen · Aalto University
                                         Dennis Olivetti · Gran Sasso Science Institute
                                         Gustav Schmid · University of Freiburg
                                         Jukka Suomela · Aalto University
arXiv:2504.05191v2 [cs.DC] 17 Aug 2026




                                         Abstract. In this paper, we present the first known example of a locally checkable labeling
                                         problem (LCL) that admits asymptotic distributed quantum advantage in the LOCAL model
                                         of distributed computing: our problem can be solved in O(log n) communication rounds in the
                                         quantum-LOCAL model, but it requires Ω(log n · log0.99 log n) communication rounds in the classical
                                         randomized-LOCAL model.
                                              We also show that distributed quantum advantage cannot be arbitrarily large: if an LCLp
                                                                                                                                    problem
                                         can be solved in T (n) rounds in the quantum-LOCAL model, it can also be solved in Õ( nT (n))
                                         rounds in the classical randomized-LOCAL model. In particular, an LCL problem that is strictly
                                         global classically is also almost-global in quantum-LOCAL.
                                              This solves a major open question at the intersection of distributed graph algorithms and
                                         quantum computing. LCL problems [Naor and Stockmeyer, STOC 1993] have been extensively
                                         studied in the past decade and they are by now very well-understood in the classical LOCAL model,
                                         yet whether any of them admits a genuine quantum advantage has remained open. Coiteux-Roy et
                                         al. [STOC 2024] showed that for some specific LCL problems, if quantum helps, it cannot help by
                                         much. Akbari et al. [STOC 2025] showed that, for some LCLs, in rooted trees, quantum-LOCAL and
                                         randomized-LOCAL have the same power. Balliu et al. [STOC 2025] showed that quantum helps in
                                         solving locally checkable problems faster when the maximum degree of the graph is super-constant;
                                         however, this does not give any asymptotic quantum advantage for LCLs. The above-mentioned
                                         works repeatedly asked the key question of whether quantum helps for LCLs. We solve this open
                                         question by giving the first example of an LCL problem that admits a super-constant distributed
                                         quantum advantage, and by also giving the first result that puts limits on distributed quantum
                                         advantage for LCLs in general graphs.
                                              Our second result also holds for T (n)-dependent probability distributions. As a corollary, if
                                         there exists a finitely dependent distribution over valid labelings of some LCL problem Π, then
                                                                                         √
                                         the same problem Π can also be solved in Õ( n) rounds in the classical randomized-LOCAL and
                                         deterministic-LOCAL models. That is, finitely dependent distributions cannot exist for global LCL
                                         problems.


                                           1
                                               This work was originally presented at SODA 2026 [BCd+26]
1     Introduction
Does quantum computation and communication help with solving graph problems in the distributed
setting? We study this question in the usual LOCAL model of distributed computing, more precisely
comparing these two settings (see Section 2 for precise definitions):

    • Randomized-LOCAL model: Each node of the input graph is a classical computer (that
      can store an arbitrary number of classical bits), and each edge is a classical communication
      channel (that can transmit an arbitrary number of classical bits per communication round).
      Each node is initialized with its own independent random bit string.

    • Quantum-LOCAL model: Each node of the input graph is a quantum computer (that can
      store an arbitrary number of qubits), and each edge is a quantum communication channel
      (that can transmit an arbitrary number of qubits per communication round). Each node is
      initialized with its own unentangled qubits.

Given a graph problem Π (e.g. graph coloring), we say that it can be solved in T (n) rounds if there
is a distributed algorithm A such that in any n-node graph after T (n) communication rounds each
node terminates and outputs its own part of the solution (e.g. its own color).

1.1   Prior work on distributed quantum advantage
It is not at all obvious if quantum-LOCAL could possibly admit any advantage over randomized-
LOCAL; after all, we did not put any limits on the amount of local computation, local storage, or
number of bits communicated per round. Could it be the case that any quantum-LOCAL algorithm
can be simulated with a classical algorithm in the same number of rounds (at least asymptotically),
if we just encode the local state of qubits with an exponentially larger number of classical bits?
    Surprisingly, this turns out not to be the case: Le Gall, Nishimura, and Rosmanis [LNR19] show
that there are graph problems that can be solved in O(1) rounds in quantum-LOCAL but that
require Ω(n) rounds in classical randomized-LOCAL. However, the problem studied in [LNR19] is
very different from problems commonly studied in the theory of distributed graph algorithms. In
particular, their problem has an inherently global specification.

1.2   Prior work on LCL problems
In recent years, a large body of literature has focused on locally checkable labeling problems,
or LCLs in brief, first introduced by Naor and Stockmeyer [NS95]. These are graph problems in
which valid solutions can be specified by listing a finite set of valid labeled neighborhoods. LCLs
strike a balance between being broad enough so that they contain a large number of interesting
graph problems and being narrow enough so that it is possible to prove strong theorems that apply
to all LCL problems, see e.g. [NS95, CP19, CKP19, BFH+16, BHK+18, BBO+21, BBO+20, Suo20,
DDL+23]. There are numerous results about LCL problems in the classical LOCAL model, yet we
do not know if all of these results hold also in the quantum-LOCAL model. Hence, this is the key
question that we study: do any LCL problems admit a distributed quantum advantage?
    There are several papers that have so far delivered mainly negative results: we have learned about
cases in which quantum cannot help, at least not much [CDG+24, DKL+24, ACd+25, BCC+25],
and we have also learned about barriers for studying such questions [ACd+25]. The main exception
is the very recent work [BBC+25] that showed the following separation result: there is a family of
LCL problems GHZ(∆) parameterized by maximum degree ∆ such that GHZ(∆) can be solved in
O(1) rounds in quantum-LOCAL but it requires Ω(∆) rounds in randomized-LOCAL. However,

                                                  1
this does not yield a super-constant separation for any fixed LCL problem: for any fixed ∆, problem
GHZ(∆) is an LCL that can be solved in O(1) rounds (albeit with very different constants) in both
quantum-LOCAL and randomized-LOCAL.
    Is it possible to exhibit a single LCL problem Π such that Π is solvable in T (n) rounds in
quantum-LOCAL but requires ω(T (n)) rounds in classical models? This is a key open question
that has been mentioned repeatedly in the literature, see e.g. [CDG+24, ACd+25, BBC+25, Suo24].

1.3   Contribution 1: first LCL problem with a quantum advantage
In this work we show that the answer is yes: quantum-LOCAL is strictly stronger than randomized-
LOCAL for LCL problems. More precisely, in Sections 3 and 5 we prove:

Theorem 1.1. There is an LCL problem Π such that the round complexity of Π is O(log n) in
quantum-LOCAL but Ω(log n · log0.99 log n) in randomized-LOCAL.

    This brings us both good news and bad news: The good news is that this demonstrates that
distributed quantum computing indeed helps even when restricted to the family of LCL problems.
The bad news is that there is now no longer hope that we could prove a theorem that shows that
quantum-LOCAL and randomized-LOCAL are asymptotically equally strong for LCL problems,
enabling us to lift a large body of prior work from classical models to the quantum model—to fully
characterize an LCL problem, we may need to separately classify its locality in deterministic-LOCAL,
randomized-LOCAL, and quantum-LOCAL.

1.4   Contribution 2: limits on quantum advantage for LCLs
While Theorem 1.1 resolves the open question, the separation that we have between the classical
and quantum models is tiny, especially if we compare this with the non-LCL problem from [LNR19]
that admits an O(1)-round quantum algorithm and requires Ω(n) rounds in classical models. Could
we demonstrate such a separation with LCL problems?
    In this work we show that the answer is no: there is no LCL with a linear-in-n gap between
classical and quantum round complexities. Formally, in Section 4 we show:

Theorem 1.2. Let Π be any p LCL problem that can be solved in T (n) rounds in quantum-LOCAL.
Then Π can be solved in O( nT (n) poly log n) rounds in randomized-LOCAL.

    In particular, if the classical round complexity is Ω(n), i.e., the problem is inherently global,
then also in the quantum-LOCAL model we need Ω̃(n) rounds (here we are using Ω̃ and Õ to hide
polylogarithmic factors).
    The main open question after this work is narrowing down the gap between Theorems 1.1
and 1.2: can we construct LCLs where quantum-LOCAL helps more than some doubly-logarithmic
factors? Currently, there is a larger gap between deterministic-LOCAL and randomized-LOCAL
than randomized-LOCAL and quantum-LOCAL, which seems counterintuitive: is access to classical
randomness already almost as good as the ability to manipulate qubits?
    While we do not know yet if Theorem 1.2 is tight, in Section 1.6 we will see that there is a direct
generalization of Theorem 1.2 to stronger (super-quantum) models, and there the result turns out to
                                                                         √
be close to the best possible, in the sense that we may have a gap of Ω̃( n) between classical models
and super-quantum models. Hence to strengthen the claim of Theorem 1.2, we need techniques that
do not generalize far beyond quantum-LOCAL.




                                                  2
1.5   Key ideas in the proof of Theorem 1.1
In the proof of Theorem 1.1, the key novel ingredient is the observation that the GHZ(∆) problem
from [BBC+25] can be linearized (with high-degree nodes replaced by paths in a way that preserves
local checkability), and then further padded with the technique from [BBO+20] to construct a
genuine LCL problem that admits a quantum advantage. We summarize here the key elements of
the proof.

LCL problems. As our goal is to construct an LCL problem that exhibits distributed quantum
advantages, let us recall what kind of entities LCL problems are. We will present a formal definition
in Section 2, but the following informal description suffices for now: An LCL problem Π can be
specified by listing a finite set of valid labeled radius-r neighborhoods N for some constant r. The
task is to label nodes and/or edges of the input graph G, and a solution is feasible if for every node
v, the radius-r neighborhood of v is isomorphic to one of the neighborhoods in N .
    In particular, this implies that the set of node labels and edge labels has to be also finite, and G
must be a bounded-degree graph in order to admit a solution to Π. This leads to another equivalent
way of characterizing LCL problems: they are graph problems for bounded-degree graphs, where
the task is to label nodes and/or edges with labels from a finite alphabet, and the validity of a
solution can be verified in a distributed manner by checking all constant-radius local neighborhoods.
    The restrictions may sound at first technical, but this exact definition originally introduced by
[NS95] has been tremendously successful: this is a problem family that is now very well-understood
especially for the classical LOCAL model. What we seek to demonstrate is that inside this well-
understood yet restrictive family there is indeed a problem Π that admits a super-constant quantum
advantage.

Starting point: the iterated GHZ problem. Let us next recall the key elements of the
problem family GHZ(∆) from [BBC+25]. Here GHZ(∆) is a family of LCL problems, parameterized
by ∆. The problem family is defined so that hard instances are bipartite graphs, where one part
consists of white nodes of degree ∆ and the other part consists of black nodes of degree 3. White
nodes represent players and black nodes represent games—more precisely, they are instances of
the GHZ game [GHZ89, Mer90], which is a 3-party game where players can win the game without
communication if they hold entangled qubits. The games are labeled with colors 1, 2, . . . , ∆, so that
each player is adjacent to one game of each color.
                                          player (degree Δ)


                                                         games (degree 3)
                                    1 2              … Δ game colors
                                          player
                                                     player



Crucially, for each player, the input that they have in game of color i is the output they got from
game of color i − 1. The key idea is that for a classical algorithm to win in a color-i game, it first has
to know the outputs of color-(i − 1) games, and spend additional communication rounds after that
to coordinate a feasible solution for the color-i game. Such a strategy is inherently sequential, taking
Ω(∆) rounds, and it can be shown with the round elimination technique [Bra19] that this is indeed
the best that a classical algorithm can do (at least in neighborhoods that are tree-like). However, a
quantum algorithm can do much better: we can use one communication round to establish a set of


                                                      3
shared qubits for each game, and then the players can do the rest locally, by applying appropriate
measurements to the shared qubits; this is O(1) rounds independently of ∆.
    At this point it is also good to recall that in the classical LOCAL model, time and distances are
interchangeable: a T -round algorithm is equivalent to a function that maps radius-T neighborhoods
to local outputs (and vice versa). So the key point is this: any classical algorithm that solves
GHZ(∆) has to see up to distance Ω(∆), in neighborhoods that locally look like a two-colored tree in
which all white nodes have degree ∆ and black nodes have degree 3 (we will call it a (∆, 3)-biregular
tree).
                                                                                    √
    Now GHZ(∆) is a well-defined graph problem even if we plug in e.g. ∆ = n, but then we
                                                                      √
cannot claim that any classical algorithm for solving it requires Ω( n) rounds, simply because we
                                                              √                          √
can no longer construct a hard instance that would be a ( n, 3)-biregular tree of depth n with at
most n nodes, which certainly does not exist. However, a more modest choice of ∆ ≈ log n/ log log n
makes sense and results in a graph problem that admits an O(1)-round quantum algorithm but
requires Ω(log n/ log log n) rounds for any classical deterministic algorithm (the case of classical
randomized algorithms is more involved, but let us put it aside for now for the purposes of this
informal overview). However, this is not an LCL problem. It is some labeling problem in which
validity of a solution is locally verifiable, but it cannot be described with any finite set of valid
neighborhoods; in particular, we will need super-constant degrees in the input graph.
    Yet this is a useful source of inspiration for the present work. We aim at engineering a graph
problem Π that captures the spirit of “what would happen if we take GHZ(∆) and plug in something
like ∆ ≈ log n/ log log n,” and at the same time Π is a genuine LCL problem in the strict sense of
[NS95], without any cheating.

Linearizing the iterated GHZ problem. The key new observation is that GHZ(∆) happens
to have a very convenient property: for each player, the set of valid labels on the incident edge
number i only depends on the labels of the incident edge number i − 1. In particular, there is a
finite automaton that processes the labels of the incident edges in the order specified by the colors of
the games and determines if a solution is valid from the player’s perspective. This makes it possible
to linearize the problem so that we can replace a player of degree ∆ with a path of ∆ nodes. This
way we can (1) eliminate high-degree nodes, (2) preserve the property that we have a finite set of
labels, and (3) preserve the property that the feasibility of a solution can be verified locally.




Therefore we can define an LCL problem Π1 , where all nodes have low degrees, and a path with ∆
white nodes behaves as if it was a degree-∆ player in the original GHZ(∆) problem. However, while
doing this translation, we lose all control over the degrees of the players. What if the adversary
constructs an input where there is a white path of length Θ(n)? Even a quantum algorithm would
have to spend Θ(n) rounds to just emulate the behavior of a single Θ(n)-degree player, and hence
there is no room for quantum advantage (as any problem can be solved in O(n) rounds by brute
force).
    We circumvent this challenge with a commonly-used solution: instead of a path we use a tree-like
construction (a balanced binary tree where each level forms a path). In particular, this way the
white nodes that represent a ∆-degree player will be within distance O(log ∆) from each other, and
even in the worst case the overhead of simulating one such node is O(log n). We can furthermore

                                                   4
add additional rules that ensure that if the adversary presents a graph that does not represent
a valid instance, we can nevertheless produce a valid labeling in O(log n) rounds; let us call the
resulting LCL problem Π2 .




Padding. Unfortunately, Π2 as constructed above does not admit any distributed quantum
advantage. To construct a hard instance for classical algorithms, we would need to construct
a (∆, r)-biregular tree of depth Ω(∆), and then replace each degree-∆ node with our tree-like
construction. But we will have to use ∆ = O(log n/ log log n) so that we do not run out of nodes. To
construct a worst-case instance, we would now take an O(∆)-deep (∆, r)-biregular tree and replace
each white degree-∆ node with a tree-like construction of diameter O(log ∆). This replacement
process increases the diameter of the graph from O(∆) to O(∆) · O(log ∆). But the diameter of
the entire graph would be still bounded by O(∆) · O(log ∆) = O(log n), and a classical algorithm
could solve it trivially in O(log n) rounds by gathering everything. On the other hand, a quantum
algorithm needs Ω(log n) rounds to merely simulate one player in the worst case, so we gained
nothing.
   We circumvent this issue by borrowing the idea of padding from [BBO+20]. In essence, we
replace each edge between a player (white node) and a game (black node) with another tree-like
construction, where the adversary gets to choose the height of the tree.


                                                                               player


                                                                               padding


                                                                               games


It turns out that this is enough to construct an LCL problem Π that exhibits a distributed quantum
advantage! In essence, the reason for this is as follows:

   • Quantum algorithms: In the worst case the adversary can add padding of depth O(log n), and
     the total overhead that we have in simulating the original O(1)-round quantum algorithm
     is O(log n) rounds to simulate the activities of the players plus O(log n) rounds to transmit
     information across a padded edge, in total O(log n) rounds.

   • Classical algorithms: The adversary can select a suitable super-constant ∆ and use trees of
     height O(log ∆) to represent players and trees of height O(log n) for padding. We can start
     with a GHZ(∆)-instance with e.g. Θ(n1/3 ) players, and we can then afford to use e.g. Θ(n1/3 )
     nodes for each tree that we use in padding. This results in an instance in which the algorithm
     has to see beyond ∆ padded edges, in total up to distance Ω(∆ log n), which is worse than the
     complexity of the quantum algorithm for a super-constant ∆.

This is the essence of the construction. We give a more formal high-level overview in Section 3 and
the technical details are postponed to Section 5.



                                                 5
Generalizations and future work. We note here that exactly the same framework is applicable
to a wide range of problems beyond GHZ(∆), as we are only making essential use of the fact that
the validity of a solution for high-degree nodes can be verified with a finite automaton that processes
edges in a sequential order, and hence we can linearize the problem. In particular, the widely-studied
maximal matching problem has the same property.
    Therefore we expect that the same construction will find use in engineering LCL problems that
separate other models. For example, the maximal matching problem would be a good candidate for
proving a separation between the quantum-LOCAL model and the SLOCAL model [GKM17].

1.6   Key ideas in the proof of Theorem 1.2
To prove Theorem 1.2, we first take a step from distributed quantum algorithms to bounded-
dependence distributions, and then observe that while such distributions cannot be efficiently
sampled in the randomized-LOCAL model, we can nevertheless do a combination of partial sampling
and brute-force completion to solve the same LCL problem.

Bounded-dependence distributions. The statement of Theorem 1.2 refers to the quantum-
LOCAL model, but it will be much more convenient to work in the bounded-dependence model
[ACd+25], which is a generalization of finitely-dependent distributions [HL16, HHL18, Hol24].
    Informally, a T -dependent distribution is a probability distribution P over labelings of some
graph G where the following holds: if we choose two sets of nodes X and Y such that their T -radius
neighborhoods do not overlap, then P restricted to X is independent of P restricted to Y .

                                                                    graph G


                                                           Y
                                            X
                                                               T
                                                T



While it is easy to see that the output of a T -round randomized-LOCAL algorithm results in a
T -dependent distribution, it also holds that the output of a T -round quantum-LOCAL algorithm
results in a T -dependent distribution. Hence it suffices to show that if we have a T -dependent
distribution P over valid solutions of some LCL√problem Π, we can construct a randomized-LOCAL
algorithm that solves the same problem in Õ( nT ) rounds.

Sampling is hard. It would be tempting to now design a randomized-LOCAL algorithm that
produces a sample from distribution P . However, this is not possible. Indeed, if we could sample
efficiently from any T -dependent distribution, we would also have a classical algorithm that efficiently
simulates the distributed quantum algorithm from [LNR19], which is known to require Ω(n) rounds.

Partial sampling is easy. We will exploit the clustering algorithm from [CDG+24]. In particular,
with
   √ it we can partition nodes into well-separated clusters
                                                        p where the diameter of each cluster is
Õ(√nT ), the number of unclustered leftover nodes is O( n/T ), and clusters can be constructed in
Õ( nT ) rounds in the randomized-LOCAL model.




                                                    6
                      graph G                                              clusters Ci
                                                                    C5
                                          C2
                                  C1              C3        C4             leftover
                                                                           nodes
                                                                    C6     between
                                                                           clusters



We will split the leftover nodes into components that are at distance Ω(T ) from each others;
                                                                                           √ in the
worst case all leftover nodes are in the same component and it will have diameter D = O( nT ).



                                  ≤D            > 2T




Now if X and Y are two components of leftover nodes, they are sufficiently far from each other
so that P restricted to X is independent of P restricted to Y . Hence we can sample from P
independently in each such component, and the joint distribution will be a sample from P restricted
to all leftover nodes.               √                                                       √
    To recap, so far we have used Õ( nT ) rounds to compute a clustering, and another O( nT )
rounds to sample from P in each component of leftover nodes. All leftover nodes have now committed
to an output.

                      graph G                                              clusters
                                                                    C5     unlabeled
                                          C2
                                  C1              C3        C4             leftover
                                                                           nodes
                                                                    C6     labeled




Completability helps us next. Now it would be tempting to switch to the clusters and locally
sample from P conditioned on what has already been sampled, with the hope of globally getting
a sample from P . But as we discussed above, this cannot work, as it would let us simulate any
quantum algorithms too efficiently in the classical models.
    This is the point in which we will have to use the assumption that P is an output distribution
that solves the LCL problem Π with high probability. In the previous step, we have produced a
sample S from P restricted to the leftover nodes. Equivalently, we can imagine that S is constructed
by the following process: we have first sampled a labeling S ∗ of the entire graph from P , and then
discarded the labels inside the clusters (keeping only the values of the leftover nodes). Now with
high probability S ∗ is a valid solution to Π, so with high probability our partial solution S can
be extended to some globally valid solution of Π. Furthermore, we can find such a completion
independently for each cluster, e.g., simply by brute force: collect the entire cluster and the partial
solution at its boundaries and find a valid completion. Here we exploit the fact that Π is a locally
checkable problem: any completion
                          √          that is locally valid √
                                                           in each cluster is also globally valid. As the
clusters√had diameter Õ( nT ), this step takes also Õ( nT ) rounds, and the total running time is
also Õ( nT ).


                                                   7
    Put together, given a T -round quantum-LOCAL algorithm for some LCL problem
                                                                          √       Π, we can
construct a randomized-LOCAL algorithm that solves the same problem in Õ( nT ) rounds. We
will give the details of the proof in Section 4.

Generalizations and future work. As we took a route through bounded-dependence distribu-
tions, we immediately get a stronger
                              √      result: T -dependent distributions over LCLs can be simulated
in randomized-LOCAL in Õ( nT ) rounds. In particular, this shows that there cannot exist an
LCL that admits a finitely dependent distribution (i.e., O(1)-dependent distribution) but requires
Ω(n) rounds to solve with classical algorithms—previously this was only known in trees [ACd+25,
DKL+24].
    Our general proof strategy can be pushed further, towards stronger models. It works directly in
the component-wise version of the online-LOCAL model [AEL+23, ACd+25]. Furthermore, online-
LOCAL algorithms with locality O(1) can be turned into component-wise algorithms [ACd+25],
and hence we also get a result that puts limits on the gap between the online-LOCAL and classical
LOCAL models. Our simulation result is also close to the best possible, as a much stronger result
would contradict with the known bounds for the problem of 3-coloring bipartite graphs, which is a
problem that can be solved with locality O(log n) in (component-wise) online-LOCAL yet requires
   √
Ω( n) rounds in the classical randomized-LOCAL model [AEL+23, CDG+24, ACd+25, CMN+23,
BHK+17]. We will discuss the extension of our result to component-wise online-LOCAL more in
Section A.


2     Preliminaries
Graphs. We work with simple undirected graphs unless otherwise specified. Let G = (V, E) be
any graph. If the set of nodes V and the set of edges E are not specified, we refer to them by the
notation V (G) and E(G), respectively. For any subset of nodes A ⊆ V , the subgraph of G induced
by A is denoted by G[A]. The distance between any two nodes u, v ∈ V is the number of edges
composing a shortest path between u and v, and is denoted by distG (u, v). The notion of distance
can be easily extended to subsets of nodes: Given any node u ∈ V and any two subsets A, B ⊆ V ,
the distance between u and A is distG (u, A) = minv∈A {distG (u, v)} and the distance between A
and B is distG (A, B) = minu∈A,v∈B {distG (u, v)}. When the graph is clear from the context, we
omit the suffix and write only dist() instead of distG ().
    For any non-negative integer T , the radius-T (closed) neighborhood of a node u in a graph G is
the set NT [u] = {v ∈ V | dist(u, v) ≤ T }. More generally, the radius-T neighborhood of any subset
of node A ⊆ V is NT [A] = ∪u∈A NT [u].
    We adopt the nomenclature half-edge to refer to any pair (v, e) where v ∈ V and e ∈ E is an
edge incident to v. In order to be able to define the class of problems we consider, we need to define
what a labeled graph is.
Definition 2.1 (Labeled graph). Let V and E be sets of labels. A graph G = (V, E) is said to be
(V, E)-labeled if the following statements are satisfied:
    1. Each node v ∈ V is assigned a label from V;
    2. Each half-edge (v, e) ∈ V × E satisfying v ∈ e is assigned a label from E.
    We also define the notion of centered graph, that is, a graph with a distinguished node that we
call the center.
Definition 2.2 (Centered graph). Let H = (V, E) be any graph, and let vH ∈ VH be any node of
H. The pair (H, vH ) is said to be a centered graph and vH is said to be the center of (H, vH ).

                                                  8
    We will focus on problems that ask to produce labelings over graphs that satisfy some constraints
in all radius-r neighborhoods of any node. We remind the reader that the eccentricity of a node v
of a graph H is the maximum distance between v and any other node of H.

Definition 2.3 (Set of constraints). Let r, ∆ ∈ N be constants, I a finite set of indices, and (V, E)
a tuple of finite label sets. Let C be a finite set of centered graphs {(Hi , vHi )}i∈I where each Hi is a
(V, E)-labeled graph of degree at most ∆ and vHi has eccentricity at most r. Then, C is said to be
an (r, ∆)-set of constraints over (V, E).

    With the following definition, we explain what it means to satisfy a set of constraints.

Definition 2.4 (Labeled graph satisfying a set of constraints). Let G = (V, E) be a (V, E)-labeled
graph for some finite sets of labels V and E. Let C be an (r, ∆)-set of constraints over (V, E) for
some finite r, ∆ ∈ N. The graph G satisfies C if the following statement is satisfied:

    • For every node v ∈ V , the (V, E)-labeled graph G[Nr [v]] is such that (G[Nr [v]], v) ∈ C.

    We are now ready to define the class of problems of interest.

Definition 2.5 (Locally checkable labeling (LCL) problems). Let r, ∆ ∈ N be constants. A locally
checkable labeling (LCL) problem Π is a tuple (Vin , Ein , Vout , Eout , C) where Vin , Ein , Vout , and Eout
are finite label sets and C is an (r, ∆)-set of constraints over (Vin × Vout , Ein × Eout ).

    We now explain what it means to solve an LCL problem Π. We are given as input a (Vin , Ein )-
labeled graph G = (V, E). For any node v ∈ V and half-edge (v, e) ∈ V × E, let us denote the input
label of v by ℓin (v), and the input label of (v, e) by ℓin ((v, e)). We want to produce an output labeling
on G so that we obtain a (Vout , Eout )-labeled graph. Let us denote by ℓout (v) and by ℓout ((v, e))
the output labels of v and (v, e), respectively. Consider the (Vin × Vout , Ein × Eout )-labeled graph G
where the labeling is defined as follows: the label of each node v is ℓ(v) = (ℓin (v), ℓout (v)), and the
label of each half-edge (v, e) is ℓ((v, e)) = (ℓin ((v, e)), ℓout ((v, e))). Now, the (Vin × Vout , Ein × Eout )-
labeled graph G must satisfy the (r, ∆)-set of constraints C over (Vin × Vout , Ein × Eout ) according to
Definition 2.4.

The LOCAL model. In the LOCAL model of computing, we are given a distributed system
of n processors/nodes. The processors are connected through a communication network that is
modeled by a graph G = (V, E). Computation proceeds in synchronous rounds: in each round,
nodes simultaneously exchange messages with their neighbors, perform some local computation,
and update their states variables based on the received messages. Note that communication
bandwidth is unconstrained (i.e., messages can be of any size) and nodes are capable of arbitrary
local computation, and it is assumed that all processes are fault-free and messages cannot be
corrupted. At the beginning of computation, all processors are identical and start with identical
copies of the same state variables, except for a distinguished local variable x(v) which stores input
data for node v. Input data for a node v encodes the number n of nodes in the network, a unique
identifier from the set [nc ] = {1, 2, . . . , nc } where c ≥ 1 is a fixed constant, and possible inputs
defined by the problem of interest (we assume nodes store both input node labels and input half-edge
labels). If computation is randomized, x(v) also encodes a private, infinite random bit string
that is independent of the random bits of all other nodes. In this case, we refer to the model as
the randomized LOCAL model as opposed to the deterministic LOCAL model. The goal of the
computation is to assign to each node v an output label ℓout (v) and computation ends when all
nodes have decided on their output labels. The running time of an algorithm is the number of


                                                       9
communication rounds required to solve a problem. If computation is randomized, we also ask that
the algorithm solves the problem of interest with probability at least 1 − 1/ poly(n), where poly n
is any polynomial function in n. Since computation and message size is unbounded, we can look
at T -rounds LOCAL algorithms as functions mapping radius-T neighborhoods of nodes to output
labels (in the deterministic case) or probability distributions over output labels (in the randomized
case). That is why we refer to the parameter T as the locality of the algorithm.

The quantum-LOCAL model. The quantum-LOCAL model of computing is similar to the
deterministic LOCAL model above, where we replace the classical processors with quantum processors
and the classical communication links with quantum communication links. More precisely, the
quantum processors can manipulate local states consisting of an unbounded number of qubits with
arbitrary unitary transformations, while the communication links are quantum communication
channels, and the local outputs can be the result of any quantum measurement. As in the
deterministic LOCAL model, adjacent nodes can exchange any number of qubits. We refer to the
randomized LOCAL model of computing as classical LOCAL, as opposed to the quantum-LOCAL
model of computing. Akin to the classical LOCAL model, also in quantum-LOCAL we ask that a
problem is solved with probability at least 1 − 1/ poly(n). This is just an intuitive definition of the
model which is sufficient for our purposes, but the interested reader can find a formal definition in
[GKM09].


3    Quantum advantage: high level ideas
In this section, we provide a high-level explanation of how the LCL problem Π that exhibits quantum
advantage is defined, and we explain why its quantum and classical complexities differ. All the
formal details are deferred to Section 5.

Proper instances. In Section 1.5, we explained how we would like a graph to be in order to have
an instance that is easy for a quantum algorithm but hard for any classical algorithm. We call the
family of graphs explained in Section 1.5 proper instances, i.e., these graphs are graphs that can be
obtained by starting from an arbitrary (not necessarily connected) graph and then replacing each
node, and each edge, with a tree-like construction.

LCLs must be promise-free. However, a standard LCL must be defined on any graph, that
is, it must not require the promise that the given input graph satisfies some specific conditions.
That is, our LCL problem Π must be well-defined even in graphs that do not look at all like proper
instances. In particular, we want a problem that, on any graph, even on those that look completely
different from a proper instance, should still be solvable in O(log n) rounds by a quantum algorithm.

Overview of the problem Π. On a high level, our (promise-free) LCL problem Π will be defined
such that it requires solving two problems, called ΠbadGraph and Πpromise . More in detail, in O(log n)
classical deterministic rounds, nodes can produce a labeling that marks invalid parts of the graph,
that is, parts of the graph that do not look like subgraphs of a proper instance. On the other hand,
the problem will be defined such that marking as invalid the parts of the graph that are actually
valid is not possible. We will formally define this labeling as an LCL called ΠbadGraph . Then, the
problem Π will require to solve some other problem Πpromise in parts of the graph that are not
marked.



                                                  10
How we define Πpromise .      The problem Πpromise will satisfy the following properties.
   • It is an LCL with promise, that is, it is guaranteed that the input graph is a proper instance.
   • In proper instances, the complexity is O(log n) for quantum algorithms but ω(log n) for
     classical randomized algorithms.

How we define ΠbadGraph .       The problem ΠbadGraph will satisfy the following properties.
   • This problem is promise-free, that is, any input graph is allowed.
   • There is a special output label for ΠbadGraph called ⊥.
   • In O(log n) classical deterministic rounds it is possible to produce a solution for ΠbadGraph
     such that the subgraph induced by nodes labeled ⊥ is a proper instance.

How we define Π.        Our LCL problem Π will then be defined as follows.
   • Nodes need to solve ΠbadGraph .
   • On the subgraph induced by nodes that output ⊥ for ΠbadGraph , nodes need to solve Πpromise .

Quantum upper bound.            Then, we will show that our problem Π can be solved in O(log n)
quantum rounds, as follows.
   • Nodes spend O(log n) classical deterministic rounds to mark invalid parts of the graph,
     guaranteeing that the subgraph induced by nodes labeled ⊥ is a proper instance.

   • Nodes spend O(log n) quantum rounds to solve Πpromise in the subgraph induced by nodes
     labeled ⊥.

Classical lower bound. Finally, we will show that our problem Π requires ω(log n) classical
randomized rounds, as follows.
   • As a lower bound graph, we consider a graph that is a proper instance. This implies that, on
     this graph, any solution for ΠbadGraph must label all nodes ⊥.

   • The (proper) instance is constructed as follows. Let G be a lower bound graph for GHZ(∆),
     where ∆ is an appropriately chosen degree, as a function of n. We replace nodes and edges
     with tree-like constructions, as follows.

        – Tree-like constructions used to replace nodes will have an appropriate height to guarantee
          that they have ∆ leaves.
        – Tree-like constructions used to replace edges will have height Θ(log n).

   • We show that if Π can be solved in O(log n) randomized classical rounds on these graphs,
     then we reach a contradiction with the lower bound for GHZ(∆). For this purpose, we will
     exploit the fact that, informally, each edge has been stretched by a Θ(log n) factor.

3.1   The tree-like gadget
A basic building block for our construction is a structure called tree-like gadget, that has already been
used in different ways in several works related to LCLs (see, e.g., [BBO+20, BGK+25, BCM+21]).
An example of tree-like gadget is shown in Figure 1. In Section 5.1, we will formally define tree-like
gadgets and state their properties.

                                                   11
                                                                    ChL   ChR

                                                                P                P
                                                                R                L
                                                        ChL ChR                  ChL ChR

                                                       P        P               P       P
                                                        R       L    R    L      R     L

Figure 1: On the left, a tree-like gadget. On the right, a tree-like gadget labeled with labels from
Σtree such that the constraints C tree are satisfied.


Local checkability of tree-like gadgets. Informally, a tree-like gadget is a perfect binary tree
in which all nodes that are at the same depth are connected via a path. It is known from previous
work that this structure is locally checkable, that is, there exist a set of labels Σtree and a set of
constraints C tree (checkable by inspecting the O(1)-radius neighborhood of each node) satisfying
the following properties.

   • Any tree-like gadget can be labeled with labels from Σtree such that the constraints C tree are
     satisfied on all nodes.

   • For any connected graph that is not a tree-like gadget, and for any labeling from Σtree , there
     exists at least one node for which the constraints C tree are not satisfied.


The LCL problem ΠbadTree . While local checkability is a very useful property, in order to define
our problem we need an even stronger property: if there is an error somewhere in the graph we
want all nodes to be able to quickly detect the error. In previous works, it is shown that tree-like
gadgets indeed satisfy this stronger property. More in detail, there exists an LCL problem ΠbadTree
satisfying the following properties.

   • There is a special output label for ΠbadTree , called ⊥.

   • For any connected graph G, there exists a solution for ΠbadTree satisfying that, if G is not a
     tree-like gadget, then no node of G is labeled ⊥.

   • Such a solution can be computed in O(log n) deterministic classical rounds.

On a high level, the problem ΠbadTree is defined as follows.

   • Labels from Σtree are an input for the problem ΠbadTree .

   • Nodes that do not satisfy the constraints C tree can directly output an error.

   • It is possible to prove that, if there is an error somewhere, all other nodes must see an error
     within distance O(log n), and ΠbadTree allows outputting pointers to prove that there is an
     error somewhere.

   • The constraints on the output of ΠbadTree are carefully defined so that, on tree-like gadgets
     that are properly labeled with labels from Σtree (i.e., the constraints C tree are satisfied on all
     nodes), no cheating is allowed, that is, it is not possible to output pointers in some carefully
     crafted way that gives a valid output for ΠbadTree .

                                                  12
                                                    0




                                       0                         0




                                0            0            1            0

Figure 2: An example of solution of ΠbadTree in which, since one node is marked (i.e., it has input 1),
all nodes output something different from ⊥ (i.e., they all output pointers). Informally, the problem
ΠbadTree allows outputting pointers, and in order to not allow cheating (i.e., by creating local cycles
with pointers), some specific sequences of pointers are forbidden in the definition of ΠbadTree . For
example, a pointer going up or down is not allowed to appear after a pointer going left or right, and
pointing to the left child is always forbidden.


   • Nodes that do not output errors or pointers must output ⊥.

For reasons that will become clear later, nodes will have an additional input for ΠbadTree , which is
either 0, i.e., unmarked nodes, or 1, i.e., marked nodes, and ΠbadTree is defined such that marked
nodes are always allowed to output an error. An example of valid solution of Πbadtree is depicted in
Figure 2.

How we will use ΠbadTree . We will define a more complex gadget, called octopus, which consists
of many tree-like structures connected in a specific way. We will define a problem ΠbadOctopus that
allows to mark invalid octopus gadgets. In the definition of ΠbadOctopus , we will use ΠbadTree as a
subproblem. Informally, our final problem Π will satisfy that, if the adversary really wants nodes
to solve Πpromise (i.e., to make the problem non-trivial), then it needs to properly label tree-like
gadgets and octopus gadgets, so that the output for the problems ΠbadTree and ΠbadOctopus needs to
be ⊥ everywhere.

3.2   The octopus gadget
In Section 5.2, we will formally define the notion of octopus gadget, and we will prove some useful
properties of this object. Informally, an octopus gadget is a graph that can be obtained as follows.
Let ∆ be an integer power of 2. Start with a tree-like gadget G0 that has ∆ leaves, and with
additional ∆ tree-like gadgets G1 , . . . , G∆ . For each 1 ≤ i ≤ ∆, add an edge between the i-th leaf
of the gadget G0 and the root of the gadget Gi . The tree-like gadget G0 is called head gadget,
while all the other tree-like gadgets are called port gadgets. The formal definition of octopus gadget
in Section 5.2 will be more general: to each leaf of the head gadget we will connect either 1 or 2
port gadgets. In this way, we will be able to handle also cases in which ∆ is not a power of 2. An
example of octopus gadget is depicted in Figure 3.

Local checkability of octopus gadgets. We will prove that, similarly to the case of tree-like
gadgets, also octopus gadgets are locally checkable. More in detail, we will prove that there exists a
set of input labels Σoctopus and a set of constraints C octopus over these labels satisfying the following
properties.

                                                   13
Figure 3: An example of octopus gadget. The connected component induced by yellow nodes and
their incident orange edges is the head gadget. Each connected component induced by gray nodes
and their incident orange edges is a port gadget. Blue edges properly connect these tree-like gadgets
to create a proper octopus gadget. Nodes and edges will be labeled such that this structure is locally
checkable. For example, blue edges will have special labels to denote that they do not belong to the
tree-like gadgets.


   • Any octopus gadget can be labeled with labels from Σoctopus such that the constraints C octopus
     are satisfied on all nodes.

   • For any connected graph that is not an octopus gadget, and for any labeling from Σoctopus ,
     there exists at least one node for which the constraints C octopus are not satisfied.

In order to define Σoctopus and C octopus , we will extend Σtree and C tree , as follows.

   • Each edge will be additionally labeled to denote whether the edge is part of a tree-like gadget,
     i.e., internal edge, or if it is an edge connecting different tree-like gadgets, i.e., external edge.

   • Each node will be additionally labeled to denote whether it is part of the head gadget or if it
     is part of a port gadget.

   • C octopus will be defined such that, in the subgraph induced by internal edges, the constraints
     C tree must hold, and such that nodes belonging to the same tree-like gadget must either be all
     labeled head or all labeled port.

   • C octopus will contain additional constraints to make sure that external edges are properly
     connected.

The LCL problem ΠbadOctopus . As in the case of tree-like gadgets, we need the stronger property
that, if there is some error somewhere, then all nodes are able to prove this fact in O(log n)
deterministic classical rounds, such that no cheating is allowed (i.e., in properly labeled octopus
gadgets, the output must be ⊥ everywhere). For this purpose, we define an LCL problem ΠbadOctopus .
On a high level, this problem is defined by requiring nodes to solve ΠbadTree multiple times, each
time having potentially more marked nodes (and hence allowed to directly output error ). More in
detail, we define ΠbadOctopus as follows.

   • Nodes that do not satisfy some of the constraints of C octopus are marked.

                                                    14
   • Nodes need to solve ΠbadTree in the subgraph induced by internal edges. Observe that it could
     be the case that some node is in a valid tree-like gadget, but some constraint of C octopus is not
     satisfied on the node (e.g., because some external edge is wrongly connected). In this case,
     since the node is marked, it is allowed to produce an error when solving ΠbadTree . Let O1 be
     the output labeling produced by the nodes at this point.

   • Nodes that are labeled to be part of a head gadget need to solve ΠbadTree again. This time,
     however, a node is marked also if it has an incident external edge connecting it to a node that
     did not output ⊥ in O1 . Let O2 be the output labeling produced by the nodes at this point.

   • Nodes that are labeled to be part of a port gadget need to solve ΠbadTree again. Similarly as
     before, this time, a node is marked also if it has an incident external edge connecting it to a
     node that did not output ⊥ in O2 .

Thanks to our triple usage of ΠbadTree , we will be able to handle bad cases like the following. Assume
that there is a broken port gadget connected to a valid head gadget, and all other port gadgets
connected to the head gadget are valid. In this case, we want ΠbadOctopus to allow a solution in
which no node outputs ⊥. Indeed, ΠbadOctopus allows the following solution.

   • In the first instance of ΠbadTree , all nodes part of the broken port gadget can output something
     different from ⊥, while all other nodes output ⊥.

   • In the second instance of ΠbadTree , the node of the head gadget that is connected to the broken
     gadget will be marked, and hence all nodes of the head gadget can output something different
     from ⊥.

   • In the third instance of ΠbadTree , all the roots of the port gadgets will be marked, and hence
     all nodes can output something different from ⊥.

In fact, we will prove that in all graphs that are not a valid octopus gadget, nodes can compute
a solution in O(log n) deterministic classical rounds such that no node outputs ⊥, while in valid
octopus gadgets, we still maintain the property that the only allowed output is ⊥ everywhere.
Figure 4 shows an example of a solution of ΠbadOctopus in a broken octopus gadget.
    Similarly as in the case of ΠbadTree , also in the case of ΠbadOctopus nodes will have an additional
input for ΠbadOctopus , which is either 0, i.e., unmarked nodes, or 1, i.e., marked nodes, and ΠbadOctopus
is defined such that nodes that are marked for ΠbadOctopus are also marked for ΠbadTree . We will use
this fact later when defining ΠbadGraph .

3.3   The family of proper instances
In Section 5.3, we will formally define the family of proper instances. Informally, a proper instance
is a graph G′ that can be obtained as follows. Let G = (U, V, E) be a bipartite graph that is not
necessarily connected and that could contain parallel edges. Assume each node u ∈ U has a degree
that is an integer power of 2 (we will get rid of this assumption, and only require u to not have
degree 0, in Section 5.3). For each node u ∈ U , we put an octopus gadget g(u) in G′ , and for each
node v ∈ V , we put a node f (v) in G′ . These latter types of nodes are called inter-octopus nodes.
Then, let {u, v} be the i-th edge incident to u, for some given order. We add an edge in G′ between
the left-most leaf of the i-th port gadget of g(u) and f (v). We call these edges inter-octopus edges.
Figure 5 shows an example of a proper instance.



                                                   15
    ⊥                     ⊥                                    1                1
                                            ⊥                                                    1


⊥       ⊥
                                        ⊥         ⊥




                                    ⊥       ⊥ ⊥       ⊥


Figure 4: This graph contains a yellow node that has no children (i.e., no incident edges labeled
ChL and ChR ) and is missing a blue edge, i.e., this graph is not a valid octopus gadget. On the left,
the output of the nodes in the first instance of ΠbadTree is shown, where port gadgets do not see any
error and output ⊥, but the nodes that are part of the broken head gadget prove that there is some
error by using pointers. On the right, the output of the nodes in the next instance of ΠbadTree is
shown, where now the roots of the port gadgets are marked, and hence all the nodes in the port
gadgets can now prove that there is an error.


Local checkability of proper instances. Similarly as in the case of tree-like gadgets and
octopus gadgets, we will define a set of input labels Σproper and a set of constraints C proper satisfying
the following properties.

    • Any proper instance can be labeled with labels from Σproper such that the constraints C proper
      are satisfied on all nodes.

    • For any connected graph that is not a proper instance, and for any labeling from Σproper , there
      exists at least one node for which the constraints C proper are not satisfied.

Similarly as in the case of octopus gadgets, in order to define Σproper and C proper , we will extend
Σoctopus and C octopus . For example, we will use additional labels for labeling inter-octopus edges.
These edges will have additional constraints, to ensure that they are properly connected to octopus
gadgets and to inter-octopus nodes.

The LCL problem ΠbadGraph . Similarly as in the case of tree-like gadgets and octopus gadgets,
we would like nodes to be able to quickly prove that the graph is not a proper instance, if that is
the case. Unfortunately, this seems to be not possible. However, a weaker guarantee is sufficient.
We will define a problem ΠbadGraph satisfying the following properties.

    • There is a special output label for ΠbadGraph , called ⊥.

    • For any graph G, there exists a solution for ΠbadGraph satisfying that the subgraph induced by
      nodes labeled ⊥ is a proper instance.

    • Such a solution can be computed in O(log n) deterministic classical rounds.

                                                          16
Figure 5: A graph G (above) and a possible proper instance G′ (below) that can be constructed
starting from G. Black nodes in G′ correspond to inter-octopus nodes, and black edges correspond
to inter-octopus edges.


This problem will be defined by first marking nodes that do not satisfy C proper , and then requiring the
nodes to solve ΠbadOctopus on the subgraph induced by nodes that are not inter-octopus. Moreover,
there will be a special output allowed for inter-octopus nodes that do not satisfy C proper .

3.4   The LCL problem Π
We will formally define our LCL problem Π in Section 5.5. Informally, it is defined as follows.

   • The input given to Π becomes an input for the problem ΠbadGraph .

   • Nodes need to solve ΠbadGraph .

   • Let G′ be the subgraph induced by the nodes outputting ⊥. On G′ , nodes need to solve
     Πpromise .

In other words, on a high level, we use ΠbadGraph to transform the promise-problem Πpromise into a
promise-free LCL problem Π. That is, all the machinery that we have defined until this point are
what we use to make Πpromise promise-free. More in detail, everything is defined so that on proper
instances, the only valid solution for ΠbadGraph is the one assigning ⊥ to all nodes, and hence it is
required to solve Πpromise on all nodes. Hence, a worst-case instance for Πpromise can be translated
into a worst-case instance for Π.
    In order to make Πproper promise-free, we pay a cost: it takes O(log n) rounds to mark invalid
parts of the graph, and hence to restrict to a subgraph that is a proper instance. Since this cost
is still lower than the randomized classical complexity of Πpromise , we are still able to prove a
promise-free separation between quantum and classical randomized.



                                                   17
3.5    The problem Πpromise
Before giving an overview of the problem Πpromise , we first discuss a family of problems that can be
used, as a starting point, in order to define Πpromise . In fact, our construction does not only work for
a specific problem, but it works for an entire family of problems that we call linearizable problems.
A linearizable problem Πlinearizable = (Σ, (F, L, P ), B) is defined as follows.
Definition 3.1 (Linearizable problem). Let H be a hypergraph, and let G be its bipartite incidence
graph. Let the nodes of G corresponding to the nodes of H be called white nodes, and let the nodes
of G corresponding to the hyperedges of H be called black nodes.
   • The task is to label each edge of G with a label from some finite set Σ.
   • There is a list of allowed black node configurations B, which is a list of multisets of labels from
     Σ that describes valid labelings of edges incident on a black node. We say that a black node
     satisfies the black constraint if its incident edges are labeled in a valid way. It is assumed that
     the rank of H, and hence the maximum degree of black nodes, is a constant.
   • Constraints on white nodes are described as a triple (F, L, P ), where F (which stands for first)
     and L (which stands for last) are finite sets of labels, and P (which stands for pairs) is a finite
     set of ordered pairs of labels. In this formalism, it is assumed that an ordering on the incident
     edges of a white node is given, and it is required that:
         – The first edge is labeled with a label from F ;
         – The last edge is labeled with a label from L;
         – Each pair of consecutive edges must be labeled with a pair of labels from P .
      We say that a white node satisfies the white constraint if its incident edges are labeled in a
      valid way.
When solving a linearizable problem in the distributed setting, it is assumed that each node knows
whether it is white or black.
    An example of a definition of a problem using this formalism is shown in Figure 6. The useful
feature of this family of problems is that, even if the labels of a node are laid down on a (possibly
very long) path, it is still possible to locally check for correctness. This property will be crucial
for defining Πpromise . Moreover, as discussed in Section 1, the family of problems GHZ(∆) can be
described as a single linearizable problem.
    We are now ready to discuss Πpromise . Let Πlinearizable = (Σ, (F, L, P ), B) be a linearizable problem.
The problem Πpromise is defined as a function of the chosen problem Πlinearizable , as follows. While in
Section 5.4 we will handle the case in which each leaf of the head gadgets is connected to either 1
or 2 port gadgets, in the following we consider the simpler setting in which each leaf of the head
gadgets is connected to a single port gadget.
   • Each port gadget of our construction corresponds to an edge of G. We require all nodes of
     each port gadget to output a label of Πlinearizable , with the requirement that all nodes of a port
     gadget are labeled with the same label.
   • In our construction, nodes corresponding to black nodes of G are marked in a special way,
     and hence they know to be nodes corresponding to black nodes. Let b be one such node, and
     let M be the multiset containing the output labels of the neighboring nodes (which are nodes
     belonging to port gadgets) of b. We require M to be a configuration allowed by the black
     constraint of Πlinearizable .

                                                    18
                                                                             2           G                   A       3
                                                                     1   3                                               2   1

                                                                 N               A                               G               N

                                                             N                           A                   A                       G
                                                         1                                       4   6                                       2
                                                             3   G                   A       5           3       G               N       1
                                                         2                                       2   1                                       3

                                                             N                           N                   N                       A

                                                                 A               G                               A               A
                                                                     3   1                                               2   3
                                                                             2           A                   G       1



Figure 6: In this example we have hyperedges of rank 2, i.e., black nodes have degree exactly 2.
We consider the problem of edge grabbing, where we need to orient some edges such that each
white node has exactly one outgoing (or grabbed) edge. On the left, it is depicted an example of a
solution for this problem. On the right, we show the same solution encoded as a solution for an
equivalent linearizable problem. The label G stands for “grabbed”, the label N stands for “non
grabbed”, the label A stands for “already grabbed some previous edge”. The constraints on black
nodes are {{N, N }, {N, A}, {N, G}, {G, A}, {A, A}}, that is, we do not allow white nodes to grab
the same edge (i.e., we forbid {G, G}). The constraints on white nodes are determined by the triple
(F, L, P ), where F = {N, G}, L = {G, A}, P = {(N, N ), (N, G), (G, A), (A, A)}. For example, the
configuration of the central white node, ordered according to the ordering of its incident edges, is
(N, N, G, A, A, A), where N ∈ F , A ∈ L, and each consecutive pair of labels is in P .

   • Thanks to the input of the problem Π, leaves of a head gadget know that they are leaves of a
     head gadget, and additionally, the left-most leaf v and the right-most leaf u know that they
     are, respectively, the left-most and the right-most leaves. Let f be the output label of the
     port node connected to v, let ℓ be the output label of the port node connected to u, and let oi
     be the output label of the port node connected to the i-th leaf. We require that f ∈ F , that
     ℓ ∈ L, and that each pair (oi , oi+1 ) is in P .
Thanks to these constraints, we have that, in a valid labeling, each octopus gadget encodes a
labeling that satisfies the white constraint of Πlinearizable . We will give all the details about Πpromise
in Section 5.4.

3.6    The complexity of Π
We now provide an overview on how we will prove lower and upper bounds for the problem Π. Since
our goal is to prove a separation between quantum-LOCAL and classical randomized-LOCAL, our
upper bound will be a quantum algorithm, while the lower bound will hold for classical randomized
algorithms.

Upper bound. In the case of upper bounds, we will assume the existence of a quantum algorithm
A for Πlinearizable with some complexity T (for example, in the case of GHZ(∆), we know that T = 1),
and we will show that, with O(log n) overhead, it can be converted into an algorithm B that solves
Π. On a high level, algorithm B works as follows.
   • First, nodes spend O(log n) deterministic classical rounds to solve ΠbadGraph . The result will
     be a labeling satisfying that nodes labeled ⊥ induce a proper instance.

                                                    19
    • Consider the graph G′ obtained by contracting each octopus gadget into a single node. The
      graph G′ is an instance of Πlinearizable , and each quantum communication round on G′ can be
      simulated with O(log n) overhead in the original graph. Hence, it is possible to solve Πlinearizable
      in the original graph in O(T log n) quantum rounds.

    • Once Πlinearizable is solved, nodes can spend O(log n) additional rounds to produce a labeling
      that is valid for Πpromise on the subgraph induced by nodes labeled ⊥ for ΠbadGraph .
Therefore, algorithm B solves Π in O(T log n) quantum rounds. The details are given in Section 5.6.

Lower bound. Suppose we know that the problem Πlinearizable requires Ω(T ) classical randomized
rounds. We prove that, if Π can be solved in o(T log n) classical randomized rounds, then Πlinearizable
can be solved in o(T ) classical randomized rounds, violating the lower bound. This result will be
achieved by showing the following. Suppose for a contradiction that there exists an algorithm B
that solves Π in o(T log n) classical randomized rounds, we construct an algorithm A for Πlinearizable
as follows.
    • Let G be an instance of Πlinearizable . Nodes construct a virtual graph G′ , which is an instance
      of Π, by imagining themselves to be a valid octopus gadget where each port gadget has height
      Θ(log n), and imagining each (hyper)edge to be a black node connecting different gadgets.

    • In this virtual graph, the only solution for ΠbadGraph is the one assigning ⊥ to all nodes.

    • By assumption, the problem Πpromise can be solved in T ′ = o(T log n) rounds in G′ , and the
      T ′ -radius neighborhood of each node in G′ is contained in o(T )-radius neighborhood of each
      node in G. Hence, nodes can solve Πpromise by communicating for only o(T ) rounds on G, and
      then obtain a solution for Πlinearizable .
There are some details that we need to take care of, like the fact that the number of nodes in G and
G′ are different, and we will show how to handle all these details in Section 5.7.


4    Upper bounding quantum advantage
In this section, we prove Theorem 1.2. We start by defining T -dependent distributions and the
bounded-dependence model using outcomes. In Section 4.1, we follow the outline of Section 1.6 and
provide and prove lemmas for each of the intermediate steps. We then combine these lemmas to
prove Theorem 1.2.

Preliminary definitions. We start by introducing some key definitions. Let G and H be two
graphs. We define the union of G and H to be the graph G ∪ H = (V, E) where V = V (G) ∪ V (H)
and E = E(G) ∪ E(H). The intersection is similarly defined, with G ∩ H = (V, E) where
V = V (G) ∩ V (H) and E = E(G) ∩ E(H). The graph difference is defined as G \ H = (V, E)
where V = V (G) and E = E(G) \ E(H); note that here we only take the difference of the edge
sets. We define the ring neighborhood between T1 and T2 of a node u ∈ V (for T1 ≤ T2 ) as
NTT21 [u] = NT2 [u] \ NT1 [u]. We use an analogous notation for subsets of nodes. Consider any node
u ∈ V (or any subset S ⊆ V ): with an abuse of notation, we define the open induced subgraph as
the graph G̊[NT [u]] = G[NT [u]] \ G[NTT −1 [u]] (or G̊[NT [S]] = G[NT [S]] \ G[NTT −1 [S]]). In practice,
in this definition we are removing from the classical notion of neighborhood the edges that connect
nodes that are at distance T from u (or S) as the graph that u (or S) sees by moving T hops away
does not include them.

                                                   20
     For any function f : A → B and any subset A′ ⊆ A, we denote by f ↾A′ the function g : A′ → B
such that f (x) = g(x) for all x ∈ A′ . For any input distributed network (G, x) to any problem,
where x(v) encodes input data for all v ∈ V (G), and any subset of nodes S ⊆ V (G), the radius-T
view of S is VT (S) = (G̊[NT [S]], x ↾NT [S] ). Basically, VT (S) includes everything that can be seen by
the nodes in S with T rounds of communication, including input data (degree, ports, identifiers and
input labels—if any, etc.). Suppose G has n nodes, and fix any subset of nodes S ⊆ V (G). Given
any two graphs G, H with inputs xG , xH and any two subset of nodes SG ⊆ V (G) and SH ⊆ V (H),
it is natural to define the notion of isomorphism between views. We say that VT (SG ) is isomorphic
to VT (SH ) if there exists a function φ : V (G) → V (H) such that the following holds:

   1. φ ↾SG is an isomorphism between G[SG ] and H[SH ];
   2. φ ↾NT [SG ] is an isomorphism between G̊[NT [SG ]] and H̊[NT [SH ]];
   3. xG (u) = xH (φ(u)) for all u ∈ NT (SG ).

     Consider any T -round (deterministic or randomized) LOCAL algorithm A run by the nodes of G,
and any subset of nodes S ⊆ V (G). Run A on G for T rounds and look at the output distribution
over S. Clearly, such distribution depends only on VT (S), while everything that is outside VT (S)
cannot influence the output distribution, even if some adversary changes the graphs and the inputs
outside VT (S) (apart from the number of nodes, as this is an input to the algorithm). The cause of
outputs in S cannot be influenced by any action of an adversary outside VT (S).
     This property is the so-called no-signaling from the future principle in physics, which states
that no signals can be sent from the future to the past, and is equivalent to the causality principle
[DCP16]. Such principle holds in every physical distributed network running any kind of synchronous
distributed algorithm, including quantum ones.
     To see how this principle formally translates in our setting, let us define the notion of outcome,
which is some kind of generalization of an algorithm. Here, we restrict to finite sets of input and output
labels since we focus on LCL problems. For a graph G, let us denote by H(G) ⊆ V (G)×V (G)×E(G)
the set containing all tuple of the form (v, (v, e)) where (v, e) ∈ V (G) × E(G) and (v, e) is a half-edge
incident to v. Let us define the notion of labeling function for a graph G as follows: a function
outi : H(G) → Vout × Eout is a labeling function if, for two different half-edges (v, e), (v, e′ ) of
the same node v, out(v, (v, e))[1] = out(v, (v, e′ ))[1], where by out(v, (v, e))[1] we mean the first
component of the tuple out(v, (v, e)). In words, the labeling function must assign to a node v only
one possible label. For any node v, the label assigned to v is any out(v, (v, e))[1] for any half-edge
(v, e) incident to v. The label assigned to a half-edge (v, e) is out(v, (v, e))[2]. With an abuse of
notation, if v has no incident edges we still assume that the writing out(v) is well-defined and only
assigns a label from Vout to v.

Definition 4.1 (Outcome). Let Vin , Ein , Vout , Eout be finite sets of labels. Let I be the family of all
input distributed networks (G, x), where G is a (Vin , Ein )-labeled graph and x encodes input data
(identifiers, ports, possible random bits, input labels, etc.). An outcome O is a function that maps
every input distributed network (G, x) ∈ I to distribution over output labelings {(outi , pi )}i∈J , where
{(outi , pi )}i∈J is defined as follows: J is a finite set of indices. The function outi : H(G) → Vout ×Eout
is a labeling function that we call output labeling function. The value pi is the probability that outi
occurs.

    This definition is easily generalizable to the case of infinite label sets, but we avoid it for the
sake of simplicity. Notice that all synchronous distributed algorithms yield outcomes: it is just the
assignment of an output distribution (the one that is the result of the algorithmic procedure) to the
input graph. We remark we have defined the domain set of outcomes to include all possible graphs.


                                                    21
This is not restrictive: Even classical (or quantum) algorithms can run on every possible graph. One
can just introduce some garbage output label so that whenever a node running an algorithm needs
to do something that is not well-defined (given its local view), it can just output the garbage label.
     We say that an outcome O solves a problem Π over a family of graphs F with probability q > 0
if, for every G ∈ F and every input data x, it holds that
                                               X
                                                     pi ≥ q.
                                                i∈I:
                                           outi ∈Π(G,x)

Let O : (G, x) 7→ {(outi , pi )}i∈I be any outcome and fix an input (G, x). Consider any subset of nodes
S ⊆ V (G). Let H(G)[S] be the subset of H(G) that contains all elements (v, (v, e)) ∈ H(G) where
v ∈ S. The restriction of the output distribution O(G, x) = {(outi : H(G) → Vout × Eout , pi )}i∈I to
S is the distribution {(outj : H(G)[S] → Vout × Eout , p′j )}j∈J such that
                                                    X
                                           p′j =               pi ,
                                                    i∈I:
                                             outj =outi ↾H(G)[S]

and is denoted by O(G, x)[S] or {(outi , pi )}i∈I [S]. We also say that two labeling distributions
{(outi : H(G) → Vout × Eout , pi )}i∈I , {(outj : H(G′ ) → Vout × Eout , pj )}j∈J over two graphs G, G′
are isomorphic if there is an isomorphism φ : V (G) → V (G′ ) between G and G′ such that
{(outi : H(G) → Vout × Eout , pi )}i∈I = {(outj ◦φ : H(G) → Vout × Eout , pj )}j∈J .
   We are now ready to define non-signaling outcomes.
Definition 4.2 (Non-signaling outcome). Let O be any outcome. Suppose there exists a non-
negative integer T ≥ 0 with the following property: For any two subsets SG ⊆ V (G), SH ⊆ V (H)
such that φ : V (G) → V (H) is an isomorphism between VT (SG ) and VT (SH ), then the restrictions
O(H, xH )[SH ] and O(G, xG )[SG ] are isomorphic under φ. In this case, we say that O is non-signaling
beyond distance T or, alternatively, that O has locality T .
    Running T -rounds classical or quantum-LOCAL algorithms without shared resources, we obtain
the following property on the output labeling distribution: for every two subset of nodes A, B such
that dist(A, B) > 2T , then the output distributions restricted to A and B are independent. Let us
formalize this notion.
Definition 4.3 (T -dependent distribution). Let Vin , Ein , Vout , Eout be finite sets of labels, and J
a finite set of indices. Let I be the family of all input distributed networks (G, x), where G is a
(Vin , Ein )-labeled graph and x contains input data (identifiers, ports, possible random bits, etc.).
An output labeling distribution {(outi : H(G) → Vout × Eout , pi )}i∈J is T -dependent if, for any
two subsets of nodes A, B ⊆ V (G) such that dist(A, B) > T , we have that {(outi , pi )}i∈J [A] is
independent of {(outi , pi )}i∈J [B]
   We can think now of non-signaling outcomes that produce such distributions.
Definition 4.4 (Bounded-dependent outcome). Let O be any outcome that is non-signaling beyond
distance T . We say that O is bounded-dependent with locality T if for any input (G, x) we have
that O(G, x) is 2T -dependent. Furthermore, when T = O(1) (i.e., it does not depend on the input
graph), we say that O(G, x) is a finitely-dependent distribution. Moreover, if for all inputs (G, x) it
holds that O(G, x) does not depend on identifiers and port numbers, we say that O is invariant
under subgraph isomorphism.
   With the addition of this further property, we can define the bounded-dependence model, first
formalized in [ACd+25].

                                                   22
The bounded-dependence model. The bounded-dependence model is a computational model
that produces bounded-dependent outcomes. The required success probability when solving a
problem must be at least 1 − 1/ poly(n).

4.1   Limits on quantum advantage
With these definitions, we are ready to prove Theorem 1.2. Formally, in this section, we prove the
following theorem:

Theorem 4.5. Let Π be an LCL problem with checking radius r. Let O be a bounded-dependent
outcome with locality T (n) of labelings that solve problem
                                                      p     Π with probability p(n). Then there exists
a rand-LOCAL algorithm solving Π with locality O( nT (n) poly log n) with probability at least p(n).

   Like in the overview, we start by clustering the graph into small well-separated clusters. Formally,
we mean the following:

Definition 4.6 ((ε, d)-clustering). Given a graph G, an (ε, d)-clustering is a partition V (G) =
D ∪ S1 , ∪ . . . , Sk meeting the following conditions:

   • The distance between two nodes u ∈ Si , v ∈ Sj , from different clusters i ̸= j, is at least 2.
   • For every 1 ≤ i ≤ k, the diameter maxu,v∈Si distG (u, v) of Si is at most O(d).
   • D contains at most |D| ≤ ε|V (G)| vertices.

    To actually compute such clustering, we use the following clustering algorithm by Coiteux-Roy
et al. [CDG+24]:

Theorem 4.7. For any 0 < ε ≤ 1, an (ε, log n·logεlog log n )-clustering can be computed with locality

                                         log(n)2 · log(1/ε)
                                                             
                                       O
                                                 ε

rounds in the deterministic LOCAL model.

    By the definition of clustering, we only get that nodes in different clusters are mutually non-
adjacent. However, to ensure that the labelings in each cluster are mutually independent given a
labeling for the unclustered nodes, we require nodes of different clusters to be at distance at least r,
where r denotes the checkability radius of our LCL problem Π. We can fix this by running     p      the
                                                       r
algorithm from Theorem 4.7 on the power graph G . By doing so and choosing ε = (1/ nT (n))
we obtain the following corollary.

Corollary 4.8. A (1/ nT (n), nT (n) log2 n)-clustering can be computed with locality
                        p        p

                                          p                  
                                        O     nT (n) log3 (n)

in the deterministic LOCAL model. Additionally, any two nodes u, v from different clusters have
distance at least r in G for any pre-chosen constant r.

    This clustering ensures that the clusters are well-separated enough such that their labelings
can be completed independently given a labeling in the unclustered nodes D. Our next step is to
produce a labeling on D by sampling for the bounded-dependence original distribution. To be able
to do this, we need to partition D into well-separated partitions whose outputs are independent.
Formally, we do the following:

                                                  23
                                                                    p        
Lemma 4.9. For any subset of nodes D ⊆ V of size at most O n/T (n) , we can partition D
into D1 , . . . , Dh such that
    • for every 1 ≤ i ≤ h, the diameter of Di is O nT (n) in G, and
                                                   p       

    • for every 1 ≤ i < j ≤ h, if u ∈ Di and v ∈ Dj then distG (u, v) ≥ 2T (n) + 1.
                                                                                    p 
Moreover, this partitioning can be computed in the LOCAL model with locality O nT (n) .
   The latter condition allows us to sample the outputs for each partition independently as, by
the definition of bounded-dependence distributions, their outputs are independent. The former
condition makes sure that each partition has a low diameter and hence the sampling can be done
with low locality. Intuitively, the partitioning is done by finding the connected components in the
power graph G2T (n) :

Proof. Each node in D iteratively runs the following exploration procedure: The node v looks at its
radius-2T (n) neighborhood in the original graph G to see if there are other nodes that belong to D.
If not, the node stops as it has found all nodes of D that are within distance 2T (n) of it, and hence
all other nodes must belong to different partitions. Otherwise the node adds newly-found nodes to
its own partition and repeats this exploration procedure from these newly-found nodes.
    It is clear that this algorithm produces a partitioning
                                                      p       that satisfies the latter condition. It
remains to prove that the algorithm stops within O nT (n) steps. Since nodes only start another
iteration if they find a new node from the set D, this procedure stops after at most |D| iterations.
As each iteration has locality 2T (n), the total running time of the algorithm is bounded by
                                         p                      p         
                        |D| · 2T (n) = O    n/T (n) · 2T (n) = O      nT (n) .
                                                          p        
This also implies that the diameter of each cluster is O nT (n) .

    We now have the nodes of graph G clustered into D, S1 , . . . , Sk , and nodes D partitioned into
D1 , . . . , Dh . Let x be an input for G and consider a 2T (n)-dependent labeling distribution O(G, x)
over (G, x) that is given by a bounded-dependent outcome O with locality T (n). We now show that
a randomized LOCAL algorithm can sample a labeling for D from O(G, x)[D] if it is given an oracle
to O.
Lemma 4.10. Let O be a bounded-dependent outcome with locality T (n). There exists a rand-
LOCAL algorithm that runs on (G, x) with V (G) clustered as D, S1 , . . . , Sk , D partitioned as
D1 , . . . , Dh and an oracle to O, and outputs labelings for D that follow the distribution O(G, x)[D].
This algorithm has locality O(maxi diamG (Di )).
Proof. Since distG (Di , Dj ) > 2T (n) if i ≠ j, for all 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ h, for any sequence 1 ≤ i1 < . . . < 1ℓ ≤ h,
the restrictions O(G, x)[Di1 ], . . . , O(G, x)[Diℓ ] of O(G, x) to Di1 , . . . , Diℓ are mutually independent
by definition of 2T (n)-dependent distribution. Let out : H(G) → Vout × Eout be any output labeling
function. For a given subset of nodes S ⊆ V (G), let us denote the probability that O(G, x)
actually yields the output out on H(G)[S] by Pout (H(G)[S]). For all 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ h, for any sequence
1 ≤ i1 < . . . < iℓ ≤ h, we have
                Pout (H(G)[Di1 ]) · . . . · Pout (H(G)[Diℓ ]) = Pout (H(G)[Di1 ∪ . . . ∪ Diℓ ]).
It follows that, for 1 ≤ i ≤ h, a rand-LOCAL algorithm can gather the subgraph induced by Di
and sample a labeling from distribution O(G, x)[Di ] independently from the other Dj , i ̸= j. The
equality above ensures that the final labeling obtained in this way for D is sampled with the same
probability as if we sampled it from O(G, x)[D]. As the algorithm samples the labeling for each Di
independently, it is obvious that the locality of the algorithm is bounded by O(maxi diamG (Di )).

                                                      24
    In other words, the output labels of nodes belonging to different partitions can be sampled
independently while respecting the locality of the bounded-dependent distribution. This implies
that, by sampling a function outD : H(G)[D] → Vout × Eout from the bounded-dependent outcome
O(G, x)[D], we can first fix the output labels outD (D), and then label the remaining nodes in G
by brute force. We first show that, if the original outcome O has success probability p, then there
exists an extension of outD to a labeling for H(G) that is a solution for Π with probability at least
p. Actually finding such a labeling for H(G) by brute force will follow as a corollary.
Lemma 4.11. Let O be a bounded-dependent outcome that solves the LCL problem Π on (G, x) with
success probability p, and let outD be a labeling for H(G)[D] sampled from O(G, x)[D]. Then, with
probability at least p, there exists at least one labeling outG for H(G) such that outD is a restriction
of outG to H(G)[D], namely outD = outG ↾H(G)[D] , and outG is a solution for Π on (G, x).
Proof. If we sample labeling outD from O(G, x)[D], we can be in three possible cases.
   1. Labeling outD for H(G) is the restriction of some labeling out for H(G), and out solves Π in
      (G, x). In this case we are guaranteed that at least the extension outG = out exists.

   2. Labeling outD for H(G) is the restriction of some labeling out for H(G), outD is a solution
      for Π on (G̊[D], x ↾D ), but out is not a solution for Π in (G, x). Even if we cannot take the
      extension outG = out, it might still be possible to find a different out′ that does not belong to
      O(G, x) but that is a solution Π on (G, x) nonetheless.

   3. Labeling outD for H(G) is the restriction of some labeling out for H(G), and outD is not a
      solution for Π on (G̊[D], x ↾D ). Then, no correct extension is possible.
The first case occurs with probability p, while with probability 1 − p either the second or the third
occur. Since a correct extension of outD could be possible even in the second case, it follows that
the overall probability of finding a correct extension of outD is at least p.

Corollary 4.12. Let outD be a labeling for H(G)[D] such that there exists a non-empty set of
labelings L = {outj }j∈J for H(G) where each outj is a solution for Π on (G, x) and outD is a
restriction of outj to H(G)[D], namely outD = outj ↾H(G)[D] . There exists a LOCAL algorithm that
runs on (G, x) with V (G) clustered as D, S1 , . . . , Sk and outputs a labeling outG ∈ L. This algorithm
has locality O(max1≤i≤k {diamG (Si )})
Proof. Every node in a given Si gathers its radius-O(diamG (Si )) neighborhood, making sure that
this radius is not smaller than the diameter of Si plus r. Then we know that every node in Si sees
every other node in the same Si , plus a frontier of depth r in D. We can then compute by brute force
a valid solution to Π restricted to Si by testing every possible labeling outj : H(G)[Si ] → Vout × Eout .
    The procedure just described clearly has locality O(diamG (Si )), and it is always correct because
Π has checkability radius r, and Corollary 4.8 guarantees that nodes in different clusters have
distance at least r in G. Thus, the radius-r neighborhood of any node in Si can intersect only the
same Si and D. Since the labeling for D is already fixed by outD , we can safely check whether an
output labeling solves Π in Si .

   We can now prove Theorem 4.5:

Proof of Theorem 4.5: Let Π be an LCL problem with checking radius r and that admits a bounded-
dependence distribution with locality T (n) and success
                                                   p probability p(n).
                                                                     We construct a rand-LOCAL
algorithm that solves problem Π with locality O nT (n) poly log n . The algorithm works in four
steps:

                                                   25
    1. It first computes a 1/ nT (n), nT (n) log2 n -clustering D ∪ S1 , ∪ . . . , Sk . By Corollary 4.8,
                             p         p           

       this can be done with locality O nT (n) log3 (n) .
                                        p              

    2. The algorithm then partitions the unclustered nodes D into partitions D1 , . . . , Dp such that
       each partition has distance
                                p at least
                                         2T (n) to every other partition. By Lemma 4.9, this can
       be done with locality O nT (n) .
    3. The algorithm then
                        p samples
                                 a labeling for each partition Di independently. This too can
                                                                                             pbe done
       with locality O nT (n) thanks to Lemma 4.10 as each partition has diameter O nT (n)
       and partitions are at distance at least 2T (n) from each other, which means that their
       distributions are independent.
    4. Finally, the algorithm completes the labeling for each cluster independently. This succeeds
       with probability at
                        pleast p(n) byLemma 4.11, and the brute force completion of Corollary 4.12
       takes locality O nT (n) log2 n as this is the bound on the diameter of each cluster.
    The locality  of the algorithm is dominated by the first step. In total, the algorithm has
locality O nT (n) log3 n .
           p               

    The only part in this algorithm where we use randomness is in step 3 when sampling from
the bounded-dependence distribution. By Lemma 4.11, we sample a labeling that is extendable
to a labeling for the whole graph with probability at least p(n). As the rest of the algorithm is
deterministic, the algorithm succeeds with probability at least p(n).

    Finally, we note that Theorem 4.5 can also be derandomized e.g. by using techniques by Ghaffari,
Harris, and Kuhn [GHK18] combined with a modern network decomposition [GGH+23], assuming
that the original bounded-dependence distribution succeeds with high enough probability. This
gives us the following result:
Corollary 4.13. Let Π be an LCL problem with checking radius r. Let O be a bounded-dependent
outcome with locality T (n) of labelings that solve problem Π with probability
                                                                           p strictly larger than
    1
                                                                                             
1 − n . Then there exists a det-LOCAL algorithm solving Π with locality O nT (n) poly log n .


5     Quantum advantage: technical details
Preliminary definitions. For any (V, E)-labeled graph G = (V, E), and for any node v ∈ V and
any edge e ∈ E, we denote by Lv (e) the label of the half-edge (v, e). We also want to be able to refer
to the endpoint of a path that starts from some node v and follows a given sequence L1 , . . . , Lk of
labels over half-edges. We define the function f as follows: Consider any node v and any sequence
of edge labels L1 , . . . , Lk ∈ E. Let P = (v1 , . . . , vk+1 ) be a path in G such that v1 = v and, for any
edge e = {vi , vi+1 }, the half-edge (vi , e) is labeled with Li . Then, we set f (v, L1 , . . . , Lk ) = vk+1 if
the path P exists and is unique, and ⊥ otherwise.

5.1    Tree-like gadget
In order to define our LCL problem, we will use, as a basic building block, an object called tree-like
gadget, which has already been used in different works related to LCLs [BBO+20, BGK+25,
BCM+21]. An example of tree-like gadget is shown in Figure 1. We report here the definition
provided in [BBO+20].
Definition 5.1 (Tree-like gadget [BBO+20]). A graph G is a tree-like gadget of height ℓ if it is
possible to assign coordinates (lu , ku ) to each node u ∈ G, where

                                                       26
    • 0 ≤ lu < ℓ denotes the depth of u in the tree, and
    • 0 ≤ ku < 2lu denotes the position of u (according to some order) in layer lu ,

such that there is an edge connecting two nodes u, v ∈ G with coordinates (lu , ku ) and (lv , kv ) if
and only if:

    • lu = lv and |ku − kv | = 1, or
    • lv = lu − 1 and kv = ⌊ k2u ⌋, or
    • lu = lv − 1 and ku = ⌊ k2v ⌋.

    A useful property of this gadget is that it can be made locally checkable, in the sense that there
exists a set of labels E tree that can be assigned to each node-edge pair, and a constraint C tree over
the labels E tree , satisfying the following.

Lemma 5.2 ([BBO+20]). Let G be a graph that is labeled with labels in E tree such that C tree is
satisfied for all nodes in G. Then, each connected component of G is a tree-like gadget.

Lemma 5.3 ([BBO+20]). Each tree-like gadget graph G can be labeled with labels in E tree such that
C tree is satisfied for all nodes in G.

     The set of labels E tree is defined in [BCM+21] as E tree = {L, R, P, ChL , ChR } (the labels stand for
“left”, “right”, “parent”, “left child”, and “right child”, respectively). The set of local constraints
C tree is defined in [BCM+21] as follows.
  The constraints C tree of [BCM+21]
       1. For any two edges e, e′ incident to a node u, it must hold that Lu (e) ̸= Lu (e′ );

       2. For each edge e = {u, v}, if Lu (e) = L, then Lv (e) = R, and vice versa;

       3. For each edge e = {u, v}, if Lu (e) = P, then Lv (e) ∈ {ChL , ChR }, and vice versa;

       4. If a node u has an incident edge e = {u, v} with label Lu (e) = P such that Lv (e) = ChL ,
          then f (u, P, ChR , L) = u;

       5. If a node u has an incident edge e = {u, v} with label Lu (e) = P such that Lv (e) = ChR ,
          if u has an incident edge labeled R, then f (u, P, R, ChL , L) = u.

       6. If a node has an incident half-edge labeled ChL , then it must also have an incident
          half-edge labeled ChR , and vice versa;

       7. A node does not have an incident half-edge labeled P if and only if it has no incident
          half-edges labeled L or R;

       8. If a node u does not have an incident edge e with label Lu (e) ∈ {ChL , ChR }, then neither
          do nodes f (u, L) and f (u, R) (if they exist);

       9. If a node u has an incident edge e = {u, v} with label Lu (e) = P such that Lv (e) = ChR
          (resp. Lv (e) = ChL ), then u has an incident edge labeled R (resp. L) if and only if f (u, P)
          has an incident edge labeled R (resp. L).

   An example of tree-like gadget labeled from labels in E tree such that C tree is satisfied for all
nodes is shown in Figure 1.


                                                     27
    Moreover, in [BGK+25], it is shown that it is easy for the nodes to prove that the graph in
which they are is an invalid tree-like gadget. More formally, in [BGK+25], it is defined an LCL
problem Πbadtree satisfying the following. Nodes have input 0 or 1, and nodes with input 1 are
called marked. Node-edge pairs have an input label from E tree . Recall that a graph with such an
input is called ({0, 1}, E tree )-labeled graph. The set V badTree of outputs labels for Πbadtree contains a
special label called ⊥, and in this problem there are only node output labels (hence, there are no
half-edge output labels).

Lemma 5.4 ([BGK+25]). There exists an LCL problem Πbadtree satisfying the following properties.

   • Let G be a ({0, 1}, E tree )-labeled graph where C tree is satisfied on all nodes and all nodes are
     not marked. Then, the only valid solution for Πbadtree is the one assigning ⊥ to all nodes.

   • Let G be a connected ({0, 1}, E tree )-labeled graph where either C tree is not satisfied on at least
     one node, or there is at least one marked node. Then, there exists a solution for Πbadtree where
     all nodes produce an output different from ⊥. Moreover, such a solution can be computed in
     O(log n) deterministic rounds in the LOCAL model.

    On a high level, we will later use Πbadtree as a black box, and we will mark nodes that witness
some local errors that are not related to the tree-like gadget itself. In this way, we will be able to
use Πbadtree to also prove errors that are unrelated to the tree-like gadget itself. An example of valid
solution of Πbadtree is depicted in Figure 2.

5.2    Octopus gadget
In this section, we formally define the notion of octopus gadget, then we prove that an octopus
gadget is locally checkable, and finally we define the LCL problem ΠbadOctopus and prove some
properties about it.

Definition 5.5 (Octopus gadget). Let x ≥ 1 be a natural number, and η = (η0 , . . . , η2x−1 −1 ) a
vector of 2x−1 entries in {1, 2}. Let W = {w(i,j) }(i,j)∈I be a family of positive integer weights, where
I is the set containing all pairs (i, j) satisfying (i, j) ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 2x−1 − 1} × {1, 2} and j ≤ ηi .
    A graph G = (V, E) is an (x, η, W )-octopus gadget if there exists a labeling λ : V → L = I ∪{root}
of the nodes of G such that the following holds.

   1. For each element y ∈ L, let Gy be the subgraph of G induced by nodes labeled with y. Then,
      for all y ∈ L, Gy must be a tree-like gadget according to Definition 5.1.

   2. For all y, z ∈ L such that y ̸= z, Gy and Gz must be disjoint.

   3. Groot has height x and, for all (i, j) ∈ I, G(i,j) has height w(i,j) ∈ W .

   4. For all (i, j) ∈ I, there is an edge connecting the node of G(i,j) that has coordinates (0, 0) with
      the node of Groot that has coordinates (x − 1, i).

Groot is called the head-gadget and, for all (i, j) ∈ I, G(i,j) is called a port-gadget.

Local checkability. While Definition 5.5 gives the definition of octopus gadget from a global
perspective, we now define a finite set of labels and a set of local constraints satisfying that a
connected graph is a properly labeled octopus gadget if and only if these local constraints are
satisfied by all nodes.


                                                    28
     We first define the sets of labels V octopus and E octopus , and then we define a set of local constraints
C octopus over these labels. We will prove that a connected graph G can be (V octopus , E octopus )-labeled
such that the constraints C octopus are satisfied on all nodes if and only if G is an (x, η, W )-octopus
gadget, for some x, η, and W .
     The sets of labels are defined as follows:

                                 V octopus = {head, port},
                                  E octopus = {hplink 1 , hplink 2 , phlink } ∪ E tree ,

where hplink stands for “head-port link” and phlink stands for “port-head link”, respectively. Recall
that the labels in V octopus are node labels, while E octopus are labels for node-edge pairs.
   We now define the set of constraints C octopus . An edge e = {u, v} is called internal if and only if
{Lu (e), Lv (e)} ∩ {hplink 1 , hplink 2 , phlink } = ∅, and external otherwise.
 The constraints C octopus
      0. In the subgraph induced by internal edges, all the constraints in C tree must be satisfied.

      1. For each edge e = {u, v}, it must hold that nodes u and v are both labeled head, or
         both labeled port, if and only if e is an internal edge.

      2. For each edge e = {u, v}, if Lu (e) = hplink j for some j ∈ {1, 2}, then Lv (e) = phlink , and
         vice versa.

      3. If a node v is labeled with head and e is an edge incident to v, then Lv (e) ̸= phlink .

      4. If a node v is labeled with port and e is an edge incident to v, then Lv (e) ̸= hplink j for
         all j ∈ {1, 2}.

      5. A node v has an incident edge labeled hplink j for some j ∈ {1, 2} if and only if v is
         labeled with head and it has no incident edge e satisfying Lv (e) ∈ {ChL , ChR }.

      6. A node v has an incident edge labeled phlink if and only if v is labeled with port and it
         has no incident edge e satisfying Lv (e) = P.

      7. A node cannot have more than one incident edge labeled with phlink , hplink 1 , and hplink 2 .

      8. If a node v has an incident edge e such that Lv (e) = hplink 2 , then it has another incident
         edge e′ such that Lv (e′ ) = hplink 1 .

Lemma 5.6. Let G be a connected graph that is (V octopus , E octopus )-labeled such that C octopus is
satisfied at all nodes. Then, G is an octopus gadget.

Proof. In the following, by labels of an edge e = {u, v} we denote the labels Lv (e) and Lu (e). By
constraint 2, for each edge e it holds that the labels of e are either both in {hplink 1 , hplink 2 , phlink }, or
both in E tree . Hence, internal edges have only labels from E tree and external edges have only labels
from {hplink 1 , hplink 2 , phlink }. Moreover, by constraint 2, an external edge has exactly two labels from
{hplink 1 , hplink 2 , phlink }, and these two labels cannot be {hplink 1 , hplink 2 }.
   By constraint 0 and Lemma 5.2, each connected component in the subgraph induced by internal
edges is a tree-like gadget (possibly, a graph without edges). Moreover, for each connected component,
by constraint 1, it must hold that all nodes in the component are either all labeled head, or all
labeled port.


                                                           29
    Summarizing what we have showed so far, each connected component in the subgraph induced by
internal edges is either a tree-like gadget where all nodes are labeled head or a tree-like gadget where
all nodes are labeled port, and external edges have labels {hplink 1 , phlink } or labels {hplink 2 , phlink }.
Hence, we only need to prove that external edges are properly connected.
    Suppose G is non-empty. Let v be a node in G. We prove that the connected component G′ (in
G, including external edges) containing v is an octopus gadget.
    Let H be the connected component containing v in the graph induced by internal edges. As
discussed, H is a tree-like gadget. We start by proving that, in G′ , there must be a tree-like gadget
where all nodes are labeled head. If v itself is labeled head, we are done. If v is marked port, then by
constraint 6 the node u in the tree-like gadget H that has no incident half-edge labeled P (i.e., the
node with coordinates (0, 0)) must have an edge e = {u, z} satisfying Lu (e) = phlink . By constraint
2, Lz (e) = hplink j for some j ∈ {1, 2}, and by constraint 4 no node labeled port can have incident
edges with label hplink j for any j ∈ {1, 2}. Hence, z must be a node labeled head.
    Let Hh be the connected component containing z in the graph induced by internal edges. Hh
must be a tree-like gadget. By constraint 5, only nodes in the last layer of Hh can have an incident
edge labeled hplink j for some j ∈ {1, 2}, and such nodes must have at least one such edge. By
constraint 7, each of these nodes cannot have other edges labeled with hplink j . Let e = {wh , wp } be
an arbitrary such edge, where Lwh (e) = hplink j for some j ∈ {1, 2}. By constraint 2, it must hold
that Lwp (e) = phlink . Moreover, by constraint 7, node wp cannot have additional incident edges
labeled phlink . By constraint 3, node wp must be labeled port and by constraints 6, 0, and 1, node
wp must be the root of a tree-like gadget Hp where all nodes are labeled port. By constraint 6, no
other node of Hp can have edges labeled phlink . Furthermore, by constraint 8, each node in the last
layer of Hp must have an incident edge labeled hplink 1 if it has an incident edge labeled hplink 2 .
    We thus get that, for each head-gadget Hh , there is at least one port-gadget Hp connected to
each leaf of Hh and at most two of them, and that Hp is connected to exactly one head-gadget via
its root. Hence, G′ is an octopus gadget. Let x be the height of the tree-like gadget Hh . Now, we
assign the label root to all nodes in Hh , and the label (i, j) to all nodes in the port-gadget Hp if
Hp is connected to Hh via the leaf v of Hh having coordinates (x − 1, i) through the edge e such
that Lv (e) = hplink j . By this assignment, we have shown that G′ satisfies Definition 5.5.
    Finally, since G is connected, then G′ = G.

Lemma 5.7. Let G be an octopus gadget. Then, G can be (V octopus , E octopus )-labeled such that
C octopus is satisfied at all nodes.

Proof. Let G = (V, E) be an octopus gadget. We can assign the labels in this way.

   • We assign the label head to all the nodes of the head-gadget.

   • We assign the label port to all the nodes of the port-gadgets.

   • By Lemma 5.3, we can assign labels to each tree-like gadget such that the constraints of C tree
     are satisfied.

   • Let e = {u, v} be an edge connecting a head-gadget to a port-gadget (i.e., the edges of point
     4 of Definition 5.5), where u is the node in the head-gadget. If v has the label (i, j) ∈ I in
     Definition 5.5, we set Lu (e) = hplink j and Lv (e) = phlink .

By construction, all the constraints of C octopus are satisfied.




                                                      30
The LCL problem ΠbadOctopus . We now define an LCL problem ΠbadOctopus that, on a high level,
allows the nodes to prove that the graph in which they are is not an octopus gadget. Similarly as in
the case of ΠbadTree , nodes also receive a binary input, where nodes that receive 1 are called marked.
Again, we will use this input later, to mark nodes that witness errors that may be unrelated to the
octopus gadget itself. On a high level, the problem will satisfy the following properties.

   • Nodes receive as input whether they are marked or not.

   • There are two possible types of output: a node can either produce an empty output (⊥), or it
     can output an error. In the latter case, a node needs to also output a locally checkable proof of
     the fact that the graph is not an octopus gadget or that it contains at least one marked node.

   • If the octopus gadget is valid and it does not contain any marked node, the constraint of the
     problem are defined such that the only valid solution to the problem ΠbadOctopus is the one
     where all nodes output ⊥.

   • Otherwise, if the graph is not an octopus gadget or it contains at least one marked node, all
     nodes are able to spend O(log n) round in the LOCAL model to produce a proof of this fact.

We now give a formal definition of the LCL problem ΠbadOctopus . The inputs are defined as follows.

   • Each node v receives an input pair (mv , gv ) from the set {0, 1} × V octopus , that is, each node
     receives a pair, where the first element mv denotes whether the node is marked or not, while
     the second element gv of the pair is an element from the previously described set V octopus .

   • Each half-edge receives an input from the previously described set E octopus .

Let V badTree be the node output labels of the LCL problem ΠbadTree . The possible output labels
V badTree are the following.

   • The label ⊥, which represent an empty output.

   • A pair (Error, M), where M is a triple, and each element of the triple is a label from V badTree .

We denote the pairs (Error, M) as error outputs. On a high level, the constraints C badOctopus are
defined such that the output ⊥ is always allowed, while the constraints on the error outputs are
defined such that these outputs encode a proof of the fact that there is an error in the graph.
Informally, the error output triples will be used as follows.

   • If the first element of a triple of some node v is not ⊥, it means that, in the connected
     component of the subgraph induced by internal edges that contains v there is some error.

   • If the second element of a triple of some node v is not ⊥, it means that, even if the connected
     component of v may be correct, node v is in a head gadget connected to at least one broken
     port gadget.

   • If the third element of a triple of some node v is not ⊥, it means that, even if the connected
     component of v may be correct, and even if v is in a correct port gadget connected to a correct
     head gadget, node v is in a port gadget connected to a head gadget that is connected to at
     least one broken port gadget.

In order to allow this labeling, we allow more and more nodes to be marked, as follows.



                                                  31
   • For the first instance of ΠbadTree , only marked nodes and nodes that have already witnessed
     some error are marked.

   • For the second instance, additionally, nodes in head gadgets that are neighbors of nodes of
     port gadgets that output an error in the previous instance are marked.

   • For the third instance, additionally, nodes in port gadgets that are neighbors of nodes of head
     gadgets that output an error in the previous instance are marked.

More formally, the constraints C badOctopus are defined as follows.
 The constraints C badOctopus
     • A node can always output ⊥.

      • If a node v outputs (Error, (xv,1 , xv,2 , xv,3 )), then the following must hold.

           1. The triple (xv,1 , xv,2 , xv,3 ) must be different from (⊥, ⊥, ⊥).
           2. Consider the labeling of the graph obtained by labeling each node v with the label
              gv ∈ V octopus , and each half-edge (v, e) with the label Lv (e) ∈ E octopus (i.e., on the
              nodes we take the second element of their input pair, while on the edges we take
              the original input half-edge label). For each node v, let iv,1 := 1 if, according to
              this labeling, node v does not satisfy the constraints C octopus or if mv = 1, and let
              iv,1 := 0 otherwise.
           3. Consider the labeling of the subgraph induced by internal edges obtained by input
              labeling each node v with iv,1 and output labeling each node v with xv,1 . This
              labeling must satisfy the constraints of ΠbadTree .
           4. Let iv,2 := 1 if iv,1 = 1 or if v is a node such that gv = head and such that there
              exists an edge e = {u, v} satisfying Lv (e) = hplink j for some j ∈ {1, 2} and xu,1 ̸= ⊥.
              Let iv,2 := 0 otherwise.
           5. Consider the labeling of the subgraph induced by internal edges obtained by input
              labeling each node v with iv,2 and output labeling each node v with xv,2 . This
              labeling must satisfy the constraints of ΠbadTree .
           6. Let iv,3 := 1 if iv,2 = 1 or if v is a node such that gv = port and such that there
              exists an edge e = {u, v} satisfying Lv (e) = phlink and xu,2 ̸= ⊥. Let iv,3 := 0
              otherwise.
           7. Consider the labeling of the subgraph induced by internal edges obtained by input
              labeling each node v with iv,3 and output labeling each node v with xv,3 . This
              labeling must satisfy the constraints of ΠbadTree .

Lemma 5.8. Let G be a ({0, 1} × V octopus , E octopus )-labeled graph where C octopus is satisfied for
all nodes and all nodes are not marked. Then, the only valid solution for ΠbadOctopus is the one
assigning ⊥ to all nodes.

Proof. For a contradiction, assume that some node v in G outputs (Error, (xv,1 , xv,2 , xv,3 )) for some
labels xv,1 , xv,2 , xv,3 . By the definition of iv,1 in constraint 2, for all nodes v it must hold that
iv,1 = 0, and by constraint 3 and Lemma 5.4 we thus get that xv,1 = ⊥. Similarly, by the definition
of iv,2 in constraint 4, for all nodes v it must hold that iv,2 = 0, and by constraint 5 and Lemma 5.4
we thus get that xv,2 = ⊥. Again, by the definition of iv,3 in constraint 6, for all nodes v it must


                                                   32
hold that iv,3 = 0, and by constraint 7 and Lemma 5.4 we thus get that xv,3 = ⊥. The claim then
follows by the fact that constraint 1 forbids the triple (⊥, ⊥, ⊥).

Lemma 5.9. Let G be a connected ({0, 1} × V octopus , E octopus )-labeled graph where either C octopus is
not satisfied on at least one node, or there is at least one marked node. Then, there exists a solution
for ΠbadOctopus where all nodes produce an output different from ⊥. Moreover, such a solution can
be computed in O(log n) deterministic rounds in the LOCAL model.

Proof. In order to produce the claimed solution, we will use, as a black box, the algorithm for
ΠbadTree reported in Lemma 5.4. The algorithm for solving ΠbadOctopus works as follows. Each node
v spends O(1) rounds to compute iv,1 . By Lemma 5.4, nodes can spend O(log n) deterministic
classical rounds to compute a solution for ΠbadTree , where iv,1 is the input of v for the problem, and,
if in the subgraph induced by internal edges, in the connected component containing v, there is at
least one marked node or a node not satisfying C tree , then v outputs a label different from ⊥. For
each node v, let xv,1 be this output.
     Then, each node v spends O(1) rounds to compute iv,2 , and again, as before, nodes spend
O(log n) rounds to compute a solution for ΠbadTree , where this time the input of node v is iv,2 .
     Finally, each node v spends O(1) rounds to compute iv,3 and spends O(log n) rounds to compute
a solution for ΠbadTree , where the input of node v is now iv,3 . If a node v satisfies xv,1 = xv,2 = xv,3 ,
then it outputs ⊥. Otherwise, it outputs (Error, (xv,1 , xv,2 , xv,3 )).
     The correctness of the output directly follows from the definition of C badOctopus , and the runtime
is clearly upper bounded by O(log n) deterministic classical rounds. We now prove that, if G
contains at least one marked node, or at least one node not satisfying C octopus , then all nodes output
a label different from ⊥.
     Let Ĝ be the graph obtained by contracting each connected component induced by internal edges
into a single node. If there are multiple edges between different connected components, we have
parallel edges in Ĝ. By the definition of the algorithm, it holds that all nodes v of G corresponding
to the same node of Ĝ, in the first output of ΠbadTree (i.e., the values xv,1 ), either all output ⊥ or
all output something different. Let us label E (which stands for error ) each node of Ĝ satisfying
that all its nodes output something different from ⊥. We label all the other nodes either H (head )
or P (port), as follows. If a node of Ĝ is not labeled E, then either all its nodes of G have input
head, or all its nodes of G have input port. In the former case, we label the node H, while in the
latter case we label the node P .
     By Lemma 5.6, at least one node of Ĝ is labeled E. Moreover, by the definition of C octopus , the
graph Ĝ must satisfy the following properties.

   • Each node labeled P must have degree 1.
   • Nodes labeled P must form an independent set.
   • Nodes labeled H must form an independent set.

We thus get that each connected component of Ĝ induced by nodes not labeled E must form stars
centered at nodes labeled H. Moreover, we observe that each node labeled H must have at least one
neighbor labeled E, since otherwise we would get that, in Ĝ, there is a connected component not
containing E, which in G corresponds to a valid octopus gadget. By the definition of the algorithm,
we thus get that, in each connected component corresponding to a node labeled H, at least one node
is marked when solving ΠbadTree for the second time. Let us update the labeling of Ĝ by changing
nodes labeled H into nodes labeled E if their connected component contains nodes not outputting
⊥. We get that, after this update, no node of Ĝ is labeled H. Hence, all nodes of Ĝ labeled P
have a neighbor labeled E. By the definition of the algorithm, we thus get that, in each connected


                                                    33
component corresponding to a node labeled P , at least one node is marked when solving ΠbadTree
for the third time. Let us update the labeling of Ĝ by changing nodes labeled P into nodes labeled
E if their connected component contains nodes not outputting ⊥. We get that, after this update,
no node of Ĝ is labeled P . Hence, all nodes of Ĝ are labeled E, and hence no node of G outputs ⊥.


5.3    The family of proper instances
In Section 3.3, we informally defined the family of graphs called proper instances that we will use to
prove our main result. We now provide a formal definition of such graphs. The main ingredient is
the octopus gadget defined in Definition 5.5.
Definition 5.10 (Proper instance). Let G = (V, E) be a graph. We say that G is a proper instance if
there exists a node labeling function λ : V → {intra-octopus, inter-octopus} with the following
properties.
   1. Every connected component in the subgraph induced by nodes labeled intra-octopus is an
      octopus gadget (according to Definition 5.5).
   2. The subgraph induced by nodes labeled inter-octopus does not contain any edge.
   3. A node v labeled intra-octopus is connected to a node labeled inter-octopus if and only
      if v has coordinates (w − 1, 0) in the port-gadget P containing v, where w is the height of P
      (that is, v is the left-most leaf of the port-gadget containing v).

Local checkability. While Definition 5.10 gives the definition of proper instances from a global
perspective, we now define a finite set of labels and a set of local constraints satisfying that a
connected graph is a properly labeled valid instance if and only if these local constraints are satisfied
by all nodes.
     We first define the sets of labels V proper and E proper , and then we define a set of local constraints
C proper over these labels. We will prove that a connected graph G can be (V proper , E proper )-labeled
such that the constraints C proper are satisfied on all nodes if and only if G is a proper instance.
     The sets of labels are defined as follows. The node labels are defined as V proper = V octopus ∪
{inter-octopus}, where inter-octopus stands inter-octopus node. The half-edge labels are defined as
E proper = E octopus ∪ {pilink , iplink }, where pilink stands for “port−inter-octopus link” and iplink stands
for “inter-octopus−port link”.
     We now define the set of constraints C proper . An edge e = {u, v} is called intra-octopus if and
only if {Lu (e), Lv (e)} ∩ {pilink , iplink } = ∅, and inter-octopus otherwise.
 The constraints C proper
      0. In the subgraph induced by intra-octopus edges, all the constraints in C octopus must be
         satisfied.

      1. For each edge e = {u, v}, if Lu (e) = pilink , then Lv (e) = iplink , and vice versa.

      2. Each node v has an incident edge labeled pilink if and only if v is labeled with port and
         it has no incident edge e satisfying Lv (e) ∈ {ChL , ChR , L}.

      3. Each node v labeled inter-octopus has degree at least 1 and only incident half-edges
         labeled iplink . Moreover, nodes not labeled inter-octopus have no incident half-edges
         labeled iplink .


                                                     34
Lemma 5.11. Let G be any non-empty connected graph that is (V proper , E proper )-labeled such that
C proper is satisfied at all nodes. Then, G is a proper instance according to Definition 5.10.
Proof. We start by proving that there must be at least one node not labeled inter-octopus. Since
the graph G is non-empty, it contains at least some node v, which is either labeled inter-octopus
or not. In the latter case we are done. In the former case, by constraint 3, v has an incident edge
e = {u, v} such that Lv (e) = iplink . By constraints 1 and 2, u is labeled with port and Lu (e) = pilink .
Hence, a node not labeled inter-octopus exists.
    We thus know that the subgraph HOct induced by nodes not labeled inter-octopus is non-empty,
and, by constraint 0, HOct is such that each connected component is an octopus gadget.
    By constraint 2, each port node u that is the left-most leaf of its gadget must have an incident
edge {u, u′ } such that Lu (e) = pilink , and no other node is allowed to have such an incident edge. By
constraint 1 and 3, u′ must be labeled inter-octopus and Lu′ (e) = iplink . This in particular implies
that the set V (HExt ) = V (G) \ V (HOct ) is non-empty.
    By constraint 3, all edges incident to nodes in V (HExt ) are labeled iplink . Moreover, by constraint
3, no nodes in HOct have incident half-edges labeled iplink . By constraint 1, each edge e = {u, v}
incident to an inter-octopus node u, must satisfy Lv (e) = pilink , and, by constraint 2, v must be a
left-most leaf of a port gadget. Summarizing, we obtained the following.
   • Each connected component in the subgraph induced by intra-octopus edges is an octopus
     gadget.
   • Only left-most leaves of port gadgets have incident inter-octopus edges.
   • Inter-octopus edges must have an endpoint that is a left-most leaf of a port gadget and an
     endpoint that is an inter-octopus node.
Hence, G is a proper instance.

Lemma 5.12. Let G be a proper instance as defined in Definition 5.10. Then, there exists a
(V proper , E proper )-labeling of G that satisfies the constraints in C proper at all nodes.
Proof. We properly label all nodes and edges in octopus gadgets respecting C octopus as in Lemma 5.7.
To all nodes that are outside octopus gadgets, we assign the label inter-octopus. To all edges e that
connect a node u labeled with inter-octopus to a node v labeled with port, we assign labels so that
Lu (e) = iplink and Lv (e) = pilink . All constraints are satisfied by construction.

The LCL problem ΠbadGraph . We now define an LCL problem ΠbadGraph that, on a high level,
allows the nodes to prove that the graph in which they are is not a proper instance labeled in a
valid way. Differently from the cases of ΠbadTree and ΠbadOctopus , we cannot guarantee the property
that, if the graph is invalid, then nodes can spend O(log n) rounds to produce a solution in which
no node outputs ⊥. This time, the problem ΠbadGraph will satisfy the following weaker guarantee,
which will be sufficient for our purposes: nodes can spend O(log n) rounds to produce a solution in
which the graph induced by nodes outputting ⊥ is a proper instance. On a high level, the problem
will satisfy the following properties.
   • There are three possible types of output: a node can either produce an empty output (⊥), or
     it can output an error, and there are two types of errors. In the latter case, a node needs to
     also output a locally checkable proof of the fact that the graph is not a proper instance.
   • If the graph is a proper instance, the constraints of the problem are defined such that the only
     valid solution to the problem ΠbadGraph is the one where all nodes output ⊥.

                                                    35
   • Otherwise, if the graph is not a proper instance, nodes are able to spend O(log n) deterministic
     classical rounds to label invalid parts of the graph, such that the graph induced by nodes
     outputting ⊥ is a proper instance, and such that the labeling on the invalid parts of the graph
     encodes a proof that these parts are indeed invalid.
We now give a formal definition of the LCL problem ΠbadGraph . The inputs are defined as follows.
   • Each node v receives as input a label gv ∈ V proper .
   • Each half-edge receives as input a label from E proper .
The possible node output labels V badGraph for the problem ΠbadGraph are the following.
   • The empty output ⊥.
   • A pair (Errorintra , xv ), where xv ∈ V badOctopus . This label will be allowed only on intra-octopus
     nodes.
   • The labels Errorinter,1 and Errorinter,2 . These labels will be allowed only on inter-octopus nodes.
We call error outputs all labels that are different from ⊥. Informally, the label Errorinter,1 will be
used by inter-octopus nodes that do not satisfy the constraints C proper , while Errorinter,2 will be used
by inter-octopus nodes satisfying that all their intra-octopus neighbors output errors. On a high
level, these labels will be used as follows. Inter-octopus nodes that are not properly connected
to intra-octopus nodes output Errorinter,1 . Then, intra-octopus nodes connected to inter-octopus
nodes that are outputting an error are marked. Then, nodes solve ΠbadOctopus in the subgraph
induced by intra-octopus nodes. Finally, inter-octopus nodes output Errorinter,2 if they satisfy the
following two properties: they did not output Errorinter,1 previously, and all their neighbors (which
are intra-octopus nodes) output an error. We now define the constraints C badGraph .
 The constraints C badGraph
     • A node can always output ⊥.

       • A node v can output Errorinter,1 only if gv = inter-octopus and it does not satisfy the
         constraints C proper .

       • If a node v outputs (Errorintra , xv ), then the following must hold.

           1. xv must be different from ⊥.
           2. Consider the labeling of the graph obtained by input labeling each node v with the
              pair (mv , gv ), where mv := 1 if v has a neighbor outputting Errorinter,1 and mv := 0
              otherwise, and output labeling each node v with xv . On node v the constraints
              C badOctopus must be satisfied. That is, xv is a valid solution for ΠbadOctopus when
              we mark nodes that are incident to inter-octopus nodes that output Errorinter,1 .

       • A node v can output Errorinter,2 only if gv = inter-octopus and all its neighbors do not
         output ⊥.

Lemma 5.13. Let G be a (V proper , E proper )-labeled graph where C proper is satisfied for all nodes.
Then, the only valid solution for ΠbadGraph is the one assigning ⊥ to all nodes.
Proof. Since C proper is satisfied at all nodes, an inter-octopus node cannot output Errorinter,1 . This
implies that the input for ΠbadOctopus satisfies mv = 0 for all intra-octopus nodes v. Since each
connected component of the subgraph induced by intra-octopus nodes is a properly labeled octopus
gadget, intra-octopus nodes must output ⊥. This implies that inter-octopus nodes cannot output
Errorinter,2 . We thus get that all nodes must output ⊥.

                                                   36
Lemma 5.14. Let G be a (V proper , E proper )-labeled graph. There exists a solution for ΠbadGraph
where each connected component induced by nodes outputting ⊥ is a proper instance. Moreover,
such a solution can be computed in O(log n) classical deterministic rounds.

Proof. In order to produce the claimed solution, we will use the algorithm for ΠbadOctopus reported
in the proof of the Lemma 5.9. The algorithm for solving ΠbadGraph works as follows.
    Each node v satisfying gv = inter-octopus spends O(1) rounds to check whether it satisfies C proper .
If these constraints are not satisfied, v outputs Errorinter,1 . Then, each intra-octopus node v spends
O(1) rounds to compute mv . By Lemma 5.9, intra-octopus nodes can spend O(log n) deterministic
classical rounds to compute a solution for ΠbadOctopus , where (mv , gv ) is the input of node v for
the problem. Such a solution satisfies that the following property: if in the subgraph induced by
intra-octopus edges, in the connected component containing v, there is at least one marked node or a
node not satisfying C octopus , then v outputs a label different from ⊥. For each node v, let xv be this
output. If xv ̸= ⊥, then v outputs (Errorintra , xv ), otherwise v outputs ⊥. Finally, each inter-octopus
node that did not output Errorinter,1 spends O(1) rounds to check if at least one neighbor output
some error in the previous phase, and in that case it outputs Errorinter,1 .
    The solution clearly satisfies the constraints of ΠbadGraph , and the runtime is clearly O(log n).
We now prove that the subgraph induced by nodes outputting ⊥ is a proper instance.
    Let G′ be the subgraph induced by nodes outputting ⊥. By the definition of the algorithm, each
connected component of the subgraph of G′ induced by intra-octopus nodes must be a valid octopus
gadget. Moreover, the inter-octopus nodes incident to intra-octopus gadgets of G′ must not be
labeled Errorinter,1 , since otherwise their neighbors v in octopus gadgets would have satisfied mv = 1
and hence output something different from ⊥. Also, inter-octopus nodes incident to intra-octopus
gadgets of G′ cannot be labeled Errorinter,2 , since they have at least one intra-octopus neighbor
outputting ⊥. We thus get that inter-octopus nodes that are neighbors of intra-octopus gadgets of
G′ are all labeled ⊥. Additionally, all left-most leaves of octopus ports must have an inter-octopus
neighbor, since otherwise they would have output an error. We thus get that, in G′ , C proper is
satisfied on all nodes, and by Lemma 5.11 this implies that G′ is a proper instance.

5.4   The problem Πpromise
In this section, we define the problem Πpromise as a function of a given problem Πlinearizable =
(Σ, (F, L, P ), B) (see Definition 3.1 for the definition of linearizable problems). As mentioned in
Section 3.5, the problem Π will be defined such that it is required to solve ΠbadGraph on the whole
graph, and it is required to solve Πpromise on the subgraph induced by nodes that output ⊥ for
ΠbadGraph .
    Recall that the problem ΠbadGraph allows to output ⊥ on all nodes, even on graphs that are not
proper instances. If an algorithm produces such an output, then it is required to solve Πpromise on a
graph that is not a proper instance. However, when proving a lower bound for Π, we will use a
proper instance, and when proving an upper bound for Π, we will define an algorithm satisfying
that the subgraph induced by nodes outputting ⊥ for ΠbadGraph is always a proper instance. In
other words, it does not matter how Πpromise is defined on graphs that are not proper instances, as
it will not affect the lower and the upper bounds that we prove. For this reason, we will define the
constraints C promise of Πpromise under the assumption that the given graph G is a proper instance
labeled such that all nodes satisfy C proper . This will make the definition easier to read. Then, the
definition of Πpromise is lifted to any arbitrary graph as follows.

   • Let r = O(1) be the distance that each node v needs to inspect to check whether it satisfies
     C promise (on a proper instance).

                                                   37
   • If all nodes that are within distance r from v (including v) satisfy C proper , then v needs to
     satisfy C promise .

   • Otherwise, any output is considered incorrect.
In this way, whenever a node v needs to satisfy C promise , the radius-r neighborhood of v is a subgraph
of a proper instance, and hence the constraints of C promise are well-defined.
    Let us proceed with some nomenclature. If v is labeled head and Lv (e) ∈      / {ChL , ChR } for all e
incident to v, then we call v head-leaf. If v is labeled port and Lv (e) ̸= P for all e incident to v,
then we call v port-root. For each head-leaf v, let η(v) = |{e : Lv (e) ∈ {hplink 1 , hplink 2 }}| count the
number of port gadgets that are connected to v (which are either 1 or 2).
                                                                                  promise
    We are now ready to define Πpromise . The node input set for Πpromise is Vin           = V proper , while
                                         promise                                        promise
the node-edge input set for Πpromise is Ein      = E proper . The node output set is Vout        = Σ ∪ {⊥}.
Let us denote with out(v) the output of a node v for Πpromise . The constraints C promise of Πpromise
are defined as follows.
 The constraints C promise
      1. If v is labeled port, then it must hold that out(v) ∈ Σ.

      2. If v is not labeled port, then it must hold that out(v) = ⊥.

      3. If a node v is labeled port, then, for each neighbor u of v that is also labeled port, it
         must hold that out(v) = out(u).

      4. If v is a head-leaf node, and Lv (e) ̸= L for all e incident to v, then it must hold that
         out(f (v, hplink 1 )) ∈ F .

      5. If v is a head-leaf node, and Lv (e) ̸= R for all e incident to v, then:

            • if η(v) = 1, then it must hold that out(f (v, hplink 1 )) ∈ L;
            • if η(v) = 2, then it must hold that out(f (v, hplink 2 )) ∈ L.

      6. If v is a head-leaf node satisfying that η(v) = 2, then it must hold that
         (out(f (v, hplink 1 )), out(f (v, hplink 2 ))) ∈ P .

      7. If v is a head-leaf node satisfying that η(v) = j for some j ∈ {1, 2}, and
         f (v, R) = u ̸= ⊥, then it must hold that (out(f (v, hplink j )), out(f (u, hplink 1 ))) ∈ P.

      8. If v is labeled inter-octopus and {u1 , u2 , . . . , uk } is the set of all nodes adjacent to v,
         then it must hold that {out(u1 ), out(u2 ), . . . , out(uk )} ∈ B.

   We now prove some facts about the relation between Πlinearizable and Πpromise . As informally
explained in Section 3.3, a proper instance can be obtained by replacing the nodes belonging to
one side of a bipartite graph with octopus gadgets. We now provide a formal definition of this
construction.
Definition 5.15 (Lift of a bipartite graph). Let G = (W ∪ B, E) be a bipartite graph that is not
necessarily connected and that may contain parallel edges. A lift of G is a pair (L, compression),
where L = (V ′ , E ′ ) is a graph that is a proper instance (according to Definition 5.10), and
compression : V ′ → W ∪ B ∪ E is a function, with the following properties.
   1. For each node v of any head gadget, compression(v) ∈ W .

                                                     38
   2. If u, v ∈ V ′ are nodes of the same head gadget, then compression(u) = compression(v).

   3. If u, v ∈ V ′ are nodes of different head gadgets, then compression(u) ̸= compression(v).

   4. For any node v of any port gadget, compression(v) ∈ E.

   5. If u, v ∈ V ′ are nodes of the same port gadget, then compression(u) = compression(v).

   6. If u, v ∈ V ′ are nodes of different port gadgets, then compression(u) ̸= compression(v).

   7. Let u ∈ V ′ be a node of a port gadget P , and let v ∈ V ′ be a node of a head gadget H. The
      edge compression(u) is incident to the node compression(v) if and only if P is connected to H.

   8. If v ∈ V ′ is an inter-octopus node, then compression(v) ∈ B.

   9. Let u ∈ V ′ be a node of a port gadget P , and let v ∈ V ′ be an inter-octopus node. The edge
      compression(u) is incident to the node compression(v) if and only if P is connected to v.
Furthermore, for a proper instance L and a bipartite graph G, if there exists a function compression
for which (L, compression) is a lift of G, then we say that L can be compressed to G.
   In the following, for a bipartite graph G = (W ∪ B, E), by ordering assigned to the edges of G
we denote a function τ : w 7→ σw that takes as input a node w ∈ W and returns a function σw ,
where the function σw gives an ordering of the incident half-edges of w. That is, τ assigns, to each
node w, an injective function σw mapping each edge incident to w to an integer in {1, . . . , deg(w)},
where deg(w) is the degree of w.
Observation 5.16. Let G = (W ∪ B, E) be a bipartite graph, and let (L = (V ′ , E ′ ), compression)
be a lift of G that is (V proper , E proper )-labeled such that C proper is satisfied on all nodes. Then, the
function compression : V ′ → W ∪ B ∪ E uniquely defines, for each node w ∈ W , the ordering σw of
the edges incident to w.
Proof. For each node w ∈ W , let Gw be the octopus gadget whose nodes map either to w or to
its incident edges according to the function compression. We now define an ordering of the port
gadgets of Gw which will automatically induce an ordering of the edges incident to w, and hence
an ordering assigned to the edges of G. Assume that Gw has height h. Consider two port gadgets
P and P ′ of Gw , and let rP and rP ′ be their root nodes, respectively. Furthermore, let vP and
vP ′ be the head-leaf nodes of Gw that are connected to rP and rP ′ , respectively. Assume that
vP = (h − 1, i) and vP ′ = (h − 1, j) for some i, j ∈ {0, . . . , 2h−1 }. We say that P < P ′ if and only if
i < j or, if i = j, LvP ({vP , rP }) = hplink 1 and LvP ({vP , rP ′ }) = hplink 2 . Let Pi be the i-th port of
Gw according to this ordering, and let u be an arbitrary node of Pi . The i-th edge of w is the edge
compression(u).

   In the definition of Πlinearizable , the given bipartite graph G = (W ∪ B, E) comes with a local
ordering σw of the edges of each node w ∈ W . We can then think of lifts that “respect” such an
ordering.
Definition 5.17 (Edge-order preserving lift). Let G = (W ∪ B, E) be a bipartite graph that is
not necessarily connected and that may contain parallel edges, and let τ : w 7→ σw be an ordering
assigned to the edges of G. Let (L, compression) be a lift of G, where L is (V proper , E proper )-labeled.
Let τ ′ : w 7→ σw
                ′ be a function assigning to each w ∈ W the edge ordering defined via compression

according to Observation 5.16. We say that (L, compression) is edge-order preserving with respect
to τ if σw′ = σ for all w ∈ W .
                w


                                                     39
Lemma 5.18. For each bipartite graph G = (W ∪ B, E) which comes with an ordering τ : w ∈
W 7→ σw assigned to its edges, and for each integer h, there exists a lift (L, compression) that is
(V proper , E proper )-labeled such that all nodes satisfy C proper where all port gadgets of L have height h,
and such that (L, compression) is edge-order preserving with respect to τ . Moreover, for each proper
instance L, there exists a bipartite graph G such that L can be compressed to G.

Proof. We first prove that for each bipartite graph G = (W ∪ B, E) with an edge-ordering τ and
for each integer h, there exists a lift (L, compression) where all port gadgets of L have height h and
that is edge-order preserving w.r.t. τ . Recall that to each node w ∈ W is assigned an ordering σw
of its incident edges.
    For each node w ∈ W , we create an (xw , ηw , Ww )-octopus gadget Gw , where the parameters xw ,
ηw , and Ww are chosen as follows.

    • xw = 2⌊log2 (deg(w))⌋ + 1.

    • ηw ∈ {1, 2}xw −1 is a vector satisfying that
                                                          P
                                                              ηw (i) = deg(w). Such a vector exists, since
      (xw − 1) ≤ deg(w) ≤ 2(xw − 1).

    • All elements of Ww are equal to h.

Let Ew = {e(w,1) , . . . , e(w,deg(w)) } be the set of edges that are incident to w, ordered according to
σw . For each 1 ≤ i ≤ deg(w), let Pe(w,i) be the i-th port gadget connected to the octopus gadget
Gw (according to the natural order defined in the proof of Observation 5.16). For each black node
b ∈ B, we create a node vb that is an inter-octopus node. If b is connected to w through some
edge e(w,i) , then vb is connected to the left-most leaf of Pe(w,i) . It is trivial to see that L admits a
compression function to G with the properties given in Definition 5.15.
    We now prove that each proper instance L = (V, E) can be compressed to some bipartite graph
G = (W ∪ B, E ′ ). We construct G as follows. The set of white nodes W contains a vertex vH for
each head gadget H. The set of black nodes B contains a node uvinter-octopus for each inter-octopus
node vinter-octopus . Then, vH is connected to uvinter-octopus through an edge if and only if H is connected
to a port gadget P that is, in turn, connected to vinter-octopus .

Lemma 5.19. Let Πpromise be the problem defined as a function of a linearizable problem Πlinearizable
as described in Section 5.4. Let L = (V ′ , E ′ ) be a proper instance, and let G = (W ∪ B, E) be the
bipartite graph to which L can be compressed to, according to Lemma 5.18. For each node w ∈ W ,
let σw be the ordering defined in Observation 5.16.
    Then, there is a bijective function that maps solutions of Πpromise on L to solutions of Πlinearizable
on G (with the aforementioned edge ordering).

Proof. Let compression : V ′ → W ∪ B ∪ E be the function that compresses L to G. First, suppose
that we are given a solution for Πpromise on L. Consider any white node w of G and its set of
incident edges e(w,1) , . . . , e(w,deg(w)) ordered according to σw . Consider an arbitrary node v of a port
gadget P such that compression(v) = e(w,i) . Then, the output of w on the edge e(w,i) is defined to
be the same as the output of v. This labeling clearly satisfies the constraints of Πlinearizable under
the ordering of the edges defined by σ = {σw | w ∈ W }.
    Now, suppose we are given a solution for Πlinearizable on G. Consider any white node w of
G and its set of incident edges e(w,1) , . . . , e(w,deg(w)) , ordered according to σw . For all nodes
v ∈ compression−1 (e(w,i) ), we define the output of v to be the same as the output of w on e(w,i) .
For all other nodes v of G, we define the output of v to be ⊥. This labeling clearly satisfies the
constraints of Πpromise .


                                                     40
5.5   The LCL problem Π
We are now ready to define our problem Π, as a function of the given problem Πpromise . The input
labels of Π are the same as the input labels V proper and E proper of ΠbadGraph . The set V Π of output
labels contains the following labels.

   • (badGraph, x), for all x ∈ V badGraph \ {⊥}.
                                promise
   • (promise, x), for all x ∈ Vout     .

The constraints C Π are defined as follows.
 The constraints C Π
     • Consider the graph labeling in which the output labels are changed as follows: nodes
       labeled (promise, x) become labeled ⊥, while nodes labeled (badGraph, x) become labeled
       x. Then, this labeling must satisfy the constraint C badGraph .

      • Let G′ be the subgraph induced by nodes outputting (promise, x), for some x. Consider
        the labeling of G′ in which nodes labeled (promise, x) become labeled x. Then, all nodes
        of G′ , in the subgraph G′ , must satisfy C promise .

    In other words, if nodes output a (badGraph, ·) label, then this labeling must be a valid solution
for ΠbadGraph . This allows nodes to mark invalid parts of the graph. Then, in the parts that are not
marked as invalid, nodes need to solve Πpromise .

5.6   Upper bound in quantum-LOCAL
In this section, we prove an upper bound on the quantum complexity of Π as a function of the
quantum complexity of Πlinearizable . More in detail, we prove the following.

Lemma 5.20. Let T (n) be an upper bound on the quantum complexity of Πlinearizable , that holds
also if the given graph contains parallel edges. Then, the quantum complexity of Π is upper bounded
by O(T (n) log n).

Proof. Let G be the graph in which we need to solve Π. The algorithm is composed of two parts,
a classical deterministic part and a quantum part. The first part uses Lemma 5.14 to compute a
solution for ΠbadGraph such that the nodes outputting ⊥ induce a proper instance. This requires
O(log n) classical deterministic rounds. For each v, let xv be its output for ΠbadGraph . Each node v
satisfying xv ̸= ⊥ outputs (badGraph, xv ) for Π. Note that the graph G′ induced by nodes that still
did not output anything for Π is a proper instance.
     The second part of the algorithm works as follows. Nodes that have already produced an output
for Π do nothing. The other nodes simulate the quantum algorithm A for Πlinearizable as follows. The
goal is to simulate A in the graph obtained by contracting each octopus gadget of G′ into a single
node. Let Ĝ be this graph. Observe that this is the graph that G can be compressed to, according
to Lemma 5.18. For each octopus gadget ν, the root of its head gadget is the node responsible
for storing the quantum state of the node in Ĝ corresponding to ν. The inter-octopus nodes are
unaffected and simulate themselves in Ĝ. Since the diameter of a valid octopus gadget is clearly
upper bounded by O(log n), we get that the communication between nodes of Ĝ can be simulated
in O(log n) quantum rounds in G′ . Hence, after O(T (n) log n), all the roots of the head gadget
computed a solution for Πlinearizable in Ĝ. With additional O(log n) steps nodes can solve Πpromise in
G′ , according to the mapping defined in Lemma 5.19. For each node v in G′ , let xv be its output
for Πpromise . Each node v in G′ outputs (promise, xv ) for Π.

                                                    41
   The output clearly satisfies the constraints C Π , and the runtime is clearly upper bounded by
O(T (n) log n).

5.7    Lower bound in LOCAL
In this section, we prove a lower bound on the classical randomized complexity of Π as a function of
the classical randomized complexity of Πlinearizable . More in detail, we prove the following.

Lemma 5.21. Let T (n) be a lower bound on the time required to solve Πlinearizable with a classical
randomized algorithm that has failure probability at most 1/n. Then, any classical randomized
algorithm for Π with failure probability at most 1/n requires Ω(T (n1/3 ) log n) rounds.

Proof. For a contradiction, assume that there exists an algorithm A that solves Π in T ′ (n) =
o(T (n1/3 ) log n) rounds with failure probability at most 1/n. We show that we can construct an
algorithm B that solves Πlinearizable in o(T (n)) with failure probability at most 1/n, contradicting
the hypothesis.
    The algorithm B works as follows. Let G be an instance of Πlinearizable . We construct an instance
  ′
G of Π by applying Lemma 5.18 to construct a lift of G with parameter h = Θ(log n). On a high
level, the algorithm B will be defined such that the nodes of G simulate the execution of A on G′ .
     Recall that G′ is constructed as follows. Each hyperedge e of G is replaced with an inter-octopus
node be . Each node v of degree dv is replaced with an octopus gadget νv that contains exactly dv
ports, such that each port gadget has height Θ(log n), and such that the number of nodes of each
port gadget is strictly less than n. For each node-hyperedge pair (u, e) of G, we add an edge to G′
that connects the left-most leaf of the i-th port of νv to be , assuming that e is the i-th edge incident
to u according to the given ordering σu . We label G′ such that it is a properly labeled valid instance.
Observe that the labeling of the nodes of νv can be computed by v without communication.
     Since each port gadget has size strictly less than n, and since the maximum degree of G is
n, we obtain that G′ has at most n3 nodes. Observe that if two nodes (u, v) are neighbors in G,
then the head gadgets of νv and νu are at distance Θ(log n) in G′ . Hence, each node v of G can
spend O(T ′ (n3 )/ log n) rounds of communication in G to gather its T ′ (n3 )-radius neighborhood in
G′ . Since the runtime of A on instances of size at most n3 is upper bounded by T ′ (n3 ), and since
G′ has size at most n3 , then each node v is able to compute the output of A for Π on G′ without
further communication.
     Since G′ is a properly labeled valid instance, all nodes of G′ must output labels of type (promise, ·).
Hence, v can reconstruct a solution for Πlinearizable as a function of the output of the nodes in νv ,
without communication, according to Lemma 5.19.
    The runtime of the algorithm B for Πlinearizable is O(T ′ (n3 )/ log n) = o(T (n)), and its failure
probability is upper bounded by 1/n3 ≤ 1/n, proving the claim.

5.8    Instantiating the construction
In [BBC+25], the authors introduced a family of problems {GHZ(∆) | ∆ ≥ 3}. While this set can
be seen as a family of problems parametrized by the maximum degree ∆ of the graph, for the ease
of presentation we will present this family as a single problem that we call iterated GHZ. We now
formally define this problem, show that it can be defined as a linearizable problem, and then state
its quantum and classical complexities.

The iterated GHZ problem. An instance of the problem is a hypergraph of rank 3. However,
for the ease of presentation, in the following, we will describe an input instance as a bipartite graph


                                                    42
(U, V, E), where nodes in V have degree exactly 3 (equivalently, in order to remove this assumption,
if a node in V has degree different from 3, then it is unconstrained). Nodes in U are called white
nodes, or players, while nodes in V are called black nodes, or games. Each node u ∈ U receives as
input an ordering on its incident edges. Let eu,i be the i-th edge incident to u according to this
order, where 1 ≤ i ≤ du , and du is the degree of u. The problem is defined as follows. Each node
u ∈ U must output two bits x(u, i) and y(u, i) on each incident edge eu,i . The following must hold.

   • For each white node u, it must hold that x(u, 1) = 0.

   • For each white node u, it must hold that y(u, i) = x(u, i + 1), for all i.

   • Let v be a black node, and let u1 , u2 , u3 be its white neighbors. Let ij be the position of
     the edge {uj , v} according to the order of the edges incident to uj , for 1 ≤ j ≤ 3. Then, the
     following must hold.

        – If i1 = i2 = i3 = 1, then it must hold that the multiset {y(u1 , 1), y(u2 , 1), y(u3 , 1)} is
          equal to {0, 0, 1}.
        – Otherwise, if x(u1 , i1 ) + x(u2 , i2 ) + x(u3 , i3 ) is even, then it must hold that y(u1 , i1 ) ⊕
          y(u2 , i2 ) ⊕ y(u3 , i3 ) = x(u1 , i1 ) ∨ x(u2 , i2 ) ∨ x(u3 , i3 ).
        – Otherwise, node v is unconstrained.

The original definition of GHZ(∆) of [BBC+25] is equivalent to the definition that we have provided,
when restricted to the case in which the maximum degree of the graph is ∆.

Lower bound for classical randomized algorithms.                In [BBC+25], the following lower bound
is shown.

Theorem 5.22 ([BBC+25]). Let ∆ ≥ 3 be an integer. Any classical randomized algorithm that
solves GHZ(∆) with high probability requires Ω(min{∆, log∆ log n}) rounds.

   In order
             to obtain
                        the best possible lower bound stated solely as a function of n, we take
         log log n
∆ = Θ log log log n , and we obtain the following.

Corollary 5.23 ([BBC+25]).       Any classical
                                               randomized algorithm that solves iterated GHZ with
                              log log n
high probability requires Ω log log log n rounds.

Upper bound for quantum algorithms. In [BBC+25], the lower and upper bounds for the
problem GHZ(∆) are proved in a setting in which the input instances are ∆-edge colored. In the
construction described in this section, however, we would need to provide a different color to each
port gadget belonging to the same octopus gadget. This would require ω(1) input labels, which is
not allowed in a proper LCL.
    Since the lower bound of [BBC+25] holds in a ∆-edge colored graph, this lower bound clearly
holds in graphs that are not ∆-edge colored (having such a coloring can only make the problem
potentially easier). However, for an upper bound, we need to adapt the algorithm of [BBC+25] to
the case in which the edge coloring is not provided. Moreover, in order to use Lemma 5.20, we need
an algorithm that works also in the case of parallel edges.

Lemma 5.24. The iterated GHZ problem can be solved in O(1) rounds with a quantum algorithm,
even if parallel edges are present.


                                                    43
Proof. The algorithm works in two rounds of communications, which are described in the following
two points.
   1. Each white node w does the following. Let bi be the i-th neighbor of w. Node w sends i to bi ,
      for all 1 ≤ i ≤ dw , where dw is the degree of w.

   2. Each black node b has now received three port numbers pv , pu , pz from its three white neighbors
      v, u, z. It then prepares three qubits qv , qu , qz in the GHZ state, i.e.,
                                             1                                     
                         |0⟩qv |0⟩qu |0⟩qz → √ |0⟩qv |0⟩qu |0⟩qz + |1⟩qv |1⟩qu |1⟩qz .
                                              2
      If pv = pu = pz = 1, then b sends the pair (qv , 0) to v, the pair (qu , 0) to u, and the pair (qz , 1)
      to z. Otherwise, it just sends the qubit qv to v, the qubit qu to u, and the qubit qz to z.
Now, all white nodes decide on their outputs without any further communication. First, all white
nodes w set x(w, 1) = 0. Now, observe that each white node w has received a qubit qw,i through its
i-th incident edge. Furthermore, some white nodes w have received a pair (qw,1 , jw ), where qw,1 is a
qubit and jw ∈ {0, 1}: we call such nodes lucky. Each lucky white node w sets y(w, 1) = jw and
x(w, 2) = jw (if dw ≥ 2). Now we describe what each white node w outputs for the j-th incident
edge. If a node is lucky, it does the following for each j ≥ 2 iteratively, while if a node is unlucky it
does the following for each j ≥ 1 iteratively. Each node w measures the qubit qw,j according to the
well-known GHZ strategy (with input x(w, j)) that wins the game with probability 1 [BBT05], and
sets the output y(w, j) accordingly. Then, node w sets x(w, j + 1) = y(w, j) (if j + 1 ≤ dw ).
     We now argue about the correctness of the algorithm. White constraints are satisfied by
construction of the algorithm. Suppose now that the constraints of some black node b is not satisfied.
This means that the three white neighbors v, u, z of b have some outputs (xv , yv ), (xu , yu ), (zu , yu )
that do not satisfy the constraints of the problem. We have three cases: If the three port numbers
pv , pu , pz are such that pv = pu = pz = 1, then, by point 2, the white nodes are lucky and have set
the outputs to be (0, 0), (0, 0), (0, 1), which is a valid solution. Suppose that at least a port number
between pv , pu , pz is different from 1. If xv + xu + xz is odd, then any solution is valid. Suppose now
that xv + xu + xz is even. Then, the outputs of the white nodes are constructed by measuring the
three entangled qubits qv , qu , qz in the GHZ state prepared by b. By the well-known GHZ winning
strategy [BBT05], the white nodes’ outputs are such that yv ⊕ yu ⊕ yz = xv ∨ xu ∨ xz , which is a
valid solution.

The iterated GHZ problem as a linearizable problem. We define a problem Πlinearizable =
(Σ, (F, L, P ), B) that encodes iterated GHZ as a linearizable problem. On a high level, each label
will encode a pair (x(v, i), y(v, i)) of bits, and we will use special labels for the case in which i = 1.
We define the set of possible first labels as F = {(first, y) | y ∈ {0, 1}}. Then, we define the set of
possible output labels as Σ = F ∪ {(other, x, y) | x, y ∈ {0, 1}}, and we define L = Σ. The allowed
pairs P are defined as all the pairs satisfying the following.
   • All pairs ((first, y1 ), (other, x2 , y2 )) where y1 = x2 and y1 , x2 , y2 ∈ {0, 1}.

   • All pairs ((other, x1 , y1 ), (other, x2 , y2 )) where y1 = x2 and x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 ∈ {0, 1}.
Let {L1 , L2 , L3 } be a multiset containing three elements from Σ. If Li = (first, yi ) for some yi ∈ {0, 1},
then let ℓi = first and let xi = 0. If Li = (other, xi , yi ) for some xi , yi ∈ {0, 1}, then let ℓi = other.
Observe that now, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ 3, ℓi , xi and yi are defined. The set B contains the multisets
{L1 , L2 , L3 } satisfying the following.

                                                       44
   • All the multisets satisfying ℓ1 = ℓ2 = ℓ3 = first such that the multiset {y1 , y2 , y3 } is equal to
     {0, 0, 1}.

   • All the multisets where, if other ∈ {ℓ1 , ℓ2 , ℓ3 }, and x1 + x2 + x3 is even, then y1 ⊕ y2 ⊕ y3 =
     x1 ∨ x 2 ∨ x 3 .

   • All the multisets where other ∈ {ℓ1 , ℓ2 , ℓ3 } and x1 + x2 + x3 is odd.

It is clear that Πlinearizable and iterated GHZ are equivalent:

   • both problems require outputting two bits per edge;

   • the black constraint of iterated GHZ has the same requirements of the set B on the pairs
     incident to a black node;

   • both the white constraint of iterated GHZ and the triple (F, L, P ) requires that the second
     bit of a port is the same as the first bit of the next one.

Putting things together. By combining the problem Πlinearizable obtained as a function of iterated
GHZ with Corollary 5.23 and Lemmas 5.20, 5.21 and 5.24, we obtain the following result.

Theorem 5.25. There exists
                            an LCL problem    Π with quantum complexity O(log n) and classical
                                  log log n
randomized complexity Ω log n · log log log n .


Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the Research Council of Finland, Grants 359104 and 363558, by
the MUR (Italy) Department of Excellence 2023–2027 for GSSI. Francesco d’Amore is supported by
the project Decreto MUR n. 47/2025, CUP: D13C25000750001. This project was initiated at the
Research Workshop on Distributed Algorithms (RW-DIST 2025) in Freiburg, Germany; we would
like to thank all workshop participants and organizers for inspiring discussions. We would also like
to thank Sebastian Brandt, Xavier Coiteux-Roy, François Le Gall, Augusto Modanese, Marc-Olivier
Renou, Ronja Stimpert, Lucas Tendick, and Isadora Veeren for discussions that led to this project.


References
[ACd+25]     Amirreza Akbari, Xavier Coiteux-Roy, Francesco d’Amore, François Le Gall, Henrik
             Lievonen, Darya Melnyk, Augusto Modanese, Shreyas Pai, Marc-Olivier Renou, Václav
             Rozhoň, and Jukka Suomela. “Online locality meets distributed quantum computing”.
             In: Proc. 57th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2025). ACM Press,
             2025. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3717823.3718211.
[AEL+23]     Amirreza Akbari, Navid Eslami, Henrik Lievonen, Darya Melnyk, Joona Särkijärvi,
             and Jukka Suomela. “Locality in Online, Dynamic, Sequential, and Distributed Graph
             Algorithms”. In: 50th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Program-
             ming, ICALP 2023, July 10-14, 2023, Paderborn, Germany. Ed. by Kousha Etessami,
             Uriel Feige, and Gabriele Puppis. Vol. 261. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum
             für Informatik, 2023, 10:1–10:20. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.ICALP.2023.10.




                                                   45
[BBC+25]   Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Xavier Coiteux-Roy, Francesco d’Amore, Massimo
           Equi, François Le Gall, Henrik Lievonen, Augusto Modanese, Dennis Olivetti, Marc-
           Olivier Renou, Jukka Suomela, Lucas Tendick, and Isadora Veeren. “Distributed
           quantum advantage for local problems”. In: Proc. 57th ACM Symposium on Theory
           of Computing (STOC 2025). ACM Press, 2025. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/
           3717823.3718233.
[BBO+20]   Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela. “How much does
           randomness help with locally checkable problems?” In: PODC ’20: ACM Symposium
           on Principles of Distributed Computing, Virtual Event, Italy, August 3-7, 2020. Ed. by
           Yuval Emek and Christian Cachin. ACM, 2020, pp. 299–308. doi: 10.1145/3382734.
           3405715.
[BBO+21]   Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela. “Almost global
           problems in the LOCAL model”. In: Distributed Computing 34.4 (2021), pp. 259–281.
           doi: 10.1007/S00446-020-00375-2.
[BCd+26]   Alkida Balliu, Filippo Casagrande, Francesco d’Amore, Massimo Equi, Barbara Keller,
           Henrik Lievonen, Dennis Olivetti, Gustav Schmid, and Jukka Suomela. “Distributed
           Quantum Advantage in Locally Checkable Labeling Problems”. In: Proceedings of the
           2026 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA). 2026, pp. 1268–
           1308. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611978971.49. eprint: https://epubs.siam.org/doi/
           pdf/10.1137/1.9781611978971.49. url: https://epubs.siam.org/doi/abs/10.
           1137/1.9781611978971.49.
[BCM+21]    Alkida Balliu, Keren Censor-Hillel, Yannic Maus, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela.
           “Locally Checkable Labelings with Small Messages”. In: 35th International Symposium
           on Distributed Computing, DISC 2021, October 4-8, 2021, Freiburg, Germany (Virtual
           Conference). Ed. by Seth Gilbert. Vol. 209. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum
            für Informatik, 2021, 8:1–8:18. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2021.8.
[BCC+25]    Alkida Balliu, Corinna Coupette, Antonio Cruciani, Francesco d’Amore, Massimo
            Equi, Henrik Lievonen, Augusto Modanese, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela.
           “New Limits on Distributed Quantum Advantage: Dequantizing Linear Programs”. In:
           39th International Symposium on Distributed Computing, DISC 2025, October 27-31,
           2025, Berlin, Germany. Ed. by Dariusz Kowalski. Vol. 356. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl -
            Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025.
[BGK+25]   Alkida Balliu, Mohsen Ghaffari, Fabian Kuhn, Augusto Modanese, Dennis Olivetti,
           Mikaël Rabie, Jukka Suomela, and Jara Uitto. “Shared Randomness Helps with Local
           Distributed Problems”. In: 52nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages,
           and Programming, ICALP 2025, Aarhus, Denmark, July 8-11, 2025. Ed. by Keren
           Censor-Hillel, Fabrizio Grandoni, Joël Ouaknine, and Gabriele Puppis. Vol. 334. LIPIcs.
           Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025, 16:1–16:18. doi: 10.4230/
           LIPICS.ICALP.2025.16. url: https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2025.16.
[BHK+18]   Alkida Balliu, Juho Hirvonen, Janne H. Korhonen, Tuomo Lempiäinen, Dennis Olivetti,
           and Jukka Suomela. “New classes of distributed time complexity”. In: Proceedings of
           the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2018,
           Los Angeles, CA, USA, June 25-29, 2018. Ed. by Ilias Diakonikolas, David Kempe,
           and Monika Henzinger. ACM, 2018, pp. 1307–1318. doi: 10.1145/3188745.3188860.



                                              46
[Bra19]    Sebastian Brandt. “An Automatic Speedup Theorem for Distributed Problems”. In:
           Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing,
           PODC 2019, Toronto, ON, Canada, July 29 - August 2, 2019. Ed. by Peter Robinson
           and Faith Ellen. ACM, 2019, pp. 379–388. doi: 10.1145/3293611.3331611.
[BFH+16]   Sebastian Brandt, Orr Fischer, Juho Hirvonen, Barbara Keller, Tuomo Lempiäinen,
           Joel Rybicki, Jukka Suomela, and Jara Uitto. “A lower bound for the distributed Lovász
           local lemma”. In: Proceedings of the 48th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
           of Computing, STOC 2016, Cambridge, MA, USA, June 18-21, 2016. Ed. by Daniel
           Wichs and Yishay Mansour. ACM, 2016, pp. 479–488. doi: 10.1145/2897518.2897570.
[BHK+17]   Sebastian Brandt, Juho Hirvonen, Janne H. Korhonen, Tuomo Lempiäinen, Patric
           R. J. Östergård, Christopher Purcell, Joel Rybicki, Jukka Suomela, and Przemyslaw
           Uznanski. “LCL Problems on Grids”. In: Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on
           Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2017, Washington, DC, USA, July 25-27,
           2017. Ed. by Elad Michael Schiller and Alexander A. Schwarzmann. ACM, 2017,
           pp. 101–110. doi: 10.1145/3087801.3087833.
[BBT05]    Gilles Brassard, Anne Broadbent, and Alain Tapp. “Quantum Pseudo-Telepathy”. In:
           Foundations of Physics 35.11 (2005), pp. 1877–1907. doi: 10.1007/s10701-005-7353-
           4.
[CKP19]    Yi-Jun Chang, Tsvi Kopelowitz, and Seth Pettie. “An Exponential Separation between
           Randomized and Deterministic Complexity in the LOCAL Model”. In: SIAM Journal
           on Computing 48.1 (2019), pp. 122–143. doi: 10.1137/17M1117537.
[CMN+23] Yi-Jun Chang, Gopinath Mishra, Hung Thuan Nguyen, Mingyang Yang, and Yu-Cheng
         Yeh. “A Tight Lower Bound for 3-Coloring Grids in the Online-LOCAL Model”. In:
         CoRR abs/2312.01384 (2023). doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2312.01384. arXiv: 2312.01384.
[CP19]     Yi-Jun Chang and Seth Pettie. “A Time Hierarchy Theorem for the LOCAL Model”.
           In: SIAM Journal on Computing 48.1 (2019), pp. 33–69. doi: 10.1137/17M1157957.
[CDG+24]   Xavier Coiteux-Roy, Francesco D’Amore, Rishikesh Gajjala, Fabian Kuhn, François Le
           Gall, Henrik Lievonen, Augusto Modanese, Marc-Olivier Renou, Gustav Schmid, and
           Jukka Suomela. “No Distributed Quantum Advantage for Approximate Graph Color-
           ing”. In: Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
           STOC 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, June 24-28, 2024. Ed. by Bojan Mohar, Igor
           Shinkar, and Ryan O’Donnell. ACM, 2024, pp. 1901–1910. doi: 10.1145/3618260.
           3649679.
[dAm25]    Francesco d’Amore. “On the limits of distributed quantum computing”. In: Bulletin of
           the EATCS 145 (2025), pp. 51–91. url: http://bulletin.eatcs.org/index.php/
           beatcs/article/view/829.
[DCP16]    Giacomo Mauro D’Ariano, Giulio Chiribella, and Paolo Perinotti. Quantum Theory
           from First Principles: An Informational Approach. Cambridge University Press, 2016.
           doi: 10.1017/9781107338340.
[DDL+23]   Sameep Dahal, Francesco D’Amore, Henrik Lievonen, Timothé Picavet, and Jukka
           Suomela. “Brief Announcement: Distributed Derandomization Revisited”. In: 37th
           International Symposium on Distributed Computing, DISC 2023, October 10-12, 2023,
           L’Aquila, Italy. Ed. by Rotem Oshman. Vol. 281. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-
           Zentrum für Informatik, 2023, 40:1–40:5. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2023.40.


                                              47
[DKL+24]   Anubhav Dhar, Eli Kujawa, Henrik Lievonen, Augusto Modanese, Mikail Muftuoglu,
           Jan Studený, and Jukka Suomela. “Local Problems in Trees Across a Wide Range of
           Distributed Models”. In: 28th International Conference on Principles of Distributed
           Systems, OPODIS 2024, December 11-13, 2024, Lucca, Italy. Ed. by Silvia Bonomi,
           Letterio Galletta, Etienne Rivière, and Valerio Schiavoni. Vol. 324. LIPIcs. Schloss
           Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024, 27:1–27:17. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.
           OPODIS.2024.27.
[GKM09]    Cyril Gavoille, Adrian Kosowski, and Marcin Markiewicz. “What Can Be Observed
           Locally?” In: Distributed Computing, 23rd International Symposium, DISC 2009, Elche,
           Spain, September 23-25, 2009. Proceedings. Ed. by Idit Keidar. Vol. 5805. Lecture
           Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2009, pp. 243–257. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
           04355-0_26.
[GGH+23]   Mohsen Ghaffari, Christoph Grunau, Bernhard Haeupler, Saeed Ilchi, and Václav
           Rozhon. “Improved Distributed Network Decomposition, Hitting Sets, and Spanners,
           via Derandomization”. In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
           Algorithms, SODA 2023, Florence, Italy, January 22-25, 2023. Ed. by Nikhil Bansal and
           Viswanath Nagarajan. SIAM, 2023, pp. 2532–2566. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611977554.
           CH97.
[GHK18]    Mohsen Ghaffari, David G. Harris, and Fabian Kuhn. “On Derandomizing Local Dis-
           tributed Algorithms”. In: 59th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
           Science, FOCS 2018, Paris, France, October 7-9, 2018. Ed. by Mikkel Thorup. IEEE
           Computer Society, 2018, pp. 662–673. doi: 10.1109/FOCS.2018.00069.
[GKM17]    Mohsen Ghaffari, Fabian Kuhn, and Yannic Maus. “On the complexity of local dis-
           tributed graph problems”. In: Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Sympo-
           sium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2017, Montreal, QC, Canada, June 19-23, 2017.
           Ed. by Hamed Hatami, Pierre McKenzie, and Valerie King. ACM, 2017, pp. 784–797.
           doi: 10.1145/3055399.3055471.
[GHZ89]    Daniel M. Greenberger, Michael A. Horne, and Anton Zeilinger. “Going Beyond Bell’s
           Theorem”. In: Bell’s Theorem, Quantum Theory and Conceptions of the Universe.
           Springer Netherlands, 1989, pp. 69–72. doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-0849-4_10.
[Hol24]    Alexander E. Holroyd. “Symmetrization for finitely dependent colouring”. In: Electronic
           Communications in Probability 29 (2024). doi: 10.1214/24-ecp600.
[HHL18]    Alexander E. Holroyd, Tom Hutchcroft, and Avi Levy. “Finitely dependent cycle
           coloring”. In: Electronic Communications in Probability 23 (2018). doi: 10.1214/18-
           ecp118.
[HL16]     Alexander E. Holroyd and Thomas M. Liggett. “Finitely Dependent Coloring”. In:
           Forum of Mathematics, Pi 4, e9 (2016). doi: 10.1017/fmp.2016.7.
[LNR19]    François Le Gall, Harumichi Nishimura, and Ansis Rosmanis. “Quantum Advantage
           for the LOCAL Model in Distributed Computing”. In: 36th International Symposium
           on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS 2019, March 13-16, 2019, Berlin,
           Germany. Ed. by Rolf Niedermeier and Christophe Paul. Vol. 126. LIPIcs. Schloss
           Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019, 49:1–49:14. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.
           STACS.2019.49.
[Mer90]    N. David Mermin. “Quantum mysteries revisited”. In: American Journal of Physics
           58.8 (1990), pp. 731–734. doi: 10.1119/1.16503.

                                              48
[NS95]    Moni Naor and Larry J. Stockmeyer. “What Can be Computed Locally?” In: SIAM
          Journal on Computing 24.6 (1995), pp. 1259–1277. doi: 10.1137/S0097539793254571.
[Suo20]   Jukka Suomela. “Landscape of Locality (Invited Talk)”. In: 17th Scandinavian Sympo-
          sium and Workshops on Algorithm Theory, SWAT 2020, June 22-24, 2020, Tórshavn,
          Faroe Islands. Ed. by Susanne Albers. Vol. 162. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-
          Zentrum für Informatik, 2020, 2:1–2:1. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.SWAT.2020.2.
[Suo24]   Jukka Suomela. Open problems related to locality in distributed graph algorithms. 2024.
          url: https://jukkasuomela.fi/open/.




                                             49
A       Simulation of component-wise online-LOCAL in LOCAL
In this section, we extend the result of Section 4 to hold also for the component-wise randomized
online-LOCAL model. We start by briefly discussing the state of the art and motivating the study of
yet another variant of the LOCAL model. We then define formally what we mean by component-wise
randomized online-LOCAL. Finally, we extend the proofs of Section 4 to hold also in this new
model.

A.1      Motivation
Informally, component-wise randomized online-LOCAL is just like the component-wise deterministic
online-LOCAL model (see [ACd+25, dAm25]), but generalized for the randomized case. In particular,
a deterministic component-wise online-LOCAL algorithm is also a randomized one.
    The component-wise deterministic online-LOCAL model was originally introduced because it
allows simulation of randomized online-LOCAL in weaker models like SLOCAL in rooted trees and
forests [ACd+25]. In particular, randomized online-LOCAL captures the power of non-signaling
distributions [ACd+25], SLOCAL [GKM17] and dynamic-LOCAL [AEL+23]. Hence, proving lower
bounds for randomized online-LOCAL allows us to provide strong lower bounds that span across a
wide variety of models.
    One way to prove these lower bounds is by providing a simulation of stronger models in weaker
ones. One such model is the component-wise randomized online-LOCAL, which is stronger than
both the deterministic component-wise online-LOCAL and the bounded-dependence model.
    Extending the simulation result of Section 4 to component-wise randomized online-LOCAL
model improves the state of the art in two major ways:

    1. So far the only result known for component-wise deterministic online-LOCAL is the simulation
       result of Akbari et al. [ACd+25] in rooted trees and forests. Our result works in all graphs,
       albeit with a worse locality.

    2. We provide a direct reduction from the bounded-dependence model to the component-wise
       randomized online-LOCAL. Previously, the reduction had to go through the non-signaling
       model, randomized online-LOCAL and component-wise deterministic online-LOCAL. This
       round-trip through randomized online-LOCAL incurs a doubly exponential cost in the locality.
       For localities in the Ω(log log n) region, our result is asymptotically tighter.

A.2      Definitions
We now formally define what we mean by component-wise randomized online-LOCAL. To do this,
we first define the notion of partial online-LOCAL run of length ℓ, as introduced by Akbari et al.
[ACd+25]:

Definition A.1 (Partial online-LOCAL run of length ℓ). Let G be a graph with an order of
nodes v1 , v2 , . . . , vn , and let x encode the input data on each vertex. Consider the subgraph Gℓ ⊆ G
induced by the radius-T neighborhoods of the first ℓ nodes v1 , . . . , vℓ , i.e., Gℓ = G̊[NT [{v1 , . . . , vℓ }]].
We call (Gℓ , (v1 , . . . , vℓ ), x ↾NT [{v1 ,...,vℓ }] ) the partial T -rounds online-LOCAL run of length ℓ of G.
    We denote by (Gℓ , (v1 , . . . , vℓ ), x ↾NT [{v1 ,...,vℓ }] )[vℓ ] the tuple (Ḡℓ , (w1 , . . . , wk ), x ↾NT [{w1 ,...,wk }] )
where Ḡℓ ⊆ Gℓ is the connected component containing vℓ , (w1 , . . . , wk ) is the maximal subsequence
of (v1 , . . . , vℓ ) of nodes that belong to Ḡℓ , and x ↾NT [{w1 ,...,wk }] is the restriction of the local inputs
to this component. In such case, k is the length of (Gℓ , (v1 , . . . , vℓ ), x ↾NT [{v1 ,...,vℓ }] )[vℓ ]. Notice that
wk = vℓ .

                                                                50
    Now we are ready to introduce the online-LOCAL model. We loosely follow the definitions given
in by Akbari et al. [ACd+25].

The online-LOCAL model. The deterministic online-LOCAL model was first introduced
in [AEL+23]. It is a centralized model of computing where the algorithm initially knows only the
number of nodes n of the input graph G. The nodes are processed with respect to an adversarial input
ordering sequence σ = v1 , v2 , . . . , vn . Like in the LOCAL model, each node v has some local state
variable x(v) which encodes input data. In an algorithm with locality T , the output of node vi depends
on the partial T -rounds online-LOCAL run of length i of G, that is, (Gi , (v1 , . . . , vi ), x ↾NT [{v1 ,...,vi }] )
(see Definition A.1). In the randomized online-LOCAL model [ACd+25], every node has access to a
private infinite random bit string, which is independent of the random bit strings of other nodes.
Trivially, thanks to global memory, node vi knows the random bit strings of NT [{v1 , . . . , vi }]. In the
randomized case, the solution to a problem should be correct with probability at least 1 − 1/ poly(n).
    We now give a formal definition of the component-wise online-LOCAL model.

The component-wise online-LOCAL model. The component-wise online-LOCAL model is
similar to the online-LOCAL model above, but with some further restrictions. More specifically, let
(G, (v1 , . . . , vn ), xG ) and (H, (u1 , . . . , un ), xH ) be two n-node input instances. Let i, j ∈ [n] be two
indices such that

             (Gi , (v1 , . . . , vi ), xG ↾NT [{v1 ,...,vi }] )[vi ] = (Ḡi , (v1′ , . . . , vk′ ), xG ↾NT [{v1′ ,...,vk′ }] )   and
          (Hj , (u1 , . . . , uj ), xH ↾NT [{u1 ,...,uj }] )[uj ] = (H̄j , (u′1 , . . . , u′k ), xH ↾NT [{u′1 ,...,u′k }] )

are isomorphic with the following properties: the isomorphism preserves the order, i.e., it brings
vh′ to u′h for every h ∈ [n], and the isomorphism also preserves the inputs xG and xH in these
neighborhoods. Then, the algorithm must produce the same output for vi and uj .
     In the randomized component-wise online-LOCAL model, each node is given access to a private
infinite random bit string, which is independent of the random bit strings of other nodes. When the
algorithm needs to output a label for node vi , it can only use the random bit strings of nodes in
Ḡi . Again, in the randomized model a solution to a problem must be correct with probability at
least 1 − 1/ poly(n).
     To see why this matches the intuition of an algorithm being component-wise, imagine that Gi is
the real input and that Hj consists of only a single component, that is

             (Hj , (u1 , . . . , uj ), xH ↾NT [{u1 ,...,uj }] )[uj ] = (Hj , (u1 , . . . , uj ), xH ↾NT [{u1 ,...,uj }] ).

By the above definition, the algorithm must produce the same output for Gi and Hj . Then,
effectively what the algorithm does on Gi must depend only on what the algorithm has seen in Hj ,
that is only the current component.

A.3     Simulation of component-wise randomized online-LOCAL in randomized
        LOCAL
It is intuitive that a bounded-dependence outcome implies the existence of a component-wise
online-LOCAL algorithm with the same locality: we formalize this intuition through the following
lemma.

Lemma A.2. Let Π be any labeling problem with output node label set Σ, and let O be a bounded-
dependent outcome solving Π with probability p > 0 and locality T (n) on graphs of n nodes. Then

                                                                       51
there exists a component-wise randomized online-LOCAL algorithm solving Π with probability p with
the same locality T (n).
Proof. Consider any graph G of n nodes, and any adversarial processing order of the nodes
(v1 , . . . , vn ). We now construct a randomized component-wise online-LOCAL algorithm A with the
desired properties. When the adversary reveals v1 and (G1 , (v1 ), x ↾NT [v1 ] ) to A, A just samples
an output out(v1 ) = λv1 for v1 from O(G, x)[{v1 }]. Now, when the adversary reveals vi and
(Gi , (v1 , . . . , vi ), x ↾NT [{v1 ,...,vi }] )[vi ] = (Ḡi , (v1′ , . . . , vk′ ), x ↾NT [{v1′ ,...,vk′ }] ) to A, it samples an output
out(vi ) for vi from the distribution O(G, x)[NT [{v1′ , . . . , vk′ }]] conditional on the fact that the outputs
of v1′ , . . . , vk−1
                  ′     have already been sampled and are equal to out(v1′ ) = λv1′ , . . . , out(vk−1                        ′  ) = λvk−1
                                                                                                                                       ′   .
Let PA denote the probability measure induced by the algorithm A on the outputs of the nodes,
and let PO denote the probability measure induced by the bounded-dependence outcome O on the
outputs of the nodes. Fix any k ∈ [n], and suppose

                 (Gk , (v1 , . . . , vk ), x ↾NT [{v1 ,...,vk }] )[vk ] = (Ḡk , (w1 , . . . , wh ), x ↾NT [{w1 ,...,wh }] ),

with wh = vk . We first show that, for all (λw1 , . . . , λwh ) ∈ Σh , we have that

                               PA (∩hi=1 {out(wi ) = λwi }) = PO (∩hi=1 {out(wi ) = λwi }).

Let us start by induction on h. The base case is h = 1. Since w1 is the only node in Ḡ1 , then it
means that there are no nodes in the radius-(2T ) neighborhood of w1 which have been previously
labeled (otherwise the partial online-LOCAL run would contain them). By construction of A we are
freely sampling from O(G, x)[NT [w1 ]] and the thesis is trivial. Suppose now h > 1. We have that

                           PA (∩hi=1 {out(wi ) = λwi })
                                                                 
                         = PA out(wh ) = λvh ∩h−1                       h−1
                                                   i=1 {wi = λwi } PA (∩i=1 {wi = λwi }).


By theinductive hypothesis, PA (∩h−1
                                  i=1 {w
                                        i = λwi })
                                                         h−1
                                                 = PO (∩i=1 {wi = λwi }) and, byconstruction of
A, PA out(wh ) = λvh               ∩h−1
                                    i=1 {wi = λwi } = PO out(wh ) = λvh                         ∩h−1
                                                                                                 i=1 {wi = λwi } . Hence,


                           PA (∩hi=1 {out(wi ) = λwi })
                                                                   
                         = PA out(wh ) = λvh ∩h−1  i=1  {w i = λwi }  PA (∩h−1
                                                                           i=1 {wi = λwi })
                                                                   
                         = PO out(wh ) = λvh ∩h−1                          h−1
                                                   i=1 {wi = λwi } PO (∩i=1 {wi = λwi })

                         = PO (∩hi=1 {out(wi ) = λwi }),

and the induction is complete. Let S ⊆ V (G) with S = {vj1 , . . . , vjh } where j1 , . . . , jh are induced
by the ordering v1 , . . . , vn . The above argument implies that, for all (λvj1 , . . . , λvjh ) ∈ Σh it holds
that
                        PA (∩hi=1 {out(vji ) = λvji }) = PO (∩hi=1 {out(vji ) = λvji }).
In fact, consider the partial online-LOCAL runs {(Gji , (v1 , . . . , vji ), x ↾NT [{v1 ,...,vji }] )[vji ]}i∈[h] . Con-
sider the maximal subsequence of partial online-LOCAL runs {(Gjik , (v1 , . . . , vjik ), x ↾NT [{v1 ,...,vji }]
                                                                                                                                       k
)[vjik ]}ik ∈[h⋆ ] such that Gjik has no intersection with Gji for all i > ik , i ∈ [h]. We have two
                                               ⋆
properties: First, it trivially holds that ∪hk=1 Gjik = ∪hi=1 Gji . As for the second property, for any
two k ̸= k ′ ∈ [h⋆ ], let

             (Ḡjik , (w1 , . . . , ws ), x ↾NT [{w1 ,...,ws }] ) = (Gjik , (v1 , . . . , vjik ), x ↾NT [{v1 ,...,vji }] )[vjik ]
                                                                                                                     k



                                                                     52
and

        (Ḡji ′ , (w1′ , . . . , ws′ ′ ), x ↾NT [{w1′ ,...,w′ ′ }] ) = (Gji ′ , (v1 , . . . , vji ′ ), x ↾NT [{v1 ,...,vji        }] )[vjik′ ].
              k                                            s                k                   k                            k′


Then, distG ({w1 , . . . , wS }, {w1′ , . . . , ws′ ′ }) > 2T . Hence, we can treat the two partial online-LOCAL
runs as independent, and we can apply the inductive hypothesis separately to each of them to
conclude the proof and get that the overall success probability is at least p.

Remark A.3. The non-signaling model (see [ACd+25] for a definition) cannot be simulated in
the component-wise online-LOCAL model because non-signaling can make use of globally shared
resources, such as shared randomness, while component-wise online-LOCAL cannot.
Remark A.4. Theorem 4.5 is almost-tight for the randomized component-wise online-LOCAL model.
This is because [AEL+23] provides a deterministic O(log n)-round component-wise online-LOCAL
                                                                           √
algorithm for 3-coloring bipartite graphs, and Theorem 4.5 would give a Õ( n)-round deterministic
                                                                         √
LOCAL algorithm for the same problem. However, we know that Ω( n) is a lower bound for
the problem in the LOCAL model, as well as in the bounded-dependence model (and even in the
non-signaling model).




                                                                       53
