                                                             The Submodular Santa Claus Problem
                                                         Étienne Bamas∗              Sarah Morell†             Lars Rohwedder‡
arXiv:2407.04824v1 [cs.DS] 5 Jul 2024




                                                                                          Abstract
                                                  We consider the problem of allocating indivisible resources to players so as to maximize
                                               the minimum total value any player receives. This problem is sometimes dubbed the Santa
                                               Claus problem and its different variants have been subject to extensive research towards
                                               approximation algorithms over the past two decades.
                                                  In the case where each player has a potentially different additive valuation function,
                                               Chakrabarty, Chuzhoy, and Khanna [FOCS’09] gave an O(nε )-approximation algorithm with
                                               polynomial running time for any constant ε > 0 and a polylogarithmic approximation al-
                                               gorithm in quasi-polynomial time. We show that the same can be achieved for monotone
                                               submodular valuation functions, improving over the previously best algorithm due to Goe-
                                               mans, Harvey, Iwata, and Mirrokni [SODA’09], which has an approximation ratio of more
                                                    √
                                               than n.
                                                  Our result builds up on a sophisticated LP relaxation, which has a recursive block structure
                                               that allows us to solve it despite having exponentially many variables and constraints.


                                        1      Introduction
                                        The egalitarian welfare is the value of the least happy player. Other natural welfare functions
                                        include utilitarian welfare, the sum of values, and Nash social welfare, the product of values.
                                        Egalitarian welfare can be seen as the trade-off that emphasizes most extremely on fairness. In
                                        this paper we study the problem of allocating indivisible resources with the goal of maximizing
                                        egalitarian welfare, which is sometimes called the Santa Claus problem or max-min fair allocation.

                                        Problem setting. Given resources R and players P , we wish to find an allocation σ : R → P
                                        such that
                                                                      min fp ({r ∈ R : σ(r) = p})
                                                                                p∈P
                                                                     R
                                        is maximized. Here fp : 2 → R≥0 with p ∈ P is the function that specifies the value that player p
                                        receives from a set of resources. When considering polynomial-time approximation algorithms, one
                                        typically assumes the function can be accessed by value queries, i.e., an oracle that returns fp (A)
                                        for some given p and A in polynomial time. Strong assumptions on the functions are necessary in
                                        order to hope for any meaningful algorithmic guarantees. At the same time, the functions should
                                        still remain expressive enough to capture realistic scenarios.
                                             A natural assumption is that each fp is non-negative and additive (a linearP function), which
                                        means that there are values vp,r ∈ R≥0 for each p ∈ P, r ∈ R and fp (A) = r∈A vp,r for each
                                        A ⊆ R. Already for this class of functions, the study of approximation algorithms for the Santa
                                        Claus problem has proven to be extremely challenging. The best algorithm due to Chakrabarty,
                                        Chuzhoy, and Khanna [11] achieves an nε -approximation in polynomial time, for every fixed
                                            ∗ Post-Doctoral Fellow, ETH AI Center, Switzerland. etienne.bamas@inf.ethz.ch
                                            † TU Berlin, Germany. morell@math.tu-berlin.de. Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG,

                                        German Research Foundation) under Germany´s Excellence Strategy – The Berlin Mathematics Research Center
                                        MATH+ (EXC-2046/1, project ID: 390685689).
                                            ‡ Maastricht University, Netherlands. l.rohwedder@maastrichtuniversity.nl. Supported by Dutch Research Coun-

                                        cil (NWO) project “The Twilight Zone of Efficiency: Optimality of Quasi-Polynomial Time Algorithms” [grant
                                        number OCEN.W.21.268].


                                                                                               1
constant ε > 0, or a (logO(1) n)-approximation in quasi-polynomial time, more precisely in time
nO(log n/ log log n) . The best lower bound on the approximation ratio of a polynomial-time algorithm
is 2 (assuming P̸=NP). Closing the gap remains a big open question in approximation algorithms
and is connected to the similar task of minimizing makespan on unrelated parallel machines, see [5].
    An important generalization of additive functions is the class of monotone submodular func-
tions. A function f is submodular if it satisfies the diminishing marginal returns property, which
means that

                f (A ∪ {r}) − f (A) ≥ f (B ∪ {r}) − f (B) for all A ⊆ B and r ∈
                                                                              / B.

Monotonicity states that f (A) ≤ f (B) for A ⊆ B. As is standard in approximation algorithms, we
also assume that any monotone submodular function is normalized such that f (∅) = 0. Staying
the metaphor of Santa Claus, an example of the diminishing marginal returns property is that the
value of an apple is higher for a child, when the child does not have a donut than when it does.
    For utilitarian welfare or Nash social welfare, the class of monotone submodular functions still
admits good algorithms [21, 24], which raises the question whether the restriction to additive
functions is necessary in egalitarian welfare.
    Even more general than monotone submodular functions are subadditive functions, which only
need to satisfy f (A ∪ B) ≤ f (A) + f (B) for all A, B. Next to additive functions, submodular
and subadditive functions are arguably the most fundamental classes of valuation functions. Both
submodular and subadditive functions are also briefly mentioned by Chakrabarty, Chuzhoy, and
Khanna [11] who emphasize that at the time the best lower bound for both in the Santa Claus
problem was also only 2. Since then however, Barman, Bhaskar, Krishna, and Sundaram [8]
have proven that for XOS functions, a class of functions that lies between monotone submodular
and subadditive, any O(n1−ε )-approximation algorithm requires exponentially many value queries,
which therefore also forms a lower bound on subadditive functions. This lower bound is in the
value query model. In literature there are more powerful query models, for example demand
queries, see e.g. [8, 16], which we do not detail here.
    Monotone submodular functions are not subject to the mentioned lower bound and a sub-
linear approximation rate is indeed possible: Goemans,√Harvey, Iwata, and Mirrokni [17] gave a
reduction to the additive case, which loses a factor of O( n log n) and thus leads to an O(n1/2+ε )-
approximation algorithm when combined with [11].

Contribution and outline. In this paper we achieve a direct generalization from the addi-
tive to the monotone submodular case, without the reduction of Goemans, Harvey, Iwata, and
Mirrokni [17], and match the state-of-the-art from the additive case.
Theorem 1. For the Submodular Santa Claus problem there is a polylogarithmic approximation
algorithm with running time nO(log n/ log log n) and an nε -approximation algorithm with running
time nO(1/ε) for any constant ε > 0.

   Similar to Chakrabarty, Chuzhoy, and Khanna [11], our techniques can be divided into three
steps:
  1. Reducing to a carefully designed layered flow problem, the augmentation problem.
  2. Formulating and solving a strong linear programming relaxation of the augmentation prob-
     lem.
  3. Obtaining integral solution of the augmentation problem via randomized rounding.
The most challenging part to generalize is the second step. In order to include submodular valua-
tion functions in the linear programming relaxation, we use the standard concept of configuration
variables, i.e., a variable for each set of resources that has a sufficiently large value. The natu-
ral way of writing a configuration LP, however, is not sufficient even for the additive case, see
e.g. [7]. The formulation used by Chakrabarty, Chuzhoy, and Khanna for the additive case is


                                                 2
                            poly



                                            ..
                                                 .                         exp


                                                         ..
                                                              .
                                                                  ..
                                                                       .

                                                     exp

Figure 1: Block structure of non-zero entries in constraint matrix of linear programming relaxation


highly non-trivial. It is closely related to using a constant or logarithmic number of rounds of the
Sherali-Adams hierarchy on a naive formulation, see [9]. Notably, their linear program is strong
for the augmentation problem, to which they give a non-trivial reduction (step 1), but not for the
original problem.
    Combining their approach with configuration variables as above leads to a linear program that
has both an exponential number of variables and constraints, an issue that does not occur in the
additive case. Typically, one needs to have either a polynomial number of variables or constraints
in order to even hope to solve a linear program efficiently. Otherwise, already the encoding of
a solution might require exponential space. Exceptions are very rare, see e.g. [18]. The distinct
feature of our linear programming relaxation is that it has a recursive block structure. Specifically,
the matrix consists of an exponentially large number of blocks along the diagonal which are linked
by a polynomial number of constraints. The blocks on the diagonal exhibit the same structure
recursively up to a recursion depth of h, see Figure 1. It can be shown that if in addition the
feasible region of each block (ignoring the linking constraints) forms a polyhedral cone, then indeed
such matrices always have solutions of support nO(h) (if any exist). This is then polynomial for
constant recursion depth h. We solve our specific formulation using ideas from the Dantzig-Wolfe
decomposition [12], where the pricing problem requires a combination of recursively solving a linear
program with lower recursion depth and the search for a configuration of high submodular function
value. For the latter we use the multilinear extension and continuous Greedy in a non-standard
variant. This way we arrive at a sufficiently good approximation of the linear program.
    As an additional contribution, we significantly simplify the reduction step of Chakrabarty,
Chuzhoy, and Khanna which used very intricate techniques and non-trivial graph theory results.
In contrast, our reduction only uses standard flow arguments.

Further related work. If all functions are identical and additive, then there exists a PTAS for
the Santa Claus problem [25, 14]. If they are identical and monotone submodular, then a Greedy
type of algorithm still achieves a constant approximation [19].
    A substantially harder variant, which has received a lot of attention is the so-called restricted
assignment case. Here, the valuation functions are identical (fp = fp′ for p, p′ ∈ P ), but each
player p can only receive resources from a specific set R(p) ⊆ R. This can equivalently be phrased
as fp (A) = f (A ∩ R(p)) for some uniform function f , or in the additive case, that vp,r ∈ {0, vr }
for some uniform value vr for each resource r ∈ R. Most of this work focuses on the mentioned
additive case, leading to a constant factor approximation for this case [7, 15, 2, 13, 22, 3]. For
the submodular case, an O(log log n)-approximation algorithm is known [4]. These works heavily
rely on the configuration LP, a linear programming relaxation, which is known to have a high
integrality gap outside of the restricted assignment variant [7]. Therefore these techniques have
only limited impact towards the goals of this paper.
    Outside the restricted assignment problem, some progress towards a constant approximation


                                                     3
is due to Bamas and Rohwedder [6] who gave a (logO(1) log n)-approximation algorithm in quasi-
polynomial time for the so-called max-min degree arborescence problem, a special case of the
additive variant, where the configuration LP already has a high integrality gap.
    The dual problem of minimizing the maximum instead of maximizing the minimum function
value is usually motivated by machine scheduling, specifically makespan minimization. Here, the
additive case is well known to admit a constant approximation [20] and the reduction by √Goemans,
Harvey, Iwata, and Mirrokni [17] works in the same way, yielding a polynomial-time O( n log n)-
approximation algorithm for makespan minimization with monotone submodular load functions.
Interestingly, this is known to be the best possible up to logarithmic factors in the value query
model, see [23], and therefore behaves differently to the problem studied in this paper.


2     Algorithmic framework
In this chapter, we introduce the augmentation problem as well as the linear programming re-
laxation for it. Those are the pillars of our algorithm that connect the three steps outlined in
the introduction. In Section 3 we then show how to reduce to the augmentation problem, in
Section 4 we explain how to solve its linear programming relaxation, and in Section 5 we present
the rounding algorithm for the relaxation.

2.1     The augmentation problem
As the name suggests, the augmentation problem is related to augmenting some partial solution
of the Submodular Santa Claus problem to a better solution. This can be seen as a much more
involved variant of finding augmenting paths to solve bipartite matching. Similar to there, we will
later invoke it several times in order to arrive at the final solution for the Santa Claus problem.
We formulate the augmentation problem in purely graph theoretical terms.
    An instance of the augmentation problem contains several levels. We will start by introducing
the structure within one level.

One level of the augmentation problem. Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph and let
S, T ⊆ V denote disjoint sets of sources and sinks. Each source in S has exactly one outgoing
edge and no incoming edges. Each sink in T has only incoming edges. Furthermore, for all v ∈ T
let fv : 2δ(v) → R≥0 be monotone, submodular functions. Here, δ(v) are the edges incident to v.
    The solution for this level is a binary flow g : E → {0, 1} from S to T , i.e., S
                                                                                    flow conservation
is satisfied on V \ (S ∪ T ). We write E(g) = {e ∈ E : g(e) > 0} and V (g) = (u,v)∈E(g) {u, v}.
Furthermore, in slight abuse of notation we write V ′ ∩ g = V ′ ∩ V (g) for some V ′ ⊆ V and
E ′ ∩g = E ′ ∩E(g) for some E ′ ⊆ E. We say that sink v ∈ T is α-covered by g if fv (g ∩δ(v)) ≥ 1/α.
We give an example in Figure 2.

Augmentation problem. For h ∈ N, an h-level instance of the augmentation problem consists
of levels (Gi , Si , Ti ) with Gi = (Vi , Ei ) for i = 1, 2, . . . , h with the structure as above and monotone
submodular functions fv : 2δ(v) → R≥0 for v ∈ T1 ∪ T2 ∪ . . . ∪ Th . In addition, there are linking
edges Li ⊆ Ti+1 × Si for i = 1, 2, . . . , h − 1. Each set Li forms a matching, i.e., the edges are
disjoint. For U ⊆ Si we write Li (U ) = {v ∈ Ti+1 : (v, u) ∈ Li for some u ∈ U }.
    A solution consists of a flow gi for each level i, as described above. The h levels depend on
each other in that for the source g ∩ Si is used by the flow in level i, gi+1 must cover Li (g ∩ Si ). In
other words, if s ∈ g ∩ Si and there is no edge (u, s) ∈ Li for any u ∈ Ti+1 , i.e., Li ({s}) = ∅, then
there is no further requirement and if indeed there exists such an edge then we may informally
think of the flow leaving source s to arrive through the linking edge and indirectly from u. Note,
however, that u may require an incoming flow higher than the amount of flow leaving s. The sinks
of the first level T1 and the sources of the last level Sh have no dependencies with other levels.
    To conclude the description of the problem, a solution is feasible for some T ∗ ⊆ T1 if



                                                      4
                                                                          S
                                T




Figure 2: An instance of the one-level augmentation problem. The top sink on the left has valuation
function equal to the total flow received, and the sink at the bottom has valuation function equal
to the total flow received divided by 2. The set of bold orange edges forms a feasible solution
which covers all the sinks in T .


   • g1 α-covers each v ∈ T ∗ and
   • for i = 1, 2, . . . , h − 1, solution gi+1 α-covers each v ∈ Li (gi ∩ Si ).
We refer the reader to Figure 3 for an example. In the remainder we denote by n the total number
of vertices in all h graphs. This will be polynomial in the size of the original instance.

                                                 S1                                           S2
       T1                                                 T2




Figure 3: An instance of 2-level augmentation problem. The two levels are copies of the one level
of Figure 2, with the same valuation functions for the sinks in each level. The second and fourth
source in S1 have a linking edge with the first and second sinks in T2 . The set of bold orange
edges forms a feasible solution which covers all of T1 .


Congestion. A technically very useful notion is the following relaxation of the problem: we allow
each gi (e) to be an integer number in {0, 1, . . . , β} instead of {0, 1}. The rest of the definition
remains the same. We say that such a solution has congestion β.
    We will reduce the Submodular Santa Claus problem to the following gap problem: for some
T ∗ ⊆ T1 either find a feasible solution g1 , g2 , . . . , gh with coverage 1/α and congestion at most β
or determine that there is no such solution with coverage 1 and congestion 1. We call an algorithm
that solves this problem an (α, β)-approximation algorithm. The lower the values of α and β are,
the better the approximation rate for the Submodular Santa Claus problem. The reduction to the
augmentation problem follows a very similar strategy to Chakrabarty, Chuzhoy, and Khanna [11].
Formally, we prove in section 3 the following theorem.


                                                      5
Theorem 2. Let A be an (α, β)-approximation algorithm for the augmentation problem and let
h, γ ∈ N with γ ≥ 1000α3 β 3 h4 log2 (n) and h ≥ 1 + log(βn2 )/ log(γ/(2α)). Then there is a γ-
approximation algorithm for the Submodular Santa Claus problem that uses polynomially many
calls to A on h-level instances and has polynomial time overhead.
   The main technical novelty is in proving that the augmentation problem can indeed be ap-
proximated well.

Theorem 3. There is an (α, β)-approximation algorithm for the h-level routing problem with
running time nO(h) with α = O(1) and β = polylog(n).
   These two theorems imply the main theorem.
Proof of Theorem 1. Let α, β as in Theorem 3. By setting h = ⌈1 + log(βn2 )/ log log(n)⌉ =
O(log n/ log log n) and γ = ⌈1000α3 β 3 h4 log2 (n)⌉ = polylog(n) we obtain a polylogarithmic ap-
proximation in time nO(log n/ log log n) .
    On the other hand, for γ = nε and h = ⌈1 + log(βn2 )/ log(γ/(2α))⌉ = O(1/ε) we have for
sufficiently large n that γ ≥ 1000α3 β 3 h4 log2 (n). Hence, there is a nε -approximation algorithm
with running time nO(1/ε) .

2.2    Definition of the linear programming relaxation
Consider a solution to the augmentation problem without congestion. This solution exhibits the
following hierarchical structure: after an arbitrary path decomposition of the flows g1 , . . . , gh , we
can associate with each sink u ∈ Ti the set of sources A ⊆ Si , for which in the decomposition some
path ends in u and starts in A. Moreover, we associate Li (A) ⊆ Ti+1 with u and by the fact that
each source has only one outgoing edge, effectively enforcing a vertex capacity of 1 on it, each sink
in Ti+1 is only associated to one sink in Ti . Recursively, this results in a forest-like structure of
sinks. Based on this structure, we design our linear programming formulation recursively.
    For each suffix of the levels i, i + 1, . . . , h. We define E≥i = Ei ∪ · · · ∪ Eh . For each level i,
set of sinks T ∗ ⊆ Ti , and α, β ≥ 1, we define the linear program CLP≥i (T ∗ , α, β). Here, α is a
parameter that stands for the coverage requirement, i.e., that every covered sink receives value at
least 1/α, and β stands for the allowed congestion.
    In order to model the submodular function requirement, we make use of configuration sets
C(v, α, β) for each sink v ∈ T ∗ . These configurations are the integral flows g in Gi starting in
the sources Si and ending in v, such that the congestion of g is at most β and the coverage of v,
that is, fv (g ∩ δ(v)), is at least 1/α. Each sink in T ∗ needs to pick one configuration subject to
constraints that will be explained below. The sum of all configurations stands for the flow gi in
level i.
                                                                                  E
    The linear program CLP≥i (T ∗ , α, β) contains the variable sets bv,g ∈ R≥0≥i and xv,g ∈ R≥0 for
all v ∈ T ∗ , g ∈ C(v, α, β), as well as parameter (fixed constant) b ∈ [0, β]E≥i . Here, b(e) describes
a ”budget” of how much flow is allowed to pass through edge e, i.e., an upper bound on gi (e)
where Ei ∋ e. Including b is necessary for the recursive definition. The budget is decomposed
further into bv,g (e), which describes how much of b(e) is used by the sink v ∈ T ∗ together with
configuration g, using the intuition of a fixed path decomposition as before, which allows us to
trace each unit of flow back to one of the sinks in T ∗ . We write (b, bv,g , xv,g ) ∈ CLP≥i (T ∗ , α, β)
if these variables and parameters are feasible. Let B≥i (T ∗ , α, β) be the set of feasible values
b ∈ [0, β]E≥i for CLP≥i (T ∗ , α, β), i.e., b ∈ B≥i (T ∗ , α, β) if and only if there exist bv,g , xv,g such
that (b, bv,g , xv,g ) ∈ CLP≥i (T ∗ , α, β). B≥i (T ∗ , α, β) forms a polytope, which can be seen from
turning b into variables in CLP and then projecting to b. We are now ready to state the linear
program completely.




                                                     6
    Multi-level configuration LP, CLP≥i (T ∗ , α, β)

                    X
                              xv,g ≥ 1                                   ∀v ∈ T ∗                     (1)
                 g∈C(v,α,β)
         X       X
                           bv,g (e) ≤ b(e)                               ∀e ∈ E≥i                     (2)
        v∈T ∗ g∈C(v,α,β)

                     g(e) · xv,g = bv,g (e)                              ∀v ∈ T ∗ , g ∈ C(v, α, β),   (3)
                                                                         e ∈ Ei ,
              (bv,g (e))e∈E≥i+1 ∈ xv,g · B≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), α, β)      ∀v ∈ T ∗ , g ∈ C(v, α, β)    (4)
                                                                                  ∗
                              xv,g ≥ 0                                   ∀v ∈ T , g ∈ C(v, α, β)      (5)
                           bv,g (e) ≥ 0                                  ∀v ∈ T ∗ , g ∈ C(v, α, β),   (6)
                                                                         e ∈ E≥i

    For the last level i = h we omit Constraint (4).
    Constraint (1) ensures that each sink in T ∗ selects one configuration. Constraint (2) enforces
the relationship between b(e) and bv,g (e). Constraint (3) guarantees that bv,g (e) correctly repre-
sents the amount of flow on edge e caused by v and g in level i.
    The last Constraint (4) requires some more elaboration. First, we verify that it is indeed a
polyhedral constraint: for some v, g, the values xv,g and bv,g (e), e ∈ E≥i+1 , that satisfy (4) are
exactly those generated by the polyhedral cone with extreme rays xv,g = 1 and bv,g (e), e ∈ E≥i+1 ,
being a vertex of B≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), α, β).
    The intuition of the constraint is that if v is covered via the flow g, then Li (g ∩ Si ) need to be
covered in the next level. However, it is not sufficient that CLP≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), α, β) is feasible,
since several sinks in Ti (not just v) share the budget on edges in E≥i+1 . Hence, we use bv,g (e)
to store the budget used by v (together with configuration g). Constraint 2 then ensures that the
flow used by all sinks together does not exceed the budget. In the uncongested case and with the
intuition of the forest-like structure, this simply says that the trees rooted in different sinks of
T ∗ are edge-disjoint. Formally, the fact that we can separately consider solutions induced by the
different sinks Li (g ∩ Si ) in the next level is justified by the following lemma.
Lemma 4. Let T ∗ , T ∗∗ be disjoint sets of sinks and let b ∈ [0, β]E≥i . Then b ∈ B≥i (T ∗ ∪ T ∗∗ , α, β)
if and only if there exist b′ + b′′ = b with b′ ∈ B≥i (T ∗ , α, β) and b′′ ∈ B≥i (T ∗∗ , α, β).
    This means that for an integral uncongested solution Constraint (4) is equivalent to

                                  (b(e))e∈E≥i+1 ∈ B≥i+1 (Li (gi ∩ Si ), 1, 1) ,

where gi = v∈T ∗ g∈C(v,α,β) xv,g g. The implication uses the fact that Li (g ′ ∩ Si ) and Li (g ′′ ∩ Si )
            P      P

must be disjoint for different g ′ , g ′′ used by the solution: g ′ ∩ Si and g ′′ ∩ Si are disjoint since each
vertex in Si has out-degree 1, enforcing a vertex capacity of 1 on Si and Li (·) is injective. The
proof of the lemma is straight-forward and deferred to Appendix B.


3     Reduction to the augmentation problem
We now present the reduction of the Submodular Santa Claus problem to the augmentation
problem that we have introduced in Section 2.1.
    In order to devise a γ-approximation algorithm, by a standard binary search framework it
suffices for a given η to either find a solution of value at least η/γ or to determine that OPT < η.
Furthermore, by scaling all functions fp we may assume that η = 1.




                                                       7
3.1    From general instances to canonical instances.
We will first reduce to the following canonical instances.

Canonical instance. As mentioned above we need to either determine that OPT < 1 or find a
solution of value at least 1/γ. We distinguish between basic players B and complex players C.
    For a basic player p ∈ B, we have that fp (S) ∈ {0, 1} for all S ⊆ R. Notice that fp (S) = 1 if
and only if S contains a resource r with fp ({r}) = 1. We may therefore assume without loss of
generality that each basic player gets exactly one resource of value 1 in a solution.
    Each complex player p has a private resource r(p) with fp ({r(p)}) = 1 and fq ({r(p)}) = 0 for
all complex players q ̸= p. Similar to before, we may assume that if player p gets r(p) in a solution
then p does not get any other resources. For all resources r ̸= r(p), we have fp ({r}) < 1/γ.

Reduction to canonical instances. In a general instance, we split each player p ∈ P into a
basic player p′ and a complex player p′′ and we introduce an additional resource r(p′′ ) which has
value fp′ ({r(p′′ )}) = fp′′ ({r(p′′ )}) = 1 for p′ and p′′ and value 0 for all other players. For player p,
             (b)
we define Rp the set of resources r such that fp ({r}) ≥ 1/γ (i.e. the big resources for p). Then,
we can define the submodular valuation function for player p′ as follows.
                                           (
                                                         (b)
                                             1 if S ∩ (Rp ∪ {r(p′′ )}) ̸= ∅,
                                fp′ (S) :=
                                             0 otherwise.

For player p′′ , we define the submodular valuation function as follows
                                            (
                                             1 if r(p′′ ) ∈ S,
                                fp′′ (S) :=             (b)
                                             fp (S \ Rp ) otherwise.

    Note that the resource r(p′′ ) can cover either p′ or p′′ . This corresponds intuitively to the
fact that p needs either small resources that sum up to a large value or a single resource of
sufficiently large value. Note that in the above construction p′ is a basic player which values only
the additional resource r(p′′ ) or the big resources of p, while p′′ is a complex player which values
only the additional resource or the small resources of p.
    It is easy to see that a solution of value at least 1 in the original instance can be transformed
to a solution of value at least 1 in the canonical instance: if a player p receives at least one
big resource r in the orginal instance such that fp (r) ≥ 1/γ, we give that same resource to the
corresponding basic player p′ in the canonical instance, and the complex player p′′ is given the
additional resource r(p′′ ). On the other hand, if a player p does not receive any big resource, we
give the resource r(p′′ ) to the basic player p′ in the canonical instance, and the complex player p′′
receives the same resources as p receives in the original instance.
    Conversely, it is easy to see that a solution of value at least 1/γ in the canonical instance can
be transformed to a solution of value at least 1/γ in the original instance. Indeed, if a pair of
players p′ , p′′ (corresponding to one player p in the original instance) both receive value at least
1/γ, it must be that either (a) p′ does not receive the resource r(p′′ ) hence p′ must receive one
resource of value at least 1/γ for p in the original instance, or (b) the player p′′ does not receive
the resource r(p′′ ) hence must receive a bundle of resources S of total value at least 1/γ for player
p in the original instance. In both cases, the original player p is covered.
    Hence, it suffices to devise an algorithm for the canonical instance.

3.2    From canonical instances to augmentation problem
Consider a partial assignment of resources σ : R → P ∪ {⊥}, where symbol ⊥ is used to describe
that a resource is not assigned to any player. From a canonical instance, partial assignment σ,
and a parameter h ∈ N, we will construct an instance I(σ, h) of the augmentation problem that


                                                     8
closely relates to potential reassignments of resources. Parameter h, the number of levels in the
instance, will influence the approximation ratio and the running time. First, we define
                                 (
                                   σ(r) if σ(r) ̸= ⊥ and fσ(r) ({r}) = 1 ,
                          σ(r) =
                                   ⊥ otherwise.

Intuitively, the assignment σ is equal to the assignment σ except that all complex players release
the small resources assigned to them. Notice that in this new assignment σ, a complex player p can
only receives its unique big resource r(p), if any. The intuition here is that this greatly simplifies
the structure of potential reassignments, since every player can now only give up a single resource
(i.e., has an out-degree of at most 1). Thus, reassignments can be thought of as directed trees.

Construction of augmentation instance. All our h levels will feature the same graph, which
is defined as follows. Let G = (V, E) where V consists of all resources R, all basic players B, two
copies of the complex players, which we denote by C S and C T , a vertex t and a vertex s(r) for
each currently unassigned resource r (i.e., σ(r) = ⊥). For each resource r and each q ∈ B ∪ C T
for which fq ({r}) > 0 there is an edge from each r to q if σ(r) ̸= q. Further, for each q ∈ B ∪ C S
and each resource r which is currently assigned to q (in the assignment σ) there is an edge from
q to r. Recall that by definition of σ this implies that fq ({r}) = 1. Finally, there is an edge from
s(r) to r for each unassigned resource r and an edge from each basic player that is currently not
assigned any resource to t (again referring to the assignment σ).
    The sinks are t and the copies C T , and the sources are s(r) for unassigned resources r and the
copies C S . The incoming edges for some p ∈ C T all come from resources and thus, a set A ⊆ δ(p)
naturally corresponds to the set of resources incident to it. We define fp (A) as the function value
for these resources and complex player p in the canonical instance.
    For vertex t we define ft (A) = |A|/|δ(t)| for each A ⊆ δ(t). Notice that this function is linear,
hence submodular.
    In the reassignment of resources corresponding to the optimal solution, any complex player p
whose private resource r(p) is taken away would receive a lot of other resources. The intuition
for C T and C S is that we do not strictly enforce this: from the copies in C S we potentially take
away the private resource and the copies in C T potentially receive a lot of other resources, but
consistency is not enforced. This relaxation is to make it easier to find a good reassignment.
However, we still have to strengthen this relaxation to avoid that a reassignment simply takes
away all private resources from C S without being able to cover them with other resources.
    Towards this, we build a multi-level instance of the augmentation problem by stacking several
copies of the graph defined as above on top of each other. Then we connect these graphs together
by some linking edges. Formally, for each 1 ≤ i < h and every complex player p, we add a
linking edge from the vertex in C T corresponding to player p in level i + 1 to the vertex in C S
corresponding to the player p in level i.
    By construction, this enforces that if the unique resources of some complex players A ⊆ C S of
level i are removed, then in the next level there must be a solution that gives a lot of resources to
the elements in C T of level i + 1 that correspond to A.
    We denote by I(σ, h) the multi-level augmentation instance obtained as above.

Existence of an augmentation. In the following lemma we prove that the instance I(σ, h) as
above is feasible, assuming that the canonical instance is.
Lemma 5. Consider the instance I(σ, h) of the augmentation problem, where σ is an arbitrary
assignment of resources. If there exists a solution of value 1 for the canonical instance, then there
exists a solution with coverage α = 1 and congestion β = 1 for I(σ, h) for any h ≥ 1, which covers
the sink t in level 1.
Proof. As a solution, we define the same flow in each level. Let σOPT be the optimal assignment
in the canonical instance, and σ the modified assignment derived from σ as before. We assume


                                                  9
that there is no resource r such that σOPT = ⊥. This is without loss of generality, because we can
always assign this resource to an arbitrary player and modify σOPT accordingly.
    For simplicity of notation, we denote by (p, r) the edge from the vertex corresponding to player
p to the resource r. Notice that if p is a complex player, which means that there are two vertices
corresponding to p, this edge only exists from the copy of p in C S . Thus, the edge is uniquely
defined. Similarly, we denote by (r, p) the edge from a resource r to a player p. Again, if p is a
complex player, the edge must go to C T . We also have edges (s(r), r) for unassigned resource r
and edges (p, t) for uncovered players to t.
    The solution flow gi (e) for each level i and some edge e is defined by
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                   1 if e = (p, r) and σ(r) ̸= σOPT (r),
                                  1 if e = (r, p) and σOPT (r) = p,
                                  
                                  
                                  
                          gi (e) = 1 if e = (s(r), r),
                                  
                                    1 if e = (p, t),
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  0 otherwise.

It is easy to verify the validity of this solution since our flow solution mimics the optimal assign-
ment. One can verify that the sink t in level 1 is covered since all uncovered basic players send a
flow of 1 to t, and the congestion is clearly at most 1 on any edge.
    Second, any player vertex p which is not a source nor a sink must be a basic player. Therefore,
if the corresponding vertex is traversed by some flow, there is one unit of outgoing flow since p is
assigned at most one big resource in σ, and exactly one unit of in-going flow since p receives only
one big resource in σOPT . Hence we have the flow conservation at all player vertices. The case
of resource vertices is very similar, the resource is assigned to exactly one player in σOPT and at
most one in σ, and it is easy to verify that flow conservation holds at the corresponding vertex.
Either the resource is not traversed by any flow if both σ and σOPT agree on that resource, or it
is traversed by exactly one flow unit.
    Finally, in the flow solution gi , the set of vertices in C S which send some flow corresponds to
a set of complex players which give up their big resource in the reassignment. But since σOPT
covers all players, it must be that those players are covered by some small resources, hence the
corresponding sinks in C T will receive enough flow in the assignment gi+1 , which satisfies the
constraint related to the linking edges between C S in one layer and C T in the next layer.

Approximate solution with additional structure. By Lemma 5 we know that I(σ, h) will
have a feasible solution, assuming the canonical instance is feasible. We will show next that by
a negligible loss we can simplify any solution to obey a structure that will later help in actually
augmenting the assignment σ.

Lemma 6. Let α, β ∈ N and h ≥ 1 + log(βn2 )/ log(γ/(2α)) and consider the instance I(σ, h)
constructed from the assignment σ.
    Any solution g1 , g2 , . . . , gh of coverage α and congestion β that covers t in level 1 can be turned
in polynomial time into a solution g1′ , g2′ , . . . , gh′ with coverage 2hα and congestion β such that
  1. either (a) g1 uses none of the source in C S (only the sources s(r)) or (b) g1 does not use
     sources s(r) (and therefore only C S ); and
  2. gh does not use any sources in C S (only potentially sources s(r)) .
Proof. Let i be a level and consider a path decomposition of gi into paths that each send unit
flows. We define weights for each path corresponding to the marginal values. Specifically, for a
sink v and an arbitrary ordering of the paths P1 , P2 , . . . that end in v, set

              w(i, Pj ) := fp (δ(v) ∩ Pj | δ(v) ∩ {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pj−1 })
                        = fp (δ(v) ∩ {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pj }) − fp (δ(v) ∩ {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pj−1 }) .


                                                        10
The total weight of paths ending in a covered sink is at least 1/α.
    For the construction we need the notion of a subtree: with each path P (in some level i) we
can associate the following subtree of paths: if P starts in some source s(r), then the subtree
only contains P . If it starts in some vertex of C S corresponding to a complex player p, then we
associate with P all paths in level i + 1 that end in the corresponding vertex of C T and their
recursively defined subtrees.
    Now, if the paths to sink t in level 1 that start in one of the sources s(r) have weight at
least |δ(t1 )|/(2α), then we simply keep these paths and delete all the others as well as all flows
in later levels. The obtained flow loses only a factor of 2 in the coverage at t in level 1 due to
submodularity and satisfies the conditions of (1a) and (2).
    Otherwise, it must be that paths of level 1 that start in C S and end in t have a total weight of
at least |δ(t1 )|/(2α). We drop all other paths including their subtrees, thus satisfying (1b). Next,
we proceed to establish Property (2). We assume without loss of generality that the solution is
minimal in the sense that it contains exactly the subtree of t in level 1 and no other paths.
    We mark the covered complex player vertices according to their “depth”. Every vertex in C T
of some level i ≥ 1, which receives more than a 1/(2h) fraction of its weight through paths from a
source s(r) in the same level, is marked as depth-1 vertex, and we delete all other paths that end
in them (along with their subtree). The corresponding vertices of C S in level i − 1 (linked to the
marked one via linking edges) are considered to have the same depth of 1.
    Then we proceed iteratively. Having marked all vertices up to depth ℓ for some ℓ ≥ 1, we say
that every unmarked vertex in C T of some level i ≥ 1, which receives more than a 1/(2h) fraction
of its weight via paths from depth-ℓ vertices in C S of the same level are marked as depth-(ℓ + 1)
vertices (together the corresponding vertices in C S of level i − 1), and we delete all other paths
that end in them along with the corresponding subtree.
    We claim that if we choose h as in the lemma then all covered complex players of level 2 are
marked by iteration ℓ = h − 1. Assume otherwise. Let p ∈ C T be the complex player of level 2,
which is not marked. Since this player is unmarked, it receives less than a 1/(2h) fraction of his
flow from the sources s(r) or level-ℓ′ players, for any 1 ≤ ℓ′ < h. Furthermore, there cannot be
depth-h players in level 2, since the remaining levels are only h−1. Hence, it must be that at least a
1/2 fraction of his weight comes from unmarked players. Applying the same argument recursively,
the player p in level 2 must be the root of a tree of depth h − 1 with minimum out-degree at least
γ/(2α), since by construction every resource has marginal value at most 1/γ.
    It follows that the number of paths in level h is at least

                                        (γ/(2α))h−1 > βn2 ,

which is a contradiction since then some edge would have congestion more than β.
   Notice that at the end of this process, none of the sources in C S are used, since the leafs of
subtrees induced by players C T of level 2 start in s(r) of some level. In this process, we lost an
approximation factor of at most 2h, which concludes the proof.

3.3    From approximate augmentation to canonical instance solution
Our approach is to start with a solution that covers all complex players p with their private
resource r(p) and we iteratively reduce the number of basic players that are not covered while
maintaining a good coverage of the complex players. During this process, it will be helpful to
maintain an assignment σk : R → P of resources to players, for every iteration k = 1, 2, . . .
Lemma 7 (Augmentation). Let α, β, k ∈ N and h ≥ 1+log(βn2 )/ log(γ/(2α)). Assume that there
exists a solution of value 1 for the canonical instance with parameter γ. Given an assignment σk
for this canonical instance where each complex player gets a value of at least 1/(8αβh2 k) − 4k/γ,
and a solution to the augmentation problem I(σk , h) with coverage α and congestion β, one can
find in polynomial time an assignment σk+1 where each complex player gets a value of at least
1/(8αβh2 (k + 1)) − 4(k + 1)/γ and the number of basic players not covered reduces by a factor of
(1 − 1/(4hαβ)).


                                                 11
Proof. We first take away all resources r ̸= r(q) from each complex player q to obtain the as-
signment σ k , as in the construction of the augmentation instance. With Lemma 6, we transform
the solution to the augmentation problem for the assignment σ k into an augmentation solution
g1 , . . . , gh covering t in level 1 that has coverage 2hα, congestion β, and the structural assumptions
mentioned. In particular, the solution is of one of two types, for which we derive the assertion
separately.

Flow g1 does not use C S . Assume that g1 uses only sources s(r). This means g1 forms a
flow of at least |δ(t)|/(2hα) from sources s(r) to t with congestion β. Consider the fractional flow
g1 /β. This flow has congestion at most 1 and flow value at least |δ(t)|/(2hαβ). By standard flow
arguments we can then also find an integral flow g from sources s(r) to t with congestion 1 and
flow value at least |δ(t)|/(2hαβ). This flow can be interpreted as a reassignment of resources.
Let us denote by σk′ the assignment obtained from σ k following the reassignment. σk′ covers
a 1/(2hαβ)-fraction of previously uncovered basic players and each basic player covered in σ k
remains covered.
    However, it might be that some complex players covered in σk by small resources are not
covered anymore in σ k , hence not covered either in σk′ . Consider such a complex player p. We
have two cases.
    If at least two of the small resources that are assigned to p in σk are taken away by some
other player in σk′ , then we give p back the private resource r(p) and modify the assignment σk′
accordingly. If r(p) is taken by some basic player in σk′ , this results in the basic player being
uncovered.
    Otherwise, we modify σk′ by giving to p all the resources it was assigned in σk , except for the
one resource r (if any) that is already used in σk′ . Notice that in that case, p receives value at
least
                                                 1      4k  1       1         4(k + 1)
       fp (R′ \ {r}) ≥ fp (R′ ) − fp ({r}) ≥          −    − ≥              −          ,
                                               8αkβh2   γ   γ  8α(k + 1)βh2      γ

where R′ are the resources that were assigned to p in σk . We let σk+1 be the assignment resulting
from these modifications.
    To conclude the analysis of this case, let N be the number of complex players which take back
their private resource in the first case above. For each one of these players, we uncover one basic
player, but each of these players also sends 2 flow units to t via different paths. Hence, the change
in the number of covered basic players is at least

                                                 |δ(t)|        |δ(t)|
                                 max{2N − N,            − N} ≥        ,
                                                 2hαβ          4hαβ

where |δ(t)| is the number of previously uncovered basic players.

Flow g1 only uses C S . Define g = g1 + g2 + · · · + gh . Let X ⊆ C be the complex players
for which the corresponding vertex in C S has any outgoing flow in g and let Y ⊆ C \ X be the
complex players p that are not assigned their private resource r(p) in σk . By Lemma 6, the flow
g has the following properties:
   1. g(e) ≤ βh for all e ∈ E,

   2. the incoming flow to t is at least |δ(t)|/(2hα),
   3. For each p ∈ X the corresponding copy pT ∈ C T satisfies fpT (δ(pT ) ∩ g) ≥ 1/(2hα).
The last property holds because C S in the last level is not used. For p ∈ X and the corresponding
copy pT ∈ C T write E(p) = g ∩ δ(pT ) and for p ∈ Y we define E(p) as the edges from s(r) to r
for resources r assigned to p in σk (those that were removed from p in σ k ).



                                                   12
   For some p ∈ X ∪ Y let {e1 , e2 , . . . , eℓ } = E(p) be an arbitrary but fixed order of the set E(p).
We define a partition E(p) = E1 (p) ∪ E2 (p) ∪ . . . by marginal value, with Ei (p) consisting of all
ej with
                    2−(i−1) > fpT ({e1 , . . . , ej }) − fpT ({e1 , . . . , ej−1 }) ≥ 2−i .
Notice that E1 (p), E2 (p), . . . , E⌊log γ⌋ (p) are actually empty, since fp ({e}) ≤ γ for all e ∈ E(p).
We can now find an integer flow g ′ with
   1. g ′ (e) ∈ {0, 1} for all e ∈ E
                                         |δ(t)|
   2. the incoming flow to t is at least 4hαβ
   3. For each p ∈ X ∪ Y and i = 1, 2, . . . we have

                                      g(Ei (p))                       g(Ei (p))
                                 ⌊              ⌋ ≤ g ′ (Ei (p)) ≤ ⌈            ⌉.
                                     2(k + 1)βh                      2(k + 1)βh

This holds because the fractional flow g1 /2 + g/(2(k + 1)βh) satisfies Properties 2 and 3 and has
congestion at most 1: here notice that g1 has no flow on any of the edge sets Ei (p). Arguing
with dummy vertices for each set Ei (p), it follows easily by standard flow arguments that this
fractional flow is a convex combination of flows that satisfy 1 and 3, at least one out of which then
also satisfies 2.
     We use this flow g ′ to transform σk into a new assignment σk+1 in the natural way: From the
flow g ′ we can transform σ k (itself obtained from σk ) into a new assignment σk′ . Then, we modify
σk′ by giving to each player p ∈ Y all the resources that p was assigned in σk and that are not
traversed by any flow in g ′ . This constitutes our final assignment σk+1 . We will analyze that the
new assignment satisfies the properties in Lemma 7.
     First, each basic player that loses its current resource gets a new resource, because basic players
are not sources. This means that all basic players that had a resource in the current assignment,
still have one in the new assignment. Furthermore, for each unit of incoming flow to t, there must
be one basic player that previously did not have a resource and now gets one. This means that
the number of basic players that do not have a resource decreases by a factor of (1 − 1/(4hαβ)).
     Consider now a complex player p ∈ X, i.e., p may lose its private resource r(p). Then the value
of the resources assigned to p through the reassignment is
                                       ∞
                                       X
                  fp (E(p) ∩ g ′ ) ≥         2−i · g ′ (Ei (p))
                                       i=1
                                       ∞
                                       X                g(Ei (p))
                                 ≥           2−i · ⌊              ⌋
                                       i=1
                                                       2(k + 1)βh
                                                   ∞                             ∞
                                            1     X                              X
                                 ≥                    2−(i−1) · g(Ei (p)) −                  2−i
                                       4(k + 1)βh i=1
                                                                              i=⌊log2 (γ)⌋
                                        1                       4
                                 ≥            fp (E(p) ∩ g) −
                                   4(k + 1)βh                   γ
                                        1         1     4
                                 ≥            ·      −
                                   4(k + 1)βh 2hα γ
                                          1         4(k + 1)
                                 ≥                −           .
                                   8αβh2 (k + 1)       γ


Finally, consider a complex player p ∈ Y , i.e., p is not assigned r(p) in the assignment σk . The
reassignment may further take away resources, but we will argue that p retains a large value. More



                                                            13
precisely, the value of resources that p still has after the reassignment is
                                              ∞
                                              X
                          ′
            fp (E(p) \ E(g )) ≥ fp (E(p)) −         2−(i−1) · g ′ (Ei (p))
                                              i=1
                                               ∞
                                              X                    g(Ei (p))
                              ≥ fp (E(p)) −         2−(i−1) · ⌈              ⌉
                                              i=1
                                                                  2(k + 1)βh
                                                       ∞                        ∞
                                                1     X                        X
                              ≥ fp (E(p)) −               2−i · g(Ei (p)) −              2−i
                                           (k + 1)βh i=1
                                                                            i=⌈log2 (γ)⌉
                                                        
                                                   1          4
                              ≥ fp (E(p)) 1 −               −
                                               (k + 1)βh      γ
                                                             
                                     1      4k             1         4
                              ≥           −        1−             −
                                  8αβh2 k    γ         (k + 1)       γ
                                       1         4(k + 1)
                              ≥               −           .
                                8αβh2 (k + 1)       γ

We can conclude that the new assignment σk+1 satisfies our desiderata in both cases.
Proof of Theorem 2. We repeatedly apply Lemma 7 with h as specified in the lemma. After at
most k = 4hαβ log(n) iterations all basic players are covered. According to the lemma, in the
resulting assignment each complex player receives a value of at least

                                         1                 16hαβ log(n)
                                                       −                .
                                 32α2 β 2 h3 log(n)             γ

This is at least 1/γ provided that

                                      γ ≥ 1000α3 β 3 h4 log2 (n) .


4     Solving the linear programming relaxation
This section is devoted to proving the following theorem.

Theorem 8. Let α = 40 and β = 10 log(n). There is a Las Vegas algorithm that given some b ∈
[0, β]E≥i determines that b ∈ B≥i (T ∗ , α, β) and finds corresponding variables for CLP≥i (T ∗ , α, β)
or finds a hyperplane that separates b from B≥i (T ∗ , 1, 1). The algorithm makes polynomially many
recursive calls on B≥i+1 and has otherwise polynomial time overhead.
   It follows immediately that one can find a solution to CLP≥1 (T ∗ , α, β) for a given b ∈ [0, β]E
and T ∗ ⊆ T1 in time nO(h) with α, β as in the theorem.

4.1    Reduction to separation problem
In this subsection we reformulate the linear program using Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition, which
then can be solved using the Ellipsoid method. This will reduce the proof of Theorem 8 to a certain
separation problem, which we then solve in the next subsection. Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition,
see [12], is a reformulation method of specific block structured linear programs. The specific
variant we are interested in is given in the following lemma.
Lemma 9. Suppose we are given a linear program with k sets of variables x(1) ∈ Rn1 , x(2) ∈
Rn2 , . . . , x(k) ∈ Rnk . There are local constraints given by Bi x(i) ≤ b(i) for some Bi ∈ Rmi ×ni and
b(i) ∈ Rmi as well as global constraints of the form A1 x(1) + · · · + Ak x(k) ≤ b(0) for Ai ∈ Rm0 ×ni
and b(0) ∈ Rm0 . We assume that each set Qi = {x(i) ∈ Rni : Bi x(i) ≤ b(i) } is a polyhedral cone


                                                     14
generated by a finite set of extreme rays Ri . Then this linear program is feasible if and only if
there is a solution to
                   X                     X
               A1      λ(1)
                        r r + · · · + A1   λ(k)
                                            r r ≤b
                                                   (0)

                  r∈R1                      r∈Rk

                                                      λ(i) ∈ RRi
                                                              ≥0                 ∀i = 1, 2, . . . , k

Proof. If there is a solution x(1) , . . . , x(k) to the original linear program, then we can write each
x(i) ∈ Qi as a conic combination of the extreme rays Ri . The corresponding weights λ(i) form a
solution to the reformulation.
                                                                 (1)       (k)
    Suppose
       P on the other hand there exists a solution λ , . . . , λ               to the reformulation. Then
x(i) := r∈Ri λ(i) r ∈ Qi is a solution to the original linear program.
   This reformulation will be useful to us because it can greatly reduce the number of constraints at
the cost of increasing the number of variables. To apply it, we first need to make some preparations.
Let X≥i (T ∗ , α, β) ⊆ B≥i (T ∗ , α, β) be the set of extreme points of the polytope, in particular,

                                  conv(X≥i (T ∗ , α, β)) = B≥i (T ∗ , α, β) .

Define further
                                           E
       Qv,g = {(xv,g , bv,g ) ∈ R≥0 × R≥0≥i : (bv,g (e))e∈E≥i+1 ∈ xv,g · B≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), α, β),
                                                    g(e) · xv,g = bv,g (e) ∀e ∈ Ei } .
                                                                                                        E
Then Qv,g is a polyhedral cone generated by the extreme rays (1, g, d) ∈ R≥0 × RE      ≥i+1
                                                                                ≥0 × R≥0
                                                                                  i
                                                                                            for
each d ∈ X≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), α, β).
    Given b ∈ [0, β]E≥i as fixed parameters, we apply Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition (Lemma 9) to
obtain the formulation CLPDW , which is equivalent to CLP in the sense that one LP is feasible
for b if and only if the other is.

   Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition of multi-level configuration LP, CLPDW   ∗
                                                                   ≥i (T , α, β)


                       X                X
                                                         yv,g,d ≥ 1       ∀v ∈ T ∗                          (7)
                   g∈C(v,α,β) d∈X≥i+1 (Li (g∩Si ),α,β)
        X        X                X
                                                   g(e) · yv,g,d ≤ b(e)   ∀e ∈ Ei ,                         (8)
       v∈T ∗ g∈C(v,α,β) d∈X≥i+1 (Li (g∩Si ),α,β)
        X        X                X
                                                   d(e) · yv,g,d ≤ b(e)   ∀e ∈ E≥i+1 ,                      (9)
       v∈T ∗ g∈C(v,α,β) d∈X≥i+1 (Li (g∩Si ),α,β)

                                                         yv,g,d ≥ 0       ∀v ∈ T ∗ , g ∈ C(v, α, β),    (10)
                                                                          d ∈ X≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), α, β)

    It is now sufficient to either find a solution of CLPDW or a hyperplane that separates b from
all b′ for which CLPDW is feasible, i.e., from B≥i (T ∗ , α, β). Since CLPDW has only polynomially
many constraints, it is useful to consider the dual, which has polynomial dimension.




                                                         15
   Dual of CLPDW   ∗
              ≥i (T , α, β)


                                 X                 X
                         min            b(e)µe −           πv                                         (11)
                                e∈E≥i              v∈T ∗
             X                 X
                   g(e)µe +             d(e)µe ≥ πv                  ∀v ∈ T ∗ , g ∈ C(v, α, β),       (12)
            e∈Ei              e∈E≥i+1

                                                                     d ∈ X≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), α, β)
                                           πv ≥ 0                    ∀v ∈ T ∗                         (13)
                                           µe ≥ 0                    ∀e ∈ E≥i                         (14)

   Our plan is to apply the Ellipsoid method to the dual using an approximate separation problem,
which we introduce below.

Separation problem. Given dual variables πv , µe find u∗ ∈ T ∗ , g ∗ ∈ C(u∗ , α, β), and d∗ ∈
B≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), α, β) such that
                                X                   X
                                     g ∗ (e) · µe +   d∗ (e) · µe < πu∗
                                e∈Ei                  e∈E≥i+1


or determine that πv , µe satisfy all constraints (12) in the dual of CLPDW     ∗
                                                                         ≥i+1 (T , 1, 1).

Lemma 10. Given an algorithm for the separation problem and some b ∈ [0, β]E≥i , we can find
with polynomially many calls to the algorithm and polynomial running time overhead a solution
to CLPDW      ∗                                                          DW   ∗
        ≥i (T , α, β) or find a feasible solution π, µ to the dual of CLP≥i (T , 1, 1) with negative
                                   DW    ∗
objective (which proves that CLP≥i (T , 1, 1) is infeasible).
Proof. We have C(v, 1, 1) ⊆ C(v, α, β), and we can swap the requirement of d ∈ X≥i+1 (Li (g ∩
Si ), α, β) for d∗ ∈ B≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), α, β), since these also form valid constraints for the dual.
Hence, the feasible region P of the dual of CLPDW         ∗
                                                     ≥i (T , α, β) is contained in the feasible region Q
of the dual of CLPDW          ∗
                     ≥i+1 (T , 1, 1). An algorithm for the separation problem can be seen as an
approximate separation oracle in the sense that, given dual variables as input, it either detects
membership of the larger polyhedron Q or outputs a hyperplane separating the input from the
smaller polyhedron P .
     Notice that the all-zero-vector is feasible for the dual. Furthermore, if (π, µ) is a feasible
solution with objective −1, then (c · π, c · µ) is also feasible for the dual and has an objective
value of −c for any c > 0, i.e., the dual is unbounded. It follows that CLP≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), α, β) is
feasible if and only if its dual has no solution of value −1. Let
                                                     X              X
                       P ′ = {(π, µ) : (π, µ) ∈ P,       b(e)µe −       πv = −1},
                                                       e∈E≥i               v∈T ∗

                                                           X               X
                      Q′ = {(π, µ) : (π, µ) ∈ Q,                b(e)µe −           πv = −1}.
                                                       e∈E≥i               v∈T ∗

We simulate the Ellipsoid method on P ′ with the given approximate separation oracle (over P ′
and Q′ ) in order to find a feasible point in Q′ , if there exists one. Recall that in each iteration
the Ellipsoid method presents a point (π, µ) and it expects us to either determine that x ∈ P ′ or
a hyperplane separating x from P ′ . In each iteration, we apply the approximate separation oracle
which either determines (π, µ) ∈ Q′ or finds a hyperplane separating (π, µ) from P ′ . In the latter
case, we continue the Ellipsoid method adhering to its requirements. In the former case we can
stop the algorithm, since we found the required solution. Note that we terminate earlier than one



                                                           16
would normally when running Ellipsoid on P ′ , since we cannot actually decide whether (π, µ) ∈ P ′
or not.
   As mentioned above, the existence of (π, µ) ∈ Q′ implies infeasibility of CLPDW      ∗
                                                                                  ≥i (T , 1, 1). If
such a point can not be found, it is enough to consider the primal variables that are encountered
as dual constraints when solving the dual. Since we only had polynomially many calls to the
approximate separation oracle, one can solve the primal restricted to these variables.

   Assuming we can solve the separation problem efficiently, this implies Theorem 8. Indeed, if
the algorithm from Lemma 10    P is not successful,
                                                 Pthen we find a feasible solution π, µ′ e for the dual    of
CLPDW≥i (T ∗
             , 1, 1) such that  e∈E≥i   b(e)µe −    v∈T ∗ π v < 0. Notice that for any b  ∈ B ≥i (T ∗
                                                                                                      , 1, 1)
the dual has no negative solutions, thus e∈E≥i b′ (e)µe − v∈T ∗ πv ≥ 0. Hence, this provides us
                                             P                   P

with a hyperplane that separates b from B≥i (T ∗ , 1, 1) as required in Theorem 8.

4.2     Separation via multilinear extension
Our goal is now to devise an algorithm that solves the separation problem stated above. We will
formulate a continuous relaxation of the separation problem, solve and round it, but in order to
do so we need to first introduce the concept of multilinear extension. Let f : {0, 1}n → R≥0 be a
submodular function. We want to extend f : {0, 1}n → R to the domain [0, 1]n , since we will be
working with continuous relaxations. There are several natural extensions, one of which is known
as the multilinear extension. The multilinear extension F : [0, 1]n → R is defined by
                                       X         Y Y
                               F (x) =     f (S)    xi    (1 − xj ) .
                                           S⊆[n]       i∈S    j ∈S
                                                                /


It is equivalent to set F (x) = E[f (X)] where X is a random set with elements appearing inde-
pendently with probabilities xi . Notice that the definition of F involves summing over all subsets
of [n], but a good approximation can be computed by sampling from the said distribution. Al-
though F is not convex, there are strong results for approximately maximizing it over polytopes,
most notable the continuous Greedy algorithm [24]. We will need a non-standard variant that is
summarized in the lemma below.
Lemma 11. Let P ⊆ Q ⊆ [0, 1]n be downward-closed polytopes1 and suppose that we can approx-
imately optimize over Q in the following way: given some c ∈ Rn we can find some x ∈ Q such
that cT x ≥ cT y for all y ∈ P or determine that P is empty. Let F be the multilinear extension
of a monotone submodular function f and let x∗ = argmaxx∈P F (x). Assume furthermore that
f ({i}) ≤ F (x∗ ) for any element i ∈ [n]. Then, there is a polynomial time Las Vegas algorithm
that finds some x ∈ Q such that F (x) ≥ (1 − 1/e − ε)F (x∗ ).
     The proof of the lemma is almost identical to the classical analysis of the continuous Greedy
algorithm [24], see Appendix A.
     We will now reformulate the separation problem as maximizing a submodular function over a
polytope. Assume that πv , µe do not satisfy all constraints (12) for the dual of CLPDW       ∗
                                                                                       ≥i+1 (T , 1, 1),
                         ∗   ∗   ∗         ∗           ∗
i.e., there exists some u ∈ T , g ∈ C(u , 1, 1), and d ∈ B≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), 1, 1) with
                               X                X
                                   g ∗ (e)µe +        d∗ (e)µe < πu∗ .
                                  e∈Ei             e∈E≥i+1


We can assume that we know u∗ through guessing. Our goal is to approximately find g ∗ and d∗ .
Using the definition of a configuration, the values g ∗ and d∗ are feasible for the following system
    1 A polyope is downward-closed if for any x in the polytope and any y with 0 ≤ y ≤ x for each component i, y
                                                                                    i   i
is also in the polytope.




                                                      17
and have a value of at least 1.

                                        max fu∗ (g ∩ δ(u∗ ))                                                  (15)
          X                  X
                 g(e)µe +             d(e)µe ≤ πu∗                                                            (16)
          e∈Ei              e∈E≥i+1

                                    g(δ − (v)) = g(δ + (v))                            ∀v ∈ Vi \ (Si ∪ Ti )   (17)
                                            d ∈ B≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), 1, 1)                                    (18)
                                         g(e) ∈ {0, 1}                                 ∀e ∈ Ei                (19)

We need to find a solution of value at least 1/α and we can make use of congestion β. For technical
reasons we will assume without loss of generality that fu∗ is upper bounded by 1, which is possible
by replacing fu∗ with fu′ ∗ (S) = min{1, fu∗ (S)}, since this preserves monotonicity, submodularity
and the existence of a solution of value 1. We further assume that each individual element has
a small value, more precisely, fu∗ ({e}) ≤ 1/20 for each e ∈ δ(u∗ ). The careful reader will have
noticed that the reduction in Section 3 anyway guarantees this property. However, it is also easy
to establish this assumption without adding more technical restrictions to the definition of the
augmentation problem2 .
   By Lemma 4 we can replace Constraint (18) with the following equivalent constraints and
additional variables. The main idea is that we introduce a binary variable ys ∈ {0, 1} for each
s ∈ Si , which describes whether s ∈ g ∩ Si .

                      ds ∈ ys · B≥i+1 (Li ({s}), 1, 1)                       ∀s ∈ Si
                                +
                      ys = g(δ (s))                                          ∀s ∈ Si
                      ys ∈ {0, 1}                                            ∀s ∈ Si
                            X
                    d(e) =      ds (e)                                       ∀e ∈ E≥i+1
                             s∈Si

                    d(e) ∈ [0, 1]                                            ∀e ∈ E≥i+1
                   ds (e) ∈ [0, 1]                                           ∀s ∈ Si , e ∈ E≥i+1

In order to find an approximate solution we consider the continuous relaxation using the multi-
linear extension as described below.
   2 If g ∗ (e) = 1 for some e ∈ δ(u∗ ) with f ∗ ({e}) > 1/40 we guess e as well as the source s ∈ S , from which
                                              u                                                      i
the flow on e comes (in an arbitrary path decomposition of g ∗ . We compute
                                                                        P        a shortest path from s to e with
weights µe and we compute some d ∈ B≥i+1 (Li ({s}), α, β) minimizing e∈E            d(e)µe using Ellipsoid method.
                                                                                ≥i+1
This yields a solution of the separation problem for α ≥ 1/40. In the other case we can remove all e ∈ δ(u∗ ) with
fu∗ ({e}) > 1/40, since they are not used.




                                                          18
   Relaxed separation problem SEP(u∗ , α, β) with multilinear extension


                                          max Fu∗ ( (g(e))e∈δ(u∗ ) )                                    (20)
       X                  X      X
             g(e)µe +                  ds (e)µe ≤ πu∗                                                   (21)
      e∈Ei              e∈E≥i+1 s∈Si

                                    g(δ − (v)) = g(δ + (v))                      ∀v ∈ Vi \ (Si ∪ Ti )   (22)
                                             ds ∈ ys · B≥i+1 (Li ({s}), α, β)    ∀s ∈ Si                (23)
                                             ys = g(δ + (s))                     ∀s ∈ Si                (24)
                                   X
                                          ds (e) ≤ 1                             ∀e ∈ E≥i+1             (25)
                                   s∈Si

                                           g(e) ∈ [0, 1]                         ∀e ∈ Ei                (26)
                                             ys ∈ [0, 1]                         ∀s ∈ Si                (27)
                                          ds (e) ∈ [0, 1]                        ∀s ∈ Si , e ∈ E≥i+1    (28)

   Here Fu∗ is the multilinear extension of fu∗ . If Fu∗ is replaced by a linear objective, then we
can solve SEP approximately in the following sense.

Lemma 12. ConsiderP      the system LINSEP(u∗ , α, β, c), where (20) in SEP(u∗ , α, β) is replaced by
                                                    ∗
a linear objective max e∈δ(u∗ ) ce g(e) for c ∈ Rδ(u ) .
    Let α, β ∈ N. We can find a solution for LINSEP(u∗ , α, β, c) with value at least the optimum of
LINSEP(u∗ , 1, 1, c) using polynomial running time overhead and a polynomial number of queries
that for a given s ∈ Si and ds ∈ [0, β]E≥i+1 determine either ds ∈ B≥i+1 (Li ({s}), α, β) or return
a hyperplane separating ds from B≥i+1 (Li ({s}), 1, 1).
Proof. We will run the Ellipsoid method to optimize over LINSEP: similar to the proof of
Lemma 10 we simulate Ellipsoid on LINSEP(u∗ , 1, 1, c) and terminate once the given solution
is feasible for LINSEP(u∗ , α, β, c). Optimization is reduced to feasibility testing by performing a
binary search over the optimum.
    It remains to separate (approximately) over Constraint (23). The query access from the premise
can be lifted to this task: Fix some s ∈ Si and ds , ys . If ds , ys are all zero, then ds ∈ ys ·
B≥i+1 (Li ({s}, α, β). If ys = 0 and ds (e) > 0 for some e, we have that

                     ds (e) > ys and d′s (e) ≤ ys′ for all d′s ∈ ys′ · B≥i+1 (Li ({s}, 1, 1) ,

which serves as a separating hyperplane. Assume now that ys > 0. Apply the query from the
premise on ds /ys . Either ds /ys ∈ B≥i+1 (Li ({s}), α, β), which implies that ds ∈ ys ·B≥i+1 (Li ({s}), α, β)
or we find a separating hyperplane w ∈ RE≥i+1 , W ∈ R with wT (ds /ys ) < W and wT d′ ≥ W for
all d′ ∈ B≥i+1 (Li ({s}), 1, 1). It follows that

             wT ds − W ys < 0 and wT d′s − W ys′ ≥ 0 for all d′s ∈ ys′ · B≥i+1 (Li ({s}), α, β) ,

which again serves as a separating hyperplane.
    In order to employ the continuous Greedy algorithm (Lemma 11), the feasible region needs to be
downward closed, which is not necessarily true here. If, however, we project to the variables g(e),
e ∈ δ(u∗ ), then the feasible region becomes downward closed. This is easy to see by considering the
path decomposition of the flow g, and the fact that the µe variables are non-negative. Maximizing
Fu∗ over the projection is equivalent to maximizing it over the original feasible set. Hence, we can
use the lemma to find such a solution with value at least 1 − 1/e − ε (assuming that the optimum
is 1).
    As a final step, we need to round this continuous solution to an integral one.



                                                            19
Lemma 13. Let α ≥ 40 and β ≥ 10 log(n). Given a solution of value 1 − 1/e − ε for SEP(u∗ , α, β)
with ε > 0 being a sufficiently small constant, there is a Las Vegas algorithm to find a solution for
the separation problem in polynomial time.
Proof. Let g, ys , ds be the continuous solution of SEP(u∗ , α, β). We compute
                                                                            P a path decomposition
of g into paths P from Si to u∗ and weights λP , P ∈ P, that satisfy g = P ∈P λP · χ(P ), where
χ(P ) ∈ {0, 1}Ei is the characteristic vector of path P . We partition P into sets P(e), e ∈ δ(u∗ ),
which are the paths with last edge being e.
    Independently for each e ∈ δ(u∗ ) we sample at most one path from P(e) such that the proba-
bility of sampling P is exactly λP . Let P ′ be the resulting paths. For simplicity of notation, we
write                                               [
                                    fu∗ (Q) = fu∗ (    P ∩ δ(u∗ )) ,
                                                         P ∈Q

for the submodular function value of some set of paths Q. Furthermore, for each P ∈ P ′ define
                                     X          X
                            Φ(P ) =     µe +         ds (e)/ys · µe ,
                                            e∈P          e∈E≥i+1

where s is the source that P originates from. Then we have that
                   X            X              X X
                E[     Φ(P )] =     g(e)µe +            ys · ds (e)/ys · µe ≤ πu∗ .
                     P ∈P ′          e∈Ei             e∈E≥i+1 s∈Si

Thus, by Markov’s inequality we get
                                   X
                                P[   Φ(P ) > 10πu∗ ] ≤ 1/10 .
                                          P ∈P ′

Further, let p = P[fu∗ (P ′ ) < 1/2]. Since f is bounded by 1 due to an earlier assumption, we have

                    1 − 1/e − ε ≤ Fu∗ ((g(e))e∈δ(u∗ ) ) = E[fu∗ (P ′ )] ≤ p/2 + (1 − p) .

This implies
                                             p ≤ 2/e + 2ε ≤ 0.75 ,
assuming
 P        ε (from the continuous Greedy algorithm) is choosen sufficiently small. Define k =
⌈ P ∈P ′ Φ(P )/πu∗ ⌉. With probability at least 0.15 we have that

                                       k ≤ 10      and     fu∗ (P ′ ) ≥ 1/2 .                                  (29)

We will show that if (29) holds, then we can recover a set of paths P ′′ ⊆ P ′ with P ∈P ′′ Φ(P ) <
                                                                                             P
πu∗ and fu∗ (P ′′ ) ≥ 1/α.
    Partition P ′ into k+1 many sets P0′ , . . . , Pk′ where |P0′ | ≤ k and Φ(Pi′ ) < 1 for all i = 1, 2, . . . , k:
for this, we greedily add paths to P1′ until Φ(P1′ ) < 1 would be violated with the next path. This
path is added to P0′ . Then we repeat the same with P2′ , P3′ , . . . until all paths are placed in one
set. Since each iteration packs Φ(P ) values of sum at least 1, the process must terminate after at
most k iterations.
    Since f is monotone submodular and in particular subadditive and since fu∗ ({e}) ≤ 1/40 by
an earlier assumption, we have that

                fu∗ (P1′ ) + · · · + fu∗ (Pk′ ) ≥ fu∗ (P ′ ) − fu∗ (P0′ ) ≥ 1/2 − k · 1/40 ≥ 1/4 .
                ′
Thus, fu∗ (PP   i ) ≥ 1/(4k) ≥ 1/40 = 1/α for some i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k}. Let i be the index above and
define g = P ∈P ′ χ(P ), where χ(P ) is the characteristic vector of path P . In other words, g ′ is
          ′
                      i
the flow corresponding to Pi′ . We further define d′ = s∈Li (g′ ∩Si ) ds /ys .
                                                       P
    By the previous arguments we have that with probability at least 0.15, the function value
fu∗ (g ′ ∩ Si ) ≥ 1/40. It remains to show that with a high probability g ′ has congestion at most


                                                         20
β and that d′ ∈ B≥i+1 (Li (g ′ ∩ Si ), α, β). For the former, we analyze the flow value on each edge
e ∈ Ei separately. Note that

                               E[g ′ (e)] ≤ E[ |{P ∈ P ′ : e ∈ P }| ] = g(e) ≤ 1 .

Further, X = |{P ∈ P ′ : e ∈ P }| can be seen as a sum of independent 0/1 random variables, one
for each set P(e′ ), e′ ∈ δ(u∗ ). Thus, we can apply a Chernoff bound on X, which implies that

                              P[g ′ (e) > 10 log(n)] ≤ P[X > 10 log(n)] ≤ 1/n3 .

Now consider d′ . Since ds /ys ∈ CLP≥i+1 (Li ({s}), α, β) for all s ∈ g ′ ∩ Si and d′ is their sum, due
to Lemma 4 it suffices to show that d′ ∈ [0, β]E≥i+1 . This we can argue in a similar way with a
Chernoff bound: let e ∈ E≥i+1 . Then
                                 X                                X
                     E[d′ (e)] =   P[s ∈ g ′ ∩ Si ] · ds (e)/ys ≤    ds (e) ≤ 1 .
                                     s∈Si                              s∈Si

Each term ds (e)/ys can be seen as an independent random variable, which is bounded by 1 since
ds ∈ ys · CLP≥i+1 ({s}, 1, 1). Thus

                                          P[d′ (e) > 10 log(n)] ≤ 1/n3 .

To summarize, we have with probability 0.15 − |E≥i |/n3 that the solution we output is a correct
solution to the separation problem. This can be boosted to high probability by repeating the
random experiment.


5     Rounding the linear programming relaxation
In this section we will perform randomized rounding on a solution to the multi-level configuration
LP, CLP≥1 (T ∗ , α, β), in order to arrive at a solution for the augmentation problem. For conve-
nience, we restate here the LP. We recall that B≥i (T ∗ , α, β) is the set of feasible values b ∈ [0, β]E≥i
for CLP≥i (T ∗ , α, β).

    Multi-level configuration LP, CLP≥i (T ∗ , α, β)

                   X
                             xv,g ≥ 1                                      ∀v ∈ T ∗                     (30)
                g∈C(v,α,β)
        X       X
                           bv,g (e) ≤ b(e)                                 ∀e ∈ E≥i                     (31)
        v∈T ∗ g∈C(v,α,β)

                    g(e) · xv,g = bv,g (e)                                 ∀v ∈ T ∗ , g ∈ C(v, α, β),   (32)
                                                                           e ∈ Ei ,
             (bv,g (e))e∈E≥i+1 ∈ xv,g · B≥i+1 (Li (g ∩ Si ), α, β)         ∀v ∈ T ∗ , g ∈ C(v, α, β)    (33)
                                                                                  ∗
                             xv,g ≥ 0                                      ∀v ∈ T , g ∈ C(v, α, β)      (34)
                                                                                  ∗
                           bv,g (e) ≥ 0                                    ∀v ∈ T , g ∈ C(v, α, β),     (35)
                                                                           e ∈ E≥i

    The rounding procedure will be defined recursively and its properties are summarized in the
following lemma.
Lemma 14. Assume we are given a set of sinks T ∗ ⊆ Ti , and b = (γ, . . . , γ) ∈ B≥i (T ∗ , α, β) with
γ ≥ 6β · log3 n. Then, we can in polynomial time find an integral flow ḡ in Gi such that with high
probability


                                                       21
  1. flow ḡ α-covers every sink in T ∗ with congestion O(γ), and
                                                                               
  2. (γ̄, γ̄, . . . , γ̄) ∈ B≥i+1 (Li (ḡ ∩ Si )), α, β) for γ̄ = γ · 1 + log1 n .

Proof. We proceed as follows. We let xv,g and bv,g (e) be the variables that attest (γ, γ, . . . , γ) ∈
B≥i (T ∗ , α, β). We assume without loss of generality that (30) holds with equality. Each sink
v ∈ T ∗ picks independently a flow (configuration) gv with probability xv,gv , which by the previous
assumption is a valid probability distribution. By Constraints (33), we have that bv,gv /xv,gv ∈
                                                         (v)    (v)
B≥i+1 (Li (gv ∩ Si ), α, β) attested by some variables xu,gu , bu,gu (corresponding to the conditions of
CLP≥i+1 ). We then define
                         X                  X                                X
                   ḡ =       gv , x̄u,gu =      x(v)
                                                  u,gu ,     and b̄u,gu =       b(v)
                                                                                 u,gu .
                        v∈T ∗                     v∈T ∗                                      v∈T ∗

We will show that with high probability ḡ satisfies the properties of the lemma and x̄u,gu , b̄u,gu
attest that (γ̄, . . . , γ̄) ∈ B≥i+1 (T̄ ∗ , α, β), where T̄ ∗ = Li (ḡ ∩ Si ).
    For the first property, we need to analyze the congestion of ḡ. By Constraints (32) and (31)
we obtain that the expected congestion on any edge e is equal to
                              X                X      X                        X X
           E[ḡ(e)] = E[          gv (e)] =                    g(e) · xv,g ≤       bv,g ≤ γ .
                          v∈T ∗            v∈T ∗ g∈C(v,α,β)                       v∈T ∗ g∈C(v,α,β)

Further, the congestion is the sum of independent random variables, one for each v ∈ T ∗ , that
are each bounded by β. Therefore, using a Chernoff bound, the probability that the congestion is
more than 2γ is at most                  
                                        γ
                                            ≤ exp −2 log3 n) .
                                                            
                                exp −
                                       3β
    Hence, with high probability, the congestion in Ei at most 2γ. For the second property, we
verify Constraints (30), (32), (31), and (33) one by one, the last two being trivial to verify.

Constraint (30). Let u ∈ T̄ ∗ be one of our new sources. Let gw ∈ C(w, α, β) be a configuration
that was selected for some w ∈ T ∗ such that u ∈ V (gw ) (it must exists by definition of T̄ ∗ ). Then,
                                                                                                    (w)
by Constraint (33), we have that that bw,gw /xw,gw ∈ B≥i+1 (Li (gw ∩ Si ), α, β) attested by xv,g ,
 (w)
bv,g . Due to Constraint (30) in CLP≥i+1 we have
                                  X               X
                                         x̄u,g ≥           x(w)
                                                            u,g ≥ 1 .
                                    g∈C(u,α,β)             g∈C(u,α,β)


Constraints (32) and (33). Notice that x̄u,g , b̄u,g are the sum of variables that each satisfy (32)
and (33). It is easy to see that these constraints remain satisfied under taking the sum of feasible
solutions (since those constraints define polyhedral cones).

Constraint (31).       Notice that
                              X      X                         X        X                  bv,g (e)
                         E[                     b̄u,g (e)] ≤                      xv,g ·
                                                                                            xv,g
                            u∈T̄ ∗ g∈C(u,α,β)                  v∈T ∗ g∈C(v,α,β)
                                                                       xv,g >0
                                                               X        X
                                                          ≤                       bv,g (e)
                                                               v∈T ∗ g∈C(v,α,β)

                                                          ≤γ ,

where the first inequality is obtained by definition of our sampling procedure
                                                                           P and the
                                                                                 P last inequality
by Constraint (31) in CLP≥i . Second, we notice that the random variable u∈T̄ ∗ g∈C(u,α,β) b̄u,g (e)


                                                           22
is a sum of independent random variables, one for each u ∈ T ∗ that take a value bu,g (e)/xu,g for
some configuration g. By definition of B≥i+1P                Phave the constraint that bu,g (e)/xu,g ≤ β
                                                     , we also
for all u and g. Hence the random variable u∈T̄ ∗ g∈C(u,α,β) b̄u,g (e) is a sum of independent
random variables, all bounded in absolute value by β, and of total expectation at most γ. By a
standard Chernoff bound, we have
                                                        
                                                                             
           X       X                                                    γ
        P                 b̄u,g (e) ≥ γ · (1 + 1/ log n) ≤ exp −              ≤ exp(−3 log n) .
              ∗ g∈C(u,α,β)
                                                                    2β log2 n
          u∈T̄

Hence, with high probability, Constraint (31) is satisfied as well.
    Now we can solve the augmentation problem by applying Lemma 14 iteratively. If we have an
LP solution with coverage α and congestion β for an h-level instance, this yields an (α, O(β log3 (n)·
(1 + 1/ log n)h )-approximate solution. For any h = O(log n), this is a (α, O(β log3 n))-approximate
solution. Hence, Theorem 8 and Lemma 14 imply Theorem 3.


References
 [1] Noga Alon and Joel H Spencer. The probabilistic method. John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
 [2] Chidambaram Annamalai, Christos Kalaitzis, and Ola Svensson. Combinatorial algorithm
     for restricted max-min fair allocation. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 13(3):1–28, 2017.
 [3] Arash Asadpour, Uriel Feige, and Amin Saberi. Santa claus meets hypergraph matchings.
     ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 8(3):24:1–24:9, 2012.
 [4] Étienne Bamas, Paritosh Garg, and Lars Rohwedder. The submodular santa claus problem
     in the restricted assignment case. In Proceedings of ICALP, pages 22:1–22:18, 2021.
 [5] Étienne Bamas, Alexander Lindermayr, Nicole Megow, Lars Rohwedder, and Jens Schlöter.
     Santa claus meets makespan and matroids: Algorithms and reductions. In Proceedings of
     SODA, pages 2829–2860, 2024.
 [6] Étienne Bamas and Lars Rohwedder. Better trees for santa claus. In Proceedings of the 55th
     Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 1862–1875, 2023.
 [7] Nikhil Bansal and Maxim Sviridenko. The santa claus problem. In Proceedings of STOC,
     pages 31–40, 2006.
 [8] Siddharth Barman, Umang Bhaskar, Anand Krishna, and Ranjani G. Sundaram. Tight
     Approximation Algorithms for p-Mean Welfare Under Subadditive Valuations. In Proceedings
     of ESA, pages 11:1–11:17, 2020.
 [9] Mohammad Hossein Bateni, Moses Charikar, and Venkatesan Guruswami. Maxmin allocation
     via degree lower-bounded arborescences. In Proceedings of STOC, pages 543–552, 2009.
[10] Gruia Calinescu, Chandra Chekuri, Martin Pal, and Jan Vondrák. Maximizing a mono-
     tone submodular function subject to a matroid constraint. SIAM Journal on Computing,
     40(6):1740–1766, 2011.
[11] Deeparnab Chakrabarty, Julia Chuzhoy, and Sanjeev Khanna. On allocating goods to maxi-
     mize fairness. In Proceedings of FOCS, pages 107–116, 2009.
[12] George B Dantzig and Philip Wolfe. Decomposition principle for linear programs. Operations
     research, 8(1):101–111, 1960.
[13] Sami Davies, Thomas Rothvoss, and Yihao Zhang. A tale of santa claus, hypergraphs and
     matroids. In Proceedings of SODA, pages 2748–2757, 2020.


                                                  23
[14] Leah Epstein and Jiřı́ Sgall. Approximation schemes for scheduling on uniformly related and
     identical parallel machines. In Proceedings of ESA, pages 151–162, 1999.
[15] Uriel Feige. On allocations that maximize fairness. In Proceedings of SODA, pages 287–293,
     2008.
[16] Uriel Feige. On maximizing welfare when utility functions are subadditive. SIAM Journal on
     Computing, 39(1):122–142, 2009.

[17] Michel X Goemans, Nicholas JA Harvey, Satoru Iwata, and Vahab Mirrokni. Approximating
     submodular functions everywhere. In Proceedings of SODA, pages 535–544, 2009.
[18] Sungjin Im, Benjamin Moseley, Hung Q. Ngo, Kirk Pruhs, and Alireza Samadian. Optimizing
     polymatroid functions. CoRR, abs/2211.08381, 2022.

[19] Andreas Krause, Ram Rajagopal, Anupam Gupta, and Carlos Guestrin. Simultaneous place-
     ment and scheduling of sensors. In Proceedings of IPSN, pages 181–192, 2009.
[20] Jan Karel Lenstra, David B. Shmoys, and Éva Tardos. Approximation algorithms for schedul-
     ing unrelated parallel machines. Mathematical Programming, 46:259–271, 1990.

[21] Wenzheng Li and Jan Vondrák. A constant-factor approximation algorithm for nash social
     welfare with submodular valuations. In Proceedings of FOCS, pages 25–36, 2022.
[22] Lukáš Poláček and Ola Svensson. Quasi-polynomial local search for restricted max-min fair
     allocation. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 12(2):1–13, 2015.
[23] Zoya Svitkina and Lisa Fleischer. Submodular approximation: Sampling-based algorithms
     and lower bounds. SIAM Journal on Computing, 40(6):1715–1737, 2011.
[24] Jan Vondrák. Optimal approximation for the submodular welfare problem in the value oracle
     model. In Proceedings of STOC, pages 67–74, 2008.
[25] Gerhard J Woeginger. A polynomial-time approximation scheme for maximizing the minimum
     machine completion time. Operations Research Letters, 20(4):149–154, 1997.


A     Continuous greedy with approximate separation
In this section, we prove Lemma 11. Let P ⊆ Q ⊆ [0, 1]n be two polyhedra which are downward-
closed.
    Let F be the multilinear relaxation of a monotone submodular function f . We also assume
that for any element i in the ground set, we have that f ({i}) ≤ F (x∗ ), where x∗ is the point in P
maximizing F (x∗ ).
    We show that we can obtain with high probability, in polynomial time for any fixed ε > 0, a
point y ∈ Q such that F (y) ≥ (1 − 1/e − ε) · F (x∗ ).
    The proof is an easy modification of [10], which we repeat here for completeness. The algorithm
is as follows.

  1. Let δ = 1/(10n2 ), and let t = 0, y(0) = 0.
  2. Let R(t) contain each j ∈ [n] independently with probability yj (t). For all j ∈ [n], we let
     wj (t) be an estimate of
                                          E[f (j | R(t))]
     by taking the average over 10
                                δ 2 (1 + ln n) independent samples of R(t). We denote by Et the
     vector whose j-th coordinate is equal to E[f (j | R(t))]. We also aggregate the wj (t) into a
     single vector w(t).



                                                   24
   3. Find y ∈ Q such that w(t)T y ≥ w(t)T x for all x ∈ P . We can find such a point by the
      assumption in Lemma 11. Set

                                                  y(t + δ) = y(t) + δ · y .

   4. If t < 1, return to step 2, otherwise output y(1).

    Note that the output y(1) is a convex combination of points in Q (recall that y(0) = 0 ∈ Q
since Q is downward-closed). Hence, we have y(1) ∈ Q.
    We use essentially the same arguments as in [10]. We start by the first key lemma.
Lemma 15. Let y ∈ [0, 1]n and let R be a random set containing each j independently with
probability yj . Then                       X
                      F (x∗ ) ≤ F (y) + max
                                         ′
                                              yj′ · E[f (j | R(t))] .
                                                     y ∈P
                                                            j∈[n]

Proof. We can write by submodularity, for any set R, and any set O,
                                                X
                               f (O) ≤ f (R) +      f (j | R) .
                                                                 j∈O

By taking the expectation over the set R containing each j independently with probability yj and
over the set O containing each element j independently with probability x∗j , we obtain
                                  X                                            X
             F (x∗ ) ≤ F (y) +            x∗j · E[f (j | R)] ≤ F (y) + max
                                                                        ′
                                                                                       yj′ · E[f (j | R)] ,
                                                                        y ∈P
                                  j∈[n]                                        j∈[n]

where the inequality holds since x∗ ∈ P . This concludes the proof.
   The second lemma essentially states that estimating the expectations with sampling does not
loose much. Before proving this result, we state here an inequality that will be useful in the proof.
Theorem 16 (Theorem A.1.16 in [1]). Let Xi , 1 ≤ i ≤ k be independent random variable with
E[Xi ] = 0 and |Xi | ≤ 1 for all i, then
                                          k
                                          X
                                   P[|          Xi | > a] ≤ 2 exp(−a2 /(2k)) .
                                          i=1

Lemma 17. With probability at least 1 − 1/poly(n), for every t the algorithm finds some y ∈ Q
such that
                         (Et )T y ≥ (1 − 2nδ) · F (x∗ ) − F (y(t)) .
Proof. Recall that y is selected to (approximately) maximize w(t)T y among feasible points in Q,
where wj (t) is our estimate of (Et )j = E[f (j | R(t))]. We say that an estimate wj (t) is bad if
|wj (t) − E[f (j | R(t))]| > δ · F (x∗ ). As in [10], one can argue that with high probability there is
no bad estimate during the whole run of the algorithm.
    Let R1 , R2 , . . . , Rk be the k = 10
                                         δ 2 (1 + ln n) samples used for the estimates wj (t), and let us
denote by Xi the random variable Xi = (f (j | Ri )−E[f (j | R(t))])/F (x∗ ). First, by submodularity
and our assumption in the beginning of this section, we always have
                                  max(f (j | Ri ), E[f (j | R(t))])    f (j)
                        |Xi | ≤                                     ≤         ≤1.
                                              F (x∗ )                 F (x∗ )
Next, note that the estimate is bad exactly if
                                           k
                                           X             10
                                                  Xi >      (1 + ln n) · δ .
                                            i=1
                                                         δ2


                                                            25
By applying Theorem 16, the probability of this happening is at most
                                            
                              5
                    2 exp − 2 (1 + ln n) · δ = 2 exp (−5 ln(n)) ≤ n−4 .
                             δ
By union bound over all 10n2 timesteps and all coordinates j ∈ [n], with high probability all
estimates are good.
    Now, let y ′ ∈ P defined as
                                y ′ = argmaxy′′ ∈P (Et )T y ′′ ,
and let M be this value. By Lemma 15, we have that
                                       M ≥ F (x∗ ) − F (y(t)) .
Since all estimates are good, we also have that
      X                  X                    X
           yj · wj (t) ≥   yj′ · wj (t) ≥ M −   yj′ |wj (t) − E[f (j | R(t))]| ≥ M − nδF (x∗ ) ,
     j∈[n]             j∈[n]                       j∈[n]

where y ∈ Q is the point chosen by the algorithm such that (w(t))T y ≥ (w(t))T y ′′ for all y ′′ ∈ P .
Therefore, we obtain that
              X                          X               X
                  yj · E[f (j | R(t))] ≥   yj · wj (t) −   yj |wj (t) − E[f (j | R(t))]|
              j∈[n]                       j∈[n]                      j∈n
                                          X
                                      ≥           yj′ · wj (t) − nδF (x∗ )
                                          j∈[n]

                                      ≥ M − 2nδF (x∗ )
                                      ≥ (1 − 2nδ)F (x∗ ) − F (y(t)) ,
as desired.
   We can conclude with the main result we need.
Lemma 18. With high probability, if f is a monotone submodular function such that F (x∗ ) ≥ f (i)
for all i ∈ [n], the fractional solution y found by the continuous greedy algorithm satisfies
                                F (y) ≥ (1 − 1/e − 1/(2n)) · F (x∗ ) .
Proof. Assume without loss of generality that F (y(t)) ≤ F (x∗ ) for all t, since otherwise the
assertion follows immediately from the fact that F (y) ≥ F (y(t)). The assumption is not trivial,
since x∗ is in the set P , while y(t) is allowed to be inside the bigger polytope Q.
    The algorithm starts with F (y(0)) = 0. We lower bound the increase in value at each step of the
algorithm. The proof is the same as in [10]. Let R(t) be the random set containing each element j
independently with probability yj (t), and D(t) the set containing each element independently with
probability ∆j (t) = yj (t + δ) − yj (t). We can easily see that
                          F (y(t + δ)) = E[R(t + δ)] ≥ E[f (R(t) ∪ D(t))] .
This is because R(t + δ) contains j with probability yj (t) + ∆j (t), while R(t) ∪ D(t) contains j
with smaller probability 1 − (1 − yj (t))(1 − ∆j (t)). The two distributions can be coupled so that
R(t) ∪ D(t) is a subset of R(t + δ), and we can conclude by the monotonicity of f . By denoting
y ∗ ∈ Q the direction in which we move y(t), we can write
                  F (y(t + δ)) − F (y(t)) ≥ E[f (R(t) ∪ D(t)) − f (R(t))]
                                            X
                                          ≥      P[D(t) = {j}] · E[f (j | R(t))]
                                               j∈[n]
                                               X               Y
                                           =         (δyj∗ )             (1 − δyj∗′ ) · E[f (j | R(t))]
                                               j∈[n]           j ′ ̸=j
                                               X
                                           ≥         (δyj∗ )(1 − nδ) · E[f (j | R(t))] .
                                               j∈[n]



                                                       26
Using Lemma 17 and F (y(t)) ≤ F (x∗ ), we obtain
                          X
F (y(t + δ)) − F (y(t)) ≥   (δyj∗ )(1 − nδ) · E[f (j | R(t))]
                              j∈[n]

                           ≥ δ(1 − nδ)((1 − 2nδ) · F (x∗ ) − F (y(t))) ≥ δ((1 − 3nδ) · F (x∗ ) − F (y(t)) .

Writing F̃ (x∗ ) = (1 − 3nδ) · F (x∗ ), we rearrange to get

                             F̃ (x∗ ) − F (y(t + δ)) ≤ (1 − δ)(F̃ (x∗ ) − F (y(t))) .

It follows now by induction that for any k ≥ 0 (recall that F (y(0)) = 0),

                                       F̃ (x∗ ) − F (y(kδ)) ≤ (1 − δ)k F̃ (x∗ ) .

Hence,

                                      F (y(1)) ≥ F̃ (x∗ )(1 − (1 − δ)1/δ )
                                               ≥ F̃ (x∗ )(1 − 1/e)
                                               = (1 − 3nδ) · F (x∗ ) · (1 − 1/e)
                                               ≥ (1 − 1/e − 1/(2n)) · F (x∗ ) ,

which concludes the proof.


B      Proof of Lemma 4
For convenience, we restate the assertion here: Let T ∗ , T ∗∗ be disjoint sets of sinks and let b ∈
[0, β]E≥i . Then b ∈ B≥i (T ∗ ∪ T ∗∗ , α, β) if and only if there exist b′ + b′′ = b with b′ ∈ B≥i (T ∗ , α, β)
and b′′ ∈ B≥i (T ∗∗ , α, β).

Proof. Let (b, bv,g , xb,g ) ∈ CLP≥i (T ∗ ∪ T ∗∗ , α, β) and assume without loss of generality that each
constraint (2) is tight. Let
                               (                                   (
                       ′        xv,g if v ∈ T ∗             ′       bv,g if v ∈ T ∗
                     xv,g :=                           and bv,g :=
                                0      otherwise.                   0    otherwise.

Similarly, let               (                                              (
                              xv,g          if v ∈ T ∗∗                      bv,g if v ∈ T ∗∗
                   x′′v,g :=                                  and b′′v,g :=
                              0             otherwise.                       0      otherwise.
Define b′ (e) = v∈T ∗ g∈C(v,α,β) b′v,g (e) and b′′ (e) = v∈T ∗∗ g∈C(v,α,β) b′′v,g (e). Then (b′ , b′v,g , x′v,g ) ∈
                 P       P                                          P         P

CLP≥i (T ∗ , α, β), (b′′ , b′′v,g , x′′v,g ) ∈ CLP≥i (T ∗∗ , α, β), and b = b′ + b′′ .
   For the other direction, let (b′ , b′v,g , x′v,g ) ∈ CLP≥i (T ∗ , α, β) and (b′′ , b′′v,g , x′′v,g ) ∈ CLP≥i (T ∗∗ , α, β).
Then (b′ + b′′ , b′v,g + b′′v,g , x′v,g + x′′v,g ) ∈ CLP≥i (T ∗ ∪ T ∗∗ , α, β).




                                                          27
