                                                           Santa Claus meets Makespan and Matroids:
                                                                  Algorithms and Reductions∗
                                              Étienne Bamas†           Alexander Lindermayr‡             Nicole Megow‡          Lars Rohwedder§
                                                                                         Jens Schlöter‡
arXiv:2307.08453v1 [cs.DS] 17 Jul 2023




                                                                                            Abstract
                                                   In this paper we study the relation of two fundamental problems in scheduling and fair allo-
                                               cation: makespan minimization on unrelated parallel machines and max-min fair allocation, also
                                               known as the Santa Claus problem. For both of these problems the best approximation factor
                                               is a notorious open question; more precisely, whether there is a better-than-2 approximation for
                                               the former problem and whether there is a constant approximation for the latter.
                                                   While the two problems are intuitively related and history has shown that techniques can
                                               often be transferred between them, no formal reductions are known. We first show that an
                                               affirmative answer to the open question for makespan minimization implies the same for the
                                               Santa Claus problem by reducing the latter problem to the former. We also prove that for
                                               problem instances with only two input values both questions are equivalent.
                                                   We then move to a special case called “restricted assignment”, which is well studied in both
                                               problems. Although our reductions do not maintain the characteristics of this special case, we
                                               give a reduction in a slight generalization, where the jobs or resources are assigned to multiple
                                               machines or players subject to a matroid constraint and in addition we have only two values.
                                               Since for the Santa Claus problem with matroids the two value case is up to constants equivalent
                                               to the general case, this draws a similar picture as before: equivalence for two values and the
                                               general case of Santa Claus can only be easier than makespan minimization. To complete the
                                               picture, we give an algorithm for our new matroid variant of the Santa Claus problem using a
                                               non-trivial extension of the local search method from restricted assignment. Thereby we unify,
                                               generalize, and improve several previous results. We believe that this matroid generalization
                                               may be of independent interest and provide several sample applications.
                                                   As corollaries, we obtain a polynomial-time (2−1/nǫ)-approximation for two-value makespan
                                               minimization for every ǫ > 0, improving on the previous (2 − 1/m)-approximation, and a
                                               polynomial-time (1.75 + ǫ)-approximation for makespan minimization√in the restricted assign-
                                               ment case with two values, improving the previous best rate of 1 + 2/ 5 + ǫ ≈ 1.8945.




                                            ∗
                                              We thank Schloss Dagstuhl for hosting the Seminar 23061 on Scheduling in February 2023 where we had fruitful
                                         discussions on this topic.
                                            †
                                              Post-Doctoral Fellow, ETH AI Center, Switzerland. etienne.bamas@inf.ethz.ch. This work was partially sup-
                                         ported by the Swiss National Science Foundation project entitled “Randomness in Problem Instances and Randomized
                                         Algorithms” [project number 200021–184656/1].
                                            ‡
                                              Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Bremen, Germany. {linderal,nmegow,jschloet}@uni-
                                         bremen.de.
                                            §
                                              Maastricht University, Netherlands. l.rohwedder@maastrichtuniversity.nl. Supported by Dutch Research Council
                                         (NWO) project “The Twilight Zone of Efficiency: Optimality of Quasi-Polynomial Time Algorithms” [grant number
                                         OCEN.W.21.268].
1    Introduction
In this paper we study two prominent topics from scheduling theory: the SantaClaus problem and
unrelated-machine Makespan minimization; in particular, two notoriously diﬃcult questions about
polynomial-time approximations that are considered major open problems in the ﬁeld [5, 27, 31, 32].
     In the SantaClaus problem (also known as max-min fair allocation), we are given a set of m
players P and a set of n indivisible resources R. Each resource j ∈ R has unrelated values vij ≥ 0
for each player i ∈ P . The task is to ﬁnd an assignment of resources to players with the objective to
maximize the minimum total value assigned to any player. This objective is arguably the best from
the perspective of fairness for each individual player. The name “Santa Claus” is due to Bansal and
Sviridenko [6] who stated this problem as Santa’s task to distribute gifts to children in a way that
makes the least happy child maximally happy. From the perspective of approximation algorithms,
it is entirely plausible that there exists a polynomial-time constant approximation for the problem,
with the best lower bound assuming P6=NP being only 2 [7]. On the other hand, the state-of-the-
art is “only” a polynomial-time nǫ -approximation for any constant ǫ > 0, a remarkable result by
Chrakabarty, Chuzhoy, and Khanna [8], who also give a polylogarithmic approximation in quasi-
polynomial time using the same approach. Positive evidence towards a constant approximation
comes from an intensively studied special case, called restricted assignment. Here, the values satisfy
vij ∈ {0, vj }, or equivalently each resource has one ﬁxed value, but can only be assigned to a
speciﬁc subset of players. The inapproximability from the general case still holds for restricted
SantaClaus, even for instances with only two non-zero values, introduced formally later. The
ﬁrst constant approximations have been achieved ﬁrst by randomized rounding of the so-called
conﬁguration LP combined with Lovász Local Lemma (LLL) [6, 15] and later using a sophisticated
local search technique analyzed against the conﬁguration LP [2,3,11,12,14,18,25]. The local search
method originates from work on hypergraph matchings by Haxell [19].
     The “dual” problem with a min-max objective is the equally fundamental and prominent problem
of scheduling jobs on unrelated parallel machines so as to minimize the maximum completion time,
that is, the makespan. For brevity we refer to this as the Makespan problem. Formally, we are given
a set of m machines M and a set of n jobs J. Every job j ∈ J has size (processing time) pij ≥ 0
on machine i ∈ M . The task is to ﬁnd an assignment of jobs to machines that minimizes the
maximum load over all machines. Here, the load of a machine is the total size of jobs assigned to
that machine. Lenstra, Shmoys and Tardos [24] gave a beautiful 2-approximation algorithm based
on rounding a sparse vertex solution of the so-called assignment LP (a simpler relaxation than the
conﬁguration LP). The rounding has been slightly improved to the factor 2 − 1/m [28], but despite
substantial research eﬀorts, this upper bound remains undefeated. The best lower bound on the
approximability assuming P6=NP is 3/2 [24]. Similar to the SantaClaus problem, the restricted
assignment case with pij ∈ {pj , ∞} has also been studied extensively here. However, the barrier
of 2 has been overcome only partially: with non-constructive integrality gap bounds [30] and better-
than-2 approximations in quasi-polynomial time [21] and for the special case of two sizes [1, 9].
     Intuitively, the two problems are related and in the community the belief has been mentioned
that SantaClaus admits a constant approximation if (and only if) Makespan admits a better-
than-2 approximation; see e.g., [4,5]. Indeed, techniques for one problem often seem to apply to the
other one, but no formal reductions are known. We give some examples for such parallels:
   (i) The conﬁguration LP, see [6], is the basis of all mentioned results for the restricted assignment
       variant of both problems.
  (ii) The local search technique by Haxell [19] for hypergraph matching has been adopted and shown
       to be very powerful for both problems. First, it has been picked up for restricted SantaClaus
       [2, 3, 14, 25] and later it has been further developed for restricted Makespan [1, 21, 30].


                                                   1
(iii) Chakrabarty, Khanna and Li [9] transferred the technique of rounding the conﬁguration LP
      via LLL used for restricted SantaClaus [15, 17] to restricted Makespan with two job sizes
      and thereby provided the ﬁrst slightly-better-than-two approximation in polynomial time.
 (iv) The reduction for establishing hardness of approximation less than 2 for SantaClaus [7] is es-
      sentially the same as the earlier construction for the 3/2-inapproximability for Makespan [24].
  (v) The LP rounding by Lenstra et al. [24] achieves an additive approximation within the maxi-
      mum (ﬁnite) processing time pmax , i.e., the makespan is at most OPT + pmax , which can be
      translated into a multiplicative 2-approximation. Bezakova and Dani [7] show the same addi-
      tive approximation for SantaClaus: each player is guaranteed a value at least OPT − vmax .
      Note that for the max-min objective this does not translate into a multiplicative guarantee.
    In this paper, we conﬁrm (part of) the conjectured relation between the Makespan and the
SantaClaus problem with respect to their approximability. As our ﬁrst main result we prove that
a better-than-2 approximation for Makespan implies an O(1)-approximation for SantaClaus.
Theorem 1. For any α ≥ 2, if there exists a polynomial-time (2−1/α)-approximation for Makespan,
then there exists a polynomial-time (α + ǫ)-approximation for SantaClaus for any ǫ > 0.
    For values of α < 2, a (2 − 1/α)-approximation for the Makespan problem is NP-complete and
the implication would still hold, even though clearly uninteresting. Similarly to this, we will restrict
our attention in later theorems to non-trivial values of α.
    We prove also the reverse direction for the two-value case, in which all resource values are
vij ∈ {0, u, w}, for some u, w ≥ 0, and all processing times are pij ∈ {u, w, ∞}, for some u, w ≥ 0,
respectively. This implies the equivalence of Makespan and SantaClaus in that case.
Theorem 2. For any α ≥ 2, there exists an α-approximation algorithm for two-value SantaClaus
if and only if there exists a (2 − 1/α)-approximation algorithm for two-value Makespan.
    We then move to the restricted assignment case, where one might hope to unify previous results
and possibly infer new results by showing a similar relationship. Using our techniques, however,
this seems unclear, since the aforementioned reductions do not maintain the characteristics of the
restricted assignment case. However, it turns out to be useful to consider a matroid generalization
of our problems. Towards this, we brieﬂy introduce the notion of a matroid. A matroid is a non-
empty, downward-closed set system (E, I) with ground set E and a family of subsets I ⊆ 2E , which
satisﬁes the augmentation property:

                    if I, J ∈ I and |I| < |J|, then I + j ∈ I for some j ∈ J \ I.                   (1)

Given a matroid M = (E, I), a set I ⊆ E is called independent if I ∈ I, and dependent otherwise.
An inclusion-wise maximal independent subset is called basis of M, and we denote the set of bases
by B(M). With a matroid M, we associate a rank function r : 2E → Z≥0 , where r(X) describes the
maximal cardinality of an independent subset of X. Typical examples of matroids include: linearly
independent subsets of some given vectors, acyclic edge sets of a given undirected graph, and subsets
of cardinality bounded by some given value. A polymatroid is the multiset analogue of a matroid.
We refer to Section 1.3 for further deﬁnitions and to [26] for a general introduction to matroids.
    Moving back to our two problems, we ﬁrst introduce the restricted resource-matroid Santa-
Claus problem, where we consider again an input of resources and players and each resource j has
a value vj for each player i as in the restricted assignment case. In the matroid variant, however,
each resource can potentially be assigned to multiple players, subject to a (poly-)matroid constraint;
more precisely, we require the set of players, which we assign the resource to, to be a basis of a
given resource-speciﬁc (poly-)matroid, and the resource contributes to the total value of each of

                                                   2
these players. As one may also consider a more general variant with unrelated values vij we use the
phrase restricted to emphasize our model. Similarly, we deﬁne a restricted job-matroid Makespan
problem by replacing the max-min with a min-max objective and asking for an assignment of each
job to a set of machines which forms a basis in the job’s matroid.
    Davies, Rothvoss and Zhang [14] recently introduced a closely related matroid variant of re-
stricted SantaClaus. Their variant, however, is signiﬁcantly more restrictive and can be sum-
marized as follows: they allow a single inﬁnite value matroid-resource and a set of “small value”
traditional resources (without the matroid generalization). For this variant they give a (4 + ǫ)-
approximation algorithm.
    First, we show that in our general variant an analogous relation to Theorem 2 holds.

Theorem 3. For any α ≥ 2, there exists a polynomial-time α-approximation algorithm for the
restricted two-value resource-matroid SantaClaus problem if and only if there exists a polynomial-
time (2−1/α)-approximation algorithm for the restricted two-value job-matroid Makespan problem.

    Since the matroid version is a new problem, we cannot directly infer any approximation results
for it. Hence, we develop a polynomial-time approximation algorithm for the restricted resource-
matroid SantaClaus problem.

Theorem 4. For any ǫ > 0, there exists a polynomial-time (8 + ǫ)-approximation algorithm for the
restricted resource-matroid SantaClaus problem and a (4+ǫ)-approximation in the two-value case.

    This is achieved via a non-trivial generalization of the commonly used local search technique for
restricted assignment, see Section 1.2 for a technical overview. We prove the variant for two values
and then give a reduction from the general case, see Lemma 22. Apart from the curiosity-driven
motivation for a matroid generalization of the classical scheduling problems and the usage through
our reductions, we present in Section 1.1 sample applications where such a variant arises. Next, we
state two immediate implications of our results to the state-of-the-art of the Makespan problem.

Corollary 5. For every ǫ > 0, there exists a polynomial-time (1.75 + ǫ)-approximation algorithm
for the restricted two-value job-matroid Makespan problem.

     For completeness, we also provide a 2-approximation of the restricted job-matroid Makespan
problem (with any number of values) that follows from standard techniques, see Theorem 23. Corol-
lary 5 holds in particular true for the restricted Makespan √   problem, thus improving upon the
previously best polynomial-time approximation rate of 1 + 2/ 5 + ǫ ≈ 1.8945 [1]. The corollary
follows from combining Theorems 3 and 4. In their work on restricted SantaClaus, Davies et
al. [14] managed to reduce the technical complexity of previous works, which handled complicated
path decompositions explicitly, using a cleaner matroid abstraction. Our algorithm shows that such
a simpliﬁcation is also possible for restricted two-value Makespan, which was not clear before.

Corollary 6. For every ǫ > 0, there exists a polynomial-time (2 − 1/nǫ )-approximation algorithm
and a quasi-polynomial-time (2 − 1/polylog(n))-approximation algorithm for two-value Makespan.

   This result follows from the algorithm of Chakrabarty et al. [8] and Theorem 2, and improves
upon the best-known polynomial-time approximation factor of 2 − 1/m for m machines [28].




                                                 3
1.1    Applications
Next, we lay out three sample applications of our matroid generalization.
    First, consider service centers that oﬀer various types of services to clients. The speciﬁc service
that such a center oﬀers has some value associated with it and it can only be provided to a lim-
ited number of clients, a typical constraint appearing for example in capacitated facility location
problems. Furthermore, a service center can serve only clients that are located in the same region
and a client can only receive a speciﬁc type of service once, i.e., by a single center, since receiving
the same service twice yields no additional value. The services should be assigned to the clients
in such a way that all clients are treated “fairly” with respect to their total value for the services.
That is, we want to maximize the total value for the least happy client. This can be modeled as
a resource-matroid SantaClaus problem with clients being players and services (one per service
type) being resources. The set of clients that can receive a particular type of service can be modeled
as a transversal matroid1 . In the classical (restricted) SantaClaus problem, one cannot express
the constraint that a client can receive each type of service only once.
    As a second example, consider a program committee (PC) for a scientiﬁc conference. We would
like to assign papers to PC members such that the workload is balanced in the sense that we
minimize the maximum workload over all PC members. We will view this as a Makespan problem
with PC members being machines and submissions being jobs. PC members have declared which
submissions they would agree to assess. Submissions may be of diﬀerent types such as “short papers”
or “regular paper” with varying workloads. In a typical conference, each submission needs to be
assessed three times and obviously it is important that this is done by diﬀerent PC members; hence,
we cannot simply model this as a traditional restricted assignment problem where we duplicate a
job three times. However, it is easy to model this using matroids by having one basis for each triple
of PC members that agree to assess this submission, i.e., we have a job-matroid Makespan problem
with a uniform matroid2 of rank 3.
    Our third illustration is a job-matroid Makespan problem, in which a graphic matroid3 allows
us to model connectivity requirements. In cloud computing and data centers, a number of servers is
available to execute multiple applications at the same time. Each application is executed on a subset
of servers and these servers must be connected to allow for communication. We assume that these
connections are direct in the sense that an application may not use additional servers as Steiner
nodes. We need to reserve a certain bandwidth for each application’s communication, which depends
on characteristics of the application itself. The task is to select carefully on which links to reserve the
bandwidth for each individual application such that load on these links is balanced, more precisely,
we want to select links to minimize the maximum total bandwidth requirement imposed on any link.
This can be modelled as job-matroid Makespan problem with jobs being applications, machines
being the edges (links) in a graph formed by the allocated servers, and the load (processing time)
being the requested bandwidth of the application. The task is to choose for each job a spanning
tree, that is, a basis in the job-dependent graphic matroid such that the maximum total bandwidth
on any edge is minimized. This cannot be modeled as classical Makespan or restricted assignment
problem, since it cannot capture the structure of a graphic matroid.
   1
     Given a bipartite graph G = (J ∪ S, E), a set S ′ ⊆ S is independent in the transversal matroid M = (S, I) if
there is a matching in G which covers S ′ .
   2
     A uniform matroid M = (X, I) of rank r has as independent sets all subsets of X of cardinality at most r.
   3
     Given an undirected graph G = (V, E), the graphic matroid M = (E, I) has as independent sets the cycle-free
edge sets (forests), i.e., I = {F ⊆ E : F is acyclic in G}.




                                                        4
1.2   Algorithmic techniques
Our main algorithmic contribution lies in a local search algorithm for the new variant restricted
resource-matroid SantaClaus, see Theorem 4. We give an overview of the method here, its main
technical merits, and how it relates to previous works. The speciﬁc local search method that we
refer to originates in an algorithmic proof for a hypergraph matching theorem by Haxell [19]. The
theorem is a generalization of Hall’s theorem for bipartite graphs to hypergraphs and Haxell’s proof
can be thought of as a very non-trivial extension of the augmenting path method in bipartite
graphs. Asadpour et al. [3] made the connection to restricted SantaClaus. In addition to a
black-box reduction to the speciﬁc hypergraph matching problem, they also reinterpreted Haxell’s
method as a sophisticated algorithm for restricted SantaClaus.
    Although not explicitly mentioned in earlier works, this new algorithm can be thought of as a
generalization of the typical augmentation algorithm for matroid partition: the core of the problem
lies in the case where we have two values for the resources, more precisely, either the value of a
resource is inﬁnitely large or it is a unit value 1. This case is up to constants equivalent to the
general problem, see e.g., [6]. Observe now the following structure: we need to select a subset IM
of players such that there exists a left-perfect matching of IM to the inﬁnite-value resources and
such that there exists a b-matching of all players in P \ IM to the small resources (each player is
matched to b resources, each resource to at most one player), where b has to be maximized. The
sets IM that fulﬁll the condition above form a transversal matroid, but unfortunately the sets of
players for which there is a b-matching does not (for a ﬁxed b > 1). If they would actually form a
matroid, then the problem could easily be solved by matroid partition, where given two matroids
M1 = (E, I1 ), M2 = (E, I2 ) over the same ground set, we want to ﬁnd two independent sets
                                                          ˙ 2 = E (here we focus on the variant with
I1 ∈ I1 , I2 ∈ I2 that partition the ground set, i.e., I1 ∪I
two matroids, although also more than two matroids may be allowed). Matroid partition–and the
equivalent problem of matroid intersection–can be solved in polynomial time by an augmenting path
algorithm that repeatedly increases the union of I1 and I2 by ﬁrst swapping elements between these
two sets. Although, as mentioned above, the b-matching does not have a matroid structure, the
algorithmic paradigm of swapping elements between matching and b-matching in order to increase
their union still works once we allow approximation of b.
    The constraint on set IM forms a transversal matroid (implied by the inﬁnite-value resources) and
Davies et al. [14] then showed that the algorithmic idea generalizes to arbitrary matroid structures.
In their problem, however, the b-matching remains the same without further abstraction, whereas
in our further generalization, we embrace the polymatroid structure of the b-matching. We now
require instead of a b-matching that the multiset b · (P \ IM ) (having b copies for each element in
P \ IM ) is in some given polymatroid. We believe that this abstraction is the logical conclusion for
this line of research.
    Although a seemingly natural extension, it is highly non-trivial to generalize the existing algo-
rithm to our setting. Firstly, there are conceptional issues that come from the fact that previous
methods revolve around reassigning resources or jobs and those do not exist explicitly in our poly-
matroid. Secondly, a serious technical problem comes from the lack of a certiﬁcate of infeasibility.
The design of the algorithm is closely connected to a certiﬁcate of infeasibility, which is provided (for
analysis’ sake) in case the algorithm fails. For example, in matroid partition when the augmenting
path algorithm fails, one can derive a set X such that r1 (X) + r2 (X) < |X|, where r1 and r2 are the
rank functions of the matroids [23]. This clearly proves infeasibility. In applications of the method
to restricted SantaClaus or Makespan, the role of the certiﬁcate of infeasibility was taken by the
conﬁguration LP. It is unclear how one would generalize the conﬁguration LP beyond the partial
matroid generalization of Davies et al. [14], since it heavily relies on the matching structure of small


                                                   5
resources. But even worse, we show that already in a special case for which the conﬁguration LP is
still meaningful, its integrality gap is large; hence it is not helpful. Consider the following instance
(which appeared already in [6]). We have a ﬁrst set E of m players, and a set S of m − 1 resources.
For each player i ∈ E, there is an additional set Ei of m players and an additional set Si of m + 1
resources. Each player i ∈ E has valuation m for all the resources in S, valuation 1 for all the
resources in Ei , and valuation 0 for the remaining resources. For any i ∈ E, each player in Ei has
valuation m for the resources in Si , and valuation 0 for other resources. It was showed in [6] that in
this example the conﬁguration LP will give of m to this instance, while it is clear that the integral
optimum is at most 1. Indeed, there are only m − 1 resources in S, hence at least one player i from
E will need to take resources from Si . But Si contains only m + 1 resources while m players in Ei
need to take one resource each from the corresponding set Si . Interestingly, this example can be
captured by our polymatroid variant. We have universe E and the uniform matroid of rank |E| − 1
(i.e. r(X) = |X| for any X 6= E, and r(E) = |E| − 1), and f (X) = |X|, which      S models that a set of
|X| players in E1 can beSassigned a maximum of |X| resources from the set i∈E Si . In the matroid
problem, the players in i∈E Ei only appear       S implicitly. One may also derive f by deﬁning a natu-
ral  polymatroid   that assigns  the items   in   i∈E Si and from which we then contract the players of
         . As  stated above,  the  conﬁguration    LP does not give us a good lower bound (or certiﬁcate
S
       E
   i∈E i
of infeasibility) in this case. Another way to ﬁnd a certiﬁcate would be, in the spirit of matroid
partition, to try to ﬁnd a set X, for which r(X) + f (X)/b < |X|, where r is the rank function
of the matroid and f the submodular function corresponding to the polymatroid. Although this
would prove infeasibility of a solution of value b, it is not suﬃcient as seen in the example above.
As previously detailed, it is clear that no solution of value more than 1 exists. On the other hand,
r(X) + f (E)/|E| ≥ r(X) = |X| for all X 6= E and r(E) + f (E)/|E| = |E| − 1 + 1 ≥ |E|. Hence,
the certiﬁcate above is also not suﬃcient to rule out a solution of value |E| = m.
     To overcome this issue, we develop the following certiﬁcate of infeasibility. Let X ⊆ E with
f (X) ≤ b · |X|, in the example above we can take X = ∅. Further, let Y ⊇ X have a not too large
rank of r(Y ) < |Y | − |X|/2 and small marginal values for each element, that is, f (i | X) < b for
all i ∈ Y \ X. In the example above, take Y = E. We claim that this constitutes a proof that no
solution of value 3b exists. Suppose that for IP ⊆ Y we have that 3b · IP is in the polymatroid.
Then                                               X
                        2b · |IP | ≤ 3b · |IP | −       f (i | X) ≤ f (X) ≤ b · |X| ,
                                             i∈IP \X

where we use that 3b · |IP | ≤ f (IP ) ≤ f (X) + i∈IP \X f (i | X). It follows that |IP | ≤ |X|/2, but
                                                  P
because of its rank the matroid cannot cover all remaining elements. Our algorithm is carefully
designed to either output a solution of value b or to prove, using the idea above, that no solution
exists for (4 + ǫ)b. Note that we use a slightly higher constant compared to the miniature above and
we also require a more complicated variant of the certiﬁcate. This is mainly for eﬃciency reasons:
in order to achieve polynomial running time we need to work with weaker conditions.

1.3   Definitions and notation
We write Oǫ (·) as the standard O-notation, where we suppress any factors that are functions in
only ǫ. For a set X and an element i we write X + i := X ∪ {i}. Similarly, X − i := X \ {i}.
    Let E be a universe.  For a vector x ∈ RE , we write x(e) for the entry of x corresponding to
e ∈ E, and x(S) = e∈S x(e). For some X ⊆ E, we write b · X as the vector y ∈ ZE with y(e) = b
                   P
for e ∈ X and y(e) = 0 for e ∈ / X. A set function f : 2E → R is submodular if for all subsets
A, B ⊆ E holds f (A) + f (B) ≥ f (A ∪ B) + f (A ∩ B), and monotone if for all A ⊆ B ⊆ E holds


                                                   6
f (A) ≤ f (B). Let f : 2E → Z≥0 be a monotone submodular integer function with f (∅) = 0. An
integer polymatroid over E associated with f is deﬁned as

                               P = {x ∈ ZE
                                         ≥0 : x(S) ≤ f (S) ∀S ⊆ E}.

In the following we always refer to integer polymatroids when talking about polymatroids. A
polymatroid can be interpreted as the multiset generalization of a matroid and most concepts
of matroids translate easily to polymatroids. Every element x ∈ P can be seen as an independent
multiset in which an element e ∈ E appears with multiplicity x(e). A polymatroid is also downward-
closed, that is, x ∈ P implies y ∈ P for any 0 ≤ y ≤ x, and satisﬁes the augmentation property, that
is, if x, y ∈ P with x(E) < y(E), then there is some e ∈ E such that x′ ∈ P with x′ (e) = x(e) + 1
and x′ (e′ ) = x(e′ ) for all e′ ∈ E − e. In particular, any matroid is a polymatroid.
     A basis of a polymatroid P is an element x ∈ P which satisﬁes f (E) = x(E), meaning that all
bases have the same cardinality (in terms of multisets). We denote the set of bases of P by B(P).
For a given polymatroid P and a constant k ∈ Z≥0 , the set {x ∈ P : x(e) ≤ k ∀e ∈ E} is again a
polymatroid.
     For a given polymatroid P of the submodular function f , and some vector z ∈ ZE   ≥0 with x ≤ z
for all x ∈ P, we deﬁne the dual polymatroid P of P with respect to z via the set function g with

                                   g(S) = z(S) + f (E \ S) − f (E)

for every S ⊆ E. This function is submodular, monotone and satisﬁes g(∅) = 0, hence this deﬁnition
is well-deﬁned. Note that if x ∈ B(P) it follows g(E) = z(E) + f (∅) − f (E) = z(E) − x(E), and
therefore z − x ∈ B(P).
    If a polymatroid P associated with a function f is given as an input for a problem, we assume
that it is represented in form of a value oracle for f . We can test whether some vector x is in P by
checking whether the minimum of the submodular function f (S) − x(S) is non-negative, which can
be done with a polynomial number of value queries to f .
    We refer for an extensive overview over polymatroids to Schrijver [26, chapters 44 - 49]. We now
give precise deﬁnitions of the matroid problems we consider.

Definition 7 (Resource-matroid SantaClaus). In the restricted resource-matroid SantaClaus
problem, there are sets of m players P and n resources R with values vj for all j ∈ R. Further, for
every resource j ∈ R there is an integer polymatroid Pj over P . The task is to allocate each resource
j ∈ R to a basis xj ∈ B(Pj ) and let each player i profit from the resource j withP   value vj · xj (i).
The goal is to maximize the minimum total value any player receives, i.e., mini∈P j∈R vj · xj (i) .

Definition 8 (Job-matroid Makespan). In the restricted job-matroid Makespan problem, there
are sets of m machines M and n jobs J with sizes pj for all j ∈ J. Further, for every job j ∈ J there
is an integer polymatroid Pj over M . The task is to allocate each job j ∈ J to a basis xj ∈ B(Pj )
which means that j contributes load pj · xj (i) to the total load
                                                             P of machine i. The goal is to minimize
the maximum total load over all machines, i.e., maxi∈M j∈J pj · xj (i) .

    These new matroid allocation problems generalize the restricted assignment variants of Santa-
Claus and Makespan, respectively. In fact, the matroid variant with a uniform matroid of rank 1
corresponds to the respective traditional problem.
    Note that in restricted resource-matroid SantaClaus it is equivalent to require that xj ∈ Pj
for each resource j instead of xj ∈ B(Pj ), since we can always increase xj to reach a basis without
making the solution worse. In restricted job-matroid Makespan this is not the case.


                                                   7
    Both matroid problems can be reduced to instances where the number of polymatroids is equal
to the number of distinct job sizes (resource values). This is because we can sum polymatroids
associated with jobs (resources) of equal size (value) to a single one, and then decompose a basis for
such a merged polymatroid into bases for the original polymatroids via polymatroid intersection.
Formally, we get the following proposition. For a more detailed explanation, see Appendix A.

Proposition 9. For any α ≥ 1, if there exists a polynomial-time α-approximation algorithm for re-
stricted job-matroid Makespan (resource-matroid SantaClaus) with h jobs (resources), then there
exists a polynomial-time α-approximation algorithm for restricted job-matroid Makespan (resource-
matroid SantaClaus) with pj resp. vj ∈ {w1 , . . . , wh } and w1 , . . . , wh ≥ 0.


2     Santa Claus and makespan reductions
In this section we present our ﬁrst two reductions and prove Theorem 1 and Theorem 2. The
precise statements given in the following subsections imply these results. They are formulated as
subroutines for a standard guessing framework (see e.g. [20]), which we brieﬂy explain here. Consider
a SantaClaus instance I for which we want to compute an α-approximate solution. We ﬁrst guess
OPT(I) with some variable T using binary search as follows. For some guess T , we scale down all
values of I by factor T and obtain I ′ . Then, we prove that if OPT(I) ≥ T (and OPT(I ′ ) ≥ 1),
our subroutine ﬁnds a solution for I ′ with an objective value of at least 1/α. If we do not obtain
such a solution, we can conclude OPT(I) < T and safely repeat with a smaller guess. Otherwise,
we repeat with a larger guess. After establishing T = OPT(I), the subroutine gives us a solution
with an objective value of at least T /α. For Makespan one can design an analogous procedure.

2.1     From Santa Claus to makespan minimization
In this section, we present an approximation preserving reduction (up to a factor of 1 + ǫ) from
SantaClaus to Makespan. More precisely, we show the following result.

Lemma 10. For any α ≥ 2 and ǫ > 0, given an instance I of SantaClaus with OPT(I) ≥ 1,
we can construct in polynomial time an instance I ′ of Makespan such that, given a (2 − 1/α)-
approximate solution for I ′ , we can compute in polynomial time a solution for I with an objective
value of at least 1/(α + ǫ).

    This lemma then implies Theorem 1 via the guessing framework. We split the proof of Lemma 10
into two parts (cf. Lemmas 11 and 12). First, we show that we can deﬁne a polynomial number
of configurations for each player, which represent diﬀerent options this player has. We show that
there is a nearly optimal solution, up to a factor of 1 + ǫ, that only uses these conﬁgurations.
    Second, we reduce this problem to Makespan without losing additional constants. That is,
we present a reduction proving that a (2 − 1/α)-approximation for Makespan implies an α-
approximation for SantaClaus restricted to polynomially many conﬁgurations. Intuitively, the
fact that we can enumerate the list of possible optimal conﬁgurations per player enables us to cre-
ate gadgets for every conﬁguration in the constructed Makespan instance which we exploit when
reducing solutions.

2.1.1    Santa Claus with polynomially many configurations
Consider a SantaClaus instance with players P and n resources R. We deﬁne the set of value
types as T = {vij : i ∈ P, j ∈ R}, which contains all distinct resource values that occur in the


                                                  8
instance.
       P We call a function c : T → {0, 1, . . . , n} a configuration, and deﬁne the total value of c as
|c| = v∈T c(v) · v. One can also see a conﬁguration as a multiset of value types.
     Given a conﬁguration ci for a player i of a SantaClaus instance I, we say that a resource as-
signment A = {Ai }i∈P for I that assigns the set of resources Ai to player i matches the conﬁguration
ci if |{j ∈ Ai : vij = v}| = ci (v) for every value type v ∈ T .
     We use Ci to refer to a set of conﬁgurations for a player i ∈ P and call C = {Ci }i∈P a collection of
configurations. A resource assignment A matches a collection of conﬁgurations C if, for each player
i, there exists a conﬁguration c ∈ Ci such that Ai matches c. Given a SantaClaus instance I and
a collection of conﬁgurations C = {Ci }i∈P , we use OPTC (I) to refer to the optimal objective value
for instance I among those solutions that match C.
     The main result of this section is the following lemma.
Lemma 11. For every ǫ > 0 and a given instance I of SantaClaus with OPT(I) ≥ 1, we
can construct a rounded instance I ′ with a collection of configurations C such that the number of
configurations for each player is polynomial in the input size of I and OPTC (I ′ ) ≥ 1/(1 + ǫ).
   Further, every solution for I ′ of objective value T is a solution for I with objective value at least
T.
    The lemma essentially allows us to consider only solutions that partially match the constructed
collection of conﬁgurations C. If we ﬁnd such a solution that α-approximates OPTC (I ′ ), we imme-
diately get a (α + ǫ)-approximation for OPT(I).
    To prove the lemma, we employ several rounding techniques and enforce a certain monotonicity
condition on the conﬁgurations. This allows us to reduce the number of conﬁgurations per player to
a polynomial while still guaranteeing OPTC (I ′ ) ≥ 1/(1+ǫ). For a full proof, we refer to Appendix B.

2.1.2   Reduction to makespan minimization
We prove the following lemma which, together with Lemma 11, implies Lemma 10.
Lemma 12. Let I be an instance of SantaClaus and let C be a collection of configurations with
OPTC (I) ≥ 1. For any α ≥ 1, we can construct in polynomial time an instance I ′ of Makespan
such that, given a (2 − 1/α)-approximate solution for I ′ , we can compute in polynomial time a
solution for I with value at least 1/α. The running times are polynomial in the size of (I, C).
    We ﬁrst give some intuition for the reduction of the lemma. Assume for simplicity that ev-
ery conﬁguration in C has value 1. We want to construct a Makespan instance with an op-
timal makespan equal to 1. Exploiting the polynomial number of conﬁgurations, we introduce
configuration-machines for every player and every conﬁguration of that player. By using a gadget
structure, we ensure that every solution for the Makespan instance “selects” one conﬁguration-
machine for each player, which we call the player-machine. This is done by forcing an extra
(selection-)load of 1 on exactly one conﬁguration-machine for that player. The other conﬁguration-
machines will just be able to absorb all other jobs that can be placed on the machine, so we assume
that they do so and ignore them. Intuitively, the player-machine determines the conﬁguration which
we (partially) use for the player when transferring a solution back to the SantaClaus instance.
To this end, we encode the corresponding conﬁguration c of the player-machine by introducing for
every v ∈ T a total of c(v) configuration-jobs with size v on that machine. For every resource
we also introduce a resource-machine, on which only conﬁguration-jobs of the same value type as
the corresponding resource can be placed, with size 1. In an optimal solution of makespan 1, no
conﬁguration-job can be placed on a player-machine due to the selection-load. This means that
all these jobs have to be placed on the resource-machines instead. Since each resource-machine

                                                    9
                                                                                                ji
                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                              mic
                                                                                                         v
                                                                                                        |c|
                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                Jc,v


                                                                                                 1
                                                                                               mj


(a) SantaClaus instance I. Players are vi-    (b) Makespan instance I ′ . Machines are visualized by squares with a
sualized by smileys and resources by gifts.   gear and jobs by cycles.

Figure 1: The construction used in Lemma 12. In both pictures an edge indicates that an item has a
non-trivial value for an entity.


can absorb at most one job, we can interpret the placement of the conﬁguration jobs as resource
assignment for the SantaClaus instance that matches the conﬁguration of the player-machines.
This, however, only works for optimal solutions.
    To better understand the connection between approximate solutions, imagine an initial state
where all conﬁguration-jobs are placed on their player-machines in the Makespan instance, and all
resources are unassigned in the SantaClaus instance. This means that all player-machines have a
total load of 1+|c| = 2 (observe that |c| = 1 is caused by the conﬁguration-jobs) and all players have
a total value of 0. Now, a player can gain a resource by moving a suitable conﬁguration-job away
from her player-machine to a resource-machine. Since, even in a better-than-2 approximation for the
Makespan instance, a resource-machine can absorb at most one job, we can again interpret this as
the players competing for the resources via moving jobs away from their player-machines to resource-
machines. Therefore, in a (2 − 1/α)-approximation for the Makespan instance, a player must be
able to move jobs away from her player-machine of total size at least 1/α. But this means in our
interpretation that she receives resources of total value at least 1/α in the SantaClaus instance.
    In the following, we formalize these ideas and prove Lemma 12. Fix an instance I of the
SantaClaus problem and a collection of conﬁgurations C for I with OPTC (I) ≥ 1. We proceed by
describing the reduction and proving two auxiliary lemmas that imply Lemma 12.

Preprocessing We ﬁrst remove all conﬁgurations from C of value strictly less than 1. Since we
assumed that OPTC (I) ≥ 1, this does not aﬀect OPTC (I).

Construction We construct a Makespan instance I ′ as follows. For every player i in instance I,
we introduce a player-job ji and for every conﬁguration c ∈ Ci a conﬁguration-machine mic , where the
size of ji is equal to 1 on every conﬁguration-machine mic and ∞ on all other machines. For every con-
ﬁguration c ∈ Ci and for every value type v ∈ T we introduce a set Jc,v i of c(v) many conﬁguration-

jobs. For every resource j we introduce a resource-machine mj . Finally, every conﬁguration-job in
  i has size 1 on every resource-machine m if resource j has value type v for player i (i.e., v = v),
Jc,v                                           j                                               ij
size v/|c| on the conﬁguration-machine mic , and ∞ on all other machines. See Figure 1.


                                                        10
Lemma 13. The optimal objective value of I ′ is at most 1.

Proof. Fix a solution of I that is optimal among the solutions that match C. Consider a player i of
instance I and let c ∈ Ci be the selected conﬁguration for player i in the given solution. Let Ai be
the set of resources assigned to player i. In the solution for I ′ , we assign job ji to machine mic , giving
it a load of 1. Further, we assign the conﬁguration-jobs Jc,v i of conﬁguration c to resource-machines

{mj : j ∈ Ai } such that every resource-machine receives at most one job. Such an assignment must
exist by the fact that conﬁguration c is matched by the ﬁxed solution for I. For every conﬁguration
c′ ∈ Ci \P{c} we assign for all v ∈ T every conﬁguration-job in Jci′ ,v to machine mic′ , giving those a
load of v∈T c′ (v) |cv′ | = 1. Since, in the given solution, every resource j is assigned to at most one
player i, and since we have assigned at most one conﬁguration-job to machine mj , every resource-
machine also has a load of at most 1. Hence, the makespan of the constructed solution for I ′ is at
most 1.

Lemma 14. For any α ≥ 1, given a solution for I ′ with a makespan of at most 2 − 1/α, we can
construct in polynomial time a solution for I where every player receives a total value of at least 1/α.

Proof. Given a solution for I ′ where every machine has a load of at most 2 − 1/α, we construct a
solution for I as follows. Fix a player i and assume that ji is assigned to machine mic .
    Let Ji be the set of conﬁguration-jobs of conﬁguration c of player i which are not assigned to
  i
mc . Thus, every job in Ji is assigned to a resource-machine. Note that every resource-machine has
at most one assigned job, because every job has size of at least 1 on these machines. Let Ri be the
set of resources for which the corresponding resource-machines receive a job of Ji . We assign the
resources Ri to player i in the solution for I. The load contributed by conﬁguration-jobs to machine
mic is at most 1 − 1/α, because job ji is also assigned to mic and has size 1. This implies that the
total size of jobs in Ji for machine mic is at least
                                                  !                       
                      X        v     X         v           1               1     1
                                  ≥      c(v)      − 1−        =1− 1−          = .
                              |c|             |c|          α               α     α
                           i
                   j∈Ji :j∈Jc,v           v∈T


Since |c| ≥ 1 by our preprocessing, we conclude that player i receives a total value of at least
                                  X                 X                   X            v   1
                                         vij =                  v≥                      ≥ .
                                                                                    |c|  α
                                  j∈Ri                    i
                                                 j∈Ji :j∈Jc,v                 i
                                                                     j∈Ji :j∈Jc,v

A visualization of this argument is given in Figure 2.



2.2    Equivalence in the unrelated 2-value case
In this section, we consider the two-value case of SantaClaus and Makespan and prove that
there exists an approximation preserving equivalence between these two problems. We give a full
proof in Appendix C. Here, we brieﬂy restate the main theorem and highlight the technical ideas.

Theorem 2. For any α ≥ 2, there exists an α-approximation algorithm for two-value SantaClaus
if and only if there exists a (2 − 1/α)-approximation algorithm for two-value Makespan.




                                                                11
                                                         1



                                       ≤ 1 − α1              ≥ α1




    ≥ α1




(a) α-approximation in instance I.                (b) (2 − 1/α)-approximation in instance I ′ .

      Figure 2: Visualization of the argument for translating approximate solutions used in Lemma 14.


    For the direction from two-value SantaClaus to two-value Makespan, we show that we can
apply a similar reduction as in Lemma 10. We do so by reducing the given SantaClaus instance
to an instance where the reduction does not introduce a third value. Further, we observe that, in
the two-value case, we only have a polynomial number of relevant conﬁgurations, so we do not have
to reduce this number and, thus, do not lose the additional factor of 1 + ǫ.
    For the other direction, we prove that similar ideas as in the reduction of Lemma 10 also work
in the direction from Makespan to SantaClaus if we only have to job sizes. This requires some
additional ideas to ensure that we do not need to introduce further resource values.


3     Reductions for matroid allocation problems
We move to the restricted assignment setting and consider the matroid generalizations of Santa-
Claus and Makespan. The main result here is Theorem 3, which we restate here for convenience.

Theorem 3. For any α ≥ 2, there exists a polynomial-time α-approximation algorithm for the
restricted two-value resource-matroid SantaClaus problem if and only if there exists a polynomial-
time (2−1/α)-approximation algorithm for the restricted two-value job-matroid Makespan problem.

    We prove the theorem using the following two lemmas, one for each direction, and the same stan-
dard binary search framework as in the Section 2. The key ideas for constructing instances and for
transforming solutions in these reductions rely on polymatroid duality. Note that, by Proposition 9,
we can w.l.o.g. assume that the number of resources and jobs, respectively, is exactly two.

Lemma 15. Let α ≥ 2 and I be an instance of the restricted job-matroid Makespan problem with
two jobs and OPT(I) ≤ 1. Then we can compute an instance I ′ of the restricted resource-matroid
SantaClaus problem with two resources, such that, given an α-approximate solution for I ′ , we can
compute a solution for I with an objective value of at most 2 − 1/α.

Proof. Given an instance I with OPT(I) ≤ 1 of the restricted job-matroid Makespan problem with
machines E and two jobs with sizes p1 , p2 ≥ 0 and polymatroids P1 , P2 , we construct an instance I ′
of the restricted resource-matroid SantaClaus problem as follows.


                                                    12
    Let k1 = ⌊1/p1 ⌋ and let k2 = ⌊1/p2 ⌋. We ﬁrst consider the polymatroids P1′ = {x ∈ P1 : x(e) ≤
k1 ∀e ∈ E} and P2′ = {x ∈ P2 : x(e) ≤ k2 ∀e ∈ E}. Let f1′ and f2′ be the associated submodular
functions of these polymatroids. Since OPT(I) ≤ 1, any optimal solution xj ∈ B(Pj ) satisﬁes
xj (e) ≤ kj for all e ∈ E, and therefore, xj ∈ B(Pj′ ), for j ∈ {1, 2}. Thus, fj (E) = xj (E) = fj′ (E).
Let P j be the dual polymatroid of Pj′ with respect to the vector kj · E (the vector of ZE where all
entries are equal to kj ), for j ∈ {1, 2}. We compose instance I ′ using players E and two resources
with polymatroids P 1 , P 2 and resource values p1 , p2 .
    Let t = k1 · p1 + k2 · p2 − 1. We show that OPT(I ′ ) ≥ t. Fix an optimal solution for I which
selects bases x1 ∈ B(P1 ) and x2 ∈ B(P2 ). We deﬁne vectors xj (e) = kj − xj (e) for all e ∈ E, and
conclude that xj ∈ B(P j ), because xj ∈ B(Pj′ ). This means that x1 and x2 are a feasible solution
for I ′ . Using OPT(I) ≤ 1, for every player e ∈ E holds

           p1 · x1 (e) + p2 · x2 (e) = (1 + t) − (p1 · x1 (e) + p2 · x2 (e)) = (1 + t) − OPT(I) ≥ t,

showing that OPT(I ′ ) ≥ t.
    We ﬁnally prove the stated bound on the objective value of an approximate solution. Fix an α-
approximate solution for I ′ which selects bases y 1 ∈ P 1 and y 2 ∈ P 2 . We construct an approximate
solution yj ∈ B(Pj ) for instance I by setting yj (e) = kj − yj (e) for every e ∈ E and j ∈ {1, 2}.
The construction of the dual polymatroid P j implies yj ∈ B(Pj′ ) for j ∈ {1, 2}. We further have
yj ∈ B(Pj ), because Pj′ ⊆ Pj and yj (E) = fj′ (E) = fj (E). Moreover, for every machine e ∈ E holds

                                                                                      1                      t
    p1 · y1 (e) + p2 · y2 (e) = (1 + t) − (p1 · y 1 (e) + p2 · y 2 (e)) ≤ (1 + t) −     · OPT(I ′ ) ≤ 1 + t − .
                                                                                      α                      α
   Since by construction t ≤ 1, we have t − t/α ≤ 1 − 1/α, which implies that the makespan of the
constructed solution (y1 , y2 ) is at most 2 − 1/α.

    The second direction can be shown with the same proof idea and some additional tweaks speciﬁc
to the direction. We give the full proof for the following lemma in Appendix D

Lemma 16. Let α ≥ 2 and I an instance of the restricted resource-matroid SantaClaus problem
with two resources and OPT(I) ≥ 1. Then we can compute an instance I ′ of the restricted job-
matroid Makespan problem with two jobs, such that, given a (2 − 1/α)-approximate solution for I ′ ,
we can compute a solution for I with an objective value of at least 1/α.


4     Local search algorithm
In this section we present our algorithm for Theorem 4 that ﬁnds an (8 + ǫ)-approximation for the
restricted resource-matroid SantaClaus problem and a (4 + ǫ)-approximation in the case of two
values. The analysis is moved to Appendix F
    We will show in Lemma 22 that it suﬃces to solve the following problem with α = 4 + ǫ. Given
a matroid M = (E, I) and a polymatroid P over the same set of elements as well as some b ∈ N,
ﬁnd some IM ∈ I and y ∈ P such that for every i ∈ E we have i ∈ IM or y(i) ≥ b, or determine
that no solution exists for αb. Before we move to the algorithm, we deﬁne some speciﬁc notation
used throughout the section.

Notation. Recall that for some X ⊆ E, we write b · X as the vector y ∈ ZE with y(i) = b
for i ∈ X and y(i) = 0 for i ∈
                             / X. Contracting a set X ⊆ E of a matroid M deﬁnes a new
matroid M/X obtained from restricting the elements to E \ X and deﬁning the rank function as

                                                         13
r(Y | X) = r(Y ∪ X) − r(X). Naturally, the independent sets of the contracted matroid form
all the sets that together with any independent set in S are independent in the original matroid.
We use contraction primarily to ﬁx some elements in the matroid. We need a similar notion for
the polymatroid P deﬁned by the submodular function f . However, while a single element i ∈ E
has rank function r(i) ≤ 1 in a matroid, the value f (i) could be arbitrarily large. In particular,
contracting a set using f (Y | X) we may reserve more resources for X than intuitively necessary
(recall we only need to cover elements with the polymatroid b times). Hence, we need to use a more
sophisticated approach here. First, consider the polymatroid P ′ = {y ∈ P : y(i) ≤ b ∀i ∈ X},
i.e., a restriction on the multiplicity of each element in X within the polymatroid. Let, f ′ be the
submodular function deﬁning P ′ . After this transformation we can use f ′ (Y | X) without the
aforementioned issues. We introduce the short notation

                                    f (Y | b · X) = f ′ (Y | X) .

Note that f (Y | b · X) behaves as one would expect in the sense of decreasing marginal returns, see
Lemma 24. We will deﬁne both r(Y | X) and f (Y | b · X) on all X ⊆ E instead of only Y ⊆ E \ X.
More precisely, r(Y | X) = r(Y ∪ X) − r(X) = r((Y \ X) ∪ X) − r(X) = r(Y \ X | X) gives a
natural extension although clearly the elements in X behave trivially. Similar to this, we extend
f (Y | b · X) to Y ∩ X 6= ∅ by deﬁning f (Y | b · X) = f (Y \ X | b · X).

Framework. We move to a further variation of the problem, which resembles an augmentation
framework similar to matroid partition problems, where we are given a partial solution that we then
extend. The algorithm itself is deﬁned using recursion with the following interface.

 Input. Matroid M = (E, I) with rank function r, polymatroid P ⊆ ZE with function f , both over
     the same elements, and a number b ∈ N.
     Further, disjoint sets IM ∈ I, b · IP ∈ P, B0 ⊆ E. Finally, a partial order ≺ on B0 .

 Output. Either an augmented solution IM                                    ˙ P′ ⊇ IM ∪ IP and
                                        ′ ∈ I and b · I ′ ∈ P such that I ′ ∪I
                                                       P                 M
       ′           2
     |IM ∩ B0 | ≥ ǫ |B0 | or “failure”.
                                                                               ∗ , I ∗ can exist with
     In case failure is returned, we provide a certiﬁcate that proves that no IM    P
       ∗    ∗                ∗                                         ∗
     IM ∪ IP ⊇ IM ∪ IP , IM ∈ I and the stronger conditions αb · IP ∈ P for α = 4 + O(ǫ) and
     |IM∗ ∩ B | ≥ 3ǫ|B |. Details on the certiﬁcate follow in the analysis.
              0         0

     The partial order ≺ aﬀects which elements of B0 the algorithm tries ﬁrst to add to IM . The
     precise guarantees on the output are subtle, but important inside the recursion, see proof of
     Lemma 28.

We can apply this variant to solve our previous polymatroid problem as follows: we initialize IP
as the set of all elements i ∈ E that have r(i) = 0. If b · IP ∈/ P it is clear that the optimum is
smaller than b. Assuming b · IP ∈ P we set I = ∅ and now extend IM ∪ IP one element at a time
by calling the procedure above with B0 = {i} for some element i ∈ / IM ∪ IP . Each time IM and IP
will be changed, but end up covering an additional element. Repeating this at most |E| times we
either have a solution that covers all elements or some element i cannot be added, which certiﬁes
that no solution exists with i covered by the matroid. In this case we alter the rank function to
r(X) ← r(X − i), setting in particular r(i) ← 0. We then restart the whole procedure.
    We will now describe how to solve this variant of the problem. First, we assume without loss of
generality that IM ∪ IP ∪ B0 = E by simply dropping irrelevant elements from the input. As stated
above, we want to add many elements of B0 to IM . In the trivial case that r(B0 | IM ) ≥ ǫ2 |B0 |,


                                                 14
we add greedily as many elements of B0 as possible to IM (while maintaining IM ∈ I), which will
result in |IM ∩ B0 | ≥ ǫ2 |B0 |, and we terminate successfully. Otherwise, we will have to remove
elements from IM before we can add suﬃciently many elements of B0 to IM . To this end, we will
carefully construct a set of addable elements A ⊆ IM , where the notion has historical reasons and
comes from the idea that we want to “add” A to IP . The procedure for creating A is deferred to
later and here we summarize only its important properties. The existence of A will be guaranteed
by the algorithm. Along with A we also create the set C with A ⊆ C ⊆ IM , which contains more
elements of IM that are relevant for adding B0 to IM (but not all of them could be added to A).
The relevant properties of A and C are as follows.
  1. It holds that 2b · A ∈ P, which means that in principle A could be added to IP (and removed
     from IM ). Note that this does not take into account potential conﬂicts with other elements
     currently in IP . Also remark that we are intentionally overprovisioning here, by using 2b
     instead of b.

  2. Set A is maximal within C regarding the previous property. More speciﬁcally, f (i | 2b·A) < 2b
     for all i ∈ C \ A.

  3. If we remove many elements of A from IM , we are able to add many elements of B0 to IM .
     Speciﬁcally, we require that for every R ⊆ A with |R| ≥ ǫ|A| we have

                                          r(B0 | IM \ R) ≥ ǫ2 |B0 | .

      We note that while this property initially holds, only a weaker version is maintained as the
      algorithm progresses. For more details see Lemma 28.

  4. Set C should contain almost all elements that block elements of B0 from being added to IM .
     Formally, r(B0 | C) ≤ 2ǫ|B0 |. In particular, a solution that covers many elements of B0 with
     the matroid needs to cover a substantial amount of elements in C with the polymatroid.
Our new goal is to move many elements of A to IP , which may not be possible immediately because
of conﬂicting elements currently in IP . We ﬁrst characterize these elements: Deﬁne the blocking
elements B as the set of all i ∈ IP such that f (i | b · (IP ∪ A − i)) < b. It is intuitively clear that
elements not in B are not relevant to adding A: assume we remove some elements of IP and add
some elements of A to it. Then afterwards all elements not in B can easily be added back to IP (if
they were removed), since each of their marginal values will still be at least b.
    When an element in A can be added to IP , we will not add it right away. Instead we will only
place it in a set of immediately addable elements AI . Only when we have enough of these elements to
successfully terminate, we will add them to IP . This is mainly for simplicity, i.e., to keep structures
as static as possible during execution. We now repeatedly perform the ﬁrst possible operation from
the following:
  1. If f (i | b · (IP ∪ AI )) ≥ b (equivalently, b · (IP ∪ AI + i) ∈ P) for some i ∈ A \ AI , add i to AI .

  2. If |AI | ≥ ǫ|A|, add AI to IP , remove it from IM , and greedily add as many elements of B0 as
     possible to IM , in the order given by ≺. We can then terminate successfully (Lemma 28).

  3. If |B| < ǫ|B0 |, return “failure”.

  4. If none of the above applies, we will recurse on B, which means that we try to move many
     elements of B to IM so that they can be removed from IP , hopefully allowing us to move
     elements of A to AI . The details of the recursion follow towards the end of the section.

                                                    15
Construction of addable elements. We construct a series of disjoint sets A1 , A2 , . . . as follows:
assume that A1 , A2 , . . . , Aℓ−1 have already been created. We initialize Aℓ = ∅. Then repeat the
following until exhaustion: if there exists an i ∈ IM \(A1 ∪A2 ∪· · ·∪Aℓ ) with r(i | B0 ∪IM \Aℓ −i) = 0
and
                                   f (i | 2b · (A1 ∪ A2 ∪ · · · ∪ Aℓ )) ≥ 2b ,
then we add i to Aℓ . If |Aℓ | < ǫ|B0 | we terminate with A = A1 ∪ A2 ∪ · · · ∪ Aℓ−1 . Otherwise, we
continue with the next set. When the construction of A is ﬁnalized, we deﬁne

                           C = B0 ∪ A ∪ {i ∈ IM \ A : f (i | 2b · A) < 2b} .

Recursion. We will denote the input of the recursion using prime next to the symbol, e.g. E ′ ,
B0′ , etc. The goal of the recursion is to move many elements of B to IM . On the other hand,
we want to keep our structures within B0 , A, and C largely intact. To this end, we ﬁrst contract
C from the matroid, which means that the recursion cannot remove elements of C from IM . It
may not be intuitively clear why this would be bad for us, but removing many elements of C does
not necessarily allows us to add many elements of B0 (comparable to Property 3 of the set A) for
arbitrary elements of C. In any case, we want to avoid the complications related to such changes
in C. Hence, we set

                                        E′ = E \ C ,
                                        ′
                                       IM = IM \ C , and
                                    r ′ (X) = r(X | C) ∀X ⊆ E ′

which deﬁnes a new matroid M′ = (E ′ , I ′ ). Regarding the polymatroid, we remove B from IP so
as to produce an input where sets B0′ , IM
                                         ′ , and I ′ are disjoint. However, by contracting b · B from
                                                  P
the polymatroid we make sure that we can add it back to the modiﬁed solution after the recursion
has returned (at least for those elements that were not moved into IM ). Furthermore, we want to
avoid that the recursion moves elements to IP that hinder A from being added to the polymatroid.
Hence, we contract b · A as well. This is achieved by setting

                                  IP′ = IP \ B and
                               f ′ (X) = f (X | b · (A ∪ B)) ∀X ⊆ E ′ .

From f ′ we obtain the new polymatroid P ′ . Finally, we deﬁne

                                             B0′ = B0 ∪ B

and extend ≺ by giving all elements of B lower priority than B0 . Intuitively, it does not hurt us to
include B0 in B0′ . If the recursion manages to move elements to B0 , this is only good for us. We
prove in Lemma 30 that this indeed forms a valid input of the problem. If the recursive call returns
                                                                          ′′ and I ′′ be the output of
failure, we return failure as well. Otherwise, we update as follows. Let IM       P
the recursion. First, we add back the previously removed C:
                                                     ′′
                                           IM ← C ∪ IM  .

As for IP , we want to add back B except for those elements that were covered with the matroid in
the recursive call. Thus,
                                                  ′′
                                      IP ← (B \ IM   ) ∪ IP′′ .


                                                  16
In Lemma 29 we show that the new IM , IP constitute again a feasible solution. If the returned set IM   ′′
               ′′ | ≥ ǫ2 |B | we terminate successfully. Otherwise, it must hold that |B ∩I ′′ | ≥ ǫ2 |B|,
satisﬁes |B0 ∩IM           0                                                                M
which intuitively means we made big progress in freeing B and is used in the running time analysis.
Since IP has changed, B may no longer correspond to its initial deﬁnition. Hence, we update B to
again reﬂect the set of all i ∈ IP with f (i | b · (IP ∪ A − i)) < b according to the new set IP .


5    Final remarks
For the two notorious open problems in scheduling theory, we prove Makespan to be at least as diﬃ-
cult as SantaClaus; more precisely, a better-than-2 approximation for Makespan would imply an
O(1)-approximation for SantaClaus. In the two-value case both problems appear equivalent w.r.t.
approximability. The obvious open question is whether there is also a Makespan-to-SantaClaus
reduction (for restricted assignment or the general case). Here we note that for restricted assignment
Makespan, all eﬀorts to reﬁne the local search method in order to give a better-than-2 approxi-
mation have failed so far. Also with our new reduction techniques it seems that it would require
additional ideas to handle this problem. By the reductions, our local search method generalizes all
previously known polynomial-time local search results for the two problems (up to constants) and
yields the ﬁrst approximation algorithm for a new matroid SantaClaus variant, where items are
allocated to the basis of a (poly-)matroid. We hope that this makes it clearer where the power and
limitations of the method are.
    Finally, we comment on an alternative matroid scheduling variant with matroid constraints on
the items allocated to a speciﬁc machine/player. In the machine-matroid Makespan problem,
each machine would be given a matroid on the jobs. All jobs must be assigned such that each
machine receives an independent set of its matroid. The player-matroid SantaClaus can be
deﬁned similarly.
    Kawase et al. [22] consider such matroid partition problems for various objective functions show-
ing complexity results. Further, two special-matroid examples for Makespan have been studied,
namely, bag-constrained scheduling [13, 16] (single partition matroid) and scheduling with capacity
constraints [10] (uniform matroids). The approximability lower bound Ω((log n)1/4 ) by [13] holds
for the restricted assignment setting and even translates to an inapproximability bound for machine-
matroid Makespan for identical machines with machine-dependent matroids. We are not aware of
any similarly strong lower bounds for the SantaClaus variant.


References
 [1] Chidambaram Annamalai. Lazy local search meets machine scheduling. SIAM Journal on
     Computing, 48(5):1503–1543, 2019.
 [2] Chidambaram Annamalai, Christos Kalaitzis, and Ola Svensson. Combinatorial algorithm for
     restricted max-min fair allocation. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 13(3):1–28, 2017.
 [3] Arash Asadpour, Uriel Feige, and Amin Saberi. Santa claus meets hypergraph matchings.
     ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 8(3):24:1–24:9, 2012.
 [4] Etienne Bamas and Lars Rohwedder. Better trees for santa claus. In Proceedings of STOC,
     2023.
 [5] Nikhil Bansal. Scheduling: Open problems old and new, 2017. Invited Presentation at MAPSP
     2017, Kloster Seeon, Germany.

                                                   17
 [6] Nikhil Bansal and Maxim Sviridenko. The santa claus problem. In Proceedings of STOC, pages
     31–40, 2006.

 [7] Ivona Bezáková and Varsha Dani. Allocating indivisible goods. ACM SIGecom Exchanges,
     5(3):11–18, 2005.

 [8] Deeparnab Chakrabarty, Julia Chuzhoy, and Sanjeev Khanna. On allocating goods to maximize
     fairness. In Proceedings of FOCS, pages 107–116, 2009.

 [9] Deeparnab Chakrabarty, Sanjeev Khanna, and Shi Li. On (1,ǫ)-restricted assignment makespan
     minimization. In Proceedings of SODA, pages 1087–1101, 2014.

[10] Lin Chen, Klaus Jansen, Wenchang Luo, and Guochuan Zhang. An eﬃcient PTAS for paral-
     lel machine scheduling with capacity constraints. In Proceedings of COCOA, pages 608–623.
     Springer, 2016.

[11] Siu-Wing Cheng and Yuchen Mao. Restricted max-min fair allocation. In Proceedings of
     ICALP, volume 107, pages 37:1–37:13, 2018.

[12] Siu-Wing Cheng and Yuchen Mao. Restricted max-min allocation: Approximation and inte-
     grality gap. In Proceedings of ICALP, pages 38:1–38:13, 2019.

[13] Syamantak Das and Andreas Wiese. On minimizing the makespan when some jobs cannot be
     assigned on the same machine. In Proceedings of ESA, pages 31:1–31:14, 2017.

[14] Sami Davies, Thomas Rothvoss, and Yihao Zhang. A tale of santa claus, hypergraphs and
     matroids. In Proceedings of SODA, pages 2748–2757, 2020.

[15] Uriel Feige. On allocations that maximize fairness. In Proceedings of SODA, pages 287–293,
     2008.

[16] Kilian Grage, Klaus Jansen, and Kim-Manuel Klein. An EPTAS for machine scheduling with
     bag-constraints. In Proceedings of SPAA, pages 135–144, 2019.

[17] Bernhard Haeupler, Barna Saha, and Aravind Srinivasan. New constructive aspects of the
     lovász local lemma. Journal of the ACM, 58(6):28:1–28:28, 2011.

[18] Penny Haxell and Tibor Szabó. Improved integrality gap in max-min allocation: or topology
     at the north pole. In Proceedings of SODA, pages 2875–2897, 2023.

[19] Penny E Haxell. A condition for matchability in hypergraphs. Graphs and Combinatorics,
     11(3):245–248, 1995.

[20] Dorit S. Hochbaum and David B. Shmoys. Using dual approximation algorithms for scheduling
     problems theoretical and practical results. J. ACM, 34(1):144–162, 1987.

[21] Klaus Jansen and Lars Rohwedder. A quasi-polynomial approximation for the restricted as-
     signment problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 49(6):1083–1108, 2020.

[22] Yasushi Kawase, Kei Kimura, Kazuhisa Makino, and Hanna Sumita. Optimal matroid parti-
     tioning problems. Algorithmica, 83(6):1653–1676, 2021.

[23] Donald Ervin Knuth. Matroid partitioning. Computer Science Department, Stanford University,
     1973.

                                              18
[24] Jan Karel Lenstra, David B Shmoys, and Éva Tardos. Approximation algorithms for scheduling
     unrelated parallel machines. Mathematical programming, 46(1):259–271, 1990.

[25] Lukáš Poláček and Ola Svensson. Quasi-polynomial local search for restricted max-min fair
     allocation. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 12(2):1–13, 2015.

[26] Alexander Schrijver. Combinatorial Optimization − Polyhedra and Efficiency. Springer, 2003.

[27] Petra Schuurman and Gerhard J. Woeginger. Polynomial time approximation algorithms for
     machine scheduling: Ten open problems. Journal of Scheduling, 2(5):203–213, 1999.

[28] Evgeny V. Shchepin and Nodari Vakhania. An optimal rounding gives a better approximation
     for scheduling unrelated machines. Oper. Res. Lett., 33(2):127–133, 2005.

[29] David B. Shmoys and Éva Tardos. An approximation algorithm for the generalized assignment
     problem. Math. Program., 62:461–474, 1993.

[30] Ola Svensson. Santa claus schedules jobs on unrelated machines. SIAM Journal on Computing,
     41(5):1318, 2012.

[31] David P. Williamson and David B. Shmoys. The Design of Approximation Algorithms. Cam-
     bridge University Press, 2011.

[32] Gerhard J. Woeginger. Open problems in the theory of scheduling. Bull. EATCS, 76:67–83,
     2002.


A     Definitions and notation
Proposition 9. For any α ≥ 1, if there exists a polynomial-time α-approximation algorithm for re-
stricted job-matroid Makespan (resource-matroid SantaClaus) with h jobs (resources), then there
exists a polynomial-time α-approximation algorithm for restricted job-matroid Makespan (resource-
matroid SantaClaus) with pj resp. vj ∈ {w1 , . . . , wh } and w1 , . . . , wh ≥ 0.

Proof. In the following, we use the notation [h] := {1, . . . , h}. Let I be an instance of the restricted
job-matroid Makespan problem with machines E and h distinct processing times p1 , . . . , ph . Let
Jℓ , ℓ ∈ [h], denote the set of jobs with processing times pℓ . Further, let Pjℓ with ℓ ∈ [h] and j ∈ Jℓ
denote the corresponding polymatroids over E and let fjℓ be the associated submodular function.
     We construct an instance I ′ of the restricted job-matroid Makespan problem with h jobs by
using the same set of machines      PE andℓ creating the polymatroids Pℓ for ℓ ∈ [h] withPthe montone
submodular function fℓ (S) = j∈Jℓ fj (S) for every subset S ⊆ E. Note that Pℓ =P j∈Jℓ Pjℓ [26].
For ℓ ∈ [h], the goal in instance I ′ is to ﬁnd vectors xℓ ∈ B(Pℓ ) such that maxe∈E ℓ∈[h] pℓ · xℓ (e)
is minimized. We prove that this reduction preserves the approximation factor.
     Consider a solution of instance I that selects the bases xℓj for job j ∈ Jℓ with ℓ ∈ [h] and consider
the vectors x′ℓ with x′ℓ (e) = j∈Jℓ xℓj (e) for all e ∈ E. Using again the fact that Pℓ = j∈Jℓ Pjℓ we
                               P                                                                     P

have x′ℓ ∈ Pℓ for all ℓ ∈ [h]. In particular, x′ℓ (E) = e∈E j∈Jℓ xℓj (e) = j∈Jℓ fjℓ (E) = fℓ (E), so
                                                                  P     P                  P
x′ℓ is a basis of Pℓ . Thus, (x′1 , . . . , x′h ) is a feasible solution for instance I ′ . Furthermore,
                                    X                            XX
                 OPT(I ′ ) ≤ max            x′ℓ (e) · pℓ = max                xℓj (e) · pℓ = OPT(I).
                              e∈E                        e∈E
                                    ℓ∈[h]                        ℓ∈[h] j∈Jℓ




                                                        19
    Consider some solution (y1′ , . . . , yh′ ) to instance I ′ , i.e., yℓ′ ∈ B(Pℓ ) and fℓ (E) = yℓ′ (E) for all
ℓ ∈ [h]. We construct a solution to I by decomposing each yℓ′ , ℓ ∈ [h], into bases yjℓ ∈ B(Pjℓ ) such
that yℓ′ (e) = j∈Jℓ yjℓ (e) holds for all e ∈ E. As OPT(I ′ ) ≤ OPT(I), this implies that the reduction
              P
preserves the approximation factor. If such decomposition would not exist for some ℓ ∈ [h], then, by
construction of the submodular function fℓ , we would arrive at a contradiction to fℓ (E) = yℓ′ (E).
    To ﬁnd the decomposition for an ℓ ∈ [h] in polynomial time, consider the polymatroids P̂jℓ
which are just copies of the original polymatroids Pjℓ on pairwise disjoint copies Êj of the ground
set E. For each ℓ ∈ [h], we decompose the solution yℓ′ of instance I ′ into bases of the copy
polymatroids, which then implies a decomposition into bases of the original polymatroids. For
each e ∈ E, let Ce denote the set of copies P         of e introduced by the ground set copies. We want
to ﬁnd a basis ŷjℓ for every j ∈ Jℓ such that ê∈Ce ŷjℓ (ê) = yℓ′ (e) holds for all e ∈ E and ℓ ∈ [h].
For an element e ∈ E and ℓ ∈ [h], consider the polymatroid Xeℓ on the ground set Ce implied
by bases B(Xeℓ ) = {x ∈ ZC                       ′                 ℓ
                             ≥0 : x(Ce ) = yℓ (e)} and let X denote the union of these polymatroids.
                              e


Furthermore, let P̂ ℓ denote the union of the polymatroids P̂jℓ . The largest element in the intersection
of X ℓ and P̂ ℓ gives us the decomposition. We can compute the largest element in the intersection
in polynomial time using algorithms for polymatroid intersection (cf. e.g. [26, Chapter 41]).
    The statement for resource-matroid SantaClaus can be shown with the same reduction and
proof; only the inequality OPT(I ′ ) ≤ OPT(I) trivially changes to OPT(I ′ ) ≥ OPT(I).


B      Santa Claus with polynomially many configurations
Lemma 11. For every ǫ > 0 and a given instance I of SantaClaus with OPT(I) ≥ 1, we
can construct a rounded instance I ′ with a collection of configurations C such that the number of
configurations for each player is polynomial in the input size of I and OPTC (I ′ ) ≥ 1/(1 + ǫ).
   Further, every solution for I ′ of objective value T is a solution for I with objective value at least
T.

Proof. Let ǫ > 0 be a suﬃciently small constant and κ = ⌈1/ǫ3 ⌉. Given a SantaClaus instance I
with the set P of m players, the set R of n resources and OPT(I) ≥ 1, we construct the SantaClaus
instance I ′ by executing the following steps.

    1. Use the same set of players and resources as in I.

    2. Round all resource values vij down to the closest power of 1/(1 + ǫ). That is, we round
       1/(1 + ǫ)ℓ−1 ≥ vij ≥ 1/(1 + ǫ)ℓ to v̄ij = 1/(1 + ǫ)ℓ . If vij ≥ 1, then we set v̄ij = 1.
       Furthermore, we round all vij with vij < 1/((1 + ǫ)n) to zero. In summary, each v̄ ∈ T is
       either a power of 1/(1 + ǫ) of value at least 1/((1 + ǫ)n) or 0.

    Next, we construct the conﬁgurations for the rounded instance I ′ by executing the following
steps. Since these steps will reduce the number of possible conﬁgurations per player to a polynomial,
an algorithm creating the conﬁgurations can just compute them via enumeration.

    3. For each player i ∈ P , we create the set Ci of conﬁgurations and restrict the set to con-
       ﬁgurations c such that, for every value type v̄ ∈ T , either c(v̄) = 0, c(v̄) = ⌈(1 + ǫ)ℓ ⌉ or
       c(v̄) = ⌊(1 + ǫ)ℓ ⌋ for some ℓ ∈ N0 with (1 + ǫ)ℓ ≤ n.

    4. Let v̄1 ≥ . . . ≥ v̄τ be the rounded value types in T . We partition T into κ value classes
       T1 , . . . , Tκ where Tℓ = {v̄ℓ+s·κ : s = 0, 1, . . .}. We further restrict the set of conﬁgurations Ci


                                                       20
      for a player i ∈ P to conﬁgurations c which satisfy for every 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ κ and for every v̄, v̄ ′ ∈ Tℓ
      with v̄ > v̄ ′ that either c(v̄) < c(v̄ ′ ) or c(v̄) = 0 or c(v̄ ′ ) = 0. That is, the function values of
      value types v̄ ∈ Tℓ of one value class that actually occur in a conﬁguration (i.e., have c(v̄) > 0)
      increase with decreasing value v̄ ∈ Tℓ .

    We ﬁrst argue that, for each player i, the number of conﬁgurations in Ci is polynomial in the
input size. Because of the second step, the number of value types in I ′ is in Oǫ (log n). By the third
step, the number of distinct function values c(v̄) over all conﬁgurations c ∈ Ci and all value types
v̄ ∈ T is in Oǫ (log n) as well.
    By step 4, we can represent the entries of c ∈ Ci which correspond to the same value class Tℓ in
terms of a vector with Oǫ (log n) entries such that all non-zero entries strictly increase in value (each
entry of the vector corresponds to a value type v̄ ∈ Tℓ , in decreasing order, and the entry values
represent the corresponding function values c(v̄)). We can represent such a vector by the set of
entries that have a non-zero value and by the set of non-zero values that occur in the vector. Since
there are at most 2Oǫ (log n) diﬀerent sets of non-zero values that can occur in the vector and at most
2Oǫ (log n) diﬀerent sets of non-zero entries, the number of such vectors is 2Oǫ (log n) ·2Oǫ (log n) ⊆ nOǫ (1) .
Since the total number of value classes is constant, and there is a simple rule to compose the vectors
of every class to a vector for all value types T , the total number of vectors which represent every
valid conﬁguration is polynomial in the size of I.
    Next, we prove the approximation factor. Let I ′ denote the rounded instance constructed by the
ﬁrst two steps. Furthermore, let C ′ denote the collection of conﬁgurations that is created by only
executing the third step of the construction and let C denote the ﬁnal collection of conﬁgurations.
We separately prove OPTC ′ (I ′ ) ≥ 1/(1 + ǫ)3 and OPTC (I ′ ) ≥ OPTC ′ (I ′ )/(1 + ǫ). Together, these
inequalities imply OPTC (I ′ ) ≥ 1/(1 + ǫ)4 . Then, for any suﬃciently small ǫ′ > 0, we can choose
ǫ = ǫ′ /5 and conclude OPTC (I ′ ) ≥ 1/(1 + ǫ′ ).
    We ﬁrst show OPTC ′ (I ′ ) ≥ 1/(1 + ǫ)3 . Consider some optimal solution for I. For a player i, let
Ai denote the resources that are assigned to i in the optimal solution. Clearly v(Ai ) ≥ 1. Discarding
all resources in Ai with value smaller than 1/((1 + ǫ)n) reduces the value of Ai by a factor of at
most 1 + ǫ. Rounding the remaining resource values down to powers of 1 + ǫ reduces the value by
another factor of 1 + ǫ. To make sure that the remaining resources in Ai with their rounded values
match a conﬁguration in Ci′ , we might have to remove a 1 + ǫ fraction of the resources for each value
type from Ai . This reduces the value of Ai by another factor of 1 + ǫ. The remaining value is at
least 1/(1 + ǫ)3 . By doing this for every player i, we obtain a solution to I ′ that matches C ′ with
an objective value of at least 1/(1 + ǫ)3 , which implies OPTC ′ (I ′ ) ≥ 1/(1 + ǫ)3 .
    Finally, we prove OPTC (I ′ ) ≥ OPTC ′ (I ′ )/(1 + ǫ). To that end, ﬁx an optimal solution for I ′
among those solutions that match C ′ . Consider some player i and let c′i denote the conﬁguration
that is selected for player i in the optimal solution for I ′ . We argue that we can ﬁnd a conﬁguration
ci ∈ Ci that

  (i) has a total value that is at least a 1/(1 + ǫ) fraction of the value of c′i and

 (ii) satisﬁes ci (v̄) ≤ c′i (v̄) for all v̄ ∈ T .

This gives us a feasible solution for I ′ that matches C and has an objective value of at least
OPTC ′ (I ′ )/(1 + ǫ) and, thus, proves the statement.
   We start by building a conﬁguration ci independently for every value class Tℓ .
   First, we iteratively construct a subset Sℓ ⊆ Tℓ of value types as follows.
   Start with the largest v̄ ∈ Tℓ such that c′i (v̄) > 0 and add v̄ to Sℓ . Then, ﬁnd the largest v̄ ′ ∈ Tℓ
with v̄ > v̄ ′ and c′i (v̄) < c′i (v̄ ′ ). Add v̄ ′ to Sℓ and repeat from v̄ ′ until we do not ﬁnd another value

                                                       21
type to add. Based on Sℓ , deﬁne conﬁguration ci as ci (v̄) = c′i (v̄) if v̄ ∈ Sℓ and ci (v̄) = 0 otherwise.
By choice of the sets Sℓ , the conﬁguration ci is contained in Ci and satisﬁes (ii).
    It remains to prove that ci also satisﬁes (i). Fix an arbitrary value type v̄j ∈ Sℓ and let v̄j ′ denote
the next smaller value type in Sℓ . Recall that the rounded value types are indexed in decreasing
order and let s be the integer such that j ′ = j + κ · (s + 1). If v̄j is already the smallest value type
in Sℓ , we set s to the largest integer such that ℓ + κ · s ≤ τ .
    We show
                                                       s
                                                  1   X
                               ci (v̄j ) · v̄j ≥    ·    c′i (v̄j+s′ ·κ ) · v̄j+s′ ·κ .                  (2)
                                                 1+ǫ ′
                                                                       s =0
If this inequality holds for all v̄j ∈ Sℓ , and for all 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ τ , then (ii) follows.
      To prove the inequality, observe that, by choice of set Sℓ , all integers 0 ≤ s′ ≤ s satisfy
                                                                      ′
ci (v̄j+s′ ·κ ) ≤ c′i (v̄j ). Furthermore, v̄j+s′ ·κ = v̄j /(1 + ǫ)κ·s by the rounding of the value types.
 ′

This gives us
               s                                                     s                                       s
               X                                                     X                                       X           1
                       c′i (v̄j+s′ ·κ ) · v̄j+s′ ·κ ≤ c′i (v̄j ) ·           v̄j+s′ ·κ = ci (v̄j ) · v̄j ·
                                                                                                                     (1 + ǫ)κ·s
                                                                                                                                ′
               s′ =0                                                 s′ =0                                   s′ =0
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                       ≤ ci (v̄j ) · v̄j ·         1                (3)
                                                                                                             1 − (1+ǫ)κ


    By further using
                                               ln(1 + 1ǫ )
                                                                                                                    
                             1+ǫ 1     1                                                                     1+ǫ
                           κ≥ 2 ≥ ·          ≥             = log1+ǫ                                                      ,
                              ǫ  ǫ ln(1 + ǫ)   ln(1 + ǫ)                                                      ǫ
it is not hard to see that (3) is at most ci (v̄j ) · v̄j · (1 + ǫ), and thus, implies (2). This concludes the
proof of OPTC (I ′ ) ≥ OPTC ′ (I ′ )/(1 + ǫ).


C     Approximation equivalence for the unrelated two-value case
We consider the two-value SantaClaus and Makespan variants, where all resource values and
job sizes are in {u, w, 0} and {u, w, ∞}, respectively, with u, w ≥ 0. Assume w.l.o.g. that u ≤ w.
We prove the following theorem.
Theorem 2. For any α ≥ 2, there exists an α-approximation algorithm for two-value SantaClaus
if and only if there exists a (2 − 1/α)-approximation algorithm for two-value Makespan.
    To prove this theorem we prove two lemmas (Lemma 17 and Lemma 20) in the following sub-
sections, one for each direction. Then, a standard binary search argument completes the proof.

C.1    Makespan to Santa Claus
Lemma 17. Let I be an instance of the two-value Makespan problem with OPT(I) ≤ 1. For any
α ≥ 2, we can construct in polynomial time an instance I ′ of two-value SantaClaus such that,
given an α-approximate solution for I ′ , we can compute in polynomial time a solution for I with an
objective value of at most 2 − 1/α.
    Fix an instance I of the two-value Makespan problem with OPT(I) ≤ 1. First, we observe that
we can w.l.o.g. assume that w > OPT(I)/2. Otherwise, the algorithm by [24] gives us a solution of
objective value at most OPT(I) + w ≤ 3/2 · OPT(I). Since α ≥ 2, this solution satisﬁes the lemma
for every possible α. Thus, in the following we assume w > OPT(I)/2.

                                                                       22
                                                                                                qi

                                                        w          u                w                 u
                                                 ri′                                                            riℓ
                                   i
                     b
              u               u                                                                           w
        b
                    w    u
                                       j                                                                  q̂j


    (a) Two-value Makespan instance I.                      (b) Two-value SantaClaus instance I ′ .

                              Figure 3: The construction used in Lemma 17.


Construction. We construct an instance I ′ of the two-value SantaClaus problem. Let k =
min{⌊1/u⌋, n}, where n is the number of jobs in I. That is, k denotes the maximal number of small
jobs that can be assigned to a single machine in an optimal solution with OPT(I) ≤ 1. By our
assumption on the size w, we have that at most one big job can be placed on a single machine.
     For every machine i we introduce a machine-player qi , one (large) resource ri , and k (small)
resources ri1 , . . . , rik . The value of the large resource ri for player qi is equal to w, the value of a
small resource riℓ for player qi is equal to u.
     For every job j, we introduce a job-player q̂j . Furthermore, for every machine i, we set the value
of resource ri for q̂j to w if pij = w and to 0 otherwise. For a small resource riℓ we set the value for
q̂j to w if pij = u and to 0 otherwise.
     Note that in I ′ , every machine-player qi has only values in {0, u, w}, and every job-player q̂j has
only values in {0, w}. Thus, I ′ is a two-value SantaClaus instance. Further, for every machine
the number of introduced resources is at most the total number of jobs in I, asserting that I ′ is of
polynomial size. An illustration of this construction is depicted in Figure 3.
     Let t = w + k · u − 1 and note that t ≤ 1 holds by construction. Also, observe that

                                  t = w + k · u − 1 ≤ w + k · u − k · u = w,

which implies w ≥ t. We ﬁrst prove the following lemma.
Lemma 18. OPT(I ′ ) ≥ t.
Proof. Fix an optimal solution of I and recall that we assume OPT(I) ≤ 1. In the following we
construct a solution for I ′ .
    Fix a machine i of instance I. If the given solution assigns a job j of size w to i, we assign
resource ri to job-player q̂j . If the given solution assigns a job j of size u to machine i, we assign an
arbitrary unassigned small resource riℓ to job-player q̂j . All yet unassigned resources are assigned
to their corresponding machine-players.
    We continue by separately proving that each player in instance I ′ receives a value of at least t,
which implies the lemma.
    First, consider the job-players. Since every job j is assigned to exactly one machine in I, the
job-player q̂j receives exactly one resource in the constructed solution for I ′ . These resources have
value w for those players, giving them a suﬃciently large value of w ≥ t.
    Next, we consider the machine-players. Fix a machine i. By our assumption that OPT(I) ≤ 1,
every machine i receives jobs of total size at most 1 in the solution for instance I. For our constructed

                                                       23
                                                                  ≤ (1 + t) − αt − w
                                                                                                       ≥ αt

             w
                          ≤ (1 + t) − αt − w                                           w




  (a) (2 − 1/α)-approximation in instance I.                  (b) α-approximation in instance I ′ .

     Figure 4: Visualization of the argument for translating approximate solutions used in Lemma 19.


solution to instance I ′ , this means that the                             1            k
                                            P subset Ni of resources ri , ri , . . . , ri that are not assigned
to machine-player qi satisﬁes vi (Ni ) = r∈Ni vr,qi ≤ 1. This implies that the value assigned to
machine-player i is a least

                                  w + k · u − vi (Ni ) ≥ w + k · u − 1 = t,

which implies OPT(I ′ ) ≥ t.

Lemma 19. For any α ≥ 2, given an α-approximate solution for I ′ , we can construct in polynomial
time a solution for I where every machine has a makespan of at most 2 − 1/α.

Proof. Consider an α-approximate solution for instance I ′ . Such a solution must assign resources
of value at least OPT(I ′ )/α to each player. By the previous lemma, OPT(I ′ )/α ≥ t/α.
    Clearly, in the given solution for I ′ every job-player q̂j receives at least one resource, as otherwise
the objective value would be zero. We modify the given solution in a way such that each job-player
receives exactly one resource. If a job-player receives more than one resource, we select an arbitrary
resource and reassign all other resources to their corresponding machine-players. Now, we can
construct a solution for I ′ as follows. If a resource belonging to machine i has been assigned to a
job-player q̂j , we assign job j to machine i. By the above assumption this assignment is well-deﬁned.
    It remains to argue about the load of every machine in I. Thus, ﬁx a machine i. In the solution
to instance I ′ , the corresponding machine-player receives resources of value at least t/α. This means
that the subset Ni of resources ri , ri1 , . . . , rik that are not assigned to machine-player qi satisﬁes
                                                            t      t
                                   vi (Ni ) ≤ w + k · u −     =1+t− .
                                                            α      α
Since by construction t ≤ 1, we have t − t/α ≤ 1 − 1/α, which implies vi (Ni ) ≤ 2 − 1/α. We
conclude the proof by observing that, by construction, the makespan of machine i is exactly equal
to vi (Ni ) ≤ 2 − 1/α.


    A visualization of the argument used in Lemma 19 is given in Figure 4.




                                                      24
C.2    Santa Claus to makespan
Lemma 20. Let I be an instance of the two-value SantaClaus problem with OPT(I) ≥ 1. For
any α ≥ 2, we can construct in polynomial time an instance I ′ of two-value Makespan such that,
given an (2 − 1/α)-approximate solution for I ′ , we can compute in polynomial time a solution for I
with an objective value of at least 1/α.
Proof. Let I be an instance of the two-value SantaClaus problem with OPT(I) ≥ 1 and vij ∈
{0, u, w}. We assume w.l.o.g. that u ≤ w. We consider three exhaustive cases.
    In the ﬁrst case we assume that w < OPT(I)/α. Then, we can use the algorithm of Bezakova
and Dani [7] to compute in polynomial time a solution in which every player receives a total value
of at least OPT(I) − vmax = OPT(I) − w > (1 − 1/α)OPT(I) ≥ OPT(I)/α, using α ≥ 2.
    In the second case we assume that w ≥ OPT(I)/α and that there is an optimal solution for I
in which every player i receives a resource j of value vij = w. Then, we can essentially set u to
0 and compute a solution where every player receives a resource of value w by solving a bipartite
matching problem. Since every player receives a value of at least w ≥ OPT(I)/α ≥ 1/α, we are
done.
    In the last case we assume that w ≥ OPT(I)/α and that in every optimal solution for I there
is some player i which does not receive a resource j of value vij = w. We can conclude that such
a player must receive at least b = ⌈1/u⌉ many resources j ′ for which she has a value of vij ′ = u,
because OPT(I) ≥ 1. Then, we construct a new instance I ′ by copying I and adjusting the resource
values to w′ = 1 and u′ = 1/b. Observe that OPT(I ′ ) ≥ 1 and that any solution for I ′ in which a
player either receives a resource of value 1 or b resources of value 1/b gives an objective value of at
least 1. We can therefore deﬁne a collection of conﬁgurations C in which every player has these two
conﬁgurations. Then, we can use Lemma 12 (by noting that in the constructed Makespan instance
every job has either size 1 or 1/b) to compute a solution for I ′ in which every player receives a total
value of at least 1/α. Since u ≥ u′ and w ≥ OPT(I)/α, this means that we can use the same
solution for instance I and guarantee that every player receives a total value of at least 1/α.


D     Reductions for matroid allocation problems
Lemma 16. Let α ≥ 2 and I an instance of the restricted resource-matroid SantaClaus problem
with two resources and OPT(I) ≥ 1. Then we can compute an instance I ′ of the restricted job-
matroid Makespan problem with two jobs, such that, given a (2 − 1/α)-approximate solution for I ′ ,
we can compute a solution for I with an objective value of at least 1/α.
Proof. Let I be an instance of the restricted resource-matroid SantaClaus problem with two re-
sources with associated polymatroids P1 , P2 and values v1 , v2 ≥ 0 such that OPT(I) ≥ 1. By
Lemma 22 we can assume that we are given a simpliﬁed case. For convenience, we slightly refor-
mulate it as follows: given v1 = 1 (instead of ∞), v2 = 1/b ≤ v1 (instead of 1) for b ∈ N, and
OPT(I) ≥ 1, ﬁnd a solution of value at least 1/α.
   Consider the polymatroids P1′ = {x ∈ P1 : x(e) ≤ 1 ∀e ∈ E} and P2′ = {x ∈ P2 : x(e) ≤ b ∀e ∈
E}. Let P 1 be the dual polymatroid of P1′ with respect to the vector 1 · E, and let P 2 be the
dual polymatroid of P2′ with respect to the vector b · E. We compose an instance I ′ of job-matroid
Makespan using machines E, one job of size p1 = 1 with polymatroid P 1 and one job of size
p2 = 1/b with polymatroid P 2 .
   We now show that OPT(I ′ ) ≤ 1. Fix an optimal solution for I which selects bases x1 ∈ B(P1 )
and x2 ∈ B(P2 ). Since OPT(I) ≥ 1, we have v1 · x1 (e) + v2 · x2 (e) ≥ 1 for every e ∈ E. Further
observe that our choice of b implies x1 (e) + (1/b) · x2 (e) ≥ 1. Our goal is to dualize bases of P1′

                                                  25
and P2′ to obtain bases of P 1 and P 2 , which are feasible for I ′ . To this end, we ﬁrst construct
vectors x′1 ∈ P1′ and x′2 ∈ P2′ such that x′1 (e) + (1/b) · x′2 (e) ≥ 1 for all e ∈ E. This can be done
by restricting x1 to values of at most 1 and x2 to values of at most b, and then selecting any bases
which dominate these intermediate vectors. Now, we deﬁne x1 (e) = 1 − x′1 (e) and x2 (e) = b − x′2 (e)
for all e ∈ E. By the construction of P 1 and P 2 , this solution is feasible for I ′ , i.e., xj ∈ B(P j ) for
j ∈ {1, 2}. We further have for every machine e ∈ E
                                                                        
                                   1                   ′         1 ′
                          x1 (e) + · x2 (e) = 2 − x1 (e) + · x2 (e) ≤ 1,
                                   b                             b

showing that OPT(I ′ ) ≤ 1.
    We ﬁnally prove the stated bound on the objective value of an approximate solution. Fix a
(2 − 1/α)-approximate solution for I ′ which selects bases y 1 ∈ B(P 1 ) and y 2 ∈ B(P 2 ). We construct
an approximate solution for I by deﬁning y1′ (e) = 1 − y 1 (e) and y2′ (e) = b − y 2 (e) for every e ∈ E,
meaning that yj′ ∈ B(Pj′ ), and then choose an arbitrary basis yj ∈ B(Pj ) which dominates yj′ , for
j ∈ {1, 2}. We have for every player e ∈ E
                                                                                 
           1            ′      1 ′                      1                         1                  1
   y1 (e) + · y2 (e) ≥ y1 (e) + · y2 (e) = 2 − y 1 (e) + · y2 (e) ≥ 2 − 2 −            · OPT(I ′ ) ≥ .
           b                   b                        b                         α                  α

   Since v2 = 1/b and v1 = 1, we conclude v1 · y1 (e) + v2 · y2 (e) ≥ 1/α for every e ∈ E, which
implies that the value of the constructed solution y1 and y2 is at least 1/α.


E     Reduction from restricted matroid Santa Claus to two-value case
Before proving the main result in this section, we start this section with a rounding theorem which
can be obtained by a variant of standard arguments in the scheduling literature (see [29]). In this
section, we will often refer to a standard relaxation of the problem, called the assignment LP. In this
LP, we have one variable xj (i) for each pair job/resource j and player/machine i. In the restricted
job-matroid Makespan problem, the relaxation can be written as follows.
                                       X
                                          xj (i) · pj ≤ T ∀i ∈ M
                                       j∈J

                                              xj ∈ B(Pj )     ∀j ∈ J
                                                  x≥0,

where T ≥ 0 is some given makespan bound. Similarly in the restricted resource-matroid Santa-
Claus problem, the assignment LP becomes the following.
                                 X
                                    xj (i) · vj ≥ T ∀i ∈ P
                                       j∈R

                                              xj ∈ B(Pj )     ∀j ∈ R
                                                   x≥0.

Theorem 21. Given a fractional assignment x of resources to players which is feasible for the
assignment LP (with parameter T ) of some an instance I of the restricted resource-matroid San-
taClaus problem, we can obtain, in polynomial time, a feasible integral assignment of resources to
players of value at least T − maxj∈R vj .


                                                     26
Proof. We assume w.l.o.g. that v1 ≥ v2 ≥ · · · ≥ vn and that vn = 0. We denote the polyma-
troids associated to the resources as P1 , P2 , . . . , Pn , corresponding to the submodular functions
f1 , f2 , . . . , fn . Given the fractional assignment x, we will create a feasible fractional solution x′ to a
certain polymatroid intersection problem. We deﬁne the two polymatroids using a bipartite graph
as follows. On the left-hand side, we have a set of vertices W with one vertex wj for each resource
j, and on the right-hand side we have a set of vertices U with one vertex uij for each player i and
resource j. The edge set will be denoted by E, and both polymatroids will have E as a ground set.
We set E = {(wj , uij )}i∈P,j∈R ∪ {(wj , ui(j+1) )}i∈P,j∈R\{n} . For some edge e ∈ E, we denote by ew
the resource corresponding to its left-hand side vertex, and by eu the player corresponding to its
right-hand side endpoint. The ﬁrst polymatroid P1′ will be associated with the submodular function
                                                                      
                                                    n
                                                    X         [
                                          f1 (S) :=    fj          eu  .
                                                j=1         e∈S:ew =j


The second polymatroid P2′ will be deﬁned using the right-hand side vertices in our graph. Each
vertex u ∈ U will have some degree constraint d(u) and the submodular function f2 is simply deﬁned
as                                               X
                                     f2 (S) :=          d(u) .
                                                      e=(w,u)∈S

We deﬁne the degree constraints using the following process for each player i in instance I. Let us
ﬁx one player i. We start with
                                       d(ui1 ) = ⌊x1 (i)⌋ ,
and we deﬁne the remainder R1 := x1 (i) − d(ui1 ) (for ease of notation we deﬁne R0 = 0). Then we
deﬁne recursively the degree constraint d(uij ) and remainders as follows.

d(uij ) := ⌊Rj−1 + xj (i)⌋ , and
    Rj := {Rj−1 + xj (i)} = Rj−1 + xj (i) − ⌊Rj−1 + xj (i)⌋ = Rj−1 + {xj (i)} − ⌊Rj−1 + {xj (i)}⌋ .

By construction, it is clear that the fractional assignment x in instance I can be transformed into
a feasible fractional solution to our polymatroid intersection problem. To see this, ﬁx a player i.
Then the ﬁrst resource j = 1 can be assigned to vertex ui1 up to an extent of ⌊x1 (i)⌋, which is
represented in our graph as taking ⌊x1 (i)⌋ copies of the edge (w1 , ui1 ). The remaining fraction of
x1 (i) can be assigned to player i by taking the edge (w1 , ui2 ) fractionally by some amount {x1 (i)}.
Then we move on to job j = 2, and we take the edge (w2 , ui2 ) by the maximal amount possible
until the degree constraint on vertex ui2 becomes tight. By construction, we see that there might
be some leftover of the value x2 (i) which is precisely equal to the number R2 in our construction.
We continue this assignment until the last job j = n. Note that our deﬁnition of remainder Rs
is precisely this small leftover of xj (i) that carries over to the edge going to vertex ui(j+1) (note
that this remainder is always less than 1). There is one slight caveat at the end is that some small
amount of the fractional assignment xn (i) might be thrown away, but as we will see, this does not
hurt our purpose because we assume that vn = 0.
    Note that this fractional solution to our polymatroid intersection problem makes all the degree
constraints on the right-hand side tight. By integrality of the polymatroid intersection polytope (see
Chapters 46-47 in [26]) there exists an integral solution which also makes all the degree constraints on
the right-hand side tight (and we can ﬁnd it in polynomial time by ﬁnding the maximum cardinality
multiset of edges which belongs to the polymatroids intersection).


                                                       27
    It is easy to see that this integral solution corresponds to an integral assignment of resources to
players in the instance I, in which each player i receives a value of at least
                                        n
                                        X
                                               ⌊Rj−1 + xj (i)⌋ vj .
                                         j=1

Let us compute the diﬀerence in objective ∆i with the fractional solution. We have that
                 n
                 X                                     n
                                                       X
          ∆i ≤     (xj (i) − ⌊Rj−1 + xj (i)⌋)vj + vn =   ({xj (i)} − ⌊Rj−1 + {xj (i)}⌋)vj .
                 j=1                                         j=1

Looking at each term individually, we notice that either ⌊Rj−1 + {xj (i)}⌋ = 0, or that ⌊Rj−1 + {xj (i)}⌋ =
1. In the ﬁrst case the next remainder Rj is equal to Rj−1 + {xj (i)} < 1. In the second case, we
have that
                  Rj = Rj−1 + {xj (i)} − ⌊Rj−1 + {xj (i)}⌋ = Rj−1 + {xj (i)} − 1 .
Let us denote by R′ the set of all indices where the second case happens. Then we can write
                                           n
                                           X              X
                                      ∆i ≤   {xj (i)}vj −   vj .
                                           j=1                 j∈R′

   Now note that if j ∈  / R′ , then {xj (i)} = Rj − Rj−1 , and that if j ∈ R′ then {xj (i)} =
1 + Rj − Rj−1 . Using this observation, we obtain

         n
         X                  X      X      n
                                          X                  n−1
                                                             X
  ∆i ≤     (Rj − Rj−1 )vj +   vj −   vj ≤   (Rj − Rj−1 )vj =    (vj − vj+1 )Rj ≤ v1 ,
         j=1                   j∈R′      j∈R′          j=1                j=1

where we use the fact that R0 = vn = 0, and Rj ≤ 1 for all j.

Lemma 22. For any α ≥ 2, if there is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given an instance of
restricted two-value resource-matroid SantaClaus problem with one matroid of value v1 = ∞ and
one polymatroid of value v2 = 1 and a number b ∈ N, finds a solution of value at least b or determines
that there is no solution of value αb, then there is also:

  1. a polynomial-time α-approximation algorithm for (any instance of ) the restricted two-value
     resource-matroid SantaClaus problem and

  2. a polynomial-time 2α-approximation algorithm for the restricted resource-matroid Santa-
     Claus problem.

Proof. We start by proving the ﬁrst result of the lemma. Let u, w (with w ≥ u) be the two sizes of
the instance I, and let fu , fw be the associated submodular functions.
    Now, we have three possible cases. If OPT(I)/α ≤ u, then it suﬃces to give at least one resource
to any player to obtain an α-approximate solution. This can be checked in polynomial time (see
Chapter 42 in [26]). If u < OPT(I)/α ≤ w, then, in an α-approximate solution, it suﬃces to give
to each player either one resource of value w or OPT(I)/(αu) resources of value u. We deﬁne a
new instance I2 with one matroid of value v1 = ∞ and one polymatroid of value v2 = 1. The
independent sets of the matroid are the sets of players which can be covered by at least one resource
of value w each in the original instance. The polymatroid is deﬁned by the submodular function
f2 (S) := fu (S). Clearly, in this case, we have that OPT(I1 ) ≥ OPT(I)/u, and a solution of value

                                                     28
t in instance I1 can immediately be translated into a solution of value min{OPT(I)/α, tu} in the
original instance. So an α-approximation on instance I1 gives us an α-approximation on the original
instance. In the last case where OPT(I)/α > w, we ﬁrst assume without loss of generality that
u, w are integers (by appropriate scaling). Then we deﬁne a polymatroid P3 with the submodular
function f3 (S) := u · fu (S) + w · fw (S); this should be thought of splitting the resources of value w
(respectively u) into w (respectively u) individual resources of value 1 each. The biggest b such that
b·E ∈ P3 (where E is the set of all players and b·E is the |E| dimensional vector with all entries equal
to b) can be found in polynomial time, since we simply need to minimize a submodular function
(see Chapter 45 in [26]). This gives us a fractional solution to the original instance of objective
value OPT(I). Using Theorem 21, we can round (in polynomial time) this fractional solution into
an integral solution of objective value OPT(I) − max{u, w} ≥ OPT(I) · (1 − 1/α) ≥ OPT(I)/α
(using α ≥ 2), which concludes the proof of the ﬁrst point of the lemma.
     For the second point, by a standard guessing strategy (as explained in the beginning of Section
2), we can assume that we know the optimum value OPT(I). We call a resource j heavy if vj ≥
OPT(I)/(2α), and light otherwise (let H and L be the set of heavy and light resources respectively).
We then deﬁne an instance I ′ with one matroid of value ∞, whose independent sets are the sets of
players which can be covered by at least one heavy resource each (this is a matroid by the matroid
union theorem see Chapter 42 in [26]). Again, assuming that all values vj are     P integers, we deﬁne
one polymatroid of value 1 associated to the submodular function f ′ (S) := j∈L vj fj (S). In this
new instance, it is clear that OPT(I ′ ) ≥ OPT(I). Hence an α-approximate solution to instance
I ′ can be transformed into an α-approximate solution to instance I, in which the heavy resources
are assigned integrally, and the light resources fractionally. Using Theorem 21, we can round
this fractional assignment into and integral assignment of value at least OPT(I)/α − maxj∈L vj ≥
OPT(I)/α − OPT(I)/(2α) = OPT(I)/(2α).

Theorem 23. Given a fractional assignment x of jobs to machines which is feasible for the as-
signment LP (with parameter T ) of some an instance I of the restricted Makespan problem, we
can obtain, in polynomial time, a feasible integral assignment of jobs to machines of makespan at
most T + maxj∈J pj . This implies that we can find in polynomial time a feasible integral solution of
makespan at most OPT(I) + maxj∈J pj ≤ 2OPT(I).
Proof. The proof here is very similar to the proof of Theorem 21. We repeat it here for completeness.
    We assume w.l.o.g. that p1 ≥ p2 ≥ · · · ≥ pn and that pn = 0. We denote the polymatroids
associated to the jobs as P1 , P2 , . . . , Pn , corresponding to the submodular functions f1 , f2 , . . . , fn .
Given the fractional assignment x, we will create a feasible fractional solution x′ to a certain poly-
matroid intersection problem. We deﬁne the two polymatroids using a bipartite graph as follows.
On the left-hand side, we have a set of vertices W with one vertex wj for each job j, and on
the right-hand side we have a set of vertices U with one vertex uij for each machine i and job
j. The edge set will be denoted by E, and both polymatroids will have E as a ground set. We
set E = {(wj , uij )}i∈M,j∈J ∪ {(wj , ui(j−1) )}i∈M,j∈J\{1} (note the slight change here compared to
Theorem 21). For some edge e ∈ E, we denote by ew the job corresponding to its left-hand side
vertex, and by eu the machine corresponding to its right-hand side endpoint. The ﬁrst polymatroid
P1′ will be associated with the submodular function
                                                                    
                                                  X n        [
                                     f1 (S) :=        fj         eu  .
                                                j=1         e∈S:ew =j

The second polymatroid P2′ will be deﬁned using the right-hand side vertices in our graph. Each
vertex u ∈ U will have some degree constraint d(u) and the submodular function f2 is simply deﬁned

                                                       29
as                                                                        X
                                                        f2 (S) :=                  d(u) .
                                                                       e=(w,u)∈S

We deﬁne the degree constraints using the following process for each machine i in instance I. We
start with
                                       d(ui1 ) = ⌈x1 (i)⌉ ,
and we deﬁne the remainder R1 := d(ui1 ) − x1 (i). Then we deﬁne recursively the degree constraint
d(uij ) (j ≥ 2) and remainders as follows.
            d(uij ) := ⌈xj (i) − Rj−1 ⌉ , and
                  Rj := ⌈xj (i) − Rj−1 ⌉ − (xj (i) − Rj−1 ) = ⌈{xj (i)} − Rj−1 ⌉ − ({xj (i)} − Rj−1 ) .
It is easy to see that the solution x to the assignment LP can be transformed into a feasible fractional
solution to our polymatroid intersection problem. Similar to the proof of Theorem 21, the remainder
Rj is deﬁned to be exactly the quantity by which we can select the edge (wj , ui(j−1) ) in our fractional
solution to the polymatroid intersection problem.
     Note that this fractional solution to our polymatroid intersection problem is such that we have
a basis of the polymatroid P1′ (the left-hand side polymatroid). By integrality of the polymatroid
intersection polytope (see Chapters 46-47 in [26]) there exists an integral solution which is also a
basis in P1′ (and we can ﬁnd it in polynomial time by ﬁnding the maximum cardinality multiset of
edges which belongs to the polymatroids intersection).
     It is easy to see that this integral solution corresponds to an integral assignment of jobs to
machines in the instance I, in which each machine i receives a load of at most
                                                         n
                                                         X
                                                               ⌈xj (i) − Rj−1 ⌉ pj .
                                                         j=1

Let us compute the diﬀerence in objective ∆i with the fractional solution. We have that
            n
            X                                 n−1
                                              X
     ∆i ≤     (⌈xj (i) − Rj−1 ⌉ − xj (i))pj =    (⌈xj (i) − Rj−1 ⌉ − xj (i))pj
            j=1                                            j=1
                                                                                          n−1
                                                                                          X
                                                                                      =         (⌈{xj (i)} − Rj−1 ⌉ − {xj (i)})pj ,
                                                                                          j=1

using pn = 0. Looking at each term individually, we notice that either ⌈{xj (i)} − Rj−1 ⌉ = 0, or
that ⌈{xj (i)} − Rj−1 ⌉ = 1. In the ﬁrst case the next remainder Rj is equal to Rj−1 − {xj (i)}. In
the second case, we have that
                                 Rj = 1 + Rj−1 − {xj (i)} ⇐⇒ {xj (i)} = 1 + Rj−1 − Rj .
Let us denote by J ′ the set of all indices where the second case happens. Then we can write
            X              n
                           X                    X              X            n
                                                                            X                  n
                                                                                               X
     ∆i ≤           pj −         {xj (i)}pj =           pj −           pj −   (Rj−1 − Rj )pj =   (Rj − Rj−1 )pj
            j∈J ′          j=1                  j∈J ′          j∈J ′       j=1                         j=1
                                                                                                          n−1
                                                                                                          X
                                                                                                      =         (pj − pj+1 )Rj ≤ p1 ,
                                                                                                          j=1

where we use the fact that R0 = pn = 0, and Rj ≤ 1 for all j.

                                                                         30
F       Analysis of local search algorithm
F.1      General properties of matroids and submodular functions
Lemma 24. Let g : E → Z≥0 be monotone submodular with g(∅) = 0, X ′ ⊆ X ⊆ E, and h′ < h.
Then

                               g(Y | h · X ′ ) ≥ g(Y | h · X) for all Y ⊆ E \ X and
                               g(Y | h′ · X) ≥ g(Y | h · X) for all Y ⊆ E \ X .


Proof. Recall that g(Y | h · X) is derived by ﬁrst constructing a new monotone submodular function
g′ corresponding to the polymatroid deﬁned by g but with entries of X bounded by h. For the ﬁrst
inequality, let g ′′ be the corresponding function with X ′ instead of X. Then

    g(Y | h · X ′ ) = g′′ (Y | X ′ ) = g′′ (Y ∪ X ′ ) − g′′ (X ′ )
                                          ≥ g ′ (Y ∪ X ′ ) − g ′ (X ′ ) = g′ (Y | X ′ ) ≥ g ′ (Y | X) = g(Y | h · X) .

Here we use that g′′ (X ′ ) = g ′ (X ′ ). For the second inequality, let g′′′ be the submodular function for
h′ instead of h. Let Q be the polymatroid corresponding to g. Then there exists some y ′′′ ∈ Q with
supp(y ′′′ ) ⊆ X, y ′′′ (i) ≤ h′ for all i ∈ E, and y ′′′ (X) = g′′′ (X). We deﬁne y ′ accordingly, except
for g′ instead of g′′′ . Here we may assume, by augmentation property of the polymatroid that
y ′ (i) ≥ y ′′′ (i) for all i ∈ E. The value g(Y | h′ · X) = g′′′ (Y | X) is simply the largest element (by
sum) in the polymatroid deﬁned by restricting Q to E \ X and replacing the submodular function
by g′′′ (Y ′ ) = g(Y ′ ∪ X) − yi′′′ (X). It is clear that this is at least as big as g(Y | h · X) = g ′ (Y | X),
since the corresponding polymatroid here has a submodular function g′ (Y ′ ) = g(Y ′ ∪ X) − yi′ (X)
that is smaller or equal to g ′′′ everywhere.

Lemma 25. Let g : E → Z≥0 be monotone submodular with g(∅) = 0 and X ⊆ E. Define
Y = {i ∈ X : g(i | h · (X − i)) < h}. Then for every i ∈ X we have g(i | h · (Y − i)) < h if and only
if i ∈ Y .

Proof. For any i ∈ X with g(i | h · (Y − i)) < h we have g(i | h · (X − i)) < h by Lemma 24. This
proves one direction. For the other direction, let i ∈ X with g(i | h · (Y − i)) ≥ h. Further, let
Q be the polymatroid corresponding to g and let y ∈ Q with supp(y) ⊆ Y − i and y(j) ≤ h for
all j ∈ E. Further, choose y such that y(Y − i) is maximized. Since g(i | h · (Y − i)) ≥ h, we
can extend y to y ′ which is equal for all j 6= i and has y ′ (i) = h. Now for any i′ ∈ X \ Y , since
g(i′ | h · Y ) ≥ g(i′ | h · (X − i′ )) ≥ h we can repeat the same trick and increase the value of y ′ (i′ )
to h as well. It is easy to see that this can be continued to obtain y ′′ ∈ Q with y ′′ (j) = h for all
j ∈ X \ (Y − i) and y ′′ (j) = y(j) for all j ∈ Y − i.
    It is clear that y ′′ when restricted to X − i maximizes y ′′ (X − i) over all elements of Q with
support X − i and upper bound h: It maximizes the sum already on Y − i and all other components
are obviously the largest possible. Together with the fact that y ′′ with y ′′ (i) = h is in Q, this implies
that g(i | h · (X − i)) ≥ h.

Lemma 26. Let g : E → Z≥0 be monotone submodular with g(∅) = 0 and X ′ ⊆ X ⊆ E. Further,
let g(i | h · (X − i)) < h for all i ∈ X ′ . Then g(X ′ ) ≤ h|X| and strict inequality holds whenever
X ′ 6= ∅.



                                                             31
Proof. We use an induction over |X ′ |. For X ′ = ∅ the claim obviously holds. Now consider X ′ 6= ∅
and let i ∈ X ′ . There must be some Y ⊆ X with i ∈ Y such that g(Y ) < h|Y |: assume otherwise
and let Q be the polymatroid corresponding to g. Let z ∈ Q with z(j) ≤ h for all j ∈ E and
z(i) = 0, maximizing z(E). It can easily be checked that z ′ with z ′ (j) = z(j) for j 6= i and z ′ (i) = h
is also in Q. This however implies that g(i | h · (X − i)) ≥ h.
     Having established that g(Y ) < h|Y | for some Y ∋ i, we use the induction hypothesis on X \ Y ,
X \ Y and g′ (Y ′ ) := g(Y ′ | Y ). It follows that g(X ′ \ Y | Y ) ≤ h|X \ Y | and therefore
   ′


                       g(X ′ ) ≤ g(Y ) + g(X ′ \ Y | Y ) < h|Y | + h|X \ Y | = h|X| .

F.2    Basic properties and invariants of the data structures
Note that after A, C, B, and AI are initially created, we never change A, C, IM ∩ C or IP ∩ C. The
only dynamic sets are B, AI , IM \ C, and IP \ C. Hence, for properties that rely solely on the ﬁxed
elements, it suﬃces to verify them at the time they were created. Furthermore, the only place that
makes potentially dangerous changes to B, IM \ C, and IP \ C is the recursion. In the remainder,
“at all times” means that a property should hold between any two of the four main operations that
are performed repeatedly.
    We will now verify the properties of the set of addable elements. Notice that Properties (1)
and (2), that is, 2b · A ∈ P and f (i | 2b · A) < 2b for all i ∈ C \ A, hold trivially by construction.

Lemma 27. For the set of addable elements A and set C we have that r(B0 | C) ≤ 2ǫ|B0 |.

Proof. Let A1 , A2 , . . . , Aℓ be the sets created by the procedure. Consider the time that C is created.
Here, it holds that r(B0 | IM ) < ǫ2 |B0 | ≤ ǫ|B0 |. Now assume towards contradiction that r(B0 |
C) > 2ǫ|B0 |. Thus, we can ﬁnd some X ⊆ B0 with |X| = r(B0 | C) and C ∪ X ∈ I. After ﬁnalizing
A, for all i ∈ IM \ (C ∪ Aℓ ) we have r(i | B0 ∪ IM \ Aℓ − i) = 1. Thus, X ∪ IM \ Aℓ ∈ I, which can
be seen by adding to C ∪ X the elements from IM \ (Aℓ ∪ C) one at a time (each having marginal
value 1). Applying the matroid augmentation property on IM , we can ﬁnd a set Y ⊆ B0 such that
Y ∪ IM ∈ I and
                              |Y | = |X ∪ IM \ Aℓ | − |IM | ≥ |X| − |Aℓ | > ǫ|B0 | ,
a contradiction.

Lemma 28. For the set of addable elements A and set C we have that r(B0 | IM \ R) ≥ ǫ2 |B0 | −
|B0 ∩ IM | for every R ⊆ A with |R| ≥ ǫ|A|.

Proof. We will ﬁrst prove the statement for the time when A was created, but then we need to
show that it also holds later. Let A1 , A2 , . . . , Aℓ be the sets created by the procedure and recall
that A = A1 ∪ · · · ∪ Aℓ−1 and Aj ≥ ǫB0 for all j < ℓ. Thus, there must be some Aj , j < ℓ, with
|R ∩ Aj | ≥ ǫ|Aj | ≥ ǫ2 |B0 |. For IM at the time of construction it holds that

                   r(B0 ∪ IM \ (R ∩ Aj )) ≥ r(B0 ∪ IM \ Aj ) = r(B0 ∪ IM ) ≥ |IM | .

This is because Aj is constructed greedily from elements that do not decrease the rank. Hence,

  r(B0 | IM \ R) ≥ r(B0 | IM \ (R ∩ Aj ))
                   = r(B0 ∪ IM \ (R ∩ Aj )) − r(IM \ (R ∩ Aj )) ≥ |IM | − |IM | + |R ∩ Aj | ≥ ǫ2 |B0 | .

We will now study the eﬀects of IM changing throughout the algorithm. Essentially, when an
element of B0 is added to IM then r(B0 | IM \ R) may decrease by 1, otherwise it does not change.

                                                    32
Note that we can view the changes made by the algorithm (or its recursive calls) to IM as a sequence
of single insertions or deletions. More precisely, there exists a sequence of sets Let I1 , I2 , . . . , Ik ∈ I,
where Ik is the current state of IM that we want to analyze, I1 is the initial state, and Ih+1 is
derived from Ih either by deletion or addition of a single element. Further, whenever Ih+1 = Ih + i
for some i ∈/ Ih , then we know that Ih + j ∈  / I for all j ∈
                                                             / Ih with j ≺ i. Finally, once an element of
B0 is added to some Ih , it remains in IM , i.e., it is also in Ih+1 , . . . , Ik . All of these properties are
observations that follow easily from the deﬁnition of the algorithm.
    Let 1 ≤ h < k, R ⊆ C ⊆ Ih , S ⊆ E \ Ih such that |R| ≥ |S| and Ih \ R ∪ S ∈ I. Assume
further that Ih + s ∈ / I for all s ∈ S. Then Ih+1 \ R ∪ S ∈ I as well: if Ih+1 is derived by deletion
of an element, this follows immediately. Now assume that Ih+1 = Ih + i. Since Ih + i ∈ I and
Ih \ R ∪ S ∈ I, by matroid augmentation property there exists some j ∈ (Ih + i) \ (Ih \ R ∪ S) = R + i
with Ih \ R ∪ S + j ∈ I. If j = i we are done, otherwise we get a contradiction: suppose that
Ih \ (R − j) ∪ S ∈ I. Then we can apply the matroid augmentation property to Ih to ﬁnd some
s ∈ S with Ih + s ∈ I.
    Now consider a subsequence Ih , Ih+1 , . . . , Ig where no element of B0 is added. Then if Ih \R∪S ∈
I it follows that Ig \ R ∪ S ∈ I. Notice that as we have shown earlier, for every R ⊆ A ⊆ C with
|R| ≥ ǫ|A| there exists some S1 ⊆ B0 such that |S1 | ≥ ǫ2 |B0 | and I1 \ R ∪ S1 ∈ I. Let Ih be the ﬁrst
time that an element of B0 is inserted into IM . Then by previous arguments Ih−1 \R∪S1 ∈ I. Since
Ih extends Ih−1 by only one element, by matroid augmentation property Ih \ R ∪ S2 ∈ I for some
S2 ⊆ S1 with |S2 | = |S1 | − 1. We can repeat this argument and since only |Ik ∩ B0 | many times an
element from B0 is added, we will ﬁnally obtain a set Sk with |Sk | = |S1 |−|B0 ∩Ik | ≥ ǫ2 |B0 |−|B0 ∩Ik |
and Ik \ R ∪ Sk ∈ I; thus proving the lemma.


Lemma 29. At all times, IM and IP are disjoint, IM ∈ I, and b · IP ∈ P.
Proof. The only modiﬁcations to IM are IM ← C ∪ IM             ′′ through recursion, where I ′′ is independent
                                                                                            M
in the contracted matroid M/C and greedy additions of elements before terminating. Both of these
operations clearly maintain IM ∈ I.
     For IP , we will argue the stronger statement that at all times b · (IP ∪ AI ) ∈ P, which also
implies that the operation of adding elements from AI to IP will maintain IP ∈ P. The property
that b · (IP ∪ AI ) ∈ P is by deﬁnition of the algorithm maintained when adding elements to AI .
Consider now the operation IP ← (B \ IM        ′′ ) ∪ I ′′ performed by the recursion, where each element
                                                        P
       ′′                         ′′
i ∈ IP satisﬁes f (i | b · (IP ∪ A ∪ B − i)) ≥ b. We assume that before the recursive call we
have b · (IP ∪ AI ) ∈ P and, in particular, b · (B ∪ AI ) ∈ P. Thus, because of the marginal
values of all elements in IP′′ , it follows immediately that b · (AI ∪ B ∪ IP′′ ) ∈ P and, in particular,
                ′′ ) ∪ I ′′ ) ∈ P. Note that (B \ I ′′ ) ∪ I ′′ is equal to I after the recursion. Since these
b · (AI ∪ (B \ IM       P                           M       P                P
are the only places where IP is changed, this completes the proof.
                                 ′ , I ′ , M′ , P ′ created for the recursion is feasible. More concretely,
Lemma 30. The input E ′ , B0′ , IM    P

   1. B0′ , IM
             ′ , I ′ ⊆ E ′ are disjoint,
                  P
       ′ ∈ I ′ , and
   2. IM
   3. b · IP′ ∈ P ′ .
Proof. The only non-obvious statement is b · IP′ ∈ P ′ . Here, notice that f ′ (X) = f (X | b · (A ∪ B))
and for each i ∈ IP′ we have f (i | b · (A ∪ IP − i) ≥ b, since i ∈
                                                                  / B. Starting with X = ∅ and adding
each element of IP′ one at a time, it is easy to see that the marginal values f ′ (i | b · X) are always
least b.

                                                      33
Lemma 31. For all i ∈ A ∪ B \ AI we have f (i | b · (A ∪ B − i)) < b.

Proof. Consider the time B was last updated. By deﬁnition we have f (i | b · (A ∪ IP − i)) < b if and
only if i ∈ B for all i ∈ IP . Further, for every i ∈ A\AI we have f (i | b·(A∪IP −i)) ≤ f (i | b·IP ) < b.
    Let X = {i ∈ A ∪ IP : f (i | b · (A ∪ IP − i) < b}. Then by the previous observations,
A ∪ B \ AI ⊆ X ⊆ A ∪ B. By Lemma 25 it follows that f (i | b · (A ∪ B − i)) ≤ f (i | b · (X − i)) < b
for all i ∈ A ∪ B \ AI .

   We will now prove that a recursion signiﬁcantly decreases the number of blocking elements.

Lemma 32. Let B ′ be the set of blocking elements after a recursion has returned and assume that the
algorithm did not immediately terminate. Denote by B the blocking elements before the recursion.
Then B ′ ⊆ B. Moreover, |B ′ | ≤ (1 − ǫ2 )|B|.

Proof. Let i ∈ IP′ \ B, where again the prime denotes the state after the recursion. Then f (i |
b · (A ∪ IP′ − i)) ≥ b (using the deﬁnition of the submodular function f ′ of the recursion). Therefore,
i∈ / B ′ . Since |IM
                   ′ ∩ B| ≥ ǫ2 |B| and such elements will not appear in I ′ it follows immediately that
                                                                          P
    ′           2
|B | ≤ (1 − ǫ )|B|.

Lemma 33. At all times we have |B| > (1 − 2ǫ)|A|

Proof. Recall that for all i ∈ A ∪ B we have f (i | b · (A ∪ B − i)) < b unless i ∈ AI , see Lemma 31.
Thus, from Lemma 26 it follows that f ((A \ AI ) ∪ B) < b|A ∪ B|. Furthermore, 2b · A ∈ P and
|AI | < ǫ|A|, which implies that f ((A \ AI ) ∪ B) ≥ f (A \ AI ) ≥ 2b|A \ AI | ≥ (2 − 2ǫ)b|A|. Putting
both inequalities together, we get |A ∪ B| > (2 − 2ǫ)|A|, which simpliﬁes to |B| > (1 − 2ǫ)|A|.

F.3    Termination with failure
In the case that our algorithm returns failure, we need to prove that there does not exist a (slightly
stronger) solution. This proof comes in the form of a certiﬁcate that we will deﬁne here.

Definition 34. A certificate of infeasibility consists of two (possibly empty) sets Z2 ⊆ Z1 ⊆ E \ B0
with

   1. r(B0 | Z1 ) < 2ǫ|B0 |,

   2. r(Z1 ) ≤ |Z1 | − (0.5 − 2ǫ)|Z2 | + ǫ|B0 |,

   3. f (i | b · (Z2 − i)) < b for at least a (1 − ǫ) fraction of elements in Z2 ,

   4. f (i | 2b · Z2 ) < 2b for all i ∈ Z1 \ Z2

   The intuition for the certiﬁcate is that the ﬁrst property states that a signiﬁcant amount of Z1
cannot be covered by the polymatroid if we want to cover many elements of B0 . However, the other
properties imply that this is not possible.
                                                                                        ∗ ∪I ∗ ⊇ E \B
Lemma 35. If there exists a certificate of infeasibility then there cannot be two sets IM   P         0
      ∗            ∗                   ∗
with IM ∈ I, αb · IP ∈ P, and |B0 ∩ IM | ≥ 3ǫ|B0 |, where α = 4 + O(ǫ).




                                                     34
Proof. Let IM  ∗ ∪ I ∗ ⊇ E \ B with I ∗ ∈ I, αb · I ∗ ∈ P. Let Z ′ ⊆ Z be the elements with
                      P            0     M            P                2    2
f (i | b · (Z2 − i)) ≥ b. Then by (3) we have |Z2′ | ≤ ǫ · |Z2 | and from Lemma 26 it follows that
f (Z2 \ Z2′ ) ≤ b · |Z2 |. We ﬁrst bound

                  αb|IP∗ ∩ (Z1 \ Z2′ )| ≤ f (IP∗ ∩ (Z1 \ Z2′ ))
                                           ≤ f (Z2 \ Z2′ ) + f (IP∗ ∩ (Z1 \ Z2 ) | Z2 \ Z2′ )
                                           ≤ f (Z2 \ Z2′ ) + f (IP∗ ∩ (Z1 \ Z2 ) | 2b · (Z2 \ Z2′ ))
                                           ≤ f (Z2 \ Z2′ ) + 2b|Z2′ | + f (IP∗ ∩ (Z1 \ Z2 ) | 2b · Z2 )
                                                                              X
                                           ≤ f (Z2 \ Z2′ ) + 2b|Z2′ | +               f (i | 2b · Z2 )
                                                                             ∗ ∩(Z \Z )
                                                                          i∈IP    1  2
                                                                               X
                                           ≤ f (Z2 \ Z2′ ) + 2b|Z2′ | +                     f (i | 2b · Z2 ) .
                                                                             ∗ ∩(Z \Z ′ )
                                                                          i∈IP    1  2


From this it follows that
                                      X
b(α − 2)|(Z1 \ Z2′ ) ∩ IP∗ | ≤                 (αb − f (i | 2b · (Z2 − i))) ≤ 2ǫb|Z2 | + f (Z2 \ Z2′ ) ≤ (1 + 2ǫ)b|Z2 | .
                                    ∗ ∩(Z \Z ′ )
                                 i∈IP    1  2


Consequently, |(Z1 \ Z2′ ) ∩ IP∗ | ≤ (1 + 2ǫ)/(α − 2) · |Z2 |. Thus,

            ∗                                                        1 + 2ǫ + (α − 2)ǫ
     |Z1 ∩ IM | ≥ |Z1 | − |(Z1 \ Z2′ ) ∩ IP∗ | − |Z2′ | ≥ |Z1 | −                      |Z2 | ≥ r(Z1 ) − ǫ|B0 | ,
                                                                           α−2
where the last inequality holds because of Property (2) for α = 4 + O(ǫ) and ǫ suﬃciently small.
We conclude

         ∗             ∗                   ∗              ∗
  |B0 ∩ IM | ≤ r(B0 | IM ∩ Z1 ) = r(B0 ∪ (IM ∩ Z1 )) − r(IM ∩ Z1 )
                                         ≤ r(B0 ∪ Z1 ) − r(Z1 ) + ǫ|B0 | = r(B0 | Z1 ) + ǫ|B0 | < 3ǫ|B0 | .

    Next we will prove that whenever the algorithm returns failure, there exists such a certiﬁcate.

Lemma 36. If |B| < ǫ|B0 | then there exists a certificate that proves infeasibility.

Proof. We set Z2 = A ∪ B and Z1 = C ∪ B. Then by Lemma 27 we have

                                          r(B0 | Z1 ) ≤ r(B0 | C) < 2ǫ|B0 | .

Further,

  r(Z1 ) ≤ r(C) + r(B) = |C| + ǫ|B0 | ≤ |Z1 | + ǫ|B0 | − 0.5|B| − 0.5|B|
                                 ≤ |Z1 | + ǫ|B0 | − 0.5|B| − (0.5 − ǫ)|A| ≤ |C1 | − (0.5 − 2ǫ)|Z2 | + 2ǫ|B0 | .

Here we use that |B| ≥ (1 − 2ǫ)|A|, see Lemma 33. It follows from Lemma 26 and Lemma 24 that
f (i | b · (Z2 − i)) ≤ f (i | b · (A ∪ B − i)) < 2b for each i ∈ C2 \ AI and |AI | ≤ ǫ|A| ≤ ǫ|Z2 | since
otherwise we would have terminated successfully.
     Finally, f (i | 2b · C2 ) ≤ f (i | 2b · A) < 2b for all i ∈ C \ A follows immediately from the deﬁnition
of C.

Lemma 37. When a recursive call returns failure, then there exists a certificate that proves infea-
sibility.

                                                            35
Proof. Assume that a recursive call has failed. Let Z1′ , Z2′ be the certiﬁcate returned by it. We set
Z1 = Z1′ ∪ C ∪ B and Z2 = Z2′ ∪ A ∪ B. Then by Lemma 27,

                                     r(B0 | Z1 ) ≤ r(B0 | C) < 2ǫ|B0 | .

Further,

                    r(Z1 ) = r(Z1′ ∪ C ∪ B)
                           = r(Z1′ | C) + r(C) + r(B | Z1′ ∪ C)
                           ≤ r ′ (Z1′ ) + |C| + r ′ (B | Z1′ )
                           ≤ |Z1′ | − (0.5 − 2ǫ)|Z2′ | + 2ǫ|B| + |C| + ǫ|B0 |
                           = |Z1 | − (0.5 − 2ǫ)|B| − 0.5|B| − (0.5 − 2ǫ)|Z2′ | + ǫ|B0 |
                           ≤ |Z1 | − (0.5 − 2ǫ)|Z2 | + ǫ|B0 | .

Moreover, for all i ∈ C2 \ AI it holds that f (i | b · (Z2 − i)) ≤ f (i | b · (A ∪ B − i)) < 2b
Similarly, for a 1 − ǫ fraction of Z2′ it holds that f (i | b · (Z2 − i)) ≤ f (i | b · (Z2′ − i)) < b. Since
|AI | < ǫ|A| ≤ ǫ|A ∪ B| Property (3) is satisﬁed. Likewise f (i | 2b · Z2 ) ≤ f (i | 2b · Z2′ ) < 2b for
all i ∈ Z1′ \ Z2 and f (i | 2b · Z2 ) ≤ f (i | A) < 2b for all i ∈ C \ Z2 . Thus, also the last property
holds.

F.4    Running time
We are going to bound only the number of nodes in the recursion tree. It is clear that the overhead
of operations outside the recursive call is polynomially bounded. To this end, we focus on the sets
B0 and B. Initially, the set B created in the algorithm will have size at most n. Then with every
recursive call it decreases by a factor of (1 − ǫ2 ), see Lemma 32, but never below ǫ|B0 | (else, the
algorithm terminates immediately).
     For a ﬁxed instance, let T (k) be the maximum number of nodes in the recursion tree of the
algorithm over all inputs B0 , X, Y where |B0 | ≥ 1/(1 − ǫ2 )k . Then T (k) is monotone decreasing,
i.e., T (k′ ) ≤ T (k) for k′ ≥ k, simply because the set over which the maximum is taken is smaller.
Let ℓ = ⌈log1/(1−ǫ2 )k (n)⌉. Then,

                                                 ℓ
                                                 X
                                T (k) ≤ 1 +            T (i) and T (ℓ) = 1 .
                                               i=k+1

Here, the sum starts at k+1, since the smallest size of B0′ of the recursion satisﬁes |B0′ | ≥ (1+ǫ)|B0 | ≥
|B0 |/(1 − ǫ2 ). The numbers T (ℓ), T (ℓ − 1), T (ℓ − 2), . . . , T (1) are similar to the Fibonacci series
(except for the addition of 1 for the current node) and it can easily be shown by induction that
T (k) ≤ 2ℓ−k ≤ 2ℓ ≤ nOǫ (1) for all k.




                                                         36
