                                             Displayed Type Theory and Semi-Simplicial Types
                                                                  Astra Kolomatskaia*                      Michael Shulman†
arXiv:2311.18781v2 [math.CT] 1 Feb 2024




                                                                                           Abstract
                                                     We introduce Displayed Type Theory (dTT), a multi-modal homotopy type theory with
                                                 discrete and simplicial modes. In the intended semantics, the discrete mode is interpreted
                                                 by a model for an arbitrary ∞-topos, while the simplicial mode is interpreted by Reedy
                                                 fibrant augmented semi-simplicial diagrams in that model. This simplicial structure is
                                                 represented inside the theory by a primitive notion of display or dependency, guarded by
                                                 modalities, yielding a partially-internal form of unary parametricity.
                                                     Using the display primitive, we then give a coinductive definition, at the simplicial
                                                 mode, of a type SST of semi-simplicial types. Roughly speaking, a semi-simplicial type
                                                 X consists of a type X0 together with, for each x : X0 , a displayed semi-simplicial type
                                                 over X. This mimics how simplices can be generated geometrically through repeated
                                                 cones, and is made possible by the display primitive at the simplicial mode. The discrete
                                                 part of SST then yields the usual infinite indexed definition of semi-simplicial types, both
                                                 semantically and syntactically. Thus, dTT enables working with semi-simplicial types in
                                                 full semantic generality.


                                                                                             Contents

                                          1 Introduction                                                                                                     2

                                          2 Syntax                                                                                                         12
                                            2.1 The mode theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        12
                                            2.2 The modal type theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        13
                                            2.3 Telescopes and meta-abstractions, I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        16
                                            2.4 Décalage and displayed types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        19
                                            2.5 Telescopes and meta-abstractions, II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                         22
                                            2.6 Displayed telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       24

                                          3 Semi-Simplicial and Displayed Coinductive Types                                                                29
                                            3.1 Semi-simplicial types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      29
                                            3.2 Examples of semi-simplicial types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        32
                                            3.3 Displayed coinductive types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        36
                                            3.4 Examples of displayed coinductive types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                          38
                                             * We acknowledge the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
                                          Cette recherche a été financée par le Conseil de recherches en sciences naturelles et en génie du Canada (CRSNG).
                                          [funding reference number CGSD3-545891-2020]
                                          This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DMS-2204304.
                                             † This material is based upon work supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number

                                          FA9550-21-1-0009.


                                                                                                   1
4 Semantics                                                                                    39
  4.1 The semantics of dependent type theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         40
  4.2 The simplicial model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     51
  4.3 Modalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   63
  4.4 Semantics of dTT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     74
  4.5 Semantics of semi-simplicial types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       80

5 Conclusion and Future Work                                                                   97

A Verifications for the Simplicial Model                                                     103
  A.1 Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
  A.2 Π-types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
  A.3 Universes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
  A.4 ω-limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106


                                     1 Introduction

Semi-simplicial types. Homotopy Type Theory (HoTT) [Uni13] is a perspective on inten-
sional dependent type theory that regards types as homotopical spaces or ∞-groupoids. It
has proven remarkably successful as a synthetic context in which to do homotopy theory
and algebraic topology, and as an internal language for (∞, 1)-toposes [Shu19]. However,
an enduring frustration has been its apparent inability to define general homotopy-coherent
structures. Some infinite structures can be defined in HoTT, such as globular types and
spectra; but others, such as A∞ -spaces or (∞, 1)-categories, have so far resisted all attempts
at definition. We know no convincing explanation for why they should be impossible, but
the fact that all attempts appear to fail in a similar way suggests the operation of an as-yet-
unarticulated principle.
    Specifically, stating an ‘infinite coherence’ property generally seems to require an infinite
structure within which to assemble the coherences, while defining such a structure itself
seems to require infinite coherence, leading to an infinite regress. This is in contrast to the
situation in classical homotopy theory where the infinite structures to describe coherence,
such as operads and simplicial diagrams, can themselves be defined using strict point-set-
level equalities, which are then automatically fully coherent. It is tempting to try to mimic
this in homotopy type theory using definitional equalities in place of point-set ones, but this
is difficult because definitional equality is not reified in the theory and we have limited tools
for forcing it to hold.
    One of the more flexible ways to enforce definitional equalities is to use type depen-
dency, moving from a fibred perspective to an indexed one. In the simplest case, this means
replacing a function p : E → B with a type family E     e : B → Type. This has a corresponding
                               e
projection function π1 : Σ E → B, but we can suppose a point e         e :ΣEe with a definitional
equality π1 e                                  e
              e ≡ b by supposing a point e : E b and letting e  e = (b, e).
    Thus, it is natural to try to define infinitely coherent structures that can be expressed
in a purely indexed way. The example of this sort which has attracted the most attention
is that of semi-simplicial types, because they are well-known within homotopy theory and


                                               2
could be used to encode many, if not all, other infinitely coherent structures. In indexed
style, a semi-simplicial type consists of type families A0 , A1 , A2 , and so on, having types
that start out as follows:

A0 : Type
A1 : (x01 : A0 ) (x10 : A0 ) → Type
A2 : (x001 : A0 ) (x010 : A0 ) (β011 : A1 x001 x010 ) (x100 : A0 ) (β101 : A1 x001 x100 ) (β110 : A1 x010 x100 ) → Type
A3 : (x0001 : A0 ) (x0010 : A0 ) (β0011 : A1 x0001 x0010 ) (x0100 : A0 ) (β0101 : A1 x0001 x0100 ) (β0110 : A1 x0010 x0100 )
     (f0111 : A2 x0001 x0010 β0011 x0100 β0101 β0110 ) (x1000 : A0 ) (β1001 : A1 x0001 x1000 ) (β1010 : A1 x0010 x1000 )
       (f1011 : A2 x0001 x0010 β0011 x1000 β1001 β1010 ) (β1100 : A1 x0100 x1000 ) (f1101 : A2 x0001 x0100 β0101 x1000 β1001 β1100 )
       (f1110 : A2 x0010 x0100 β0110 x1000 β1010 β1100 ) → Type

First, we have a type A0 of points. Second, we have for every two points x01 , x10 : A0 , a type
A1 x01 x10 of lines joining x01 and x10 . Third, for every three points x001 , x010 , x100 : A0 and three
lines β011 : A0 x001 x010 , β101 : A0 x001 x100 , and β110 : A0 x010 x100 , a type A1 x001 x010 β011 x100 β101 β110 of
triangles with the given boundary. The pattern continues with tetrahedra, which we may
also, more technically, call 3-simplices. In general, An describes the type of n-simplices
indexed by their boundaries.
Remark 1.1. The binary subscripts on variables above follow a scheme that we learned from
Tim Campion, although related schemas have been rediscovered many times. The 2n+1 − 1
simplices constituting an n-simplex and its boundary are labeled by the numbers from 1 to
2n+1 − 1 written in binary, where the number of 1s in a binary number corresponds to the
dimension of the simplex, and the binary numbers corresponding to the boundary of some
simplex are obtained by replacing one or more of the 1s in its binary number by 0s. (As we
will see later, the binary number 0 can also be regarded as denoting the unique (−1)-simplex
in the boundary of an n-simplex in an augmented semi-simplicial set.)
     We then list these simplices in the order given by these numbers. This ordering may seem
somewhat curious, compared to the more naı̈ve approach of listing all the 0-simplices, then
all the 1-simplices, and so on; but it does retain the important property that all the simplices
in the boundary of some simplex are listed before it (thus, for instance, it makes the semi-
simplex category into an ‘ordered direct category’; see section 4.5.5). We will see later that
this ordering is what arises most naturally in (co)inductive constructions of semi-simplicial
sets (which was also Campion’s motivation).
     In addition to subscripting simplex variables by binary numbers according to this scheme,
in this paper we will use different base letters to indicate the dimension of each variable.
Thus for instance x001 , x010 , and x100 are all 0-simplices, while β011 , β101 , and β110 are all 1-
simplices, and f111 is a 2-simplex. We will not have much occasion to denote 3-simplices;
for (−1)-simplices we use the Cyrillic letter ӡ (ze). We may also use different letters from
the same alphabets for simplices in different semi-simplicial types, e.g. γ11 : B1 y01 y10 and
δ11 : C1 z01 z10 .                                                                                  ⊳

    One may think of the terms A0 , A1 , A2 , and so on as defining the fields of an infinite
record type. Terms of this infinite record type SST are known as semi-simplicial types. Thus,
the problem is to define a type of semi-simplicial types within homotopy type theory, contin-
uing the above pattern. As a correctness criterion, one would expect that when interpreted
in any (∞, 1)-topos the type SST becomes a classifier of semi-simplicial objects. However,


                                                                   3
even this problem is still unsolved: every attempt to internally encode the combinatorics
that generate the type of An , as a function of n, seems to lead once again to an infinite
regress.
    In light of this situation, an alternative approach is to formulate more expressive type
theories that can solve the problem of infinitely coherent objects. One such proposal is Two-
Level Type Theory (2LTT) [ACKS23], which introduces an ‘outer level’ of ‘exo-types’ that are
not homotopy-invariant. The exo-types admit a strict exo-equality type, essentially reifying
definitional equality, which can then be used analogously to classical point-set equality to
define infinitely coherent structures. And by the results of [Usk23], 2LTT can be interpreted
in any (∞, 1)-topos, so its semantics are not significantly less general than ordinary HoTT,
and the type SST defined in 2LTT does interpret to the correct classifier. However, although
the exo-equality is assumed to satisfy Uniqueness of Identity Proofs, to keep type-checking
decidable it cannot satisfy a reflection rule making exo-equalities into definitional equalities.
Thus, it can be quite cumbersome to work with in practice.
    Another proposal is Simplicial Type Theory (STT) [RS17], which changes perspective to
view individual types as simplicial spaces, with additional primitives for manipulating the
simplicial structure. One can then simply impose conditions on one of these ‘simplicial types’
to make it represent (for instance) an (∞, 1)-category. This suggests a ‘synthetic’ approach
to higher category theory analogous to ordinary HoTT’s synthetic approach to homotopy
theory, which is potentially quite powerful; and the results of [RS17, Wei22] imply that
it can be interpreted in the category of simplicial objects in any (∞, 1)-topos. However,
the strength of the synthetic approach is also its weakness: because simplicial types are
postulated rather than defined, what we can do with them is limited to what is expressed
by the axiomatization.

A coinductive definition of semi-simplicial types. In this paper we propose a third en-
hancement of homotopy type theory, called Displayed Type Theory (dTT), in which it is possi-
ble to define and work with semi-simplicial types (and many other things). This type theory
is inspired by the following idea for a coinductive definition of a type SST of semi-simplicial
types:
Idea 1.2. A semi-simplicial type A consists of

   • a type Z A, and
   • for each x : Z A, a semi-simplicial type S A x over A.

It may not be at all obvious why this should be a definition of semi-simplicial types, so let
us unravel it a few steps:

  0. Every semi-simplicial type A has a type Z A, whose points we call 0-simplices of A.
     Thus we may also write A0 = Z A.
  1. Every 0-simplex x : A0 gives rise to a semi-simplicial type S A x over A, called the slice
     of A over x. Of course, if we don’t know what a semi-simplicial type is, we can’t be
     expected to know what one semi-simplicial type over another one is — at least, not
     completely. But we do know that every semi-simplicial type A has an underlying type
     Z A, so it stands to reason that a semi-simplicial type B over A should in particular
     have an underlying type Zd B over Z A, i.e. a type family Zd B : Z A → Type. Thus, in

                                               4
   particular for every x : A0 we have Zd (S A x) : A0 → Type, hence for every additional
   y : A0 we have a type Zd (S A x) y. We call this the type A1 x y of 1-simplices from x
   to y.
2. Now we know that every semi-simplicial type A has not only an underlying type of
   0-simplices A0 , but for every x01 , x10 : A0 a type A1 x01 x10 of 1-simplices. Therefore, it
   stands to reason that any semi-simplicial type B over A should also have, not only a
   type family B0 over A0 , but a type
                                     R family B1 over A1 . Thinking of A1 as an indexed
   representation of a span A0 ← A1 → A0 , we deduce that B1 should be an indexed
   representation of a span morphism
                                        R                RR                  R
                                            B0                B1                 B0

                                                         R
                                         A0                  A1              A0

   and therefore we should have

             B1 : (y01 : A0 ) (z01 : B0 y01 ) (y10 : A0 ) (z10 : B0 y10 ) (γ11 : A1 y01 y10 ) → Type.

   More precisely, since every 0-simplex y01 of A gives rise to a semi-simplicial type
   S A y01 over A, any 0-simplex z01 of B over y01 should give rise to a semi-simplicial
   type Sd B y01 z01 over both B and S A y01 . But the common dependence on A should be
   shared, so Sd B y01 z01 should live over the cospan B → A ← S A y01 :

                                                 B            Sd B y01 z01


                                                 A              S A y01
                                                                 
   Passing to 0-simplices, this means that Zdd Sd B y01 z01 should be a type dependent
   on y10 : A0 , z10 : B0 y10 , and y11 : (S A y01 )0 y10 ≡ A1 y01 y10 . Thus we can define the
   1-simplices of B as B1 y01 z01 y10 z10 γ11 ≡ Zdd Sd B y01 z01 y10 z10 γ11 .
   In particular, therefore, since for any x : A0 we have a semi-simplicial type S A x over
   A, we have

   (S A x)1 : (y01 : A0 ) (z01 : (S A x)0 y01 ) (y10 : A0 ) (z10 : (S A x)0 y10 ) (γ11 : A1 y01 y10 ) → Type.

   Since (S A x)0 y01 ≡ A1 x y01 by definition, this is equivalently

      (S A x)1 : (y01 : A0 ) (z01 : A1 x y01 ) (y10 : A0 ) (z10 : A1 x y10 ) (γ11 : A1 y01 y10 ) → Type.

   Renaming the variables as yab ≡ xab0 , γab ≡ βab0 , and zab ≡ βab1 , and writing x ≡ x001 , this
   becomes

   (S A x001 )1 : (x010 : A0 ) (β011 : A1 x001 x010 ) (x100 : A0 ) (β101 : A1 x001 x100 ) (β110 : A1 x010 x100 ) → Type.

   Thus, this is precisely correct to be a type of 2-simplices:

                        A2 x001 x010 β011 x100 β101 β110 ≡ (S A x001 )1 x010 β011 x100 β101 β110 .

                                                        5
This pattern may be visualised as follows:
                                                                              
          ZA           Zd (S A x01 ) x10          Zdd Sd (S A x001 ) x010 β011 x100 β101 β110

           x1                 x01                         x001
                                                                        β101
                            x11                        β011      f111          x100
                                                                        β110
                              x10                         x010

    An alternative, and more geometrical, viewpoint, is that the n-simplex is the cone of
the (n − 1)-simplex. Thus, if we already know that every semi-simplicial type has a suitably
indexed type of (n−1)-simplices, we can conclude the same about the n-simplices as follows.
For every 0-simplex x, the dependent semi-simplicial type S A x has a type of ‘dependent
(n − 1)-simplices’ indexed by the type of (n − 1)-simplices of A. Thus, an element of this type
depends on x (the cone vertex) as well as an (n−1)-simplex of A (the base face, opposite the
cone vertex), and its boundary consisting of dependent k-simplices for k < n − 1 that form
cones over all the faces of the base (n − 1)-simplex sharing the same vertex x. Together,
these form the boundary of an n-simplex. (In the ordering of variables induced by the
above presentation, the simplices in the base face are interspersed with their dependent
versions: thus in the case n ≡ 2 the faces x010 , x100 , β110 form the base 1-simplex with β011 , β101
the dependent 0-simplices (i.e. 1-simplices) forming a cone over the boundary x010 , x100 .)
Hopefully this is sufficiently convincing for now; later we will give a precise justification.
    As simple and appealing as this ‘definition’ is, it is not meaningful in ordinary dependent
type theory. The intuitive claim is that it defines a type SST by coinduction, with Z and S
as destructors. For Z this is unproblematic (it is not even corecursive). However, the output
of S is not an element of the type SST being defined, as would be usual for a corecursive
destructor of a coinductive type, but a ‘dependent element’, or ‘displayed element’, of SST over
the input of S. If we write SSTd for this putative family of ‘displayed elements’, the types of
Z and S are
                                 Z : SST → Type
                                                                                             (1.3)
                                 S : (X : SST) → Z X → SSTd X.
We would like to regard this as a sort of ‘higher coinductive type’. Just as a higher inductive
type can have constructors involving not just elements of the type being defined but also
paths therein, here we have a putative coinductive type whose destructors involve not just
elements of the type being defined but also ‘displayed elements’ thereof. Thus, to make sense
of this we need a type theory with a primitive operation (– )d associating to a type its family
of ‘displayed elements’. As it turns out, the precise notion of (– )d that we require is a variant
of unary internal parametricity.


External and internal parametricity. In general, by ‘parametricity’ we mean a statement
that every type (perhaps subject to contextual restrictions; see below) is equipped with
a relation (of some arity), and every function (subject to the same restrictions) preserves
those relations. The original form of parametricity, such as in [Wad89], is a meta-theoretic


                                                  6
statement about type theory, in which the relations are meta-theoretic, and the contextual
restriction is that it applies only to closed types and terms (those defined in the empty
context). That is, in this ‘external’ parametricity, every closed type is given a relation on its
closed terms, which is preserved by every closed function. For instance, in the unary case,
given a closed function () ⊢ f : A → B, if the A-relation holds of a closed term () ⊢ a : A,
then the B-relation holds of the closed term () ⊢ f a : B. Indeed, the fact that f satisfies
this condition is exactly the statement that the (A → B)-relation holds of it, and is thus a
special case of the ‘fundamental theorem of logical relations’ that every closed term satisfies
the relation on its type. Semantically, external parametricity is obtained by interpreting type
theory in a ‘gluing’ or ‘relational’ model.
    By contrast, in type theories with fully internal parametricity such as [BM12, BCM15,
Mou16], there is no contextual restriction, and the relations are internal (i.e. type families).
In the unary case, this means for any type in any context, say Γ ⊢ A type, there is a type
family that we will denote Γ , x : A ⊢ Ad x type, and every function Γ ⊢ f : A → B in any
context lifts to a function Γ ⊢ fd : (x : A)(x ′ : Ad x) → Bd (f x) between these type families.
As in the external case, there is a formula for the relation of a function-type:
                                                            
                ((a : A) → B [ a ]) d f ≡ (a : A) a ′ : Ad a → Bd [ a , a ′ ] (f a)        (1.4)

which says that so-called ‘computability witnesses’ for f take computability witnesses of a to
computability witnesses of f a. Thus the statement that f preserves computability witnesses
is equivalent to saying it lifts to an element fd of this type, and is a special case of a general
rule that every term Γ ⊢ a : A lifts to a computability witness Γ ⊢ ad : Ad a.1
    Such an internalization of parametricity introduces the new possibility of iterating it,
leading to Add , Addd , and so on. Semantically, this means that each type must be inter-
preted by a cubical type (or set), where the arity of the relations determines the number
of ‘boundary points’ on each side of the cubes, and the dependencies of each iterated re-
lation on the previous ones supplies the faces of a cube. Our primary interest is in unary
parametricity, where Ad depends only on one copy of A; in this case the semantics involves
‘unary cubes’ where each edge has only one vertex.2
    The rule lifting any a to ad then implies that these cubical types must have degeneracies,
taking any cube to a higher-dimensional one with some boundaries trivial. More surpris-
ingly, it seems that to have good computational behavior and semantic models, the cubical
types must also include symmetries (transpositions): from d ≡ λ x. xd : (x : X) → Xd x, we
can either directly obtain the type of dd as (x : X) x ′ : Xd x → Xdd x x′ xd or first perform
the computation dd ≡ λ x x ′ . x ′d and obtain its type as (x : X) x ′ : Xd x → Xdd x xd x ′ , and
it these must be related by a symmetry operation.
    The general advantages of internal parametricity over external are clear: we can reason
about computability witnesses while staying within a single type theory, using a single proof
assistant. Moreover, internal parametricity allows us to at least try to make sense of a type
SST with the destructors (1.3). However, fully internal parametricity is not conservative
over ordinary type theory: it is highly nonclassical, incompatible with axioms such as the
law of excluded middle; and its semantics is not as general as we would like. We would
like our type theory to be interpretable in any (∞, 1)-topos (generalizing [Shu19]), in such
   1 The punning of notation is intentional, and indeed consistent, as we will see: the type ( – )d coincides with the

term ( – )d applied to elements of the universe.
   2 Geometrically, these can be thought of as powers of a half-open interval [0, 1)n , or closed octants [0, ∞)n in

n-dimensional Euclidean space.


                                                          7
a way that our type SST is interpreted by a category-theoretic ‘classifier’ of semi-simplicial
objects; but as we have just observed, the semantics of internal parametricity seems to live
only in a category of cubical objects. Now the category of cubical objects in an (∞, 1)-
topos is again an (∞, 1)-topos, so (using [Shu19]) we can expect to interpret an internally
parametric type theory in the latter; but the connection of this interpretation to the original
(∞, 1)-topos is not clear.


Displayed Type Theory. Our solution is to use a less internally parametric type theory. We
can think of internal parametricity as arising in three stages. The first stage is an external
parametricity model, where types are interpreted by pairs (A0 : Type, A1 : A0 → Type). In
this case (– )d maps one model to a different model, interpreting an ordinary type by a pair
of types; this yields parametricity results as metatheorems. In the second stage, to make Ad
live in the same model as A, we iterate this construction infinitely many times; now types
are interpreted by semi-cubical types, with faces but not degeneracies. Finally, in the third
stage we add a ‘degeneracy’ operation (x : A) → Ad x making every term parametric. This
allows proving parametricity theorems inside the type theory, and semantically moves us
from semi-cubical types to cubical ones.
    The solution to our problem is to stop after the second stage. This is advantageous
semantically because semi-cubical sets are presheaves on a direct category (i.e. covariant
diagrams on an inverse category), and in this case the model construction is much more
concrete. Specifically, in [Shu15] it was shown that from any model of univalent dependent
type theory inside of a type theoretic fibration category, one may form a derived model of
Reedy fibrant presheaves on any direct category, with the type formers in the presheaf model
constructed inductively in terms of those in the original model. In particular, in degree 0
all the type-formers act exactly as they do in the original model. Thus, semantically we can
be sure that all our constructions, including SST, specialise to something meaningful in an
arbitrary (∞, 1)-topos.
    dTT is a syntax corresponding to this model, which is likewise intermediate between
external parametricity and fully internal parametricity: its parametricity primitive (– )d has
a contextual restriction that is weaker than the ‘only closed terms’ requirement of external
parametricity, but stronger than the ‘any context goes’ laxity of internal parametricity. We
start by observing that in either cubical or semi-cubical sets, the semantically fundamental
parametricity operation actually changes the context: given Γ ⊢ t : A, one has Γ D ⊢ td :
Ad t, where Γ D augments Γ by computability witnesses of all its variables. For cubical sets
with degeneracies, we can deduce a version of (– )d that doesn’t change the context by
substituting along a degeneracy map Γ → Γ D (e.g. this is the isomorphism between the
‘global’ and ‘local’ models of [ACKS24]). But for semi-cubical sets this is impossible, so we
have to bite the bullet and deal with context-modifying operations.
    The notion of a non-binding operation that changes contexts is familiar from the realm
of modal logic, where, to first approximation, a proof of necessity of some proposition,
i.e. of  A, may only use necessary assumptions. Modalities in dependent type theory
have previously been used to internalise meta-theoretic operations that don’t make sense
in arbitrary contexts, such as the right adjoint to a Π-type in [LOPS18], and we use them
similarly here. Specifically, in dTT we have a modality △ that partially internalises the
notion of ‘closed term’ appearing in external parametricity, and which restricts the domain
of (– )d . Thus the only analogue of the above d ≡ λ x. xd : (x : X) → Xd x in dTT is
                       
e ≡ λ x. xd : x :△ X → Xd x. In particular, modal variables are protected from alteration
d


                                              8
                                                    
                           e d ≡ λ x. xdd : x :△ X → Xdd x xd xd , thereby avoiding the need
by (– )d , so that we have d
for symmetry.
    In fact, to emphasise further that dTT retains general semantics over an arbitrary (∞, 1)-
topos, we will use a multimodal type theory [GKNB21, GCK+ 22] with two modes, one for
the original topos and the other for the topos of semi-cubical sets. These modes are related
by modalities △ (the constant semi-cubical type), ♦ (the 0-cubes of a cubical type), and 
(the limit of a cubical type), and △ = △ ◦  is a composite endo-modality. Only △ is
necessary to formulate display, but the other modalities are also useful to have around: in
particular, ♦ internalises the process of passing from the model in semi-cubical types to the
original model in C. For instance, ♦ SST is what corresponds semantically to the classifier
of semi-simplicial objects in C.
    Furthermore, display itself may be thought of as a modality, albeit one that is indexed
over the original type. Display falls into into the new and yet underdeveloped frame-
work of indexed modalities, such as the path types of cubical type theory (treated modally
in [GCK+ 22]) and the identity types of the forthcoming Higher Observational Type Theory
(HOTT) [AKS22, ACKS24]. Moreover, analogously to those cases, we could formulate dis-
play either as an inert type-former defined by abstraction over an ‘interval’ (like path types
in cubical type theory), or as an operation that computes on most other canonical type-
formers (like identity types in HOTT). In this paper we make the latter choice, so that rules
like eq. (1.4) are actually definitional equalities. Formulating such rules computationally is
actually easier for dTT than for HOTT, due mainly to the lack of symmetry (although there
is a tradeoff, since the presence of modalities is an extra complicating factor).
    Until now we have been talking about semi-cubical types to make the connection with
parametricity clear, but in the unary case there is an intriging coincidence: the unary semi-
cube category is isomorphic to the augmented semi-simplex category,3 with a dimension shift:
the n-cube corresponds to the (n − 1)-simplex. For this reason we refer to the two modes
in our theory as the discrete mode dm and the simplicial mode sm. Thus, dTT can actually
internalise semi-simplicial types in two ways: as the coinductive type SST mentioned above,
and as the universe of types at the simplicial mode. The latter suggests that dTT could
also be used similarly to simplicial type theory, with types at the simplicial mode treated as
synthetic (augmented semi-) simplicial types.
    (Note that an augmented semi-simplicial type can be viewed as a family of ordinary
semi-simplicial sets indexed by the type of (−1)-simplices. Thus, our observation that aug-
mented semi-simplicial types support a better internal language than ordinary ones is anal-
ogous to the observation of [RFL21] that parametrised spectra are likewise preferable to
unparametrised ones.)


Displayed structures. Our terminology display for the operation d is inspired by the fact
that when applied to record types whose elements are algebraic structures, it produces
displayed structures of the corresponding sort. Here a ‘displayed structure’ over a structure B
is a structure A of the same kind with a structure map A → B, but reformulated in terms of
the corresponding family of fibres B → Type. Working with displayed structures rather than
morphisms is a technique for enforcing definitional equalities on images in B.
   3 To see this geometrically, note that the (n + 1)-dimensional octant [0, ∞)n+1 contains a standard face-

preserving embedding of the n-simplex, ∆n = {(x0 , . . . , xn ) ∈ [0, ∞)n+1 | x0 + · · · + xn = 1}, including
the augmentation case ∆−1 = ∅.




                                                     9
    The most common displayed structure is a displayed category; here the terminology was
introduced by [AL19]. This arises from the record type of categories, defined in the usual
dependently typed way (where we omit the axioms for concision):
record Cat : Type where
   ob : Type
   hom : ob → ob → Type
   id : (x : ob) → hom x x
   comp : {x y z : ob} → hom y z → hom x y → hom x z
   ...

We do not discuss record types (including Σ-types) in this paper, but the extension of d to
them produces another record type whose fields have d applied to them. For instance, from
a Σ-type:
record Σ (A : Type) (B : A → Type) : Type where
   fst : A
   snd : B fst

We obtain:
record Σd (A : Type) (A ′ : Typed A) (B : A → Type)
            (B ′ : (A → Type) d B) : Typed (Σ A B) where
   fstd : Ad fst
   sndd : (B fst ) d snd

Applying (1.4) and the similar rule Typed A ≡ A → Type, this becomes:
record Σd (A : Type) (A ′ : A → Type) (B : A → Type)
            (B ′ : (x : A) → A ′ x → B x → Type) (s : Σ A B) : Type where
      d    ′
   fst : A (fst s)
   sndd : B ′ (fst s) fstd (snd s)

In a similar way, the above definition of the record type of categories yields:
record Catd (C : Cat) : Type where
   obd : ob C → Type
   homd : (x : ob C) (x ′ : obd x) (y : ob C) (y ′ : obd y ) → hom C x y → Type
   idd : (x : ob C) (x ′ : obd x) → homd x x ′ x x ′ (id C x)
   compd : {x : ob C} {x ′ : obd x} {y : ob C} {y ′ : obd y} {z : ob C}
       {z ′ : obd z} (α : hom C y z) (α ′ : homd y y ′ z z ′ α) (β : hom C x y)
       (β ′ : homd x x ′ y y ′ β) → homd x x ′ z z ′ (comp C α β)
   ...

Thus a displayed category over C has a type of objects indexed by those of C, types of
morphisms indexed by pairs of objects-over-objects and by a morphism of C, identity and
composition operations on displayed objects and morphisms that lie strictly over those in C,
and similarly for the axioms.
   As observed in [AL19], one use of displayed categories is to state definitions such as
Grothendieck fibrations in terms of the existence of cartesian liftings strictly over any mor-
phism in C, without internalizing definitional equality. Another is to construct categories
and prove their properties in a modular way out of dependent pieces, just as we do for
types using Σ-types and more general records. It is ‘well-known’ by now that any sort of

                                              10
algebro-categorical structure has a ‘displayed version’ — for instance, displayed bicategories
were used in [AFM+ 21] to prove univalence modularly — but to our knowledge this has
not previously been formalised. Our Displayed Type Theory (dTT) automatically generates
the displayed version of any notion definable in type theory; hence the name.


Outline of the paper. The rest of this paper has three parts. In section 2 we describe
the general syntax of dTT, including the modalities, the operation of display (in various
different forms), and how they compute. We do not prove any canonicity or normalization
results, but we conjecture that they hold.
    In section 3 we extend the syntax of dTT to define a type SST of semi-simplicial types.
In fact, we obtain this as a special case of a general notion of ‘displayed coinductive type’,
which is easier to work with abstractly, and also includes other important examples such as
the type of semi-simplicial morphisms between two semi-simplicial types.4 Then we explore
a few applications, to make the point that this coinductive notion of semi-simplicial type is
useful and practical.
    Finally, in section 4 we consider the semantics of dTT. In particular, we will show that
from any model C of ordinary dependent type theory with countable inverse limits (roughly
as considered in [Kra15]), we can construct a model of dTT whose discrete mode is C and
whose simplicial mode is the category of Reedy fibrant augmented semi-simplicial diagrams
in C, and that this model supports displayed coinductive types including a type SST of semi-
simplicial types. The underlying ordinary type theory of this model at the simplicial mode
is an instance of the inverse diagram models of [Shu15, KL21], but we construct it more
explicitly by hand so as to be able to verify the needed formulas for the additional operations
of dTT.
    Thus, although dTT is (apparently) not conservative over ordinary dependent type the-
ory, we can isolate exactly a kind of extra infinitary structure that yields a well-behaved
theory for working with semi-simplicial types, which precisely includes the original model
at one mode. In particular, by [Shu19] any (∞, 1)-topos can be presented by a type-theoretic
model topos, which is a model of type theory with countable inverse limits, and thus also
yields a model of dTT. However, an object with the internal universal property of SST ex-
pressable in dTT has the potential to exist even in models that lack such infinitary limits,
which may have implications for a notion of elementary (∞, 1)-topos.


Acknowledgements. Both authors would like to thank Tim Campion for bringing the bi-
nary ordering to their attention, via a talk given by Emily Riehl on her joint work with Tim.
Astra would also like to thank Emily for for many discussions in the course of weekly advis-
ing meetings. Further, Astra is grateful to Steve Awodey for hosting her during the months
of March and April 2023 at Carnegie Mellon University, and Emily for hosting her during
the Fall 2023 semester at Johns Hopkins Univeristy. Many of the initial ideas regarding the
semantics of dTT were developed during the CMU visit, and our construction of the simpli-
cial model was worked out during the JHU visit. Mike is grateful to Thorsten Altenkirch and
Ambrus Kaposi for many useful conversations while developing Higher Observational Type
Theory that have also informed this work.


  4 One might hope that it would also include the displayed versions SSTd , SSTdd , etc., but this does not seem to

be the case unless we add symmetry to our theory.


                                                       11
                                                  2 Syntax

As suggested in the introduction, dTT is based on a modal type theory roughly in the style
of [GKNB21, GCK+ 22], with two modes, one for discrete types and one for (augmented
semi-)simplicial types. It then adds a notion of ‘display’ at the simplicial mode that partially
internalises unary parametricity.
    In addition, the general form of display, which is needed to state the computation rules
for simple display, incorporates dependence on an arbitrary telescope (i.e. context exten-
sion). Thus, we also have to include a calculus of telescopes in the theory.5 The fully
general calculus of telescopes and display involves a lot of operations, but in syntax and in
most models they are all definable from a smaller number of primitives.
    This section is organised as follows. In section 2.1 we define the mode theory, which is a
2-category describing the structure of the modal operators. Then in section 2.2 we give the
rules for the underlying modal type theory, with modalities but not display.
    In section 2.3 we introduce the most basic notions of the telescope calculus: telescopes,
partial substitutions (elements of telescopes), and types and terms dependent on a specified
telescope (which we call ‘meta-abstractions’). These basic notions suffice to give the rules
for display, defined mutually with a similar but non-indexed operation on telescopes that
we call décalage, in section 2.4.
    The remaining two sections introduce further operations that are all essentially ‘defin-
able’ in terms of the previous ones. This is not strictly true at the level of algebraic syntax,
where telescopes are just an additional sort of a generalised algebraic theory. But in a
model where telescopes are defined to be finite lists of types — which is an option in any
model, both the free syntactic model and in semantic models arising from categories — the
laws satisfied by these operations characterise them uniquely. Specifically, in section 2.5
we introduce meta-abstracted telescopes, telescope concatenation, and Π-telescopes, and
then in section 2.6 we introduce display for telescopes, and décalage for dependent tele-
scopes. These operations will be used in section 3 to formulate displayed coinductive types,
including the type of semi-simplicial types.


                                       2.1      T HE MODE THEORY
We begin with a modal type theory based on the following 2-category M:

    • there are two modes (objects), dm for discrete and sm for simplicial
    • there are five nonidentity morphisms, forming hom-posets:

                         M(dm, dm) = {1dm }                M(dm, sm) = {△}
                         M(sm, dm) = { ⩽ ♦}               M(sm, sm) = {△ ⩽ 1sm ⩽ △♦}
   5 It would probably be possible to collapse this to dependence on a single type, using Σ-types instead of telescope

extension, as in [ACKS24], but this would be unaesthetic and less practical for implementation.




                                                         12
   • composition is defined by the following tables (plus identity laws)

                                            ρ
                            ν◦ρ △          △♦    △
                                                                         ρ
                              ♦ 1dm         ♦    
                                                               ν◦ρ     ♦   
                               1dm         ♦    
                        ν                                  ν    △     △♦ △
                             △♦  △         △♦    △
                            △   △         △♦    △

Intuitively, △ takes a discrete type and forms the constant (augmented semi-)simplicial
type, while ♦ takes the (−1)-simplices of an (augmented semi-)simplicial type and  takes
the limit of an (augmented semi-)simplicial diagram.
   One verifies that the following adjunctions hold in M:

                    ♦⊣△⊣                       △♦ ⊣ △               1p ⊣ 1p

Thus every morphism in M, except for ♦ and △♦, has a right adjoint. We refer to the
morphisms ♦ and △♦ as hazardous, and the others safe.                             ⊳


                            2.2    T HE MODAL TYPE THEORY
The basic syntactic structure of dTT follows MTT [GKNB21]. Following Coquand, we
parametrize the type judgment by a universe level; we assume these form a linear hierarchy
generated by lzero and lsuc, with a join operation ⊔, giving the judgement ℓ level. Each
mode has its contexts, substitutions, types, and terms, so we have the following judgements
where p denotes an arbitrary mode (dm or sm).

           Γ ctxp           Γ ⊢p A type ℓ             Γ ⊢p t : A          θ : Γ ⇒p Θ

Formally speaking, the inference rules we will give below for these judgments should be
interpreted as defining a Generalised Algebraic Theory with these four generating sorts.
Later, we will also introduce some additional sorts.


2.2.1   Contexts

Contexts are built up from the empty contexts by extending with modally annotated vari-
ables and applying locks associated to modalities:

   p mode           µ:p→q         Γ ctxq          µ:p→q         Γ ctxq     Γ , µµ ⊢p A type ℓ
                                                                       µ
   ()p ctxp           (Γ , µµ ) ctxp                           (Γ , x : A) ctxq

We additionally enforce the functoriality of locking, and the fact that some locks preserve
empty contexts.
        
 Γ , µ1p ≡ Γ       (Γ , µµ , µν ) ≡ (Γ , µµ◦ν )   (()dm , µ ) ≡ ()sm    (()sm , µ△ ) ≡ ()dm

               equality follows from the other three, since (()sm , µ△ ) = (()dm , µ , µ△ ) =
In fact, the last
 ()dm , µ◦△ = (()dm , µ1dm ) = ()dm . Note that µ♦ does not preserve empty contexts.


                                                 13
    These equalities mean that contexts no longer have a unique presentation using the
above rules. However, there are ways to select a canonical presentation for any context. One
is to interpret the above equalities as directed rewrites and work with context presentations
that are normal for this rewriting system; thus there are no identity locks, no repeated locks,
and µ and µ△ never occur immediately after an empty context. Another way is to require
that exactly one lock appears in between any two variables.
    Semantically, each lock is left adjoint to its corresponding modality. Thus, µ is se-
mantically the same as △, while µ△ is semantically the same as ♦. The other lock, µ♦ ,
is not reified internally by a modality: intuitively, it takes a discrete type and makes it an
(augmented semi-)simplicial type that is empty at all dimensions n > −1.
    In particular, µ and µ△ have the further left adjoints µ△ and µ♦ , respectively, so that
we will be able to represent their modalities  and △ in Fitch-style as in [GCK+ 22, Shu23].
    As far as µ♦ goes, we can say that it is fully faithful and hence an equivalence onto its
image, which consists of the simplicial types that are empty in dimensions n > −1. Moreover,
since the initial object is strict, this subcategory is a sieve: if we have a morphism Γ → ∆ and
∆ lies in this subcategory, then so does Γ . Therefore, while µ♦ is not a right adjoint, it is a
parametric right adjoint, so we can still use the method of of [GCK+ 22] for ♦.
    However, rather than postulating an uninterpreted parametric left adjoint of µ♦ as
in [GCK+ 22], we can use our knowledge about how this left adjoint is defined semanti-
cally to give more specific rules. Specifically, we can identify its domain as the subcategory
of contexts in the essential image of µ♦ , and on that subcategory the left adjoint actually
coincides with µ△ . To represent this semantically, we say that an sm-context is flat if, intu-
itively, it contains a µ♦ which is not to the left of any µ△ . Formally, flatness is a predicate
on contexts (an additional sort of the GAT) characterised by the following rules:

           Γ ctxdm             Γ ctxsm     Γ flat     µ : p → sm            Γ , µµ ⊢p A type ℓ
        (Γ , µ♦ ) flat                              (Γ , x :µ A) flat

Semantically, we think of these as the sm-contexts that are empty above dimension n > −1,
on which the parametric left adjoint of µ♦ will act as µ△ . (In our actual model we will do
something more clever to avoid assuming the existence of strict initial objects.)         ⊳


2.2.2   Substitutions

The judgment θ : Γ ⇒p Θ says that θ is a substitution from context Γ to context Θ at mode
p. It is generated by the following generating rules, which are the same as those given for
MTT in [GKNB21]

       Γ ctxp                 Γ ctxp           µ:p→q             Γ ctxq           Γ , µµ ⊢p A type ℓ
                                                             x:µ A            µ
    1Γ : Γ ⇒p Γ          [ ]p : Γ ⇒p ()p                 ↑           : (Γ , x : A) ⇒q Γ

        θ : Γ ⇒p Θ       ν : Θ ⇒p Υ            θ : Γ ⇒q Θ         Γ , µµ ⊢p t : A [ θ, µµ ]
               ν ◦ θ : Γ ⇒p Υ                         [ θ, t ] : Γ ⇒q (Θ, x :µ A)

                       θ : Γ ⇒q Θ                                        µ⩽ν
                                                          µ⩽ν
           [ θ, µµ ] : (Γ , µµ ) ⇒p (Θ, µµ )            ¤            : (Γ , µν ) ⇒p (Γ , µµ )


                                               14
                                   △♦⩾1sm
With the the exceptional rule ¤             , which represents the fact that semantically µ△♦ acts
as the identity on flat contexts:

                                                Γ flat
                                      △♦⩾1sm
                                    ¤          : Γ ⇒sm (Γ , µ△♦ )

In practice, it is useful to iterate the weakening rule and combine it with the lock and key
rules to obtain the following rule:

                                  θ : Γ ⇒q Θ           µ ⩽ locks(Υ)
                                  [ θ, ↑Υ
                                        µ ] : (Γ , Υ) ⇒p (Θ, µµ )

In fact, we will generally use named variables and leave weakening implicit.                    ⊳


2.2.3   Types

These are defined by several classes of type formers, including, at the most basic level:
Π-types (parametrised by a modality, as in MTT), universes (at each mode), and modal
operators.

                         Γ , µµ ⊢p A type ℓ1    Γ , x :µ A ⊢q B type ℓ2
                                 Γ ⊢q (x :µ A) → B type ℓ1 ⊔ ℓ2

                          ℓ level                                  ℓ level
                   Γ ⊢dm Disc ℓ type lsuc ℓ                 Γ ⊢sm Type ℓ type lsuc ℓ

         Γ , µ ⊢sm A type ℓ            Γ , µ△ ⊢dm A type ℓ              Γ , µ♦ ⊢sm A type ℓ
          Γ ⊢dm  A type ℓ                Γ ⊢sm △ A type ℓ                Γ ⊢dm ♦ A type ℓ

We don’t bother with primitive modal operators △♦ or △, since they can be obtained up to
isomorphism by composing the others.
   We will work with Tarski style universes, and thus require a decoding operation:

                        Γ ⊢dm A : Disc ℓ                     Γ ⊢sm A : Type ℓ
                       Γ ⊢dm El A type ℓ                     Γ ⊢sm El A type ℓ

Finally, we also have types that arise from substitution:

                                  θ : Γ ⇒p Θ      Θ ⊢p A type ℓ
                                        Γ ⊢p A [ θ ] type ℓ

As usual, substitution will be ‘eliminable’ in that A [ θ ] is always equal to something not
involving [ θ ], but in the GAT presentation it is one of the generating rules like the others. ⊳


2.2.4   Terms

Terms are defined for each class of type former through introduction and elimination rules.
But first, we have variables. There are two rules for variables: the ordinary one from MTT,

                                                  15
                                                                       △♦⩾1sm
and an ‘exceptional’ one arising, like the exceptional key ¤                    , from the fact that µ△♦
acts as the identity on flat contexts.
                                                µ ⩽ locks(Θ)
                                                                   µ
                               Γ , x : A, Θ ⊢q x : A [ 1Γ , ↑x:
                                       µ
                                                             µ
                                                                A, Θ
                                                                     ]

                                       Γ flat       locks(Θ) = 1sm
                                                             △♦           △♦⩾1sm
                        Γ , x :△♦ A, Θ ⊢sm x : A [ 1Γ , ↑x:
                                                         △♦
                                                            A, Θ
                                                                 ][¤                  ]
For Π-types, we have (as in MTT):
            Γ , x :µ A ⊢ q t : B                    Γ ⊢q f : (x :µ A) → B       Γ , µµ ⊢p a : A
        Γ ⊢q λ x. t : (x :µ A) → B                              Γ ⊢q f a : B [ a/x ]
For universes, we have a coding function:
                         Γ ⊢dm A type ℓ                           Γ ⊢sm A type ℓ
                      Γ ⊢dm Code A : Disc ℓ                    Γ ⊢sm Code A : Type ℓ
For the modal operators, we have an introduction rule and negative ‘Fitch-style’ elimination
rules. Following [GCK+ 22], we formulate these using parametric adjoints in the mode
theory. As noted in section 2.1, the safe modalities have actual left adjoints, so their rules
simplify as in [Shu23]. And for µ♦ , we have observed that its parametric left adjoint is
defined on the flat contexts, and on those it coincides with µ△ .

            Γ , µ ⊢sm t : A                Γ , µ△ ⊢dm t : A               Γ , µ♦ ⊢sm t : A
            Γ ⊢dm  t :  A                 Γ ⊢sm △ t : △ A                Γ ⊢dm ♦ t : ♦ A

        Γ , µ△ ⊢dm t :  A                 Γ , µ♦ ⊢sm t : △ A          Γ flat      Γ , µ△ ⊢dm t : ♦ A
                                                                                              △♦⩾1sm
           A
   Γ ⊢sm  t : A [ ¤
                          △⩽1sm
                                   ]        Γ ⊢dm NA t : A                        A
                                                                        Γ ⊢sm  t : A [ ¤              ]
Finally, we have terms that arise from substitution:
                                       θ : Γ ⇒p Θ        Θ ⊢p t : A
                                                                                                           ⊳
                                           Γ ⊢p t [ θ ] : A [ θ ]


                      2.3    T ELESCOPES AND META - ABSTRACTIONS , I
2.3.1   Telescopes

Telescopes are suffixes of contexts, with the restriction that they may not contain locks. The
judgement Γ ⊢p Θ tel ℓ denotes that Θ is a telescope in context Γ of ‘level ℓ’, where the latter
means that ℓ is greater than or equal to the level of the types occurring in Θ. We allow
it to be strictly greater, and in particular allow an empty telescope to exist at all universe
levels, for a reason to be explained in section 2.6.3. Formally, telescopes are an additional
level-indexed sort of the GAT, with formation rules saying that there is an empty one and
they can be built by concatenating types.
        Γ ctxp               µ:p→q              Γ ⊢q Θ tel ℓ   Γ | Θ, µµ ⊢p A type ℓ ′        ℓ′ ⩽ ℓ
     Γ ⊢p ()p tel ℓ                                   Γ ⊢q (Θ, x :µ A) tel ℓ

                                                     16
Just as with ordinary contexts, we regard these rules as generating telescopes ‘inductively’,
although this is not formally the case syntactically. We thus regard some other operation on
telescopes as ‘defined’ when we specify rules for how it computes on these forms. This is
justified in most models, where we do actually define the judgment of telescopes inductively
by the above rules.
    For example, the premise of the second rule above requires knowing how to extend a
context by a telescope. We write this with a distinctive notation as Γ | Θ, from which the
reader can infer that Θ is a telescope. Since | is an operation on contexts, not a constructor
of contexts, it computes on the constructors of telescopes:

        Γ ⊢p Θ tel ℓ
                              (Γ | ()p ) ≡ Γ            (Γ | (Θ, x :µ A)) ≡ ((Γ | Θ), x :µ A)
         (Γ | Θ) ctx

We consider the operation | to be left-associative with the comma. Thus, for instance, the
context Γ | Θ, µµ in the rule for extending a telescope by a type means (Γ | Θ), µµ .
   By a strict telescope we mean a telescope without any nontrivially modal variables.

               Γ ctxp                   Γ ⊢p Θ stel ℓ         Γ | Θ ⊢p A type ℓ ′     ℓ′ ⩽ ℓ
                                                                        
            Γ ⊢p ()p stel ℓ                           Γ ⊢p    Θ, x :1p A stel ℓ

As is evident, we do not distinguish syntactically between general telescopes and strict ones.
That is, we consider strictness to be a mere property of a telescope, or alternatively we treat
the obvious map from strict telescopes to telescopes as an implicit coercion.
    Similarly, we can introduce a ‘lifting’ operation taking a telescope to any higher level.

                                       Γ ⊢p Θ tel ℓ    ℓ ⩽ ℓ′
                                           Γ ⊢p Θ tel ℓ ′

As is evident from the notation, we also treat this as an implicit coercion. Thus, when we
define it recursively on the structure of a telescope, the rules look trivial unless we annotate
them somehow with levels:

                        ()p ≡ ()p                       (Θ, x :µ A) ≡ (Θ, x :µ A)                      ⊳

2.3.2   Partial substitutions

If Γ ⊢ Υ tel ℓ there is a judgment Γ ⊢ σ : Υ for the ‘elements’ of Υ. We call such σ a ‘partial
substitution’, thinking of it as a substitution Γ ⇒ (Γ | Υ) that is the identity on Γ . Formally,
we specify that they can be built out of terms:

                        Γ ⊢q σ : Υ        Γ | Υ, µµ ⊢p A type ℓ       Γ , µµ ⊢p t : A [ 1Γ | σ, µµ ]
 Γ ⊢p [ ]p : ()p                                 Γ ⊢q [ σ, t ] : (Υ, x :µ A)

The second rule involves a notion of extending an ordinary substitution by a partial one.

           θ : Γ ⇒p ∆        ∆ ⊢p Υ tel ℓ      Γ ⊢p σ : Υ [ θ ]
                                                                              [ θ | [ ]p ] ≡ θ
                         [ θ | σ ] : Γ ⇒p (∆ | Υ)

                                    [ θ | [ σ, t ] ] ≡ [ [ θ | σ ], t ]

                                                   17
This gives a simple way to ensure that partial substitutions are uniquely determined by their
components: their equality is detected by equality of the induced substitutions.
                Γ ⊢p σ : Υ       Γ ⊢p τ : Υ     [ 1Γ | σ ] ≡ [ 1Γ | τ ] : Γ ⇒p (Γ | Υ)
                                           Γ ⊢p σ ≡ τ : Υ
Note that a partial substitution does, in fact, have ‘components’: given Γ ⊢q σ : (Υ, x :µ A)
we have
                          [ 1Γ | σ, x, µµ ] : (Γ , µµ ) → (Γ | Υ, x :µ A, µµ )
                                       Γ | Υ, x :µ A, µµ ⊢ x : A
                                   Γ , µµ ⊢ x [ 1Γ | σ, x, µµ ] : A
We also have a notion of weakening for telescopes. As before, we omit the equations that
this must satisfy.
                  Γ ⊢ Θ tel ℓ                                           µ                µ

              Θ
                                            ↑()p ≡ 1Γ             ↑Θ, x: A ≡ ↑Θ ◦ ↑x: A       ⊳
             ↑ : (Γ | Θ) ⇒ Γ

2.3.3   Meta-abstracted types and terms
                                                            
We now introduce a new judgement form Γ ⊢p A type ℓ1 υ : Υ , where Γ ⊢ Υ tel ℓ0 . This
should be thought of saying that A is a type depending on the variables υ in Υ, i.e. belonging
to a ‘framework-level Π-type’ A : (υ : Υ) → type ℓ1 . Accordingly, elements of this judgment
are introduced by binding and eliminated by application, with a β and η-rule.
                                                               
             Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢p A type ℓ1           Γ ⊢p A type ℓ1 υ : Υ      Γ ⊢p σ : Υ
                                   
          Γ ⊢p (( A ))υ : Υ type ℓ1 υ : Υ                 Γ ⊢p A σ type ℓ1

                                Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢p A type ℓ1     Γ ⊢p σ : Υ
                                    Γ ⊢p (( A ))υ : Υ σ ≡ A [ 1Γ | σ ]
                                                   
          Γ ⊢p A type ℓ1 υ : Υ        Γ ⊢p B type ℓ1 υ : Υ        Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢p A υ ≡ B υ
                                            Γ ⊢p A ≡ B
                         
We also regard A type ℓ1 υ : Υ as standing in for its own Π-type ‘(υ : Υ) → A υ’. Thus,
such an A can have its own terms belonging to it, which are also introduced by binding and
eliminated by application, with a β and η-rule.
                                      
                       Γ ⊢p A type ℓ1 υ : Υ           Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢p t : A υ
                                 Γ ⊢p [[ t ]] υ : Υ : (( A ))υ : Υ
                                       
                         Γ ⊢p A type ℓ1 υ : Υ    Γ ⊢p t : A         Γ ⊢p σ : Υ
                                      Γ ⊢p t σ : A σ type ℓ1
                                 
                   Γ ⊢p A type ℓ1 υ : Υ       Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢p t : A υ        Γ ⊢p σ : Υ
                                  Γ ⊢p [[ t ]] υ : Υ σ ≡ t [ 1Γ | σ ]
                      
        Γ ⊢p A type ℓ1 υ : Υ        Γ ⊢p t : A     Γ ⊢p s : A      Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢p t υ ≡ s υ
                                                                                              ⊳
                                             Γ ⊢p t ≡ s

                                                  18
                       2.4        D ÉCALAGE AND DISPLAYED TYPES
Semantically, the fundamental operation is shifting the dimensions of a simplicial type. In
classical simplicial homotopy theory, this is called décalage:
                                            
                                        AD n = An+1

The simplicial structure maps of AD are a subset of those of A, while the unused ones
assemble into a simplicial map AD → A. When A is a type at mode sm, we will regard AD
as the projection from a type Ad dependent on A; thus we have

                                      AD = (x : A, x ′ : Ad x)

(Semantically, this is validated by the fact that if A is Reedy fibrant, then the map AD → A
is a Reedy fibration.) These dependent types Ad , which we call display, are our version of
the ‘logical relations’ assigned to every type by an internal parametricity theory.


2.4.1   Display for types

In contrast to fully internal parametricity theories, because we don’t have degeneracies
in our cube category, décalage and display can only be applied in restricted contexts. In
external parametricity, the logical relations apply only to types in the empty context; but
our modalities allow us to say more generally that they apply to any ‘boxed’ type. Here
by ‘box’ we mean not  but the corresponding endofunctor of the simplicial mode, namely
△. Thus, informally display should have the type d : (A :△ Type ℓ ) → A → Type ℓ , with
computability witnesses being assigned by a function d : (A :△ Type ℓ )(x :△ A) → Ad x.
If we reformulate these without referring to Π-types, we obtain the following rules for our
basic notion of displayed type:
                                                △⩽1sm
     Γ , µ△ ⊢sm A type ℓ         Γ ⊢sm t : A [ ¤        ]            Γ , µ△ ⊢sm t : A
                              d                                                   △⩽1sm    
                     Γ ⊢sm A t type ℓ                            Γ ⊢ t : Ad t [ ¤
                                                                      d
                                                                                           ]

    However, in order to compute with this, we need a version of it that incorporates depen-
dence on a telescope to the right of the lock. The corresponding action on that telescope is
called décalage.                                                                          ⊳


2.4.2   Telescope décalage

As noted above, with display Ad defined as dependent on A, décalage AD is naturally not
a single type but a telescope. It is therefore natural to generalise its input to be a telescope
also. This yields an operation that doubles the variables and groups each type with its
displayed version, e.g.

                     (x : A, y : B)D ≡ (x : A, x ′ : Ad x, y : B, y ′ : Bd y).

The classical projection from décalage to the identity, composed of the leftover face maps,
becomes an ‘evens’ substitution ΥD → Υ that throws away the elements of the displayed



                                                    19
types (the primed variables in the above example). (The corresponding ‘odds’ substitution
must wait until we introduce telescope display in section 2.6.3.)
           Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ                Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ                  Γ , µ△ ⊢sm σ : Υ
                      D
              Γ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ                                      Γ ⊢sm σ : ΥD  D



                      Γ ⊢sm σ+ : ΥD                                                        △⩽1sm
                                       △⩽1sm
                                                                         σD ev ≡ σ [ ¤                 ]
                          +ev
                Γ ⊢sm σ         :Υ[¤            ]
Notationally, we put a superscript ‘+’ on variables and metavariables belonging to décalaged
telescopes, and a prime on variables belonging to displayed types and telescopes. These
symbols are part of the variable name, e.g. σ+ above is a single variable that just happens
to be named mnemonically.
    At this point we can assert that décalage preserves empty telescopes.
                ()D
                  sm ≡ ()sm                  [ ]D
                                                sm ≡ [ ]sm                             [ ]ev
                                                                                          sm ≡ [ ]sm

Décalage will also compute on telescopes extended by a type, but we wait to give these rules
in section 2.4.4, since they require more structure.                                        ⊳

2.4.3   Display for meta-abstractions

The more general version of display alluded to above can informally be thought of as having
the following rule:
                                       Γ , µ△ | Υ ⊢sm A type ℓ
                                 ¿                                                 ?
                                     Γ | ΥD , a : A ⊢sm Ad a type ℓ
However, this is not a well-behaved rule because the context of the conclusion is not fully
general. There are multiple ways to solve this problem; we will solve it by saying that
general display acts on a meta-abstracted type.
                                                         
                                Γ , µ△ ⊢sm A type ℓ1 υ : Υ
                                        .
                        Γ ⊢sm Ad type ℓ1 υ+ : ΥD , a : A [ ¤△⩽1sm ] υ+ ev
                                           
                      Γ , µ△ ⊢sm A type ℓ1 υ : Υ                Γ , µ△ ⊢sm t : A
                                      d         d    +
                                                                 
                                                               +ev
                                Γ ⊢sm t : (( A υ          tυ              )) υ+ : ΥD
In general, this does not reduce to ordinary display, but it does when applied to a décalaged
partial substitution.
                                                                              △⩽1sm
        Γ , µ△ ⊢sm A type ℓ1 υ : Υ    Γ , µ△ ⊢sm σ : Υ      Γ ⊢ t : (A σ) [ ¤       ]
                                       Γ ⊢ Ad σD t ≡ (A σ)d t
                                
           Γ , µ△ ⊢sm A type ℓ1 υ : Υ              Γ , µ△ ⊢sm σ : Υ                  Γ , µ△ ⊢sm t : A
                                                d    D               d
                                          Γ ⊢ t σ ≡ (t σ)
In particular, when Υ ≡ ()sm these rules say that display for trivial meta-abstractions is
equivalent to ordinary display.                                                          ⊳

                                                     20
2.4.4   Computing décalage

Now we can give the rules ‘defining’ telescope décalage on telescopes extended by a vari-
able. Specifically, when extending by a non-modal variable, we also extend by its displayed
version. But that displayed version needs to depend on ΘD , so we define it in terms of
display for meta-abstractions. Note that the well-typedness of td in these rules depends on
the reduction of meta-abstraction display on displayed partial substitutions.
                                                                                          
         (θ : Θ, x : A) D ≡ θ+ : ΘD , x : A [ ¤△⩽1sm | θ+ev ], x ′ : (( A ))θ : Θ d θ+ x
                  [ σ, t ]D ≡ [ σD , t, td ]
          [ σ , t, t ′ ]ev ≡ [ σ+ev , t ]
             +


   The case of a nontrivially modal variable is actually simpler. Note that in this case, the
modality must be of the form △ ◦ µ. Recalling that semantically, △ constructs a constant
simplicial type, we should have informally (△ A)D = △ A, and therefore (△ A)d is trivial.
For an action on types, this would mean that (△ A)d x is the unit type; for our current action
on telescopes, it means we can just omit the displayed variables.
                                                         △⩽1sm                 
              θ : Θ, x :△◦µ A D ≡ θ+ : ΘD , x :△◦µ A [ ¤          | θ+ev , µ△◦µ ]
                            [ σ, t ]D ≡ [ σD , t ]
                          [ σ+ , t ]ev ≡ [ σ+ev , t ]                                                           ⊳

2.4.5   Computing display

Recall from section 1 that we treat display computationally like the identity types of HOTT,
so that it computes on the basic type-formers. Note that the abstracting telescope changes
as we compute, so these rules could not be stated for ordinary display alone.

2.4.5.1 Non-modal Π-Types This rule represents the traditional behavior of parametric-
ity and logical relations on functions: a computability witness for a function says that it
preserves computability witnesses.
                                                                                  
      (( x : A → B ))υ : Υ d ≡ (( x : A [ ¤△⩽1sm | υ+ev ] x ′ : (( A ))υ : Υ d υ+ x →
                                           (( B ))υ : Υ, x : A d υ+ x x ′ (f x) ))υ+ : ΥD , f : (x : A) → B
                 [[ λ x. t ]] υ : Υ d ≡ [[ λ x x ′ . [[ t ]] υ : Υ, x : A d υ+ x x ′ ]] υ+ : ΥD
                                                                                        
                     [[ f a ]] υ : Υ d ≡ [[ [[ f ]] υ : Υ d υ+ a [[ a ]] υ : Υ d υ+ ]] υ+ : ΥD

2.4.5.2 Nontrivially modal Π-Types As with décalage, here we use the fact that display
of △ is trivial. Note also that here a modal variable appears in the domain of a meta-
abstraction. This is the reason that we cannot restrict to strict telescopes in general.
                                                                        
  (( x :△◦µ A → B ))υ : Υ d ≡ (( x :△◦µ A [ ¤△⩽1sm | υ+ev , µ△◦µ ] →
                                           (( B ))υ : Υ, x :△◦µ A d υ+ x (f x) ))υ+ : ΥD , f : (x :△◦µ A) → B
                 [[ λ x. t ]] υ : Υ d ≡ [[ λ x. [[ t ]] υ : Υ, x :△◦µ A d υ+ x ]] υ+ : ΥD
                    [[ f a ]] υ : Υ d ≡ [[ [[ f ]] υ : Υ d υ+ a ]] υ+ : ΥD

                                                          21
2.4.5.3 Universes As with Π-types, this rule represents the traditional behavior of para-
metricity and logical relations on universes: a computability witness for a type is a relation
on that type.
                   (( Type ℓ ))υ : Υ d ≡ (( El A → Type ℓ ))υ+ : ΥD , A : Type ℓ
                                                                           
                  [[ Code A ]] υ : Υ d ≡ [[ λ a. Code (( A ))υ : Υ d υ+ a ]] υ+ : ΥD
                                                                   
                     (( El A ))υ : Υ d ≡ (( El [[ A ]] υ : Υ d υ+ a ))υ+ : ΥD , a : El A        ⊳


                  2.5      T ELESCOPES AND META - ABSTRACTIONS , II
The rules given so far essentially suffice to characterise the basic theory of dTT. However,
in order to formulate our definition of semi-simplicial types, we need a bit more structure.
To this end, in this section we introduce some more operations on telescopes that can be
‘defined’ in terms of those already given.

2.5.1   Meta-abstracted telescopes

We start with another judgement form Γ ⊢p Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ for a telescope dependent on a
telescope, with rules entirely analogous to those for types and terms in section 2.3.3.
              Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢p Φ tel ℓ1                   Γ ⊢p Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ  Γ ⊢p σ : Υ
           Γ ⊢p (( Φ ))υ : Υ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ                      Γ ⊢p Φ σ tel ℓ1

                               Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢p Φ tel ℓ1   Γ ⊢p σ : Υ
                                 Γ ⊢p (( Φ ))υ : Υ σ ≡ Φ [ 1Γ | σ ]

           Γ ⊢p Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ       Γ ⊢p Ψ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ       Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢p Φ υ ≡ Ψ υ
                                           Γ ⊢p Φ ≡ Ψ

                           Γ ⊢p Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ      Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢p t : Φ υ
                                  Γ ⊢p [[ t ]] υ : Υ : (( Φ ))υ : Υ

                        Γ ⊢p Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ    Γ ⊢p t : Φ           Γ ⊢p σ : Υ
                                       Γ ⊢p t σ : Φ σ tel ℓ1

                  Γ ⊢p Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ      Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢p t : Φ υ         Γ ⊢p σ : Υ
                                  Γ ⊢p [[ t ]] υ : Υ σ ≡ t [ 1Γ | σ ]

        Γ ⊢p Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ      Γ ⊢p t : Φ     Γ ⊢p s : Φ          Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢p t υ ≡ s υ
                                                                                                ⊳
                                            Γ ⊢p t ≡ s

2.5.2   Telescope concatenation

Telescope concatenation is not necessary for the syntactic definition of SSTs, but seems to
be required for a clean description of the semantics. It is essentially a Σ-type for telescopes,
which is definitionally associative with context and telescope extension.

                                                   22
  Γ ⊢ Υ tel ℓ0   Γ | Υ ⊢ Φ tel ℓ1            Γ ⊢σ:Υ       Γ ⊢ δ : Φ [ 1Γ | σ ]        Γ ⊢ θ : (Υ | Φ)
       Γ ⊢ (Υ | Φ) tel ℓ0 ⊔ ℓ1                   Γ ⊢ [ σ | δ ] : (Υ | Φ)                Γ ⊢ θ0 : Υ

        Γ ⊢ θ : (Υ | Φ)
                                  [ σ | δ ]0 ≡ σ          [ σ | δ ]1 ≡ δ          [ θ0 | θ1 ] ≡ θ
         Γ ⊢ θ1 : Φ θ0

  (Γ | (Υ | Φ)) ≡ ((Γ | Υ) | Φ)        (Υ | ()p ) ≡ Υ        (Υ | (Φ, x :µ A)) ≡ ((Υ | Φ), x :µ A)

Note that to be at the right universe level, in the rule (Υ | ()p ) ≡ Υ, the right-hand side ‘Υ’
must be implicitly lifted to ℓ0 ⊔ ℓ1 .                                                         ⊳


2.5.3   Π-telescopes

To define the copointed endofunctors whose coalgebras are display inductive types, we will
need Π-telescopes. For simplicity, we require that the codomain be a strict telescope; this
suffices for our application. The basic rules are just like those for Π-types.


           Γ ⊢ Υ tel ℓ0    Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢ Θ stel ℓ1                  Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢ θ : Θ
                Γ ⊢ (υ : Υ) → Θ stel ℓ0 ⊔ ℓ1                     Γ ⊢ λ υ. θ : (υ : Υ) → Θ

          Γ ⊢ δ : (υ : Υ) → Θ       Γ ⊢σ:Υ                 Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢ θ : Θ    Γ ⊢σ:Υ
                 Γ ⊢ δ σ : Θ [ 1Γ | σ ]                      Γ ⊢ (λ υ. θ) σ ≡ θ [ 1Γ | σ ]

           Γ ⊢ δ : (υ : Υ) → Θ         Γ ⊢ δ ′ : (υ : Υ) → Θ      Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢ δ υ ≡ δ ′ υ
                                               Γ ⊢ δ ≡ δ′

In addition, we assert computation laws for Π-telescopes when the domain or codomain is
an extension.
                         Γ ⊢ Υ tel ℓ                               Γ ⊢ Θ stel ℓ
                   ((υ : Υ) → ()p ) ≡ ()p                    ((ξ : ()p ) → Θ) ≡ Θ

                          λ υ. [ ]p ≡ [ ]p                  λ (υ : ()p ). θ ≡ θ

            Γ ⊢ Υ tel ℓ0  Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢ Θ stel ℓ1   Γ | (υ : Υ) | (θ : Θ) ⊢ B type ℓ2
          ((υ : Υ) → (Θ, y : B)) ≡ (δ : (υ : Υ) → Θ, ǫ : (υ : Υ) → B [ 1Γ | υ | δ υ ])

                                   λ υ. [ θ, b ] ≡ [ λ υ. θ, λ υ. b ]

        Γ ⊢q Υ tel ℓ0       Γ | (υ : Υ), µµ ⊢p A type ℓ1  Γ | (υ : Υ), x :µ A ⊢q Θ tel ℓ2
                        ((υ : Υ, x :µ A) → Θ) ≡ ((υ : Υ) → (x :µ A) → Θ)

                                   λ (υ : (Υ | A)). θ ≡ λ υ. λ x. θ




                                                   23
               Γ ⊢ Υ tel ℓ0   Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢ Θ tel ℓ1  Γ | (υ : Υ) | (θ : Θ) ⊢ Φ tel ℓ2
            ((υ : Υ) → (Θ | Φ)) ≡ (δ : (υ : Υ) → Θ | ǫ : (υ : Υ) → (Φ [ 1Γ | υ | δ υ ]))

                                        λ υ. [ θ | φ ] ≡ [ λ υ. θ | λ υ. φ ]
When telescopes are definitionally lists of types, these rules suffice to compute any Π-
telescope in terms of Π-types. Note that in the rule ((ξ : ()p ) → Θ) ≡ Θ, the ‘Θ’ on the
right-hand side must be implicitly lifted to the maximum of the levels of ()p and Θ.    ⊳


                                   2.6       D ISPLAYED TELESCOPES
The structure in section 2.4, with display acting on types and décalage on telescopes, is
sufficient to determine the behavior of display. However, in practice we will also need a
notion of dependent décalage and display for telescopes. When telescopes are lists of types,
this is determined (like ordinary décalage) by display for types.


2.6.1     Meta-abstracted décalage


        Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ               Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ             Γ , µ△ ⊢sm τ : Φ
                 D                                                                D      D
         Γ ⊢sm Φ      tel ℓ1 /υ+ : ΥD                                     Γ ⊢sm τ : Φ

                              Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ                Γ ⊢sm τ+ : ΦD
                                                             △⩽1sm
                              Γ ⊢sm τ+ev : (( Φ [ ¤                   ] υ+ev ))υ+ : ΥD

                            Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ               Γ , µ△ ⊢sm σ : Υ
                                                                                                              (2.1)
                                            Γ ⊢sm Φ σ ≡ (Φ σ)D
                                                       D     D


              Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ             Γ , µ△ ⊢sm σ : Υ           Γ , µ△ ⊢sm τ : Φ
                                                       D     D            D
                                             Γ ⊢sm τ σ ≡ (τ σ)

                     Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ             Γ ⊢sm σ+ : ΥD            Γ ⊢sm τ : Φ
                                                      D ev    +          +ev
                                            Γ ⊢sm τ          σ ≡τσ

We also require that this operation reduce to ordinary décalage on constant meta-abstractions,
and commute appropriately with telescope concatenation, both globally and inside further
meta-abstractions.
                   Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ0          Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1             Γ ⊢sm σ+ : ΥD
                                         Γ ⊢sm (( Φ ))υ : Υ D σ+ ≡ ΦD

          Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ0          Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1             Γ ⊢sm σ+ : ΥD        Γ ⊢sm δ : Φ
                                                                 D   +        D
                                           Γ ⊢sm [[ δ ]] υ : Υ σ ≡ δ

                            Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ0              Γ , µ△ | Υ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1
                                                                                                             (2.2)
                                (Υ | Φ)D ≡ (υ+ : ΥD ) | (( Φ ))υ : Υ D υ+


                                                           24
   Γ , µ△ | Υ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1           Γ , µ△ ⊢sm σ : Υ             Γ , µ△ ⊢sm δ : Φ [ 1Γ , µ△ | σ ]
                                                                                                                 (2.3)
                                           [ σ | δ ]D ≡ [ σD | δD ]

                        Γ , µ△ | Θ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ1              Γ , µ△ | Θ | Υ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ2
        (( (Υ | Φ) ))θ : Θ ≡ (( (υ : (( Υ ))θ : Θ θ+ ) | (( Φ ))θ : Θ, υ : Υ D θ+ υ+ ))θ+ : ΘD
                            D             +               D


                 Γ , µ△ | Θ ⊢sm σ : Υ            Γ , µ△ | Θ ⊢sm δ : Φ [ 1Γ , µ△ | 1Θ | σ ]
                      [[ σ | δ ]] θ : Θ ≡ [[ [[ σ ]] θ : Θ D θ+ | [[ δ ]] θ : Θ D θ+ ]] θ+ : ΘD
                                      D


Note that in (2.2) we have to meta-abstract Φ in order to apply décalage, since Φ itself is
not in a △-locked context. In (2.3), δD is supposed to inhabit (( Φ ))D      D
                                                                       υ : Υ σ , but by (2.1)
                                                                     D
and β-reduction for meta-abstractions this is equal to (Φ [ 1Γ | σ ]) , which is the natural
type of δD . The last two equations are similar.
Remark 2.4. The rules for telescope décalage from section 2.4.2 and this section should be
compared with the ‘local theory’ from [ACKS24], with telescopes and telescope concatena-
tion replacing types and Σ-types. The ΥD from section 2.4.2 corresponds to their ∀A, while
the (( Φ ))Υ D from this section corresponds to their ∀d(x.B). The σD from section 2.4.2
corresponds to their R (although with an added modal lock), while the [[ δ ]] υ : Υ D from this
section corresponds to their apd (with modal lock). We don’t have their ap represented
explicitly, but one of their rules says it is equivalent to apd in a constant family. Our ev is
their k (in the unary case, so k = 0), and we do not have their S; as discussed before, the
modal guards make symmetry unnecessary. And, of course, we don’t have Π-telescopes or a
universe; we have those only for display, which is indexed.                                   ⊳


2.6.2    Computing meta-abstracted décalage

Like ordinary décalage, meta-abstracted décalage computes on telescopes that are made out
of types. For brevity we omit the typing premises of these equalities, but we emphasize that
all the meta-variables on the left-hand sides such as Θ, A, σ, t can depend nontrivially on
the abstraction variables υ or υ+ .


                                                                                 △⩽1sm
    (( θ : Θ, x : A ))υ : Υ D ≡ (( θ+ : (( Θ ))υ : Υ D υ+ , x : A [ ¤                       | υ+ev | θ+ev υ+ ],
                                                                      x ′ : (( A ))υ : Υ | θ : Θ d υ+ θ+ x ))υ+ : ΥD
               [[ σ, t ]] υ : Υ D ≡ [[ [[ σ ]] υ : Υ D υ+ , [[ t ]] υ : Υ υ+ev , [[ t ]] υ : Υ d υ+ ]] υ+ : ΥD
     [[ σ+ , t, t ′ ]] υ+ : ΥD ev ≡ [[ σ+ev , t ]] υ+ : ΥD
(( θ : Θ, x :△◦µ A ))υ : Υ D ≡ (( θ+ : (( Θ ))υ : Υ D υ+ ,
                                                          △⩽1sm
                                          x :△◦µ A [ ¤              | υ+ev | θ+ev υ+ , µ△◦µ ] ))υ+ : ΥD
               [[ σ, t ]] υ : Υ D ≡ [[ [[ σ ]] υ : Υ D υ+ , [[ t ]] υ : Υ υ+ev ]] υ+ : ΥD
          [[ σ , t ]] υ+ : ΥD ev ≡ [[ σ+ev , t ]] υ+ : ΥD
             +
                                                                                                                    ⊳




                                                          25
2.6.3   Telescope display

We also need a notion of indexed display for telescopes. Note that this always gives a strict
telescope, even if its input is not.
                                               △⩽1sm
Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ      Γ ⊢sm σ : Υ [ ¤                   ]         Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ           Γ , µ△ ⊢sm σ : Υ
                         d                                                           d       d        △⩽1sm
               Γ ⊢sm (Υ σ) stel ℓ                                         Γ ⊢sm σ : (Υ (σ [ ¤                  ]))
Like décalage, telescope display computes on empty telescopes, and on telescopes extended
by a type:
                                  ()dsm [ ]sm ≡ ()sm
                                         [ ]dsm ≡ [ ]sm
                                                                                                       
                (θ : Θ, x : A) d [ σ, t ] ≡ θ ′ : Θd σ, x ′ : (( A ))θ : Θ d h σ , θ ′ i t
                              [ σ, t ]d ≡ [ σd , td ]                  (for a non-modal variable)
                            
             θ : Θ, x :△◦µ A d [ σ, t ] ≡ Θd σ
                                      [ σ, t ]d ≡ σd                   (for a modal variable)
As promised, this is the reason that the empty telescope must exist at all levels: if Υ consists
only of modal variables, then Υd is empty, but it must be at the same level as Υ.
   Note that compared to décalage, telescope display reorders the variables. For instance,
we have
                              (x : A, y : B)D ≡ (x : A, x ′ : Ad x, y : B, y ′ : Bd y)
                                  (x : A, y : B)d ≡ (( x ′ : Ad x, y ′ : Bd y ))x : A, y : B
              (x : A, y : B) | (x : A, y : B)d ≡ (x : A, y : b, x ′ : Ad x, y ′ : Bd y)
                                                        6≡ (x : A, y : B)D .
Thus, we instead relate telescope display to décalage by an ‘odds’ operation that picks out
the elements of displayed types, and a ‘pairing’ operation that interleaves them together,
such that evens and odds together form an isomorphism with pairing as inverse.
                                                                        △⩽1sm
             Γ ⊢sm σ+ : ΥD                      Γ ⊢sm σ : Υ [ ¤                  ]        Γ ⊢sm σ ′ : Υd σ
          Γ ⊢sm σ+od : Υd σev                                       Γ ⊢sm h σ , σ ′ i : ΥD

          σ+ ≡ h σ+ev , σ+od i                    h σ , σ ′ iev ≡ σ                      h σ , σ ′ iod ≡ σ ′
                                                                     △⩽1sm
                      σD od ≡ σd                          hσ[¤                ] , σd i ≡ σD
These operations also compute on empty telescopes and on telescopes extended by a type:
                               [ ]od
                                  sm ≡ [ ]sm
                  h [ ]sm , [ ]sm i ≡ [ ]sm
                  [ σ+ , t, t ′ ]od ≡ [ σ+od , t ′ ]                   (for a non-modal variable)
                          ′   ′                     ′           ′
           h [ σ, t ] , [ σ , t ] i ≡ [ h σ , σ i, t, t ] (for a non-modal variable)
                       [ σ+ , t ]od ≡ σ+od                             (for a modal variable)
                                  ′                 ′
                 h [ σ, t ] , σ i ≡ [ h σ , σ i, t ]                   (for a modal variable)

                                                          26
2.6.4    Meta-abstracted telescope display

Unsurprisingly, we generalise telescope display to apply to meta-abstracted telescopes as
well, with rules combining those of sections 2.4.3 and 2.6.3. First we have the basic rules:

                                  Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ
                                         .
                                      d
                          Γ ⊢sm Φ stel ℓ1 υ+ : ΥD , φ : Φ [ ¤△⩽1sm ] υ+ ev

                         Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ                 Γ , µ△ ⊢sm δ : Φ
                                           d         d      +       +ev
                                Γ ⊢sm δ : (( Φ υ (δ υ                     ) ))υ+ : ΥD

                                                                                                       △⩽1sm
        Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ            Γ , µ△ ⊢sm σ : Υ                  Γ ⊢sm t : (Φ σ) [ ¤           ]
                                                    d       D                 d
                                          Γ ⊢sm Φ σ t ≡ (Φ σ) t

             Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ             Γ , µ△ ⊢sm σ : Υ                 Γ , µ△ ⊢sm t : Φ
                                                        d       D         d
                                               Γ ⊢sm t σ ≡ (t σ)

Then we have the odds/pairing isomorphism:

                             Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ              Γ ⊢sm δ+ : ΦD
                              Γ ⊢sm δ+od : (( Φd υ+ (δ+ev υ+ ) ))υ+ : ΥD

                                      Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1 /υ : Υ
                          △⩽1sm
        Γ ⊢sm δ : (( Φ [ ¤          ] υ+ev ))υ+ : ΥD   Γ ⊢sm δ ′ : (( Φd υ+ (δ υ+ ) ))υ+ : ΥD
                                               Γ ⊢sm h δ , δ ′ i : ΦD

              δ ≡ h δev , δod i                  h δ , δ ′ iev ≡ δ                     h δ , δ ′ iod ≡ δ ′
                                                                    △⩽1sm
                      δD od ≡ δd                            hδ[¤                   ] , δd i ≡ δD

On constant meta-abstractions, this reduces to ordinary telescope display:

                                             Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ0
                                                                            △⩽1sm
            Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1           Γ ⊢sm σ+ : ΥD     Γ ⊢sm δ : Φ [ ¤       | σ+ ]
                                    Γ ⊢sm (( Φ ))υ : Υ d σ+ δ ≡ Φd δ

                                             Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ0
                                                                            △⩽1sm
            Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1           Γ ⊢sm σ+ : ΥD     Γ ⊢sm δ : Φ [ ¤       | σ+ ]
                                          Γ ⊢sm [[ δ ]] υ : Υ d σ+ ≡ δd




                                                            27
And we have computation rules for telescope extensions:
                                              Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ0
                                                         △⩽1sm                                       △⩽1sm
     Γ , µ△ | Υ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1             Γ ⊢sm σ : Υ [ ¤        Γ ⊢sm δ : Φ [ ¤
                                                                  ]                                            |σ]
                                                                              
                         (Υ | Φ) σ δ ≡ (υ : Υ σ) | (( Φ ))υ : Υ h σ , υ ′ i δ
                                d        ′   d                 d



                                               Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ0
        Γ , µ△ | Υ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1          Γ , µ△ ⊢sm σ : Υ       Γ , µ△ ⊢sm δ : Φ [ 1Γ , µ△ | σ ]
                                               [ σ | δ ]d ≡ [ σd | δd ]

                            Γ , µ△ | Θ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ0             Γ , µ△ | Θ | Υ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ1
(( (Υ | Φ) ))θ : Θ ≡ (( (υ : (( Υ ))θ : Θ θ υ) | (( Φ ))θ : Θ, υ : Υ d θ+ h υ , υ ′ i φ ))θ+ : ΘD , υ : Υ, φ : Φ
                    d           ′                d    +



                 Γ , µ△ | Θ ⊢sm σ : Υ               Γ , µ△ | Θ ⊢sm δ : Φ [ 1Γ , µ△ | 1Θ | σ ]
                                                                                                                        ⊳
                        [[ σ | δ ]] θ : Θ d ≡ [[ [[ σ ]] θ : Θ d θ+ | [[ δ ]] θ : Θ d θ+ ]] θ+ : ΘD

2.6.5     Computing meta-abstracted telescope display

These computation rules are analogous to the previous ones, first in the non-modal case:
          (( θ : Θ, x : A ))υ : Υ d [ σ+ | δ, t ] ≡ θ ′ : (( Θ ))υ : Υ d σ+ δ,
                                                                                                                   
                                                                     x ′ : (( A ))υ : Υ, θ : Θ d σ h δ , θ ′ i t
                               [[ δ, t ]] υ : Υ d σ+ ≡ [ [[ δ ]] υ : Υ d σ+ , [[ t ]] υ : Υ d σ+ ]
                    [[ δ+ , t, t ′ ]] υ+ : ΥD od σ+ ≡ [ [[ δ+ ]] υ+ : ΥD od σ+ , [[ t ′ ]] υ+ : ΥD σ+ ]
  h [[ δ, t ]] υ+ : ΥD , [[ δ ′ , t ′ ]] υ+ : ΥD i σ+ ≡ [ h [[ δ ]] υ+ : ΥD , [[ δ ′ ]] υ+ : ΥD i σ+ ,
                                                                          [[ t ]] υ+ : ΥD σ+ , [[ t ′ ]] υ+ : ΥD σ+ ]
and then the modal case:
          (( θ : Θ, x :△◦µ A ))υ : Υ d [ σ+ | δ, t ] ≡ (( Θ ))υ : Υ d σ+ δ
                                    [[ δ, t ]] υ : Υ d σ+ ≡ [[ δ ]] υ : Υ d σ+
                                [[ δ, t ]] υ+ : ΥD od σ+ ≡ [[ δ ]] υ+ : ΥD od σ+
            h [[ δ, t ]] υ+ : ΥD , [[ δ ′ ]] υ+ : ΥD i σ+ ≡ [ h [[ δ ]] υ+ : ΥD , [[ δ ′ ]] υ+ : ΥD i σ+ ,              ⊳
                                                                                           [[ t ]] υ+ : ΥD σ+ ]

2.6.6     Computing display on Π-telescopes

Finally, we give the following rules for computing display and meta-abstracted display of
a Π-telescope. These are consistent with the rules for computing display on telescopes
extended by a type.
                        ((φ : Φ) → Θ φ)d δ ≡ (φ+ : ΦD ) → Θd φ+ev (δ φ+ev )

    (( (φ : Φ υ) → Θ υ φ ))υ : Υ d
                ≡ (( (φ+ : ΦD υ+ ) → Θd υ+ φ+ (δ φ+ev ) ))υ+ : ΥD , δ : (φ : Φ υ+ev ) → Θ υ+ ev φ


                                                           28
However, it does not seem possible to give rules for computing décalage on a Π-telescope
that are similarly consistent. Fortunately, we will not need such rules. Of course, since
décalage and Π-telescopes both compute independently on telescopes extended by a type,
so does their combination.
    This concludes our description of the ambient syntax of dTT.                        ⊳


            3    Semi-Simplicial and Displayed Coinductive Types

Recall from the introduction that our primary goal in formulating dTT (at the moment) is to
have a type theory in which we can make precise our coinductive definition of the type SST
of semi-simplicial types. In this section we give that definition, making use of the ‘display’
primitives of dTT that was introduced in section 2. The basic definition is contained in
section 3.1, followed by an exploration of some examples in section 3.2. Then in section 3.3
we describe a more general notion of ‘displayed coinductive type’ that has SST as a special
case, and in section 3.4 we explore a few other examples of the general notion.


                             3.1      S EMI - SIMPLICIAL TYPES
In an ideal version of displayed type theory, one could define semi-simplicial types as an
instance of a general codata decleration. We would expect to write this in a proof assistant
with a syntax like the following, which generalises Agda-like syntax for records by allowing
the coinductive input of each destructor to be specified explicitly and referred to in its type:
codata SST : Type where
  Z : SST → Type
  S : (A : SST) → Z A → SSTd A

It is beyond the scope of this paper to give a sufficiently broad framework to generally
encompass such definitions, but we will describe one general paradigmatic class of them,
analogous to W-types as paradigmatic inductive types and M-types as paradigmatic coinduc-
tive types. However, we begin by discussing the concrete example of SST in more detail, to
help motivate the general case.

3.1.1   SST basics

We begin by giving the type formation law and destructors. Of course, since SST is a sort of
‘universe’, its elements consisting of types, it must also be parametrized by a level.

                                      Γ ⊢sm SST ℓ type lsuc ℓ
                                   Γ ⊢sm Z : (( Type ℓ ))A : SSTℓ
                           Γ ⊢sm S : (( SSTℓd A ))A : SSTℓ , a : El (Z A)
Note that the destructors are defined as terms belonging to ‘meta-abstractions’ as introduced
in section 2.3.3. We have chosen this over the more common method of supplying the
arguments in premises, e.g.
                                       Γ ⊢sm A : SST ℓ
                                                        ,
                                     Γ ⊢sm Z A : Type ℓ

                                                29
because it makes it easier to compute d of them:
                                                            
                                     Γ ⊢sm SSTℓd type lsuc ℓ Aӡ : SSTℓ
                      Γ ⊢sm Zd : (( El (Z Aӡ ) → Type ℓ )){Aӡ : SSTℓ }, Ax : SSTdℓ Aӡ
    Γ ⊢sm Sd : (( SSTdd
                     ℓ Aӡ Ax (S Aӡ aӡ ) )){Aӡ : SSTℓ }, Ax : SSTdℓ Aӡ , aӡ : El (Z Aӡ ), ax : El (Zd Ax aӡ )

What this calculation suggests is that the family SSTd should behave as though defined by
computing d on all of the destructors in the code block above:
codata SSTd (Aӡ : SST) : Type where
  Zd : SSTd A → Z A → Type
  Sd : (Ax : SSTd A) (aӡ : Z Aӡ ) → Zd Ax aӡ → SSTdd Aӡ Ax (S Aӡ aӡ )

Unfortunately, as we will see this is not actually possible in our theory, but it is a useful
intuition. In general, the types obtained by iterating d n-times on Z and S will begin by
taking a n-fold dependent SST in a generic augmented simplicial context of SSTs of lower
dependency. This context can be generally inferred from the type of n-fold dependent SST,
and we have thus chosen to make those arguments implicit, which aligns with the syntactic
presentation in the introduction. In particular, the formula for A2 is given by:
                                                        
                            Zdd Sd (S A x001 ) x010 β011 x100 β101 β110

as opposed to:
                                                                          
                  Zdd A (S A x001 ) (S A x010 ) Sd A (S A x001 ) x010 β011 x100 β101 β110 .                    ⊳

3.1.2   The coinduction principle

Suppose that we want to construct a function mapping into SST from a telescope of arbitrary
length. We first think purely in terms of code, written in the style of Agda-esque copattern
matching, with the goal of writing down something that can conceivably be justified:
f : X → SST
Z (f t) = (?Z0 : Type)
S (f t) a = fd t (?S0 : Xd t)

g : (t : X) → Y t → SST
Z (g t s) = (?Z1 : Type)
S (g t s) a = gd t (?S1 : Xd t) s (?S2 : Y d t ?S1 s)

Here, suppose that Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ ′ . If we think of Υ as a state space and [ σ : Υ ] as
a state. Then the above definition suggests that we are able to define f : (υ : Υ) → SSTℓ
provided that we are able to provide two ingredients. First, we need a way of extracting
[Ze σ : Type ℓ ], a type of 0-simplices, from a state σ. Second, we need a way of extracting
  e                                                                                     e σ ].
[ S σ a : Υd σ ], a dependent section of Υ over σ, from a state σ and a 0-simplex [ a : Z
This suggests that a reasonable coinduction principle for SSTℓ is the following:
                                       Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ ctx ℓ ′
                      e : (( Type ℓ ))δ : Υ
          Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Z                       Γ , µ△ ⊢sm e  S : (( Υd δ )) δ : Υ, a : El (Ze δ)
                                               ee
                                      Γ ⊢sm RΥ Z S : (( SSTℓ ))δ : Υ

                                                      30
and that its computation rules should be:
                                       
                           Z RΥ Z eeSσ ≡Z eσ
                                               
                        S RΥ Z ee            ee
                                 S σ aӡ ≡ RΥ Z S dhσ,e
                                                     S σ aӡ i.
                                
Now, the expression RΥ Z    e Se d defines a meta abstracted-term of meta-abstracted type
                       
(( SSTℓd RΥ Ze eS υ+ev ))υ+ : ΥD . One reasonable hope is that the display in the above
line could be computed in terms of a corecursor for SSTdℓ . However, this approach runs into
issues. Towards this aim, let us more generally try to work out the coinduction principle
that would let us define f : (x : X) → SSTℓd (A x) for Γ , µ△ ⊢sm A : X → SSTℓd . We apply
the same methodology as before, and start by writing down reasonable looking code:
f : (t : X) → SSTd (A t)
Zd (f t) a = (?Z2 : Type)
Sd (f t) a b = fd t (?S3 : Xd t)

However, we then have:

Γ , µ△ , t : X, a : El (Z (A t)) , b : El ?Z2 ⊢sm Sd (f t) a b : SSTℓdd (A t) (f t) (S (A t) a)
                                                                                    
Γ , µ△ , t : X, a : El (Z (A t)) , b : El ?Z2 ⊢sm fd t ?S3 : SSTℓdd (A t) Ad t ?S3 (f t)

We see then that there is an index ordering mismatch that seems to prevent us from writing
down a coinduction principle for SSTℓd corresponding to a simple class of syntactic tricks
as above. If dTT were extended to have symmetries, then we could make progress here by
lining up the f t indices and imposing the definitional equality S (A t) a ≡ Ad t ?S3 as a
corecursor premise. On the other hand, without the ability to line up the two f t indicies,
trying to instead impose definitional equalities involving f, the very term being defined,
creates a vicious cycle, since whether or not a definition of f is well-typed would depend on
checking a definitional equality with f, which presupposes that f is well-typed. Since, for
the present, we have chosen to develop a theory without symmetries, we must abandon this
approach.
                                           
    To salvage this, we will leave RΥ Z eeS d as a stuck form in the theory, but will specify
how to compute Zd and Sd on this normal form. The main idea is that if we define:
f : X → SST
Z (f t) = z t
S (f t) a = fd t (s t a)

then we can compute display on each line of this definition to obtain:
fd : (t : X) → Xd t → SSTd (f t)
Zd (fd t s) = λ a → zd t s a
Sd (fd t s ) a0 a1 = fdd t s (s t a0 ) (sd t s a0 a1 )

Thus we obtain the computation laws:
                                  
                          ee
                   Zd R Υ Z            e d σ+ a
                            S d σ+ a ≡ Z
                                             
                Sd RΥ ZeeS d σ+ a0 a1 ≡ RΥ ZeeS dd h σ+ , e
                                                          SD σ+ a0 a1 i



                                              31
Note that these computation rules were exactly obtained by applying display to both sides
of the equation in the initial computation rules. We can iterate this to obtain:
                                      dn n 
                   Zd
                          n
                               RΥ ZeeS          edn σn ∂a
                                         σ ∂a ≡ Z
                                    dn n             dn+1
                 Sd
                      n
                                 ee
                              RΥ Z S                ee
                                        σ ∂a a ≡ RΥ Z S      h σn , e
                                                                      n
                                                                    SD σn ∂a a i

The situation on our hands is not unlike that of Agda, where a definition of f made by
(co)pattern matching defines a new normal form and does not expand to a first class intro
or elim form when normalised6 ; such names only reduce when their defining patterns occur.
This specific point does not itself inhibit Nat canonicity (which Cubical Agda otherwise
currently lacks due to its treatment of transport in indexed inductives).
    We conjecture that dTT, including its treatment of SST, is fully computational in the
sense of Nat canonicity, normalization, and decidable typechecking. More precisely, al-
though this may very well not hold verbatim of the theory as written down in this paper, we
expect it to hold of a modified presentation fitting within the general framework of ideas.
In particular, while we have presented dTT only as a Generalised Algebraic Theory, all the
equations have a clear direction and there are no obvious stuck terms.                    ⊳


                              3.2   E XAMPLES OF SEMI - SIMPLICIAL TYPES
Of course, simply defining a type of semi-simplicial types is only the first step: we also want
to be able to work with such things conveniently. Developing a full theory of semi-simplicial
types is beyond the scope of this paper, but in this section we will give a few examples to
suggest that this at least may be possible with our definition of SST and its corecursion
principle. We will use Agda-esque copattern-matching, and assume that our type theory has
plenty of other structure rather than the bare-bones version of dTT that we have studied
formally in this paper.


3.2.1    The singular semi-simplicial types

Thus far we have not discussed propositional equality at all, and the reason for this is
that the implementation of display is independent from any implementation of equality,
whether that be Martin-Löf, cubical, or observational. However, we now want to define
a semi-simplicial type that arises from the ∞-groupoid structure of a type in HoTT. For
concreteness we will do this using a cubical notion of equality, with notation that aligns
with Cubical Agda.
   When dTT is combined with cubical type theory, we expect display on cubical path types
should work as follows. We have:

                                          A : Type ℓ , x : A, y : A ⊢sm Path A x y type ℓ
A : Type ℓ , P : A → Type ℓ , x : A, x ′ : P x,
                              y : A, y ′ : P y, p : Path A x y ⊢sm PathP (λ i. P (p i)) x ′ y ′ type ℓ ,
   6 The culprit here is not a lack of first-class forms, since Agda has pattern matching lambdas. Rather, the

restriction is made primarily to control such runaway unfolding that would substantially affect the performance of
type-checking and normalisation. As a consequence, two structurally identical top-level definitions of functions f
and g made by pattern matching are not definitionally equal.



                                                       32
so the latter has the right type to be the display of the former. Thus we expect:

  (( Path A x y ))A : Type ℓ , x : A, y : A d ≡
   (( PathP (λ i. P (p i)) x ′ y ′ ))A : Type ℓ , P : A → Type ℓ , x : A, x ′ : P x, y : A, y ′ : P y, p : Path A x y .

   With this given, the singular semi-simplicial types are defined by corecursion. Rather
than write this explicitly using the corecursor from section 3.1, we use a copattern-matching
syntax, including a ‘displayed corecursive call’ Singd .
Sing : Type → SST
Z (Sing A) = A
S (Sing A) x = Singd A (λ y → Path A x y)

A calculation then yields:
Z (Sing A) = A
Zd (S (Sing A) x01 ) x10 = Path A x01 x10
Zdd (Sd (S (Sing A) x001 ) x010 β011 ) x100 β101 β110
     = PathP (λ i → Path A x001 β110 i) β011 β101
Zddd (Sdd (Sd (S (Sing A) x0001 ) x0010 β0011 ) x0100 β0101 β0110 f0111 ) x1000 β1001 β1010 f1011 β1100 f1101 f1110
     = PathP (λ i → PathP (λ j → Path A x0001 f1110 i j) β0011 (f1101 i) ) f0111 f1011



3.2.2    Nerves of categories

The semi-simplicial nerve of a 1-category can also be defined by corecursion. Let Cat denote
the type of 1-categories, defined as a record inside dTT (extended by record types), and
recall that in section 1 we computed Catd to consist of ‘displayed categories’ in the usual
sense [AL19]. Thus we can define:
Nerve : Cat → SST
Z (Nerve C) = ob C
S (Nerve C) x = Nerved C (coslice C x)

Here for a category C and object x : ob C, by coslice C x we mean the coslice category x/C,
regarded as a displayed category over C via the forgetful functor. Note that a definition of
coslice : (C : Cat) → ob C → Catd C at the global level in dTT automatically induces the
definition of the dependent coslice cosliced . A similar idea works for bicategories, and any
other kind of category for which we can define a displayed (co)slice.                       ⊳

3.2.3    Topological singular complexes

In section 3.2.1 we constructed the singular semi-simplicial type associated to the intrin-
sic ∞-groupoid structure of any type. But we can also construct a more classical singular
semi-simplicial set associated to a topological space. For any type Top of ‘topological space’
definable inside of dTT as a record, we have a displayed version Topd . In some cases, par-
ticularly ‘nonalgebraic’ ones such as open-set spaces, an element of Topd X is more general
than an Y : Top with a map Y → X; but at least from such a Y we can construct its fibers as
a displayed space. Thus, as long as we can construct, for any x : X, a space of ‘continuous
paths in X starting at x’ with an endpoint projection down to X, we can make it a displayed
space paths X x over X, and use this to construct the singular semi-simplicial types:

                                                          33
Sing : Top → SST
Z (Sing X) = pt X
S (Sing X) x = Singd X (paths X x )



3.2.4     Fibers and higher spans

As we will see in section 4, semantically each type at mode sm is already an augmented
semi-simplicial type. We expect that if we fix a particular (−1)-simplex in an augmented
semi-simplicial type, we should obtain an (unaugmented) semi-simplicial type as its ‘fibre’.
And indeed, we can define this operation:
Fib : (X : △ Type) (ӡ : X) → SST
Z (Fib X ӡ) = Xd ӡ
S (Fib X ӡ) x = Fibd X ӡ x

Note that X is required to be modal so that we can take display of it. Then we have, for
instance, if ӡ00 : X and x01 , x10 : Xd ӡ00 ,
                                         (Fib X ӡ00 )0 ≡ Z (Fib X ӡ00 )
                                                        ≡ Xd ӡ00
                                 (Fib X ӡ00 )1 x01 x10 ≡ Zd (S (Fib X ӡ00 ) x01 ) x10
                                                        ≡ Zd (Fibd X ӡ00 x01 ) x10
                                                        ≡ Xdd ӡ00 x01 x10
and as a last example
         (Fib X ӡ000 )2 x001 x010 β011 x100 β101 β110 ≡ Zdd (Sd (S (Fib X ӡ000 ) x001 ) x010 β011 ) x100 β101 β110
                                                     ≡ Zdd (Sd (Fibd X ӡ000 x001 ) x010 β011 ) x100 β101 β110
                                                     ≡ Zdd (Fibdd X ӡ000 x001 x010 β011 ) x100 β101 β110
                                                     ≡ Fibdd X ӡ000 x001 x010 β011 x100 β101 β110 .
In particular, if we let X = Type ℓ be a universe and ӡ = ⊤ be a unit type, we have
                              (Fib Type ℓ ⊤)0 ≡ Typedℓ ⊤
                                                   ≡ ⊤ → Type ℓ
                                                   ∼ Type ℓ
                                                   =
                     (Fib Type ℓ ⊤)1 X01 X10 ≡ Typedd
                                                    ℓ ⊤ X01 X10
                                             ∼
                                             = X01 → X10 → Type ℓ
 (Fib Type ℓ ⊤)2 X001 X010 B011 X100 B101 B110 ≡ Typedddℓ     ⊤ X001 X010 B011 X100 B101 B110
                                               ∼
                                               = (x001 : X001 )(x010 : X010 )(β011 : B011 x001 x010 )
                                                      (x100 : X100 )(β101 : B101 x001 x100 )(β110 : B110 x010 x100 ) → Type ℓ
Thus Fib Type ℓ ⊤ is the semi-simplicial type of types, spans, and a sort of simplicial ‘higher
spans’ that could also be called ‘heterogeneous simplices’. More generally, Fib Type ℓ A for
any type A consists of types, spans, and simplicial higher spans indexed by A.                ⊳

                                                            34
3.2.5   Operations on semi-simplicial types

We can also use corecursion to define operations on semi-simplicial types that are essentially
levelwise. For instance, any two semi-simplicial types have a product:
 × : SST → SST → SST
Z (X × Y ) = Z X × Z Y
S (X × Y ) h x , y i = (S X x) ×d (S Y y )

Here in the S case, we have treated the non-displayed arguments of ×d as implicit: its full
type is
             ×d : {X : SST} (X ′ : SSTd X) {Y : SST} (Y ′ : SSTd Y) → SSTd (X × Y)
There is a similar dependently-typed version, i.e. a Σ-semi-simplicial-type:
Σ : (X : SST) → SSTd X → SST
Z (Σ X Y ) = Σ (Z X) (Zd Y )
S (Σ X Y ) h x , y i = Σd (S X x) (S Y y )

There is an empty semi-simplicial type. Note that the S case can be omitted, since one of its
arguments would belong to the empty type ⊥.
∅ : SST
Z ∅ = ⊥

Similarly, there is a trivial one:
⊤ : SST
Z ⊤ = ⊤
S ⊤ u = ⊤d

We can also take the product of any family of semi-simplicial types indexed by a discrete
type. Note that the discreteness of A means that it doesn’t need a displayed version when
we apply ×d in the S case.
× : (A : Disc) → ( ( a : A) ) → SST) → SST
            △                   △

Z (× A X) = ( ( a : A) → Z (X a ) )
                          △

S (× A X) p = × A X (λ a → S (X a ) (p a ) )
                      d



    However, there are some things we would naturally expect to be able to define that do
not seem possible with our current theory. For example, the disjoint union of semi-simplicial
types should certainly have the disjoint union of 0-simplices, but the slice over a 0-simplex
should come only from one of the two sides. That is, S (X + Y) (inl x) should be morally
just S X x. However, S X x belongs to SSTd X, whereas S (X + Y) (inl x) must belong to
SSTd (X + Y); thus we need to take its disjoint union with an empty semi-simplicial type
displayed over Y.
    We defined a ‘global’ empty semi-simplicial type above, and it seems intuitively that
we should be able to define a ‘constant’ version of this displayed over Y. But as noted in
section 3.1, without symmetry it does not seem possible to formulate a useful corecursor
for SSTd , and without such a thing it is unclear how to define ‘constantly displayed’ semi-
simplicial types. This suggests that further work in this direction might require the addition
of symmetries.                                                                               ⊳

                                             35
                          3.3     D ISPLAYED COINDUCTIVE TYPES
Generalizing the discussion of SST, we now formulate a fairly general notion of ‘indexed
displayed coinductive type’. It depends on a telescope Φ of ‘non-uniform parameters’, and
every element of it has a ‘head’ belonging to some specified type family A and a ‘tail’,
depending on a telescope of parameters B, and belonging to the displayed version of the
coinductive type itself. The parameters of this displayed version of the very type being
defined are ΦD , which we can assemble provided that the data of the old parameters ϕ : Φ,
the head x : A ϕ, and the new dependencies b : B ϕ a, are sufficient to extract a section
σ ϕ x b : Φd ϕ. The idea is analogous to an ‘indexed M-type’, but with the output of the tail
being displayed, and with B being a telescope rather than a simple type. The pseudo-Agda
corresponding to this would be:
module    (Φ : △ Tel) (A : △ Φ → Type) (B : △ (ϕ : Φ ) (a : A ϕ) → Tel)
          (σ : △ (ϕ : Φ) (a : A ϕ) (b : B ϕ a ) → Φd ϕ) where
  codata dCoind (ϕ : Φ) : Type where
    head : dCoind ϕ → A ϕ
    tail : (x : dCoind ϕ) (b : B ϕ (head x ) ) → dCoindd h ϕ , σ ϕ (head x ) b i x

We can thus write down the formation and introduction rules for dCoind as follows:
                                                                    
                   Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Φ tel ℓ0       Γ , µ△ ⊢sm A type ℓ1 ϕ : Φ
   Γ , µ△ ⊢sm B tel ℓ2 /ϕ : Φ, a : A ϕ   Γ , µ△ ⊢sm σ : (( Φd ϕ )) ϕ : Φ, a : A ϕ, b : B ϕ x
                                                          .
                  Γ ⊢sm dCoind [ Φ, A, B, σ ] type ℓ1 ⊔ ℓ2 ϕ : Φ [ ¤△⩽1sm ]
                                                  △⩽1
             Γ ⊢sm head [ Φ, A, B, σ ] : (( A [ ¤      sm
                                                          ] ϕ ))ϕ, x : dCoind [ Φ, A, B, σ ] ϕ
                                            d
Γ ⊢sm tail[ Φ,A,B,σ ] : (( dCoind[ Φ,A,B,σ ] h ϕ , σ ϕ (head x) b i x ))ϕ, x, b:B[ ¤△⩽1sm ] ϕ (head ϕ x)

Note that the universe level of dCoind is governed by those of A and B, but does not depend
on the level of the telescope of non-uniform parameters Φ.
    Following the example of SST, we will begin by attempting to write down a reasonable
template for a coinduction principle. In the same module context, we can attempt to map
into a dCoind type from a length two context as follows:
f : (t : X) (s : Y t) → dCoind (φ t s)
head (f t s) = (?h1 : A (φ t s) )
tail (f t s) b = fd t (?t1 : Xd t) s (?t2 : Y d t ?t1 s)

The types that we have are then:
                    tail (f t s) b : dCoindd h φ t s , σ (φ t s) ?h1 b i (f t s)
                     fd t ?t1 s ?t2 : dCoindd h φ t s , φd t ?t1 s ?t2 i (f t s)
Thus there is a non-trivial condition that needs to be imposed for this definition template to
be well typed. Fortunately, unlike in the case of SSTd , we generally have terms lining up in
the sense that the terminal (f t s) terms align, which avoids the vicious cycle from before.
We get the following rule:
                      Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ ′      Γ , µ△ ⊢sm φ : (( Φ ))υ : Υ
                 e : (( A (φ υ) ))υ : Υ
     Γ , µ△ ⊢sm h                            Γ , µ△ ⊢sm e  τ : (( Υd υ ))υ : Υ, b : B (φ υ) (he υ)
            Γ , µ△ | υ : Υ, b : B (φ υ) (he υ) ⊢ φd h υ , e τ υ b i ≡ σ (φ υ) (h    e υ) b
                                             e e
          Γ ⊢sm corec [ Φ, A, B, σ ] [ Υ, φ, h,  τ ] : (( dCoind [ Φ, A, B, σ ] (φ υ) ))υ : Υ

                                                   36
This comes with the following computation rules:
                                                  
 head (φ υ) corec [ Φ, A, B, σ ] [ Υ, φ, h,e e τ]υ ≡heυ
                                                                                     
                                        e e
tail (φ υ) corec [ Φ, A, B, σ ] [ Υ, φ, h,                                         e e
                                            τ ] υ b ≡ corec [ Φ, A, B, σ ] [ Υ, φ, h, τ] dhυ,e
                                                                                             τυbi

    Now we can define SST as a particular instance of an indexed displayed coinductive
type (which happens to have trivial indexing). In fact, it is in some sense the universal such
instance, where the family B indexed by A is the universal family El indexed by Type ℓ .
This may be compared with the fact that the W-type of El is the type of ‘presentations
of well-founded sets’ [Acz78], while its M-type is the type of ‘presentations of ill-founded
sets’ [Lin89].
                      h                                                                                    i
      SSTℓ ≡ dCoind ()sm , (( Type ℓ ))ϕ : ()sm , (( El X ))X : Type ℓ , [[ [ ]sm ]] X : Type ℓ , x : El X

This is the end of all the primitive rules and definitions we have to give. From here, we can
deduce the rules for SSTℓ , defining Z ≡ head and S ≡ tail and R ≡ corec:

          Γ ⊢sm Z : (( Type ℓ ))X : SSTℓ            Γ ⊢sm S : (( SSTdℓ X ))X : SSTℓ , x : El (Z X)

                                       Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ ′
                      e : (( Type ℓ ))υ : Υ
          Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Z                       Γ , µ△ ⊢sm S  e : (( Υd υ ))                e υ)
                                                                            υ : Υ, x : El (Z
                                             eS
                                    Γ ⊢sm RΥ Z e : (( SST ℓ ))υ : Υ

    The problem of giving a corecursion rule for SSTd carries over to the general case in the
following way. Just as d of a Π-type is another Π-type and so on for records and ordinary
coinductive types, We’d like to compute d of a dCoind to be another dCoind, with something
like the following:
                                          h                                        
          dCoind [ Φ, A, B, σ ] d ≡ dCoind ϕ+ : ΦD , c : dCoind [ Φ, A, B, σ ] ϕ+ev ,
      ¿           (( Ad ϕ+ (head c) )) ϕ+ , c , (( BD ϕ+ (head c) a ′ ))ϕ+ , x, a ′ ,                    ?
                                                                                                     i
                                     [[ σD ϕ+ [ head c, a ′ ] b+ , tail c b+ev ]] ϕ+ , c, a ′ , b+

To see whether this is well-typed, observe that we have
                                ϕ : Φ, a : A ϕ, b : B ϕ a ⊢sm σ ϕ a b : Φd ϕ
      ϕ+ : ΦD , a : A, a ′ : Ad a, b+ : BD ϕ+ [ a, a ′ ] ⊢sm σD ϕ+ [ a, a ′ ] b+ : ΦdD ϕ+
                                                                                          
whereas the σ of the resulting dCoind must lie in ϕ+ : ΦD , c : dCoind [ Φ, A, B, σ ] ϕ+ev d .
Thus, in particular, we need to compare ΦdD ϕ+ to ΦDd ϕ+ , where ϕ+ : ΦD . In the case of
a one-type telescope Φ = (a : A), this becomes
                                                             
                                 ΦD ≡ a : A, a ′ : Ad a
                                                    
                               Φd a ≡ a ′ : Ad a
                                                                             
                        ΦdD [ a, a ′ ] ≡ a ′′ : Ad a, a ′′′ : Add a a ′ a ′′
                                                                             
                        ΦDd [ a, a ′ ] ≡ a ′′ : Ad a, a ′′′ : Add a a ′′ a ′


                                                    37
Unfortunately the last two are not the same! This is not just about ordering the variables
in a telescope; although the second and third arguments of Add both lie in Ad a, it need
not be symmetrical with respect to those arguments. So again we see that without adding
symmetry to the theory, it seems we can’t give a general corecursor for dCoindd , and hence
we can’t compute corecd to something more primitive.                                      ⊳


                3.4     E XAMPLES OF DISPLAYED COINDUCTIVE TYPES
We now continue our exploration of the theory of semi-simplicial types from section 3.2,
now using the general notion of displayed coinductive type. As in section 3.2, we will use
Agda-esque codata and copattern-matching definitions, and assume that our type theory
has plenty of other structure.
    We have already noted that SST is in some sense the ‘universal’ (unparametrised) dis-
played coinductive type, whose determining family x : A ⊢ B x type ℓ2 is the universal one
X : Type ℓ ⊢ El X type ℓ . Moreover, it seems likely that in order for an unparametrised dis-
played coinductive type to be interesting, the types A and B must have nontrivial display
structure, i.e. they must not be discrete. But the simplicial universe Type ℓ is the primary
source of types with nontrivial display, just as the universe in homotopy type theory is a
primary source of types with higher homotopy structure. (In section 5.0.0.9 we will specu-
late about a notion of ‘display inductive type’ analogous to higher inductive types, which are
the other source of higher homotopy structure in homotopy type theory.) For these reasons,
we do not have a lot of interesting examples of other unparametrised displayed coinductive
types, but there is at least one: augmented semi-simplicial types.


3.4.1   Augmented semi-simplicial types

If we simply omit the Z input of S in the definition of SST, we obtain a definition of aug-
mented semi-simplicial types. (Recall from section 1 that these are equivalently unary semi-
cubical types.)
codata ASST : Type where
  Z+ : ASST → Type
  S+ : (A : ASST) → ASSTd A

We can convince ourselves of this by extracting types of low-dimensional simplices from an
X : ASST:

                                            ⊢ X−1 ≡ Z+ X
                                   ӡ0 : X−1 ⊢ X0 ӡ0 ≡ Z+d (S+ X)
         ӡ00 : X−1 , x01 : X0 ӡ00 , x10 : X0 ӡ00 ⊢ X1 ӡ00 x01 x10 ≡ Z+dd (S+d (S+ X)) ӡ00 x01 x10

and so on. Now we can observe that the construction Fib of section 3.2.4 factors through
ASST via a pair of maps, both defined by copattern-matching:
Int : (X :△ Type) → ASST
Z+ (Int X) = X
S+ (Int X) = Intd X



                                                   38
Fib ′ : (X : ASST) (x : Z+ X) → SST
Z (Fib ′ X x) = Z+d (S+ X) x
S (Fib ′ X x) y = Fib ′ d X (S+ X) x y



3.4.2   Pointed semi-simplicial types

More interesting examples of displayed coinductive types have nontrivial parametrizations,
often involving more semi-simplicial types. For instance, we can define the structure of a
pointing on a semi-simplicial type displayed-coinductively:
codata Pt (X : SST) : Type where
  zp : Pt X → Z X
  sp : (p : Pt X) → Ptd X (S X (zp p) ) p

We then have, for p : Pt X,
                      zp p : Z X ≡ X0
              zp (sp p) : Zd (S X (zp p)) (zp p) ≡ X1 (zp p) (zp p)
                  d

        zpdd (spd (sp p)) : X2 (zp p) (zp p) (zpd (sp p)) (zp p) (zpd (sp p)) (zpd (sp p))
and so on. That is, an element of Pt X equips X with a ‘fat point’, i.e. a chosen 0-simplex zp
that comes with all of the higher ‘degenerate simplices’ that one would expect to be associated
to zp if it were in a simplicial set rather than a semi-simplicial one.                       ⊳

3.4.3   Morphisms of semi-simplicial types

With a double parametrization, we can define a type of morphisms of semi-simplicial types.
codata Hom (X Y : SST) : Type where
  zhom : Hom X Y → Z X → Z Y
  shom : (f : Hom X Y ) (x : Z X) → Homd X (S X x) Y (S Y (zhom f x ) ) f

As usual, we can unravel this a few steps to see what it looks like. zhom f is a function
between types of 0-simplices, which we may denote f0 . At the next dimension we have:
                  zhomd (shom f x01 ) x01 β11 : Zd (S Y (zhom f x01 )) (zhom f x01 )
which is to say
                      zhomd (shom f x01 ) x01 : X1 x01 x10 → Y 1 (f0 x01 ) (f0 x10 ).
We may denote this function by f1 , and go on to extract a function f2 between types of
2-simplices and so on. We expect other basic operations on semi-simplicial types to be
internalizable in a similar way.                                                      ⊳


                                          4     Semantics

We now discuss the semantics of dTT. Specifically, we will show that from any model of
ordinary dependent type theory with infinite limits, we can construct a model of dTT in
which the original model sits as the discrete mode.

                                                   39
Remark 4.1. Actually we will not quite model all of dTT as presented in section 2: we omit
the type-former △ and its associated introduction and elimination rule. This is purely for
reasons of simplicity and space. It should be possible to model △ as well as long as the
starting discrete model has a unit type, but we leave the details for the future. We will,
however, still model △-annotated variables and function types such as (x :△ A) → B x.

    In section 4.1 we review the semantics of ordinary dependent type theory, introduce
some notation, extend this to our calculus of telescopes and meta-abstractions, and define
what it means for such a model to have countable infinite limits. Then in section 4.2 we
construct a model of augmented semi-simplicial Reedy diagrams, starting with any model
of dependent type theory having countable infinite limits. This is essentially an instance
of the general inverse diagram models constructed in [Shu15, KL21], but we give an ex-
plicit inductive construction that avoids category-theoretic machinery and builds display
and décalage in from the beginning. In section 4.3 we add modalities to this model, and
then in section 4.4 we discuss the general notion of model of dTT and show that the simpli-
cial model is in fact such. Finally, in section 4.5 we construct displayed coinductive types in
these models, including the type SST of semi-simplicial types.


               4.1     T HE SEMANTICS OF DEPENDENT TYPE THEORY
We approach semantics from the perspective of Categories with Families (CwF) [CCD21].
Here we will recount the relevant categorical concepts while providing a translation into
language reminiscent of a type theoretic logical framework.
    At the most basic level, a category with families is just a category with a terminal object
and distinguished substructure of objects and morphisms that behave like types and terms
in a dependent type theory. In the absence of any other structure, the only way in which
this behaviour is manifested is through the presence of substitution, which categorically
corresponds to a choice of definitionally functorial distinguished pullbacks. Here, instead
of giving the substructure as a proposition on objects and morphisms, we first give it as
presheaves, and then use representability to overlay this structure into the category.


4.1.1   Categories with Families

A ‘CwF with levels’ consists of a category C, along with a chosen terminal object 1, and
equipped with the data of two families of presheaves, indexed by ℓ level:
                                                      Z       
                         op                              C
                 Ty ℓ : C → Set                Tm ℓ :      Ty ℓ op → Set,

such that for every Γ : obC and A : Ty ℓ Γ , there is a chosen representation of the presheaf:

                         ∆ 7→ (σ : morC (∆ , Γ )) × Tm ℓ (∆ , Aσ ) .                             ⊳

4.1.2   Notation

The objects of the category C are called contexts and denoted by Γ , ∆. For Γ : obC we write:

                                             Γ ob

                                              40
The empty context is the chosen terminal object 1, and is denoted by:

                                            () ob

The morphisms of C are called substitutions and denoted by σ, τ. For σ : morC (∆, Γ ) we
write:
                                       σ:∆→Γ
The unique substitution into the empty context is denoted by:

                                         [ ] : Γ → ()

The notations Γ ob and σ : ∆ → Γ are examples of ‘absolute’ or ‘context-less’ judgments. In
the notation of this section, each absolute judgment asserts that some element belongs to
some set, such as the set of objects or a hom-set of C. Note that a set can be ‘dependent’
on elements of another set, such as the hom-set morC (∆, Γ ) depending on ∆, Γ : obC ; and
thus elements of one absolute judgment can appear in another absolute judgment, such
as σ : ∆ → Γ where ∆ ob and Γ ob. Operations on sets can be written as rules, such as
composition of morphisms:
                                  σ:∆→Γ         τ:Γ →Θ
                                                         .
                                       τ◦σ:∆→Θ
Equations between these operations can likewise be written as rules, where we use ≡ for
equality since it corresponds to definitional equality in syntax:

                          σ:∆→Γ      τ:Γ →Θ          υ:Θ→Υ
                                                           .
                              υ ◦ (τ ◦ σ) ≡ (υ ◦ τ) ◦ σ

   The elements of Ty ℓ are called types of level ℓ and denoted by A, B. For A : Ty ℓ Γ we
write:
                                     γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type ℓ
Similarly, the elements of Tm ℓ are called terms and denoted by t, s. For t : Tm ℓ (Γ , A) we
write:
                                      γ:Γ ⊢tγ:Aγ
These notations are examples of ‘hypothetical’ or ‘contextual’ judgments. In the notation
of this section, each hypothetical judgment asserts that some element belongs to a value
of some presheaf, such as Tm ℓ or Ty ℓ . The object of C at which the presheaf is evaluated
(in these examples, Γ ) is written on the left-hand side of the turnstile ⊢. We annotate it
with a formal ‘variable’ such as γ, and ‘apply’ all the elements appearing on the right-hand
side to that element; at the moment this is just a convention of notation. As with absolute
judgments, one presheaf can be dependent on another, such as Tm ℓ (Γ , A) depending on
A : Ty ℓ Γ ; and thus the elements of one hypothetical judgment can appear in another
hypothetical judgment, such as γ : Γ ⊢ t γ : A γ where γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type ℓ .
    For a morphism σ : ∆ → Γ , we denote its functorial action on types A and terms t by Aσ
and tσ ; thus the presheaf actions of Ty ℓ and Tm ℓ can be expressed by rules

            σ:∆→Γ      γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type ℓ               σ:∆→Γ        γ:Γ ⊢t:A
               δ : ∆ ⊢ Aσ δ type ℓ                        δ : ∆ ⊢ t δ : Aσ δ
                                                                   σ




                                             41
We allow ourselves to write this alternatively by taking the formal variables γ, δ more seri-
ously and ‘applying’ σ to them:

                     δ : ∆ ⊢ A (σ δ) type ℓ                     δ : ∆ ⊢ t (σ δ) : A (σ δ)

Formally, this is justified by interpretation in the internal type theory of the presheaf category
    op
SetC . By virtue of functoriality, for σ : ∆ → Γ and τ : Ω → ∆ we have that

              A (σ (τ ω)) ≡ A ((σ ◦ τ) ω)                        t (σ (τ ω)) ≡ t ((σ ◦ τ) ω)

   Now let us consider the representation hypothesis. In categorical notation, for Γ : obC
and A : Ty ℓ Γ we have a representing object Γ  A : obC called the context extension. In
type-theoretic notation, we denote the context extension by

                                         Γ ob      γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type ℓ
                                             (γ : Γ , a : A γ) ob

Note that this is an operation that takes an element of one set (the absolute judgment Γ ob)
and an element of one presheaf (the hypothetical judgment γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type ℓ ) and produces
an element of a set (the absolute judgment (γ : Γ , a : A γ) ob). As before, at the moment
the ‘variables’ γ and a are just a convention of notation.
   We then have a family of bijections, natural in ∆:

                 (∆ → (γ : Γ , a : A γ)) ≃ ((σ : ∆ → Γ ) × (δ : ∆ ⊢ t δ : A (σ δ)))

Note that this says that a substitution into an extended context (γ : Γ , a : A γ) is precisely a
substitution σ into Γ , along with some term t of type Aσ . By the Yoneda lemma, the left-to-
right part of this bijection is determined by setting ∆ to (γ : Γ , a : A γ) and evaluating at the
identity 1(γ : Γ , a : A γ) . The first component gives us a substitution ptA : (γ : Γ , a : A γ) → Γ ,
which we call a fundamental context projection or parent map7 and denote by:

                                         ptA : (γ : Γ , a : A γ) _ Γ

The second component then gives us a term that we call the zero variable and denote by
                                 A
zvA : Tm((γ : Γ , a : A γ) , Apt ), or:
                                                                     
                             δ : (γ : Γ , a : A γ) ⊢ zvA δ : A ptA δ

                          τ  of the bijection sends a substitution τ : ∆ → (γ : Γ , a : A γ)
Note that the forward direction
to the pair ptA ◦ τ, zvA . That this map is a bijection is witnessed by the existence of a
substitution extension operation:

                                    σ:∆→Γ          δ : ∆ ⊢ t δ : A (σ δ)
                                      [ σ, t ] : ∆ → (γ : Γ , a : A γ)

such that for σ : ∆ → Γ and δ : ∆ ⊢ t δ : A (σ δ), we have:

                                               ptA ◦ [ σ, t ] ≡ σ                                           (4.2)
                                                     [ σ, t ]
                                                 zvA           ≡t                                           (4.3)
   7 From the perspective of type theoretic fibration categories, an alternative approach to semantics from that of

CwFs, the role of fundamental context projections is instead played by fibrations.


                                                        42
and, conversely, for τ : ∆ → (γ : Γ , a : A γ), we have:
                                                    τ
                                    [ ptA ◦ τ, zvA ] ≡ τ.                                  (4.4)
As a corollary of this we have that the following diagram is a pullback:
                                                         σ     σ
                                             [ σ ◦ ptA , zvA       ]
                    (δ : ∆, a : A (σ δ))                               (γ : Γ , a : A γ)
                           Aσ                                                     ptA
                         pt

                              ∆                      σ                        Γ
So, in particular, in a CwF we have a distinguished pullback of any parent map along an
arbitrary morphism, as another parent map, and this choice of pullbacks is definitionally
functorial. We will often omit the superscripts from pt and zv.
   The map constructed from σ in the top row of the diagram above will occur frequently in
the exposition that follows, and we shall refer to it as the weakening two of σ by A. Formally,
given σ : ∆ → Γ , and γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type ℓ , we have:
                        WA
                         2 σ : (θ : Θ, a : A (σ θ)) → (γ : Γ , a : A γ)

                        WA
                         2 σ = [ σ ◦ pt, zv ]

    Finally, when working with hypothetical judgments in an extended context, we can also
treat the variables more traditionally. Instead of δ : (γ : Γ , a : A γ) ⊢ B δ type ℓ1 , we write
γ : Γ , a : A γ ⊢ B γ a type ℓ1 , and so on. In particular, the zero variable zv can be written
more simply as
                                     γ : Γ, a : A γ ⊢ a : A γ
As before, this can be justified formally as an interpretation in the internal type theory of
    op
SetC .                                                                                      ⊳


4.1.3   Π-Types

All the basic type-forming operations in syntax translate into structure on a CwF. For in-
stance, a Π-structure on a CwF with levels consists of the following structure and properties:
                     γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type ℓ0   γ : Γ , a : A γ ⊢ B γ a type ℓ1
                                γ : Γ ⊢ (Π A B) γ type ℓ0 ⊔ ℓ1

                                    γ : Γ, a : A γ ⊢ t γ a : B γ a
                                     γ : Γ ⊢ (λ t) γ : (Π A B) γ

                         γ : Γ ⊢ f γ : (Π A B) γ             γ:Γ ⊢sγ:Aγ
                                   γ : Γ ⊢ (app f s) γ : B[ 1Γ , s ] γ
The above notation lets us talk about types in point-free notation, e.g. Π A B : Ty ℓ Γ . When
the explicit dependence on γ is written, we can propagate the notation as follows:
                                  (Π A B) γ ≡ (a : A γ) → B γ a
                                      (λ t) γ ≡ λ a. t γ a
                                  (app f s) γ ≡ app γ (f γ) (s γ)


                                                   43
Such that the β and η laws hold:
                       γ : Γ, a : A γ ⊢ t γ a : B γ a         γ:Γ ⊢sγ:Aγ
                                                      [ 1Γ , s ]
                        γ : Γ ⊢ (app (λ t) s) γ ≡ t                γ : B[ 1Γ , s ] γ

                                 γ : Γ ⊢ f γ : (a : A γ) → B γ a
                                                 
                          γ : Γ ⊢ λ app f pt zv γ ≡ f γ : (Π A B) γ

Or, in indexed notation:

                  γ : Γ ⊢ app γ (λ a. t γ a) (s γ) ≡ t γ (s γ) : B γ (s γ)
                  γ : Γ ⊢ λ a. app [ γ, a ] (f γ) a ≡ f γ : (a : A γ) → B γ a

And such that the above constructs are stable under substitution, i.e. for σ : ∆ → Γ :
                                                                   A
                                    (Π A B)σ ≡ Π Aσ BW2 σ
                                                        A
                                       (λ t)σ ≡ λ tW2 σ
                                   (app f s)σ ≡ app fσ sσ                                                 ⊳

4.1.4   Universes

A U-structure on a CwF with levels consists of the following structure and properties:

             ℓ level                      γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type ℓ                     γ : Γ ⊢ A γ : Type ℓ γ
   γ : Γ ⊢ Type ℓ γ type lsuc ℓ     γ : Γ ⊢ Code A γ : Type ℓ γ                  γ : Γ ⊢ El A γ type ℓ

Such that Code and El are mutual inverses:
               γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type ℓ                        γ : Γ ⊢ A γ : Type ℓ γ
        γ : Γ ⊢ El (Code A) γ ≡ A γ             γ : Γ ⊢ Code (El A) γ ≡ A γ : Type ℓ γ

And such that the above constructs are stable under substitution, i.e. for σ : ∆ → Γ :

                                         Typeσℓ ≡ Type ℓ
                                     (Code A)σ ≡ Code Aσ
                                        (El A)σ ≡ El Aσ                                                   ⊳

4.1.5   Natural models

We recall from [Awo18] that a CwF can equivalently be described as a natural model: a cat-
egory C together with an (algebraically) representable natural transformation pr : Tm → Ty
of presheaves on C. This amounts to representing the dependency of terms on types in
‘fibered’ rather than ‘indexed’ style, which is different from the usual type-theoretic nota-
tion, but it has the advantage that various operations can cleanly be described in terms of
pr. Similarly, of course, a CwF with levels can be described by a family of representable
transformations pr ℓ : Tm ℓ → Ty ℓ .
     In particular, like any morphism in a locally cartesian closed category, any such pr
induces a polynomial endofunctor Ppr of the presheaf category, where for any presheaf

                                               44
(i.e. judgment) X, morphisms よΓ → Ppr (X) (i.e. elements of the presheaf Ppr (X)) are
bijectively related to pairs consisting of a type A ∈ Ty(Γ ) in context Γ and a morphism
よ(γ : Γ , a : A γ) → X (i.e. an element of X(γ : Γ , a : A γ)). In syntax, this is a bidirectional
rule, indicating a bijection between the data above and below the lines:

                         γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type     γ : Γ, a : A γ ⊢ ξ γ a : X
                         =============================================
                                      γ:Γ ⊢ξ  e γ : Ppr (X)

    Thus, for instance, Ppr ℓ0 (Ty ℓ1 ) represents families of types of level ℓ1 indexed by a type
of level ℓ0 . Therefore, formation rules such as those for for Π-types and Σ-types:

                      γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type ℓ0   γ : Γ , a : A γ ⊢ B γ a type ℓ1
                                 γ : Γ ⊢ (Π A B) γ type ℓ0 ⊔ ℓ1

                      γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type ℓ0    γ : Γ , a : A γ ⊢ B γ a type ℓ1
                                 γ : Γ ⊢ (Σ A B) γ type ℓ0 ⊔ ℓ1

are represented by morphisms Π, Σ : Ppr ℓ0 (Ty ℓ1 ) → Ty ℓ0 ⊔ℓ1 .
  The rules for terms can also be represented in this language. For instance, a natural
model has Π-types if and only if there is a pullback square

                                    Ppr ℓ0 (Tm ℓ1 )               Tm ℓ0 ⊔ℓ1
                               Ppr ℓ (pr ℓ1 )            y               pr ℓ0 ⊔ℓ1
                                   0


                                       Ppr ℓ0 (Ty ℓ1 )        Π
                                                                  Ty ℓ0 ⊔ℓ1 ,

meaning that there is a bijection

                                   γ : Γ, a : A γ ⊢ t γ a : B γ a
                                   ============================
                                     γ : Γ ⊢ (λ t) γ : (Π A B) γ

     Polynomial functors can also be composed, yielding another polynomial functor. For
instance, in a CwF without levels, Ppr ◦ Ppr is the functor such that (P pr ◦ Ppr )(X) represents
elements of X in a doubly-extended context (γ : Γ , a : A γ, b : B γ a), which means that
it is the polynomial functor associated to the map pr2 : Tm2 → Ppr (Ty) where the fiber of
Tm2 (Γ ) over (A, B) consists of a pair of terms γ : Γ ⊢ a : A γ and γ : Γ ⊢ b : B γ a. In
particular, a CwF C has Σ-types if and only if Σ : Ppr (Ty) → Ty represents any such pair by a
single term, i.e. there is a pullback square

                                                Tm2               Tm
                                             pr   2      y          pr

                                            Ppr (Ty)          Σ
                                                                  Ty,

This is equivalent to a (cartesian) morphism of polynomial functors Ppr ◦ Ppr → Ppr . Of
course, there is an analogous version for a CwF with levels.                           ⊳


                                                         45
4.1.6    Telescopes

We will often have finite towers of types:

                                γ : Γ ⊢ A γ type ℓ0
                                γ : Γ , a : A ⊢ B γ a type ℓ1
                                γ : Γ , a : A, b : B γ a b ⊢ C γ a b type ℓ2

We represent these with a single judgement, defining a telescope:

                             γ : Γ ⊢ (a : A γ, b : B γ a, c : C γ a b) γ tel ℓ .

Formally speaking, telescopes and their elements (which we call partial substitutions) are
another CwF structure on the same category of contexts, which are related to the original
one by specified operations. In natural model style, the definition is:
Definition 4.5. A natural model with levels C has telescopes if it is equipped with:

    • Another family of (algebraically) representable natural transformations tpr ℓ : PSub ℓ →
      Tel ℓ . This yields two families of judgments for telescopes and partial substitutions:

                                  γ : Γ ⊢ Υ γ tel ℓ                          Γ :Γ ⊢υ:Υ

        Their representability yields the extension of a context by a telescope:

                                              Γ ob      γ : Γ ⊢ Υ γ tel ℓ
                                                 (γ : Γ | υ : Υ γ) ob.

    • Morphisms of polynomial functors 1C → Ptpr ℓ , i.e. pullback squares

                                                    1            PSub ℓ
                                                        y
                                                                     tpr ℓ

                                                    1            Tel ℓ .
                                                            ()


        This gives ‘empty telescopes’ γ : Γ ⊢ () tel ℓ containing exactly one partial substitution
        γ : Γ ⊢ [ ] : ().
    • Morphisms of polynomial functors P tpr ℓ ◦ Ppr ℓ ′ → Ptpr ℓ whenever ℓ ′ ⩽ ℓ. This says how
      to extend a telescope by a type:8

                        γ : Γ ⊢ Υ γ tel ℓ    γ : Γ | υ : Υ γ ⊢ A γ υ type ℓ ′              ℓ′ ⩽ ℓ
                                    γ : Γ ⊢ (υ : Υ γ, a : A γ υ) tel ℓ0 ⊔ ℓ

        such that the partial substitutions in (υ : Υ γ, a : A γ υ) are exactly pairs of a partial
        substitution in Υ and a term in A, just as for Σ-types. Thus we get the rules from
        section 2.3.2.
   8 Note that P
                 tpr ◦ P pr is the polynomial functor associated to a map whose codomain is P tpr (Ty), which is the
presheaf of types in a context extended by a telescope.



                                                        46
   • The rules (Γ | ()p ) ≡ Γ and (Γ | (Θ, x : A)) ≡ ((Γ | Θ), x : A) from section 2.3.1 hold.
     Note that these are equalities of objects of C, and in particular only make sense if pr
     and tpr are algebraically representable.
   • A morphism of polynomial functors Ptpr ℓ0 ◦ Ptpr ℓ1 → Ptpr ℓ0 ⊔ℓ1 , giving the extension of
     telescopes by telescopes (υ : Υ | φ : Φ υ) from section 2.5.2, such that the rules from
     that section hold:

       (Γ | (Υ | Φ)) ≡ ((Γ | Υ) | Φ)       (Υ | ()) ≡ Υ           (Υ | (Φ, x : A)) ≡ ((Υ | Φ), x : A)

    Syntactically, this definition represents the rules from sections 2.3.1, 2.3.2 and 2.5.2, in
the non-modal case. Because it is phrased in terms of presheaves and operations on them,
it implicitly includes substitution into telescopes that commute with the other operations.
Some of these commutation properties refer to weakening-two, which can be characterised
in terms of them as well, for instance:

     γ : Γ ⊢ Υ γ tel ℓ    σ:∆→Γ                    σ:∆→Γ          γ : Γ ⊢ Υ γ tel ℓ
           δ : ∆ ⊢ Υ (σ δ) tel ℓ             Υ
                                            W2 σ : (δ : ∆, υ : Υ (σ δ)) → (γ : Γ , υ : Υ γ)
                                                                                            
     ()σ ≡ ()         (υ : Υ γ, a : A γ υ)σ δ ≡ δ : Υ (σ δ) , a : A             WΥ
                                                                                 2 σ [ δ, υ ]

                         ()                          (Υ, A)              
                     W2 σ ≡ σ                    W2           σ ≡ WA
                                                                   2 WΥ
                                                                      2 σ

For example, we have:

         (a : A γ, b : B γ a)σ δ ≡ (a : A (σ δ) , b : B (σ (pt [ δ, a ])) (zv [ δ, a ]))

When we allow ourselves to use variables in the usual way, justified by the internal type
theory of presheaves, we can write this as:

                    (a : A γ, b : B γ a)σ δ ≡ (a : A (σ δ) , b : B (σ δ) a)

Note that the meaning of this construction is simply iterating the canonical construction of
pullbacks over a tower:

                                           [ [ σ ◦ pt, zv ] ◦ pt, zv ]
    (δ : ∆, a : A (σ δ) , b : B (σ δ) a)                                 (γ : Γ , a : A γ, b : B γ a)

                                               [ σ ◦ pt, zv ]
            (δ : ∆, a : A (σ δ))                                              (γ : Γ , a : A γ)


                                                     σ
                     ∆                                                                Γ

    We can also characterise the Π-telescopes from section 2.5.3 just like the Π-types in
section 4.1.3.
Definition 4.6. A CwF with levels C with telescopes has Π-telescopes if:




                                                47
   • There is a pullback square

                                     Ptpr ℓ0 (PSub ℓ1 )              PSub ℓ0 ⊔ℓ1
                                Ptpr ℓ (tpr ℓ1 )             y             tpr ℓ0 ⊔ℓ1
                                     0


                                         Ptpr ℓ0 (Tel ℓ1 )       Π
                                                                     Tel ℓ0 ⊔ℓ1 ,


   • The computation rules from section 2.5.3 hold.

    Now the above rules allow us to build telescopes up from the empty telescope by adding
types, just as the rules of a CwF allow us to build contexts from the empty context by adding
types. However, just as in the case of contexts, the rules do not stipulate that every telescope
is obtained in that way. Indeed, there is no way to assert such a thing in a Generalised
Algebraic Theory. However, it holds ‘admissibly’ in the initial syntactic model, and any CwF
can be extended with telescopes in this way:
Theorem 4.7. Any CwF with levels can be equipped with telescopes. If it has Π-types, it also
has Π-telescopes.

Proof. We define tpr ℓ to be the map such that
                                       X
                              Ptpr ℓ =       Ppr ℓ0 ◦ · · · ◦ Ppr ℓn .
                                               n∈N
                                            ∀i⩽n,ℓi ⩽ℓ



Thus an element of Tel ℓ (Γ ) is a tower of n types over Γ of level ⩽ ℓ, and similarly for
terms. The two morphisms of polynomial functors are then immediate. We define context
extension in the obvious way by iterating context extension by types, and the equations
hold. (This is the initial structure of telescopes on C in a straightforward sense.) Similarly,
we define Π-telescopes by using the rules for computing them on extended telescopes.  ⊳


4.1.7   Meta-abstractions

Because meta-abstractions are not ‘reified’ in the theory as types, they do not require assum-
ing any structure beyond that which is already present in the presheaf category. Specifically,
the rules for the judgment Γ ⊢ A type/δ : Υ simply say that it should be (up to isomorphism)
the object Ptpr (Ty) that classifies types indexed by a telescope. Similarly, the rules for the
elements of a meta-abstraction simply say that these are the object Ptpr (Tm) that classifies
terms indexed by a telescope. In other words, meta-abstractions of types and their terms
are classified by a map (isomorphic to) Ptpr (pr). Likewise, meta-abstractions of telescopes
(the judgment Γ ⊢ Θ tel/δ : Υ ) are classified by a map isomorphic to Ptpr (tpr). This gives
all the rules from sections 2.3.3 and 2.5.1; thus any natural model with telescopes also has
meta-abstractions of types and telescopes.
    Semantically, we don’t ever need to discuss meta-abstractions explicitly, since to judge
Γ ⊢ A type ℓ /δ : Υ is equivalent to judging Γ | Υ ⊢ A type ℓ , and so on. Thus we will generally
talk only about types and telescopes in contexts.                                               ⊳




                                                       48
4.1.8   Infinite Telescopes

We now define a new judgement γ : Γ ⊢ Υ    e γ stel∞ whose elements are ‘infinite telescopes’.
                                                   ℓ
As with meta-abstractions, this is not (yet) introducing new structure on a CwF, rather it is a
definition that can be made in the presheaf category of any CwF. The idea is that an infinite
telescope consists of an infinite sequence of types each dependent on all the previous ones:

                                                  γ:Γ ⊢Υe 0 γ type ℓ
                                                                    0
                                               0 e0     e 1     0
                                      γ : Γ , υ : Υ γ ⊢ Υ γ υ type ℓ    1

                                   e 0 γ, υ1 : Υ
                      γ : Γ , υ0 : Υ           e 1 γ υ0 ⊢ Υ
                                                          e 1 γ υ0 υ1 type ℓ
                                                                            2

                                                       ..
                                                        .
where ℓn ⩽ ℓ for all n. Formally, we define this along with its approximating finite tele-
scopes:
                              e ∂0 γ ≡ ()
                              Υ
                                                
                              e ∂1 γ ≡ υ0 : Υ
                              Υ             e0 γ
                                                                
                              e ∂2 γ ≡ υ0 : Υ
                              Υ             e 0 γ, υ1 : Υ
                                                        e 1 γ υ0

                                     ..
                                      .

so that we can say that in general Υ e n is a type in context (γ : Γ | υ : Υ
                                                                           e ∂n ). In syntax, this
means we give the following bidirectional rule with infinitely many premises:
                                                                        
    γ:Γ ⊢Υ  e ∂n γ tel ℓ                      e ∂n γ ⊢ Υ
                                 γ : Γ | ∂υ : Υ         e n γ ∂υ type ℓ           (ℓ ⩽ ℓ)n∈N
                          n∈N                                          n n∈N
                                                                                n
             e ∂0
             Υ γ ≡ ()         γ:Γ ⊢Υ  e ∂(n+1)             e ∂n        e n
                                                γ ≡ (∂υ : Υ γ, υ : Υ γ ∂υ)
   ===========================================================================n∈N=============
                                        γ:Γ ⊢Υ   e γ stel∞
                                                         ℓ

(It would also be possible to define infinite contexts coinductively, but for our purposes this
concrete definition is easier to work with.)
    We have already defined substitution on finite telescopes, and that definition extends
level-wise to infinite telescopes. Given σ : ∆ → Γ and γ : Γ ⊢ Υ        e γ stel∞ , we define
                                                                                 ℓ
δ:∆⊢Υ  e (σ δ) stel to consist of the data:
                    ∞
                    ℓ

                                      e n (σ δ) ⊢ Υ
                          δ : ∆, ∂υ : Υ           e n (σ δ) ∂υ type ℓ
                                                                     n


   Similarly, we would like to define infinite partial substitutions as infinite lists of terms
sectioning an infinite telescope. This is encapsulated by the judgement γ : Γ ⊢ υ    eγ:Υ   e γ,
which is characterised by a similar bidirectional rule:

              (γ : Γ ⊢ υ        e ∂n γ)n∈N
                        e∂n γ : Υ                                 e n γ (e
                                                           en γ : Υ
                                                  (γ : Γ ⊢ υ             υ∂n γ))n∈N
                     ∂0                        ∂(n+1)         ∂n       n
                   e γ≡[]
                   υ                         e
                                    (γ : Γ ⊢ υ         γ≡[υ  e γ, υ  e γ ])n∈N
              =================================================================
                                          γ:Γ ⊢υ  eγ:Υ  eγ

Pullback of infinite partial substitutions is defined, as before, to consist of the data:
                                                                      
                           δ:∆⊢υ   en (σ δ) : Υe n (σ δ) υ e∂n (σ δ)


                                                49
   Categorically, these rules mean we define the map pr∞ ℓ : PSub∞ ℓ → Tel∞ ℓ to be the
limit of the sequence:
                           · · · → prnℓ → · · · → pr3ℓ → pr2ℓ → pr ℓ → 1
where prnℓ is the map such that
                                            X
                              Pprnℓ =                 Ppr ℓ0 ◦ · · · ◦ Ppr ℓn .
                                         ∀i⩽n,ℓi ⩽ℓ

In particular, P1 is the identity functor and 1 is the identity map of the terminal object.
There is only one natural map pr ℓ n+1 → pr ℓ n , which discards the last type in a telescope of
length n + 1; it is not possible to discard any of the other types and get a telescope of length
n.                                                                                             ⊳

4.1.9   ω-Limits

Finally, we define the structure of infinite (sequential, Reedy) limits on a CwF. These are an
‘infinitary rule’ (i.e. a non-elementary structure) that is not part of dTT or any implementable
type theory, but we will use them to build our intended models of dTT. Syntactically, they
are essentially just a kind of Σ-type of an infinite telescope.
Definition 4.8. A CwF with levels has ω-limits if it is equipped with pullback squares
                                                       lim
                                         PSub∞
                                             ℓ                Tm ℓ
                                        pr∞ ℓ
                                                  y               pr ℓ

                                          Tel∞
                                             ℓ        lim
                                                              Ty ℓ ,

  In syntax, this means we have the following structure and properties. Firstly, having a
merely commutative square as above gives the following rules:

                   γ:Γ ⊢Υ e γ stel∞                                γ:Γ ⊢υ eγ:Υ eγ
                                  ℓ
                                                                                   
                            e
               γ : Γ ⊢ lim Υ γ type ℓ                                              eγ
                                                                         e γ : lim Υ
                                                             γ : Γ ⊢ lim υ
Secondly,
                                                                                  
                               eγ
               γ : Γ ⊢ u : lim Υ                               γ : Γ ⊢ u : lim Υeγ
                                                                                           
                                e ∂n γ
            γ : Γ ⊢ res∂n γ u : Υ                      γ : Γ ⊢ resn γ u : Υe n γ res∂n γ u

We require that res∂n is derived from resn via:
                                  res∂0 γ u ≡ [ ]
                            res∂(n+1) γ u ≡ [ res∂n γ u, resn γ u ]
and that the following computation and uniqueness rules hold:
                             res∂n γ (lim (e       e∂n γ
                                           a γ)) ≡ a
                              resn γ (lim (e       en γ
                                           a γ)) ≡ a
                                                      u ≡ lim (resn γ u)n


                                                  50
Of course, all these constructions must also be stable under substitution:
                                      σ                
                                    eγ
                                lim Υ        ≡ lim Υ e (σ θ)

                                       a γ))σ ≡ lim (e
                                 (lim (e             a (σ θ))
                                ∂n
                                           σ      ∂n
                             res γ (a γ) ≡ res θ (a (σ θ))
                             (resn γ (a γ))σ ≡ resn θ (a (σ θ))                             ⊳


                             4.2    T HE SIMPLICIAL MODEL
In this section we fix a model of dependent type theory with all of the structure described
above, which we call the discrete model (dm). From it, we will construct a derived model
called the simplicial model (sm). We will do this, first, by way of constructing the truncated
simplicial models (smn ) for n ⩾ −2.


4.2.1   The Augmented Semi-Simplex Category

Let B be the type of binary digits, which are 0, 1 : B. For n ⩾ m ⩾ −1, let Bhni,hmi be the
type of length n + 1 binary sequences such that exactly m + 1 of the digits have value 1.
When b1 : Bhni,hmi and b0 : Bhmi,hki , we have a composition b1 ◦ b0 : Bhni,hki obtained by
replacing the 1 digits in b1 with the digits of b0 . For example 1010011 ◦ 0110 = 0010010.
The category whose objects are hni and whose morphisms hmi → hni are Bhni,hmi is the
augmented semi-simplex category ∆+ . Note that each of the representables Bhni, – only
has finitely many elements. We write ∅ for the length-zero sequence, which is the unique
element of Bh−1i,h−1i .
    The identities 1hni are given by length n + 1 sequences of the digit 1. Further, for any
b : Bhni,hki , we obtain 0b : Bhn+1i,hki and 1b : Bhn+1i,hk+1i by left appending the indicated
digit. The following identities hold:

                                   0b1 ◦ b0 ≡ 0 (b1 ◦ b0 )
                                   1b1 ◦ 1b0 ≡ 1 (b1 ◦ b0 )
                                   1b1 ◦ 0b0 ≡ 0 (b1 ◦ b0 )

Note that by the second rule, along with the fact that 11hni ≡ 1hn+1i , the assignments
hni 7→ hn + 1i and b 7→ 1b define an endofunctor of ∆+ .
                                                                   +
   Additionally, for every n ⩾ −2, we have the full subcategory ∆n   of ∆+ on those objects
                        +                               +
hki with k ⩽ n. Thus ∆−2 is the empty category, while ∆−1 is the terminal category.       ⊳


4.2.2   Truncated Simplicial Objects
                                                                                +
The objects of the n-truncated simplicial model smn are C-valued presheaves on ∆n , de-
noted:
                                         Γ obsmn
                                            +
Thus the underlying category of smn is C∆n . For each such presheaf and n ⩾ m ⩾ −2, we
have Γ m obdm , where Γ −2 ≡ ()dm is the distinguished terminal object of C.


                                                51
   Further, if we have b : Bhni,hmi , then Γ b : Γ n → Γ m , and this assignment is contravari-
antly functorial on the nose. We also sometimes write γb for Γ b γ. Morphisms of simplicial
objects are natural transformations. The data of σ : ∆ → Γ thus consists of a morphism
σn : ∆n → Γ n for each n, such that for any b : Bhni,hmi , we have:

                                               ∆b ◦ σn ≡ σm ◦ Γ b

There are two additional functors of relevance relating the truncated simplicial models at
different dimensions: truncation and décalage.
                               +          +                                   +           +
                         π : C∆n+1 → C∆n                          (– ) D : C∆n+1 → C∆n
                                                                       
                         (πΓ )m+1 ≡ Γ m+1                          Γ D m+1 ≡ Γ m+2
                                                                       b
                         (πΓ )b ≡ Γ b                              Γ D ≡ Γ 1b
                                                                       
                         (πσ)m+1 ≡ σm+1                            σD m+1 ≡ σm+2

There is a natural transformation between them:

                                              ρ : (– ) D ⇒ π
                                               (ρΓ )m+1 ≡ Γ 01hm+1i

Note that ρΓ : Γ D → πΓ is a morphism of presheaves since for b : Bhn+1i,hm+1i , we have:
             b
        πΓ        ◦ (ρΓ )n+1 ≡ Γ b ◦ Γ 01hn+1i ≡ Γ 01hn+1i ◦b ≡ Γ 0(1hn+1i ◦b) ≡ Γ 0b
                                                                                                             b
                             ≡ Γ 0(b◦1hm+1i ) ≡ Γ 1b◦01hm+1i ≡ Γ 01hm+1i ◦ Γ 1b ≡ (ρΓ )m+1 ◦ Γ D

A similar proof shows that ρ is natural, as its components arise from morphisms in ∆+
                                                                                    n , and
any morphism of presheaves must respect these.                                            ⊳

4.2.3     Intuition

We will now construct the type-theoretical/fibrant structure of the truncated simplicial
model. This will be done concretely through a series of mutually inductive definitions that
will require substantially strengthening the inductive hypothesis for the sake of making ev-
erything well-typed.
    However, before we launch into that, it would be useful to keep in mind where we are
headed. At the most basic level, we would like to define the judgement

                                              γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 A γ type ℓ

A simplicial type consists entirely of the data of its discrete m-simplex types for m ⩽ n + 1,
all of which live at the same level ℓ:

                                                                γ−1 : Γ −1 ⊢dm A−1 γ−1 type ℓ
                                                    γ0 : Γ 0 , ӡ0 : A−1 γ0 0 ⊢dm A0 γ0 ӡ0 type ℓ
         γ1 : Γ 1 , ӡ00 : A−1 γ1 00 , x01 : A0 γ1 01 ӡ00 , x10 : A0 γ1 10 ӡ00 ⊢dm A1 γ1 ӡ00 x01 x10 type ℓ
                                                                              ..
                                                                               .


                                                        52
Note that Γ 0 (for example) denotes the 0-component of the presheaf Γ , which is an object at
dm, while γ0 is an atomic variable name belonging to this object. As another example, the
type annotation on the variable x01 is well-typed because the outer square of the following
diagram is a distinguished pullback:
                                                                                          
   γ1 : Γ 1 , ӡ00 : A−1 γ1 01 0        γ0 : Γ 0 , ӡ0 : A−1 γ0 0    γ−1 : Γ −1 , ӡ∅ : A−1 γ−1


                                 Γ 01                                    Γ0                            
             γ1 : Γ 1                              γ0 : Γ 0                                 γ−1 : Γ −1


                                               Γ 0 ◦Γ 01 ≡Γ 00

   We will write the type declarations of An generically as:
               γn+1 : Γ n+1 , ∂a : πA∂(n+1) γn+1 ⊢dm An+1 γn+1 ∂a type ℓn+1 .
Here πA∂(n+1) is a telescope consisting of the ‘boundary’ of an (n + 1)-simplex, also known
as the Reedy ‘matching object’ of an augmented semi-simplicial type. For example, we will
have:
                A∂(−1) γ−1 ≡ ()
                                              
                    A∂0 γ0 ≡ ӡ0 : A−1 γ0 0
                                                                                      
                    A∂1 γ1 ≡ ӡ00 : A−1 γ1 00 , x01 : A0 γ1 01 ӡ00 , x10 : A0 γ1 10 ӡ00 .

   Similarly, we would like to define simplicial terms to consist of the data of their discrete
m-simplex terms for m ⩽ n + 1. The judgement
                                         γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 t γ : A γ
will be defined to consist of the data:
                  γ−1 : Γ −1 ⊢dm t−1 γ−1 : A−1 γ−1
                                                                 
                    γ0 : Γ 0 ⊢dm t0 γ0 : A0 γ0 t−1 γ0 0
                                                                                              
                    γ1 : Γ 1 ⊢dm t1 γ1 : A1 γ1 t−1 γ0 00              t0 γ1 01       t0 γ1 10
                             ..
                              .
Similarly to before, we will write this generically as
                                                                                                
                  γn+1 : Γ n+1 ⊢dm tn+1 γn+1 : An+1 γn+1 πt∂(n+1) γn+1
where πt∂(n+1) γn+1 denotes the action of the lower-dimensional parts of t on the boundary
of γn+1 .                                                                                ⊳

4.2.4   Fibrant Structure

As suggested above, the basic structure of the fibrant theory of the models smn will be
defined by mutual induction. In this section our goal is to define the presheaves of types and
terms in smn , along with the context extension operation (but not yet its universal property).
This requires defining several other notions mutually, including a type-theoretic version of
Reedy ‘matching objects’ and a truncated version of display that decreases dimension.

                                                   53
4.2.4.1 Declarations and Simple Cases We start by declaring the type of all these struc-
tures and operations, and giving those definitions that are direct. First, we will have match-
ing telescopes and matching substitutions:

      γ – : πΓ ⊢smn A γ – type ℓ                         γ – : πΓ ⊢smn t γ – : A γ –
  γn+1 : Γ n+1 ⊢dm A∂(n+1) γn+1 tel ℓ         γn+1 : Γ n+1 ⊢dm t∂(n+1) γn+1 : A∂(n+1) γn+1

The inductive definitions of these telescopes and substitutions will be given in section
4.2.4.2. However, in terms of them, we are able to define the types and terms of smn+1 , as
pairs of a type or term in smn with a discrete type or term over its matching object. We can
formulate these definitions type-theoretically as bidirectional rules.

                                   γ – : πΓ ⊢smn πA γ – type ℓ
                 γn+1 : Γ n+1 , ∂a : πA∂(n+1) γn+1 ⊢dm An+1 γn+1 ∂a type ℓ
                 ============================================================
                                     γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 A γ type ℓ

                                 γ – : πΓ ⊢smn πt γ – : πA γ –             
                 γn+1 : Γ n+1 ⊢dm tn+1 γn+1 : An+1 γn+1 πt∂(n+1) γn+1
                 ===========================================================
                                     γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 t γ : A γ

Extension of contexts by a type γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 A γ type ℓ , and of a substitution by a term
γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 t γ : A γ, are then obtained as follows:
                                                     
         γ : Γ , a : A γ m+1 ≡ γ – : πΓ , a – : πA γ – m+1 for m < n
                                                                                   
         γ : Γ , a : A γ n+1 ≡ γn+1 : Γ n+1 , ∂a : πA∂(n+1) γn+1 , a : An+1 γn+1 ∂a
                [ σ, t ]m+1 ≡ [ πσ, πt ]m+1 for m < n
                 [ σ, t ]n+1 ≡ [ σn+1 , πt∂(n+1) , tn+1 ].

So far this is just a definition of the family of discrete objects underlying (γ : Γ , a : A γ); we
will enhance it to a diagram in (4.15) below.
    We will also prove that matching telescopes and substitutions are stable under substitu-
                                      +
tion, such that for σ : ∆ → Γ in C∆n+1 , we have:
                                       σ                                      σ
             Aπσ ∂(n+1) ≡ A∂(n+1) n+1                     tπσ ∂(n+1) ≡ t∂(n+1) n+1

Substitution on types γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 A γ type ℓ and terms γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 t γ : A γ can then be
defined as:
                                                               πA∂(n+1)
                                                                W2        σn+1
                 π Aσ ≡ πAπσ                         Aσ n+1 ≡ An+1
                                                      
                  π tσ ≡ πtπσ                        tσ n+1 ≡ tσn+1
                                                               n+1 .

Functoriality of substitutions in smn+1 then follows from that of smn and dm.
    In order to define the matching telescopes and substitutions, we will require the defi-
nition of display to be part of the mutual induction. As noted above, when working with
truncated diagrams, display takes an (n + 1)-truncated semi-simplicial diagram A to an n-
truncated one that’s dependent on πA. Since we have no modal locks available yet, we are


                                                54
also forced to take this version of display to be in a totally décalaged context; recall that
décalage makes sense for arbitrary (non-fibrant) contexts.

               γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 A γ type ℓ                                 γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 t γ : A γ
      +                    +                +
           D
     γ : Γ , a : πA  ρΓ                 d
                          γ ⊢smn A γ a type ℓ                     γ : Γ D ⊢smn td γ+ : Ad γ+ πtρΓ
                                                                   +

                                                                                         +
We will prove that display is stable under substitution by σ : ∆ → Γ in C∆n+1 , and satisfies
the expected formulas relating it to décalage:
                                              WπAρΓ σD
                               (Aσ ) d ≡ Ad 2
                                             σD
                                (tσ ) d ≡ td
                                                                                     
                  (γ : Γ , a : A γ) D ≡ γ+ : Γ D , a : πAρΓ γ+ , a ′ : Ad γ+ a                      (4.9)
                                    D           D   ρ∆     d
                            [ σ, t ] ≡ [ σ , πt          , t ].                                 (4.10)
                                                                                        +
   Finally, we will also define substitutions that give an the actions of morphisms in ∆n+1
on matching telescopes and on types:

                          γ – : πΓ ⊢smn A γ – type ℓ           b : Bhn+1i,hm+1i
                                                                                                
      γn+1 : Γ n+1 , ∂a : A∂(n+1) γn+1 ⊢dm actA
                                              ∂b γn+1 ∂a : π
                                                             n−m
                                                                 A∂(m+1) Γ b γn+1

                         γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 A γ type ℓ   b : Bhn+1i,hm+1i
       γn+1 : Γ n+1 , ∂a : πA∂(n+1) γn+1 , a : An+1 γn+1 ∂a
                                                                            
                       ⊢dm actA
                              b γn+1 ∂a a : π
                                              n−m
                                                  Am+1 Γ b γn+1 act∂b γn+1 ∂a

We will show that these compute to the identities (i.e. weakening) when b = 1hn+1i , are
functorial such that for b1 : Bhn+1i,hm+1i and b0 : Bhm+1i,hk+1i :
                          n−m                               
                     actπ
                        ∂b0
                              A
                                  Γ b1 γn+1 actA                   A
                                                  ∂b1 γn+1 ∂a ≡ act∂(b1 ◦b0 ) γn+1 ∂a (4.11)
     n−m                                                   
 actπ
    b0
         A
             Γ b1 γn+1 actπA  ∂b1 γn+1 ∂a     actA                 A
                                                 b1 γn+1 ∂a a ≡ actb1 ◦b0 γn+1 ∂a a (4.12)

                                                                                         +
and are also stable under substitution in the sense that for σ : ∆ → Γ in C∆n+1 :
                                   πσ            A∂(n+1)σn+1
                                             A W2
                               actA
                                  ∂b   ≡ act ∂b                                                 (4.13)
                                     σ         An+1 WπA
                                             A W2
                                                          ∂(n+1)
                                                                σn+1
                                actA
                                   b ≡ actb
                                                       2
                                                                     .                          (4.14)

Given these, we can then define the functorial structure of the putative object (γ : Γ , a : A γ):
a morphism b1 : Bhn+1i,hm+1i acts on it by:

     (γ : Γ , a : A γ)b γn+1 ∂a a ≡ [ Γ b γn+1 , actπA             A
                                                    ∂b γn+1 ∂a, actb γn+1 ∂a a ]                (4.15)

Equations (4.11) and (4.12) tell us that the assignment (γ : Γ , a : A γ)b is functorial, while
eqs. (4.13) and (4.14) tell us that the extension [ σ, t ] is a morphism of presheaves.
    The above is the complete list of constructions and theorems that we need in order
to inductively define the type and term presheaves in the models smn and their context
extension function.

                                                    55
4.2.4.2 The Inductive Cases Now we give the inductive definitions and proofs of the
objects and theorems declared previously. The model sm−2 is the terminal CwF on the
terminal category. For sm−1 , we have that:
                          A∂(−1) ≡ ()dm                     t∂(−1) ≡ [ ]dm
from which the rest of the definitions and theorems evidently follow.
   Suppose now that the model smn+1 has been defined with all of the above structure and
properties. We first define matching telescopes and substitutions as follows:
                        
     A∂(n+2) γn+2 ≡ ∂a : (πAρπΓ )∂(n+1) γn+2 , a : (AρΓ )n+1 γn+2 ∂a,
                                                                                   
                                                   ∂a ′ : Ad ∂(n+1) [ γn+2 , ∂a, a ]
                                                        
      t∂(n+2) γn+2 ≡ [ (πtρπΓ )∂(n+1) , (tρΓ )n+1 , td ∂(n+1) ].

The stability of these under substitution follows from that of the constituent constructions
                                                +
in the previous dimension; for σ : ∆ → Γ in C∆n+2 :
        
    Aπσ ∂(n+2) δn+2
          
        ≡ ∂a : (πAππσ◦ρπ∆ )∂(n+1) δn+2 , a : (Aπσ◦ρ∆ )n+1 δn+2 ∂a,
                                                                                  
                                            ∂a ′ : (Aπσ ) d ∂(n+1) [ δn+2 , ∂a, a ]
                         D
                                                     D
                                                         
        ≡ ∂a : πAρπΓ ◦πσ             δn+2 , a : AρΓ ◦σ         δn+2 ∂a,
                              ∂(n+1)                          n+1
                                                           πWA ρΓ
                                                                    σD
                                                                                                   
                                            ∂a ′ :       Ad    2
                                                                                    [ δn+2 , ∂a, a ]
                                                                           ∂(n+1)
                                                                     
       ≡ ∂a : (πAρπΓ )∂(n+1)      σD                 ρΓ
                                   n+1 δn+2 , a : (A )n+1    σD
                                                              n+1 δn+2 ∂a,
                                                                                      
                                              ∂a ′ : Ad ∂(n+1) [ σDn+1 δ n+2   , ∂a, a ]
        
       ≡ ∂a : (πAρπΓ )∂(n+1) (σn+2 δn+2 ) , a : (AρΓ )n+1 (σn+2 δn+2 ) ∂a,
                                                                                     
                                             ∂a ′ : Ad ∂(n+1) [ (σn+2 δn+2 ) , ∂a, a ]
        
       ≡ ∂a : (πAρπΓ )∂(n+1) γn+2 , a : (AρΓ )n+1 γn+2 ∂a,
                                                                    σn+2
                                    ∂a ′ : Ad ∂(n+1) [ γn+2 , ∂a, a ]
       ≡ A∂(n+2) (σn+2 δn+2 ) .
For display, we define:
                                                             
                    π Ad ≡ πAd                              Ad n+1 ≡ An+2
                                                             
                     π td ≡ πtd                             td n+1 ≡ tn+2 .
                                                                          
This definition is well typed because the expected typing judgement for Ad n+1 is:

    γn+2 : Γ n+2 , ∂a : (ππAρπΓ )∂(n+1) γn+2 , a : (πAρΓ )n+1 γn+2 ∂a,
                                                         
                   ∂a ′ : πAd ∂(n+1) γn+2 ∂a a ⊢dm Ad n+1 [ γn+2 , ∂a, a ] ∂a ′ type ℓ


                                             56
and the context in which An+2 lives expands to this by the definition of matching telescopes:

                γn+2 : Γ n+2 , ∂a : πA∂(n+2) γn+2 ⊢dm An+2 γn+2 ∂a type ℓ .

We can now check (4.9) at the level of n + 1 simplices:
                 
  γ : Γ, a : A γ D
                     n+1
                     
   ≡ γ : Γ , a : A γ n+2
                                                                                      
   ≡ γn+2 : Γ n+2 , ∂a : πA∂(n+2) γn+2 , a : An+2 γn+2 ∂a
   ≡ γn+2 : Γ n+2 , ∂a : (ππAρπΓ )∂(n+1) γn+2 , a : (πAρΓ )n+1 γn+2 ∂a,
                                                                                          
                     ∂a ′ : πAd ∂(n+1) [ γn+2 , ∂a, a ], a ′ : Ad n+1 [ γn+2 , ∂a, a ] ∂a ′
                                           
   ≡ γ+ : Γ D , a : πAρΓ γ+ , a ′ : Ad γ+ a n+1 ,

where (4.10) follows similarly. Stability under substitutions follows inductively:
                                     
              π Aσ d         ≡ πAπσ d
                         n+1
                                               WππAρπΓ
                                                        πσD
                               ≡ πAd             2


                                      πWπAρΓ
                                              σD
                               ≡ πAd     2

                                      WπAρΓ σD 
                               ≡ π Ad 2
                                 
                    Aσ d       ≡ Aσ n+2
                         n+1
                                           πA∂(n+2)
                                       W                    σn+2
                               ≡ An+2
                                   2


                                           (πAd )∂(n+1)           (πAρΓ )n+1      (ππAρπΓ )∂(n+1)
                                       W                      W2                 W2                 σn+2
                               ≡ An+2
                                   2

                                                                   d                     
                                                         W(πA
                                                             2
                                                                 )∂(n+1)     ρ
                                                                         W2πA Γ σD
                                           d                                                  n+1
                               ≡       A        n+1
                                              WπAρΓ    
                                                      σD
                               ≡       Ad        2
                                                                         .
                                                                   n+1

Lastly, we define the components of the functorial action on presheaves as follows:
                                                       ρ
                           ′
  actA                             πA πΓ
     ∂(0b) γn+2 [ ∂a, a, ∂a ] ≡ act∂b    γn+2 ∂a
                                                       ρ
                        ′   ′
  actA                            πA Γ
     0b γn+2 [ ∂a, a, ∂a ] a ≡ actb    γn+2 ∂a a
                           ′
  actA
     ∂(1b) γn+2 [ ∂a, a, ∂a ] ≡
                               ρ                                  ρ                            d
                                                                                     ′
                      [ actπA
                           ∂b
                              πΓ
                                 γn+2 ∂a, actA
                                             b
                                               Γ
                                                 γn+2 ∂a a, actA
                                                               ∂b [ γn+2 , ∂a, a ] ∂a ]
                                                   d
                        ′   ′                          ′ ′
  actA                            A
     1b γn+2 [ ∂a, a, ∂a ] a ≡ actb [ γn+2 , ∂a, a ] ∂a a ,




                                                             57
                                                  
where the last definition is well typed because Ad n+1 ≡ An+2 . We check functoriality:
                 (n+1)−m                                               ′
                                                                           
            actπ
               ∂b0
                           A
                              Γ 0b1 γn+2 actA ∂(0b1 ) γn+2 [ ∂a, a, ∂a ]
                           n−m                  b                            
                    ≡ actπ
                         ∂b0
                               πA
                                     ρΓ m+1 Γ D 1 γn+2         actA
                                                                  ∂(0b1 ) γn+2 ∂a
                           n−m
                               πAρπΓ
                                           b              ρπΓ           
                    ≡ actπ
                         ∂b0            Γ D 1 γn+2 actπA ∂b1    γn+2 ∂a
                               ρ
                    ≡ actπA  πΓ
                         ∂(b1 ◦b0 ) γn+2 ∂a
                                                     ′
                    ≡ actA
                         ∂(0b1 ◦b0 ) γn+2 [ ∂a, a, ∂a ]

and stability under substitutions:
                 πσ                                      ππσ◦ρπ∆
                                     ′
            actA                             πA
               ∂(0b) δn+2 [ ∂a, a, ∂a ] ≡ act∂b                      δn+2 ∂a
                                                         ρ    ◦πσD
                                              ≡ actπA
                                                   ∂b
                                                      πΓ
                                                                    δn+2 ∂a
                                                     πAρπΓ
                                                                           
                                              ≡ act∂b             σD
                                                                   n+1 δn+2 ∂a
                                                                                 ′
                                              ≡ actA
                                                   ∂(0b) (σn+2 δn+2 ) [ ∂a, a, ∂a ].

All omitted verifications are similar to the cases presented. This completes the construction
of the type and term presheaves and their context extension function, plus display, for the
truncated simplicial models smn .                                                           ⊳


4.2.5   Variables

To make the models smn into CwFs, what is missing from the above construction are the
fundamental context projections and variables. In this section we will now define these:

           γ : Γ ⊢smn A γ type ℓ                                  γ : Γ ⊢smn A γ type ℓ
          A
                                                                                             .
        ptsmn : (γ : Γ , a : A γ) → Γ               γ : Γ , a : A γ ⊢smn zvA          pt
                                                                           smn γ a : A γ a

We now construct variables and parent maps in smn inductively, with all of the hypothesise
eqs. (4.2) to (4.4) outlined before assumed at all prior levels. This construction will be
performed such that the following theorems hold inductively:
                                               D             ρ         d
                                     ptA
                                       smn+1
                                                        πA Γ
                                                    ≡ ptsm n ◦ ptA
                                                                 smn                             (4.16)
                                               d       Ad
                                     zvA
                                       smn+1        ≡ zvsmn                                      (4.17)
                                       
                                     πA ρ(Γ , A)
                                                                  Ad
                                                             πAρΓ ptsmn
                                   zvsmn            ≡ zvsmn                 .                    (4.18)

Note that the above equations are well typed by way of the formulas for décalage given in
the fibrant construction above. Now for sm−1 , we define:
                                                  A−1
                                     ptA
                                       sm−1 −1 ≡ ptdm
                                                  A−1
                                     zvA
                                       sm−1 −1 ≡ zvdm .




                                                    58
Then we inductively define:
                                                        
                                    ptA              πA
                                      smn+1 m+1 ≡ ptsmn m+1      for m < n
                                                       ρΓ 
                                                                     Ad
                                                                        
                                    ptA              πA
                                       smn+2 n+2 ≡ ptsmn+1 n+1 ◦ ptsmn+1 n+1
                                               
                                     π zvA          πA
                                          smn+2 ≡ zvsmn
                                                    Ad
                                                           
                                    zvAsmn+2 n+2 ≡ zvsmn+1 n+1 .

This says that the constructions are performed level-wise. From this, theorems eqs. (4.16)
and (4.17) then follow inductively, since the hypothesised décalage and display formulas
were used to define each successive level.
    Are these definitions correct? We gave well typed definitions, but to show that they
give a notion of parent maps and zero variables, we have to verify that equations eqs. (4.2)
to (4.4) hold. These verification appear in appendix A.1.                                  ⊳


4.2.6    Π-Types

We construct Π-types inductively, with all of the assumptions of a Π-type structure outlined
before assumed at all prior levels. Now note that we have the following two types in the
same context:
                    n      ρΓ +             n+1     
 γ+ : Γ D , f : Πsm πA πB       γ ⊢smn Πsm       A B d γ+ f type ℓ
                    n      ρΓ +
 γ+ : Γ D , f : Πsm πA πB       γ ⊢smn
                                                                                     
              a : πAρΓ γ+ a ′ : Ad γ+ a → Bd [ γ+ , a, a ′ ] app [ γ+ , f, a, a ′ ] f a type ℓ .

We will prove inductively along with our definition that these two types are equal. In point-
free notation, this means we will have:

              n+1             n             n  WπAρΓ pt                           [ WAd πAρΓ
                                                                                        2 W2    pt, app zvpt◦pt zvpt ]
        Πsm         A B d ≡ Πsm (πAρΓ )pt Πsm Ad 2                             Bd
                                                                                                                  (4.19)
              smn+1
                          d        smn           smn   d
                                                            
          λ           t        ≡λ             λ         t                                                         (4.20)
               n+1        d              n                 n          
     appsm           fs        ≡ appsm            appsm         fd πsρΓ sd .                                      (4.21)

Now to start on the induction, for sm−1 we define:
                                    −1      
                                Πsm A B −1 ≡ Πdm A−1 B−1
                                         −1 
                                    λsm t −1 ≡ λdm t−1
                                      −1    
                               appsm f s −1 ≡ appdm f−1 s−1 .




                                                                     59
Then we inductively define:
          n+2             n+1
   π Πsm       A B ≡ Πsm       πA πB
                                                   WπAρΓ pt      [ WA d πAρΓ
                                                                                 pt, app zvpt◦pt zvpt ]
                                                                                                        
      n+2                   n+1               n+1                       2 W2
  Πsm     A B n+2 ≡ Πsm         (πAρΓ )pt Πsm      Ad 2          Bd
                                                                                                          n+1
           smn+2
                       smn+1
       π λ         t ≡λ        πt
         n+2           n+1  n+1  
     λsm      t n+2 ≡ λsm         λsm    td
                                               n+1
         smn+2
                         smn+1
  π app          f s ≡ app       πf πs
       n+2                  n+1
                                         n+1
                                                      
 appsm      f s n+2 ≡ appsm         appsm     fd πsρΓ sd       .
                                                               n+1

As before, this says that the constructions are performed level-wise. From this, theorems
eqs. (4.19) to (4.21) then follow inductively, since the hypothesised display formulas were
used to define each successive level. The correctness of these definitions will follow from
verifying the β and η laws in appendix A.2.                                               ⊳

4.2.7   Universes

The universes of the discrete model are denoted Disc ℓ . We construct universes in smn
inductively, with all of the assumptions of a U-type structure outlined before assumed at all
prior levels. We will inductively have that:
                                     n+1         n                n
                             Typesmℓ
                                          d
                                            ≡ Πsm (El zv) Typesm ℓ                   (4.22)
                                smn+1
                                         d    smn       smn   d
                                                                 
                           Code       A ≡λ          Code     A                       (4.23)
                                smn+1
                                         d     smn    smn
                                                                
                                                              d pt
                                                                       
                              El      A ≡ El        app      A       zv .            (4.24)
For sm−1 , we define:
                                                −1   
                                      Typesm
                                          ℓ  −1
                                                ≡ Disc ℓ
                                            
                                           −1
                                   Codesm A −1 ≡ Codedm A−1
                                         −1 
                                     Elsm A −1 ≡ Eldm A−1 .
Then we inductively define:
                                  n+2           n+1
                      π Typesm  ℓ       ≡ Typesm
                                               ℓ
                              n+2 
                                              n+1                 n+1
                                                                       
                     Typesmℓ       n+2
                                        ≡ Πsm       (El zv) Typesm
                                                                 ℓ
                                                                        n+1
                             smn+2
                                              smn+1
                    π Code          A ≡ Code         πA
                                          n+1                    
                       smn+2                                n+1
                   Code        A n+2 ≡ λsm          Codesm      Ad
                                                                      n+1
                             smn+2
                                           smn+1
                      π El          A ≡ El        πA
                          n+2                 n+1        n+1     pt 
                     Elsm      A n+2 ≡ Elsm          appsm      Ad     zv           .
                                                                              n+1

Again, this says that the constructions are performed level-wise. From this, theorems
eqs. (4.22) to (4.24) then follow inductively, since the hypothesised display formulas were

                                                         60
used to define each successive level. The correctness of these definitions will follow from
verifying that Code and El are mutual inverses in appendix A.3.                           ⊳


4.2.8   ω-Limits
                                                                               e γ stel∞ or
If ω-limits are defined in smn , then given an infinite telescope γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 Υ       ℓ
                                           eγ:Υ
infinite partial substitution γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 υ    e γ in sm , we can meaningfully give a type
                                                         n

declaration of its display through use of limits:

                                      γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 Υe γ stel∞
                                                            ℓ
                                           n    ρ
                         +   D
                        γ : Γ , u : lim sm    e   Γ  +
                                             πΥ γ ⊢smn Υ      e d γ+ u stel∞
                                                                             ℓ


                                   γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 υeγ:Υ  e γ stel∞
                                                               ℓ
                                                                      
                          γ+ : Γ D ⊢smn υ         e d γ+ limsmn πe
                                         e d γ+ : Υ              υρ Γ

We then define these by:
                                                                       
                            e d γ+ u ∂m ≡
                            Υ                     e ∂m d γ+ res∂mn γ+ u
                                                  Υ            sm
                                                                     
                             e d γ+ u m ≡
                             Υ                    e m d γ+ resm n γ+ u
                                                  Υ           sm
                                     ∂m               
                                  ed
                                  υ      ≡        e∂m d
                                                  υ
                                       
                                     d m
                                                     
                                   e
                                   υ     ≡        em d .
                                                  υ

The third declaration, for example, is well typed because its expected type is:
                                               ∂m
                          e d γ+ limsmn πe
                          Υ               υρΓ
                                                               
                            ≡ Υ e ∂m d γ+ res∂mn γ+ limsmn πe
                                                            υρΓ
                                              sm
                                                 ρ 
                            ≡ Υ e ∂m d γ+ π υe∂m Γ .

We now construct ω-limits in smn inductively, with all of the assumptions of a ω-structure
outlined before assumed at all prior levels. This construction will be performed such that
the following theorems hold inductively:
                                        n+1   
                                 limsm      e d ≡ limsmn Υ
                                            Υ            ed                         (4.25)
                                      smn+1
                                              d     smn d
                                  lim       e ≡ lim
                                            υ            e
                                                         υ                          (4.26)
                                      ∂m
                                              d     ∂m d
                                   ressmn+1 u ≡ ressmn u                            (4.27)
                                      m
                                              d     m    d
                                   ressmn+1 u ≡ ressmn u .                          (4.28)

For sm−1 , we define:
                                             −1  
                                     limsm     e
                                               Υ             e −1
                                                     ≡ limdm Υ
                                                  −1
                                            −1   
                                      limsm υ  e −1 ≡ limdm υe−1
                                          ∂m
                                                         ∂m
                                       ressm−1 u −1 ≡ resdm u−1
                                                 
                                    resm sm−1 u −1 ≡ resm dm u−1 .



                                                    61
We then inductively define:
                                                
                                 π limsm
                                           n+2
                                              e ≡ limsmn+1 πΥ
                                              Υ                 e
                                                               
                               limsm
                                      n+2
                                          e
                                          Υ
                                                         n
                                                  ≡ limsm Υ ed
                                             n+2                 n+1
                                        smn+2
                                                     smn+1
                                  π lim       e ≡ lim
                                              υ              πeυ
                                    smn+2
                                                      smn d
                                                               
                                lim       e n+2 ≡ lim
                                          υ                e n+1
                                                           υ
                                                
                                   π res∂m            ∂m
                                        smn+2 u ≡ ressmn+1 πu
                                                              
                                 res∂m                 ∂m d
                                    smn+2 u n+2 ≡ ressmn u n+1
                                                
                               π resm smn+2 u ≡ resm  smn+1 πu
                                                              
                                 ressmn+2 u n+2 ≡ resm
                                    m                        d
                                                       smn u n+1 .

As always, this says that the constructions are performed level-wise. From this, theorems
eqs. (4.25) to (4.28) then follow inductively, since the hypothesised display formulas were
used to define each successive level. The correctness of these definitions will follow from
verifying laws in appendix A.4.                                                           ⊳

4.2.9   The Simplicial Model

Having constructed the truncated simplicial models smn , we obtain the simplicial model
fairly directly by taking a limit. In order to state this, we first define a tail-cutting truncation
functor and extend décalage to an endofunctor:
                           +        +                                   +       +
                   πn : C∆ → C∆n                             ( – ) D : C∆ → C∆
                                                                   
                   (πn Γ )m+1 ≡ Γ m+1                          Γ D m+1 ≡ Γ m+2
                                                                   b
                   (πn Γ )b ≡ Γ b                              Γ D ≡ Γ 1b
                                                                   
                   (πn σ)m+1 ≡ σm+1                            σD m+1 ≡ σm+2
Since décalage is now an endofunctor, ρ no longer involves truncation:
                                        ρ : (– ) D ⇒ 1C∆+
                                        (ρΓ )m+1 ≡ Γ 01hm+1i
Now we define the types and terms in sm to be compatible towers of types and terms in the
truncated models smn . In syntax this can be expressed by the following infinitary bidirec-
tional rules:
                (γ : πn Γ ⊢smn πn A γ type ℓ )n⩾−2    (π (πn+1 A) ≡ πn A)n⩾−2
                ==============================================================
                                      γ : Γ ⊢sm A γ type ℓ

                (γ : πn Γ ⊢smn πn t γ : πn A γ)n⩾−2       (π (πn+1 t) ≡ πn t)n⩾−2
                ===============================================================
                                        γ : Γ ⊢sm t γ : A γ
We also define:
                    γ : Γ ⊢sm A γ type ℓ                     γ : Γ ⊢sm t γ : A γ
                                                                                 .
                   An+1 ≡ (πn+1 A)n+1                       tn+1 ≡ (πn+1 t)n+1

                                                 62
The the above introduction rules equivalently then say that A and t in sm are defined by the
data of each of the simplex levels An+1 and tn+1 . At this point, every single construction in
smn performed above extends to sm levelwise, since it is preserved strictly by all the finite
truncation functors. In lieu of listing all of them, we will only give the case of display, which
is slightly modified in the absence of truncation:
                  γ : Γ ⊢sm A γ type ℓ                          γ : Γ ⊢sm t γ : A γ
                                                                                          .
        γ+ : Γ D , a : AρΓ γ+ ⊢sm Ad γ+ a type ℓ         γ+ : Γ D ⊢sm td γ+ : Ad γ+ tρΓ
The computation rules for display on variables, Π-types, universes, and ω-limits similarly
hold in sm when modified to exclude π.                                                   ⊳


                                      4.3   M ODALITIES
We now relate the discrete (dm) and simplicial (sm) models by way of modalities, and
introduce modal variants of the structural operations of a CwF.
                                                                                            
    The interesting facet of our approach is our treatment of (Γ , µ♦ ) and γ : Γ , a :△ A γ .
These examples concern the passage from dm to sm. Both examples construct a context in
sm, but where (part of) the starting data is discrete — Γ in the first example and A in the
second example. One naive approach to this construction would be to convert the discrete
data to simplicial data (fibrantly so in the second case) — in the first example we would set
values of the presheaf at m + 2 to be zeros, and in the second example we would set the
simplex types at levels m + 2 to be units. However, this would require us to assume that the
starting CwF has, respectively, an initial object and unit types. The approach that we take
avoids these assumptions, and also ensures that all computation laws have definitionally
strict interpretations.

4.3.1   Pieces of the triangle modality

We begin by dealing with △. The modality △ is supposed to construct a constant (aug-
mented semi-)simplicial diagram, while its left adjoint µ△ picks out the object of (−1)-
simplices. Both of these operations are determined levelwise by their behavior on truncated
diagrams, which is where most of the work is. Recalling that we will not be modeling the
modality △ on types itself, since it would require assuming the existence of unit types in
dm, in this section we describe the other aspects of △ in the models smn+1 and how they fit
together on sm.
                                                    +
   We begin by defining a functor – , µ△n+1 : C∆n+1 → C via:
                                                  
                                     γ : Γ , µ△n+1 ≡ Γ −1
                                       [ σ, µ△n+1 ] ≡ σ−1
Then we construct modal extension for △n+1 in smn+1 :
                          Γ obsmn+1        γ : Γ , µ△n+1 ⊢dm A γ type ℓ
                                                       
                                  γ : Γ , a :△n+1 A γ obsmn+1

                        σ : ∆ →smn+1 Γ      γ : Γ , µ△n+1 ⊢dm t γ : A γ
                                                                     
                         [ σ, t ]△n+1 : ∆ →smn+1 γ : Γ , a :△n+1 A γ

                                               63
These are defined such that:
                                                                           
                γ : Γ , a :△n+2 A γ D ≡ γ+ : Γ D , a :△n+1 A[ρΓ , µ△n+1 ] γ+
                                    
                        [ σ, t ]△n+2 D ≡ [ σD , t[ρΓ , µ△n+1 ] ]△n+1
For dimension −1, we define:
                                                                          
                            γ : Γ , a :△−1 A γ −1 ≡ γ−1 : Γ −1 , a : A γ−1
                                               
                                    [ σ, t ]△−1 −1 ≡ [ σ−1 , t ]
Then we inductively define:
                                                                     
           γ : Γ , a :△n+2 A γ m+1 ≡          γ – : πΓ , a :△n+1 A γ – m+1      for m ⩽ n
                                                                                  
           γ : Γ , a :△n+2 A γ n+2 ≡          γ+ : Γ D , a :△n+1 A[ρΓ , µ△n+1 ] γ+ n+1
                                                             
                   [ σ, t ]△n+2 m+1 ≡         [ πσ, t ]△n+1 m+1 for m ⩽ n
                                                                        
                    [ σ, t ]△n+2 n+2 ≡        [ σD , t[ρΓ , µ△n+1 ] ]△n+1 n+1
We next have fundamental context projections and zero variables:
                                    γ : Γ , µ△n+1 ⊢dm A γ type ℓ
                                                            
                              ptA
                                △n+1 :     γ : Γ , a :△n+1 A →smn+1 Γ

                                    γ : Γ , µ△n+1 ⊢dm A γ type ℓ
                            △n+1                                [pt, µ△n+1 ]
               γ : Γ, a :          A γ, µ△n+1 ⊢dm zvA
                                                    △n+1 γ a : A             γa
These are defined such that:
                                             D      [ρΓ , µ△     ]
                                      ptA       ≡ ptA
                                                              n+1
                                        △n+2        △n+1

For dimension −1, we define:
                                                
                                           ptA          A
                                             △−1 −1 ≡ ptdm

                                                zvA       A
                                                  △−1 ≡ zvdm

Then we inductively define:
                                          
                                  π ptA        A
                                      △n+2 ≡ pt△n+1
                                                [ρ , µ
                                                A Γ △n+1
                                                         ]
                                 ptA
                                   △n+2 n+2 ≡ pt△n+1       n+1
                                      zvA        A
                                        △n+2 ≡ zv△n+1

Finally, we construct modal Π-types:
           γ : Γ , µ△ ⊢dm A γ type ℓ0           γ : Γ , a :△n+1 A γ ⊢smn+1 B γ a type ℓ1
                                                  n+1
                                             sm
                               γ : Γ ⊢smn+1 Π△            A B γ type ℓ0 ⊔ ℓ1

                               γ : Γ , a :△n+1 A γ ⊢smn t γ a : B γ a
                                               n+1              n+1
                               γ : Γ ⊢sm λsm
                                          △          t γ : Πsm
                                                            △         ABγ
                                          n
                  γ : Γ ⊢smn f γ : Πsm
                                    △ AB γ          γ : Γ , µ△ ⊢dm s γ : A γ
                                             smn
                                γ : Γ ⊢sm app△ f s γ : B[ 1Γ , s ]△ γ

                                                     64
This construction follows the pattern of the non-modal truncated case and is performed
level-wise. We will inductively assert the following formulas for display:
                                                               [ρΓ , µ△ ]
                 n+2          smn+1
                                                  pt    [ WA            pt, appsm
                                                                                    n+1
                                                                                        zvpt◦pt zvpt
                                                                                                  △ ]
           Πsm
            △      A B d ≡ Π△         A[ρΓ , µ△ ]     Bd     2                   △


                smn+2
                                n+1
               λ△      t d ≡ λsm
                              △      td
                 n+2              n+1
           appsm
              △      f s d ≡ appsm
                                 △      fd s.

In dimension −1 we set:
                                             −1   
                                       Πsm
                                        △    A B −1 ≡ Πdm A B−1
                                              −1  
                                          λsm
                                           △     t −1 ≡ λdm t−1
                                           −1     
                                      appsm
                                         △     f s −1 ≡ appdm f−1 s.

Then we inductively define:
           smn+2
                           smn+1
      π Π△        A B ≡ Π△        A πB
                                                    A[ρΓ , µ△ ] pt, appsm n+1
                                                                                  zvpt◦pt zvpt
       smn+2                    n+1
                                      [ρΓ , µ△ ] pt  d [ W2                                 △ ]
     Π△      A B n+2 ≡ Πsm    △     A               B                      △
                                                                                                )n+1
                n+2       smn+1
          π λsm
              △       t ≡ λ△      πt
          smn+2
                          smn+1 d
         λ△      t n+2 ≡ λ△       t
            smn+2
                             smn+1
      π app△        f s ≡ app△      πf s
          n+2                  n+1
    appsm
        △     f s n+2 ≡ appsm △     fd s.

The verification of many identities has been omitted.
    Finally, we check that π preserves all the operations defined above. Therefore, we can
define the untruncated operations △ and µ△ on sm, with modal context extension x :△ A
and modal Π-types, simply by acting levelwise on each smn+1 .                            ⊳


4.3.2   Pieces of the Box Modality

The box modality is more subtle because it is not determined levelwise by operations on
truncated diagrams. However, we can still construct it in terms of truncated data. We start
                                                      +
with a truncated lock functor ( – , µn ) : C → C∆n that constructs a constant simplicial
diagram:
                                                 
                                   γ : Γ , µn+1 m+1 ≡ Γ
                                                    b
                                       γ : Γ , µn+1 ≡ 1Γ
                                     [ σ, µn+1 ]m+1 ≡ σ.

We the define the following four new pieces of syntax. The operation A(n+1) is like a
truncated version of , in that it takes the limit of a truncated diagram, but yielding a finite




                                                     65
telescope rather than a type.
             γ : Γ , µn ⊢smn A γ type ℓ               γ : Γ , µn ⊢smn t γ : A γ
              γ : Γ ⊢dm A(n+1) γ tel ℓ              γ : Γ ⊢dm t(n+1) : A(n+1) γ

                                  γ : Γ , µn ⊢smn A γ type ℓ
                                                            
                              ptA
                                n :  γ : Γ , a : A(n+1) γ → Γ

                                  γ : Γ , µn ⊢smn A γ type ℓ
                                                                   A
                                                             [ ptn , µn ]
              γ : Γ , a : A(n+1) γ, µn ⊢smn zvA
                                                  n γ a : A               γ a
These will satisfy the inductively proven property that for γ : Γ , µn ⊢smn t γ : A γ:
                                                             
                          γ : Γ , µn ⊢smn zvA
                                             n γ t(n+1) γ ≡ t γ.

For sm−2 , the term zvA
                      −2 is trivial, since it lives in the terminal CwF structure. We also set:

                                        A(−1) γ ≡ ()dm
                                        t(−1) γ ≡ [ ]dm
                                           ptA
                                             −2 ≡ 1Γ .

Note that, in general, since zvA
                               n is a simplicial term, we may form its matching substitution:

                                   γ : Γ , µn ⊢smn A γ type ℓ
                                                    
                  γ : Γ , a : A(n+1) γ ⊢dm zvA  n ∂(n+1) γ a : A∂(n+1) γ

For smn+1 we then inductively set:
                                                                                     
                        A(n+2) ≡ a : πA(n+1) γ, a ′ : An+1 γ         zvπA
                                                                         n ∂(n+1) γ a

                         t(n+2) ≡ [ t(n+1) , tn+1 ]
                                           An+1
                         ptA        πA
                           n+1 ≡ ptn ◦ ptdm
                                           An+1 , µ ]
                                       πA [ ptdm
                                                                
                         zvA
                           n+1 ≡ h zvn                , zvA
                                                            n+1 n+1 i
                           ′     ′
         zvA
           n+1 n+1 γ [ a, a ] ≡ a .

The second line is well typed by the inductive hypothesis and makes the next case of the
hypothesis clear. Also, note the pt substitution in the fourth line. The basic idea is that,
at the top dimension, the (n + 1)-st simplicial value of a boxed variables access the last
component of the modal context extension, whereas lower dimensional simplicial values
search further back in the linear context.
    We now move on to the untruncated model. The functor µ in sm similarly constructs
a constant presheaf. Note that (Γ , µ ) D ≡ (Γ , µ ), and ρΓ , µ is an identity; we will omit
writing these whenever the previous rules say that a D or ρ is necessary. We now define a
key natural transformation:
                                   △⩽1sm                     
                                 ¤         : 1sm ⇒ – , µ△
                                            
                                     △⩽1sm             m+1
                                   ¤Γ              ≡ Γ0     .
                                               m+1



                                               66
We then use the constructions above to construct a modal type former:

              γ : Γ , µ ⊢sm A γ type ℓ                   γ : Γ , µ ⊢sm t γ : A γ
              γ : Γ ⊢dm sm A γ type ℓ                 γ : Γ ⊢dm sm t γ : sm A γ

                                 γ−1 : µ△ Γ ⊢dm t γ−1 :  A γ−1
                                                         △⩽1sm       
                               γ : Γ ⊢sm A
                                          sm t γ : A ¤Γ           γ

(Recall from section 4.3.1 that µ△ Γ ≡ Γ −1 .) In order to form these, we will take an ω-limit
of sequences A or t obtained from the m-simplex levels of A or t:

              γ : Γ , µ ⊢sm A γ type ℓ               γ : Γ , µ ⊢sm t γ : A γ type ℓ
                 γ : Γ ⊢dm A stel∞
                                  ℓ                       γ : Γ ⊢dm t γ : A γ

These are defined as follows:
                          ∂(m+1)
                        A         γ ≡ (πm A)(m+1) γ
                        m+1                            πm A
                                                                       
                       A   γ a ≡ Am+1 γ            zvm    ∂(m+1)
                                                                    γ a
                          ∂(m+1)
                         t        γ ≡ (πm t)(m+1) γ
                               m+1
                              t γ ≡ tm+1 γ.

We then define:

                                          sm A ≡ lim A
                                          sm t ≡ lim t .

We define the eliminator by:
                          πn+1 A  0n+1                    n+1                  n+1
  πn+1 A  sm a γn+1 ≡ zvn+1 γn+1      [ res∂(n+1) γn+1 0     a, resn+1 γn+1 0     a ].

One then checks the computation laws.                                                        ⊳


4.3.3   The Extended Simplicial Model

So far, we have equipped the simplicial model sm with the locks µ△ and µ , modal extension
and modal Π-types for △, and a modality sm with Fitch-style introduction and elimination
rules. (Because sm satisfies an η-rule, we could then derive modal extension and modal Π-
types for sm by simply extending and mapping out of sm A, as we will do in sections 4.3.6
and 4.3.7 for our eventual model.)
     The modality ♦ presents a different problem: in syntax, for Γ obdm , the context (Γ , µ♦ )
is flat. This creates an issue of how we store such contexts semantically. Our solution is to
extend the simplicial model constructed in section 4.2 to what we call the extended simplicial
model, sm+ , built out of a copy of dm (representing the flat contexts) and the original sm
(representing the non-flat contexts). We start with the non-modal aspects of this model.




                                                67
4.3.3.1    Contexts and substitutions. We have the following introduction rules:
                              Γ obdm                                  Γ obsm
                           indm Γ obsm+                            insm Γ obsm+

         σ : ∆ →sm Γ                           σ : ∆ →dm Γ                              σ : ∆ →dm Γ −1
insm σ : insm ∆ →sm+ insm Γ           indm σ : indm ∆ →sm+ indm Γ               infl σ : indm ∆ →sm+ insm Γ
                                                                                                       +
Equivalently, we can say that the underlying category of sm+ , which we denote C∆
                                                                                + , is
defined as follows:
                                         ob ∆+ =∼ obC ⊔ ob ∆+
                                                      C+                    C
                                                     ∼ morC (∆ , Γ )
                           morC∆+ (indm ∆ , indm Γ ) =
                                +

                                                     ∼ mor ∆+ (∆ , Γ )
                           morC∆+ (insm ∆ , insm Γ ) =
                                 +                        C
                                                     ∼ morC (∆ , Γ −1 )
                           morC∆+ (indm ∆ , insm Γ ) =
                                 +

                                                     ∼ ∅.
                           morC∆+ (insm ∆ , indm Γ ) =
                                 +

This makes sense, because we intuitively think of indm ∆ as having been extended by zeroes,
thus it is easy to map out of. A substitution of the form infl σ is known as flat.       ⊳

4.3.3.2 Types and Terms. We have the following introduction forms for types and terms
in sm+ :
                   γ : Γ ⊢dm A γ type ℓ                               γ : Γ ⊢sm A γ type ℓ
             γ : indm Γ ⊢sm+ indm A γ type ℓ                    γ : insm Γ ⊢sm+ insm A γ type ℓ

                   γ : Γ ⊢dm t γ : A γ                                  γ : Γ ⊢sm t γ : A γ
                                                                                                   .
          γ : indm Γ ⊢sm+ indm t γ : indm A γ                  γ : insm Γ ⊢sm+ insm t γ : insm A γ
Formally, we set the following, depending on whether on not Γ is flat:
          Tysm (indm Γ ) =∼ Tydm Γ         Tmsm (indm Γ ) (indm A) = ∼ Tmdm Γ A
                +                                          +

                            ∼ Ty Γ
            Tysm+ (insm Γ ) =                                                ∼ Tmsm Γ A.
                                                    Tmsm+ (insm Γ ) (insm A) =
                                sm

Note that, in the following definition of the functorial action of substitutions, the flat case
discards higher data:
             (indm A)indm σ ≡ indm Aσ                           (indm t)indm σ ≡ indm Aσ
              (insm A)insm σ ≡ insm Aσ                          (insm t)insm σ ≡ insm Aσ
               (insm A)infl σ ≡ indm (A−1 )σ                     (insm t)infl σ ≡ indm (A−1 )σ .
Extension of contexts operates by passing under the inclusion:
                                  (indm Γ , indm A) ≡ indm (Γ , A)
                                     (insm Γ , insm A) ≡ insm (Γ , A)
                                 [ indm σ, indm t ] ≡ indm [ σ, t ]
                                     [ insm σ, insm t ] ≡ insm [ σ, t ]
                                      [ infl σ, indm t ] ≡ infl [ σ, t ].


                                                     68
Note that in the last case, if we have infl σ : indm ∆ → insm Γ then σ : ∆ → Γ −1 . In
order to form the extension [ infl σ, s ] : indm ∆ → insm (γ : Γ , a : A γ) , we must give
δ : indm ∆ ⊢sm+ s δ : (insm A)infl σ δ. We see then that such an s has type indm (A−1 )σ and
must be of the form indm t.                                                                ⊳


4.3.3.3 Π-Types and Universes. We define (non-modal) Π-types and universes in sm+
by reducing to the respective constructs in dm and sm, depending on whether or not the
context is flat:
                                                           
                  Πsm+ (indm A) (indm B) ≡ indm Πdm A B
                  Πsm+ (insm A) (insm B) ≡ insm (Πsm A B)
                                             
                                      sm+      indm Disc ℓ  for indm Γ
                                 Type ℓ ≡
                                               insm Typesm
                                                         ℓ  for insm Γ .

The definitions of λsm+ , appsm+ , Codesm+ , and Elsm+ are similar.
    Note that stability under substitution is a more general property in sm+ since we have
to additionally consider flat substitutions; if infl σ : indm ∆ → insm Γ , then we have:
                                                  infl σ
                           Πsm+ (insm A) (insm B)
                                            infl σ
                            ≡ insm Πsm A B
                                             σ
                            ≡ indm Πsm A B −1
                                               σ
                            ≡ indm Πdm A−1 B−1
                                                          A−1 
                            ≡ indm Πdm (A−1 )σ (B−1 )W2 σ
                                                             A−1 
                            ≡ Πsm+ indm (A−1 )σ indm (B−1 )W2 σ
                                         in σ        WA (in σ)
                            ≡ Πsm+ insm A fl    insm B 2 fl

Similarly for universes:
                                         infl σ                infl σ
                                Typesm
                                    ℓ
                                      +
                                                    ≡ insm Typesm
                                                               ℓ
                                                                         σ
                                                     ≡ indm (Typesm ℓ )−1

                                                      ≡ indm Discσℓ
                                                      ≡ indm Disc ℓ
                                                      ≡ Typesm
                                                            ℓ
                                                              +




What makes these calculations work is the relevant constructs have been defined to agree
with their discrete counterparts in dimension −1. In the rest of this section, we show how
dm and sm+ can be made into a model of all of dTT (except for the type-former △).        ⊳




                                                       69
4.3.4    Locks and Keys

The definition of sm+ is tailored to allow us to define µ♦ . Putting this together with the
µ△ and µ defined on sm in sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2, we now define a 2-functor [[ – ]] :
Mcoop → Cat , where Mcoop denotes the 2-category obtained by reversing both 1 and 2 cells.
On modes, we have:

                                            [[ dm ]] ≡ C
                                                           +
                                            [[ sm ]] ≡ C∆
                                                        + .

To define this 2-functor on modalities, we extend the prior definitions of locks to sm+ :
               +       +                  +           +                  +             +
          – , µ△ : C∆ + →C            –, µ : C → C∆  +               –, µ♦ : C → C∆   +
               +                          +                              +
     insm Γ , µ△ ≡ (Γ , µ△ )          Γ , µ ≡ insm (Γ , µ )         Γ , µ♦ ≡ indm Γ
               +
     indm Γ , µ△ ≡ Γ
               +                        +                                          +
     [ insm σ, µ△ ] ≡ σ−1        [ σ, µ ]m+1 ≡ insm [ σ, µ ]              [ σ, µ♦ ] ≡ indm σ.
               +
     [ indm σ, µ△ ] ≡ σ
               +
      [ infl σ, µ△ ] ≡ σ

We then define the evident composites:
                                        +        +    +
                                   –, µ△ ≡ – , µ△ , µ
                                        +        +    +
                                   – , µ△♦ ≡ – , µ△ , µ♦ .
                                       +    +          +   +
Finally, it is easy to check that – , µ , µ△ and – , µ♦ , µ△ define identity functors. It
follows that we have a contravariantly functorial assignment:

                                            µ:p→q
                                               +
                                [[ µ ]] ≡ – , µµ : [[ q ]] → [[ p ]]

Next, to define this 2-functor on 2-cells, we define the key natural transformations. We
have  ⩽ ♦, △ ⩽ 1sm+ , and 1sm+ ⩽ △♦, which corresponds to the following natural
transformations:
   ⩽♦        +          +     △⩽1sm+                 +      1   ⩽△♦        + 
¤      : – , µ♦ ⇒ –, µ        ¤           : 1sm+ ⇒ – , µ△   ¤ sm+      : – , µ△♦ ⇒ 1sm+
  ⩽♦                              △⩽1sm+                  △⩽1sm         1 ⩽△♦
¤Γ      ≡ infl 1Γ               ¤insm Γ           ≡ insm ¤Γ             ¤insmsmΓ   ≡ infl 1Γ −1
                                 △⩽1                                    1 ⩽△♦
                                ¤indm Γ sm ≡ infl 1Γ                    ¤insmdmΓ ≡ indm 1Γ .

                    △⩽△♦    △⩽1sm+          1     ⩽△♦
We also have ¤         ≡¤              ◦ ¤ sm+            . The keys assemble into a contravariantly
functorial assignment:
                                            α:µ⩽ν
                                             α                    .
                                  [[ α ]] ≡ ¤ : [[ ν ]] ⇒ [[ µ ]]
One checks whiskering identities to verify that [[ – ]] defines a 2-functor Mcoop → Cat .         ⊳



                                                    70
4.3.5   Modal Types

Displayed Type Theory has two modal type formers that we need to model (recall that we
omit △ at present):
                         +                                               +
               γ : Γ , µ♦ ⊢sm+ A γ type ℓ                     γ : Γ , µ ⊢sm+ A γ type ℓ
                                                                                         .
                 γ : Γ ⊢dm ♦ A γ type ℓ                        γ : Γ ⊢dm  A γ type ℓ
These come with the following intro and elimination forms:
                         +
               γ : Γ , µ♦ ⊢sm+ t γ : A γ                        γ : Γ ⊢dm t γ : ♦ A γ
                γ : Γ ⊢dm ♦ t γ : ♦ A γ                    γ : indm Γ ⊢sm+ A t γ : A γ
                     +                                               +
          γ : Γ , µ ⊢sm+ t γ : A γ                        γ : Γ , µ△ ⊢dm t γ :  A γ
                                                                                      △⩽1sm+
                                                                                                     .
          γ : Γ ⊢dm  t γ :  A γ                   γ : Γ ⊢sm+ A t γ : A [ ¤Γ                  γ]
Note that there is an asymmetry between the statements of laws for  and . To clear up
this confusion, we could have instead written:
                                                      +
                                 Γ flat       γ : Γ , µ△ ⊢dm t γ : ♦ A γ
                                                               △♦⩾1sm+
                                                                                  .
                                γ : Γ ⊢sm+ A t γ : A [ ¤Γ                   γ]
But this is entirely equivalent, because the semantic-side definition of the predicate Γ flat is
                                                                   +
that Γ is of the form indm ∆, in which case we have (indm ∆), µ△ ≡ ∆ by definition. Note
                    △♦⩾1sm+
that the key ¤Γ               does not arise from a natural transformation and is only defined
                                                              △♦⩾1sm
when Γ ≡ indm ∆, in which case we simply have ¤indm ∆ + ≡ indm 1∆ . The first definition
can thus be seen as a proof-relevant pattern match along the flat predicate.
   The definition of ♦ and its introduction and elimination rules are done by shuffling
around discrete information and inclusions:
                                            ♦ (indm A) ≡ A
                                             ♦ (indm t) ≡ t
                                                  A t ≡ indm t.
For , we fall back to our prior construction for the type former and intro rule:
                                             (insm A) ≡ sm A
                                             (insm t) ≡ sm t
For the eliminator, we split on whether or not Γ is flat:
                                                    
                             insm A      indm Adm t      for indm Γ
                                   t≡               
                                         insm Asm t      for insm Γ
where the discrete case above is as follows:
                                 Γ obdm         γ : Γ ⊢dm t γ : lim A γ
                                          γ : Γ ⊢dm A
                                                     dm t γ : A−1 γ

It is defined by:
                                             insm A t ≡ res−1 γ a                                       ⊳

                                                     71
4.3.6   Modal Variables

We have the following rules for extending a context and substitution modally:
                                                              +
                    µ:p→q           Γ ob [[q]]       γ : Γ , µµ ⊢ [[p]] A γ type ℓ
                                   (γ : Γ , a :µ+ A γ) ob [[q]]

                                                         +
                          σ : ∆ →[[q]] Γ         γ : Γ , µµ ⊢ [[p]] t γ : A γ
                            [ σ, t ]µ+ : ∆ →[[q]] (γ : Γ , a :µ+ A γ)

The case of △+ is defined as follows, splitting on whether or not Γ is flat:
                                             
                       γ : indm Γ , a :△+ A γ ≡ indm (γ : Γ , a : A γ)
                                [ indm σ, t ]△+ ≡ indm [ σ, t ]
                                                                     
                       γ : insm Γ , a :△+ A γ ≡ insm γ : Γ , a :△ A γ
                                [ insm σ, t ]△+ ≡ insm [ σ, t ]△ .

Following this, the rest of the definitions say that the case of modal extension reduces to
extension by a variable or term of modal type:
                                            
                           γ : Γ , a :♦+ A γ ≡ (γ : Γ , a : ♦ A γ)
                                      [ σ, t ]♦+ ≡ [ σ, t ]
                                    △♦+
                                                                     
                          γ : Γ, a :       A γ ≡ γ : Γ , a : △+ ♦ A γ
                                    [ σ, t ]△♦+ ≡ [ σ, t ]△+
                                               
                           γ : Γ , a :+ A γ ≡ (γ : Γ , a :  A γ)
                                     [ σ, t ]+ ≡ [ σ, t ]
                                     △+
                                                                     
                          γ : Γ, a :       A γ ≡ γ : Γ , a : △+  A γ
                                   [ σ, t ]△+ ≡ [ σ, t ]△+ .

Each of the context extension operations comes with a notion of parent maps and variables:
           +                                                          +
   γ : Γ , µµ ⊢ [[p]] A γ type ℓ                          γ : Γ , µµ ⊢ [[p]] A γ type ℓ
                                                                                             +
 ptµ+ : γ : Γ , a :µ+ A γ → Γ
   A                                                              +
                                       γ : Γ , a :µ+ A γ, µµ ⊢ [[p]] zvA
                                                                       µ+ γ a : A
                                                                                          A
                                                                                 [ ptµ+ , µµ ]
                                                                                               γa

For the parent maps ptA
                      △+ , we make a definition by cases on whether or not Γ is flat:
                                   
                              A      indm ptAdm for indm Γ
                            pt△+ ≡
                                     insm ptA△   for insm Γ .

The parent maps for ♦+ and + reduce to discrete parent maps of variables of modal type:
                               ♦A                                          A
                      ptA
                        ♦+ ≡ ptdm                                 ptA
                                                                    + ≡ ptdm .

Then, for △♦+ and △+ , we combine this with the substitution above:
                               ♦A                                           A
                     ptA
                       △♦+ ≡ pt△+                                 ptA
                                                                    △+ ≡ pt△+ .



                                                   72
For the zero variables for ♦+ and + , one checks that the following are well-typed:
                            A  ♦A                                      A
                    zvA
                      ♦+ ≡  zvdm                           zvA     A
                                                              + ≡  zvdm .

For the zero variables zvA
                         △+ , we once again case split:
                                          
                                              zvA    for indm Γ
                                 zvA
                                   △+ ≡
                                                dm
                                              zvA
                                                △    for insm Γ .

Then, for △♦+ and △+ , we use zv△+ :
                           A  ♦A                                       A
                  zvA
                    △♦+ ≡  zv△+                           zvA      A
                                                             △+ ≡  zv△+ .                      ⊳


4.3.7   Modal Π-Types

The last remaining modal construct that we must address is modal Π-types. These behave
according to the following rules:
                             +
        µ:p→q        γ : Γ , µµ ⊢[[p]] A γ type ℓ0      γ : Γ , a :µ+ A γ ⊢[[q]] B γ a type ℓ1
                              γ : Γ ⊢[[q]] Πsm
                                            µ
                                               +
                                                 A B γ type ℓ0 ⊔ ℓ1

                              γ : Γ , a :µ+ A γ ⊢[[q]] t γ a : B γ a
                               γ : Γ ⊢[[q]] λsm
                                             µ
                                               +
                                                 t γ : Πsm
                                                        µ
                                                          +
                                                            ABγ

                                                               +
                  γ : Γ ⊢[[q]] f γ : Πsm
                                      µ
                                        +
                                          ABγ         γ : Γ , µµ ⊢[[p]] s γ : A γ
                                             sm+
                             γ : Γ ⊢[[q]] appµ   f s γ : B[ 1Γ , s ]µ γ

For △+ we define:
                                                                    
                             Πsm
                              △
                                +
                                  A (insm B) ≡ insm Πsm
                                                     △ AB
                                                                
                             Πsm
                              △
                                 +
                                   A (indm B) ≡ indm Πdm A B
                                                             
                                λsm
                                  △
                                    +
                                        (insm t) ≡ insm λsm
                                                         △ t
                                                             
                                λsm
                                  △
                                    +
                                       (indm t) ≡ indm λdm t
                                                                 
                            appsm
                               △
                                  +
                                     (insm f) s ≡ insm appsm△ fs
                                                                 
                            appsm
                               △
                                  +
                                    (indm f) s ≡ indm appdm f s .

The other cases reduce to functions of a modal variable:

                                 Πsm
                                  ♦
                                     +
                                       A B ≡ Πsm+ (♦ A) B
                                 Πsm        sm+
                                  △♦ A B ≡ Π△
                                     +
                                                (♦ A) B
                                 Πsm
                                  
                                     +
                                       A B ≡ Πsm+ ( A) B
                                 Πsm
                                  △ A B ≡ Π△
                                     +        sm+
                                                  ( A) B

The cases of λ and app are similar.                                                              ⊳

                                                73
                                4.4     S EMANTICS OF D TT
Having reviewed the general notion of model for dependent type theory in section 4.1,
and constructed our intended model of dTT in sections 4.2 and 4.3, we now describe the
general notion of model for dTT. Of course, since our syntax was presented as a Generalised
Algebraic Theory, there is an immediate notion of model, namely an algebra for that theory
(with algebraic syntax being the initial model). The point is to reformulate this in more
familiar category-theoretic terms.

4.4.1   Modal structure

The general multimodal type theory MTT was presented algebraically in [GKNB21]. We
therefore start from this as a baseline and add structure corresponding to our particular
theory.
    For a general mode 2-category M, the starting point is a modal context structure, which
is a 2-functor C : Mcoop → Cat , where Mcoop denotes reversal of both 1-cells and 2-cells.
The image of a mode p is the category Cp of contexts and substitutions at that mode, and
the image of a morphism µ : p → q is the lock functor µµ : Cq → Cp , which we write
postfix, Γ 7→ Γ  µµ . It is a modal natural model if each Cp is equipped with a morphism
prp : Tmp → Typ in its presheaf category such that for any µ : p → q the morphism
(µµ )∗ (prp ) is representable. (In particular, taking µ = 1p , we see that each Cp is an ordinary
natural model, hence a CwF.) This notion encapsulates all the rules for building contexts
and substitutions from section 2.2 except for those that refer to flatness of contexts.
    Now, specializing to our mode 2-category from section 2.1, the rules of section 2.2 say
that the flat contexts form a full subcategory of Csm that contains the image of µ♦ . In our
algebraic theory we take as primitive the derived rules that a context is flat if and only if
it admits a substitution to ((), µ♦ ), and in that case the latter substitution is unique. Thus,
semantically, 1µ♦ is subterminal and the flat contexts are the slice category Csm /1µ♦ . Since
the unit of the adjunction µ♦ ⊣ µ△ is an identity, µ♦ is fully faithful, and on its image it has
µ♦ as an inverse and therefore also a left adjoint. In addition, since flat contexts are fixed
points (up to isomorphism) of µ△♦ , when Γ is flat there is a bijection Ty(Γ ) =   ∼ Ty(Γ  µ△♦ ),
and so the modal comprehension (Γ , x :△♦ A) is isomorphic to an ordinary one (Γ , x : A ′ ).
This justifies the special variable rule and key substitution. Thus, the following definition
encapsulates the judgmental structure of our modal type theory.
Definition 4.29. A dTT context structure is a modal context structure C : Mcoop → Cat in
the sense of [GKNB21], where M is as in section 2.1, such that 1  µ♦ is subterminal and the
slice category Csm /1  µ♦ is the replete image of the fully faithful functor µ♦ : Cdm → Csm . A
dTT natural model is a dTT context structure that is also a modal natural model.

    Next, since our modalities are Fitch-style, their semantics follows [GCK+ 22]. This re-
quires each functor µµ to be a parametric right adjoint and have a dependent right adjoint.
However, since each safe µ is already a right adjoint in M, such µµ are also ordinary (hence
parametric) right adjoints. And since µ♦ is an equivalence onto a slice category, the inverse
of that equivalence is a parametric left adjoint of it. Thus, to justify our Fitch-style rules for
modalities, it suffices to assume the following.
Definition 4.30. A dTT modal model is a dTT natural model such that the functors µ♦ and
µ have dependent right adjoints.

                                               74
   Our primary example is, of course, the following.
Theorem 4.31. The simplicial model of sections 4.2 and 4.3 is a dTT natural model.

Proof. Of course, we use the extended simplicial model along with the discrete model. We
showed explicitly in section 4.3 that this yields a modal context structure        for our M. In
                                                                             +
the notation of that section, the object 1  µ♦ referred to above is (), µ♦ ≡ indm (). The
definition of the category sm+ implies immediately that this object is subterminal and its
                                                                     +
slice category is the replete image (and even the literal image) of µ♦ . Finally, in section 4.3.5
we verified the rules of [GCK+ 22] for ♦ and , which as shown in loc. cit. are equivalent to
                                           +        +
their being dependent right adjoints of µ♦ and µ .                                           ⊳


4.4.2   Telescopes

Modal telescopes generalise ordinary telescopes to modal natural models in a straightfor-
ward way. Let M be a 2-category.
Definition 4.32. A modal natural model C : Mcoop → Cat has telescopes if it is equipped
with:

   • For each p ∈ M, a representable natural transformation tprp : PSubp → Telp , whose
     comprehensions we write as (γ : Γ | θ : Θ γ).
   • For each p, a morphism of polynomial functors ()p : 1Cp → Ptprp .
   • For any µ : p → q, a morphism of polynomial functors Ptprq ◦ Pµµ ∗ prp → Ptprq that we
     write as (θ : Θ, x :µ A θ).
   • The rules (γ : Γ | ()) = Γ and (γ : Γ | (υ : Υ γ, x :µ A γ υ)) = ((γ : Γ | υ : Υ), x :µ A γ υ)
     from section 2.3.1 hold.
   • A morphism of polynomial functors Ptpr ◦ Ptpr → Ptpr , which we write as Υ | Φ. (This
     says how to concatenate telescopes.)
   • The rules (γ : Γ | (υ : Υ γ | φ : Φ γ υ)) = ((γ : Γ | υ : Υ γ) | φ : Φ γ υ) and
     (υ : Υ | ()) = Υ and (υ : Υ | (φ : Φ υ, x :µ A υ φ)) = ((υ : Υ | φ : Φ υ), x :µ A υ φ)
     from section 2.5.2 hold.

In addition, we say C has Π-telescopes if for each p there is a pullback square

                                    Ptprp (PSubp )           PSubp
                                Ptprp (tprp )        y          tpr p

                                     Ptprp (Telp )       Π
                                                             Telp ,

such that the computation rules from section 2.5.3 hold.

   As in sections 4.1.6 and 4.1.7, we can equip any modal natural model with telescopes
and Π-telescopes, and interpret meta-abstracted types and telescopes automatically, without
needing to discuss them explicitly.                                                       ⊳


                                                 75
4.4.3   Display and décalage

If C is a CwF with telescopes and Γ ∈ C, we write Tel Γ for the category whose objects
are telescopes Θ ∈ Tel(Γ ) and whose morphisms are morphisms (Γ | Θ1 ) → (Γ | Θ2 ) in C/Γ .
Thus, it is equivalent to the full subcategory of C/Γ on objects of the form Γ | Θ. We call this
the category of telescopes of Γ . Note that by substitution, it is strictly functorial in Γ , i.e. we
have a functor Tel − : Cop → Cat . Equivalently, therefore, we can regard this as an internal
                                         op
category in the presheaf category SetC .
    In fact the category Tel Γ is actually itself a CwF. Its ‘types’ in ‘context’ Υ ∈ Tel Γ
are meta-abstracted telescopes Γ ⊢ Φ tel ℓ /υ : Υ . These are equivalent (but not equal) to
telescopes in an extended context, i.e. the elements of Tel(Γ | Υ). Similarly, meta-abstracted
partial substitutions Γ ⊢ φ : Φ are equivalent to terms Γ | (υ : Υ) ⊢ φ : Φ υ, and semantically
to sections of such a projection, (Γ | Υ) → (Γ | Υ | Φ) over (Γ | Υ). Comprehension is
by telescope concatenation. Because Γ | () ≡ Γ , the CwF Tel Γ has the following special
property.
Definition 4.33. A CwF C is strongly democratic if every context is the comprehension of
a unique type in the empty context.

    Since all of the structure of Tel Γ is strictly stable under substitution in Γ , these cat-
                                                                op
egories form an internal CwF in the presheaf category SetC . We call this the internal
telescope model of C and denote it Tel. Recalling remark 2.4 and comparing to the discus-
sion of the local theory in [ACKS24], we find that the syntactic structure of décalage from
sections 2.4.2 and 2.6.1 can be described precisely as an internal CwF morphism.
Definition 4.34. Let C : Mcoop → Cat be a dTT natural model with telescopes. We say it has
décalage if it is equipped with a strict morphism of internal strongly democratic CwFs
                                   (– )D : (µ△ )∗ Telsm → Telsm
in the category of presheaves over Csm , together with an internal natural transformation
                           △⩽1sm
evens from (– )D to (– )[ ¤       ] : (µ△ )∗ Telsm → Telsm .

     In particular, therefore, this structure ordinary includes functors (– )D : Tel (Γ  µ△ ) →
Tel Γ and natural transformations evens consisting of maps (Γ | ΥD ) → (Γ  µ△ | Υ), all
strictly stable under pullback. This, together with the strict preservation of empty contexts
by the functor (– )D , is what the rules of section 2.4.2 say. The corresponding action on ‘types’
(meta-abstracted telescopes) and ‘terms’ (meta-abstracted partial substitutions) assembles
into the rules of section 2.6.1.
     We can phrase display in a similar way by defining an auxiliary internal CwF. We start
with telescope display (section 2.6). Recall from [Shu15, KL21] that from any CwF C we can
construct a ‘Sierpinski’ model C2 . Its objects (contexts) are arbitrary morphisms γ01 : Γ 1 →
Γ 0 in C, but its types are pairs of A0 ∈ Ty(Γ 0 ) and A1 ∈ Ty(Γ 1  A0 [ γ01 ]). Moreover, there
is a strict CwF morphism (– )0 : C2 → C, which preserves all the type-formers, in particular
Σ-types if C has them. If C has Σ-types there is also a functor (– )1 : C2 → C that sends a type
(A0 , A1 ) to Σ(A0 [ γ01 ], A1 ) ∈ Ty(Γ 1 ), but this only preserves comprehension and Σ-types
up to isomorphism. Thus it is a pseudo CwF morphism in the sense of [CD11, Definition
10], although it preserves substitution and the empty context strictly.
     Now let C be a CwF, and apply this construction internally in the category of presheaves
on C to the internal telescope model Tel. We thus obtain another CwF Tel2 internal to

                                                 76
presheaves, in which the ‘contexts’ over Γ are morphisms of telescopes θ01 : Θ1 → Θ0 over
Γ , and the ‘types’ in such a ‘context’ over Γ are pairs of two telescopes Υ0 ∈ Tel(Γ | Θ0 ) and
Υ1 ∈ Tel(Γ | Θ1 | Υ0 [ θ01 ]). This is no longer strongly democratic, but as always we have the
strict CwF morphism (– )0 : Tel2 → Tel that preserves Σ-types (i.e. telescope concatenation),
and the pseudo CwF-morphism (– )1 : Tel2 → Tel. Moreover, in this case the latter is actually
a strict CwF-morphism, because telescope concatenation is strictly associative.
Definition 4.35. Let C : Mcoop → Cat be a dTT natural model with telescopes. We say C has
telescope display if it is equipped with

  1. An internal pseudo CwF morphism that preserves substitution, the empty context, and
     Σ-types strictly:
                               (– )d : (µ△ )∗ Telsm → Tel2sm
                                                           ( – )d      ( – )0
  2. An equality between the composite (µ△ )∗ Telsm −−→ Tel2sm −−−→ Telsm and the key
                           △⩽1sm
     transformation (– )[ ¤        ] : (µ△ )∗ Telsm → Telsm . Since the latter is a strict
     morphism, that means that so is the former.
  3. A strict internal CwF morphism
                                    (– )D : (µ△ )∗ Telsm → Telsm
      and an isomorphism of pseudo CwF morphisms between (– )D and the composite mor-
                           ( – )d      ( – )1
      phism (µ△ )∗ Telsm −−→ Tel2sm −−−→ Tel, that is the identity on underlying functors.

    We have not assumed a priori in definition 4.35 that C has décalage, but it is actually
included: the morphism (– )D is of course the same as in definition 4.34, and the transfor-
mation evens : ΘD → Θ from definition 4.34 arises in definition 4.35 as the image of Θ
under the underlying functor of (– )d . The additional data in definition 4.35 beyond this
is the 1-part of the action of (– )d (the 0-part is determined by the composition with (– )0
                   △⩽1sm
equaling (– )[ ¤           ]) making it a pseudo CwF morphism preserving substitution and
Σ-types strictly, and the isomorphism on ‘types’ (dependent telescopes) between (– )D and
the composite of (– )d with (– )1 . But since the latter is to be a pseudo CwF transformation
(see [CCD17, Appendix B]), and since (– )D is strict and the underlying functor is the identity
this just means that this isomorphism must coincide with the 1-part of the comprehension
coherence isomorphism of (– )d (the 0-part being the identity).
    So all that remains is the 1-part of the action of (– )d on meta-abstracted telescopes,
preserving substitution and telescope concatenation, and coherence isomorphisms relating
it to comprehension. This gives the rules of section 2.6.4, which have section 2.6.3 as
a special case. In particular, since the 1-part of the comprehension of (Υ, Υd ) in Tel2 is
(Υ | Υd ), the comprehension isomorphisms are the pairing h – , – i together with ev and od .
    Finally, we consider display of types, as in section 2.4.3, and its relation to décalage as
in sections 2.4.4 and 2.6.2. In some ways this is simpler, since we don’t have to worry about
rearranging between display and décalage; but in other ways it is more complicated, since
we have to take account of extending dependent telescopes by types.
    To start with, note that the internal telescope model Tel of any CwF has a ‘sub-model’ Tel1
whose internal category of ‘contexts’ is the same (telescopes), but whose internal presheaf
of ‘types’ consists of the length-1 telescopes, i.e. single types annotated by a modality. Note
that unlike Tel, it does not automatically have Σ-types.

                                                77
Definition 4.36. Let C : Mcoop → Cat be a dTT natural model with telescopes. We say C has
type display if it is equipped with

  1. An internal strict CwF morphism:

                                    (– )d : (µ△ )∗ Telsm,1 → Tel2sm

                                                            ( – )d      ( – )0
  2. An equality between the composite (µ△ )∗ Telsm −−→ Tel2sm −−−→ Telsm and the key
                           △⩽1sm
     transformation (– )[ ¤       ] : (µ△ )∗ Telsm → Telsm .
  3. If a length-1 telescope A is non-modal, then the telescope Ad is a single non-modal
     type.
  4. If a length-1 telescope A is nontrivially modal, then the telescope Ad is empty.

    Note that, like definition 4.35, this definition includes décalage. It represents the rules
for display from sections 2.4.1 and 2.4.3, and the rules for computing décalage on a tele-
scope extended by a type from section 2.4.4. Of course, with both telescope display and
type display we want them to be compatible.
Definition 4.37. Let C : Mcoop → Cat be a dTT natural model with telescope display. We say
it has complete display if the restriction of (– )d : (µ△ )∗ Telsm → Tel2sm to (µ△ )∗ Telsm,1 is
an internal strict CwF morphism such that

   • Items 3 and 4 of definition 4.36 hold.

   • The rules in section 2.6.2 for computing meta-abstracted décalage in terms of type
     display hold.
   • The rules in section 2.6.5 for computing meta-abstracted telescope display in terms of
     type display hold.

   Finally, we add the compatibility conditions with type-formers:
Definition 4.38. Let C : Mcoop → Cat be a dTT natural model with telescopes, décalage,
telescope display, and type display. We say that display respects Π-types (respectively
universes) if the rules in section 2.4.5 hold.

   This completes the description of the abstract categorical semantics of the theory of
section 2: it is a dTT natural model with telescopes and complete display that respects Π-
types and universes. However, as noted in section 2, when telescopes are lists of types, as
they almost always are, much of this structure can be deduced from the rest.
Theorem 4.39. Let C be a dTT natural model, with telescopes defined from types as in theo-
rem 4.7, and with type display defined relative to these telescopes. Then there is a unique way
to extend this type display on C to complete display.

Proof. The rules in section 2.6 for computing telescope display and décalage in terms of
type display uniquely determine those operations when telescopes are defined as lists of
types.


                                               78
   Using this, we can verify that our intended model is indeed a model.
Theorem 4.40. The simplicial model of sections 4.2 and 4.3 has type display, and hence
complete display, which respects Π-types and universes.

Proof. We constructed a display operation for the simplicial model in section 4.2, but it
does not yet have exactly the needed form. What we have so far is a ‘global’ operation that
décalages the whole context:

                                         γ : Γ ⊢sm A γ type
                                                                         .
                            γ : Γ , a : AρΓ γ+ ⊢sm Ad γ+ a type
                              +      D


(Note that this is only defined on the original simplicial model sm, not the extended one
sm+ : indeed, décalage is not even defined on flat contexts.) But the (meta-abstracted
version of the) operation we specified in the syntax of section 2 is a ‘local’ one that only
décalages part of the context, keeping the rest of it modally locked away:

                                  γ : Γ , µ△ , υ : Υ ⊢sm A γ υ type
                                           △⩽1sm
                  γ : Γ , υ+ : ΥD , a : A¤          γ (υ+ )ev ⊢sm Ad γ υ+ a type

However, it is straightforward
                                to obtain the latter from the former. In sm+ , a context of the
form γ : Γ , µ△ , υ : Υ is not flat, hence lies essentially in sm so that décalage is defined on
it. Furthermore, we already observed that (Γ , µ ) D ≡ (Γ , µ ) since µ lands in constant
presheaves. Thus, when Υ is a telescope built out of types, we have
                                                                       
                         γ : Γ , µ△ , υ : Υ D ≡ γ : Γ , µ△ , υ+ : ΥD

and so the global operation yields as a special case

                               γ : Γ , µ△ , υ : Υ ⊢sm+ A γ υ type
                                                                                    .
                   γ : Γ , µ△ , υ+ : ΥD , a : Aρ γ υ+ ⊢sm+ Ad γ υ+ a type
                                         △⩽1
Now we simply substitute along ¤         sm
                                            to obtain the desired local rule. The necessary
computation rules for décalage, Π-types, and universes follow immediately from the rules
we proved for the global operation in section 4.2.                                      ⊳

4.4.4   Display of ω-limits

Finally, when we have both display and also ω-limits, it is reasonable to require the former
to compute on the latter, in the following way. Suppose that Γ , µ△ | φ : Φ ⊢sm Υ e φ stel∞ ,
                                            e ⊢ lim Υ
and we want to compute Γ , φ : ΦD , u : lim Υ       e d φ u. Then by definition, we have

                             Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υ∂n tel/φ : Φ
                                                 
                             Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Υn type φ : Φ, ∂υ : Υ∂n φ

and therefore
                                       
                     Γ ⊢sm (Υ∂n )d telℓ φ : ΦD , ∂υ : Υ∂n φev
                                        
                     Γ ⊢sm (Υn )d type ℓ φ : ΦD , ∂υ : (Υ∂n )D φ, υ : Υn φev ∂υev


                                                 79
                                                                      e we have
Weakening and substituting to the needed context Γ , φ : ΦD , u : lim Υ,

                                                  e ⊢sm (Υ∂n )d φ (res∂n u) tel
                             Γ , φ : ΦD , u : lim Υ
                       e ∂υ : (Υ∂n )d φ (res∂n u) ⊢sm (Υn )d φ h res∂n u , ∂υ i (resn u) type
  Γ , φ : ΦD , u : lim Υ,

such that
                                                   
                                   e ∂n , υ : Υ
(Υ∂(n+1) )d φ (res∂(n+1) u) ≡ ∂υ : Υ          e n ∂υ d φ [ res∂n u, resn u ]
                                                                                               
                                    e ∂n )d φ (res∂n u), υ : (Υ
                            ≡ ∂υ : (Υ                         e n )d φ h res∂n u , ∂υ i (resn u) .

Thus, these data form another infinite telescope, which we denote

                                        e ⊢sm Υ
                   Γ , φ : ΦD , u : lim Υ     e d φ u stel∞
                            (Υd )∂n φ u ≡ (Υ∂n )d φ (res∂n u)
                          (Υd )n φ u ∂υ ≡ (Υn )d φ h res∂n u , ∂υ i (resn u)

We say that display respects ω-limits if

                                           e ⊢sm lim Υ
                      Γ , φ : ΦD , u : lim Υ         e d φ u ≡ lim(Υ
                                                                   e d φ u)
                                           e ⊢sm (res∂n )d φ u ≡ res∂n φ u
                      Γ , φ : ΦD , u : lim Υ
                                           e ⊢sm (resn )d φ u ≡ resn φ u.
                      Γ , φ : ΦD , u : lim Υ

                                                                                 e and on the
where in the last two equations, the left-hand side is a restriction relative to Υ,
                                  e d
right-hand side it is relative to Υ .
Theorem 4.41. Display respects ω-limits in the simplicial model.

Proof. This holds essentially by construction of ω-limits therein, plus passing across the
translation between different forms of display from theorem 4.40.                      ⊳


                    4.5    S EMANTICS OF SEMI - SIMPLICIAL TYPES
Finally, we construct semantics for the displayed coinductive types of section 3.3, in par-
ticular including SST. As with most kinds of coinductive definitions, they are terminal
coalgebras of some sort, but in this case they are terminal coalgebras for a copointed end-
ofunctor. We will construct such a terminal coalgebra by a sequential limit construction,
assuming that the base (discrete) model admits such limits.


4.5.1   Terminal coalgebras for copointed endofunctors

Definition 4.42. A copointed endofunctor of a category C is a functor F : C → C together
with a natural transformation ǫ : F → 1C . A coalgebra for a copointed endofunctor is an
                                                                 x     ǫX
object X with a morphism x : X → FX such that the composite X − → FX −−→  X is the identity.
A terminal coalgebra is a terminal object of the category of coalgebras.



                                               80
    Note that a coalgebra for a copointed endofunctor is not just a coalgebra for its underlying
ordinary endofunctor, but satisfies the equation ǫX ◦ x = 1X .
    As usual, we can obtain terminal coalgebras by a sequential limit construction, when
such limits exist. However, in the copointed case it does not suffice to simply consider the
limit of the tower · · · → F3 1 → F2 1 → F1 → 1; we have to incorporate the transformation
ǫ in some way. The classical way to do this (e.g. the dual of [Kel80]) is to take equalisers
at each step. However, equalisers are difficult to understand homotopy-theoretically, so we
replace them by a pullback. The following definition is a partial dual of [Shu19, Definition
8.6].
Definition 4.43. Given a natural transformation ǫ : F → G and a morphism f : X → Y in the
                            d
domain of F and G, we write hom(ǫ,   f) for the gap map in the following pullback, assuming
that the pullback exists.

                                                     Ff
                              FX
                                         d
                                        hom(ǫ, f)


                                             FY ×GY GX          FY
                                 ǫX                   y              ǫY

                                                GX        Gf
                                                                GY

If the domain and codomain of F and G have a notion of ‘fibration’, we say that ǫ is a Quillen
                                                  d
pre-fibration if whenever f is a fibration, so is hom(ǫ, f).

   For example, we have:
Lemma 4.44. In a category of telescopes, consider the fibrations to be the morphisms iso-
morphic to a dependent projection of some telescope. Then the transformation evens :
               △⩽1sm
(– )D → (– )[ ¤       ] from definition 4.34 is a Quillen pre-fibration.

Proof. Given a dependent projection (Θ | Υ) → Θ in Tel (Γ µ△ ), the gap map is isomorphic
to the dependent projection of Υd :
                                      △⩽1                       △⩽1
                        (ΘD | Υ[ ¤           ] | Υd ) → (ΘD | Υ[ ¤        ]).

Theorem 4.45. Suppose C is a category with a terminal object and a notion of fibration that
is stable under pullback, and that F is a copointed endofunctor of C such that ǫ : F → 1C is a
Quillen pre-fibration. Suppose also that C has limits of inverse ω-sequences of fibrations, and
that F preserves these limits. Then there is a terminal F-coalgebra.

Proof. We define inductively a sequence of objects Xn with morphisms gn+1 : Xn+1 → Xn ,
of which the terminal F-coalgebra will be the limit X∞ . We can think of each Xn as an
approximation to the terminal coalgebra, with Xn+1 extending Xn with additional data
making it a better approximation; thus each gn should be a fibration. Since Xn+1 will be
constructed inductively from Xn , we can expect it to contain all the data that X∞ should
contain that relates to Xn , and thus we can expect to have a map xn+1 : Xn+1 → FXn (but
not yet to FXn+1 ). To achieve the copointedness condition in the limit for these data, we


                                                 81
should demand ǫXn ◦ xn+1 = gn+1 . And to ensure that the successive approximations are
consistent with each other, we should ask that Fgn ◦ xn+1 = xn ◦ gn+1 .
     In sum, therefore, we will inductively construct a sequence of objects Xn , with fibrations
gn+1 : Xn+1 → Xn and morphisms xn+1 : Xn+1 → FXn , such that ǫXn ◦ xn+1 = gn+1 and
Fgn ◦ xn+1 = xn ◦ gn+1 .
     To start with, let X0 = 1, the terminal object, and let X1 = FX0 = F1, with x1 the identity.
Now, assume the data constructed up to level n > 0. The idea is to define Xn+1 to be the
universal object equipped with gn+1 and xn+1 satisfying the desired equations. This means
it is a limit of some diagram. The usual way to write that diagram is as the equalizer of the
two maps
                                              Xn
                                          ǫ                    xn

                                                    Fgn
                                   FXn                              FXn−1 ,

but this does not make it evident that gn+1 is a fibration. Instead, we can express this same
limit as the following pullback:
                                                   xn+1
                                   Xn+1                        FXn
                              gn+1
                                              y                      d                                    (4.46)
                                                                    hom(ǫ, gn )

                                   Xn                   Xn ×Xn−1 FXn−1 .
                                          (1,xn )


The commutativity of this square says that Fgn ◦ xn+1 = xn ◦ gn+1 and ǫXn ◦ xn+1 = gn+1 .
                   d
And by assumption, hom(ǫ,   gn ) is a fibration, hence so is its pullback gn+1 .
   Now let X∞ be the limit of the ω-sequence of fibrations
                                   gn+1            gn         g2          g1
                          X∞ · · · −−−→ Xn −−→ · · · −→ X1 −→ X0 = 1.

Since F preserves limits of inverse ω-sequences, FX∞ is the limit of the corresponding se-
quence
                              Fgn+1            Fgn            Fg2              Fg1
                      FX∞ · · · −−−−→ FXn −−→ · · · −−→ FX1 −−→ FX0 = 1.
The morphisms xn and ǫXn form fence diagrams:

                X∞           ···              X3        g3    X2         g2          X1     g1    X0
               x∞
                                                    x3               x2                   x1

                FX∞          ···           FX3          Fg3
                                                              FX2        Fg2
                                                                                 FX1        Fg1
                                                                                                  FX0
              ǫX∞                              ǫX3                 ǫX2                ǫX1           ǫX0

                X∞           ···              X3        g3    X2         g2          X1     g1    X0

composed of the parallelograms Fgn ◦xn+1 = xn ◦gn+1 from our construction, and naturality
squares ǫXn ◦ Fgn+1 = gn+1 ◦ ǫXn+1 . The former induces a map of limits x∞ : X∞ → FX∞ ,
while by naturality the latter induces ǫX∞ . The universal property of limits implies that




                                                        82
ǫX∞ ◦ x∞ is induced by the composite fence, and since gn+1 = ǫXn ◦ xn+1 this is

                   X∞         ···          X3         g3    X2    g2      X1        g1   X0
                 1X∞
                                                    g3           g2            g1

                   X∞         ···          X3         g3    X2    g2      X1        g1   X0

which induces the identity 1X∞ . Thus, X∞ is an F-coalgebra.
   Now suppose y : Y → FY is another F-coalgebra. We construct inductively maps hn : Y →
Xn such that xn+1 ◦ hn+1 = Fhn ◦ y and gn+1 ◦ hn+1 = hn . We start with h0 : Y → X0 = 1
                                                                 y    Fh0
the unique morphism, and h1 : Y → X1 = FX0 the composite Y −    → FY −−→   FX0 . Then we
induce hn+1 by the universal property of the pullback defining Xn+1 :
                                              Fhn ◦y
                         Y
                                hn+1

                                                    xn+1
                                    Xn+1                         FXn
                         hn
                                       gn+1
                                                y                      d
                                                                      hom(ǫ, gn )

                                    Xn                   Xn ×Xn−1 FXn−1 .
                                           (1, xn )

This is valid because using the inductive assumptions about hn and hn−1 , we have
                                ǫXn ◦ Fhn ◦ y = hn ◦ ǫY ◦ y
                                                      = hn
and
                              Fgn ◦ Fhn ◦ y = F (gn ◦ hn ) ◦ y
                                            = Fhn−1 ◦ y
                                                    = xn ◦ hn ,
and the two triangles relating to hn+1 show that it has the necessary properties.
   Now, the equations gn+1 ◦ hn+1 = hn imply there is an induced map h∞ : Y → X∞ , such
that x∞ ◦ h∞ is induced by the composites xn+1 ◦ hn+1 . But xn+1 ◦ hn+1 = Fhn ◦ y, and the
morphisms Fhn induce the limit map Fh∞ . Thus, h∞ is an F-coalgebra morphism.
   Finally, suppose k : Y → X∞ is any F-coalgebra morphism, so we have x∞ ◦ k = Fk ◦ y.
Then k is uniquely determined by the maps kn : Y → Xn , and we have xn+1 ◦kn+1 = Fkn ◦y.
But this equation implies by induction that kn = hn for all n, hence k = h∞ .         ⊳

4.5.2   Displayed coinductive types

Let C be a dTT natural model with levels, telescopes, décalage, telescope display, type dis-
play respecting Π-types and universes, and Π-telescopes. We will apply theorem 4.45 in
Tel (Γ  µ△ | Φ), in which the fibrations are the morphisms isomorphic to the dependent
projection from some telescope,
                          (Γ  µ△ | Φ | Θ | Υ) → (Γ  µ△ | Φ | Θ).

                                                    83
In the presence of levels, the objects of Tel (Γ  µ△ | Φ) are telescopes at any level.
    Suppose given the input data for a displayed coinductive type, consisting of

 Γ ∈C        Φ ∈ Tel ℓ0 (Γ  µ△ )       A ∈ Ty ℓ1 (Γ  µ△ | Φ)              B ∈ Tel ℓ2 (Γ  µ△ | Φ  A)
                                                                   
                              σ ∈ PSub ℓ0 (Γ  µ△ | Φ  A | B), Φd .

Categorically, this yields the data of a sort of ‘display polynomial’, where we indicate fibra-
tions with ։:
                     σ                                   π
  (Γ  µ△ | ΦD )         (Γ  µ△ | Φ  A | B)              (Γ  µ△ | Φ  A)
                    τπ                                                                τ


   (Γ  µ△ | Φ)                                                                          (Γ  µ△ | Φ)

The left vertical map is a fibration because it is isomorphic to the dependent projection

                                (Γ  µ△ | Φ | Φd ) → (Γ  µ△ | Φ).

Since everything is in the category of telescopes over Γ  µ△ , we will omit it from the
notation for conciseness, so that the above display polynomial becomes

                                 σ                       π
                         ΦD           (Φ  A | B)            (Φ  A)
                               τπ                                         τ


                         Φ                                                       Φ

    This display polynomial then defines a copointed endofunctor of Tel                   (Γ  µ△ | Φ) as
follows:
                                     Γ , µ△ ⊢sm X tel ℓ /φ:Φ
                             Γ , µ△ ⊢sm FX tel ℓ ⊔ ℓ1 ⊔ ℓ2 /φ : Φ, x : X φ

            FX ≡ (( a : A φ, x ′ : (b : B φ a) → Xd h φ , σ a b i x )) φ : Φ, x : X φ

Here the → denotes a Π-telescope (section 2.5.3), and Xd denotes meta-abstracted telescope
display (section 2.6.4); this is why we wanted those in the syntax. Note that FX is meta-
abstracted over Φ extended by X, so it lies in Tel (Γ  µ△ | Φ | X) rather than Tel (Γ  µ△ |
Φ). The actual endofunctor of Tel (Γ  µ△ | Φ) is thus

                                          e
                                          F(X) ≡ (X | FX).

The weakening projection (X | FX) → X is then a copointing ǫ : e
                                                               F → 1 of this endofunctor,
which is evidently a fibration. More than this, we have:

Lemma 4.47. The copointing ǫ : e
                               F → 1 is a Quillen pre-fibration.

Proof. Suppose given a fibration over X ∈ Telℓ0 (Γ , µ△ ), meaning a dependent telescope

                                 Γ , µ△ ⊢sm Y tel ℓ1 /φ : Φ, x : X φ .

                                                    84
Then we have

                   Γ , µ△ ⊢sm (( x : X φ | y : Y φ x )) φ : Φ tel ℓ0 ⊔ ℓ1 /φ : Φ

which we write as XY for conciseness. Then by definition, we have

 F(XY) ≡ (( a : A φ, z ′ : (b : B φ a) → (XY)d h φ , σ a b i [ x | y ] )) φ : Φ, x : X φ, y : Y φ x .

To simplify this, note that by the rules in section 2.6.4
                                                                                               
     (XY)d h φ , σ a b i [ x | y ] ≡ x ′ : Xd h φ , σ a b i x | Y d h φ , σ a b i h x , x ′ i y

and therefore by the rules in section 2.5.3

  (b : B φ a) → (XY)d h φ , σ a b i [ x | y ]
                                                                                          
≡ δ : (b : B φ a) → Xd h φ , σ a b i x | ǫ : (b : B φ a) → Y d h φ , σ a b i h x , δ b i y .

Now when δ is paired with a : A φ, it yields FX. Thus, the relevant gap map


                           XY | F(XY)


                                                 XY | F(X)             X | F(X)
                                                             y

                                                    XY                     X

is the dependent projection from the telescope

  (( (b : B φ a) → Y d h φ , σ a b i h x , δ b i y )) φ : Φ, x : X φ, y : Y φ x, a : A φ,
                                                                 δ : (b : B φ a) → Xd h φ , σ a b i x   (4.48)

and thus a fibration.
Lemma 4.49. The endofunctor e
                            F preserves inverse limits of ω-sequences of fibrations.

Sketch of proof. This follows from the η-rules for inverse limits, together with the fact that
display also preserves inverse limits.

   Therefore, by theorem 4.45, there exists a terminal e  F-coalgebra. Moreover, since we
have assumed that inverse limits are representable by single types, this coalgebra is a type
and not just a telescope. This type is our candidate for the displayed coinductive type; we
can unpack its definition as follows. The construction produces a tower of fibrations gn ,
which is to say a sequence of finite telescopes dependent on the previous ones:

                               φ : Φ ⊢sm X∂n φ tel ℓ
                φ : Φ, ∂x : X∂n φ ⊢sm Xn φ ∂x tel ℓ
                               φ : Φ ⊢sm X∂0 φ ≡ ()
                               φ : Φ ⊢sm X∂(n+1) φ ≡ (∂x : X∂n φ, x : Xn φ ∂x)


                                                   85
We choose the level of the empty telescope X∂0 to be ℓ ≡ ℓ0 ⊔ ℓ1 ; the explicit description
given below then implies that all the other telescopes X∂n and Xn are also at level ℓ.
   The object Xn+1 in section 4.5.1 corresponds to the telescope
                (φ : Φ, ∂x : X∂(n+1) φ) = (φ : Φ, ∂x : X∂n φ, x : Xn φ ∂x).

Each morphism xn+1 : Xn+1 → e
                            FXn such that ǫ ◦ xn+1 = gn+1 then corresponds to a term
                    φ : Φ, ∂x : X∂n φ, x : Xn φ ∂x ⊢sm ξn : F(X∂n ) φ ∂x.
By definition of F, ξn is equivalent to two terms
                      φ : Φ, ∂x : X∂n φ, x : Xn φ ∂x ⊢sm hn φ ∂x x : A φ
φ : Φ, ∂x : X∂n φ, x : Xn φ ∂x, b : B φ (hn φ ∂x x) ⊢sm tn φ ∂x x b :
                                                               (X∂n )d h φ , σ (hn φ ∂x x) b i ∂x.
The equation Fgn+1 ◦ xn+2 = xn+1 ◦ gn+2 means that
 φ : Φ, ∂x : X∂n φ, x : Xn φ ∂x, x ′ : Xn+1 φ [ ∂x, x ] ⊢sm hn+1 φ [ ∂x, x ] x ′ ≡ hn φ ∂x x
and

  φ : Φ, ∂x : X∂n φ, x : Xn φ ∂x, x ′ : Xn+1 φ [ ∂x, x ], b : B φ (hn φ ∂x x)
                                 ⊢sm tn+1 φ [ ∂x, x ] x ′ b ≡ [ tn φ ∂x x b, sn φ ∂x x x ′ b ]
for some term

  φ : Φ, ∂x : X∂n φ, x : Xn φ ∂x, x ′ : Xn+1 φ [ ∂x, x ], b : B φ (hn φ ∂x x)
                ⊢sm sn φ ∂x x x ′ b : (Xn )d h φ , σ (hn φ ∂x x) b i h ∂x , tn φ ∂x x b i x
                                    ≡ (Xn )d h φ , σ (hn−1 φ ∂x) b i h ∂x , tn φ ∂x x b i x

    Now inspecting the actual construction, we start with X0 = X∂0 = (), the empty tele-
scope, and X0 = F(X∂0 ) = F() = A. It is easy to see by induction that the functions hn then
all just project to X0 . For the rest, combining eqs. (4.46) and (4.48), we find that Xn+1 is
defined by

  φ : Φ, ∂x : X∂n φ, x : Xn φ ∂x ⊢sm
          Xn+1 φ [ ∂x, x ] ≡
            (b : B φ (hn−1 φ ∂x)) → (Xn )d h φ , σ (hn−1 φ ∂x) b i h ∂x , tn φ ∂x x b i x
and we have tautologically
                                    sn φ ∂x x x ′ b ≡ x ′ b.
In particular, by induction we find that in fact each Xn , though by construction a telescope,
is actually just a single type for all n ⩾ 0. Therefore, the tower (X∂n , Xn ) is precisely an
infinite telescope as defined in section 4.1.8, which we denote
                                        e = (X∂n , Xn ).
                                        X
Our displayed coinductive type is therefore precisely the limit of this infinite telescope as in
section 4.1.9:                                                
                           dCoind [ Φ, A, B, σ ] φ ≡ lim X eφ .


                                              86
Example 4.50. Recall that for semi-simplicial types SST, we have Φ ≡ (), with A ≡ Type
and B a ≡ (x : El a). Therefore, in this case we have
           X0 ≡ Type
        X0 A0 ≡ El A0 → Typed A0
              ≡ El A0 → El A0 → Type
   X2 A0 A1 ≡ (a1 : A0 ) → (( A → A → Type ))A : Type d A0 (A1 a1 ) A1
              ≡ (a1 : A0 ) → (( (x : A)(x ′ : A ′ x)(y : A)(y ′ : A ′ y) → Typed (A ′′ x y) ))
                                        A : Type, A ′ : Typed A, A ′′ : A → A → Type A0 (A1 a1 ) A1
              ≡ (a001 : A0 )(a010 : A0 )(a011 : A1 a001 a010 )
                                                (a100 : A0 )(a101 : A1 a001 a100 )(a110 : A1 a010 a100 ) → Type
This suggests that in general, X∂n will be the type of (n − 1)-truncated semi-simplicial types,
while Xn A will be the type of ways to extend such an A to an n-truncated one, i.e. the types
of indexed families of n-simplices. We will prove this formally in section 4.5.5.
    It remains to show that this construction of dCoind has the structure stipulated in sec-
tion 3.3. To this end, we first unpack what it means for a type C ∈ Ty(Γ µ△ | Φ) to be an e
                                                                                            F-
coalgebra. This means it is equipped with a section of the projection e
                                                                      F(C) = (C | F(C)) → C,
which syntactically is to say a partial substitution
        Γ , µ△ | (φ : Φ), x : C ⊢sm c : (a : A φ, x ′ : (b : B φ a) → Xd h φ , σ a b i x).
But this is equivalent to giving its components, which we abstract over x to emphasise their
dependence on it:
            Γ , µ△ | (φ : Φ) ⊢sm h : C → A φ
            Γ , µ△ | (φ : Φ) ⊢sm t : (x : C)(b : B φ (h x)) → Xd h φ , σ (h x) b i x
This is evidently precisely the structure of head and tail from section 3.3. Thus, our terminal
e
F-coalgebra admits these destructors.
    Furthermore, to give some other telescope Θ ∈ Tel(Γ  µ△ | Φ) an e   F-coalgebra structure
is equivalent to equipping Υ ≡ (Φ | Θ) with the premises of the corecursor, where the
indices-assigning map ζ : (Φ | Θ) → Φ is the dependent projection. Thus, terminality of our
terminal eF-coalgebra implies that it admits the corecursor for telescopes Υ of this form.
    In the models arising from type-theoretic model toposes, the underlying category is actu-
ally locally cartesian closed, and thus the functor eF can be extended from Tel (Γ  µ△ Φ) to
the larger slice category (Tel (Γ  µ△ ))/Φ, with the same terminal coalgebra in this larger
category. This directly implies the full corecursion principle, since ζ in that rule equips Υ
with the structure of an object of this slice.
    In fact, the same is true for arbitrary models: the premises of the corecursor equip Υ with
‘enough of an e F-coalgebra structure’ to deduce the existence of a unique compatible map to
the terminal coalgebra. In the next section we prove this in a more general abstract context.

4.5.3    Terminal generalised coalgebras

Let F be a copointed endofunctor of a category C as in section 4.5.1, where C is a full
subcategory of some larger category E.

                                                      87
Definition 4.51. An object Y ∈ E is a generalised F-coalgebra if it is equipped with:

   • For any X ∈ C and morphism h : Y → X, a specified morphism h : Y → FX, such that
   • ǫX ◦ h = h.
   • For any g : X → Z in C, we have Fg ◦ h = g ◦ h.

   In more abstract language, we can say that F induces a copointed endofunctor F∗ of the
functor category SetC by precomposition, and Y is a generalised F-coalgebra if the functor
E(Y, −) : C → Set is an F∗ -coalgebra. The following observation is then a consequence of
the Yoneda lemma, but we write it out explicitly.
Lemma 4.52. If Y ∈ C, then generalised F-coalgebra structures on Y are bijective to ordinary
F-coalgebra structures.

Proof. In one direction, if y : Y → FY is an F-coalgebra structure, then given h : Y → X
define h = Fh ◦ y. Then we have

                           ǫX ◦ h = ǫX ◦ Fh ◦ y = h ◦ ǫY ◦ y = h

and
                        Fg ◦ h = Fg ◦ Fh ◦ y = F(g ◦ h) ◦ y = g ◦ h.

    In the other direction, given a generalised F-coalgebra structure, let y = 1Y : Y → FY.
Then ǫY ◦ y = 1Y by assumption, so y is an F-coalgebra structure. Moreover, the other axiom
implies that for any g : Y → Z we have g = g ◦ 1Y = Fg ◦ 1Y = Fg ◦ y. Thus one round-
trip composite is the identity. The other round-trip composite simply sends y : Y → FY to
1Y = F(1Y ) ◦ y = 1FY ◦ y = y.

    Of course, a morphism of generalised F-coalgebras is a morphism f : Y → Z such that
for any h : Z → X ∈ C we have h ◦ f = h ◦ f.
Lemma 4.53. If Y ∈ E is a generalised F-coalgebra and x : X → FX is an F-coalgebra in C,
then a morphism f : Y → X is a generalised F-coalgebra morphism if and only if f = x ◦ f.

Proof. If it is a generalised F-coalgebra map, then taking h = 1X in h ◦ f = h ◦ f we get
x ◦ f = f. On the other hand, if x ◦ f = f then for any h : X → X ′ in C we have h ◦ f =
x ′ ◦ h ◦ f = Fh ◦ x ◦ f = Fh ◦ f = h ◦ f, as desired.

Theorem 4.54. Let C and F be as in theorem 4.45, and let C be a full subcategory of E
such that the embedding preserves the terminal object and the inverse limits of ω-sequences
of fibrations. Then the terminal F-coalgebra constructed in theorem 4.45 is also a terminal
generalised F-coalgebra.

Proof. Indeed, the proof of terminality in theorem 4.45 really only uses the generalised F-
coalgebra structure, which we can see clearly by repeating it in that language. Let Y ∈
E be a generalised F-coalgebra. We construct inductively maps hn : Y → Xn such that
xn+1 ◦ hn+1 = hn and gn+1 ◦ hn+1 = hn . We start with h0 : Y → X0 = 1 the unique




                                            88
morphism (since 1 ∈ C is also terminal in E), and h1 = h0 : Y → X1 = FX0 . Then we induce
hn+1 by the universal property of the pullback defining Xn+1 :

                                                 hn
                          Y
                                   hn+1

                                                     xn+1
                                      Xn+1                      FXn
                          hn
                                          gn+1
                                                 y                   d
                                                                    hom(ǫ, gn )

                                       Xn                 Xn ×Xn−1 FXn−1 .
                                             (1, xn )


This is valid because using the inductive assumptions about hn and hn−1 and the properties
of generalised coalgebras, we have

                                          ǫXn ◦ hn = hn

and

                                       Fgn ◦ hn = gn ◦ hn
                                                      = hn−1
                                                      = xn ◦ hn ,

and the two triangles relating to hn+1 show that it has the necessary properties.
    Now, the equations gn+1 ◦ hn+1 = hn imply there is an induced map h∞ : Y → X∞ , such
that x∞ ◦ h∞ is induced by the composites xn+1 ◦ hn+1 . But xn+1 ◦ hn+1 = hn , and the
morphisms Fhn induce the limit map Fh∞ , so x∞ ◦ h∞ = h∞ . Thus, by lemma 4.53, h∞ is
an F-coalgebra morphism.
    Finally, suppose k : Y → X∞ is any F-coalgebra morphism, so we have x∞ ◦ k = k. Then
k is uniquely determined by the maps kn : Y → Xn , and we have xn+1 ◦ kn+1 = kn . But
this equation implies by induction that kn = hn for all n, hence k = h∞ .            ⊳


4.5.4   The general corecursor

Suppose Υ ∈ Tel(Γ µ△ ) has the structure of the premises of the corecursor from section 3.3:

                              Γ , µ△ | υ : Υ ⊢sm ζ υ : Φ
                              Γ , µ△ | υ : Υ ⊢sm h υ : A (ζ υ)
             Γ , µ△ | υ : Υ | y : B(ζυ, h) ⊢sm τ υ y : Υd υ
             Γ , µ△ | υ : Υ | y : B(ζυ, h) ⊢sm ζd h υ , τ υ y i = σ (ζ υ) (h υ) y

Then ζ makes it an object of the slice category (Tel (Γ µ△ ))/Φ. We will apply theorem 4.54
to the full subcategory Tel (Γ  µ△ | Φ) ⊆ (Tel (Γ  µ△ ))/Φ. To that end, we give Υ the
structure of a generalised e
                           F-coalgebra as follows.
    Suppose X ∈ Tel(Γ µ△ | Φ), and suppose we have a map g : Υ → X in (Tel (Γ µ△ ))/Φ,
which is to say
                               Γ , µ△ | υ : Υ ⊢sm g υ : X (ζ υ).

                                                     89
We want to lift g to FX, which is to say we want to give

                        Γ , µ△ | (υ : Υ) ⊢sm h υ : A (ζ υ)
        Γ , µ△ | (υ : Υ), (b : B φ (h x)) ⊢sm t υ b : Xd h ζ υ , σ (h (ζ υ) (g υ)) b i (g υ)

But such an h is exactly part of the structure of Υ, while we can define

                                       t υ b ≡ gd υ (τ υ b).

The final equation in the structure of Υ is precisely what is necessary to make this well-
typed. The functoriality condition is immediate from the functoriality of d .
    Thus Υ is a generalised eF-coalgebra, and hence it admits a unique generalised e F-coalgebra
morphism to the terminal e   F-coalgebra C. This is a map Υ → (Φ | X) over ζ, which is pre-
cisely the right type of corec. And by lemma 4.53, the fact that it is a generalised e
                                                                                     F-coalgebra
map precisely gives it the correct computation rules.                                          ⊳


4.5.5    Correctness of semi-simplicial types

Finally, we will justify our universal characterization of SST semantically. Specifically, we
will show that when SST is constructed as a displayed coinductive type as in section 4.5.2,
in a model with ω-limits, it does in fact yield a ‘classifier’ of Reedy fibrant semi-simplicial
types in the classical sense.
    We begin by constructing such a classifier category-theoretically, and then show that
this construction coincides with the one obtained from section 4.5.2. We will assume some
familiarity with the classical notions of Reedy fibrant diagrams as in [KL21]. For all of this
section, we fix a particular universe level ℓ.


4.5.5.1 Ordered direct categories. Our category-theoretic construction of diagram clas-
sifiers works for presheaves over any ‘direct category’ (i.e. diagrams on any ‘inverse cate-
gory’).
Definition 4.55. A direct category is a category such that the relation ‘there is a nonidentity
arrow from x to y’ on its objects is well-founded. A sieve in a (direct) category is a full
subcategory J such that if f : y → x and x ∈ J, then y ∈ J. An ordered direct category is a
finite direct category together with (1) a total ordering on its objects such that if f : x → y
then x ⩽ y, and (2) such that for all objects x, the set of arrows with codomain x has a
linear order such that f ◦ g ⩽ f for any composable f, g (hence in particular 1x is the greatest
element).
    An ordered presheaf
                  P         on a direct category is a finite presheaf together with a linear order
on the finite set x∈I H(x) such that H(f)(h) < h whenever the left-hand side makes sense.

   An ordered direct category is equivalently the opposite of a (finite) ‘ordered inverse
category’ in the sense of [KL21, Definition 3.17], together with a suitable total ordering
on its objects (we require this so that the order of variables in the classifying context is
specified). Similarly, an ordered presheaf is a ‘finite extension‘ ∅ ֒→ H in the sense of [KL21,
Definition 3.10].



                                                 90
Example 4.56. Let ∆n be the subcategory of the category ∆+ from section 4.2.1 containing
the objects hki with 0 ⩽ k ⩽ n. Thus ∆n (hki, hli) is the set of length l + 1 binary sequences
containing exactly k+1 1s. For fixed l we give these morphisms Campion’s ordering, namely
the usual ordering of binary numbers. Then ∆n is an ordered direct category.

    For x ∈ I we write ∂よx for the sub-presheaf of the representable よx consisting of
nonidentity morphisms, i.e. ∂よx (y) = {f ∈ I(y, x) | f 6= 1x } = {f ∈ I(y, x) | y ≺ x}.
    If I is a finite direct category and H is a finite presheaf on it, there is a new finite direct
category I ⊕ H, called the collage of H, which contains I as a full subcategory, together with
one new object ⋆ such that I(x, ⋆) = H(x) for all x ∈ I. Note that ∂よ⋆ restricted to I coincides
with H. Moreover, I and H are ordered if and only if I ⊕ H is. Moreover, if I is an ordered
direct category of finite height with x its object of greatest rank, then I =   ∼ (I \ {x}) ⊕ ∂よx .
Thus, we can treat this as an induction principle for ordered direct categories.

4.5.5.2 Classifying contexts. As our first use of this sort of induction, we construct for
each ordered direct category I a ‘classifying context’ for Reedy fibrant I-presheaves. Specifi-
cally, we construct by simultaneous induction:

  1. For each ordered direct category I, a context Γ I . This will be the classifying context of
     Reedy fibrant I-types at level ℓ.
  2. For each ordered presheaf H on I, a telescope Γ I ⊢sm ΘH telℓ .
  3. For each map of ordered presheaves α : H → H ′ (not necessarily order-preserving) on
                                              ′
     I, a partial substitution Γ I ⊢sm θα : ΘH → ΘH , varying functorially.
  4. For each object x ∈ I, a type Γ I | Θ∂よx ⊢sm Bx typeℓ .
  5. For each h ∈ H(x), inducing by the Yoneda lemma a map βh : ∂よx ⊆ よx → H, a
     term Γ I | ΘH ⊢sm bh : Bx [ θβh ], such that bh [ θα ] = bα(h) for any α : H → H ′ .
  6. For each sieve J ⊆ I, a telescope Γ J ⊢sm Γ J,I tellsuc ℓ and an isomorphism Γ I =    ∼
      Γ J | Γ J,I . Morevoer, for all the structure in 2–5, the action of the weakening sub-
     stitution Γ I =∼ Γ J | Γ J,I → Γ J corresponds to left Kan extension along the inclusion
     J ֒→ I.

   For 1, we inductively use 2 and set

                                   Γ ∅ ≡ ()
                                                            
                               Γ I⊕H ≡ Γ I , A⋆ : ΘH → Typeℓ .

   For 2, we argue inductively on the linear ordering of H. If H is empty, we set

                                              Θ∅ ≡ ().

Otherwise, H = (H \ {h}) ∪ {h} where h ∈ H(x) is the last element in the ordering; the
condition on the ordering ensures that H \ {h} is still an (ordered) presheaf. By the Yoneda
lemma, h induces a map βh : ∂よx ⊆ よx → H \ {h}, hence by 3 a substitution Γ I ⊢sm θβh :
ΘH\{h} → Θ∂よx . Thus, inductively using 4 as well, we can define
                                                             
                             ΘH = ΘH\{h} , ah : Bx [ θβh ] .


                                                91
   We similarly construct 3 by induction on H (the domain of α). The case when H is
                                                               ′
empty is trivial. Otherwise, we inductively have θα\{h} : ΘH → ΘH\{h} , and to extend the
                                                             ′
codomain to ΘH it suffices to give a term in context Γ I | ΘH of type

                            Bx [ θβh ][ θα\{h} ] ≡ Bx [ θβh ◦ θα\{h} ]
                                                ≡ Bx [ θβα(h) ].

For this we can pick bα(h) , using 5 inductively. Functoriality follows from the inductive
assumption of functoriality in 5.
    For 4, note that the slice category I/x is a sieve in I containing x. Then it suffices to
define Bx in the case of I/x, since it can then be weakened to I using 6. In this case we have
I/x = (I/x \ {x}) ⊕ ∂よx , so the last variable in Γ I/x is Ax : Θ∂よx → Typeℓ . Thus, we can
define Γ I/x | y : Θ∂よx ⊢sm Bx to be Γ I/x\{x} , Ax : Θ∂よx → Typeℓ | y : Θ∂よx ⊢sm Ax y.
    For 5, it suffices to deal with the case when h is the last element in the ordering of
H, since otherwise we can weaken from the sub-presheaf of all elements ⩽ h to all of H,
using 3 for the inclusion of this sub-presheaf. But in this case, the last variable in ΘH is
ah : Bx [ θh ], so we can take bh ≡ ah . Functoriality follows immediately, as does stability
under weakening from initial segments for all the data.
    Finally, for 6 we induct on I. For a sieve in I ⊕ H there are two possibilities: it could be
J or J ⊕ H for some sieve J in I, depending on whether it contains the new object ⋆. (Of
course, if it contains ⋆, it must also contain all objects y such that H(y) 6= ∅, which is to say
that H must be left Kan extended from J.) In these two cases, we define
                                                                   
                                Γ J, I⊕H ≡ Γ J,I , A⋆ : ΘH → Typeℓ
                           Γ J⊕H, I⊕H ≡ Γ J,I    weakened to Γ J⊕H .

   This completes the construction of the classifying context. Note in particular that a
consequence of 3 is that re-ordering the elements of a presheaf H modifies ΘH only up to
isomorphism.


4.5.5.3 The classifying context is classifying. To show this, we first construct a ‘uni-
versal’ diagram over Γ I . Specifically, in any category with families, we construct simultane-
ously:

  1. For each ordered direct category I, a Reedy type B of shape I and level ℓ over Γ I in the
     sense of [KL21, Definition 3.22].
  2. For each ordered presheaf H on I, the object ΘH is the canonical H-weighted limit of
     B constructed by the ‘master lemma‘ of [KL21, Lemma 3.11]. (In particular, therefore,
     Θ∂よx is the matching object of B at x.)
  3. The maps θα are the functorial action of these limits.
  4. The type Γ I | Θよx ⊢sm Bx is the object B(x) with its fibration to the matching object
     Mx B = Θ∂よx .
  5. The elements bx are the projections from the weighted limit ΘH .



                                                92
The interesting case is 1, where we weaken the Reedy I-type B over Γ I to Γ I⊕H and then
must extend it to a Reedy (I ⊕ H)-type by giving a type over the matching object Θ∂よ⋆ . But
よ⋆ = H (weakened to I ⊕ H), and so we can use El AH where AH is the newly added
variable in Γ I⊕H . The other parts follow essentially tautologically.
    Lastly, suppose C is a Reedy I-type over any context ∆, and suppose that it is ‘ℓ-small’ in
the sense that each type C(x) over the matching object Mx C is classified by a specified map
into the universe Mx C → Typeℓ . We show by induction on I that it is classified by a unique
map c : ∆ → Γ I such that B[ c ] ≡ C. This is trivial when I is empty. Assuming it to be true
for I, if C is a Reedy (I ⊕ H)-type over ∆, and its restriction to an I-type is classified by a
map c : ∆ → Γ I , then to extend this to a map into Γ I⊕H we must give a term in context ∆ of
type ΘH [ c ] → Typeℓ . But matching objects are preserved by substitution, so ΘH [ c ] is the
matching object M⋆ C, and thus this is exactly the data extending C to a Reedy (I ⊕ H)-type.


4.5.5.4 Display and décalage of classifying contexts. Since the data Γ I , ΘH , Bx , and
so on are concrete finite syntactic objects (for any fixed I, H, x and so on), the rules in
sections 2.4.4, 2.4.5, 2.6.2 and 2.6.5 suffice to completely compute display and décalage on
them. We can characterize the results as follows.
                                             ξ
    Let 2 denote the interval category (0 − → 1), with two objects and one nonidentity mor-
phism ξ between them. Then if I is a direct category, so is 2 × I with the product well-
ordering where x ≺ y yields (0, x) ≺ (1, x) ≺ (0, y) ≺ (1, y). If I is ordered, we make 2 × I
ordered as follows. The morphisms in 2 × I with codomain (0, x) are bijective to those in I
with codomain x, so we inherit that ordering. And the morphisms in 2 × I with codomain
(1, x) are two copies of those in I with codomain x, one copy indexed by 11 and one by
ξ, so we give them the product well-ordering where ξ ≺ 11 : thus from g ≺ f we have
(ξ, g) ≺ (11 , g) ≺ (ξ, f) ≺ (11 , f).
    There is an evident projection p : 2 × I → I, inducing by precomposition from any
presheaf H on I a presheaf p∗ H on 2 × I. Each element of H, say h ∈ H(x), then induces two
elements p∗ H in H((0, x)) and H((1, x)); we denote these (0, h) and (1, h) respectively for
clarity. If H is ordered, we induce an ordering on p∗ H by ordering each element of H((0, x))
before the corresponding element of H((1, x)) (which is necessary, since ξ maps the latter
to the former).
    We also have an inclusion i0 : I → 2 × I defined by i0 (x) = (0, x), which is a sieve. Left
Kan extending along this inclusion takes a presheaf H on I to a presheaf (i0 )! H on 2 × I that
is supported only on the objects of the form (0, x) and has exactly the same elements, hence
inherits an ordering as well.
    Now we prove by simultaneous induction:

  1. For any I, we have (Γ I )D ≡ Γ 2×I .
                                                         ∗
  2. For any presheaf H on I, we have (ΘH )D ≡ Θp H and γ ′ : Γ 2×I ⊢sm Θ(i0 )! H γ ′ ≡
     ΘH γ ′ev .
  3. This identification is functorial in maps α : H → H ′ .




                                              93
  4. For each x ∈ I, we have:

                            γ ′ : Γ 2×I ⊢sm Θ∂よ(0,x) γ ′ ≡ Θ∂よx γ ′ev
         γ ′ : Γ 2×I , y : Θ∂よ(0,x) γ ′ ⊢sm B(0,x) γ ′ y ≡ Bx γ ′ev y
                                               ∂よ(1,x) = p∗ ∂よx ∪ {(ξ, 1x )}
                                                                                                       
                            γ ′ : Γ 2×I ⊢sm Θ∂よ(1,x) γ ′ ≡ y ′ : (Θ∂よx )D γ ′ , a(0,x) : Bx γ ′ev y ′ev

        γ ′ : Γ 2×I , y ′ : Θ∂よ(1,x) γ ′ ⊢sm B(1,x) γ ′ y ′ ≡ (Bx )d γ ′ y ′

  5. For each h ∈ H(x), we have:
                                                ∗
                           γ ′ : Γ 2×I , y ′ : Θp H ⊢sm b(0,h) γ ′ y ′ ≡ bh γ ′ev y ′ev
                                                ∗
                           γ ′ : Γ 2×I , y ′ : Θp H ⊢sm b(1,h) γ ′ y ′ ≡ (bh )d γ ′ y ′

For the inductive step of 1, we have

                        2 × (I ⊕ H) = (2 × I) ⊕ (i0 )! H ⊕ (p∗ H ∪ {(ξ, 1⋆ )}).

Thus, using 2, we have

Γ 2×(I⊕H)
                                                                ∗
                                                                                       
      ≡ γ ′ : Γ (2×I) , A(0,⋆) : Θ(i0 )! H → Typeℓ , A(1,⋆) : Θ(p H∪{(ξ,1⋆ )}) → Typeℓ
                                                                                                            
     ≡ γ ′ : (Γ I )D , A(0,⋆) : ΘH γ ′ev → Typeℓ , A(1,⋆) : (y ′ : (ΘH )D γ ′ ) → A(0,⋆) y ′ev → Typeℓ
                                        
     ≡ γ : Γ I , A⋆ : ΘH γ → Typeℓ D .

The other cases are similar. We can likewise show that

                                            Γ I,2×I ≡ (Γ I )d ,
                                                 
with the isomorphism Γ 2×I      ∼ Γ I | Γ I,2×I coinciding with the evens/odds pairing isomor-
                                =
                             
              ∼ Γ I | (Γ I )d .
phism (Γ I )D =

                                                                     
4.5.5.5 Discrete fibrations. The isomorphism Γ I =      ∼ Γ J | Γ J,I ensures that if J ⊆ I is a
sieve, we have a weakening substitution Γ I → Γ J . But more generally, we can expect to
induce a context substitution from any discrete fibration. Even more generally, we can get
a partial substitution from a ‘dependent’ discrete fibration, in the following sense.
Definition 4.57. If i : J ֒→ I is the inclusion of a sieve in a direct category, a co-section of
it is a discrete fibration p : I → J such that p ◦ i = 1J . In this case, if H is a presheaf on I
and K a presheaf
           P               morphism H → K over p is a relative isomorphism if it induces a
                    on J, aP
bijection y∈I H(y) → y∈J K(y).

    Note that the projection p : 2 × I → I above is not a co-section of the sieve i0 : I ֒→ 2 × I,
since it is not a discrete fibration. The prototypical example of a relative isomorphism is
∂よx → ∂よp(x) for any x ∈ I (this is essentially the definition of a discrete fibration).
    Now we define and prove inductively:

                                                     94
  1. For any co-section p : I → J of a sieve i : J ֒→ I in an ordered direct category, a partial
     substitution Γ J ⊢sm γp : Γ J,I .
  2. In addition, for any order-preserving relative isomorphism H → K between ordered
     presheaves, we have ΘH [ γp ] ≡ ΘK .
  3. For x ∈ I, we have Bx [ γp ] ≡ Bp(x) .
  4. For α : H → K an order-preserving relative isomorphism and h ∈ H(x), we have
     bx [ γp ] ≡ bα(x) .
     To construct 1, note that as before there are two possibilities for a sieve in I ⊕ H: it can
be J or J ⊕ H for a sieve J in I. In the latter case, we have Γ J⊕H, I⊕H = Γ J,I weakened to
Γ J⊕H , and a co-section of J ⊕ H ֒→ I ⊕ H is determined by a co-section p of J ⊆ I; thus we
can similarly weaken γp .
     In the former case, a co-section I ⊕ H → J is determined by a co-section p : I → J
together with an object x ∈ J and a relative isomorphism H → ∂よx . Since Γ J, I⊕H =
 Γ J,I , A⋆ : ΘH → Typeℓ in this case, to extend γp as desired it suffices to give a term of type
Γ J ⊢sm ΘH [ γp ] → Typeℓ . But using 2 inductively, this is equal to Γ J ⊢sm Θ∂よx → Typeℓ , so
we can use the variable Ax in Γ J .
     Now to prove 2, we induct on the ordering of H and K, inductively using 3. The inductive
arguments for 3–4 are similar.

4.5.5.6 Categorical coning. Our last generic construction is a category-theoretic notion
of ‘coning’ a direct category. Let J ⊆ I be a sieve in a direct category that contains the bottom
object, which we presciently denote h0i. Let I+ denote the direct category I augmented by
an additional morphism ζx : h0i → x for all objects x ∈ I \ J.9 We define f ◦ ζx = ζy for all
f : x → y; note that x ∈ I \ J implies y ∈ I \ J since J is a sieve. If I is ordered, we order I+ by
placing ζx before all other morphisms with codomain x; this is actually the only possibility
given our definition of composition. Note that J is still a sieve in I+ .
     Similarly, for a presheaf H on I, let H+ denote the presheaf on I+ consisting of H aug-
mented by a new element ζH ∈ H(h0i), such that H+ (ζx )(h) = ζH for all h ∈ H(x). If H is
ordered, we order H+ by putting ζH first.
     We now inductively prove:
                                                                                     +
  1. For any sieve J ⊆ I in an ordered direct category, we have Γ J,I                     ≡ (z : Bh0i ) → Γ J,I
     (meaning a Π-telescope).
                                                                        +
  2. In addition, for any H on I, if we transfer ΘH and ΘH across the isomorphisms
                                             
                      ∼ γ : Γ J | δ : Γ J,I γ
                   ΓI =
                    +
                                                                                   
                 ΓI = ∼ γ : Γ J | δ : Γ J,I+ γ ≡ γ : Γ J | δ : (z : Bh0i γ) → Γ J,I γ
                            +
      to get Θ̃H and Θ̃H , then we have
                                       +
                                                                     
                                    Θ̃H γ δ ≡ z : Bh0i γ, Θ̃H γ (δ z)

Both proofs are entirely straightforward, using the inductive definition of Π-telescopes as
well as Γ I and ΘH .
  9 The notation is somewhat abusive, since the construction depends on J as well as I.




                                                      95
4.5.5.7 Correctness of semi-simplicial types. Recall that our definition of semi-simplicial
types SSTℓ is as a displayed coinductive type with Φ ≡ (), A ≡ Typeℓ , and B a ≡ (x : El a).
Therefore, the construction in section 4.5.2 simplifies as follows:

             ⊢sm X∂n tel              ∂x : X∂n ⊢sm Xn ∂x tel                ⊢sm X∂0 ≡ ()

               ⊢sm X∂(n+1) ≡ (∂x : X∂n , x : Xn ∂x)                    ⊢sm X0 ≡ Typeℓ

             ∂x : X∂n , x : Xn ∂x ⊢sm hn ∂x x : Typeℓ                x : X0 ⊢sm h0 x ≡ x

            ∂x : X∂n , x : Xn ∂x, x ′ : Xn+1 [ ∂x, x ] ⊢sm hn+1 [ ∂x, x ] x ′ ≡ hn ∂x x

                ∂x : X∂n , x : Xn ∂x, b : El (hn ∂x x) ⊢sm tn ∂x x b : (X∂n )d ∂x

                                x : X0 , b : El (h0 x) ⊢sm t0 x b ≡ [ ]

∂x : X∂n , x : Xn ∂x, x ′ : Xn+1 [ ∂x, x ], b : El (hn ∂x x) ⊢sm tn+1 [ ∂x, x ] x ′ b ≡ [ tn ∂x x b, x ′ b ]

  ∂x : X∂n , x : Xn ∂x ⊢sm Xn+1 [ ∂x, x ] ≡ (b : El (hn−1 ∂x)) → (Xn )d h ∂x , tn ∂x x b i x

We will prove inductively that

                           X∂n ≡ Γ ∆n−1     and    Xn ≡ Θ∂よhni → Typeℓ .

This will imply that SST = limn X∂n is a classifying context for all of ∆. The claim about
Xn clearly inductively implies the claim about X∂n . Also it is easy to show inductively that
hn ≡ Bh0i . So it remains to say something useful about tn .
   Let In be the subcategory of 2 × ∆n containing all the objects except (1, hni), and let
Jn = {0} × ∆n regarded as a sieve in In . The central fact is the following.
Lemma 4.58. For any n, there is a co-section qn : In + → Jn .

Proof. On objects, let qn ((1, hki)) = (0, hk + 1i) for 0 ⩽ k < n. A morphism (1, hki) →
(1, hli) is a length l + 1 sequence with k + 1 1s, and we augment it by another 1 on the right
to get a length l + 2 sequence with k + 2 1s, hence a morphism (0, hk + 1i) → (0, hl + 1i). A
morphism (0, hki) → (1, hli) is also a length l + 1 sequence with k + 1 1s, but this time we
augment it by a 0 on the right to get a length l + 2 sequence with k + 1 1s, hence a morphism
(0, hki) → (0, hl + 1i). Finally, we send the new morphism ζ(1,hli) to the sequence of l + 1
0s followed by one 1. Functoriality is easy to check. And to see that it is a discrete fibration,
we observe that any binary sequence of length l + 2 with a positive number of 1s must be of
exactly one of these three forms: a positive number of 1s followed by a 1, a positive number
of 1s followed by a 0, or a sequence of 0s followed by a 1.

   Evidently qn+1 restricts to qn as we shrink the categories. Thus, we also get a relative
               +
isomorphism ∂よ(1,hni) → ∂よ(0,hn+1i) over qn .
   Now note that if we abstract over b, the type of tn matches that of γqn . Thus, we can
now prove by simultaneous induction that:

   1. X∂n ≡ Γ ∆n−1 .


                                                  96
  2. Xn ≡ Θ∂よhni → Typeℓ .
  3. hn ≡ Bh0i .
  4. tn ≡ γqn .

We have already remarked that 1 and 3 are easy, and the base cases of 2 and 4 are likewise
trivial. For the induction step of 2, we have

          Xn+1 [ ∂x, x ] ≡ (b : El (hn−1 ∂x)) → (Xn )d h ∂x , tn ∂x x b i x
                         ≡ (b : Bh0i ∂x) → Θ∂よ(1,hni) h ∂x , tn ∂x x b i x → Typeℓ
                                +
                         ≡ Θ∂よ(1,hni) [ γqn ] → Typeℓ
                         ≡ Θ∂よ(1,hn+1i) [ ∂x, x ] → Typeℓ .

Finally, the induction step of 4 follows immediately from the definition of γp and the in-
ductive hypothesis of 2. This completes the proof of the correctness of our construction of
semi-simplicial types.                                                                    ⊳


                          5 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we have made two main contributions. First, we have described Displayed Type
Theory (dTT), a new kind of type theory that incorporates (unary) internal parametricity but
guarded by a modality, and showed that any model of dependent type theory with countable
Reedy limits can be lifted to a model of dTT using augmented semi-simplicial diagrams.
Because the latter are diagrams on an inverse category, their type theory is more closely
related to that of the original model, and indeed the original model sits inside our model
of dTT at the discrete mode. In particular, unlike other internally parametric type theories,
dTT is compatible with classical axioms such as excluded middle and choice, as long as
they are formulated at the discrete mode (or under the modality ♦), and can be used as an
internal logic to reason about arbitrary (∞, 1)-toposes.
    Secondly, inside dTT we have introduced a notion of displayed coinductive type, where
the output of a destructor can be a parametricity ‘computability witness’ of the input, and
showed that as a particular case of this notion we can define a type of semi-simplicial types.
This yields a new approach to the long-standing open problem of representing infinitely co-
herent higher structures in type theory. Relative to other approaches, ours has the advantage
that semi-simplicial types are defined (not postulated) as a simple instance of a type-former
with natural introduction and elimination rules, i.e. a categorical universal property. While
it remains to be seen how much can actually be done in practice with our definition, early
indications of its utility are promising.
    There are a number of directions for future work suggested by our results; here we
survey a few of them briefly.

5.0.0.1 Computation and implementation. We conjecture that dTT satisfies canonicity
and normalization, and should therefore be possible to implement in a proof assistant.




                                             97
5.0.0.2 Modal internal parametricity. We expect that most applications of ordinary in-
ternal parametricity have modal versions that can be proven in dTT (or a higher-ary version
of it, as discussed below). In addition to the traditional ‘free theorems’ such as those men-
tioned in the introduction, it would be especially interesting to investigate this for the proof
of the pentagon identity for the smash product in [Cav21], since such a proof would then
apply internally to any (∞, 1)-topos.

5.0.0.3 Computing diamond. Our intended semantic model strictly validates computa-
tion rules for diamond, such as ♦ (A → B) ≡ ♦ A → ♦ B, because type formers in the
simplicial model extend type formers in the discrete model at the level of (−1)-simplices.
The syntax of dTT may thus be augmented with computation rules for diamond. Formally,
this would be accomplished in a manner similar to display, by extending the definition of
diamond to meta-abstractions, such as to handle open terms under binders. One would
introduce an operation, troncature (meaning ‘truncation’ in French), to model the action of
diamond on telescopes. One then has:
                                                                    
                  Γ , µ♦ ⊢sm Υ tel ℓ            Γ , µ♦ ⊢sm A type ℓ1 υ : Υ
                                                                .
                   Γ ⊢dm ♦ Υ tel ℓ            Γ ⊢dm ♦ A type ℓ1 υ♭ : ♦ Υ

5.0.0.4 Higher category theory. We have defined a type of semi-simplicial types in dTT,
but such a definition is not an end in itself; it is intended as a tool for developing a theory
of higher categories and other higher structures. We hope that our corecursion principle of
SST, and the availability of other displayed coinductive types for predicates and structures
on them, should make the development of such a theory feasible in dTT. We sketched some
initial ideas in sections 3.2 and 3.4, but much remains to be done.

5.0.0.5 Elementary models. In section 4 we showed that any model of type theory with
ω-limits can be enhanced to a model of dTT including SST, but this is probably not the only
way to construct models of dTT. In particular, we conjecture that there are ‘realizability’
models of dTT in which SST is a classifier for ‘uniform’ semi-simplicial types. This sug-
gests that perhaps displayed coinductive types might be useful to include in a definition of
elementary (∞, 1)-topos.

5.0.0.6 Higher-ary dTT. The parametricity of dTT is unary, meaning that Ad depends
on one copy of A; but parametricity in general can be n-ary for any natural number n, and
some applications require higher arities. We expect that higher-ary versions of dTT can be
defined and modeled by a straightforward modification of the constructions in this paper,
using higher-ary semi-cubical types in place of augmented semi-simplicial types (recall that
augmented semi-simplicial types are the same as unary semi-cubical types). In this case the
binary numbers described in section 4.2.1 become base-(n + 1) numbers.

5.0.0.7 Symmetries. In theories with non-modal internal parametricity, and also in Higher
Observational Type Theory, it appears to be necessary to include a ‘symmetry’ operation on
higher-dimensional types. For instance, in our notation a symmetry operation would have
the type Add a00 a01 a10 → Add a00 a10 a01 . The absence of symmetry in dTT is a significant
simplification; for instance, it means that ∆+op is a strict inverse category, making possible
the explicit syntactic model construction in section 4.2. However, we have also seen that it


                                              98
leads to certain limitations, e.g. without symmetry it is unclear how to give a corecursion
principle for SSTd .
    It should be possible to formulate a version of dTT (unary or higher-ary) with symmetry,
but in the presence of symmetry it is unclear whether it is possible for display to compute
definitionally on type-formers. However, it should work to use either the interval-based
style of [BM12, BCM15, Mou16] or the ‘observational’ style of [ACKS24].

5.0.0.8 Unimode dTT. We have formulated dTT with two modes, but intuitively the
discrete mode is unnecessary, as the dm-types are embedded in the sm-types by the modality
△. Thus, it should be possible to formulate a version of dTT in which there is only one mode.
This is similar to other situations such as spatial/cohesive type theory [Shu18] and synthetic
guarded domain theory [GKNB21] that have both unimodal and bimodal versions.

5.0.0.9 Conjectural syntax. In addition to displayed coinductive types, one may con-
sider other kinds of generalized inductive and coinductive types. These are especially useful
when taking a more ‘synthetic’ approach to higher structures in dTT, using the sm-types as
augmented semi-simplicial objects rather than working with the internally defined type SST
of semi-simplicial types.
    Firstly, regarding display as analogous to paths in homotopy type theory suggests dis-
played inductive types as analogues of higher inductive types. Here the constructors gen-
erate displayed elements rather than ordinary ones. As an example, we can construct the
simplicial cone of any type:
data C (A : △ Type) : Type where
  ι : A → C A
  σ : (x : A) → (C A) d (ι x)

f : C A → B
f (ι x) = ?ι : B
fd (ι x ) (σ x ) = ?σ : Bd ?ι

   Secondly, regarding both display and paths as a kind of modality suggests considering
more general modal inductive types, whose constructors can land in modal versions of the
type. For instance, since ♦A is the (−1)-simplices of A, a ♦-modal constructor adds a (−1)-
simplex without any higher simplices above it. In this way we can construct the free-living
(−1)-simplex, and then all the higher simplices by coning:
data ∆−1 : Type where
  ⋆ : ♦ ∆−1

f : ∆−1 → A
♦ f ⋆ = ?⋆ : ♦ A

∆ : N → Type
∆ zero = C ∆−1
∆ (suc n) = C (∆ n)

    Note that in both cases, we rely on the computation behaviour of d and ♦ in order to
directly give induction principles.10 For example, the pattern match ♦ f a requires that ♦
 10 The case splits for defining a function f valued out of an inductive type in this hypothetical extension of Agda,




                                                        99
of a function type compute to a function type. This is an improvement on the treatment
of higher inductive types in [Uni13], since their natural elimination principle use ap, which
is not there a primitive constant but a compound expression defined by path induction. In
particular, we conjecture that in dTT, these displayed and modal inductive types can be
made fully computational.


                                               References

[ACKS23] Danil Annenkov, Paolo Capriotti, Nicolai Kraus, and Christian Sattler. Two-level
         type theory and applications. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, page
         1–56, 2023. arXiv:1705.03307. (Cited on p. 4)
[ACKS24] Thorsten Altenkirch, Yorgo Chamoun, Ambrus Kaposi, and Michael Shul-
         man. Internal parametricity, without an interval. To appear in POPL’24.
         arXiv:2307.06448, 2024. (Cited on pp. 8, 9, 12, 25, 76, and 99)
[Acz78]       Peter Aczel. The type theoretic interpretation of constructive set theory. In
              Angus Macintyre, Leszek Pacholski, and Jeff Paris, editors, Logic Colloquium ’77,
              volume 96 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 55–66.
              Elsevier, 1978. (Cited on p. 37)

[AFM+ 21] Benedikt Ahrens, Dan Frumin, Marco Maggesi, Niccolò Veltri, and Niels van der
          Weide. Bicategories in univalent foundations. Mathematical Structures in Com-
          puter Science, 31(10):1232–1269, 2021. (Cited on p. 11)
[AKS22]       Thorsten    Altenkirch, Ambrus      Kaposi,   and   Michael  Shul-
              man.            Towards a    third-generation   HOTT.         URL:
              https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/higher+observational+type+theory,
              2022. (Cited on p. 9)
[AL19]        Benedikt Ahrens and Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine. Displayed categories. Logical
              Methods in Computer Science, 15(1), March 2019. (Cited on pp. 10 and 33)
[Awo18]       Steve Awodey. Natural models of homotopy type theory. Math. Structures Com-
              put. Sci., 28(2):241–286, 2018. arXiv:1406.3219. (Cited on p. 44)
[BCM15]       Jean-Philippe Bernardy, Thierry Coquand, and Guilhem Moulin. A presheaf
              model of parametric type theory. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Sci-
              ence, 319:67 – 82, 2015. The 31st Conference on the Mathematical Foundations
              of Programming Semantics (MFPS XXXI). (Cited on pp. 7 and 99)
[BM12]        Jean-Philippe Bernardy and Guilhem Moulin. A computational interpretation of
              parametricity. In Proceedings of the 2012 27th Annual IEEE/ACM Symposium on
              Logic in Computer Science, LICS ’12, page 135–144, USA, 2012. IEEE Computer
              Society. (Cited on pp. 7 and 99)
[Cav21]       Evan Cavallo. Higher Inductive Types and Internal Parametricity for Cubical Type
              Theory. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, February 2021. (Cited on p. 98)
as above, would result automatically by writing f x = ? and pressing C-c C-c in the context of the hole.




                                                     100
[CCD17]    Simon Castellan, Pierre Clairambault, and Peter Dybjer. Undecidability of equal-
           ity in the free locally cartesian closed category (extended version). Logical Meth-
           ods in Computer Science, 13(4), November 2017. (Cited on p. 77)
[CCD21]    Simon Castellan, Pierre Clairambault, and Peter Dybjer. Categories with fami-
           lies: Unityped, simply typed, and dependently typed. In Claudia Casadio and
           Philip J. Scott, editors, Joachim Lambek: The Interplay of Mathematics, Logic,
           and Linguistics, pages 135–180. Springer Verlag, 2021. (Cited on p. 40)
[CD11]     Pierre Clairambault and Peter Dybjer. The biequivalence of locally cartesian
           closed categories and Martin-Löf type theories. In Proceedings of the 10th in-
           ternational conference on Typed lambda calculi and applications, TLCA’11, pages
           91–106, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011. Springer-Verlag. (Cited on p. 76)
[GCK+ 22] Daniel Gratzer, Evan Cavallo, G. A. Kavvos, Adrien Guatto, and Lars Birkedal.
          Modalities and parametric adjoints. ACM Trans. Comput. Logic, 23(3), apr 2022.
          (Cited on pp. 9, 12, 14, 16, 74, and 75)
[GKNB21] Daniel Gratzer, G. A. Kavvos, Andreas Nuyts, and Lars Birkedal. Multimodal
         dependent type theory. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 17(3), July 2021.
         (Cited on pp. 9, 12, 13, 14, 74, and 99)
[Kel80]    G. M. Kelly. A unified treatment of transfinite constructions for free algebras,
           free monoids, colimits, associated sheaves, and so on. Bull. Austral. Math. Soc.,
           22(1):1–83, 1980. (Cited on p. 81)
[KL21]     Krzysztof Kapulkin and Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine. Homotopical inverse di-
           agrams in categories with attributes. Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra,
           225(4):106563, 2021. arXiv:1808.01816. (Cited on pp. 11, 40, 76, 90, and 92)
[Kra15]    Nicolai Kraus. The general universal property of the propositional trunca-
           tion. In Hugo Herbelin, Pierre Letouzey, and Matthieu Sozeau, editors, 20th
           International Conference on Types for Proofs and Programs (TYPES 2014), vol-
           ume 39 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 111–
           145, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2015. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Infor-
           matik. arXiv:1411.2682. (Cited on p. 11)

[Lin89]    Ingrid Lindström. A construction of non-well-founded sets within Martin-Löf’s
           type theory. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 54(1):57–64, 1989. (Cited on p. 37)
[LOPS18] Daniel R. Licata, Ian Orton, Andrew M. Pitts, and Bas Spitters. Internal uni-
         verses in models of homotopy type theory. Leibniz International Proceedings in
         Informatics (LIPIcs), 108(22):1–17, 2018. arXiv:1801.07664. (Cited on p. 8)
[Mou16]    Guilhem Moulin. Internalizing parametricity. PhD thesis, Chalmers University,
           2016. (Cited on pp. 7 and 99)
[RFL21]    Mitchell Riley, Eric Finster, and Daniel R. Licata. Synthetic spectra via a monadic
           and comonadic modality. arXiv:2102.04099, 2021. (Cited on p. 9)
[RS17]     Emily Riehl and Michael Shulman. A type theory for synthetic ∞-categories.
           Higher structures, 1(1), 2017. arXiv:1705.07442. (Cited on p. 4)


                                            101
[Shu15]   Michael Shulman. Univalence for inverse diagrams and homotopy canonic-
          ity. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 25(5):1203–1277, June 2015.
          (Cited on pp. 8, 11, 40, and 76)
[Shu18]   Michael Shulman. Brouwer’s fixed-point theorem in real-cohesive homotopy
          type theory. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 28(6):856–941, 2018.
          arXiv:1509.07584. (Cited on p. 99)
[Shu19]   Michael Shulman.      All (∞, 1)-toposes have strict univalent universes.
          arXiv:1904.07004, 2019. (Cited on pp. 2, 7, 8, 11, and 81)
[Shu23]   Michael Shulman. Semantics of multimodal adjoint type theory. Electronic Notes
          in Theoretical Informatics and Computer Science, 3 (Proceedings of MFPS XXXIX),
          November 2023. arXiv:2303.02572. (Cited on pp. 14 and 16)
[Uni13]   Univalent Foundations Program. Homotopy Type Theory: Univalent Foundations
          of Mathematics. http://homotopytypetheory.org/book/, first edition, 2013.
          (Cited on pp. 2 and 100)
[Usk23]   Elif Uskuplu. Formalizing two-level type theory with cofibrant exo-nat. PhD thesis,
          University of Southern California, 2023. (Cited on p. 4)
[Wad89]   Philip Wadler. Theorems for free! In Functional Programming Languages and
          Computer Architecture, pages 347–359. ACM Press, 1989. (Cited on p. 6)
[Wei22]   Jonathan Weinberger. Strict stability of extension types. arXiv:2203.07194,
          2022. (Cited on p. 4)




                                           102
                    A    Verifications for the Simplicial Model

                                        A.1    VARIABLES
We first check that pt is a morphism of presheaves:
                              
             Γ b ◦ ptA
                     smn+1 n+1    γn+1 ∂a a
                ≡ Γ b γn+1
                                                                          
                ≡ ptA            b
                    smn+1 m+1 Γ γn+1         actπA
                                                ∂b γn+1 ∂a    actAb γn+1 ∂a a
                                                   
                                                   b
                ≡ ptA smn+1 m+1 ◦ (γ : Γ , a : A γ)    γn+1 ∂a a.

We now verify eq. (4.18) at the level of (n + 1)-simplices:
             ρ(Γ , A) +       
                              ′
     zvπA
       sm n+1          γ  a a
                                  n+1
                     (Γ , A)01hn+1i
         ≡ zvπA
             smn+1 n+1                γn+2 a∂(n+1) an+1 a ′ ∂(n+1) a ′ n+1
                                                                                         ′
                                                                                             
         ≡ zvπA
             smn+1 n+1 Γ
                               01hn+1i
                                        γn+2     actπA
                                                    ∂(01hn+1i ) γn+2 a∂(n+1) an+1 a ∂(n+1)
                                                                  ′           ′
                                                                                  
                              actA
                                 01hn+1i γn+2 a∂(n+1) an+1 a ∂(n+1) a n+1
                                           
         ≡ zvπA
             smn+1 n+1         ρΓ n+1 γn+2 a∂(n+1) an+1
                ρΓ 
         ≡ zvπA
             smn+1 n+1 γn+2 a∂(n+1) an+1
                ρΓ                                                                     
                                 Ad
         ≡ zvπA
             smn+1 n+1         ptsm n+1      γ      a
                                         n+1 n+2 ∂(n+1) n+1
                                                            a       , a ′ ∂(n+1) a ′ n+1
                   ρΓ ptA n+1 
                            d

         ≡ zvπAsm n+1
                         sm
                                       γ     a
                                  n+1 n+2 ∂(n+1) n+1
                                                      a     a ′ ∂(n+1) a ′ n+1
                  ρΓ ptA n+1
                            d              
         ≡ zvπAsmn+1
                          sm
                                  γ+ a a ′     .
                                            n+1

We now need to verify eqs. (4.2) to (4.4) at the level of (n + 2)-simplices. For the first two
of these, for σ : ∆ → Γ and δ : ∆ ⊢smn+2 t δ : A (σ δ), we have that:
                                                             D 
               ptAsm n+2 ◦ [ σ, t ]      ≡   pt A
                                                smn+2 ◦ [ σ, t ]
                                     n+2                             n+1
                                                     D             
                                                A                  D
                                         ≡ ptsmn+2 ◦ [ σ, t ]
                                                                      n+1
                                                                               
                                              πAρΓ        Ad
                                         ≡ ptsmn+1 ◦ ptsmn+1 ◦ [ σ , πtρ∆ , td ]
                                                                      D
                                                                                 n+1
                                                                    
                                              πAρΓ        D      ρ∆
                                         ≡ ptsmn+1 ◦ [ σ , πt ]
                                                                       n+1
                                            
                                             D
                                         ≡ σ
                                               n+1
                                        ≡ σn+2 .




                                                   103
For the second:
                                    [ σ, t ]                                 [ σ, t ] d 
                         zvA
                           smn+2                              ≡        zvA
                                                                         smn+2
                                                        n+2                                       n+1
                                                                              d [ σ, t ]D   
                                                              ≡        zvA
                                                                         smn+2
                                                                                                   n+1
                                                                             [ σD , πtρ∆ , td ]   
                                                                        Ad
                                                              ≡       zvsmn+1
                                                                                                        n+1
                                                                
                                                              ≡ td
                                                                        n+1
                                                              ≡ tn+2 .

For the third, we will use eq. (4.18). For τ : ∆ → (γ : Γ , a : A γ) in smn+2 we have:
           A                     τ 
           ptsmn+2 ◦ τ, zvA smn+2       n+2
                                             τ D 
               ≡ ptA   smn+2 ◦ τ,   zv A
                                       smn+2         n+1
                      A
                             D D           πA
                                                  πτ◦ρ∆                 τ d 
               ≡ ptsm    n+2    ◦ τ  ,   zv smn+1         , zvA   smn+2          n+1
                  πAρΓ         Ad          D      πA
                                                         ρ(Γ , A) ◦τD        A
                                                                                     τD 
               ≡ ptsmn+1 ◦ ptsmn+1 ◦ τ , zvsmn+1                       , zvsmn+2 d           n+1
                  πAρΓ         A d                   ρΓ ptA n+1 ◦τD
                                                               d
                                                                                d    τ D 
               ≡ ptsmn+1 ◦ ptsm    n+1 ◦ τ ,
                                            D
                                                 zvπA
                                                   smn+1
                                                            sm
                                                                        , zvsmA
                                                                                 n+1
                                                                                            n+1
                  Ad          D       Ad
                                              τD 
               ≡ ptsmn+1 ◦ τ , zvsmn+1              n+1
                      
               ≡ τD n+1
                ≡ τn+2 .                                                                                      ⊳


                                                        A.2       Π-TYPES
We verify the β-law at the level of (n + 2)-simplices:
                    n+2      n+2   
                appsm     λsm     t s
                                        n+2
                                              
                            smn+2    smn+2
                   ≡ app           λ        t s d
                                                     n+1
                                                                 
                          smn+1       smn+1      smn+2
                   ≡ app          app          λ       t d πsρΓ sd
                                                                       n+1
                                                                    ρ  d 
                          smn+1       smn+1      smn+1     smn+1 d
                   ≡ app          app          λ         λ        t    πs Γ s
                                                                              n+1
                                                     ρ
                                                               
                          smn+1     smn+1 d [ 1Γ D , πs Γ ] d
                   ≡ app          λ       t                  s
                                                                 n+1
                                                                      
                           smn+1    smn+1
                                                Ad            ρ
                                              d W2 [ 1Γ D , πs Γ ]
                                                                    d
                   ≡ app          λ         t                       s
                                                                                                  n+1
                               D ρ d                    
                              d [ 1Γ , πs Γ , s ]
                     ≡       t
                                                              n+1
                                          
                              [ 1Γ , s ] d
                     ≡       t
                                                n+1
                                         
                             [ 1Γ , s ]
                     ≡ t                            .
                                              n+2




                                                                  104
We also verify the η-law:
         n+2            n+2       
          λsm      appsm fpt zv
                                      n+2
                                               
                     smn+2       smn+2 pt
              ≡ λ            app       f zv d
                                                     n+1
                  n+1                                   
                    sm       smn+1        smn+2 pt
              ≡ λ          λ         app         f zv d
                                                             n+1
                  n+1                                                               
                             smn+1        smn+1         smn+1
              ≡ λ   sm
                           λ         app            app        fpt d πzvρ(Γ , A) zvd
                                                                                           n+1
                  n+1                                             D pt  
                    sm       smn+1        smn+1         smn+1    d pt
              ≡ λ          λ         app            app        f       zv zv
                                                                                     n+1
                  n+1                                                         
                    sm       smn+1        smn+1         smn+1    d pt◦pt    pt
              ≡ λ          λ         app            app        f         zv zv
                                                                                      n+1
                  n+1                                                        
                    sm       smn+1        smn+1         smn+1    d pt     pt
              ≡ λ          λ         app            app        f      zv zv
                                                                                    n+1
                  n+1                            
                    sm         smn+1      d pt
              ≡ λ          app          f       zv
                                                      n+1
                  
                   d
              ≡ f
                        n+1
                ≡ fn+2 .                                                                         ⊳


                                        A.3     U NIVERSES
We verify that Code and El are mutually inverse at the level of (n + 2)-simplices:
                 n+2         n+2    
             Elsm     Codesm      A
                                        n+2
                                                
                        smn+2         smn+2
                 ≡ El           Code         A d
                                                      n+1
                                                               pt 
                      smn+1        smn+1           smn+2
                 ≡ El          app          Code            A d zv
                                                                        n+1
                                                                          
                      smn+1        smn+1     smn+1            smn+1  d pt
                 ≡ El          app         λ           Code         A     zv
                                                                               n+1
                                                                       πAρΓ     
                         n+1          n+1       n+1             n+1    W      pt
                 ≡ Elsm        appsm       λsm         Codesm       Ad 2          zv
                                                                                     n+1
                                                         
                      smn+1          smn+1    d [ pt, zv ]
                 ≡ El          Code        A
                                                             n+1
                                               
                      smn+1          smn+1    d
                 ≡ El          Code        A
                                                   n+1
                     
                      d
                 ≡ A
                           n+1
                 ≡ An+2 .




                                                 105
In the other direction:
                     n+2       n+2    
               Codesm      Elsm      A
                                          n+2
                                                  
                            smn+2       smn+2
                   ≡ Code            El        A d
                                                       n+1
                      n+1                                 
                        sm            smn+1      smn+2
                   ≡ λ          Code          El        A d
                                                               n+1
                      n+1                                           pt 
                        sm            smn+1      smn+1       smn+1
                   ≡ λ          Code          El         app       Ad zv
                                                                             n+1
                      n+1                            
                        sm          smn+1     d pt
                   ≡ λ          app         A       zv
                                                         n+1
                      
                         d
                   ≡ A
                            n+1
                  ≡ An+2 .                                                              ⊳


                                          A.4     ω- LIMITS
We mutually verify the identity between res and lim at the m-th stage and on the boundary:
                                                                     
                     smn+2                                       smn+2
       res∂m
          smn+2 lim        e
                           a                       resm
                                                      smn+2 lim        e
                                                                       a
                               n+2                                          n+2
                                   d                                         
                  ∂m        smn+2                             m         smn+2
         ≡ ressmn+2 lim           e
                                  a                  ≡ ressmn+2 lim            a d
                                                                               e
                                          n+1                                         n+1
                                  d                                         d 
                 ∂m        smn+2                             m         smn+2
         ≡ ressmn+1 lim          e
                                 a                   ≡ ressmn+1 lim           e
                                                                              a
                                        n+1                                         n+1
                                                                             
                 ∂m        smn+1 d                           m         smn+1 d
         ≡ ressmn+1 lim          e
                                 a                   ≡ ressmn+1 lim           e
                                                                              a
                                        n+1                                         n+1
                                                      
                d ∂m                                        d m
         ≡ e  a                                      ≡ e  a
                       n+1                                       n+1
                                                           
                ∂m d                                        m d
         ≡ e  a                                      ≡ e  a
                  n+1                                  n+1
         ≡ e a∂m                                     ≡ e am       .
                   n+2                                              n+2

We also verify the η-law:
                                      n+2                
                                 limsm       resmsmn+2 eu m
                                                             n+2
                                                                 
                                            smn+2       m
                                   ≡ lim                      u m d
                                                     ressmn+2 e
                                                                      n+1
                                                             d 
                                           smn+1       m
                                   ≡ lim            ressmn+2 e
                                                             u m
                                                                   n+1
                                                                
                                           smn+1       m      d
                                   ≡ lim            ressmn+1 e
                                                             u m
                                                                    n+1
                                      
                                         d
                                   ≡ e u
                                       n+1
                                   ≡ e u       .                                        ⊳
                                         n+2




                                                  106
