                                             Popular conjectures imply strong lower bounds for dynamic
                                                                     problems
                                                                 Amir Abboud, Virginia Vassilevska Williams ∗

                                                                                  February 4, 2014
arXiv:1402.0054v1 [cs.DS] 1 Feb 2014




                                                                                       Abstract
                                                We consider several well-studied problems in dynamic algorithms and prove that sufficient
                                             progress on any of them would imply a breakthrough on one of five major open problems in the
                                             theory of algorithms:
                                               1. Is the 3SUM problem on n numbers in O(n2−ε ) time for some ε > 0?
                                               2. Can one determine the satisfiability of a CNF formula on n variables in O((2 − ε)n poly n)
                                                  time for some ε > 0?
                                               3. Is the All Pairs Shortest Paths problem for graphs on n vertices in O(n3−ε ) time for some
                                                  ε > 0?
                                               4. Is there a linear time algorithm that detects whether a given graph contains a triangle?
                                               5. Is there an O(n3−ε ) time combinatorial algorithm for n× n Boolean matrix multiplication?
                                             The problems we consider include dynamic versions of bipartite perfect matching, bipartite
                                             maximum weight matching, single source reachability, single source shortest paths, strong con-
                                             nectivity, subgraph connectivity, diameter approximation and some nongraph problems such as
                                             Pagh’s problem defined in a recent paper by Patrascu [STOC 2010].




                                       ∗
                                           Computer Science Department, Stanford University, abboud@cs.stanford.edu,virgi@cs.stanford.edu
1    Introduction
Dynamic algorithms are a natural extension of the typical notion of an algorithm: besides computing
a function on an input x, the algorithm needs to be able to update the computed function value
as x undergoes small changes, without redoing all of the computation. Dynamic algorithms have
a multitude of applications, and their study has evolved into a vibrant research area. Among its
many successes are efficient dynamic graph algorithms for graph connectivity [48, 87, 74], minimum
spanning tree [37, 51, 49], graph matching [81, 14, 68, 43] and approximate shortest paths in
undirected graphs [17, 18, 47]. Graph connectivity and minimum spanning tree for instance can be
supported in only polylogarithmic time per edge update or query.
    Nevertheless, there are some dynamic problems that seem stubbornly difficult. For instance,
consider maintaining a reachability tree from a fixed vertex under edge insertions or deletions, i.e.
the so called dynamic single source reachability problem (ss-Reach). The best known dynamic
ss-Reach algorithm [80] has update time O(n1.495 ). This is only better than the trivial recompu-
tation time for very dense graphs. Moreover, the result uses heavy machinery such as fast matrix
multiplication, and is currently not practical. There are many such problems, including dynamic
shortest paths, maximum matching, strongly connected components, and some nongraph problems
such as Pagh’s problem [72] supporting set intersection updates and membership queries. For many
of these problems, the only known dynamic algorithms are to recompute the answer from scratch.
(Although there has been some success when only insertions or only deletions are to be supported.)
    When there are no good upper bounds, lower bounds are highly sought after. Typically, for
dynamic data structure problems, one attempts to prove cell probe lower bounds. However, unfor-
tunately, the best known cell probe lower bounds are at best logarithmic [73], and for these hard
dynamic problems we would want higher, polynomial lower bounds, i.e. of the form Ω(N c ) where N
is the size of the input and c is an explicit constant. Patrascu [72] initiated the study of basing the
hardness of dynamic problems on a conjecture about the hardness of the 3SUM problem, a problem
in quadratic time with no known “truly” subquadratic solutions (N 2−ε for constant ε > 0). He
showed that one can indeed prove conditional polynomial lower bounds for some notable problems
such as transitive closure and shortest paths.
    Other papers have considered proving conditional lower bounds for specific problems. Roditty
and Zwick [79] for instance showed tight lower bounds for decremental and incremental single
source shortest paths, based on the conjecture that all pairs shortest paths (APSP) cannot be
solved in truly subcubic time. Chan [20] showed that a fast algorithm for subgraph connectivity
would imply an unusually fast algorithm for finding a triangle in a graph. Some other works
compare the complexity of their dynamic problem of study to the complexity of Boolean matrix
multiplication [79, 47]. However, the only systematic study of conditional lower bounds for a larger
collection of dynamic problems is Pǎtraşcu’s paper [72].
    In this paper we expand on Pǎtraşcu’s idea and prove strong conditional lower bounds for a
much larger collection of dynamic problems, based on five well-known conjectures: the 3SUM,
All Pairs Shortest Paths, Triangle and Boolean Matrix Multiplication Conjectures and the Strong
Exponential Time Hypothesis; we define these formally below. In section 4 we discuss the prior
work on these conjectures and some potential relationships between them. As far as we know, any
subset of the below conjectures could be false, and the rest could still be true. Hence it is interesting
to have lower bounds based on each one of them.

Conjecture 1 (No truly subquadratic 3SUM). In the Word RAM model with words of O(log n) bits,


                                                   1
any algorithm requires n2−o(1) time in expectation to determine whether a set S ⊂ {−n3 , . . . , n3 }
of |S| = n integers contains three distinct elements a, b, c ∈ S with a + b = c.

Conjecture 2 (No truly subcubic APSP). There is a constant c, such that in the Word RAM
model with words of O(log n) bits, any algorithm requires n3−o(1) time in expectation to compute
the distances between every pair of vertices in an n node graph with edge weights in {1, . . . , nc }.

Conjecture 3 (Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH)). For every ε > 0, there exists a k,
such that SAT on k-CNF formulas on n variables cannot be solved in O ∗ (2(1−ε)n ) time1 .

Conjecture 4 (No almost linear time triangle). There is a constant δ > 0, such that in the Word
RAM model with words of O(log n) bits, any algorithm requires m1+δ−o(1) time in expectation to
detect whether an m edge graph contains a triangle.

“Conjecture” 5 (No truly subcubic combinatorial BMM). In the Word RAM model with words
of O(log n) bits, any combinatorial algorithm requires n3−o(1) time in expectation to compute the
Boolean product of two n × n matrices.2

     This paper is the first study that relates the complexity of any dynamic problem to the exact
complexity of Boolean Satisfiability (via the SETH). Our lower bounds hold even for randomized
fully dynamic algorithms with (expected) amortized update times. Most of our results also hold
for partially dynamic (incremental and decremental) algorithms with worst-case time bounds.
     Interestingly, many of our lower bounds (those based on the SETH) hold even when one allows
arbitrary polynomial preprocessing time, and achieve essentially optimal guarantees. These are the
first lower bounds of this nature.
     Most of our lower bounds also hold in the setting when one knows the list of updates and queries
in advance, i.e. in the lookahead model. This is of interest since many dynamic problems can be
solved faster given sufficient lookahead, e.g. graph transitive closure [83] and matrix rank [59].

Organization. In Section 2 we discuss our results and the prior work on the problems we address.
In Section 3 we describe our techniques. In Section 4 we give an overview of the prior work on
the conjectures. In Section 5 we give a formal statement of the theorems we prove. The problems
we consider are summarized in Table 1 and the results are summarized in Table 2. In section 6
we define some useful notation and prove reductions between dynamic problems. In section 7 we
prove lower bounds based on Conjecture 3 (SETH). In section 8 we prove lower bounds based on
Conjectures 4 and 5 (Triangle and BMM). In section 9 we prove lower bounds based on Conjecture 2
(APSP). And finally, in section 10 we prove lower bounds based on Conjecture 1 (3SUM).


2        Prior work and our results
Below we define each of the problems we consider and discuss the implications of our results for
each problem in turn. The problem definitions are also summarized in Table 1, and our results for
each problem are summarized in Table 2.
    1
        The notation O∗ (f (n)) means f (n)poly n.
    2
        We use quotes above, mainly because the notion of a combinatorial algorithm is not well defined.




                                                            2
Maximum cardinality bipartite matching. The maximum cardinality bipartite matching
                                                                                            √
problem has a long history. In a seminal paper, Hopcroft and Karp [52] designed an O(m n) time
algorithm for the problem in bipartite graphs with m edges and n nodes. Mucha and Sankowski [67]
(and Harvey [46]) improved their result for dense graphs by giving an Õ(nω )3 time algorithm where
ω < 2.373 is the matrix multiplication exponent [89]. In a breakthrough paper earlier this year,
Madry [65] devised the first improvement over the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm for sparse bipartite
graphs, with a runtime of Õ(m10/7 ).
    The amazing algorithms for the static case of the problem do not seem to imply efficient dynamic
algorithms, however. Since a single edge update can cause the addition of at most one augmenting
path, a trivial fully dynamic algorithm algorithm for maximum bipartite matching has update time
O(m). The only improvement over this is a result by Sankowski [81] who gave a fully dynamic
algorithm with an amortized update time of O(n1.495 ). His result uses fast matrix multiplication
and is only an improvement for sufficiently dense graphs. Two questions emerge.
    (1) Is the use of matrix multiplication inherent?
    (2) Can one get an improvement over the trivial algorithm when the graph is sparse?
    We first address question (1). We show that any improvement over the trivial algorithm implies
a nontrivial algorithm for Boolean matrix multiplication, thus showing that the use of matrix
multiplication is indeed inherent. We partially address question (2), by showing three interesting
consequences of a dynamic algorithm for maximum bipartite matching that has (amortized) update
and query time O(mε ) for ε < 1.
    First, we show that an algorithm with ε < 0.81 would imply an improvement on the 20-year old
O(m1.41 ) time bound [6, 5] for the triangle detection problem in sparse graphs. In fact, Conjecture 4
implies that there is some ε > 0 for which (amortized, expected) Ω(mε ) update or query time is
necessary. Second, we show that an algorithm with ε < 1/3 would imply that 3SUM is in truly
subquadratic time, thus falsifying Conjecture 1. Finally, we show that any combinatorial algorithm
with any ε < 1 falsifies “Conjecture” 5. All of our results apply also for the bipartite perfect
matching problem (BPMatch).

Approximately maximum matching. In the absence of good dynamic algorithms for max-
imum matching, recent research has focused on developing efficient algorithms for dynamically
maintaining approximately maximum matchings. Ivkovic and Lloyd [56] presented the first such
algorithm, maintaining a maximal matching (and hence a 2-approximate maximum matching) with
update time O(m0.71 ). Baswana, Gupta and Sen [14] developed a randomized dynamic algorithm
for maximal matching with expected amortized O(log n) update time. Neiman and Solomon [68]
                                        √
presented a deterministic worst case O( m) update time that maintained a 3/2-approximate max-
imum matching. Finally, Gupta and Peng [43] showed that with the same update time one can
maintain a (1 + ε)-approximation for any constant ε > 0.
    All of the above papers except [43] obtain an approximate maximum matching by maintaining
a matching that does not admit short augmenting paths. It is well known that for any k ≥ 2, if
a matching does not admit length 2k − 3 augmenting paths, then it is a k/(k − 1) approximate
maximum matching. The algorithms for maximal matching exclude length 1 augmenting paths,
and the 3/2-approximation algorithm of [68] excludes length 1 and 3 augmenting paths.
    We show an inherent limitation to this approach for maintaining an approximately maximum
matching. In particular, we show that there exists a constant k ≤ 10 such that any dynamic
  3
      The Õ notation suppresses polylogarithmic factors.


                                                            3
algorithm that maintains a matching that excludes augmenting paths of length at most 2k − 3 can
be converted into an algorithm for 3SUM, triangle detection and Boolean matrix multiplication.
Our results are the same as that for BPMatch: an O(mε ) update time for the problem falsifies
Conjecture 1 for ε < 1/3, Conjecture 4 for ε < δ and “Conjecture” 5 for ε < 1 if it is combinatorial.
In particular, the above results imply that using the augmenting paths approach for dynamic
approximate matching is unlikely to yield a result such as Gupta and Peng’s algorithm.

Maximum weight bipartite matching. There are several weighted versions of the bipartite
matching problem, all equivalent to each other: find a maximum weight matching, find a maximum
weight perfect matching, find a minimum weight perfect matching (also known as the assignment
problem). We will refer to the weighted matching problem as MWM. The first polynomial time
algorithm for MWM, the Hungarian algorithm, was proposed by Kuhn [60]. Using Fibonacci
heaps [38] its runtime is O(mn + n2 log n). When the edge weights are in {−M, . . . , M }, on a word-
RAM with O(log(M n)) bit words, Gabow and Tarjan [40, 41] and a recent improvement by Duan
                                                                  √
and Su [32] give scaling algorithms for the problem running in O(m n log M ) time. Sankowski [82]
gave an Õ(M nω ) time algorithm.
    The dynamic case of the problem seems less studied. It is not hard to obtain a fully dynamic
algorithm for MWM that can answer in constant time queries about the weight of the MWM, and
perform edge updates in Õ(m) time. The algorithm is based on Edmonds-Karp’s algorithm [33]
and performs each update by searching for the shortest augmenting path. There are no dynamic
algorithms for MWM with o(m) update time. The only result for the dynamic problem is an
algorithm by Anand et al. [7] that maintains an 8-approximate MWM with expected amortized
O(log n log C) time where C is the ratio between the maximum and minimum edge weight.
    A natural question is, is it inherently hard to obtain o(m) update time dynamic MWM algo-
rithms? We address this question by showing that any dynamic MWM algorithm, even a decre-
mental or incremental one, with amortized update time O(n2−ε ) for constant ε > 0 in dense graphs
would imply a truly subcubic APSP algorithm, thus explaining the lack of progress on the problem.

Subgraph Connectivity. The subgraph connectivity problem (SubConn) is as follows: given
a graph G, maintain a subgraph S where the updates are adding/removing a node of G to/from
S, and the queries are to determine whether a query node t is reachable from a query node s
in S. SubConn is a version of the graph connectivity problem, but instead of edge updates, one
needs to maintain vertex updates. As mentioned earlier, graph connectivity has extremely efficient
algorithms (e.g. [87]). However, the obvious way of simulating vertex updates using edge updates
is to insert/delete all incident edges to a vertex that is to be inserted/deleted. As the degree of a
vertex can be linear, this type of simulation cannot give better than O(n) update time for SubConn.
Thus SubConn seems much more difficult than graph connectivity.
    The SubConn problem was first introduced by Frigioni and Italiano [39] in the context of
communication networks where processors may become faulty and later can come back online. They
obtained an efficient dynamic algorithm for planar graphs. Later, Chan [20] studied the problem
in general graphs because of its applications to geometric connectivity problems. In such problems,
one is to maintain a set of n axis parallel boxes in d dimensions under insertions and deletions
so that one can answer queries about whether there is a path between any two given points that
is contained within the set of boxes. Chan showed that for any constant d, the box connectivity
problem can be reduced to subgraph connectivity in a graph on Õ(n) edges, thus any dynamic


                                                 4
algorithm for subgraph connectivity immediately implies an algorithm for geometric connectivity.
Chan also showed that subgraph connectivity can be reduced to the box connectivity problem in 3
dimensions, thus showing that subgraph connectivity and box connectivity are equivalent problems
for all d ≥ 3. Chan, Pǎtraşcu, Roditty [21] further showed that a variety of other geometric
connectivity problems are reducible to the SubConn problem.
    Chan [20] obtained an algorithm for SubConn with O(m1.28 ) preprocessing time, O(m0.94 ) up-
date time and O(m1/3 ) query time. Later, Chan, Pǎtraşcu and Roditty [21] improved these bounds,
obtaining an algorithm with O(m4/3 ) preprocessing time, O(m2/3 ) update time and O(m1/3 ) query
time. Duan [31] presented algorithms with better space usage.
    Pǎtraşcu [72] showed that unless Conjecture 1 above is false, there is some ε > 0 such that
SubConn cannot be solved with o(m1+ε ) preprocessing time and o(mε ) update and query time.
Here we exhibit an explicit ε, ε = 1/3, for which Pǎtraşcu’s result holds. Moreover, we show that
assuming Conjecture 1, there is a tradeoff lower bound between the query and update time for fully
dynamic algorithms for SubConn. In particular, we show that unless 3SUM has truly subquadratic
algorithms, SubConn cannot be maintained with preprocessing time O(m4/3−ε ), update time O(mα )
and query time O(m2/3−α−ε ), for any ε > 0 and 1/6 < α < 1/3.
    Chan [20] showed that any dynamic algorithm for SubConn with preprocessing time O(mp ),
update and query time O(mu ) would imply an O(m1+u + mp ) time algorithm for triangle detection.
His result implies that if Conjecture 4 is true, then for any such algorithm either p ≥ 1 + ε or u ≥ ε
for some constant ε > 0, i.e. the same conclusion as Pǎtraşcu’s assuming Conjecture 1.
    Here we improve Chan’s result slightly. In particular, we show that one can reduce the triangle
detection problem on m edge, n node graphs to dynamic SubConn with O(m) updates and only
n queries. This implies that any combinatorial dynamic algorithm with truly sublinear query time
(O(m1−ε ) for some ε > 0) and truly subcubic in n preprocessing time, must have Ω(m1/2−δ ) update
time for all δ > 0, unless “Conjecture” 5 is false. (Notice that it is trivial to get O(m) query time
and O(1) update time.) Thus, if the algorithm of [21] can be improved to have update time m0.499 ,
we would have a new alternative BMM algorithm. Our results hold even for the special case st-
SubConn of SubConn in which we only care about whether two fixed vertices are connected in the
subgraph S.

Subgraph Connectedness. Chan [20] identifies a problem extremely related to SubConn, that
nevertheless seems much more difficult. The problem is Subgraph Connectedness (ConnSub): sim-
ilarly to SubConn, one has to maintain a subgraph S of a fixed graph G under vertex additions
and removals, but the query one needs to be able to answer is whether S is connected.
    The best and only known algorithm for ConnSub is to recompute the connectivity information
(via DFS in O(m) time) after each update or at each query. Here we explain this lack of progress
by showing that unless the SETH (Conjecture 3) is false, any algorithm for ConnSub with arbitrary
polynomial preprocessing time, must either have essentially linear update time or essentially linear
query time. Thus, the trivial algorithm is essentially optimal, under the SETH.
    Our result holds even for a special case of the problem called SubUnion, originally identified
by Chan: given a fixed collection of sets X = {X1 , . . . , Xt } of total size m such that ∪i Xi = U ,
maintain a subcollection S ⊆ X under set insertions and deletions, while answering the query
whether the union of the sets in S is exactly U . That is, the query is exactly “Is S a set cover?”.




                                                  5
Single Source Reachability. Unlike in undirected graphs where great results are possible (e.g.
[87]), the reachability problem in directed graphs is surprisingly tough in the dynamic setting,
even when the reachability between two fixed vertices is to be maintained (st-Reach). The trivial
algorithm that recomputes the reachability after each update or at each query is still the best known
algorithm in the case of sparse graphs. For graphs with ω(n1.495 ) edges, Sankowski [80] showed that
one can get a better update time. In particular, he obtained update time O(n1.495 ) and O(1) query
time for st-Reach and O(n1.495 ) query time for single source reachability (ss-Reach). Sankowski’s
result improved on the first sublinear update time result by Demetrescu and Italiano [30] who
obtained O(n1.575 ) update time and O(n0.575 ) query time for ss-Reach.
    Both of these results heavily rely on fast matrix multiplication. Here we show that this is
inherent. In particular, any algorithm with truly subcubic (in n) preprocessing time and truly
subquadratic query and update time can be converted without significant overhead into a truly
subcubic time algorithm for Boolean matrix multiplication. Thus, any such combinatorial algorithm
would falsify “Conjecture” 5.
    Pǎtraşcu [72] showed that assuming Conjecture 1, there is some ε > 0 such that fully dynamic
transitive closure requires either preprocessing time m1+ε , or update or query time mε . Here
we slightly extend his result, showing that under the 3SUM conjecture, st-Reach requires either
preprocessing time m4/3−o(1) or update or query time m1/3−o(1) . Similar to our results on SubConn,
we also exhibit a tradeoff: under the 3SUM conjecture, if st-Reach can be solved with preprocessing
time O(m4/3−ε ) and update time O(mα ) for some ε > 0 and 1/6 < α < 1/3, then the query time
must be at least m2/3−α−o(1) .
    The single source reachability problem has been studied in the partially dynamic setting as well.
In the incremental setting, it is not hard to obtain an algorithm for ss-Reach with O(1) amortized
update time and O(1) query. From the work of Even and Shiloach [35] follows an O(n) amortized
update time decremental ss-Reach algorithm (with constant query). For the special case of DAGs,
Italiano [55] obtained an O(1) amortized update and query time decremental ss-Reach algorithm.
    In this paper we show that any combinatorial incremental or decremental algorithm for ss-Reach
(and also st-Reach) must have m1−o(1) worst case update or query time, even in the special case of
dense DAGs, assuming “Conjecture” 5. Thus deamortizing Italiano’s DAG ss-Reach algorithm, or
Even and Shiloach’s algorithm for general graphs, would have interesting consequences for matrix
multiplication algorithms.
    Finally, we consider a version of ss-Reach, #SSR, in which we want to dynamically answer the
query about how many nodes are reachable from the fixed source. We note that any algorithm
that explicitly maintains a reachability tree can answer this counting query. We show strong
lower bounds based on the SETH for #SSR: even after polynomial preprocessing time, a dynamic
algorithm cannot beat the trivial recomputation algorithm by any, however small, polynomial
factor. Hence in particular (under the SETH) no nontrivial algorithm for ss-Reach can maintain
the size of the reachability tree.

Incremental/Decremental Single Source Shortest Paths (SSSP) Roditty and Zwick [79]
showed that any decremental or incremental algorithm for SSSP in n-node graphs with preprocess-
ing time O(n3−ε ), and update time O(n2−ε ) and query time O(n1−ε ) for any ε > 0 implies a truly
subcubic time algorithm for APSP. The trivial algorithm for the problem recomputes the shortest
paths from the source in Õ(n2 ) time after each update, via Dijkstra’s algorithm. Hence, [79] showed
that any tiny polynomial improvement over this result would falsify Conjecture 2.


                                                 6
    Their result, however, did not exclude the possibility of an algorithm that has both O(n2−ε )
time updates and O(n2−ε ) time queries. This is exactly what our result excludes, again based on the
APSP conjecture. In fact, we show it for the seemingly easier problem of incremental/decremental
st-shortest path.

Strongly Connected Components. Dynamic algorithms for maintaining the strongly con-
nected components have many applications. One example is in compilers research, to speed up
pointer analysis by finding cyclic relationships; other examples are listed in [44]. In the partially
dynamic setting, nontrivial results are known. Haeupler et al. [44] presented an incremental al-
gorithm that maintains the strongly connected components (SCCs) in a graph with amortized
update time O(min{m1/2 , n2/3 }), while being able to answer queries of the form, are u and v in
the same SCC? Bender et al. [15, 16] improved the total update time for the case of dense graphs
to O(n2 log n) (thus getting amortized update time Õ(n2 /m)). In the decremental setting, Roditty
and Zwick [78], Lacki [61], and Roditty [76] obtained algorithms with amortized update time O(n).
The algorithm of [78] was randomized, whereas Lacki’s was deterministic, and Roditty improved
the preprocessing time to Õ(m). No nontrivial results are known for the fully dynamic setting.
    Our results are manyfold. First, we show results similar to those for st-Reach. That is, under
“Conjecture” 5 any combinatorial fully dynamic algorithm must have either preprocessing time
n3−o(1) , or update or query time n2−o(1) . The same bounds apply for partially dynamic algorithms,
but for worst-case update times. Thus, if the known algorithmic results can be deamortized, we
would have an alternative BMM algorithm. Under Conjecture 1, either the preprocessing time
should be at least m4/3−o(1) , or the query or update time should be at least m1/3−o(1) .
    The above results hold even for the special case of the problem in which we want to answer
the query “Is the graph strongly connected?”. Next, we consider a variation of the problem which
we call SC2, that maintains the graph to answer the query “Does the graph have more than 2
strongly connected components?”. We note that all known algorithms for dynamic SCC explicitly
store the SCCs of the graph and hence can also solve SC2. We show surprisingly that SC2 may
be a much more difficult problem than SC. In particular, any algorithm with arbitrary polynomial
preprocessing time must have either m1−o(1) query or m1−o(1) update time, unless the SETH fails.
That is, either Conjecture 3 is false and we have a breakthrough in the area of SAT algorithms, or
the trivial algorithm for SC2 is essentially optimal.
    As before, our results also hold for partially dynamic algorithms, but for worst-case update
times, implying that deamortizing the results of [44, 15, 78, 61, 76] is SETH-hard.
    The same lower bounds under SETH hold for any of the two following variants of dynamic SCC:
   • AppxSCC: approximate the number of SCCs within some constant factor,
   • MaxSCC: determine the size of the largest SCC.
    We also consider the dynamic ST -Reach problem under edge updates: given node sets S and
T , determine whether every node in T is reachable from every node in S. We are able to prove
much stronger update and query lower bounds for it: even after polynomial preprocessing time,
the update or query time of any dynamic algorithm must be n2−o(1) in an n node graph, even when
the graph is sparse. O(n2 ) is the trivial update time for the problem.

Pagh’s problem. Pǎtraşcu [72] introduced a problem that he called Pagh’s problem (PP) defined
as follows: maintain a set X of at most k sets {Xi }i over [n] under the following operation: add

                                                 7
Xi ∩ Xj to X, while answering queries of the form “Does j belong to Xi ?”. (We can assume that
k ≥ n.) The best known dynamic algorithm for PP is the trivial one: perform the set intersection
explicitly in O(n) time at each update and store the sets in a dictionary for which membership
tests are efficient. We introduce a natural variant of Pagh’s problem, which we call ∅-PP (“Pagh’s
Problem with Emptiness Queries”) where the query is changed to “Is Xi empty?”. There is also
no nontrivial algorithm known for ∅-PP.
    The reductions in [72] imply (after some work) that if Conjecture 1 is true, then any dynamic
algorithm for PP must have either k4/3−o(1) preprocessing time or k1/3−o(1) update or query time.
We prove this same type of conditional lower bound for ∅-PP. Based on Conjecture 4 with constant
δ, we show that any algorithm for PP or ∅-PP must have either k1+δ−o(1) preprocessing time
or kδ−o(1) update or query time. (The result for PP holds only for δ > 1/3, however this is still
interesting since as far as we know, there may be no O(m4/3 ) time algorithm for Triangle detection.)
We obtain that under “Conjecture” 5, any algorithm for PP or ∅-PP must have either k3/2−o(1)
preprocessing time or k1/2−o(1) update or query time. Finally, we also relate ∅-PP to Conjecture 3,
making it the only problem for which we can prove lower bounds based on all conjectures except
for 2. We show that under the SETH, any nontrivial algorithm for ∅-PP, even assuming arbitrary
polynomial time preprocessing, would violate the SETH. Thus also, if SETH is true, any algorithm
for P P that beats the trivial recomputation cannot also answer emptiness queries.

Diameter Approximation. The graph diameter is the largest distance in the graph. One can
compute the diameter in the same time as computing all pairs shortest paths, and no better al-
gorithms are known. There are faster algorithms that achieve constant factor approximations for
the diameter, however. A folklore result is that in linear time one can obtain a 2-approximation.
Aingworth et al. [3] improved the approximation factor, obtaining a 3/2 approximation for un-
                                         √
weighted graphs that runs in Õ(n2 + m n) time. Roditty and Vassilevska Williams [77] improved
                          √
the running time to Õ(m n) with randomization, and Chechik et al. [22] obtained deterministic
3/2-approximation algorithms running in Õ(min{m3/2 , mn2/3 }) time that also work for weighted
graphs. Roditty and Vassilevska Williams showed that any (3/2 − ε)-approximation algorithm that
runs in O(n2−δ ) time in undirected unweighted graphs with Õ(n) edges, for any constants ε, δ > 0
would violate the SETH.
    In some applications, an efficient dynamic algorithm for diameter estimation may be useful.
The above result does not exclude the possibility that after some preprocessing, one can update
the estimate for the diameter faster than recomputing it. Here we show that if for some ε, δ > 0,
there is an algorithm that after an arbitrary polynomial time preprocessing can update a (4/3 − ε)-
approximation to the diameter of a graph on Õ(n) edges in O(n2−δ ) amortized update time, then
the SETH is false. That is, the trivial recomputation of the diameter is essentially optimal.


3    Description of our techniques
Lower bounds based on the SETH. We begin all of our reductions with an idea used in prior
reductions from the SETH in [75, 77, 22].
    We assume that the strong exponential time hypothesis holds. Thus, for every ε, there is some
k, such that k-SAT cannot be solved faster than O(2(1−ε)n ) time. Using this, for each ε > 0,
we work with a carefully chosen k. Given an instance F of k-SAT on n variables, we first use the
sparsification lemma of Impagliazzo, Paturi and Zane [53] to convert F to a small number of k-CNF


                                                 8
formulas with n variables and O(n) clauses each. Now we can assume that the given formula has
a linear number of clauses. After this, we can construct a graph as follows.
    Split the variables V into two sets U and V \ U of size n/2 each. We create a set S on 2n/2
nodes, each corresponding to a partial assignment to the variables in U . Similarly, we create a set
T on 2n/2 nodes, each corresponding to a partial assignment to the variables in V \ U . We also
create a set C on O(n) nodes, one corresponding to each clause.
    Suppose now that we add a directed edge from each partial assignment s ∈ S to a clause c ∈ C
if and only if s does not satisfy c, and a directed edge from c to a partial assignment t ∈ T if and
only if t does not satisfy c. Then, there is a satisfying assignment to the formula if and only if there
is a pair of nodes s ∈ S and t ∈ T such that t is not reachable from s. Hence any algorithm that
can solve this static ST -reachability problem on N node, O(N log N ) edge graphs in O(N 2−ε ) time
                                              ′
for constant ε > 0 would imply a O(2n(1−ε ) ) time algorithm for k-SAT (for some ε′ > 0 obtained
from the sparsification lemma). We have chosen k however so that we obtain a contradiction, and
hence the SETH must be false.
    Similar constructions to the above are used in prior papers [75, 77, 22]. We adapt the above
argument for the case of dynamic # SSR (counting the number of nodes reachable from a source) as
follows. (The reductions to the remaining problems use a similar approach with some extra work.)
    Instead of having all nodes of S in the above graph G, in our dynamic graph G′ we have a single
node u. We have 2n/2 stages, one for each partial assignment s ∈ S. In each stage, we add edges
from u to C but only to the neighbors of s in G, i.e. the clauses that s does not satisfy. Say we
have inserted k edges. After the insertions, we ask the query “Is the number of nodes reachable
from s less than k + 2n/2 ?”. If the answer to the query is yes, then the formula is satisfiable, and
we can stop. Otherwise, s cannot be completed to a satisfying assignment. We then remove all the
inserted edges in this stage and move on to the next partial assignment of S.
    The graph has m = O(n2n/2 ) edges, N = O(2n/2 ) vertices and we do O(n2n/2 ) updates and
O(2n/2 ) queries. Hence any dynamic algorithm with O(N 2−ε ) preprocessing time, and O(m1−ε )
update and query time would violate the SETH.
    Now, suppose that we could achieve O(m1−ε ) update and query time after O(N t ) preprocessing
for some big constant t. Then we could still contradict the SETH by modifying the above construc-
tion further. Instead of splitting the variables into two parts on n/2 variables each, we split them
into U of size (1 − δ)n and V \ U of size δn for some constant δ < 1/t. Then we apply exactly the
same construction as above where S is the set of 2(1−δ)n partial assignments to U and T is the set
of 2δn partial assignments to V \ U .
    The number of vertices and edges of the graph is now O(n2δn ) ≤ O(2n(1−γ)/t ) for some γ > 0.
Hence the O(N t ) preprocessing time only takes O(2n(1−γ) ) time. The number of updates we do is
O(n2(1−δ)n ) but since the graph is much smaller we get that O(m1−ε ) time updates and queries
imply a runtime of
                                      2δn(1−ε) · 2(1−δ)n = 2n(1−εδ)
(excluding polynomial factors) for solving the SAT instance. Hence we again violate the SETH.

Lower bounds from Triangle Detection and BMM. To obtain lower bounds based on
“Conjecture” 5, we first obtain lower bounds from Conjecture 4 that hold for arbitrary δ and an
arbitrary number of edges m, and then apply them for m = n2 and a carefully chosen δ to obtain
the lower bounds from BMM. For instance if Conjecture 4 for any constant δ implies that problem
P cannot have a dynamic algorithm with m1+δ preprocessing time, mδ update time and m2δ query

                                                   9
time, then we get that “Conjecture” 5 implies that P cannot have a dynamic algorithm with n2+2δ
preprocessing time, n2δ update time and n4δ query time. Then picking δ = (1 − ε)/2, we get a
lower bound for all ε > 0 of preprocessing time n3−ε , update time n1−ε and query time n2−ε .
    Our reductions from Triangle Detection typically begin with the following construction. Given
a graph G = (V, E) on m edges and n vertices, we create 4 copies of V , A, B, C, D, and for each
edge (u, v) ∈ E we add the directed edges (uA , vB ), (uB , vC ), (uC , vD ) where uX is the copy of u
in X ∈ {A, B, C, D}. Now G contains a triangle if and only if for some u, there is a path from
uA to uD . Since the new graph has O(m) edges and O(n) vertices, it suffices to simulate the n
reachability queries (uA , uD ) with dynamic algorithms for the problem at hand.
    For st-Reach for instance, we add two additional nodes s and t to the above graph and we
proceed in stages, one for each node u ∈ V . In each stage, we add edges (s, uA ) and (uD , t),
and ask whether t is reachable from s. This will be the case iff u appears in a triangle in G. If
the answer to the query is no, we remove the edges incident to s and t and move on to the next
stage. The number of queries and updates is O(n) overall, and hence any dynamic algorithm with
O(m1+δ ) preprocessing time, and O(m2δ ) update and query time would imply an O(m1+δ + nm2δ )
time triangle algorithm. We then apply a high-degree low-degree argument as in [6] to show that
this also implies an O(m1+δ ) time triangle algorithm.
    To obtain the lower bounds for Strong Connectivity and Bipartite Perfect Matching, we prove
general reductions from st-Reach to SC and BPMatch that show that if the latter two problems
can be solved with preprocessing time p(m, n), update time u(m, n) and query time q(m, n), then
st-Reach can be solved with preprocessing time p(O(m), O(n)), update time u(O(m), O(n)) and
query time q(O(m), O(n)). We show a separate reduction from Triangle Detection to st-SubConn
(similar to the one to st-Reach) that performs m updates and n queries, giving an mδ−o(1) lower
bound on the update time and m2δ−o(1) on the query time.
    Our lower bound for PP is more involved than the rest of the lower bounds based on Con-
jecture 4. We will explain the main ideas. Given an n-node, m-edge graph, first let us look for
triangles containing a node of high degree ≥ ∆. We begin by creating for every node j of high
degree a set Xj containing node i iff j is not a neighbor of i. The number of such sets is O(m/∆)
and constructing them takes O(mn/∆) time. Now, for each node a, using d(a) updates, we create
the intersection Ya of all sets Xj for the neighbors j of a. Then, for every edge (a, b), we query
whether b ∈ Ya . Notice that b ∈ Ya if and only if b is not a neighbor of any of the neighbors j of a.
Thus, if any one of the m queries returns “no”, we have detected a triangle.
    Suppose now that no triangle with a node of high degree is found. Then, all nodes of any triangle
have degree < ∆. We can attempt to do exactly the same reduction as above. The only problem is
that the number of sets Xj that we would have to create could be n, and thus just creating the sets
would take O(n2 ) time. This is sufficient for a reduction from triangle in dense graphs, however it
is too costly for a reduction from sparse graphs. Fortunately, we can avoid the high cost. Before we
create the sets Xj , we pick a universal hash function h and hash all nodes with it into a universe
of size O(∆2 ). We are guaranteed that with constant probability, if we take two nodes a and b of
low degree, then N (a) ∪ N (b) won’t contain any two nodes hashing to the same element. Thus,
we can simulate the search for a triangle with an edge (a, b) where both a and b have low degree,
just as before, except that we create a set for each hash value v, Xv = {j | ∀c ∈ N (j), h(c) 6= v}.
The creation time is now O(n∆2 ), and everything else works out with constant probability. We
can obtain correctness with high probability by using O(log n) hash functions. Picking ∆ = m1/3 ,
we obtain an extra term m2/3 n in our reduction which is negligible if we are trying to contradict


                                                 10
Conjecture 4 for δ > 1/3.

Lower bounds from 3SUM. Pǎtraşcu [72] showed that 3-SUM on n numbers can be reduced to
the problem of listing O(n2 /R) triangles in a certain tripartite graph on partitions A, B, C where
               √
|A| = |B| = nR, |C| = n, |E(A, B)| = O(nR) and |E(A, C)| + |E(B, C)| = O(n1.5 ), for any
         1
R = n 2 +δ and 0 < δ < 21 , in truly subquadratic time. Then, he reduced this triangle listing
problem to “the multiphase problem”, which in turn can be reduced to several dynamic problems.
We examine Pǎtraşcu’s reduction in more detail and show that by directly reducing the triangle
listing problem to dynamic problems like st-SubConn we can overcome some inefficiencies incurred
by “the multiphase problem” and get improved lower bounds.
     A first approach is to use the known reductions from triangle listing to triangle finding [93, 57]
to directly apply our hardness results based on triangle finding. However, using the currently best
reductions, even a linear time algorithm for triangle finding would not be able to get us a faster
than m4/3 time algorithm for listing m triangles which is what we need in order to get subquadratic
3SUM.
     Instead, we reason about Pǎtraşcu’s construction directly. First, we observe that to falsify
Conjecture 1, it is enough to list in subquadratic time all pairs of nodes (a, b) ∈ A × B that
participate in a triangle. To do this, note that in Pǎtraşcu’s construction, every node of A has at
most O(n/R) neighbors in C. Thus, once the ≤ O(n2 /R) pairs of nodes that appear in triangles are
known, one can go through each one pair (a, b), and check each of the at most O(n/R) neighbors
c ∈ C of a, to find all triangles going through (a, b). Thus 3SUM would be in O(n2 /R · n/R) =
                                                             1
O(n3 /R2 ) time which is truly subquadratic when R = n 2 +δ for δ > 0.
     Thus, to obtain lower bounds for our dynamic problems, we show how to list the pairs of nodes
in A × B that appear in triangles using a small number of queries and updates. We first reduce
st-Reach to st-SubConn, thus also showing that st-SubConn is at least as hard as SC and BPMatch.
Then we focus on st-SubConn. Given Pǎtraşcu’s graph for some choice of R, we create an instance
H of st-SubConn. H is a copy of G in which all the edges between parts A, B are removed. Thus
H has only O(n1.5 ) edges for any choice of R. We also add a node s that is connected to all the
nodes in A and a node t that is connected to all the nodes in B. Initially, s, t and all nodes in C
are activated, while the nodes in A, B are deactivated.
                                                                                       4
     We preprocess this graph in p(n1.5 ) time which is subquadratic if p(m) = O(m 3 −ε ). Then, we
have a stage for each of the O(nR) edges in A × B in G. In the stage for (a, b), we activate the
nodes a, b in H and query if s, t are connected. s and t are connected iff there is a node in C that is
a neighbor of both a, b, i.e. (a, b) participates in a triangle. Then we deactivate a and b and move
on to the next edge. This way, we can list all the pairs that are in triangles with O(nR) updates
and queries to st-SubConn, which would be in subquadratic time if R = n1+ε/2 and the update
                                           1
and query times are u(m), q(m) = O(m 3 −ε ).
     This type of approach is insufficient to prove a tradeoff between the query and update time,
however. To obtain such a tradeoff, we need to be able to reduce the search for triangle edges to
st-SubConn where the number of queries is very different from the number of updates. To achieve
this, on the same underlying graph as before, we use st-SubConn to binary search for the nodes in
B that participate in a triangle with a given node a (instead of simply trying each neighbor of a as
we did above). This allows us to reduce the number of queries in the reduction to Õ(n2 /R), while
keeping the number of updates Õ(nR). This lets us pick a larger R and trade-off the lower bounds
for the query and the update times.


                                                  11
    In the binary search for a fixed a ∈ A, we use the queries to check whether there is a node b in
a certain contiguous subset of B (interval) that participates in a triangle with a. This can be done
by activating all neighbors of a in the interval at once, and asking the s, t connectivity query. We
start the search with an interval that contains all of B. If we discover that an interval I contains
a node b that participates in a triangle with a, we proceed to search within both subintervals of I
of half the size. (Thus, we only search in an interval if its parent interval returned “yes”.) Since
no b that appears in a triangle with a appears in more than O(log n) B-intervals, the number of
queries to st-SubConn is only bigger than the number of triangles by a logarithmic factor, and is
thus Õ(n2 /R). The number of updates is no more than O(dB (a) log n) for each a where dB (a) is
the number of neighbors of a in B. Hence the total number of updates is Õ(nR).

Lower bounds on partially dynamic algorithms. Notice that our reductions almost always
look like this (with the exception of PP and ∅-PP). They proceed in stages, and each stage i has
the following form: Ii insertions are performed, then some number of queries Qi are asked. Finally
the Ii insertions are undone.
     We can simulate this type of a reduction with an incremental algorithm as follows. During each
stage, we perform the Ii insertions and Qi queries, and while we do them, we record the sequence of
all changes to the data structure that the insertions (and queries) cause. This makes our reduction
no longer black box (it was black box for fully dynamic algorithms). It also increases the space
usage to be on the order of the time that it takes to perform the Ii insertions. However, once we
have recorded all the changes, we can undo them in reverse order in roughly the same time as they
originally took, and bring the data structure to the same state that it was before the beginning of
the stage. We obtain lower bounds on the preprocessing, update and query time of incremental
algorithms. However, since we undo changes, the lower bounds only hold for worst case runtimes.
     Simulating the above algorithms with decremental algorithms is more challenging since it would
seem that we need to simulate Ii insertions with roughly Ii deletions, and this is not always possible.
We develop some techniques that work for many of our reductions. For instance, we are able to
simulate the following with only O(n) deletions (and undeletions) over all n stages: in each stage
i a node s has an edge to only the ith node from a set of size n. This is useful for our proof that
efficient worst-case decremental st-Reach implies faster triangle algorithms.

Lower bounds based on APSP. To show our lower bounds from APSP to incremental or
decremental st-SP and BWM, we first reduce st-SP to BWM, thus showing that we only have
to concentrate on st-SP. Then, we combine Roditty and Zwick’s [79] original reduction with Vas-
silevska Williams and Williams’ [93] proof that negative triangle detection is equivalent to APSP.
In particular, we show that the number of shortest paths queries can be reduced to n (from n2 )
since we only need to simulate determining whether there is a path on 3 edges from each vertex
back to itself.


4    The conjectures
3SUM. The 3SUM problem is the problem of determining whether a set of n integers contains
three integers a, b, c so that a + b = c. The problem has a simple Õ(n2 ) time solution: sort the
integers, and for every pair a, b, check whether their sum is in the list using binary search. There
are faster algorithms as well. Baran, Demaine and Pǎtraşcu [12] showed that in the Word RAM


                                                  12
                                                             Problem
              Maintain                                        Update                                  Query
                                        (s, t)-Subgraph Connectivity (st-SubConn)
A fixed undirected graph, a subset S Insert/remove a node into/from S                Are s and t connected in the
of its vertices and fixed vertices s, t                                          subgraph induced by the nodes in S?
                                          Bipartite Perfect Matching (BPMatch)
   An undirected bipartite graph                   Edge insertions/deletions              Does the graph have a
                                                                                             perfect matching?
                                     Bipartite Maximum Weight Matching (BWMatch)
   An undirected bipartite graph                   Edge insertions/deletions            What is the weight of the
       with integer edge weights                                                      maximum weight matching?
                             Bipartite matching without length k augmenting paths (k-BPM)
   An undirected bipartite graph                   Edge insertions/deletions        What is the size of a matching
                                                                                            that does not admit
                                                                                      length k augmenting paths?
                                           Single Source Reachability (SS-Reach)
        A directed graph and a                     Edge insertions/deletions                  Given a vertex t,
             fixed vertex s                                                                is t reachable from s?
                                                (s, t)-Reachability (st-Reach)
         A directed graph and                      Edge insertions/deletions               Is t reachable from s?
           fixed vertices s, t
                                                  (s, t)-shortest path (st-SP)
 An undirected weighted graph and                  Edge insertions/deletions                What is the distance
           fixed vertices s, t                                                                between s and t?
                                                   Strong Connectivity (SC)
           A directed graph                        Edge insertions/deletions       Is the graph strongly connected?
                                                 2 Strong Components (SC2)
           A directed graph                        Edge insertions/deletions              Are there more than 2
                                                                                   strongly connected components?
                                           2 vs k Strong Components (AppxSC)
           A directed graph                        Edge insertions/deletions              Is the number of SCCs
                                                                                             2 or more than k?
                                               Maximum SCC size (MaxSCC)
           A directed graph                        Edge insertions/deletions                 What is the size of
                                                                                              the largest SCC?
                                        Single Source Reachability Count (# SSR)
        A directed graph with                      Edge insertions/deletions            Given ℓ, is the number of
            a fixed source s                                                          nodes reachable from s < ℓ?
                                               Connected Subgraph (ConnSub)
       A fixed undirected graph                      Insert/remove a node                Is the subgraph induced
        and a vertex subset S                              into/from S                         by S connected?
                                               (S, T )-Reachability (ST -Reach)
         A directed graph and                      Edge insertions/deletions          Are there some s ∈ S, t ∈ T
     fixed node subsets S and T                                                       s.t. t is unreachable from s?
                                       (4/3 − ε)-Approximate Diameter (4/3-Diam)
         An undirected graph                       Edge insertions/deletions                    Is the diameter
                                                                                                     3 or 4?
                                        Chan’s Subset Union Problem (SubUnion)
   A subset S of a fixed collection                    Insert/remove a set                    Is ∪Xi ∈S Xi = U ?
X = {X1 , . . . , Xn } ofPsubsets over a                 Xi into/from S
    universe U , with i |Xi | = m
                                                     Pagh’s Problem (PP)
           A collection X of                             Given i, j, insert                      Given index i
       subsets X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ [n]                     Xi ∩ Xj into X                    and u ∈ U , is u ∈ Xi ?
                                      Pagh’s Problem with Emptiness Queries (∅-PP)
           A collection X of                             Given i, j, insert                      Given index i,
       subsets X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ [n]                     Xi ∩ Xj into X                            is Xi = ∅?

                                 Table 1: The problems we consider.
                                                                                                       14




                               Best Upper Bounds                             Lower Bounds
        Problem
                          p(m, n) u(m, n)    q(m, n)    p(m, n)    u(m, n)    q(m, n)             Conjecture
                             1        m       1 (*)     m4/3−ε      mα−ε     m2/3−α−ε               3SUM
        st-Reach             1        1       m (*)     m1+δ−ε     m2δ−ε       m2δ−ε               Triangle
                             1      n1.495    1 [80]     n3−ε       n2−ε       n2−ε                 BMM
                             1        m       1 (*)     m4/3−ε      mα−ε     m2/3−α−ε               3SUM
          SC                 1        1       m (*)     m1+δ−ε     m2δ−ε       m2δ−ε               Triangle
                                                         n3−ε       n2−ε       n2−ε                 BMM
                            1        m        1 (*)      n3−ε       n1−ε       n2−ε                 BMM
       SubConn              1        1       m (*)      m1+δ−ε      mδ−ε       m2δ−ε               Triangle
                           m4/3    m2/3     m1/3 [21]   m4/3−ε      mα−ε     m2/3−α−ε               3SUM
                           BM        m        1 (*)     m4/3−ε      mα−ε     m2/3−α−ε               3SUM
       BPMatch              1        1      BM (*)      m1+δ−ε     m2δ−ε       m2δ−ε               Triangle
                            1      n1.495    1 [81]      n3−ε       n2−ε       n2−ε                 BMM
   Dec/Inc BWMatch         WM        m        1 (*)      n3−ε       n2−ε       n2−ε                 APSP
                            1        m        1 (*)      n3−ε       n2−ε       n2−ε                 APSP
     Dec/Inc st-SP
                            1        1       m (*)
 SC2, #SSR, ConnSub,        1        m        1 (*)
  AppxSCC, SubUnion         1        1       m (*)      poly (n)   m1−ε          m1−ε                SETH
       ∅-PP over            1        n        1 (*)     poly (n)    n1−ε         n1−ε                SETH
   a universe of size n     1        1       kn (*)      k 1+δ−ε    k δ−ε        k δ−ε             Triangle
     and k ≥ n sets                                      k 3/2−ε   k 1/2−ε      k 1/2−ε              BMM
                                                         k 4/3−ε   k 1/3−ε      k 1/3−ε              3SUM
        PP over             1        n         1 (*)     k 1+δ−ε    k δ−ε        k δ−ε       Triangle with δ > 1/3
  a universe of size n      1        1        kn (*)     k 3/2−ε   k 1/2−ε      k 1/2−ε              BMM
     and k ≥ n sets                                      k 4/3−ε   k 1/3−ε   k 1/3−ε
                                                                                      [72]           3SUM
 ST -Reach or 4/3-Diam      1        n2       1 (*)     poly (n)    n2−ε         n2−ε                SETH
    in sparse graphs        1        1        n2 (*)

Table 2: The table includes the current best upper bounds for the listed problems, together
with bounds for which a listed conjecture would be falsified. In the above, WM refers to
             √
min{M nω , m n log M }, i.e. asymptotically the fastest known time to compute a weighted match-
ing, BM refers to min{m10/7 , nω }, i.e. asymptotically the fastest known time to compute a bipartite
perfect matching, ε > 0 is an arbitrarily small constant, α ∈ [1/6, 1/3] and δ > 0 is some constant
for which Triangle detection is not in m1+δ time. (*) denotes the trivial algorithm. Dec/Inc means
that the upper and lower bounds apply to fully dynamic, and also to partially dynamic, i.e. decre-
mental and incremental, algorithms. All lower bounds can be amortized and expected. All above
lower bounds also hold in the case of partially dynamic algorithms, however then the lower bounds
are assumed to be worst-case (unless they are already listed in the table).
model with O(log n) bit words, 3SUM can be solved in O(n3 log2 log n/ log2 n) time. However, there
are no known O(n2−ε ) time (so called “truly subquadratic”) algorithms for the problem for any
ε > 0. The lack of progress on the problem has led to the following conjecture [72, 42].

Conjecture 1 (No truly subquadratic 3SUM). In the Word RAM model with words of O(log n) bits,
any algorithm requires n2−o(1) time in expectation to determine whether a set S ⊂ {−n3 , . . . , n3 }
of |S| = n integers contains three distinct elements a, b, c ∈ S with a + b = c.

     (By standard hashing arguments, one can assume that the size of the integers in the 3SUM
instance is O(n3 ), and so the conjecture is not for a restricted version of the problem.)
     Many researchers believe this conjecture. Besides Pǎtraşcu’s paper [72] on dynamic lower
bounds, 3SUM is often used to prove conditional hardness for nondynamic problems. Gajentaan
and Overmars [42] formed a theory of “3SUM-hard problems” by showing that one can reduce
3SUM to many static problems in computational geometry, showing that unless 3SUM has a truly
subquadratic time algorithm, none of them do. One example of a 3SUM-hard problem is testing
whether in a given set of n points in the plane, 3 of them are colinear. Following [42] many other
papers proved the 3SUM hardness of geometric problems [29, 64, 34, 2, 8, 10, 23, 13]. Vassilevska
and Williams [88, 90] showed that a certain weighted graph triangle problem cannot be found ef-
ficiently unless Conjecture 1 is false, relating 3SUM to problems in weighted graphs. Their work
was recently extended [1] for other weighted subgraph problems.

APSP. The second conjecture concerns the all pairs shortest paths problem (APSP): given a
directed or undirected graph with integer edge weights, determine the distances between every
pair of vertices in the graph. Classical algorithms such as Dijkstra’s or Floyd-Warshall’s provide
O(n3 ) running times for APSP in n-ndoe graphs. Just as with 3SUM, there are no(1) improvements
over this cubic runtime. Until 2013, the fastest such runtime was O(n3 log log n/ log2 n) by Han and
Takaoka [45]. Williams [91] has recently designed an algorithm that runs faster than O(n3 /(log n)c )
time for all constants c. Nevertheless, no truly subcubic time (O(n3−ε ) for ε > 0) algorithm for
APSP is known. This led to the following conjecture assumed in many papers, e.g. [79, 93].

Conjecture 2 (No truly subcubic APSP). There is a constant c, such that in the Word RAM
model with words of O(log n) bits, any algorithm requires n3−o(1) time in expectation to compute
the distances between every pair of vertices in an n node graph with edge weights in {1, . . . , nc }.

    Vassilevska Williams and Williams [93] showed that many other graph problems are equivalent
to APSP under subcubic reductions, and as a consequence any truly subcubic algorithm for them
would violate Conjecture 2. Some examples of these problems include detecting a negative weight
triangle in a graph, computing replacement paths and finding the minimum cycle in the graph.
    One could ask, is there a relationship between Conjectures 2 and 1? The answer is unknown.
However, there is a problem that is in a sense at least as hard as both 3SUM and APSP, and may
be equivalent to either one of them. The problem, Exact Triangle, is, given a graph with integer
edge weights, determine whether it contains a triangle with total weight 0. The work of Vassilevska
Williams and Williams [90] based partially on [72] shows that if Exact Triangle can be solved in
truly subcubic time, then both Conjectures 2 and 1 are false.

The Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis. The next conjecture is about the exact complex-
ity of an NP-hard problem, namely Boolean Satisfiability in Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF-SAT).

                                                 15
The best known algorithm for CNF-SAT is the O∗ (2n ) time exhaustive search algorithm which tries
all possible 2n assignments to the variables, and it has been a major open problem to obtain an im-
provement. There are faster algorithms for k-SAT for constant k. Their running times are typically
of the form O(2n(1−c/k) ) for some constant c independent of n and k (e.g. [50, 66, 70, 69, 84, 85]).
That is, as k grows, the base of the exponent of the best known algorithms goes to 2.
    Impagliazzo, Paturi, and Zane [53, 54] introduced the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis
(SETH) to address the question of how fast one can solve k-SAT as k grows. They define:
                           sk = inf{δ |     ∃O ∗ (2δn ) time algorithm solving
                                           k-SAT instances with n variables},
The sequence sk is clearly nondecreasing. The SETH hypothesizes that limk→∞ sk = 1.
Conjecture 3 (SETH). For every ε > 0, there exists an integer k, such that SAT on k-CNF
formulas on n variables cannot be solved in O(2(1−ε)n poly n) time.
    The SETH is an extremely popular conjecture in the exact exponential time algorithms com-
munity. For instance, Cygan et al. [25] showed that the SETH is also equivalent to the assumption
that several other NP-hard problems cannot be solved faster than by exhaustive search, and the
best algorithms for these problems are the exhaustive search ones. Some other work that proves
conditional lower bounds based on the SETH for NP-hard problems includes [25, 19, 28, 63, 27, 92,
71, 24, 26, 36].
    Assuming the SETH, one can prove tight conditional lower bounds on the complexity of some
polynomial time problems as well. Pǎtraşcu and Williams [75] give several tight lower bounds for
problems such as k-dominating set (for any constant k ≥ 3), 2SAT with two extra unrestricted
length clauses, and HornSAT with k extra unrestricted length clauses. Roditty and Vassilevska
Williams [77] and the follow-up work of Chechik et al. [22] related the complexity of approximating
the diameter of a graph to the SETH. In this paper we prove the first lower bounds for dynamic
problems based on the SETH. The lower bounds we obtain are surprisingly tight- any polynomial
improvement over the trivial algorithm would falsify Conjecture 3. In addition, all lower bounds
based on the SETH also hold with arbitrary polynomial preprocessing time.

Triangle. The next conjecture is on the complexity of finding a triangle in a graph. The
best known algorithm for triangle detection relies on fast matrix multiplication and runs in time
O(min{m1.41 , nω }) in m-edge, n-node graphs [6]. Even if there were an optimal matrix multiplica-
tion algorithm, it would at best imply an O(min{m4/3 , n2 }) time algorithm for triangle detection.
The lack of alternative algorithms leads to the conjecture that there may not be a linear time algo-
rithm for triangle finding. (In fact, one may even conjecture that O(m4/3−ε ) time is not possible,
but we will be conservative.)
Conjecture 4 (No almost linear time triangle). There is a constant δ > 0, such that in the Word
RAM model with words of O(log n) bits, any algorithm requires m1+δ−o(1) time in expectation to
detect whether an m edge graph contains a triangle.
   One may ask whether Conjecture 4 is related to Conjectures 2 and 1. Although there is no
known strong relationship between Conjectures 2 and 4 4 the relationship between 3SUM and
    4
      One exception is in [93], where the authors show that triangle detection in dense graphs and Boolean matrix
multiplication (BMM) are naturally related. This gives a loose relationship between APSP and Triangle since APSP
is a generalization of BMM.


                                                       16
Triangle detection has been explored. For instance, Pǎtraşcu [72] showed that one can reduce
3SUM on n numbers to the problem of listing up to m triangles in a graph on m = O(n1.5 ) edges,
thus any algorithm that lists m triangles in an m-edge graph in O(m4/3−ε ) time for ε > 0 would
falsify Conjecture 1.
    However, is there a relationship between triangle listing and triangle detection? Vassilevska
Williams and Williams [93] proved that for dense graphs, any truly subcubic algorithm for triangle
detection implies a truly subcubic algorithm for listing any truly subcubic number of triangles.
Jafargholi and Viola [57] extended this result to the case of sparse graphs. They showed that if
one can detect a triangle in O(m1+ε ) time, then one can list m triangles in Õ(m4/3+2ε/3 ) time.
Unfortunately, their reduction always produces a listing algorithm that runs in Ω(m4/3 ) time which
is insufficient to falsify Conjecture 1. The authors [57] also show that Triangle detection on a
graph with m edges can be reduced to 3SUM on O(m) numbers, which implies that if the Triangle
Conjecture is true for some δ > 0 then 3SUM requires n1+δ−o(1) time. Beyond this, the 3SUM
conjecture and the Triangle Conjecture may be unrelated.
    We state our lower bounds in terms of the exponent δ in Conjecture 4. Thus any sufficiently
large improvement on the complexity of our dynamic problems would yield a new algorithm for
triangle detection.

Boolean matrix multiplication (BMM). The Boolean product of two Boolean matrices A
and B is the matrix C with entries C[i, j] = ∨k (A[i, k] ∧ B[k, j]). Many important problems can
not only be solved using a fast BMM routine, but are also equivalent to BMM [62, 93]. Hence an
efficient and practical BMM algorithm is highly desirable.
     The Boolean product of n × n matrices can be computed using any algorithm for integer matrix
multiplication, and hence the problem is in O(n2.373 ) time [89]. However, the theoretically efficient
matrix multiplication algorithms (except possibly Strassen’s [86]) use mathematical machinery that
causes them to have high constant factors, and are thus currently impractical. Because of this,
alternative, so called “combinatorial” methods, for BMM are sought after.
     The current best combinatorial algorithm for BMM by Bansal and Williams [11] runs in
       n3
O( log2.25 n
             ) time, improving on the well-known Four-Russians algorithm [9]. Because it has been
such a longstanding open problem to obtain an O(n3−ε ) time (for constant ε > 0) algorithm for
BMM, the following conjecture has been floating around the community; many papers base lower
bounds for problems on it (e.g. [79, 62, 58, 4]). (We place “conjecture” in quotes, mainly because
“combinatorial” is not a well-defined term.)

“Conjecture” 5 (No truly subcubic combinatorial BMM). In the Word RAM model with words
of O(log n) bits, any combinatorial algorithm requires n3−o(1) time in expectation to compute the
Boolean product of two n × n matrices.

    The only known relationship between the complexity of BMM and the rest of the conjectures
in this paper is a result from [93] that any truly subcubic in n combinatorial algorithm for finding
a triangle can be converted to a truly subcubic combinatorial algorithm for BMM. Hence “Conjec-
ture” 5 is equivalent to the conjecture that combinatorial triangle finding in n node graphs requires
n3−o(1) time. However, that does not necessarily imply Conjecture 4 since it could be that there is
a linear time algebraic triangle finding algorithm, but no combinatorial one. Furthermore, “Con-
jecture” 5 could be false but Conjecture 4 might still be true. According to our current knowledge,



                                                 17
even an optimal algorithm for BMM would at best imply an O(m4/3 ) time algorithm for triangle
detection.


5    Formal statement of our results
The problems we study are defined in Table 1. We prove the following theorems. Most of our
results are summarized in Table 2.

Theorem 5.1. If for some ε > 0 and t ∈ N, we can solve either of

    • fully dynamic #SSR, SC2, AppxSCC, MaxSCC, SubUnion, φ-PP, or ConnSub, with pre-
      processing time O(nt ), amortized update time O(m1−ε ), and amortized query time O(m1−ε ),
      or

    • incremental or decremental #SSR, SC2, AppxSCC, MaxSCC, SubUnion, φ-PP, or ConnSub,
      with preprocessing time O(nt ), worst case update time O(m1−ε ), and worst case query time
      O(m1−ε ), or

    • fully dynamic ST -Reach or 4/3-Diam with preprocessing time O(nt ), amortized update time
      O(m2−ε ), and amortized query time O(m2−ε ), or

    • incremental or decremental ST -Reach or 4/3-Diam with preprocessing time O(nt ), worst case
      update time O(m2−ε ), and worst case query time O(m2−ε ),

then Conjecture 3 is false.

Theorem 5.2. If for some ε > 0 and 1/6 ≤ α ≤ 1/3, we can solve either of
                                                                                              4
    • fully dynamic st-SubConn, st-Reach, BPMatch, or SC, with preprocessing time O(m 3 −ε ),
                                                                   2
      amortized update time O(mα−ε ), and amortized query time O(m 3 −α−ε ), or
                                                                                          4
    • incremental st-SubConn, st-Reach, BPMatch, or SC, with preprocessing time O(m 3 −ε ), worst
                                                               2
      case update time O(mα−ε ), and worst case query time O(m 3 −α−ε ), or
                                                                           4
    • decremental st-Reach, BPMatch, or SC, with preprocessing time O(m 3 −ε ), worst case update
                                                   2
      time O(mα−ε ), and worst case query time O(m 3 −α−ε ), or
                                                                                      4
    • PP or ∅-PP over k sets and a universe of size O(k) with preprocessing time O(k 3 −ε ), amor-
                                      1
      tized update and query time O(k 3 −ε ),

then Conjecture 1 is false.

Theorem 5.3. If for some δ, ε > 0, we can solve either of

    • fully dynamic st-Reach, BPMatch, 17-BPM, or SC, with preprocessing time O(m1+δ−ε ),
      amortized update and query times O(m2δ−ε ), or

    • incremental or decremental st-Reach, BPMatch, 17-BPM, or SC, with preprocessing time
      O(m1+δ−ε ), worst case update and query times O(m2δ−ε ), or


                                                18
   • fully dynamic st-SubConn or 5-BPM with preprocessing time O(m1+δ−ε ), amortized update
     time O(mδ−ε ), and amortized query time O(m2δ−ε ), or

   • incremental or decremental 5-BPM with preprocessing time O(m1+δ−ε ), worst case update
     time O(mδ−ε ), and worst case query time O(m2δ−ε ), or

   • incremental st-SubConn, or decremental st-SubConn in dense graphs, with preprocessing time
     O(m1+δ−ε ), worst case update time O(mδ−ε ), and worst case query time O(m2δ−ε ),

   • ∅-PP over k sets and a universe of size O(k) with preprocessing time O(k 1+δ−ε ), amortized
     update and query time O(k δ−ε ), or

   • for δ > 1/3, PP over k sets and a universe of size O(k) with preprocessing time O(k1+δ−ε ),
     amortized update and query time O(k δ−ε ),

then Conjecture 4 is false for this choice of δ.

   Since our reductions are “combinatorial” and hold for arbitrary m and δ, we get the following
hardness from Conjecture 5.

Corollary 5.1. If for some ε > 0 we can find a “combinatorial” algorithm for either of

   • fully dynamic st-Reach, BPMatch, 17-BPM, or SC, with preprocessing time O(n3−ε ), amor-
     tized update and query times O(n2−ε ), or

   • incremental or decremental st-Reach, BPMatch, 17-BPM, or SC, with preprocessing time
     O(n3−ε ), worst case update and query times O(n2−ε ), or

   • fully dynamic st-SubConn or 5-BPM with preprocessing time O(n3−ε ), amortized update time
     O(n1−ε ), and amortized query time O(n2−ε ), or

   • incremental or decremental 5-BPM with preprocessing time O(n3−ε ), worst case update time
     O(n1−ε ), and worst case query time O(n2−ε ), or

   • incremental or decremental st-SubConn with preprocessing time O(n3−ε ), worst case update
     time O(n1−ε ), and worst case query time O(n2−ε ),
                                                                                     3
   • PP or ∅-PP over k sets and a universe of size O(k) with preprocessing time O(k 2 −ε ), amor-
                                     1
     tized update and query time O(k 2 −ε ),

then Conjecture 5 is false.

Theorem 5.4. If for some ε > 0 we can solve decremental or incremental st-SP or BWMatch with
preprocessing time O(n3−ε ) and amortized update and query times O(n2−ε ), then Conjecture 2 is
false.




                                                   19
6     Preliminaries
Unless otherwise noted, n refers to the number of vertices and m to the number of edges of a graph.
In the context of dynamic problems, n and m are assumed to be upper bounds on the number of
nodes and edges in the input graph at any time. The notation Õ(f (n)) means f (n)polylog n. The
notation O∗ (f (n)) means f (n)poly n. For a positive integer n, [n] denotes the set {1, . . . , n}. For
a node v ∈ V , N (v) denotes the neighborhood of v, and NA (v) = N (v) ∩ A, where A ⊆ V is a
subset of vertices, denotes the neighborhood of v in A. We denote the degree of a node v by d(v)
and define dA (v) = |NA (v)| to be the degree of v when restricted to nodes in A.
    Below we present several efficient reductions between dynamic problems that allow us to focus
our lower bound reductions to a small set of problems. The rest of the bounds will follow from the
relationships proven below.

6.1    st-SubConn to st-Reach
Lemma 6.1. If fully dynamic / incremental / decremental st-Reach can be solved with prepro-
cessing, update, and query times p(m, n), u(m, n), q(m, n), respectively, then fully dynamic / incre-
mental / decremental st-SubConn can also be solved with preprocessing, update, and query times
p(O(m + n), O(n)), u(O(m + n), O(n)), q(O(m + n), O(n)), respectively.

Proof. Let G = (V, E) and s, t ∈ V be an instance of st-SubConn. We create the directed graph
H = (V ′ , E ′ ), where for every node v ∈ V we create two copies vin and vout in V ′ , and for every
undirected edge (u, v) ∈ E we add the two directed edges (uout , vin ) and (vout , uin ) to E ′ . We will
maintain the invariant that a node v ∈ S ⊆ V of G is in the set of activated nodes S if and only if
the edge (vin , vout ) is in E ′ .
      Let s′ , t′ ∈ V ′ be the nodes s′ = sout and t′ = tin . To solve st-SubConn on G, we solve s′ t′ -Reach
on H. The node updates to G are handled in a straightforward manner. If a node v is added to S,
we insert the edge (vin , vout ) to H, and if v is removed from S, we delete the edge (vin , vout ) from
H. To answer s, t connectivity queries in G, we check whether s′ can reach t′ in H and answer
similarly. Note that the number of nodes in H is O(n) and the number of edges is O(m + n).
      We will show that s and t are connected in the subgraph of G induced by S if and only if there
is a directed path from sout to tin in H. For the first direction, let P = (s, v1 , . . . , vk , t) be a path
from s to t in G that does not contain any nodes that are not in S, i.e. v1 , . . . , vk ∈ S. Then,
P ′ = (sout → v1,in → v1,out → v2,in → · · · → vk,out → tin ) is a directed path from s′ to t′ in H.
For the other direction, let P ′ = (s′         t′ ) be a directed path from sout to tin in H, and note that
since all edges in H are either of the form (uout , vin ) where u 6= v and (u, v) ∈ E, or of the form
(uin , uout ) where u ∈ S, we know that P ′ must be of the form P ′ = (s′ → v1,in → v1,out → v2,in →
· · · → vk,out → t′ ). Thus, we have the path P = (s, v1 , . . . , vk , t) in G where all the nodes are in S.
                                                                                                           

6.2    st-Reach to BPMatch
Lemma 6.2. If fully dynamic / incremental / decremental BPMatch can be solved with prepro-
cessing, update, and query times p(m, n), u(m, n), q(m, n), respectively, then fully dynamic / in-
cremental / decremental st-Reach can also be solved with preprocessing, update, and query times
p(O(m), O(n)), u(O(m), O(n)), q(O(m), O(n)), respectively.


                                                     20
Proof. Given an instance of st-Reach, a graph G = (V, E) on n nodes and m edges, we create an
instance of BPMatch, an undirected bipartite graph H, in which there will exist a perfect matching
whenever there is a path from s to t in G.
     The nodes of H will be made of two copies of the nodes of G, V (H) = Vin ∪ Vout where
Vin = {vin | v ∈ V, v 6= s} and Vout = {vout | v ∈ V, v 6= t}. For every edge (u, v) in G where v 6= s
and u 6= t we will create an edge (uout , vin ) in H, then, we also add an edge (vin , vout ) between the
two copies of each node v ∈ V \ {s, t}. Thus, E(H) = {(uout , vin ) | (u, v) ∈ E} ∪ {(vin , vout ) | v ∈
V, v 6= s, t}. Note that the number of nodes in H is O(n) and the number of edges is O(m).
     Updates are handled as follows. When an edge (u, v) is removed (or added) in G, we remove
(or add) the edge (uout , vin ) in H.
     We claim that, at any point, there is a path from s to t in G if and only if there is a perfect
matching in H. For the first direction, assume there is a path s → v1 → . . . → vk → t in G,
and consider the set of edges M = {(sout , v1,in ), (v1,out , v2,in ), . . . , (vk,out , tin )} ∪ {(uin , uout ) | u ∈
V, u 6= s, t, v1 , . . . , vk } in H. Every node in H appears exactly once in M and therefore M is a
perfect matching. For the other direction, assume that M is a perfect matching in H, and consider
the following set of edges S = {(u, v) | (uout , vin ) ∈ M, u 6= v} in G. We claim that S must
contain a path from s to t. For a node v ∈ G, define its in-degree and out-degree according to
S as din (v) = |{(x, v) ∈ S}| and dout (v) = |{(v, x) ∈ S}|. Since M is a matching, we know that
din (v), dout (v) ≤ 1 for every node v ∈ V . Moreover, we know that din (s) = dout (t) = 0 since sin , tout
do not exist in H, and dout (s) = 1 since M is a perfect matching and all neighbors of sout in H
have the form vin for v 6= s, and similarly, din (t) = 1. While for every node v 6= s, t, if din (v) = 1
then dout (v) = 1 too, since vout must be matched to a node other than vin who is already matched
to another node xout . Therefore, S must contain a path that starts at s and ends at t, along with
possibly other disjoint cycles.
                                                                                                                     

6.3    st-SP to BWMatch
Lemma 6.3. If fully dynamic / incremental / decremental BWMatch can be solved with pre-
processing, update, and query times p(m, n), u(m, n), q(m, n), respectively, then fully dynamic /
incremental / decremental st-SP can also be solved with preprocessing, update, and query times
p(O(m), O(n)), u(O(m), O(n)), and q(O(m), O(n)), respectively.
    We will use the same construction of the bipartite graph H from G that was given in the proof
of Lemma 6.2, but we will add edge weights this time and since G is undirected now we will make it
directed by bi-directing the edges. Let w : E(G) → [M ] be the edge weight function of G, we define
w′ : E(H) → [M ] as follows. For the edges of the form e = (vin , vout ) ∈ E(H) we set w′ (e) = M ,
while for the edges of the form e = (uout , vin ) ∈ E(H) we set w′ (e) = M − w(u, v). Updates are
handles the same way as before.
    We claim that the value of the maximum matching in H equals n · M minus the weight of the
shortest path from s to t in G. To see this, let P be the shortest s, t path s → v1 → . . . → vk → t in
G, and define the perfect matching M = {(sout , v1,in ), (v1,out , v2,in ), . . . , (vk,out , tin )} ∪ {(uin , uout ) |
u ∈ V, u 6= s, t, v1 , . . . , vk } in H, as before. The total weight of M is
w′ (M ) = (M − w(s, v1 )) + (M − w(v1 , v2 )) + . . . + (M − w(vk , t)) + (n − k − 2) · M = n · M − w(P ).
Let M ′ be a different perfect matching in H, we will show that w′ (M ′ ) ≤ w′ (M ) which will conclude
the proof of our claim. As before, define the set of edge S = {(u, v) | (uout , vin ) ∈ M ′ , u 6= v} in G,

                                                          21
and recall the definition of din (v) and dout (v). We have shown that since M ′ is a perfect matching,
the edges in S must contain a path P ′ from s to t and possibly some disjoint cycles C1 , . . . , Ck in
G. Therefore, since all weights are positive and since w(P ′ ) ≥ w(P ) we get that
                            X
                            k
          ′    ′
         w (M ) = n · M −         w(Ci ) − w(P ′ ) ≤ n · M − w(P ′ ) ≤ n · M − w(P ) = w′ (M ).
                            i=1


6.4   st-Reach to SC
Lemma 6.4. If fully dynamic / incremental / decremental SC can be solved with preprocessing,
update, and query times p(m, n), u(m, n), q(m, n), respectively, then fully dynamic / incremental
/ decremental st-Reach can also be solved with preprocessing, update, and query times p(O(m +
n), O(n)), u(O(m + n), O(n)), and q(O(m + n), O(n)), respectively.
Proof. Given an instance of st-Reach, a graph G = (V, E) on n nodes and m edges, the instance of
SC we create is a directed graph H which is simply G with the addition of the edges (v, s), (t, v)
for every node v ∈ V \ {s, t}. If an edge is added to G we add it to H too, and if an edge (u, v)
is removed from G, we remove it from H only if u 6= t and v 6= s – that is, we keep the additional
edges in H at all times.
    We claim that s can reach t in G, if and only if H is strongly connected. To see this, first,
assume that there is a path P from s to t in G, and note that any two nodes u, v in H will now
be connected using the path u → s → (P ) → t → v, and therefore H will be strongly connected.
While, for the other direction, assume that H is strongly connected, and therefore there must be a
simple path from s to t in H. This path cannot use any of the additional edges, and therefore it is
made entirely of edges in G, which means that s can reach t in G.
                                                                                                 

6.5   SubUnion to ConnSub
Here we show that there is an efficient reduction from SubUnion to ConnSub. Chan [20] conjectured
that the hardness of ConnSub is due to the hardness of SubUnion and this is exactly what we will
show in Section 7.
Lemma 6.5. Suppose fully dynamic / incremental / decremental ConnSub on a graph with n nodes
and m edges can be done with amortized/worst case update time u(m, n) and query time q(m, n)
and O(nt ) preprocessing time. Then fully dynamic / incremental / decremental SubUnion over a
universe of size n ≥ |X| and sum of set sizes m can be done with amortized/worst case update time
u(m + n, n) and query time q(m + n, n) and O(nt ) preprocessing time.
Proof. Given an instance of SubUnion over a universe U we simulate it with ConnSub as follows.
    Create a bipartite graph H where one partition is the universe U and the other is a set A on
|X| nodes, one corresponding to each set Xi ∈ X. For i ∈ A, add an edge to every u ∈ U such
that u ∈ Xi . Add an additional node a that all nodes of A are connected to. This node a is always
active; all nodes of U are also always active. When a subset Xi is inserted into S, we turn node i
on, and when it is removed from S, we turn node i off.
    The subgraph of H induced on the active nodes is connected if and only if every node in U has
some active node Xi that it is connected to, i.e. every u ∈ U is in ∪Xi ∈S Xi , and so ∪Xi ∈S Xi = U .
    The number of vertices in H is |U | + |X| + 1 = O(n), and the number of edges is m + n.        

                                                   22
7     Lower bounds from SETH
In this section we prove hardness results for dynamic problems assuming SETH. The proof is
divided into the lemmas below.
Reminder of Theorem 5.1 If for some ε > 0 and t ∈ N, we can solve either of

    • fully dynamic #SSR, SC2, AppxSCC, MaxSCC, SubUnion, φ-PP, or ConnSub, with pre-
      processing time O(nt ), amortized update time O(m1−ε ), and amortized query time O(m1−ε ),
      or

    • incremental or decremental #SSR, SC2, AppxSCC, MaxSCC, SubUnion, φ-PP, or ConnSub,
      with preprocessing time O(nt ), worst case update time O(m1−ε ), and worst case query time
      O(m1−ε ), or

    • fully dynamic ST -Reach or 4/3-Diam with preprocessing time O(nt ), amortized update time
      O(m2−ε ), and amortized query time O(m2−ε ), or

    • incremental or decremental ST -Reach or 4/3-Diam with preprocessing time O(nt ), worst case
      update time O(m2−ε ), and worst case query time O(m2−ε ),

then Conjecture 3 is false.
    We begin with a proposition that we will use in all of our reductions.

Proposition 1. If the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis is true, then for every γ > 0 there
exists a k such that k-SAT instances on O(n) clauses require 2(1−γ)n−o(n) time.

Proof. Let γ > 0 be given. Pick some small constant ε > 0, ε < γ. Recall that the SETH states that
                                                                                           ′
for every γ ′ > 0 there exists an integer k such that no algorithm running in time O(2(1−γ )n poly n)
solves k-SAT for all instances with n variables.
    Let k be the integer as above corresponding to γ ′ = (γ − ε), i.e. such that k-SAT cannot be
                    ′
solved in O∗ (2(1−γ )n ) time. Now, given any k-CNF formula, we apply the sparsification lemma [53]:
for our choice of ε > 0 we obtain 2εn k-SAT instances on n variables and O(n) clauses. Now suppose
that there is an O∗ (2(1−γ)n ) time algorithm for k-SAT that works on instances with O(n) clauses,
                                             ′
then there is a O∗ (2(1−γ+ε)n ) = O∗ (2(1−γ )n ) time algorithm for k-SAT that works on instances
with an arbitrary number of clauses and that would be a contradiction to our choice of k. Hence
assuming the SETH, k-SAT instances on O(n) clauses require 2(1−γ)n−o(1) time.                      

7.1   Reductions from CNF-SAT to dynamic graph problems
The graph Hδ . All of our reductions to dynamic graph problems start from the same graph Hδ
(for any constant δ ∈ (0, 1)) constructed as follows.
    Let F be a CNF formula on a set V of n variables and O(n) clauses. Let U ⊆ V be a subset
of the variables of size δn. Create a node for each of the 2δn partial assignments to the variables
of U . Call these nodes Ū . Create a node for each of the O(n) clauses of F . Call these nodes C.
Create an edge between a partial assignment φ ∈ Ū and a clause c ∈ C iff φ does not satisfy any
of the literals in c.
    The graph Hδ above has O(2δn ) vertices and O(2δn n) edges.



                                                 23
Using Hδ . The constructions in our proofs add to Hδ at most a constant number of extra nodes
and O(n) edges, thus keeping the size of the graph roughly the same. If the preprocessing time of
the corresponding dynamic problem is O(N t ) for graphs on N vertices and Õ(N ) edges, each of
our constructions can be preprocessed in O(2δnt n) time. We set δ = (1 − ε)/t for some small ε > 0,
so that the preprocessing time is O(2(1−ε)n n) .
    The reductions typically involve 2(1−δ)n stages. In each stage, O(n) edges are inserted or deleted,
O(n) queries are performed, and then the edge updates of the stage are undone. Thus, if any update
on a graph with N nodes and Õ(N ) edges takes O(N 1−ε ) time for some ε > 0, then the k-SAT
instance can be solved in time (modulo polynomial factors)

                                      2(1−δ)n · 2δn(1−ε) = 2(1−εδ)n .

We obtain a contradiction to the SETH by picking the clause size k of the input CNF-formula using
Proposition 1 with γ = 1 − εδ.

Proof of Theorem 5.1 for all graph problems except ConnSub. The lemmas below prove
all bullets of Theorem 5.1 except those for ConnSub, SubUnion and ∅-PP. Each lemma explains
how to modify the graph Hδ so that the problem at hand solves the SAT instance.
    We begin by showing a lower bound for # SSR: the problem of maintaining the size of the
reachability tree of a fixed source under edge deletions and insertions.

Lemma 7.1 (# SSR). Suppose fully dynamic # SSR on a graph with n nodes and Õ(n) edges
can be done with (amortized) update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt ) preprocessing time.
Then assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n1−ε ) for all ε > 0.

Proof. Construct Hδ for δ = (1 − ε)/t for some ε > 0, where the edges are directed from the clause
nodes C to the partial assignment nodes Ū . Add an extra node s.
    Now, there is a stage for every partial assignment to the variables of F that are not in U . The
number of stages is hence 2|V \U | = 2(1−δ)n .
    In each stage we do the following. Let φ be the partial assignment to V \ U for this stage. Add
an edge from s to every clause c that φ does not satisfy. Let d(s) be the number of edges added.
Then ask the query whether the number of nodes reachable from s is less than 2δn + d(s). If so,
return that F is satisfiable. If not, remove the edges incident to s and move on to the next partial
assignment to V \ U , starting the next stage.
    The number of updates and queries is O(2n(1−δ) n) and by the runtime analysis from before we
get that the SETH is false.
    To see the correctness, consider a stage corresponding to a partial assignment φ to the variables
of V \U . The number of clause nodes reachable from s is exactly d(s) since the only incoming edges
into C are those from s. Hence the number of nodes reachable from s is 2δn + d(s) only if s can
reach all nodes of Ū (and this number is less otherwise). A partial assignment φ′ to the variables
of U is reachable from s if and only if there is some clause that neither φ nor φ′ satisfies. Hence the
answer to the query after the stage is “yes” if and only if there is a φ′ such that φ and φ′ together
satisfy all of the clauses, i.e. F is satisfiable. Moreover, if F is satisfiable, then let a be a satisfying
assignment. Let φ be the restriction of a to the variables of U . Then the stage corresponding to φ
will have a “yes” answer to its query, and the algorithm solves the SAT problem for F .                    

   A variant of the same proof shows the following.

                                                    24
Lemma 7.2 (Inc/Dec # SSR). Suppose that incremental/decremental # SSR on a graph with n
nodes and Õ(n) edges can be done with worst case update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt )
preprocessing time. Then assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n1−ε ) for all ε > 0.

Proof. Suppose the algorithm is incremental. Then, during each stage perform all the edge inser-
tions and the query, and while doing this, write down all changes made by the algorithm. After
the query finishes, go through the changes in reverse order and undo them, going back to the state
of the data structure before any stage has begun. The time to undo the changes is no more than
the time to do the insertions and the query. Thus the same analysis goes through as in the proof
for the fully dynamic case, except that now we can only assume that we have worst case runtime
bounds.
    Suppose the algorithm is decremental. Then we change the original state of the data structure
to be the graph Hδ together with s and edges from s to all clause nodes. Now, in each stage,
instead of inserting edges from s to clauses, we delete the edges between s and the clauses that φ
satisfies. We then apply the same argument as for the incremental case.                         

   Now we prove the lower bound for SC2.

Lemma 7.3 (SC2). Suppose fully dynamic SC2 on a graph with n nodes and Õ(n) edges can be
done with (amortized) update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt ) preprocessing time. Then
assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n1−ε ) for all ε > 0.
   Similarly, suppose that decremental/incremental SC2 on a graph with n nodes and Õ(n) edges
can be done with worst case update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt ) preprocessing time.
Then assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n1−ε ) for all ε > 0.

Proof. We begin with the graph Hδ for δ = (1 − ε)/t for some ε > 0. We add two new vertices s
and s′ so that every partial assignment node has an edge to s (and there are no edges incident to
s′ ).
      In each stage we consider a partial assignment φ to the variables in V \ U . We add edges from
s to all clauses for which φ does not set any literals to true. We add bidirectional edges between
s′ and the clauses Cφ that φ satisfies. At the end of the stage these changes are undone. (For
decremental algorithms, s has edges to all clause nodes, s′ has bidirectional edges to all clause
nodes, and during the stage the respective edges are deleted until s has edges only to the clauses
not in Cφ and s′ has bidirectional edges to the clauses in Cφ .)
      Notice that there is no path from s to s′ or from s to Cφ . There are also no paths from
the partial assignment nodes to Cφ and hence also none to s′ . Thus, Cφ and s′ form a strongly
connected component. Finally, since every partial assignment node has an edge to s, these nodes
and s form a strongly connected component if and only if for every partial assignment φ′ to U ,
there is a clause node c such that neither φ nor φ′ satisfies c. Hence there are exactly 2 strongly
connected components if φ cannot be completed to a satisfying assignment, and there are more
than 2 otherwise.                                                                                  

   Modifying the above proof, we can prove the following lemma.

Lemma 7.4 (AppxSCC and MaxSCC). Suppose fully dynamic AppxSCC or MaxSCC on a graph
with n nodes and Õ(n) edges can be done with (amortized) update time u(n) and query time q(n)
and O(nt ) preprocessing time. Then assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n1−ε ) for all ε > 0.


                                                25
   Similarly, suppose that decremental/incremental AppxSCC or MaxSCC on a graph with n nodes
and Õ(n) edges can be done with worst case update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt )
preprocessing time. Then assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n1−ε ) for all ε > 0.

Proof. For MaxSCC, the same reduction as that in Lemma 7.3 works. Consider a stage for a partial
assignment φ. Let d be the number of clauses that φ does not satisfy. If the maximum size of an
SCC equals d + 2δn , then φ cannot be completed to a satisfying assignment since then all φ′ nodes
will be in the same component as s. Otherwise, if the maximum SCC size is less than d + 2δn , then
there is some φ′ that completes φ to a satisfying assignment.
    For AppxSCC for a constant k, we modify the above proof so that there are k copies of each
partial assignment node. The number of nodes and edges increases by a factor of k. The rest of
the proof stays the same. If φ cannot be completed to a satisfying assignment, then the number of
SCCs is still 2, but if it can be completed to a satisfying assignment, then the number is at least
k + 2 since all k copies of some assignment φ′ are not in the same SCC as s. Moreover, all these
copies are in separate components since the only possible paths between them must pass through
s.                                                                                               

   Next, we prove the lower bounds for ST -Reach.

Lemma 7.5 (ST -Reach). Suppose fully dynamic ST -Reach on a graph with n nodes and Õ(n)
edges can be done with (amortized) update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt ) preprocessing
time. Then assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n2−ε ) for all ε > 0.
   Similarly, suppose that decremental/incremental ST -Reach on a graph with n nodes and Õ(n)
edges can be done with worst case update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt ) preprocessing
time. Then assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n2−ε ) for all ε > 0.

Proof. Pick δ < min{1/t, 1/3} and create Hδ .
    Let U ′ be a subset of the variables not in U of size δn. Since δ < 1/3, U ′ can be picked. Create
a graph Hδ′ analogous to Hδ but for U ′ instead of U and so that the edges go from the clause nodes
to the assignments to U ′ that do not satisfy them. Let H be the disjoint union of Hδ and Hδ′ .
    H has O(2δn ) nodes and O(2δn n) edges. The node set of H is as follows: two copies of the
clause nodes, C and C ′ , and two sets of 2δn partial assignments- a set for U and a set for U ′ .
    The stages correspond to the 2n(1−2δ) partial assignments to the variables in V \ (U ∪ U ′ ).
Consider a stage corresponding to a partial assignment φ. For each clause c for which φ does not
satisfy any of its literals, we add an edge from the copy of c in C to its copy in C ′ . We then ask the
query whether all nodes of T are reachable from all nodes of S. If not, we return that the formula
is satisfiable. Otherwise, we undo the updates and move on to the next stage. (For decremental
algorithms, between stages there is a perfect matching between the clause nodes C and their copies
in C ′ , and each stage removes some of these edges.)
    Any dynamic algorithm with O(N 2−ε ) time update and query time would solve CNF-SAT
asymptotically in time (excluding polynomial factors)

                                    2n(1−2δ) · (2δn )2−ε = 2n(1−δε) .

                                                                                                      

   Next, we prove the lower bounds for maintaining a (4/3 − ε)-approximation to the diameter.


                                                   26
Lemma 7.6. Suppose fully dynamic 4/3-Diam on a graph with n nodes and Õ(n) edges can be
done with (amortized) update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt ) preprocessing time. Then
assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ n2−ε for all ε > 0.
   Similarly, suppose that decremental/incremental 4/3-Diam on a graph with n nodes and Õ(n)
edges can be done with worst case update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt ) preprocessing
time. Then assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ n2−ε for all ε > 0.
Proof. The construction is analogous to the one for ST -Reach. We outline the differences. All
edges in the graph H are made undirected.
    Let Ū be the nodes corresponding to the partial assignments to U and let Ū ′ be the nodes
corresponding to the partial assignments to U ′ . Two nodes s and s′ are added so that s has edges
to all nodes in Ū and s′ has edges to all nodes in Ū ′ . An extra node x is added with edges to all
nodes in C ∪ C ′ ∪ {s, s′ }.
    While constructing the graph, if some partial assignment (to U or U ′ ) satisfies all the clauses,
then we can just return that the formula is satisfiable. Otherwise every node of Ū has an edge to
C and every node of Ū ′ has an edge to C ′ . Because of the addition of the node x, the distance
between any two nodes in the graph is at most 4, and it is exactly 4 for all pairs of nodes from
Ū × Ū ′ . The distance between x and all nodes, between pairs within Ū , within Ū ′ within C ∪ {s},
or within C ′ ∪ {s′ } is 2.
    Now consider a stage for a partial assignment φ to V \ {U ∪ U ′ }. If the diameter of the graph
is now less than 4, it must be that for every pair of assignments α to U and α′ to U ′ , there is
some clause c that none of φ, α, α′ satisfy, as the only possible paths shorter than 4 are of the form
α → c → c′ → α′ . Hence if the diameter is less than 4, it is exactly 3 and there is no way to
complete φ to a satisfying assignment. Otherwise, if the diameter is still 4, then there exist α ∈ Ū
and α′ ∈ Ū ′ such that for every clause that φ does not satisfy, one of α or α′ does, so that φ · α · α′
is a satisfying assignment. Hence any dynamic algorithm that can distinguish between diameter 3
and 4 would solve CNF-SAT.                                                                             

7.2   Lower bounds for SubUnion, ∅-PP and ConnSub
    SubUnion and ∅-PP are nongraph problems, so our proofs no longer use Hδ . The proof for
ConnSub follows from the proof for SubUnion via Lemma 6.5 from the preliminaries.
Lemma 7.7 (SubUnion). Suppose fully dynamic SubUnion over a universe U of size n and m =
Õ(n) can be done with (amortized) update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt ) preprocessing
time. Then assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n1−ε ) for all ε > 0.
    Similarly, suppose that decremental/incremental SubUnion over a universe U of size n and m =
Õ(n) can be done with worst case update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt ) preprocessing
time. Then assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n1−ε ) for all ε > 0.
Proof. Let δ < 1/t be a constant. Let U = [2nδ ], corresponding to the 2δn partial assignments to
the first δn of the variables of the given CNF formula. X contains for P every clause c, the set Uc of
assignments (with indices in U ) that do not satisfy c. We have that c |Uc | ≤ 2δn n = Õ(2δn ) =
Õ(|U |).
    Let S = ∅ for fully dynamic and incremental algorithms. For decremental algorithms, let S
contain Uc for every clause c.
    Now, in each stage consider a partial assignment φ to the last (1−δ)n of the variables. For every
clause c for which φ does not satisfy any literals, add the set Uc to S. For decremental algorithms,

                                                   27
remove from S all sets Uc for clauses c that φ satisfies. Now say S = {X1 , . . . , Xt }. After this,
query whether ∪i Xi = U . If not, return that the formula is satisfiable, otherwise undo the changes
and move on to the next phase.
    Notice that if ∪i Xi 6= U , then there is some partial assignment φ′ to the first δn variables such
that u ∈/ Uc for every Uc ∈ X, i.e. u must satisfy all clauses c that φ does not satisfy, and φ′
completes φ to a satisfying assignment. Otherwise, if ∪i Xi = U , then for every φ′ there is some
clause c that neither φ′ nor φ satisfy, and hence φ cannot be completed to a satisfying assignment.
    Suppose that u(N ), q(N ) ≤ N 1−ε . Then the algorithm described solves the SAT problem for
the CNF-formula in time
                                     2(1−δ)n n · 2δn(1−ε) = n2n(1−εδ) ,
thus contradicting the SETH.                                                                         

   Lemma 6.5 from the preliminaries showed that SubUnion can be efficiently reduced to the
ConnSub problem. Thus, Lemma 7.7 immediately implies the following lemma.

Lemma 7.8 (ConnSub). Suppose fully dynamic ConnSub on a graph with n nodes and Õ(n) edges
can be done with (amortized) update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt ) preprocessing time.
Then assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n1−ε ) for all ε > 0.
   Similarly, suppose that decremental/incremental ConnSub on a graph with n nodes and Õ(n)
edges can be done with worst case update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt ) preprocessing
time. Then assuming the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n1−ε ) for all ε > 0.

   Finally, we prove the bounds for ∅-PP.

Lemma 7.9 (∅-PP). Suppose that dynamic ∅-PP over a universe of size n can be done with
(amortized) update time u(n) and query time q(n) and O(nt ) preprocessing time. Then assuming
the SETH, max{u(n), q(n)} ≥ Ω(n1−ε ) for all ε > 0.

Proof. Pick δ < 1/t, δ > 0. As before, let U be a subset of the CNF formula variables V of size δn.
The universe over which we will create our sets will be [2δn ]. The preprocessing time will hence be
2δnt = O(2(1−ε)n ) for some ε > 0.
    For every clause c, create a set Xc containing j if and only if the jth partial assignment to the
variables in U satisfies c.
    Now we proceed in stages. In each stage we consider a partial assignment φ to the variables in
V \ U . Using O(n) updates we create the set Xφ = ∩c : φ does not satisfy c Xc . We then ask whether
Xφ = ∅. If Xφ 6= ∅, return that the formula is satisfiable. Otherwise, move on to the next stage.
    Notice that Xφ 6= ∅ if and only if there is a partial assignment α to the variables in U such
that α satisfies all clauses that φ does not satisfy, i.e. α · φ is a satisfying assignment. Otherwise,
if Xφ = ∅, then φ cannot be completed to a satisfying assignment.
    The number of queries and updates is O(2n(1−δ) n). Hence if there is some ε > 0 such that
u(N ), q(N ) ≤ N 1−ε , we could solve CNF-SAT asymptotically in time

                                   n2n(1−δ) · 2nδ(1−ε) = n2n(1−δε) ,
                    ′
and this is O(2n(1−ε ) ) time for any constant 0 < ε′ < δε, thus violating the SETH.                 




                                                  28
8    Lower bounds from Triangle
In this section we prove our results based on the hardness of Triangle detection.
Reminder of Theorem 5.3 If for some δ, ε > 0, we can solve either of

    • fully dynamic st-Reach, BPMatch, 17-BPM, or SC, with preprocessing time O(m1+δ−ε ),
      amortized update and query times O(m2δ−ε ), or

    • incremental or decremental st-Reach, BPMatch, 17-BPM, or SC, with preprocessing time
      O(m1+δ−ε ), worst case update and query times O(m2δ−ε ), or

    • fully dynamic st-SubConn or 5-BPM with preprocessing time O(m1+δ−ε ), amortized update
      time O(mδ−ε ), and amortized query time O(m2δ−ε ), or

    • incremental or decremental 5-BPM with preprocessing time O(m1+δ−ε ), worst case update
      time O(mδ−ε ), and worst case query time O(m2δ−ε ), or

    • incremental st-SubConn, or decremental st-SubConn in dense graphs, with preprocessing time
      O(m1+δ−ε ), worst case update time O(mδ−ε ), and worst case query time O(m2δ−ε ), or

    • ∅-PP over k sets and a universe of size O(k) with preprocessing time O(k 1+δ−ε ), amortized
      update and query time O(k δ−ε ), or

    • for δ > 1/3, PP over k sets and a universe of size O(k) with preprocessing time O(k1+δ−ε ),
      amortized update and query time O(k δ−ε ),

then Conjecture 4 is false for this choice of δ.
     In some of the reductions below, we will reduce Triangle to O(n) updates and queries of the
dynamic problem. To get a lower bound for the dynamic problem using Conjecture 4, we show how
for Triangle detection, a running time of the form O(n · T (m)) implies a running time of the form
T ′ (m).

Lemma 8.1. If there is an O(nmε ) time algorithm for triangle detection for graphs on n nodes
and m edges, then there is an O(m1+ε/2 ) time algorithm for triangle detection for graphs on m
edges (and arbitrary number of nodes). And similarly, if there is an O(mnε ) time algorithm, then
                    ε
there is an O(m1+ 1+ε ) time algorithm as well.

Proof. First, we assume that the graph is connected, otherwise work on each connected component
separately. Suppose there is an O(nmε ) time algorithm and let ∆ = mε/2 . In O(m∆) = O(m1+ε/2 )
time we can find any triangle that contains a node of degree at most ∆ just by going over all edges
incident to low degree nodes x and then going over the rest of the neighbors of x. If no triangle is
found, then any triangle has only high degree nodes. The number of high degree nodes is O(m/∆),
thus we can find a triangle on them in O((m/∆)mε ) = O(m1+ε/2 ) time.
                                                                                            ε
    In case there is an O(mnε ) time algorithm, we apply the same argument with ∆ = m 1+ε . 

    As a corollary to the above Lemma, we obtain that if there is no O(m1+δ ) time algorithm for
triangle detection, then there is also no O(mnδ/(1−δ) ) or O(m2δ n) time algorithm either.
    We start by reducing Triangle to st-Reach. In Lemmas 6.2 and 6.4 we have reduced st-Reach
to both BPMatch and SC, which allows us to immediately get reductions to BPMatch and SC too.

                                                   29
Note that the reduction below can be used to reduce k-Cycle detection in directed graphs to O(n)
updates of st-Reach. Since solving k-Cycle detection in time O(m1+δ−ε ) could be a harder problem
than solving Triangle detection, i.e. the k = 3 case, in that time, this gives a lower bound for the
dynamic problems based on a perhaps weaker assumption.

Lemma 8.2 (Triangle to st-Reach). Suppose that st-Reach has a fully dynamic algorithm with
preprocessing time p(m, n), update time u(m, n) and query time q(m, n). Then, Triangle detection
can be solved in O(n · (u(m, n) + q(m, n)) + p(m, n)) time.

Proof. Let G = (V, E) be the graph for which we want to detect a triangle. Begin by creating a
4-partite graph H of partitions A, B, C and A′ , each containing a copy of each vertex of G. Let the
copy of vertex x in partition Y be denoted by xY .
    For every edge (u, v) in G, add directed edges (uA , vB ), (uB , vC ), (uC , vA′ ). Add two nodes s
and t.
    Now we have a stage for every node x of G. In the stage for x, add the directed edges (s, xA ) and
(xA′ , t). Ask the query to check whether t is reachable from s. If so, there are yB ∈ B, zC ∈ C so
that (x, y), (y, z), (z, x) ∈ E and hence G has a triangle through x. Otherwise, there is no triangle
in G containing x. After the query has been answered, if no triangle containing x was found, the
edges (s, xA ) and (xA′ , t) are removed and the next stage begins.
    The total number of queries and updates is O(n), and hence the time to solve Triangle Detection
is O(n · (u(m, n) + q(m, n)) + p(m, n)).                                                             

    The above proof immediately implies a worst case insertion time bound for incremental al-
gorithms, but it is not immediately clear how to prove the same relationship with decremental
algorithms.

Lemma 8.3 (Triangle to decremental st-Reach). Suppose that st-Reach has a decremental algo-
rithm with preprocessing time p(m, n), worst case update time u(m, n) and query time q(m, n).
Then, Triangle detection can be solved in O(n(u(m, n) + q(m, n)) + p(m, n)) time.

Proof. We want to simulate the proof of the fully dynamic case using a small number of deletions
(and undeletions).
    To do this, assume that n is a power of 2, say n = 2r and create a complete binary tree Ts
rooted at s with leaves the nodes of A. Direct the edges of Ts away from s. Similarly, create a
complete binary tree Tt rooted at t with leaves the nodes of A′ . Direct the edges of Tt towards t.
    Associate the nodes of G with the integers in [n]. Without loss of generality, stage x of the
dynamic algorithm corresponds to node x. Now, consider stage x, and the previous stage y = x − 1.
We will show how to update Ts ; Tt is analogous.
    Consider the paths Px and Py in Ts from s to xA and yA , respectively. In order for stage x to
ensure that the only path from s to A is Px , it is sufficient to ensure that for every edge (u, v) on
Px , the edge (u, v ′ ) from u to the sibling of v in Ts is removed in stage x.
    Now suppose that this is accomplished for Py in stage y = x − 1. Px and Py coincide from s
down to the least common ancestor f of xA and yA . Also, xA is the leftmost descendent of the
right child of f and yA is the rightmost descendent of the left child of f .
    We update Ts as follows. We assume (inductively) that the edge deletions in stage y proceed
in order of increasing distance from s on Py . Let Sf be the subsequence of edge deletions starting
with the edge from f to its left child. First, in stage x, we undo all edge deletions in Sf in reverse


                                                  30
order of their deletion in stage y. The last edge undeleted is hence the edge from f to its left child.
Each undeletion is performed by undoing the operations which were caused by the deletion.
    After all undeletions, we start deleting the edges away from Px starting with the edge from f
to its right child and then going down towards x along Px . (I.e. for each edge (u, v) on Px where
u is a descendent of f , we delete the edge (u, v ′ ) to the sibling v ′ of v in Ts .)
    The correctness of the procedure is clear. Here we analyze the total number of deletions and
undeletions over the course of all stages. The deletion/undeletion procedure corresponds exactly
to a DFS tree traversal of Ts . Each edge of Ts is deleted and undeleted exactly once. Hence the
number of update operations is O(n) overall.                                                         

    As a corollary from the reductions and from Lemma 8.1, if any of BPMatch, st-Reach or SC
admit dynamic algorithms with u(m, n), q(m, n) ≤ O(mε ), then triangle detection can be solved in
O(m1+ε/2 ) time. If ε < 0.82, this would imply an improvement over the fastest algorithm that we
currently have for the triangle problem in sparse graphs. The fastest known algorithm for triangle
detection would run in Θ(m4/3 ) time even if the matrix multiplication exponent is 2. If ε < 2/3
above, then this would imply an entirely new approach for the triangle problem in sparse graphs.
    Chan [20] observed that BMM and Triangle detection can be reduced to O(m) updates and
queries to the Subgraph Connectivity problem. We give an alternative construction that allows us
to reduce Triangle detection to O(m) updates and n queries of st-SubConn. We will use a version
of this construction to reduce Triangle detection to 5-BPM.

Lemma 8.4 (Triangle to st-SubConn). Suppose that st-SubConn has either

   • a fully dynamic algorithm with preprocessing time p(m, n), update time u(m, n), and query
     time q(m, n), or

   • an incremental algorithm with preprocessing time p(m, n), worst case update time u(m, n),
     and query time q(m, n).

Then triangle detection can be solved in O(m · u(m, n) + n · q(m, n) + p(m, n)) time.
   If st-SubConn has a decremental algorithm with preprocessing time p(m, n), worst case update
time u(m, n), and query time q(m, n), then triangle detection can be solved in O(n2 · u(m, n) + n ·
q(m, n) + p(m, n)) time.

Proof. Given a graph G on m edges and n nodes we create a bipartite graph H on partitions A
and B so that for every vertex v of G we add two copies vA ∈ A and vB ∈ B and for every edge
(u, v) in G we add the edge (uA , vB ). We add two additional vertices s and t so that s has edges
to all nodes in A and t has edges to all nodes of B. All vertices of A and B are originally turned
off and s and t are turned on.
    Now, the proof proceeds in stages. Each stage corresponds to a vertex u in G. When u is
considered, for every neighbor v of u in G, we activate vA and vB . After the 2d(u) activations, we
ask the query whether s and t are connected. After the query, we undo the activations and move on
to the next stage. If s and t are connected during the stage for node u, then there exist two nodes
x, y in G that are neighbors of u and such that (x, y) is an edge, i.e. u is in a triangle. Otherwise,
if s and t are not connected, there is no edge crossing the cut between A and B and hence there
is no pair of nodes that are both neighbors of u and have an edge between them, i.e. no triangle
contains u.


                                                  31
    That is, with O(m) updates and n queries we solve the triangle detection problem. The algo-
rithm works for incremental algorithms as well, but assumes that the updates are worst case. For
the decremental case, we perform O(n2 ) updates – originally all nodes are active, and to simulate
the activation of the neighbors of u, we just deactivate the nonneighbors of u.                 

Lemma 8.5 (Triangle to ∅-PP). Suppose that dynamic ∅-PP on a universe of size n and up to
k = O(m) subsets can be solved with preprocessing time p(n, k), (amortized) update time u(n, k)
and query time q(n, k), then Triangle detection on n node and m edge graphs can be solved in
O(p(n, k) + m · (u(n, k) + q(n, k))) time.

Proof. Given a graph G = (V, E) on n nodes and m edges in which we want to find triangles, we
associate each node with a number in [n] and define the sets Xu = {v | v ∈P  N (u)} ⊆ [n]. Note
that u ∈/ Xu because u ∈
                       / N (u). Note that these sets can be constructed in v O(d(v)) = O(m)
time. We preprocess the sets {Xu }u∈V in p(n, k) time. Then, we go over the edges (v, w) ∈ E
and compute the set Xv ∩ Xw then ask the query to check whether this set is empty. If one of the
answers was “no”, then there is a node x ∈ N (v) ∩ N (w) and we have found a triangle and we
output “yes”. This computation takes O(m · (u(n, k) + q(n, k))) time.                         

   As a corollary, Conjecture 4 with constant δ implies that any algorithm for ∅-PP on k sets,
and universe of size at most k has preprocessing time k 1+δ−o(1) or update or query time kδ−o(1) .
Similarly, “Conjecture” 5 implies that the preprocessing time cannot be O(k3/2−ε ), and the update
and query times cannot be O(k1/2−ε ).
   To get the reduction to PP we need to do some extra work, but we obtain the same conditional
lower bounds whenever δ > 1/3.

Lemma 8.6 (Triangle to PP). Suppose that dynamic PP on a universe of size n and up to k
subsets can be solved with preprocessing time p(n, k), (amortized) update time u(n, k) and query
time q(n, k), then Triangle detection on n node and m edge graphs can be solved in Õ(m2/3 n +
p(n, k) + m · (u(n, k) + q(n, k))) time, where k = O(m).

    We note that due to Lemma 8.1 we can replace the m2/3 n term above by m4/3 , and this term
is negligible for any application of Conjecture 4 with δ > 1/3.

Proof. Let ∆ = m1/3 . Our reduction will have two phases. In the first phase we look for triangles
that have two nodes with degree less than ∆ and in the second phase we check if there is a triangle
with a node of degree at least ∆. If the graph contains a triangle, one of these cases will happen.

Phase 1. Start by picking a random universal hash function h : [n] → [N ], where N = c · ∆2 =
O(m2/3 ) for a large enough c. In fact, we will need O(log n) such hash functions.
    For every j ∈ [N ] we create the set Xj = {a | ∀c ∈ N (a) : h(c) 6= j} ⊆ [n]. These sets can be
computed in O(n · ∆2 ) = O(nm2/3 ) time, and we preprocess them in time p(n, N ). Then, for every
node b ∈ V we compute the set Yb = ∩c∈N (b) Xh(c) using d(b) intersection updates. To compute all
the sets Yb we need O(m · u(n, k)) time, where k is the total number of sets created over the course
of the reduction. Finally, we go over the edges (a, b) of the graph for which both d(a) < ∆ and
d(b) < ∆, and ask the query “is a in Yb ?”. If one of the answers is “no” we have found a triangle
and we return “yes”. This final computation takes O(m · q(n, k)) time. The total number of subsets
can be bounded by k = O(m).


                                                32
    To see the correctness of the reduction, note that a ∈   / Yb if and only if there exists a node
c ∈ N (b) such that a ∈  / Xc . This happens if and only if there exist two nodes c ∈ N (b) and
c′ ∈ N (a) such that h(c) = h(c′ ). Since d(a), d(b) < ∆ we know that |N (a) ∪ N (b)| < 2∆ and if
N (a) ∩ N (b) = ∅ then the existence of such nodes c, c′ would be unlikely by the properties of the
universal hash function. To make the probability of a false negative smaller we pick O(log n) hash
functions and run a copy of the above procedure for each one in parallel. We return “yes” when
checking a pair (a, b) only if a ∈
                                 / Yb using all the hash functions. Thus, with high probability, we
output “yes” if and only if N (a) ∩ N (b) 6= ∅ and there is a triangle in G.

Phase 2. To check for triangles with a high-degree node, we proceed in a similar way as above, but
we do not use hashing. Instead, we create a set Xj for every node j with d(j) ≥ ∆. Since there are
at most O(m/∆) nodes with degree ≥ ∆, the number of sets we start with is still O(m2/3 ) = O(N )
as before.
    In more detail, we enumerate the high-degree nodes H = {v ∈ V | d(v) ≥ ∆} and associate
each one with a number in [N ]. Then, we create the sets Xj = {a | j ∈ / N (a)} ⊆ [n] for j ∈ [N ].
This takes time O(n · m/∆) = O(nm2/3 ), and we preprocess the sets as before in time O(p(n, N )).
From now on we proceed exactly like in phase 1, with the exception that we do not restrict the
queries to edges (a, b) for which the nodes are of low degree. The analysis is similar except that
there are no false negatives.                                                                   

8.1   Triangle to matchings without short augmenting paths
    We now show how to reduce Triangle detection directly to dynamic matching, giving graphs in
which the size of any matching M that does not have length k augmenting paths, for some constant
k, can help us detect triangles.
    We give two reductions. The first one uses O(m) updates and n queries to an algorithm for
k-BPM where k = 5. The second one uses fewer updates, only O(n), but needs to use an algorithm
for k-BPM where k = 17. We start with the first reduction as a warm up for the quite longer proof
of the second reduction.
Lemma 8.7 (Triangle to 5-BPM). Given any algorithm for fully dynamic 5-BPM with preprocess-
ing, update, and query times p(m, n), u(m, n), and q(m, n), respectively, we can get an algorithm
for Triangle that runs in time O(p(m, n) + m · u(m, n) + n · q(m, n)) .

Proof. Let G = (V, E) be the graph for which we want to detect a triangle. Begin by creating a
                                ¯ J and J,
4-layer graph H with layers I, I,           ¯ each containing a copy of each vertex of G. For every
edge (u, v) in G, add the edge (uI , vJ ) to H. Add edges (uI¯, uI ) and (uJ¯, uJ ) for each vertex of G.
Now we have a stage for every node x of G. Go over the neighborhood of x in G and for every
node y ∈ N (x), remove the edges (yI¯, yI ) and (yJ¯, yJ ) from H. Ask the query to get the size of a
matching M that does not admit length 5 augmenting paths. If |M | > 2(n − |N (x)|), then as we
will show below, G has triangle through x. Otherwise, there is no triangle in G containing x. After
the query has been answered, if no triangle was found, we add the edges (yI¯, yI ) and (yJ¯, yJ ), for
every node y ∈ N (x) back to H and the next stage begins.
    Note that H remains a bipartite graph P at all times, and that it has O(n) nodes and O(m + n)
edges. The total number of updates is x∈V (G) 2d(x) = O(m) and the number of queries is O(n),
and hence the time to solve Triangle detection is O(p(m, n) + m · u(m, n)) + n · q(m, n)).



                                                   33
    We claim that x participates in a triangle in G if and only if the answer to the query at the stage
of x will give |M | > 2(n − |N (x)|). The key reason for this is the simple fact that x participates
in a triangle if and only if there are two nodes y1 , y2 ∈ N (x) that have an edge between them.
Assume that x is not in any triangle, and therefore, all edges in H when we ask the query have
an endpoint that is either zI or zJ for some node z ∈        / N (x). Thus, the size of any matching in
H is bounded by the number of these nodes, which is exactly 2(n − |N (x)|). On the other hand,
assume that x participates in a triangle (x, u, v) in G and let M be a matching without length 5
augmenting paths. We denote unmatched edges (u, v) ∈ E by u                  v and matched edges by u → v,
so that an augmenting path always has the form (v1             v2 → v3 · · · vk−1   vk ). First, note that all
nodes zI for z ∈ / N (x) must be matched in M , since otherwise the length 1 path (zI¯              zI ) is an
augmenting path, and moreover, zI cannot be matched to a node wJ such that w ∈                 / N (x), since
otherwise there is a length 3 augmenting path, (zI¯          zI → wJ       wJ¯). The same arguments apply
for nodes zJ in H, where z ∈    / N (x). Therefore, by counting only edges in M that are adjacent to
nodes zI , zJ for z ∈/ N (x) we get 2(n − |N (x)|), and now we argue that M must contain at least
one edge of the form (u′I , vJ′ ) for u′ , v ′ ∈ N (x), which will imply that |M | ≥ 2(n − |N (x)|) + 1.
Since (x, u, v) is a triangle, the edge e = (uI , vJ ) is in H, and if e ∈ M we are done. If, however, e
is not matched, then both uI and vJ must be matched to nodes wJ = M ate(uI ), zI = M ate(vJ ).
If w ∈ N (x) or z ∈ N (x), then we have found an edge of the form (u′I , vJ′ ) for u′ , v ′ ∈ N (x) and
we are done. Otherwise, w, z ∈    / N (x) and we get a contradiction since M will admit the following
length 5 augmenting path (zI¯        zI → vJ       uI → wJ      wJ¯).
                                                                                                             

   The construction of the graph H in the proof above was an adaptation of the one in the proof of
Lemma 8.4 to the matching problem. In the next proof, we adapt the construction from Lemma 8.2.
Lemma 8.8 (Triangle to 17-BPM). Given any algorithm for fully dynamic 17-BPM with prepro-
cessing, update, and query times p(m, n), u(m, n), and q(m, n), respectively, we can get an algorithm
for Triangle that runs in time O(p(m, n) + n · (u(m, n) + q(m, n))) .
Proof. Let G = (V, E) be the graph for which we want to detect a triangle. Begin by creating
an 8-layer graph H with layers A1 , Ā1 , B, B̄, C, C̄, A2 , and Ā2 , each containing a copy uX of each
vertex u of G. For every edge (u, v) in G, add the edges (uA¯1 , vB ), (uB̄ , vC ), (uC̄ , vA2 ) to H. Add
edges (uA1 , uA¯1 ), (uB , uB̄ ), (uC , uC̄ ) and (uA2 , uA¯2 ) for each vertex u of G.
    Now we have a stage for every node x of G. We start the stage by removing the two edges
(xA1 , xA¯1 ) and (xA2 , xA¯2 ), then we ask a query to get the size of a matching M that does not admit
length 17 augmenting paths. If |M | > 4n − 2, then as we will show below, G has triangle through x.
Otherwise, there is no triangle in G containing x. After the query has been answered, if a triangle
was not found, we add the edges (xA1 , xA¯1 ) and (xA2 , xA¯2 ) back to H and the next stage begins.
    Note that H remains a bipartite graph at all times, and that it has O(n) nodes and O(m + n)
edges. The total number of updates and queries is O(n), and hence the time to solve Triangle
detection is O(p(m + n, n) + n · (u(m + n, n) + q(m + n, n))).
    We claim that x participates in a triangle in G if and only if the answer to the query at the
stage of x is that |M | > 4n − 2, in fact, |M | = 4n − 1. The key reason is that there is a triangle
(x, y, z) in G if and only if there is a path (xA¯1 − yB − yB̄ − zC − zC̄ − xA2 ) in H.
    Let us start with the easier direction, and show that if x does not participate in any triangles
in G, then |M | ≤ 4n − 2, for any matching M . First, note that there are two isolated vertices, xA1
and xA¯2 that cannot be matched. We will show that there will be another node in H that is not

                                                     34
matched in M , which would show that |M | < (8n − 3)/2, and therefore |M | ≤ 4n − 2. To see this,
consider the node xA¯1 , and if it is free (i.e. not matched) we are done, we found a third unmatched
node. Otherwise, let yB be M ate(xA¯1 ), and consider the node yB̄ . Again, if yB̄ is free, we are done,
and otherwise, let zC = M ate(yB̄ ). Finally, consider zC̄ , and if it is not free, let x′A2 = M ate(zC̄ ),
and note that x′ 6= x, since otherwise, we have found a triangle (x, y, z), and since x′A¯2 does not
have any neighbors except for x′A2 , it cannot be matched in M and we found a third free node.
    For the other direction, let (x, y, z) be a triangle in G and M be a matching without length 17
augmenting paths. We will show that |M | = 4n − 1 and every node except for the two isolated
vertices xA1 and xA¯2 will be matched. As in the proof of Lemma 8.7, we denote unmatched edges
(u, v) ∈ E by u       v and matched edges by u → v, so that an augmenting path always has the form
(v1    v2 → v3 · · · vk−1    vk ).
Claim 1. For every node u 6= x, uA¯1 and uA2 will be matched in M .

Proof. If uA¯1 is free, then uA1 is also free, and M has a length 1 augmenting path (uA1                              uA¯1 ).
The argument for uA2 is analogous.                                                                                        

    The main claim is the following.
Claim 2. For every node u 6= x, the edges (uA1 , uA¯1 ) and (uA2 , uA¯2 ) are in M .

Proof. Assume for contradiction that (uA1 , uA¯1 ) ∈              / M , and we will show an augmenting path for
M of length up to 17. The argument for the case that (uA2 , uA¯2 ) ∈                   / M is analogous.
     Let yB′ = M ate(u ). If y ′ is free, we are done, since we found the following length 3 augmenting
                            ¯
                           A1        B̄
path (uA1         uA¯1 → yB   ′       ′ ), thus, from now on assume y ′ is matched. Let z ′ = M ate(y ′ ),
                                    yB̄                                         B̄                           C            B̄
                   ′
and again, if zC̄ is free we are done because of the length 5 augmenting path (uA1                                     ′
                                                                                                               uA¯1 → yB
  ′ → z′
yB̄                ′ ). Thus, let x′
                 zC̄                                    ′                          ′
          C                            A2 = M ate(zC̄ ), and note that x must equal x, since otherwise we
have found a length 7 augmenting path (uA1                         uA¯1 → yB ′         ′ → z′
                                                                                     yB̄               ′ → x′
                                                                                                     zC̄              x′A¯ ).
                                                                                              C                 A2         2
Thus, we have reached xA2 in our walk from the free node uA1 , and now we will continue the walk
towards xA¯1 , using the nodes y, z that make the triangle (x, y, z) in G under our assumption. We
will show the analysis only for the case that y ′ 6= y and z ′ 6= z, and remark that in case y ′ = y or
z ′ = z, one can find shorter augmenting paths using the same arguments.
     The node zC̄ cannot be free, since otherwise we have the augmenting path (uA1                                     ′
                                                                                                               uA¯1 → yB
  ′
yB̄ → zC ′       ′
                zC̄ → xA2       zC̄ ). There are two options for M ate(zC̄ ): either it is in the A2 -layer, or it
is zC . In the first case, we are done, since if we let x′A2 = M ate(zC̄ ), we get that x′ 6= x and we have
the following augmenting path (uA1                 uA¯1 → yB    ′        ′ → z′
                                                                       yB̄               ′ → x
                                                                                       zC̄             zC̄ → x′A2     x′A¯ ).
                                                                               C               A2                          2
Thus, assume M ate(zC̄ ) = zC , and similarly, we walk back to yB̄ and note that it cannot be free,
since otherwise we have the augmenting path (uA1                       uA¯1 → yB ′         ′ → z′
                                                                                         yB̄            ′ →x
                                                                                                       zC̄            zC̄ →
                                                                                                C               A2
zC      yB̄ ). Again, there are two cases for M ate(yB̄ ): either it is zC for some z 6= z ′ , z, or it is yB .
                                                                                      ′′            ′′

In the first case, we are done, since either zC̄       ′′ is free and we found an augmenting path that ends in
                                         ′
it, or it is matched to a node xA2 = M ate(zC̄             ′′ ) where x′ 6= x, in which case we have the following

augmenting path (uA1             uA¯1 → yB   ′       ′ → z′
                                                   yB̄                  ′ → x
                                                                      zC̄                zC̄ → zC      yB̄ → zC̄ ′′    ′′ →
                                                                                                                      zC
                                                                C              A2
  ′
xA 2        ′
          xA¯2 ). Thus, assume M ate(yB̄ ) = yB , and walk back to xA¯1 . If xA¯1 is free, we have the
following augmenting path (uA1                uA¯1 → yB  ′        ′ → z′
                                                                 yB̄             ′ →x
                                                                               zC̄              zC̄ → zC        yB̄ → yB
                                                                           C               A2
xA¯1 ). Otherwise, we keep walking forward towards part A2 again, and this time, we cannot reach
xA2 again, and therefore we will be able to end at a free node in part Ā2 . Let yB                        ′′ = M ate(x ),
                                                                                                                         A¯1
and consider yB̄    ′′ which has to be matched since otherwise we found an augmenting path that ends




                                                             35
in it. Let zC ′′ = M ate(y ′′ ), and similarly, consider z ′′ which has to be matched as well. Note that
                            B̄                              C̄
y, y ′ and y ′′ are all distinct, since each is incident to a different matched edge, and similarly z, z ′
and z ′′ are distinct. Finally, let x′A2 = M ate(zC̄ ′′ ), and since x′ 6= x, we get the following length 17

augmenting path (uA1           uA¯1 → yB ′     ′
                                              yB̄ → zC ′       ′ → x
                                                             zC̄            zC̄ → zC    yB̄ → yB      xA¯1 →
                                                                     A2
 ′′
yB       ′′
        yB̄ → zC ′′     ′′
                      zC̄ → xA2′       ′
                                     xA¯2 ).
                                                                                                           

    Note that by Claim 2, we know that there can be at most one matched edge between parts
Ā1 and B, and at most one matched edge between parts C̄ and A2 . These edges will have to be
adjacent to xA¯1 or xA2 . Now we can also prove the following claim.
Claim 3. All the nodes in parts B and C̄ must be matched by M .

Proof. We will prove the claim for part B, and the proof for part C̄ is symmetric. Let us assume
for contradiction that node uB is free. In this case, the node uB̄ must be matched to some node
vC = M ate(uB̄ ), and the node vC̄ must be matched, since otherwise we have an augmenting path
(uB       uB̄ → vC      vC̄ ). And since, by Claim 2, we know that every matched edge between parts
C̄ and A2 must be adjacent to xA2 , we get that xA2 = M ate(vC̄ ). Now we will start walking back
towards xA¯1 . We will assume that y 6= u and z 6= v, and remark that otherwise the proof is similar.
     Consider zC̄ and note that either it is matched or we found the augmenting path (uB                   uB̄ →
vC      vC̄ → xA2      zC̄ ). Therefore, it must be the case that zC = M ate(zC̄ ). For a similar reason,
yB̄ must be matched, and if M ate(yB̄ ) is not yB but some node zC             ′ , we will have that z ′ is free,
                                                                                                        C̄
and we find the augmenting path (uB                 uB̄ → vC      vC̄ → xA2       zC̄ → zC     yB̄ → zC ′     ′ ).
                                                                                                             zC̄
Therefore, M ate(yB̄ ) = yB , and if xA¯1 was free, we could complete an augmenting path by finishing
with the unmatched edge yB              xA¯1 . Therefore, let u′B = M ate(xA¯1 ), where u′ 6= u, y. Note that
if u′B̄ is free, we would have the augmenting path (uB                uB̄ → vC        vC̄ → xA2     zC̄ → zC
yB̄ → yB        xA¯1 → u′B     u′B̄ ). Finally, let vC′ = M ate(u′ ) where v ′ 6= v, z, and since v ′ cannot be
                                                                   B̄                               C̄
matched to a node in part A2 , or we would have two matched edges between parts C̄ and A2 , we
conclude that vC̄   ′ must be free, and we found the length 15 augmenting path (u                   uB̄ → vC
                                                                                              B
vC̄ → xA2        zC̄ → zC      yB̄ → yB        xA¯1 → u′B    u′B̄ → vC′     ′ ) – a contradiction.
                                                                           vC̄
                                                                                                                

   By Claims 3 and 2 we know that there exists at most one matched edge between parts B̄ and
C, since at most one node uB from B can be matched to a node different than uB̄ , yet all nodes in
part B are matched, which means that at most one node in part B̄ can be matched to a node in C.
Finally, we can prove that all the nodes in H, except for the two isolated nodes, will be matched
in M .
Claim 4. xA¯1 will be matched to some node uB , and xA2 will be matched to some node vC̄ .
Moreover, the edge (uB̄ , vC ) will be in M .

Proof. We will show that each of the following cases gives a contradiction to the assumption that
M does not have length 17 augmenting paths.

Case 1: both xA¯1 and xA2 are unmatched. In this case, yB must be matched to yB̄ and zC
to zC̄ , and we have the following augmenting path (xA¯1 yB → yB̄ zC → zC̄ xA2 ).




                                                       36
Case 2: xA¯1 is matched to uB but xA2 is free. Note that in this case, there are no matched
edges between parts C̄ and A2 , and therefore every node vC̄ has to be matched with vC , and there
will not be any matched edges between parts B̄ and C either. Thus, note that uB̄ is free. The
argument will be slightly different according to whether u = y or u 6= y. If u = y, then we find
the augmenting path (uB̄ = yB̄       zC → zC̄     xA2 ), while if u 6= y, we have a slightly longer
augmenting path (uB̄     uB → xA¯1     yB → yB̄    zC → zC̄     xA2 ).

Case 3: xA2 is matched to vC̄ but xA¯1 is free.        This case is symmetric to the second case.

Case 4: uB = M ate(xA¯1 ) and vC = M ate(xA2 ), but (uB̄ , vC ) ∈        / M . In this case, note that
there are no matched edges between parts B̄ and C, and both uB̄ and vC are free. Therefore,
(uB̄ , vC ) ∈
            / E(H) and (u, v) ∈  / E, which implies that either u 6= y or v 6= z (or both), since
(y, z) ∈ E. We show that we get a contradiction if u 6= y, and the argument for the case that
v 6= z is similar. If u 6= y then the edge (yB , yB̄ ) is in M . If v = z, then zC is free and we have
the augmenting path (uB̄        uB → xA¯1    yB → yB̄         zC ). Otherwise, v 6= z, and we have the
augmenting path (uB̄       uB → xA¯1    yB → yB̄        zC → zC̄     xA2 → vC̄    vC ).
                                                                                                    

   Therefore, we proved that every node except for the two isolated nodes xA1 , xA¯2 must be
matched in M , which implies that |M | = 4n − 1.                                          


9    Lower bounds from APSP
In this section we prove our APSP hardness results.
Reminder of Theorem 5.4 If for some ε > 0 we can solve decremental or incremental st-SP or
BPWMatch with preprocessing time O(n3−ε ) and amortized update and query times O(n2−ε ), then
Conjecture 2 is false.
    In the Min-Weight-Triangle problem we are given an edge weighted graph where the edges
are in [M ] and are asked to return the minimum weight of a triangle in it. Vassilevska Williams
and Williams [93] showed that an O(n3−ε ) algorithm for the Min-Weight-Triangle problem, where
M = O(nc ) for some ε > 0 and large enough c, would yield a truly subcubic algorithm for the All
Pairs Shortest Paths problem and violate Conjecture 2.
    Roditty and Zwick [79] gave a reduction from APSP to O(n) updates and O(n2 ) queries of
decremental or incremental single source shortest paths(SSSP). By using a similar construction,
yet going through the Min-Weight-Triangle problem, we are able to strengthen their result in two
ways. First, we reduce the number of queries to O(n) instead of O(n2 ), implying a higher lower
bound on the query time, and second, our reduction is to the s, t-shortest path problem, which is
at least as easy as the SSSP problem.
    In the unweighted case, Roditty and Zwick [79] show that BMM can be reduced to O(n)
updates and O(n2 ) queries to the unweighted incremental or decremental SSSP problem, and using
a similar modification to their proof, we can show that Triangle detection reduces to O(n) updates
and queries to the unweighted incremental or decremental st-SP problem.
Lemma 9.1. Min-Weight-Triangle on a graph with n nodes and m edges can be reduced to O(n)
updates and queries of decremental or incremental st-SP on a graph with O(n) nodes and O(m)
edges.

                                                 37
Proof. Let G = (V, E) with weight function w : E → [M ] be the edge-weighted graph for which
we want to find the minimum weight triangle. Begin by creating a 4-partite graph H of partitions
A, B, C and A′ , each containing a copy of each vertex of G. For every edge (u, v) in G of weight
w, add edges (uA , vB ), (uB , vC ), (uC , vA′ ) and set the weight of each of them to w + 2M . Add two
nodes s and t. Let ui ∈ V be the ith node in V , and add edges (s, ui,A ) and (ui,A′ , t) both of
weight 3i · M . Now we have a stage for every node ui of G, where we find the minimum weight of a
triangle that the node ui is a part of. Start from i = 1 and set the current minimum to tmin = 3M .
At stage i ∈ [n], ask the query about the length of the shortest s, t-path in H, let it be y, and
look at z = y − 2 · 3i · M − 3 · 2M . We show below that either z equals the minimum weight of a
triangle containing ui in G, or z > 3M and ui is not a part of any triangle in G. After the query
is answered, check if z < tmin and if so, update the current minimum tmin ← z, and remove the
edges (s, ui,A ), (ui,A′ , t) from H and go on to stage i + 1. After the last stage, tmin will contain the
minimum weight of a triangle in G.
    The total number of queries and updates is O(n), the number of nodes in H is O(n) and the
number of edges is O(m).
    For correctness, consider the shortest s, t-path in H at stage i. Any s, t-path P will have the
form s − ui1 ,A − (e1 , . . . , ek ) − ui2 ,A′ − t, where k ≥ 3 is odd and i1 , i2 ≥ i, and its weight will be

                                                   X
                                                   k
                              wH (P ) = 3i1 M +      (w(ei ) + 2M ) + 3i2 M
                                                   i=1

Let ∆ = (ui , ub , uc ) be the minimum weight triangle in G that contains ui and compare wH (P )
with the weight of the following s, t-path Pmin in H, s − ui,A − ub,B − uc,C − ui,A′ − t,

                   wH (Pmin ) = 3iM + w(∆) + 3 · 2M + 3iM = (6i + 6)M + w(∆)

Assume for contradiction that wH (P ) < wH (Pmin    P), and note that it must be the case that i1 =
i2 = i, since otherwise wH (P ) ≥ (6i + 3)M + ki=1 (w(ei ) + 2M ), which even if w(ei ) = 1 for
all the edges in P can be lower bounded by wH (P ) ≥ (6i + 9)M + 3, whereas wH (Pmin ) ≤
(6i + 3)M + 6M =        P(6i + 9)M . Furthermore, it must be the case that k = 3, since otherwise
wH (P ) ≥ 6iM + 5i=1 (w(ei ) + 2M ) ≥ (6i + 10)M + 5 > (6i + 9)M ≥ wH (Pmin ). Finally,
we conclude that P must be of the form s − ui,A − ub′ ,B − uc′ ,C − ui,A′ − t, which implies that
∆′ = (ui , ub′ , uc′ ) is a triangle in G with weight w(∆′ ) < w(∆) which is a contradiction to our
choice of ∆.
    To get a reduction to the incremental problem, use the same reduction but perform the stages
in reverse order starting from i = n and adding edges every time to move down from stage i to
(i − 1).                                                                                          

   Next, we use our reduction from st-SP to the maximum weight perfect matching in bipartite
graphs from Lemma 6.3 to prove hardness for BWMatch.

Lemma 9.2. Min-Weight-Triangle on a graph with n nodes and m edges can be reduced to O(n)
updates and queries of decremental or incremental BWMatch on a graph with O(n) nodes and
O(m + n) edges.




                                                     38
10      Lower bounds from 3SUM
In this section we prove the following 3SUM hardness results. The proof is divided into the lemmas
below.
Reminder of Theorem 5.2 If for some ε > 0 and 1/6 ≤ α ≤ 1/3, we can solve either of
                                                                                                4
     • fully dynamic st-SubConn, st-Reach, BPMatch, or SC, with preprocessing time O(m 3 −ε ),
                                                                    2
       amortized update time O(mα−ε ), and amortized query time O(m 3 −α−ε ), or
                                                                                            4
     • incremental st-SubConn, st-Reach, BPMatch, or SC, with preprocessing time O(m 3 −ε ), worst
                                                                2
       case update time O(mα−ε ), and worst case query time O(m 3 −α−ε ), or
                                                                            4
     • decremental st-Reach, BPMatch, or SC, with preprocessing time O(m 3 −ε ), worst case update
                                                    2
       time O(mα−ε ), and worst case query time O(m 3 −α−ε ), or
                                                                                        4
     • PP or ∅-PP over k sets and a universe of size O(k) with preprocessing time O(k 3 −ε ), amor-
                                       1
       tized update and query time O(k 3 −ε ),

then Conjecture 1 is false.
   Pǎtraşcu [72] showed that 3-SUM can be reduced to the problem of listing triangles in a graph,
and then showed how “the multiphase problem” can be used for listing triangles. Then, by re-
ducing “the multiphase problem” to dynamic problems like Subgraph Connectivity, one can show
conditional hardness for the dynamic problems.
   Here, we reduce the triangle listing problem directly to the dynamic problems, bypassing “the
multiphase problem”, which allows us to give explicit lower bounds assuming Conjecture 1 holds.
Then we show how to modify the reduction to use fewer queries, which gives a higher lower bound
on the query time.
                                                                            1
Theorem 10.1 ([72]). If for some ε > 0 and R = O(n1−ε ) but R = Ω(n 2 +ε ), we can either list
all triangles in a tripartite graph G or say that the number of triangles is bigger than ∆ for some
∆ = O(n2 /R), where:
                                                             √
    • the three parts are A, B, C, of size N = |A| = |B| = R n and |C| = n;

     • each vertex in A ∪ B has O(n/R) neighbors in C;

     • there are O(nR) edges in A × B,

in time O(n2−ε ), then Conjecture 1 is false.

     The following observation gives an alternative problem that is easier to reduce from.

Lemma 10.1. If given a tripartite graph G as described in Theorem 10.1, we can either list all
pairs of nodes (a, b) ∈ A × B that are a part of some triangle in G, or say that the number of such
pairs is bigger than ∆ for some ∆ = O(n2 /R), in time O(n2−ε ), for some ε > 0, then Conjecture 1
is false.




                                                 39
Proof. We run the algorithm for listing all pairs (a, b) in O(n2−ε ) time, and then do the following
to list all triangles. If the number of returned pairs is more than ∆ we say that there are more
than ∆ triangles in G. Otherwise, for each of the O(n2 /R) pairs (a, b) returned by the solution
we can go over all the nodes c ∈ NC (a) ∪ NC (b) and check whether (a, b, c) is a triangle in O(1)
time. Since the size of NC (a) ∪ NC (b) is O(n/R) for any a ∈ A, b ∈ B, we can list all triangles in G
                                                                        1
in time O(n2 /R · n/R) = O(n3 /R2 ) which is O(n2−ε ) since R = Ω(n 2 −ε ), which by Theorem 10.1
implies that Conjecture 1 is false.                                                                  

    Using this lemma, we can immediately get lower bounds for the above dynamic problems assum-
ing Conjecture 1. For example, we can reduce the problem of listing all pairs (a, b) that participate
in a triangle to O(nR) updates and queries of the st-SubConn problem on a graph with O(n1.5 )
                                1
edges, which by setting R = n 2 +δ says that if we can solve st-SubConn with preprocessing time
     4                                     1
O(m 3 −ε ) and query and update time O(m 3 −ε ), for some ε, δ > 0, then we get a truly sub quadratic
algorithm for 3-SUM, and Conjecture 1 is false.
    To do this, consider the graph H that is equivalent to G except that we remove all the edges
between partitions A and B. We also add two nodes s, t to H such that s is connected with an
edge (s, a) to every node in part A, while t is connected with an edge (b, t) to every node in part
B. Initially, only the nodes of C and s and t are activated, i.e. in the set S, and note that there
is no path from s to t in the graph induced by S. Then, we go over each edge (a, b) in G, where
a ∈ A and b ∈ B and we add the nodes a, b in H to S, then we ask a query to see if there is a
path from s to t. There will be a path if and only if there is a node c ∈ C that has edges to both
a and b, in which case we know that (a, b, c) is a triangle in G and we report the pair (a, b). Then,
we remove a, b from S and go on to check the next edge. Since the number of edges in G between
parts A and B is O(nR), the reduction uses O(nR) updates and queries, and since the number of
edge in G between A and C and between B and C is O(n1.5 ), it is also the number of edges in H.
    Another example of a reduction from the problem of listing all pairs (a, b) that participate in a
triangle to a dynamic problem is the following.

Lemma 10.2. Suppose that for some ε > 0 fully dynamic ∅-PP on a universe of size n and up
                                ε                                        1  ε
to k subsets where k = O(n1.5+ 2 ) and where each subset is of size O(n 2 − 2 ) can be solved with
                                                                                             1
preprocessing time p(n, k) = O(n2−ε ) and amortized update and query times u(n), q(n) = O(n 2 −ε ),
then Conjecture 1 is false.
                   1   ε                 ε
Proof. Let R = n 2 + 2 and k = n1.5+ 2 . Given a tripartite graph G = (V, E) as described in
Theorem 10.1, we create the following instance of ∅-PP. The universe will be [n] and we associate
every node in C with an integer in [n]. For every node u ∈ A ∪ B we create the set Xu = {c | c ∈
NC (u)}. Note that the size of each of these sets is dC (u) = O(n/R), and the sets can be constructed
           √
in time O( nR · n/R) = O(n1.5 ). We preprocess the sets in p(n, k) = O(n2−ε ) time. Then we have
a stage for each edge (a, b) ∈ E ∩ A × B where we compute the set Xa ∩ Xb and ask a query to
check whether it is empty. It is easy to see that Xa ∩ Xb 6= φ if and only if (a, b) participates in a
triangle, and we can report the pair (a, b). Note that we create at most k = O(nR) subsets, and
                                                                  ε
the total running time is O(nR · (u(n, k) + q(n, k))) = O(n1.5+ 2 +0.5−ε ) which is enough to falsify
Conjecture 1 using Lemma 10.1.                                                                      

   As a corollary, we obtain that Conjecture 1 implies that ∅-PP over k sets and a universe of size
                                                                 4
O(k) cannot be solved for any ε > 0 with preprocessing time O(k 3 −ε ) and update and query time


                                                 40
     1
O(k 3 −ε ). We remark that using Pǎtraşcu’s reduction from “the multiphase problem” to PP one
can get a similar lower bound to the one we get for ∅-PP.

Lemma 10.3 (Implicit in [72]). Conjecture 1 implies that PP over k sets and a universe of size
                                                                4
O(k) cannot be solved for any ε > 0 with preprocessing time O(k 3 −ε ) and update and query time
    1
O(k 3 −ε ).

     The above reductions allow the dynamic algorithm for st-SubConn, ∅-PP and PP to see the
sequence of updates and queries in advance, which implies that the hardness result still holds when
the updates are given “offline”. In the rest of this section, however, the updates in our reductions
will depend on the answers to the queries that we ask during the reduction, and, therefore, an
algorithm with lookahead that achieves improved running times might not imply a sub quadratic
algorithm for 3-SUM. We will use a binary search trick to decrease the number of queries we ask
during the reduction. We will be able to reduce 3-SUM, via the triangles reporting problems, to
                                         √
O(nR) updates and only ( nR + ∆ log n) queries to an st-SubConn problem on a graph with
O(n1.5 ) edges. This allows us to choose a larger R and get a tradeoff – the lower the update time
is, the higher the query time needs to be.
     We now present the main binary search idea that allows us to get improved lower bounds.
Consider Algorithm 1 for listing all pairs (a, b) that participate in a triangle, and assume, for now,
that the procedure Triangle(G, a, i, j) returns yes if and only if there are nodes bk ∈ B and c ∈ C
for k ∈ {(j − 1) · N     2i
                            + 1, . . . , j · N
                                             2i
                                                }, such that (a, bk , c) is a triangle in G. We will later show how to
implement this procedure using the dynamic problems.
     For each node a ∈ A, we search for all nodes b ∈ B such that the pair (a, b) needs to be reported.
We use calls to Triangle(·) to figure out whether there exists a node b in a certain subset of B that
participates in a triangle with a. Then, if the answer was yes, we partition the subset into two
halves and recurse on both halves, until we reach subsets which contain only one node of B and we
can output a pair. Since the subset of B we start from is all of B, every pair (a, b) that participates
in a triangle will be found by our search.
     To do this, we start from level i = 0 and call the recursive function Search(G, a, i = 0, j =
1). At level i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , log N } we partition the nodes of B to 2i sets of N/2i nodes each,
and the index j indicates which set in the partition we are currently considering, namely Bi,j =
{b(j−1)· N +1 , . . . , bj· N }. We call Triangle(G, a, i, j) to check whether there is a node b in the j th set
         2i           2i
of level i such that (a, b) needs to be reported, and if the answer is yes, we advance to level (i + 1),
where we recurse on both halves of the set we were considering. At level i = log N , the sets are of
size 1 and we can report a pair if Triangle(G, a, i, j) returns yes. If at some point we have reported
more than ∆ triangles we abort and List-Pairs(G) says that there were more than ∆ pairs.

  Algorithm 1: List-Pairs(G)
    foreach a ∈ A do
        Search(G, a, 0, 1);



Lemma 10.4. Let G be a tripartite graph as described in Theorem 10.1, and denote Bi,j =
{b(j−1)· N +1 , . . . , bj· N } and da,i,j = |N (a) ∩ Bi,j | for every a ∈ A, i ∈ {0, . . . , log N }, and j ∈ [2i ].
         2i           2i
If we can compute Triangle(G, a, i, j) in time O(Q + da,i,j · U ), for some U = O((n/R)1−ε ),

                                                         41
 Algorithm 2: Search(G, a, i, j)
   if i = log N then
        if Triangle(G, a, i, j) then
            report (a, bj ) ;
            c ← c + 1;
            if c > ∆ then
                abort;

   else
       if Triangle(G, a, i, j) then
           Search(G, a, i + 1, 2j);
           Search(G, a, i + 1, 2j + 1);



Q = O(min{(n1.5 /R)1−ε , R1−ε }), and ε > 0, then Algorithm 1 runs in time Õ(n2−ε ) and Con-
jecture 1 is false.

Proof. We will first prove that the total running time of Algorithm 1 can be bounded by O(|E ∩
(A × B)| · log N · U + (N + ∆ · log N ) · Q), then we will show that under certain choices of parameters
this implies a subquadratic algorithm for 3-SUM.
    During the runtime of Algorithm 1 there will be N = |A| calls of the form Triangle(G, a, 0, 1),
and the total running time of such calls can be bounded by
              X                      X
                  (da,0,1 · U + Q) =       (dB (a) · U ) + N · Q = |E ∩ (A × B)| · U + N · Q.
             a∈A                        a∈A

In addition, there will be more calls to lower levels i ≥ 1. We will bound the contributions of the
two terms in the runtime of Triangle(G, a, i, j), namely the Q term and the da,i,j ·U term, separately.
First, note that the number of calls to Triangle(·) with level i > 1 can be bounded by 2 · ∆ log N ,
since each such call must reach a leaf bk that is a part of a triangle, while each pair (a, bk ) that
participates in a triangle incurs at most 2 log N extra calls, and the number of such pairs we reach
is bounded by ∆. Therefore, we can bound the contribution of the Q term by O(∆ · log N · Q).
Second, note that for any node a ∈ A, we never call P  Triangle(G, a, i, j) with the same i, j more than
once, and that for any i ∈ {0, . . . , log N }, the sum j∈[2i ] da,i,j equals dB (a). Therefore, the total
contribution of the da,i,j · U term can be bounded by

                  XN X
               X log                               X
                                                X log N
                                 da,i,j · U =             dB (a) · U = |E ∩ (A × B)| · log N · U.
               a∈A i=0 j∈[2i ]                  a∈A i=0

    Thus, we have shown that, under the assumptions of the lemma, the total running time of
Algorithm 1 is O(|E ∩ (A × B)| · log N · U + (N + ∆ · log N ) · Q), which can also be written as
             √
Õ(nR · U + ( nR + n2 /R) · Q). Thus, if U = O((n/R)1−ε ) and Q = O(min{(n1.5 /R)1−ε , R1−ε }),
for some ε > 0, then we can list all pairs (a, b) ∈ A × B in time Õ(n2−ε ) which by Lemma 10.1
implies that Conjecture 1 is false.                                                           

   Finally, we will show how each of the dynamic problems listed above can be used to implement
Triangle(G, a, i, j), implying lower bounds for these problems under Conjecture 1.

                                                          42
Lemma 10.5. Let 1/6 ≤ α ≤ 1/3 and suppose that fully dynamic st-SubConn on a graph with m
edges can be done with (amortized) update time u(m), query time q(m), and p(m) preprocessing
time. Then assuming Conjecture 1, we have that, for all ε > 0, either u(m) ≥ mα−ε , q(m) ≥
  2                    4
m 3 −α−ε , or p(m) ≥ m 3 −ε .

Proof. Given a tripartite graph G = (V, E) as described in Theorem 10.1, we will construct an
instance of the fully dynamic SubConn problem, the graph H constructed above, that will allow
us to compute Triangle(G, a, i, j).
    Recall that H is a copy of G in which all the edges between parts A, B are removed, and there
are two additional nodes s, t, where s is connected to all the nodes of A and t is connected to all
the nodes of B. Initially, only the nodes in C ∪ {s, t} are in S.
    Note that the number of edges in H is m = O(n1.5 ). We preprocess H in time p(m), and
                                                                                             4
now we can perform updates and queries on it. We will assume that p(m) = O(m 3 −ε ) for some
                                                       3 4              3
ε > 0, so that the preprocessing takes time O((n 2 ) 3 −ε ) = O(n2− 2 ε ), and therefore we can ignore
the preprocessing time when using Lemma 10.4 for showing that Conjecture 1 is false, since this
subquadratic process is executed only once throughout the implementation of Algorithm 1.
    To compute Triangle(G, a, i, j) we do the following. First, (1) we add the nodes a and b′ for
every node b′ ∈ N (a) ∩ Bi,j to S. Then, (2) we ask a query to determine whether s and t are
connected with the current S, and (3) we remove the nodes of S that were added in (1). Finally,
(4) we return yes if and only if the answer to the query in (2) was yes.
    We claim that our procedure computes Triangle(G, a, i, j) correctly, i.e. we answer yes if and
only if there is a triangle (a, b′ , c) in G such that b′ ∈ Bi,j . For the first direction, assume that
we answer yes and consider a path from s to t in the graph induced by S when we ask the query.
The node a must belong to this path, since it is the only neighbor of s that is in the set S. The
second node on the path must be some node c ∈ C, since a only has edges to s and some nodes in
C, and the third node on the path must be a node b′ ∈ B, since the nodes of C have edges only
to nodes in A and B while a was the only node of A that is in S. Since b′ is on the path, it must
be in S, and therefore we know that b′ ∈ N (a) ∩ Bi,j . Thus, (a, b′ ), (a, c), (b′ , c) ∈ E and we found
a triangle (a, b′ , c) in G where b′ ∈ Bi,j . For the other direction, assume that (a, b′ , c) is a triangle
in G where b′ ∈ Bi,j , and consider the path (s, a, c, b′ , t) in H. The nodes on this path will be in S
and therefore the answer to the query will be yes.
    The running time of our procedure will be q(m) + 2 · da,i,j · u(m), where da,i,j = |N (a) ∩ Bi,j |.
                                                                                                    2
Therefore, if we assume that for some 0 < ε < 21 , both u(m) = O(mα−ε ) and q(m) = O(m 3 −α−ε ),
                            3    ε                                                        ε            1 ε
then by setting R = n1− 2 α− 2 , which by our choice of α satisfies both R = O(n1− 2 ) and Ω(n 2 + 2 ),
we will get that Conjecture 1 is false by using Lemma 10.4. To see this, recall that m = O(n1.5 )
                ε
and let ε′ = 1+α     > 0 to get that both
                                                        3       3    ′       3       ′                      ′
                    u(m) = O((n1.5 )α−ε ) = O(n 2 α− 2 αε ) = O((n 2 α )1−ε ) = O((n/R)1−ε )

and
                                 2                  3       ε                3   ε       ′             3    ε   ′
            q(m) = O((n1.5 ) 3 −α−ε ) = O(n1− 2 α− 2 −ε ) = O(n1− 2 α− 2 −ε ) = O((n1− 2 α− 2 )1−ε )
since α ∈ [ 16 , 31 ],

                                        3   ε   1       3       ε        ′                   n1.5 1−ε′
                         = O((min{n1− 2 α− 2 , n 2 + 2 α+ 2 })1−ε ) = O((min{R,                  })    ),
                                                                                              R

                                                                    43
which is what we need in order to use Lemma 10.4 to falsify Conjecture 1.
                                                                                                    
Lemma 10.6. Let 1/6 ≤ α ≤ 1/3 and suppose that fully dynamic st-Reach on a graph with m edges
can be done with (amortized) update time u(m), query time q(m), and p(m) preprocessing time.
                                                                                       2
Then assuming Conjecture 1, we have that, for all ε > 0, either u(m) ≥ mα−ε , q(m) ≥ m 3 −α−ε ,
            4
or p(m) ≥ m 3 −ε .
Proof. Follows from Lemma 6.1 and the lower bound for st-SubConn.                                   
Lemma 10.7. Let 1/6 ≤ α ≤ 1/3 and suppose that fully dynamic BPMatch on a graph with m edges
can be done with (amortized) update time u(m), query time q(m), and p(m) preprocessing time.
                                                                                       2
Then assuming Conjecture 1, we have that, for all ε > 0, either u(m) ≥ mα−ε , q(m) ≥ m 3 −α−ε ,
            4
or p(m) ≥ m 3 −ε .
Proof. Follows from Lemma 6.2 and the lower bound for st-Reach.                                     

Remark. We can implement Triangle(·) using dynamic bipartite matching directly, by creating
an 8-layered graph in which, using similar arguments to those in the proofs of Lemmas 8.7 and 8.8,
the size of any matching without length 17 augmenting paths will give us the answer to the queries
we need for the implementation. Therefore, the above lower bound also applies to the 17-BPM
problem.
Lemma 10.8. Let 1/6 ≤ α ≤ 1/3 and suppose that fully dynamic SC on a graph with m edges
can be done with (amortized) update time u(m), query time q(m), and p(m) preprocessing time.
                                                                                       2
Then assuming Conjecture 1, we have that, for all ε > 0, either u(m) ≥ mα−ε , q(m) ≥ m 3 −α−ε ,
            4
or p(m) ≥ m 3 −ε .
Proof. Follows from Lemma 6.4 and the lower bound for st-Reach.                                     

10.1    Partially dynamic reductions
In the reduction to st-SubConn in Lemma 10.5, it is easy to simulate the fully dynamic algorithm
with an incremental one, since in every computation of Triangle(·) we start with a state in which all
the nodes of A and B are deactivated, then we activate some nodes (which we can do incrementally)
and then after we ask a query we deactivate the same nodes we just activated, which can be done
by undoing the activations. Therefore, the lower bounds hold for worst case update times of
incremental algorithms.
     The decremental case is more difficult and it is not clear how we can simulate the fully dynamic
st-SubConn algorithm with a decremental one efficiently. However, for st-Reach, and therefore for
BPMatch and SC too, we can simulate the fully dynamic case with the decremental one with only
a logarithmic overhead. The idea is very similar to the one we use in the proof of Lemma 8.3. To
be able to “activate” one node a in A, we do exactly the same procedure we did there with the tree
Ts . To be able to “activate” multiple nodes in B simultaneously, we add a binary tree Tt rooted at
t with leaves the nodes of B and edges directed towards t. Initially, all edges of Tt are in the graph
H, and in order to “activate” a subset of k nodes from B, we delete O(k log n) edges from Tt so
that only these k nodes can reach t. After the query is answered, we undo the deletions to go back
to the initial state. Note that the number of updates increased only by a factor of O(log n) over
the fully dynamic simulation.

                                                 44
11    Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Ryan Williams for suggesting the title of this manuscript, and to Liam Roditty
for suggesting to us to consider the subgraph connectivity problem. We would like to thank Liam
Roditty, Ryan Williams, and Uri Zwick for valuable discussions. This research was supported by
a Stanford School of Engineering Hoover Fellowship, NSF Grant CCF-1417238 and BSF Grant
BSF:2012338.


References
 [1] A. Abboud and K. Lewi. Exact weight subgraphs and the k-sum conjecture. In ICALP (1),
     pages 1–12, 2013.

 [2] M. Abellanas, F. Hurtado, C. Icking, R. Klein, E. Langetepe, L. Ma, B. Palop, and V. Sacris-
     tian. Smallest color-spanning objects. In Proc. ESA, pages 278 – 289, 2001.

 [3] D. Aingworth, C. Chekuri, P. Indyk, and R. Motwani. Fast estimation of diameter and shortest
     paths (without matrix multiplication). SIAM Journal on Computing, 28(4):1167–1181, 1999.

 [4] N. Alon and M. Naor. Derandomization, witnesses for boolean matrix multiplication and
     construction of perfect hash functions. Algorithmica, 16:434–449, 1996.

 [5] N. Alon, R. Yuster, and U. Zwick. Finding and counting given length cycles. volume 855,
     pages 354–364, 1994.

 [6] N. Alon, R. Yuster, and U. Zwick. Finding and counting given length cycles. Algorithmica,
     17:209–223, 1997.

 [7] A. Anand, S. Baswana, M. Gupta, and S. Sen. Maintaining approximate maximum weighted
     matching in fully dynamic graphs. In FSTTCS, pages 257–266, 2012.

 [8] D. Archambault, W. Evans, and D. Kirkpatrick. Computing the set of all distant horizons of
     a terrain. In Proc. CCCG, pages 76–79, 2004.

 [9] V. L. Arlazarov, E. A. Dinic, M. A. Kronrod, and I. A. Faradzev. On economical construction
     of the transitive closure of an oriented graph. Soviet Math. Dokl., 11:1209–1210, 1970.

[10] B. Aronov and S. Har-Peled. On approximating the depth and related problems. In Proc.
     SODA, 2005.

[11] N. Bansal and R. Williams. Regularity lemmas and combinatorial algorithms. In Proc. FOCS,
     pages 745–754, 2009.

[12] I. Baran, E. Demaine, and M. Pǎtraşcu. Subquadratic algorithms for 3sum. Algorithmica,
     50(4):584–596, 2008.

[13] G. Barequet and S. Har-Peled. Some variants of polygonal containment and minimum hausdorff
     distance undertranslation are 3SUM-hard. In Proc. SODA, pages 862–863, 1999.



                                               45
[14] S. Baswana, M. Gupta, and S. Sen. Fully dynamic maximal matching in O(logn) update time.
     In FOCS, pages 383–392, 2011.

[15] M. A. Bender, J. T. Fineman, and S. Gilbert. A new approach to incremental topological
     ordering. In SODA, pages 1108–1115, 2009.

[16] M. A. Bender, J. T. Fineman, S. Gilbert, and R. E. Tarjan. A new approach to incremental
     cycle detection and related problems. CoRR, abs/1112.0784, 2011.

[17] A. Bernstein. Fully dynamic (2 + epsilon) approximate all-pairs shortest paths with fast query
     and close to linear update time. In FOCS, pages 693–702, 2009.

[18] A. Bernstein and L. Roditty. Improved dynamic algorithms for maintaining approximate
     shortest paths under deletions. In SODA, pages 1355–1365, 2011.

[19] C. Calabro, R. Impagliazzo, and R. Paturi. The complexity of satisfiability of small depth
     circuits. In Parameterized and Exact Computation, pages 75–85. Springer, 2009.

[20] T. M. Chan. Dynamic subgraph connectivity with geometric applications. SIAM J. Comput.,
     36(3):681–694, 2006.

[21] T. M. Chan, M. Pǎtraşcu, and L. Roditty. Dynamic connectivity: Connecting to networks
     and geometry. In FOCS, pages 95–104, 2008.

[22] S. Chechik, D. Larkin, L. Roditty, G. Schoenebeck, R. E. Tarjan, and V. Vassilevska Williams.
     Better approximation algorithms for the graph diameter. In Proc. SODA, 2014.

[23] O. Cheong, A. Efrat, and S. Har-Peled. On finding a guard that sees most and a shop that
     sells most. In Proc. SODA, pages 1098–1107, 2004.

[24] M. Cygan. Deterministic parameterized connected vertex cover. In Algorithm Theory–SWAT
     2012, pages 95–106, 2012.

[25] M. Cygan, H. Dell, D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, J. Nederlof, Y. Okamoto, R. Paturi, S. Saurabh,
     and M. Wahlstrom. On problems as hard as CNFSAT. In Proc. CCC, pages 74–84, 2012.

[26] M. Cygan, S. Kratsch, and J. Nederlof. Fast Hamiltonicity checking via bases of perfect
     matchings. In STOC, pages 301–310, 2013.

[27] M. Cygan, J. Nederlof, M. Pilipczuk, J. van Rooij, and J. Wojtaszczyk. Solving connectivity
     problems parameterized by treewidth in single exponential time. In FOCS, pages 150–159,
     2011.

[28] E. Dantsin and A. Wolpert. On moderately exponential time for SAT. In Proc. 13th In-
     ternational Conference on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing, pages 313–325,
     2010.

[29] M. de Berg, M. de Groot, and M. H. Overmars. Perfect binary space partitions. Computational
     Geometry: Theory and Applications, 7(81):81–91, 1997.

[30] C. Demetrescu and G. F. Italiano. Fully dynamic transitive closure: Breaking through the
     o(n2 ) barrier. In Proc. FOCS, volume 41, pages 381–389, 2000.

                                                46
[31] R. Duan. New data structures for subgraph connectivity. In ICALP (1), pages 201–212, 2010.

[32] R. Duan and H.-H. Su. A scaling algorithm for maximum weight matching in bipartite graphs.
     In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
     SODA ’12, pages 1413–1424. SIAM, 2012.

[33] J. Edmonds and R. M. Karp. Theoretical improvements in algorithmic efficiency for network
     flow problems. Journal of the ACM, 19(2):248–264, 1972.

[34] J. Erickson. New lower bounds for convex hull problems in odd dimensions. SIAM Journal on
     Computing, 28(4):1198–1214, 1999.

[35] S. Even and Y. Shiloach. An on-line edge-deletion problem. J. ACM, 28(1):1–4, 1981.

[36] H. Fernau, P. Heggernes, and Y. Villanger. A multivariate analysis of some DFA problems. In
     Proceedings of LATA, pages 275–286, 2013.

[37] G. N. Frederickson. Data structures for on-line updating of minimum spanning trees, with
     applications. SIAM J. Comput., 14(4):781–798, 1985.

[38] M. L. Fredman and R. E. Tarjan. Fibonacci heaps and their uses in improved network opti-
     mization algorithms. J. ACM, 34(3):596–615, 1987.

[39] D. Frigioni and G. F. Italiano. Dynamically switching vertices in planar graphs. Algorithmica,
     28(1):76–103, 2000.

[40] H. Gabow. A scaling algorithm for weighted matching on general graphs. In Prof. FOCS,
     pages 90–100, 1985.

[41] H. N. Gabow and R. E. Tarjan. Faster scaling algorithms for general graph-matching problems.
     J. ACM, 38(4):815–853, 1991.

[42] A. Gajentaan and M. Overmars. On a class of o(n2 ) problems in computational geometry.
     Computational Geometry, 5(3):165–185, 1995.

[43] M. Gupta and R. Peng. Fully dynamic (1 + ε)-approximate matchings. In FOCS, 2013.

[44] B. Haeupler, T. Kavitha, R. Mathew, S. Sen, and R. E. Tarjan. Incremental cycle detection,
     topological ordering, and strong component maintenance. ACM Transactions on Algorithms,
     8(1):3, 2012.

[45] Y. Han and T. Takaoka. An O(n3 log log n/ log2 n) time algorithm for all pairs shortest paths.
     In SWAT, pages 131–141, 2012.

[46] N. J. A. Harvey. Algebraic structures and algorithms for matching and matroid problems. In
     Proc. FOCS, volume 47, pages 531–542, 2006.

[47] M. Henzinger, S. Krinninger, and D. Nanongkai. Dynamic approximate all-pairs shortest
     paths: Breaking the O(mn) barrier and derandomization. In Proc. FOCS, 2013.

[48] M. R. Henzinger and V. King. Randomized fully dynamic graph algorithms with polylogarith-
     mic time per operation. J. ACM, 46(4):502–516, 1999.

                                                47
[49] M. R. Henzinger and V. King. Maintaining minimum spanning forests in dynamic graphs.
     SIAM J. Comput., 31(2):364–374, 2001.

[50] E. A. Hirsch. Two new upper bounds for SAT. In Proc. SODA, pages 521–530, 1998.

[51] J. Holm, K. de Lichtenberg, and M. Thorup. Poly-logarithmic deterministic fully-dynamic
     algorithms for connectivity, minimum spanning tree, 2-edge, and biconnectivity. J. ACM,
     48(4):723–760, 2001.

[52] J. Hopcroft and R. Karp. An n5/2 algorithm for maximum matchings in bipartite graphs.
     SIAM Journal on Computing, 2(4):225–231, 1973.

[53] R. Impagliazzo and R. Paturi. On the complexity of k-sat. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 62(2):367–
     375, 2001.

[54] R. Impagliazzo, R. Paturi, and F. Zane. Which problems have strongly exponential complexity?
     J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 63(4):512–530, 2001.

[55] G. F. Italiano. Finding paths and deleting edges in directed acyclic graphs. Inf. Process. Lett.,
     28(1):5–11, 1988.

[56] Z. Ivkovic and E. L. Lloyd. Fully dynamic maintenance of vertex cover. In WG, pages 99–111,
     1993.

[57] Z. Jafargholi and E. Viola. 3sum, 3xor, triangles. Electronic Colloquium on Computational
     Complexity (ECCC), 20:9, 2013.

[58] T. Kavitha. Faster algorithms for all-pairs small stretch distances in weighted graphs. In Proc.
     FSTTCS, pages 328–339, 2007.

[59] T. Kavitha. Dynamic matrix rank with partial lookahead. In FSTTCS, pages 268–279, 2008.

[60] H. W. Kuhn. The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval Research Logistics
     Quarterly, 2:83–97, 1955.

[61] J. Lacki. Improved deterministic algorithms for decremental reachability and strongly con-
     nected components. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 9(3):27, 2013.

[62] L. Lee. Fast context-free grammar parsing requires fast boolean matrix multiplication. J.
     ACM, 49(1):1–15, 2002.

[63] D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, and S. Saurabh. Known algorithms on graphs on bounded treewidth
     are probably optimal. In SODA, pages 777–789, 2011.

[64] J. E. M. Soss and M. H. Overmars. Preprocessing chains for fast dihedral rotations is hard or
     even impossible. Computational Geometry: Theory and Applications, 26(3):235–246, 2002.

[65] A. Madry. Navigating central path with electrical flows: from flows to matchings, and back.
     In Proc. FOCS, 2013.

[66] B. Monien and E. Speckenmeyer. Solving satisfiability in less than 2n steps. Discrete Applied
     Mathematics, 10(3):287 – 295, 1985.

                                                 48
[67] M. Mucha and P. Sankowski. Maximum matchings via gaussian elimination. In Proc. FOCS,
     volume 45, pages 248–255, 2004.

[68] O. Neiman and S. Solomon. Simple deterministic algorithms for fully dynamic maximal match-
     ing. In STOC, pages 745–754, 2013.

[69] R. Paturi, P. Pudlák, M. E. Saks, and F. Zane. An improved exponential-time algorithm for
     k-SAT. J. ACM, 52(3):337–364, 2005.

[70] R. Paturi, P. Pudlák, and F. Zane. Satisfiability coding lemma. Chicago J. Theor. Comput.
     Sci., 1999, 1999.

[71] M. Pilipczuk and M. Pilipczuk. Finding a maximum induced degenerate subgraph faster than
     2n . In Parameterized and Exact Computation, pages 3–12. 2012.

[72] M. Pǎtraşcu. Towards polynomial lower bounds for dynamic problems. In STOC, pages
     603–610, 2010.

[73] M. Pǎtraşcu and E. D. Demaine. Logarithmic lower bounds in the cell-probe model. SIAM J.
     Comput., 35(4):932–963, 2006.

[74] M. Pǎtraşcu and M. Thorup. Planning for fast connectivity updates. In FOCS, pages 263–271,
     2007.

[75] M. Pǎtraşcu and R. Williams. On the possibility of faster SAT algorithms. In Proc. SODA,
     pages 1065–1075, 2010.

[76] L. Roditty. Decremental maintenance of strongly connected components. In SODA, pages
     1143–1150, 2013.

[77] L. Roditty and V. Vassilevska Williams. Fast approximation algorithms for the diameter and
     radius of sparse graphs. In Proceedings of the 45th annual ACM symposium on Symposium on
     theory of computing, STOC ’13, pages 515–524, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.

[78] L. Roditty and U. Zwick. Improved dynamic reachability algorithms for directed graphs. In
     FOCS, pages 679–689, 2002.

[79] L. Roditty and U. Zwick. On dynamic shortest paths problems. In ESA, pages 580–591, 2004.

[80] P. Sankowski. Dynamic transitive closure via dynamic matrix inverse. In Proc. FOCS, vol-
     ume 45, pages 509–517, 2004.

[81] P. Sankowski. Faster dynamic matchings and vertex connectivity. In Proc. SODA, pages
     118–126, 2007.

[82] P. Sankowski. Maximum weight bipartite matching in matrix multiplication time. Theor.
     Comput. Sci., 410(44):4480–4488, 2009.

[83] P. Sankowski and M. Mucha. Fast dynamic transitive closure with lookahead. Algorithmica,
     56(2):180–197, 2010.

[84] I. Schiermeyer. Solving 3-satisfiability in less then 1.579n steps. In CSL, pages 379–394, 1992.

                                                 49
[85] U. Schöning. A probabilistic algorithm for k-SAT and constraint satisfaction problems. In
     Proc. FOCS, pages 410–414, 1999.

[86] V. Strassen. Gaussian elimination is not optimal. Numer. Math., 13:354–356, 1969.

[87] M. Thorup. Near-optimal fully-dynamic graph connectivity. In STOC, pages 343–350, 2000.

[88] V. Vassilevska and R. Williams. Finding, minimizing, and counting weighted subgraphs. In
     Proc. STOC, pages 455–464, 2009.

[89] V. Vassilevska Williams. Multiplying matrices faster than Coppersmith-Winograd. In Proc.
     STOC, pages 887–898, 2012.

[90] V. Vassilevska Williams and R. Williams. Finding, minimizing, and counting weighted sub-
     graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 42(3):831–854, 2013.

[91] R. Williams. Faster all-pairs shortest paths via circuit complexity. Submitted, 2013.

[92] R. Williams and H. Yu. Finding orthogonal vectors in discrete structures. In SODA, 2014. to
     appear.

[93] V. V. Williams and R. Williams. Subcubic equivalences between path, matrix and triangle
     problems. In Proc. FOCS, pages 645–654, 2010.




                                                50
