                                                                 A proof of the Nisan-Ronen conjecture
                                                      George Christodoulou∗            Elias Koutsoupias †          Annamária Kovács‡


                                                                                        Abstract
arXiv:2301.11905v1 [cs.GT] 27 Jan 2023




                                                     Noam Nisan and Amir Ronen conjectured that the best approximation ratio of deterministic
                                                 truthful mechanisms for makespan-minimization for n unrelated machines is n. This work
                                                 validates the conjecture.


                                         1       Introduction
                                         This work resolves the oldest open problem in algorithmic mechanism design, the Nisan-Ronen con-
                                         jecture. The seminal work of Nisan and Ronen [28] set the foundations of the field of algorithmic
                                         mechanism design by probing the computational and information-theoretic aspects of mechanism
                                         design. Mechanism design, a celebrated branch of game theory and microeconomics, studies the
                                         design of algorithms (called mechanisms) in environments where the input is privately held and
                                         provided by selfish participants. A mechanism for an optimization problem, on top of the tradi-
                                         tional algorithmic goal (that assumes knowledge of the input), bears the extra burden of providing
                                         incentives to the participants to report their true input.
                                             One of the main thrusts in this research area is to demarcate the limitations imposed by truth-
                                         fulness on algorithms. To what extent are mechanisms less powerful than traditional algorithms?
                                         This question was crystallized by the widely influential Nisan-Ronen conjecture for the scheduling
                                         problem, which asserts that no deterministic mechanism for n machines can have approximation
                                         ratio better than n.
                                             The objective of the scheduling problem is to minimize the makespan of allocating m tasks
                                         to n unrelated machines, where each machine i needs tij units of time to process task j. The
                                         problem combines various interesting properties. First, it belongs to the most challenging and
                                         unexplored area of multi-dimensional mechanism design, as the private information (the tij ’s) is
                                         multi-dimensional. In contrast, related machines scheduling belongs to single-dimensional mech-
                                         anism design, which is well-understood, and for which the power of truthful mechanisms does
                                         not substantially differ from the best non-truthful algorithms: not only truthful mechanisms can
                                         compute exact optimal solutions (if one disregards computational issues [1]), but a truthful PTAS
                                         exists [13]. Second, the objective of the scheduling problem has a min-max objective, which from
                                         the mechanism design point of view is much more challenging, as opposed to the min-sum objective
                                         achievable by the famous VCG [30, 14, 22] mechanism. VCG is truthful and can be applied to
                                         the scheduling problem, but it achieves a very poor approximation ratio, equal to the number of
                                         machines n [28].
                                             Is there a better mechanism for scheduling than VCG? Nisan and Ronen [28] conjectured that
                                         the answer should be negative, but for the past two decades, the question has remained open. In
                                         this work we validate the Nisan-Ronen conjecture.
                                             ∗
                                               School of Informatics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. Email: gichristo@csd.auth.gr
                                             †
                                               Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK. Email: elias@cs.ox.ac.uk
                                             ‡
                                               Department of Informatics, Goethe University, Frankfurt M., Germany. Email: panni@cs.uni-frankfurt.de


                                                                                               1
Theorem 1. There is no deterministic truthful mechanism with approximation ratio better than n
for the problem of scheduling n unrelated machines.

    This result resolves the Nisan-Ronen conjecture. Over the years, various research attempts with
limited success have been made to improve the original lower bound of 2 by Nisan and Ronen. For
example, the bound was improved to 2.41 in [12], and later to 2.61 in [23], which held as the best
bound for over a decade. More recently, the lower bound was improved to 2.75 by Giannakopoulos,
Hamerl, and Poças [19], and then to 3 by Dobzinski and Shaulker [17]. These improved bounds
represented progress in the field, but they left a huge gap between the lower and upper bounds.
The first non-constant lower bound for the truthful scheduling problem was given in [9], which
                              √
showed a lower bound of Ω( n).

1.1   Further Related work
A line of research studies randomized mechanisms with slightly improved approximation guaran-
tees. Note that there are two notions of truthfulness for randomized mechanisms; a mechanism is
universally truthful if it is defined as a probability distribution over deterministic truthful mecha-
nisms, and it is truthful-in-expectation, if in expectation no player can benefit by lying. In [28], a
universally truthful mechanism was proposed for the case of two machines, and was later extended
to the case of n machines by Mu’alem and Schapira [27] with an approximation guarantee of 0.875n,
which was later improved to 0.837n by [25]. Lu and Yu [26] showed a truthful-in-expectation mech-
anism with an approximation guarantee of (n + 5)/2. Mu’alem and Schapira [27], showed a lower
bound of 2 − 1/n, for both types of randomized truthful mechanisms. In [7], the lower bound
was extended to fractional mechanisms, where each task can be fractionally allocated to multiple
machines. They also showed a fractional mechanism with a guarantee of (n + 1)/2. Even for the
special case of two machines the upper and lower bounds are not tight [26, 6].
    In the Bayesian setting, Daskalakis and Weinberg [16] showed a mechanism that is at most
a factor of 2 from the optimal truthful mechanism, but not with respect to optimal makespan.
The work of [5] provided bounds of prior-independent mechanisms (where the input comes from a
probability distribution unknown to the mechanism). Giannakopoulos and Kyropoulou [20] showed
that the VCG mechanism achieves an approximation ratio of O(log n/ log log n) under some dis-
tributional and symmetry assumptions. Finally, in a recent work, [10] showed positive results for
graph settings where each task can only be allocated to at most two machines. The construction
of the lower bound of this work uses multi-cliques and multi-stars.
    There is also work on variants of the scheduling problem and also of special cases, for which
significant results have been obtained. Ashlagi, Dobzinski, and Lavi [2], resolved a restricted version
of the Nisan-Ronen conjecture, for the special but natural class of anonymous mechanisms. Lavi
and Swamy [24] studied a restricted input domain which however retains the multi-dimensional
flavour of the setting. They considered inputs with only two possible values “low” and “high”
and they showed an elegant deterministic mechanism with an approximation factor of 2. They also
showed that even for this setting achieving the optimal makespan is not possible under truthfulness,
and provided a lower bound of 11/10. Yu [32] extended the results for a range of values, and [3]
studied multi-dimensional domains where the private information of the machines is a single bit.


2     Preliminaries
In the unrelated machines scheduling problem, a set M of m tasks needs to be scheduled on a set N
of n machines. The processing time or value that each machine i needs to process task j is tij , and


                                                  2
the completion time of machine i for a subset S of tasks is equal to the sum of the individual task
values ti (S) = j∈S tij . The objective is to find an allocation of tasks to machines that minimize
               P

the makespan, that is, the maximum completion time.

2.1    Mechanism design setting
We assume that each machine i ∈ N is controlled by a selfish agent (player) that is unwilling to
process tasks and the values tij is private information known only to them (also called the type of
agent i). The set Ti of possible types of agent i consists of all vectors bi = (bi1 , . . . , bim ) ∈ Rm
                                                                                                       + . Let
also T = ×i∈N Ti denote the space of type profiles.
    A mechanism defines for each player i a set Bi of available strategies the player can choose from.
We consider direct revelation mechanisms, i.e., Bi = Ti for all i, meaning that the players strategies
are to simply report their types to the mechanism. Each player i provides a bid bi ∈ Ti , which not
necessarily matches the true type ti , if this serves their interests. A mechanism (A, P) consists of
two parts:

An allocation algorithm: The allocation algorithm A allocates the tasks to machines based on
the players’ inputs (bid vector) b = (b1 , . . . , bn ). Let A be the set of all possible partitions of m
tasks to n machines. The allocation function A : T → A partitions the tasks into the n machines;
we denote by Ai (b) the subset of tasks assigned to machine i for bid vector b = (b1 , . . . , bn ).

A payment scheme: The payment scheme P = (P1 , . . . , Pn ) determines the payments, which
also depends on the bid vector b. The functions P1 , . . . , Pn stand for the payments that the
mechanism hands to each agent, i.e., Pi : T → R.
    The utility ui of a player i is the payment that they get minus the actual time that they need to
process the set of tasks assigned to them, ui (b) = Pi (b) − ti (Ai (b)), where ti (Ai (b)) = j∈Ai (b) ti,j .
                                                                                             P

We are interested in truthful mechanisms. A mechanism is truthful, if for every player, reporting
his true type is a dominant strategy. Formally,

                      ui (ti , b−i ) ≥ ui (t′i , b−i ),   ∀i ∈ [n], ti , t′i ∈ Ti , b−i ∈ T−i ,

where notation T−i denotes all parts of T except its i-th part.
    The quality of a mechanism for a given type t is measured by the makespan Mech(t) achieved
by its allocation algorithm A, Mech(t) = maxi∈N ti (Ai (t)), which is compared to the optimal
makespan Opt(t) = minA∈A maxi∈N ti (Ai ).
    It is well known that only a subset of algorithms can be allocation algorithms of truthful
mechanisms. In particular, no mechanism’s allocation algorithm is optimal for every t, so it is
natural to focus on the approximation ratio of the mechanism’s allocation algorithm. A mechanism
is c-approximate, if its allocation algorithm is c-approximate, that is, if c ≥ Mech(t)
                                                                                Opt(t) for all possible
inputs t.
    In this work, we do not place any requirements on the time to compute the mechanism’s
allocation A and payments P. In other words, the lower bound is information-theoretic and does
not make use of any computational assumptions.

2.2    Weak monotonicity
A mechanism consists of two algorithms, the allocation algorithm and the payment algorithm.
However, we are only interested in the performance of the allocation algorithm. Therefore it is


                                                           3
natural to ask whether it is possible to characterize the class of allocation algorithms that are
part of a truthful mechanism with no reference to the payment algorithm. Indeed the following
definition provides such a characterization.

Definition 2. An allocation algorithm A is called weakly monotone (WMON) if it satisfies the
following property: for every i ∈ N and two inputs t = (ti , t−i ) and t′ = (t′i , t−i ), the associated
allocations A and A′ satisfy
                                 ti (Ai ) − ti (A′i ) ≤ t′i (Ai ) − t′i (A′i ).
An equivalent condition, using indicator variables aij (t) ∈ {0, 1} of whether task j is allocated to
player i, is

                                               (aij (t′ ) − aij (t))(t′ij − tij ) ≤ 0.
                                          X

                                         j∈M

    It is well known that the allocation function of every truthful mechanism is weakly monotone [4].
Although it is not needed in establishing a lower bound on the approximation ratio, it turns out
that this is also a sufficient condition for truthfulness in convex domains [29] (which is the case for
the scheduling domain).
    A useful tool in our proof relies on the following immediate consequence of weak monotonicity
(see [8] for a simple proof). Intuitively, it states that when you fix the values of all players for a
subset of tasks, then the restriction of the allocation to the rest of the tasks is still weakly monotone.

Lemma 3. Let A be a weakly monotone allocation, and let (S, T ) a partition of M . When we fix
the values of the tasks of T , the restriction of the allocation A on S is also weakly monotone.

    The following implication of weak monotonicity, that was first used in [28], is a standard tool
for showing lower bounds for truthful mechanisms (see for example [28, 12, 27, 2, 19, 17]).

Lemma 4. Consider a truthful mechanism (A, P) and its allocation for a bid vector t. Let S be
a subset of the tasks allocated to player i and let S ′ be a subset of the tasks allocated to the other
players. Consider any bid profile t′ = (t′i , t−i ) that is obtained from t by decreasing the values of
player i in S, i.e., t′ij < tij , j ∈ S, and increasing the values of player i in S ′ , i.e., t′ij > tij , j ∈ S ′ .
Then the allocation of player i for t and t′ agree for all tasks in S ∪ S ′ .

    Notice that this lemma guarantees that only the set S of tasks allocated to player i remains
the same. This does not preclude changing the allocation of the other players for the tasks in S ′ ,
unless there are only two players. This is a major obstacle in multi-player settings, that we avoid
in this work by focusing on graph settings with only two players for each task.


3        The main argument
We consider multi-graph instances, where edges correspond to tasks and nodes to machines [10].
For an edge e, we use the notation e = {i, j} to denote its vertices i and j, although they do not
determine e uniquely. An edge e = {i, j} corresponds to a task that has extremely high values for
nodes other than i and j, which guarantees that any algorithm with approximation ratio at most
n must allocate it to either machine i or machine j (see Figure 1 for an illustration).
   The argument deals with multi-cliques with very high multiplicity 1 , in which every edge has an
endpoint with value 0 (see Figure 3 for an example). The goal is to carefully select a subgraph
    1
        The multiplicity of a multi-graph is defined to be the minimum multiplicity among its edges.


                                                               4
of this multi-clique and change the values of some of its edges to obtain a lower bound on the
approximation ratio. The fact that one of the two values of every edge is 0 is very convenient: a
lower bound on the approximation ratio of the subgraph is a lower bound on the approximation
ratio of the whole multi-clique as well, since the other edges do not affect the cost of the optimal
allocation.
                                                                        1
                                                                                4
                                      
                         5 3 7 4                                    5




                                                                    3

                                                                            7
                     1    2 ∞ ∞
                                
                         ∞ ∞ 9 6




                                                            1




                                                                                        6
                                                                2                   9
                                                        2                                   3


Figure 1: A multi-star instance with three players and four tasks in matrix form (left) and in graph
form (right). The symbol ∞ denotes values that are extremely high compared to the other values.
This instance is a multi-star, in which player 1 is the root and players 2 and 3 are the leaves.

     In this and the next section, which deal with multi-graphs, for an instance v, we use the notation
vie to denote the value of node i for an edge e = {i, j}. Section 5 deals only with multi-stars and
we use a different, more convenient, notation. In most of the argument, we fix the values of the
multi-clique and we focus on the boundary functions.

Definition 5 (Boundary function). Fix a mechanism and consider a multi-clique with values v.
                                                                            e (z) is the threshold value
For an edge e = {i, j}, the boundary function or critical value function ψi,j
for the allocation of e to node i. More precisely, if we keep all the other values fixed and change
                                                                   e (z) and to j if v e > ψ e (z).
the value of e for node j to z, then e is allocated to i if vie < ψi,j                i     i,j

    Note that a boundary function ψi,j   e (·) may depend on the other values of v. A more precise
                     e            e
notation would be ψi,j [v](z) or ψi,j [v−e ](z), but in this and in the next section we are dealing with
a fixed v, so we drop it from the notation.
    Boundary functions are real functions that are monotone but not necessarily continuous. An
annoying, albeit minor, issue is that boundary functions are difficult to handle at points of discon-
tinuity, so we want to avoid such points. The high level idea for achieving this is obvious: since the
functions are monotone, they have only countably many points of discontinuity by Froda’s theorem;
by taking random instances in a continuous range, we have no points of discontinuity almost surely.
This is formalized in Lemma 17. The following definition makes the requirement precise.

Definition 6 (Continuity requirement). Fix a mechanism and consider an instance v. We say that
v has a discontinuity if there exists some edge e = {i, j} so that vje 6= 0 and ψi,j
                                                                                 e (·) is discontinuous
    e
at vj . We say that an instance satisfies the continuity requirement if no rational translation of v
has a discontinuity.

    The instances of the argument will be selected randomly so that they satisfy the continuity
requirement almost surely.
    The aim of the proof of Theorem 1 is to show — by the probabilistic method — that there
exists a multi-clique of sufficiently high multiplicity that contains a star with approximation ratio
at least n, when we keep the values of all other edges fixed. Actually the argument aims to show
that the bound on the approximation ratio for the star is arbitrarily close to n − 1. The extra
+1 in the approximation ratio comes, almost for free, by adding a loop to the root of the star, or
equivalently an additional edge between the root and another node j with very high value for j.


                                                   5
   To show that there exists a star S with approximation ratio n − 1, we roughly aim to show that
there exists a star with some root i, with the following properties:

   1. every edge e = (i, j) of S has value 0 for i and the same value z for the leaves, for some z > 0.

   2. the sum of the values of the boundary functions over all edges           e
                                                                          e∈S ψi,j (z) is at least (n−1)z.
                                                                        P

                                                                                   e (z) for all
   3. the mechanism allocates all edges to the root, when we change its values to ψi,j
      j 6= i.

    It follows immediately that such a star has approximation ratio n − 1: the mechanism allocates
all tasks to the root with makespan e∈S ψi,j
                                      P       e (z) ≥ (n − 1)z, while a better allocation is to allocate

all tasks to the leaves with makespan z.
    A star that satisfies the second property will be called nice and the third property box. Actually,
for technical reasons we need to work with approximate notions of niceness and box-ness.

Definition 7 (Nice star and multi-star). For a given ε > 0 and an instance v, a star S with root
i and leaves all the remaining (n − 1) nodes is called ε-nice, or simply nice, if there exists z > 0
such that, first, every edge e = {i, j} of S has value vie = 0 for root i and vje ∈ (z, (1 + ε)z) for leaf
j, and second,
                                          e
                                             (vje ) ≥ (1 − 3ε)(n − 1)z.
                                     X
                                        ψi,j                                                           (1)
                                    e∈S

A multi-star is called nice if all of its stars with n − 1 leaves are nice, with the same z.

   By letting ε tend to 0, 1 − 3ε can be arbitrarily close to 1 and vie can be arbitrarily close to
z. The factor 3 in the expression 1 − 3ε is for convenience when such a property is established in
Section 4.

Definition 8 (Box). For a given δ > 0 and instance v, a star S with root i is called δ-box, or
simply box, if every edge e of S has value 0 for i and the mechanism allocates all edges to the root,
when we change the root values to ψi,je (v e ) − δ for every leaf j of S.
                                          j

    See Figure 2 for an illustration. Note that while nice stars have n − 1 leaves, box stars may
have fewer leaves. This will be useful to facilitate induction in Section 5, where this property is
established.
    Now that we have the definitions of nice multi-stars and box stars, we can state the two main
propositions that almost immediately establish the main result.
    First, the following theorem, proved in Section 4, says that there exist nice multi-stars of
arbitrarily high multiplicity (see Figure 3).

Theorem 9 (Nice Multi-Star). For every mechanism with bounded approximation ratio and every
q, there exists a multi-clique that satisfies the continuity requirement and contains a nice multi-star
with multiplicity q.

    Second, the following theorem says that nice multi-stars with sufficiently high multiplicity —
guaranteed to exist by the above theorem — contain a spanning box i.e., a box star of n − 1 leaves
(see Figure 4).

Theorem 10 (Box). Fix δ, ε > 0 and a mechanism with approximation ratio at most n. Consider
an instance that satisfies the continuity requirement and contains a multi-star, of sufficiently high
multiplicity, in which all values of the root i are 0 and all values of the leaves are in (z, (1 + ε)z).
Then the multi-star contains a star with n − 1 leaves, which is a δ-box.

                                                    6
                 t2                                    t2                                         t2

                                                                                                 ψ2∗                   o
                ψ2∗
                           o
                                                   ψ2∗
                                                              o
                            ψ1∗               t1                  ψ1∗                   t1                            ψ1∗   t1
                            (a)                                         (b)                                     (c)
                                              t3                                        t3
                                        ψ3∗                                       ψ3∗

                                                   o                                         o

                               ψ2∗                          ψ1∗ t1          ψ2∗                        ψ1∗ t1

                                   t2                                        t2
                                               (d)                                       (e)

Figure 2: (Box). Allocation partitions of the root values for a star of 2 leaves (a)-(c) and 3 leaves (d)-(e);
in the latter case, only part of the allocation partition is shown. This figure is about a star with root i and
                                                                                                      e
leaves j ∈ {1, 2, 3}. If we denote the edges of the star by ej , the figure uses the shorthand: tj = vi j for the
                                 ej  ej
values of the root, and ψj = ψi,j (vj ) for the boundary values. Note that monotonicity restricts the shapes
                           ∗

and boundaries of the allocation areas, as discussed in detail in Sections 5.1.1 and 5.1.2. The dotted red
lines correspond to values ψj∗ − δ of the box definition. Cases (a), (b), and (d) are boxes, as the corner o is
inside the region where the root gets all the tasks. On the other hand, cases (c) and (e) are not boxes, since
the corner point o lies outside this region.


    The proof of the Box Theorem is given in Section 5. To keep the notation as clean as possible,
in the proof we assume without loss of generality that the root of the multi-star is node 0, the
leaves are nodes 1 to n − 1, and we adapt the notation accordingly.
    The proof of the main result (Theorem 1) follows immediately from the above two theorems.
We consider multi-cliques that contain loops with value 0 for every node and observe that the
addition of loops does not affect the proofs of the above theorems. Use Theorem 9 to find a multi-
clique that satisfies the continuity requirements and contains a nice multi-star with sufficiently high
multiplicity. Use Theorem 10 to find a nice box inside it.

Lemma 11. A δ-nice box with a loop in the root, in which all values of the root are 0 and all values
of the leaves are in (z, (1 + ε)z), has approximation ratio n, as δ and ε tend to 0.

Proof. Take a nice box and consider the instance when we change the values of the root i to
  e (v e ) − δ for all j 6= i. By the box-ness property all the edges are allocated to the root. Change
ψi,j  j
now the value of the loop to z and decrease the values of the root to ψi,j e (v e ) − 2δ. By using the fact
                                                                               j
that the task that corresponds to the loop must still be allocated to root, even when we increase
its value to z, and by also applying monotonicity (Lemma 4), the allocation of the edges remains
the same. The makespan of the mechanism is
                                     e
                                         (vje ) − 2δ) ≥ z + (1 − 3ε)(n − 1)z − 2(n − 1)δ,
                            X
                       z+          (ψi,j
                            j6=i




                                                                        7
                                              0                                                  0
                                     0                 z                               0
                                                                                                         0




                                                   0




                                                                                           0 0
                                         z




                                                                                                     0
                                                  z
                                         0




                                                                                                 0
                                                                                   z




                                                                                                                 z
                         z




                                                               0
                             0                                 z                   z                         z
                                 z                         0
                     1           0                         z           3       1                                     3
                             z                                 0



                         0




                                                                   z
                                               0




                                                                                                     z
                                         z




                                                                                           z
                                                   z
                                     0
                                     z                 0

                                              2                                                  2


                                             (a)                                             (b)


Figure 3: This is an illustration of the components that appear in the statement of Theorem 9.
In (a), a multi-clique with four nodes and multiplicity 2 is depicted. For simplification, we use z
to denote non-zero values, which are not necessarily the same for all edges. It should be noted
that the actual multiplicity needed is much higher. In (b), a multi-star which is a subgraph of
the multi-clique is depicted. Again the actual multiplicity needed is very high. If this is a nice
multi-star, the value z is approximately the same for all leaves.


while the optimal makespan is at most (1 + ε)z, (when the root gets the loop and the leaves get all
the remaining edges). The ratio tends to n as δ and ε tend to 0.

    The lemma, together with the Nice-Multi-Star and the Box theorems, establishes the main
result. Actually it establishes something stronger. The approximation ratio of truthful scheduling
is n even when the domain is the set of multi-graphs.

Corollary 12. The approximation ratio of truthful scheduling of multi-graphs is n.


4     Proof of the Nice Multi-Star theorem (Theorem 9)
The aim of this section is to prove Theorem 9. To keep the argument clean, we first collect and
prove some useful statements. These include an immediate application of Young’s inequality on
boundary functions of one-dimensional mechanisms, and two easy properties of mechanisms with
two players and one or two tasks.

4.1   Boundary functions and integrals
For an edge e = {i, j}, we fix the values of every other edge and consider the boundary functions
  e (·) and ψ e (·). By the definition of the boundary functions (Definition 5), if the values of an
ψi,j          j,i
                                                              e (v e ) and to node j when v e < ψ e (v e ),
edge e are vie and vje , e is allocated to node i when vie < ψi,j j                        j     j,i i
         e        e
where vi and vj are the values of nodes i and j on edge e, respectively. Note that the boundary
functions do not determine the allocation when we have equality.
     These functions are nondecreasing and, roughly speaking, inverse of each other. More precisely,
  e is a pseudo-inverse of ψ e , that is,
ψj,i                            i,j

                                e               e                      e
                   sup{x ≥ 0 : ψi,j (x) < y} ≤ ψj,i (y) ≤ inf{x ≥ 0 : ψi,j (x) > y}.                                     (2)

By convention the supremum on the left is 0 when y = 0.

                                                                           8
                                                   0                                               0
                                         0
                                                           0




                                                                                                        ψ3
                                                                                              1
                                             0 0




                                                                                             ψ
                                                       0




                                                                                                  ψ2
                                                   0
                                 z




                                                                   z
                                 z                             z




                                                                                                             z
                                                                                        z
                             1                                         3            1                            3




                                                       z
                                             z




                                                                                                  z
                                                   2                                               2


                                               (a)                                                (b)


Figure 4: The figure depicts a multi-star with high multiplicity (a) and the final spanning star (b)
selected by Theorem 10. If the multi-star satisfies the niceness property, then the final star also
satisfies the niceness property (hence roughly ψ1 + ψ2 + ψ3 ≥ 3z) and also the box-ness property
(see Figure 2(d)) which guarantees that these edges must be allocated to the root. Note that this
final star is a subgraph of the original multi-clique, the contribution of the remaining edges (which
do not appear in the figure) to the optimal makespan is 0.

   The following proposition is a special case of Young’s Inequality2 . The original proof required
continuous and strictly increasing functions, but subsequent proofs relaxed these conditions to
nondecreasing pseudo-inverse functions [15].
                                         e and ψ e are the boundary functions of an edge, then
Proposition 13 (Young’s inequality). If ψi,j    j,i
for every a ≥ 0:
                                                   Z a                     Z a
                                                            e                     e
                                                           ψi,j (x) dx +         ψj,i (x) dx ≥ a2 .                  (3)
                                                       0                    0


4.2      Independence of boundary functions of parallel edges
Proposition 14. For every mechanism with bounded approximation ratio and every multi-graph in
                                                            e (·) of an edge e = {i, j} is independent
which one value of every edge is 0, the boundary function ψi,j
of the values of the other edges between i and j, except perhaps at its points of discontinuity.
Proof. Let e′ 6= e be an edge between i and j. It suffices to show that ψi,je (·) is independent of

the values of e′ when we fix the values of the remaining edges. It is known [18] and it also follows
directly from Theorem 37 that a 2 × 2 mechanism has unbounded approximation ratio unless it is a
(relaxed) task-independent mechanism. This proves the proposition, since the contribution of the
remaining edges to the optimal makespan is 0.

Proposition 15. For every mechanism with approximation ratio less than n and every multi-graph
                                                              e (·) of an edge e = {i, j} satisfies
in which one value of every edge is 0, the boundary function ψi,j
  e
ψi,j (x) < n x.
Proof. If for some x, ψi,j
                       e (x) ≥ n x, by setting the values of e for nodes j and i to x and ψ e (x) − ǫx,
                                                                                           i,j
respectively, for some ǫ > 0, the approximation ratio is at least n − ǫ. The proposition follows by
letting ǫ → 0.
     2
R a The original Young’s Inequality states that if f is nonnegative, continuous, and strictly increasing, then
            R b −1
 0
     f (x) dx +   0
                      f   (x) dx ≥ ab.


                                                                           9
4.3   The construction
Fix some ε so that 1/ε is a positive integer and let εZ>0 = {kε : k ∈ Z>0 } denote the integer
multiples of ε. We will also use the notation ⌊x⌋ε = ε⌊x/ε⌋ and ⌈x⌉ε = ε⌈x/ε⌉.
   Let Dε denote the subset εZ>0 with values in (0, 1], i.e., Dε = {ε, 2ε, . . . , 1 − ε, 1}, and define
Wε = {(0, z) : z ∈ Dε } ∪ {(z, 0) : z ∈ Dε }.
   In this section, we will say that a multi-graph has multiplicity k when every edge of the multi-
graph has multiplicity k. The instances of the argument are selected as follows:

Definition 16 (Random multi-clique). Take a multi-clique of sufficiently large multiplicity q ′ . For
each edge e of this multi-clique, select its values in two steps: in the first step, uniformly and
independently select a value (0, z) or (z, 0) from Wε and, in the second step, change z to a random
value uniformly distributed in (z, (1 + ε)z). We will refer to the result as a random multi-clique.

    Once we select the values, we fix them once and for all in this section. Since every edge of a
random multi-clique has a value equal to 0, the optimal makespan for these multi-graphs is 0.
    The only reason of having the second step in selecting the values of a random multi-clique is to
satisfy the continuity requirements, which is established in the next lemma. This second step plays
no other role in this section and it can be mostly ignored, in the sense that the argument would be
more straightforward if the values of an edge e were simply in Wε .

Lemma 17. A random multi-clique satisfies the continuity requirement almost surely.

Proof. For a fixed instance v, Froda’s theorem applied to the monotone boundary function ψi,j   e (·)

guarantees that its set of discontinuity points is countable. Since the set of edges is finite, and
the rational translations of v are countable, the set of discontinuity points for v and its rational
translations is also countable. The lemma follows because, every value of a random multi-clique is
selected uniformly in (z, (1 + ε)z), for some z, ε > 0, which is an uncountable set.

    The objective in this section is to show that for every truthful mechanism with bounded approx-
imation ratio and for any given positive integer q, if the multiplicity q ′ of the random multi-clique
is sufficiently high, it contains a nice multi-star of multiplicity q. To do this, we work with a finite
set of functions with domain Dε that approximate the boundary functions with multiples of ε:
                                                         e
                                          ψ ei,j (z) = ⌊ψi,j (z)⌋ε ,                                    (4)

for every z ∈ Dε .
    The important property is that the set of approximate boundary functions is finite. Their domain
Dε consists of 1/ε values and their range consists of n/ε values {0, ε, 2ε, . . . , n − ε}, which follows
from the fact that a mechanism with approximation ratio strictly less than n must satisfy ψi,j   e (z) <

nz (Proposition 15). We will use this fact to show that a large random multi-clique contains many
edges with identical approximate boundary functions. Actually, we will need something stronger,
because the edges of nice multi-stars must also agree on their values. To achieve this, we consider
sets of edges with identical approximate boundary functions that cover the whole spectrum of
values. The precise requirements are captured by the following definition.

Definition 18. A set A of 2/ε edges between nodes i and j is called a full-range-dipole or simply
dipole if

  • for every value z in Dε , there is a pair of edges e, e′ ∈ A with values such that ⌊vie ⌋ε = z, vje = 0,
       ′             ′
    vie = 0, and ⌊vje ⌋ε = z, and

                                                     10
  • all edges e ∈ A have the same ψ ei,j (·), which we simply denote by ψ i,j (·). Similarly all edges
    have the same ψ ej,i (·).
    Dipoles are useful because any clique of them — that is, a multi-graph with a dipole between
every pair of nodes — contains a nice star as the following lemma shows. Actually the lemma
shows the stronger statement that bound (1) in the definition of nice stars (Definition 7) holds
                   e (v e ) by its lower bound ψ e (z). It is this stronger statement that will be useful
when we replace ψi,j   j                         i,j
to establish the main result of the section.
Lemma 19. In every clique of dipoles there exist i ∈ [n] and z ∈ Dε such that the following holds
for the star S that has root i, leaves the remaining n − 1 nodes, and edges with value 0 for i and in
(z, (1 + ε)z) for every j 6= i:      X
                                         ψ i,j (z) ≥ (1 − 3ε)(n − 1)z.                            (5)
                                                  j6=i
                                                       e (x) and ψ e (x) are pseudo-inverse functions,
Proof. First, for every edge e between i and j, since ψi,j        j,i
Young’s inequality (Proposition 13) gives
                                                   Z 1
                                                           e          e
                                                          ψi,j (x) + ψj,i (x) dx ≥ 1.
                                                     0
                                                      e (·) and the definition of the approximate
Second, by the monotonicity property of the function ψi,j
boundary functions, we get
            Z 1                   Z 1                                   Z 1
                   e                        e
                                                                                                              X
                  ψi,j (x) dx ≤            ψi,j (⌈x⌉ε ) dx ≤                     ψ i,j (⌈x⌉ε ) + ε dx = ε +          εψ i,j (z).
             0                        0                                  0                                    z∈Dε

Putting both facts together, we get that for every edge e between i and j:
                                                  X                                       1
                                                         (ψ i,j (z) + ψ j,i (z)) ≥          − 2.
                                                 z∈Dε
                                                                                          ε

By summing for all pairs {i, j}, we get
                                                                                           !
                                                                                         n      1
                                  X X                                                                
                                                   (ψ i,j (z) + ψ j,i (z)) ≥                      −2 ,
                                  z∈Dε {i,j}
                                                                                         2      ε
                                                                                           !
                                                                                         n      1
                                                    X XX                                             
                                                                        ψ i,j (z) ≥               −2 .
                                                   z∈Dε      i   j6=i
                                                                                         2      ε

Therefore, by a variant of the mean value theorem, there exists z ∈ Dε and i ∈ [n] such that (5)
holds. To see this, assume that there is no such z and i and therefore,
                         X XX                                    X X
                                                 ψ i,j (z) <                     (n − 1)(1 − 3ε)z
                         z∈Dε     i       j6=i                   z∈Dε        i

                                                            = n(n − 1)(1 − 3ε)(ε + 2ε + · · · + 1)
                                                                               1+ε
                                                            = n(n − 1)(1 − 3ε)
                                                                 !             2ε
                                                               n    1
                                                                          
                                                            ≤         −2 ,
                                                               2    ε
a contradiction.
    The edges that have value 0 for i and z for every j 6= i form a star that satisfies the properties
of the lemma.

                                                                         11
                                                           i




                                                   ε




                                                                         0
                                                 2ε



                                                                    0
                                                           1
                                                               0
                                                     ···           ···




                                                           0
                                                               1

                                                                    2ε
                                                   0
                                                 0




                                                                      ε
                                                           j


Figure 5: A dipole. All pairs (ψ ei,j (·), ψ ej,i (·)) are identical and the set of values {⌊vie ⌋ε , ⌊vje ⌋ε } is
equal to Wε = {(0, z) : z ∈ Dε } ∪ {(z, 0) : z ∈ Dε }. The figure shows ⌊vie ⌋ε instead of vie .

                                                  e (z). Furthermore, if z = ⌊v e ⌋ , we have ψ (z) ≤
     By definition ψ i,j (z) is a lower bound of ψi,j                          j ε             i,j
  e         e     e
ψi,j (z) ≤ ψi,j (vj ). Therefore the star guaranteed by the above lemma is a nice star. However, we
need a nice multi-star with appropriately high multiplicity. There is a straightforward strategy to
achieve it: take a random multi-clique with sufficiently high multiplicity; between every pair of
nodes, it will contain many dipoles with the same approximate boundary functions with nonzero
probability, due to the fact that the number of values and the number of approximate boundary
functions are bounded; by the above lemma every multi-clique formed from these dipoles will have
a nice star with the same i and z.

Lemma 20. Define a multi-clique of dipoles of multiplicity q to be a multi-graph that contains q
disjoint dipoles between every pair of nodes {i, j} with the same approximate boundary functions
ψ i,j (·) and ψ j,i (·). For any given q, there is q ′ such that a random multi-clique of multiplicity q ′
contains a multi-clique of dipoles of multiplicity q with strictly positive probability.

Proof. Consider a random multi-clique and focus on the edges between two nodes i and j. We
argue that for sufficiently high q ′ , the probability that there are q dipoles between i and j is close
to 1. Actually it suffices this probability to be more than 1 − 1/ n2 to get the lemma by the union
bound.
    Each one of the q ′ edges between i and j is associated with a pair of values in Wε and a pair
of approximate boundary functions. There are two crucial properties here. First, since the domain
and the range of the approximate boundary functions take 2/ε and (n/ε)2 values, respectively,
there are at most K = (n/ε)4/ε possible pairs of approximate boundary functions. Second, the
boundary functions — and therefore the approximate boundary functions — are independent of
the values of the edges between i and j (Proposition 14).
    It follows from the first property that there exists a set of at least q ′ /K edges with identical
approximate boundary functions. Fix such a set, partition it into subsets of 2/ε edges, and for each
part consider the event that it forms an dipole. The probability for each such event is equal to the
probability that all the values in a part are distinct, which is p = (2/ε)!(ε/2)2/ε . To see this, note
that the probability that the 2/ε edges have values (0, ε), (ε, 0), . . . , (0, 1), (1, 0) is (ε/2)2/ε and that
there are (2/ε)! permutations of these pairs of values. Taking into account that the values on the
edges are selected independently, the events for each part are independent. It follows immediately
that if q ′ /K is sufficiently high, there are q dipoles with probability more than 1 − 1/ n2 .
                                                                                                     

    Although it is not needed in the proof, we give a bound of q ′ in relation to q. The situation

                                                           12
is captured by a random experiment in which there are (q ′ /K)/(2/ε) independent Bernoulli trails,
each with probability p of success, and the question is to determine the probability that there are
at least q successes. It follows3 from Cantelli’s inequality that a binomially distributed random
variable X ∼ B((2k + λ2 )/p, p) satisfies P [X > k] ≥ 1 − 1/(1 + λ2 ). In our case, k = q, λ2 = n2 ,
                                                                                                   

and   p = (2/ε)!(ε/2)2/ε . Actually, in the rest of the proof, we will need q to be much larger than
 n                             2                               ′
 2 , so we can simplify 2k + λ to 3k to obtain the bound (q /K)/(2/ε) ≥ 3q/p. We conclude that
q ′ ≥ 6Kq/(pε) suffices for the statement of the lemma.

        The proof of Theorem 9 follows directly from Lemma 19 and Lemma 20.

Proof of Theorem 9. Lemma 20 guarantees the existence of a multi-clique of dipoles of multiplicity
q. By Lemma 19, there exist i and z such that every clique formed by its dipoles satisfy (5). Since
parallel dipoles have the same approximate boundary functions 4 , the same i and z work for every
clique of dipoles.
     Therefore there exists a multi-star of multiplicity q such that all its stars satisfy (5). Since
  e (v e ) ≥ ψ e (⌊v e ⌋ ) ≥ ψ e (⌊v e ⌋ ), this is a nice multi-star.
ψi,j  j       i,j   j ε        i,j  j ε


5        Proof of the Box Theorem (Theorem 10)
In this section we prove the Box Theorem 10, which states that all multi-stars with sufficiently
high multiplicity contain a box. Roughly, a box is a star S for which when we fix the values of its
leaves, and we set the values of the root to all other tasks to 0, the allocation region RS of the root
for obtaining all the tasks in S is rectangular (see Figure 2 for an illustration, Definition 8 for the
precise definition, and Section 5.1.1 for a precise definition and properties of the allocation region
RS ).
    Actually the proof establishes that the probability that a random star is a box tends to 1, as
the multiplicity tends to infinity.
    The Nice Multi-Star theorem of the previous section (Section 4) shows that there exist nice
multi-stars of any desired multiplicity and values in (z, (1 + ε)z), for some z ∈ [ε, 1], for a given
small parameter ε > 0. To keep the notation simple, the main theorem of this section is about
multi-stars with values in (ξ, 1), where ξ can be any strictly positive value. Naturally the argument
applies to any interval of values not only to (ξ, 1), and in particular to the interval (z, (1 + ε)z), so
the two theorems can be combined to obtain the main result of this work.
    The proof of the Box Theorem is by induction on the number of leaves k. The case of one leaf is
trivial — all stars are boxes. However, we don’t use this as the base case of the induction, because
proving the theorem for k = 2 requires different handling than the general case, and it is harder
than the inductive step, in many aspects. The difference between the case of two leaves and more
than two leaves is due to simple geometric facts that will become clear when we discuss the idea of
the inductive step.
    Roughly speaking the inductive step goes as follows: suppose that we have established that
most stars of multi-stars with k − 1 leaves are boxes. Then we can find a star S of k leaves —
actually many such stars — in which all its sub-stars of k − 1 leaves are boxes. Now S may be a box
    3                                   2
     Proof: For X ∈ B(m, p), we have σX   = mp(1 − p) ≤ E[X] = mp, so substituting them to Cantelli’s inequality
                                                               √
                                    2
P [X > E[X] − λσX ] ≥ 1 − 1/(1 + λ ), we get P [X > mp − λ mp] > 1 − 1/(1 + λ2 ). When m = (2k + λ2 )/p, it can
                               √
be easily verified that mp − λ mp ≥ k, so we get the result.
   4
     but not necessarily the same boundary functions; this is the reason for using the stronger statement with approx-
imate boundary functions in (5).




                                                         13
                t3                    t3                   t3                    t3




                           t1                   t1                    t1                    t1

         t2                     t2                    t2                   t2

Figure 6: The figure is a high-level illustration of the main argument of the proof of Lemma 53
for k = 3. The left figure corresponds to a strictly chopped off box, while the other three figures
illustrate the shift of the boundaries when s3 is decreased, which leads to a contradiction, as the
last figure is not a box for tasks 1, 2.


itself, in which case there is nothing to prove, or a box with a single corner cut off by a diagonal
cut (see Figures 2 and 6). Let’s call this shape “chopped off box”.
     The heart of the argument, which is based on the characterization of 2 × 2 (2 players, 2 tasks)
mechanisms, is to establish that either the chopped off box is actually a box, or we can obtain a
box when one of the tasks in S is replaced by a sibling task (i.e., a task of the same leaf). To show
this, we take a task p of the star S and some sibling p′ of p and consider the (p, p′ )-slice mechanism,
that is, the mechanism for these two tasks when we fix the values of every other task. By the
characterization of 2 × 2 mechanisms, the slice mechanism is either a (relaxed) affine minimizer or
a (relaxed) task independent mechanism.
     If the slice mechanism is task independent the proof is relatively straightforward. The fact that
tasks p and p′ are independent implies by geometry of the allocation region that if we replace task
p by p′ , we obtain a box that includes p′ and the remaining k − 1 tasks. The only real complication
for this case would arise at discontinuity points, but we have excluded them by the continuity
requirement.
     The other case is when the (p, p′ )-slice mechanism is an affine minimizer and the allocation
boundaries are linear functions. The key idea is to exploit this linearity. We keep only the linearity
property for p and completely ignore task p′ and focus on the original box. Linearity is used to
show that the allocation boundaries move rectilinearly, when we change the leaf value of task p. In
other words, the whole upper envelope of the chopped off box moves rectilinearly. But then if it
is moved sufficiently close to the side, the chopped off piece will reach the boundary and create a
chopped off box on it (see the 3-dimensional case in Figure 6). This would contradict the inductive
hypothesis that the sub-stars are boxes or equivalently that the sides are lower dimensional boxes,
except for the fact that we have changed the leaf value of task p. To actually reach a contradiction,
we use a stronger inductive hypothesis in which the side (sub-star) is a box for many values of the
leaf (see the definition of chopped off box, below).
     Notice however that the above argument fails for k = 2, because a chopped off 1-dimensional
interval is still an interval, that is, a box. Thus the case of k = 2 needs to be handled differently.
For this, we consider a star with two leaves and two edges per leaf and show that at least one of
its four stars is a box. This is done by an argument similar to the argument for the inductive step,
only that linearity is exploited for moving boundaries in two distinct directions. The fact that a
multi-star with two leaves and two edges per leaf contains a box, can be combined by a known
extremal graph theory result — related to the Zarankiewicz problem — to show that almost all
stars are boxes.
     The rest of this section makes the above outline precise. In particular, in Subsection 5.1 we

                                                     14
set up the notation and provide definitions, a formal statement of the main result of this section
(Thm 24), and useful facts and lemmas. In Section 5.2 we present the main argument. In Section 5.3
we provide the proof of the base case, in Section 5.4 the proof of the induction step, and finally in
Section 5.5 we wrap up to show existence of a box.

5.1    Notation, definitions and preliminaries
Most of the following definitions depend on the mechanism at hand, therefore it will be convenient
to fix an arbitrary truthful mechanism throughout this section. Since we are dealing with multi-stars
and not general multi-graphs, it will be convenient to change the notation.
     We consider multi-stars with n nodes: the root is node 0 and the leaves are nodes 1, . . . , n − 1.
We name the edges 1, 2, . . . , m, where m = ℓ(n − 1). Edges correspond to tasks; two parallel edges
are called siblings. The set of tasks for leaf i is denoted by Ci , and we use the term leaf for both i
and Ci . The multiplicity of every edge is ℓ, i.e., |Ci | = ℓ, for every i ∈ [n − 1].
     The values of an edge j ∈ [m] between node 0 and leaf i has two nonnegative values (v0j , vij ),
which represent the processing time for the two players; for simplicity we denote them by (tj , sj ).
All the instances in this section satisfy sj ∈ [0, B) for some arbitrarily high value B, although in
most of the argument sj takes values in [0, 1]. The set of values for all edges T = (t, s) = (tj , sj )j∈[m]
is called an instance.
                                                                               j
     For a given instance T = (t, s), we denote the boundary function ψ0,i       (vij ) of the root for edge
j ∈ [m] by ψj (sj ). Recall that the interpretation is that, having fixed the values of all other
edges, edge j is given to the root if tj < ψj (sj ), and it is given to the leaf when tj > ψj (sj ).
Since the argument sometimes considers more than one instance, it will be useful to extend the
notation to ψj (t−j , s−j , sj ) to explicitly indicate the values of the other edges. We also write it as
ψj [t−j , s−j ](sj ) when we want to treat it as a function of sj only. Since the values of most other
edges can be inferred from the context, we only indicate the values that have changed inside the
optional part (the part inside the square brackets). For example, for an instance T = (t, s), which
can be inferred from the context, if we change t1 from its current value to x, the new boundary
function of edge 2 is written as ψ2 [t1 = x](s2 ) or simply ψ2 [x](s2 ).
     In this section, we use instances that satisfy the continuity requirement (Definition 6), although
their values do not have to be rational. We use the following fixed parameters.
Definition 21 (Parameters). The values of these parameters are assumed to be rational numbers.
   • ξ ∈ (0, 1);

   • ν ∈ (0, n2ξ·4n ), a very small fixed strictly positive value;

   • ν ′ = ν/4.
    The aim is to prove that a multi-star (t, s) with tj = 0 and sj ∈ (ξ, 1), for all j ∈ [m] has a box
with parameter δ = 4n ν. Obviously the range of values (ξ, 1) can be replaced by any other interval,
so the theorem can be used for the nice multi-stars of the main argument, where the values are in
the range (z, (1 + ε)z), where ε is fixed small parameter.
    To apply induction, we need the definition of box for smaller stars, so we repeat the definition
of box (Definition 8) using the notation of this section and for the specific parameter δ that we are
going to use. Note that δ depends on the size of the star.
Definition 22 (Box). For a fixed ν, a star S with k leaves, is called a δ-box or simply box, if the
mechanism allocates all edges to the root, when we set tj = ψj (sj ) − δ for every leaf j of S, where
δ = 4k ν.

                                                    15
   The following derived instances are used many times in what follows.
Definition 23 (Instance Tν (S)). For a given instance T = (t, s), let Tν (S) = (tν , s) be the instance
that agrees with T everywhere, except for tasks in a star S with k leaves for which tj = ψj (sj )− 4k ν.
   We can now restate the main theorem of this section, a restatement of Theorem 10.
Theorem 24 (Box). For every ν and ξ that satisfy the requirements of Definition 21, a multi-star
                                                                                2n
instance T = (t, s̄) with values tj = 0, s̄j ∈ [ξ, 1] and multiplicity ℓ > 5n
                                                                            ν          , that satisfies the
continuity requirement contains a δ-box with n − 1 leaves, where δ = 4n−1 ν.
   Usually we fix the values of most tasks and consider the allocation of the mechanism on the
remaining tasks. In particular, we do this when we employ the characterization of 2×2 mechanisms.
The next definition formalizes this.
Definition 25 (Slice and slice mechanism). Fix an instance T and two tasks p and p′ . The set of
instances that agree with T on all tasks except for the tasks p and p′ is called a (p, p′ ) slice. The
allocation function of these two tasks by the mechanism is called the (p, p′ ) slice mechanism for the
given values of the other tasks, or simply the (p, p′ ) slice mechanism, when the other values can be
inferred by the context. Similarly, we define slice mechanisms for larger sets of tasks.
Definition 26 (Trivial leaf). A leaf i with set of edges Ci is called trivial for a given instance T
if tj = 0 and sj < 1 for every task j ∈ Ci .
   We now provide the definition of the main type of instances that we consider throughout.
Definition 27 (Standard instance). For a given truthful mechanism, an instance T = (t, s̄) is a
standard instance for a set of leaves C if the following conditions hold
  • tj = 0, for every j ∈ [m]
  • s̄j ∈ (ξ, 1), for every task j of these leaves, i.e., j ∈ ∪i∈C Ci ,
  • T satisfies the continuity requirement.
The leaves in C are then called standard leaves for the instance T.
    Henceforth the notation s̄ will denote some fixed standard instance (clear from the context).
We reserve the notation s for the variable, which can take any value. Note that instance T = (t, s̄)
in the statement of Theorem 24 is standard for the set of all leaves.
    The central part of the argument is an induction on the number of leaves k. In the induction
step from (k − 1) to k, the remaining leaves are trivial with fixed values, and therefore play no role;
in particular they do not affect the approximation ratio.
Definition 28 (critical values αj for singletons). For standard instances T = (t, s̄), we will use the
shorthand αj for ψj (s̄j ).
    The following observation about the boundary functions ψj (sj ) is a straightforward generaliza-
tion of Proposition 15. The proof of the lower bound is almost identical to the proof of the upper
bound given in Proposition 15.
Lemma 29. Let T = (t, s) be an instance so that all leaves are trivial. Assuming that the approx-
imation factor is less than n, for every task j ∈ [m] it holds that
  (i) sj /n < ψj (sj ) < nsj ;
 (ii) limsj →0 ψj (sj ) = ψj (0) = 0;

                                                   16
5.1.1    Region RP
The next definition of region RP of a given mechanism and instance T, concerns a k-dimensional
slice defined by a task set P. The other tasks [m] \ P have fixed values and for simplicity they are
not treated in the definition. In most cases when RP is considered, P will be a star, or a pair of
siblings, and the tasks [m] \ P will be trivial.
Definition 30 (region RP and R∅|P ). Let T = (t, s) be a given instance and P = {p1 , . . . , pk }
be a set of tasks. The allocation region RPT ⊂ Rk0,+ consists of all vectors t′P such that for input
T ′ = ((t′P , t−P ), s), all tasks of P are allocated to the root. Similarly, R∅|P
                                                                                 T  consists of all the t′P
so that for ((t′P , t−P ), s), all tasks of P are allocated to the leaves. T is omitted from the notation
when it is clear from the context.
    It follows directly by the Weak Monotonicity property that RP is a (possibly degenerate) k-
dimensional polyhedron defined by linear constraints of the form i∈I tpi ≤ cI , for some I ⊂ [k],
                                                                     P

and some cI ∈ R+ . In particular, for k = 2, RP is either a rectangle or a rectangle from which we
cut off a piece by a −45o cut. For higher dimensions, it is a hyperrectangle (orthotope) with pieces
cut off by specific hypercuts. See Figure 2 for examples of RP for k = 2 and k = 3 and see also [31]
for a geometric interpretation of truthfulness. Note that RP ⊆ ×ki=1 [0, αpi ], where αpi = ψpi (spi ).
    Two particular shapes of RP play significant role in the argument, boxes (complete orthotopes),
and chopped off boxes, which are boxes with a single corner removed by a diagonal cut of the form
  i∈[k] tpi = c[k] . Strictly speaking, in the definition of box and chopped off box, we allow thin
P

pieces of width at most δ to be missing from its faces.
    More generally, when the facet i∈[k] tpi = c[k] of RP exists, we call it bundling facet. When
                                       P

the bundling boundary facet exists, it separates the regions RP and R∅|P .
    The following obvious lemma will be useful later.
Lemma 31. Let T = (t, s) be an instance with tj = 0 for all j, and assume that for some set of
tasks P = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pk } the region RP has a full dimensional bundling facet, i.e., it contains a
point with strictly positive coordinates. Then ψpj (spj ) > 0 and spj > 0 for every task pj ∈ P .
Proof. Let t̂P be a point on the bundling facet with strictly positive coordinates. For some suffi-
ciently small ǫ > 0, consider the point (tpj = t̂pj − ǫ , (tpi = 0)i∈[k]\j ). By weak monotonicity, this
input point is in RP , so all tasks in P are given to the root. It follows that ψpj (spj ) ≥ t̂pj − ǫ > 0.
The fact that spj is also strictly positive follows from Lemma 29, since spj > ψpj (spj )/n.

    The following is a useful proposition from [9].
Proposition 32 ([9] Lemma 21. Claim (i)). For every truthful mechanism, and arbitrary T = (t, s),
the boundary function ψr (t−r , s) is 1-Lipschitz in t−r , i.e., |ψr (t−r , s) − ψr (t′−r , s)| ≤ |t−r − t′−r |1 .

5.1.2    Facts about two tasks.
In this section we summarize known concepts and results for two tasks, i.e., two edges that can
belong to the same leaf (sibling tasks) or to two different leaves (star of two tasks) (see for exam-
ple [9]). Here we assume that all other tasks are fixed, and omit them from the notation. So let
simply t = (t1 , t2 ) and s = (s1 , s2 ). First we consider allocation regions for the root depending on
his own bids (t1 , t2 ) for fixed values s = (s1 , s2 ). Here the s1 and s2 do not necessarily belong to
the same leaf. It is known that in the case of two tasks, for a fixed s the four possible allocation
regions of the root in a weakly monotone allocation subdivide R2≥0 basically in three possible ways
summarized in the following definition (see Figure 7 for an illustration).

                                                       17
Definition 33. For given (s1 , s2 ) we call the allocation for the root

   • quasi-bundling, if there are at least two points t 6= t′ on the boundary of R{1,2} and R∅|{1,2} ;

   • quasi-flipping, if R{1,2} and R∅ have no common boundary point;

   • crossing, otherwise, if there is a unique common boundary point.

We sometimes refer collectively to both quasi-bundling and quasi-flipping allocations as non-crossing.


                          ψ1 [t2 ](s1 )                                     ψ1 [t2 ](s1 )
                    t2                                           t2
                                   R∅|{1,2}                                             R∅|{1,2}



                              R{1,2}                             R{1,2}

                                                  t1                                    t1
                                   (a)                                      (b)


                                  ψ1 [t2 ](s1 )
                         t2                                           t2
                                             R∅|{1,2}                             R∅|{1,2}



                                R{1,2}                                     R{1,2}

                                                       t1                                    t1
                                       (c)                                        (d)

Figure 7: The possible allocation to the root depending on their own bid vector (t1 , t2 ) for fixed values
s = (s1 , s2 ) of the other player: (a) quasi-bundling allocation; (b) quasi-flipping allocation; (c) crossing
allocation. The boundary ψ1 [t2 ](s1 ) for task 1 is shown by a dashed line. Part (d) depicts a half-bundling
allocation at task 1, a degenerate case of quasi-bundling allocation.

    In case the allocation is quasi-bundling, the boundary between R{1,2} and R∅|{1,2} is a bundling
boundary. In general the facets defining R{1,2} in R20,+ are of the possible forms t1 = c1 , t2 = c2 ,
and t1 + t2 = c. A nontrivial facet t1 + t2 = c exists if and only if the allocation is quasi-bundling.
    We need to distinguish and treat separately a special sort of quasi-bundling allocation, because
in this case the boundary function ψ1 can become nonlinear function of s1 , even in affine minimizers
(more precisely, in their generalizations called relaxed affine minimizers, see Theorem 35 and [8]).
If the facet t1 + t2 = c exists but the facet t1 = c1 is missing (i.e., c1 > c), then we will call the
allocation of the tasks half-bundling, as defined next (see Figure 7 (d)).

Definition 34. The allocation of two tasks (1, 2) (siblings or not) is called half-bundling at task
1, if the region R{1,2} is nonempty and is defined by at most two facets t2 = c2 and t1 + t2 = c, but
no nontrivial facet t1 = c1 exists i.e., c1 > c. The allocation will be called fully bundling, if it is
half-bundling at both task 1 and task 2 i.e. both c1 , c2 > c.


                                                            18
    Finally, we include here the characterization result for 2 machines and 2 tasks (2 × 2 case).5
That is, from here on we consider two sibling tasks: the input (t1 , t2 ) is of the root, and (s1 , s2 )
belong to the same leaf. The characterization assumes that for fixed values s and sufficiently high
values of the root, both tasks will be allocated to the leaf; otherwise the approximation ratio is
unbounded (even when there exist other players and tasks with fixed values). Recall that in our
instances T = (t, s) the values for the root can be arbitrarily high, but for the s players they belong
in [0, B). The theorem from [8] that we use, characterizes mechanisms with values exactly in this
domain.
Theorem 35 (Characterization of 2 × 2 mechanisms [8]). For every B ∈ R>0 ∪ {∞}, every weakly
monotone allocation for two tasks and two players with values t ∈ [0, ∞) × [0, ∞) and s ∈ [0, B) ×
[0, B) – such that for every s there exists t for which both tasks are allocated to the second player
– belongs to the following classes: (1) relaxed affine minimizers (including the special case of
affine minimizers), (2) relaxed task independent mechanisms (including the special case of task
independent mechanisms), (3) 1-dimensional mechanisms, (4) constant mechanisms.
Remark. Two important remarks are due.
    (a) Strictly speaking, the allocation of the root in an affine minimizer adheres to the definition
over the open region s ∈ (0, B) × (0, B). If s1 = 0 or s2 = 0 the ψ boundaries of (even) an
affine minimizer can have jump discontinuities (and vice versa for the leaf, see [8]). However,
this will not affect our proof because (i) no jump in sp = 0 in a 2 × 2 mechanism can occur if
every task other than the siblings (p, p′ ) is trivial and the approximation is finite (by Lemma 29,
limsp →0 ψp (sp ) = ψp (0) = 0); (ii) whenever the other tasks are non trivial, and the characterization
for (p, p′ ) is used, we never consider an instance with sp = 0.
    (b) 1-dimensional bundling mechanisms (where the 2 tasks are always bundled) are special
relaxed affine minimizers with some additive constants that are ∞. 1-dimensional task independent
mechanisms (where one of the tasks is always given to the same player) are special relaxed task
independent mechanisms. Constant mechanisms (these are independent of (s1 , s2 )) are special affine
minimizers with a multiplicative constant 0. In this sense, the only possible 2 × 2 mechanisms are
relaxed affine minimizers and relaxed task independent mechanisms.
    Some mechanisms can be of two types; for example the VCG mechanism is both an affine
minimizer and task independent, and there exist other task independent affine minimizers. These
will be treated as task independent mechanisms.
    We summarize the most relevant properties of these mechanisms in terms of the possible allo-
cation figures (see [8, 9]). Roughly speaking, when there exists a bundling (or flipping) boundary
and three or four allocation regions, the boundary functions are affine.
Observation 36. The following properties hold for a 2 × 2 truthful mechanism.
  (i) the allocation of a relaxed task independent mechanism is crossing for every (s1 , s2 ), except
      for countably many points (s′1 , s′2 ), where both ψ1 (s1 ) has jump discontinuity in s′1 , and ψ2 (s2 )
      has jump discontinuity in s′2 ;
 (ii) the allocation of a (non task independent) relaxed affine minimizer is non crossing for every
      (s1 , s2 );6 either it is always quasi-bundling, or always quasi-flipping, with the same length
      of slanted boundary for every high enough s — as s1 and/or s2 gets smaller, part of the
      slanted boundary may disappear, thus it may get shorter (moreover, in degenerate relaxed
      affine minimizers, the possible length of the slanted boundary may be unbounded);
  5
      For a description of these mechanisms see [8, 9]. For related characterization results see [11, 18].
  6
      unless, because of small s, the allocation has at most two regions


                                                            19
(iii) the boundary function ψ1 [t2 , s2 ](s1 ) of a relaxed affine minimizer is a truncated linear function
      for every (t2 , s1 , s2 ), unless the allocation is fully bundling:7

                                  ψ1 [t2 , s2 ](s1 ) = max(0 , λ(t2 , s2 ) s1 − γ(t2 , s2 ) ).

        Symmetric statements hold for ψ2 .

    The fact that relaxed task independent mechanisms have discontinuities could create complica-
tions, but we avoid them by considering instances that satisfy the continuity requirement.

5.2     Proof of the main Box Theorem 24
The proof of the Box Theorem has some similarities to the main lemma in [9], but both the general
structure and the details of the proof must be handled differently.

Proof of Theorem 24. Fix some standard instance of n − 1 leaves and sufficiently high multiplicity
ℓ. We show by induction on k that in every subset of k ∈ [n − 1] leaves, a random star selected
uniformly and independently is a box with a certain positive probability.
    More precisely, let 1 − bk be (a lower bound on) the probability that a random star of k leaves
is a box. We establish a recurrence on bk that shows that bn−1 < 1, which proves the existence of
at least one box of n − 1 leaves.
    Specifically,
        √         Theorem 45 establishes the base case of the induction (k = 2), which shows that
b2 ≤ 2/ ℓ. Lemma 58 based on the proof of the inductive hypothesis establishes the recurrence

                                                      5n            2n3
                                                          
                                           bk ≤          − 1 bk−1 + √ ,
                                                       ν           ξ ℓ

for k ≥ 3. It follows that for sufficiently large ℓ, bn−1 can be arbitrarily small (see Corollary 59 for
a more precise bound on bk ).

5.2.1     Preliminary observations
The following theorem, essentially a restatement of Proposition 14, says that if the mechanism
has bounded approximation ratio, the allocation of the slice mechanism of two siblings must be
crossing. It also excludes the degenerate case of constant mechanisms.

Theorem 37. Let T = (t, s̄) be a standard instance. If the mechanism has approximation ratio
at most n, the boundary function ψp [t−p , s̄−p ](sp ) of a task p is independent of the values of its
siblings. Furthermore, for an arbitrary sibling p′ the (p, p′ )-slice mechanism cannot be constant,
even when we change t to non-zero values.

Proof. The theorem is a direct consequence of the following two lemmas. The first lemma excludes
the degenerate case of constant mechanisms. The next one states that slice mechanism of two
sibling tasks cannot have a quasi-bundling or quasi-flipping boundary, when the approximation
ratio is bounded. By the characterization, the slice mechanism must be a relaxed task independent
mechanism. By the continuity requirement, there are no discontinuities, so ψp [t−p , s̄−p ](sp ) of a
task p is independent of the values of its siblings.
   7
    Therefore, if the allocation is half-bundling at task 1, then for reduced s1 the ψ1 (s1 ) can become non-linear when
the figure becomes fully bundling.



                                                          20
                          tp ′                                                    tp ′
                                                      R∅|{p,p′ }                                          R∅|{p,p′ }
             αp′ + αp,p′
                          αp′
                                                                             αp,p′
                                  R{p,p′ }                                    2

                                         αp          tp                                    αp,p′      tp
                                 (a)                                                     (b) 2

                   tp ′                                       tp ′                                 tp ′
                                       R∅|{p,p′ }                           R∅|{p,p′ }                            R∅|{p,p′ }
                  αp′
         αp′ − αp,p′
                                  R{p,p′ }
                                                                                                     ǫ
                                             αp tp                   αp,p′ + 2ǫ             tp               ǫ                 tp
                           (c)                                       (d)                                   (e)

                                Figure 8: High-level illustration of the proof of Lemma 39

Lemma 38. Assume that the mechanism has approximation ratio at most n. Let T = (t, s̄) be a
standard instance and Q any leaf, with sibling tasks p, p′ ∈ Q. Furthermore, for some k ≤ n − 1 let
P = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pk } be an arbitrary set of k other tasks. If in T we increase each tpi (pi ∈ P ) to
some arbitrary value t̂pi ≥ 0, then in the obtained instance T̂ the slice mechanism (p, p′ ) is not a
constant mechanism, unless the approximation ratio of the whole mechanism is at least n.
Proof. Consider the (p, p′ ) slice mechanism, and let (t, t′ ) = (tp , tp′ ) and (s, s′ ) = (sp , sp′ ) denote an
input for these two tasks in general. A 2× 2 constant mechanism is by definition independent of the
values of (at least) the root or the leaf. Looking at the allocation of the root (for any fixed s), w.l.o.g.
the region R∅|{p,p′ } is nonempty (otherwise we could increase to (t, t′ ) = (∞, ∞), so that the root
still gets a task, showing unbounded approximation ratio). So, if the mechanism were independent
of the root, then for every (s, s′ ) the allocation would consist only of R∅|{p,p′ } – the root would
never get any task, also independently of s. Thus, in any case the allocation must be independent
of s. The contribution to OP T of every task other than p, p′ , is at most pi ∈P s̄pi ≤ (n − 1) · 1,
                                                                                        P

since T is a standard instance.
     Now, set (t, t′ ) = (n2 , n2 ). If the root receives no task from {p, p′ }, then increase (s, s′ ) = (2n3 , 0).
Then Mech ≥ 2n3 , and Opt < n + n2 < 2n2 , proving high approximation. If the root receives at
least one of the tasks, then Mech ≥ n2 . Setting (s, s′ ) = (0, 0), we have Opt < n, so again, we
have high approximation ratio.

Lemma 39. Let T = (t, s̄) be a standard instance, and Q be any leaf. Assume that two sibling
tasks p, p′ ∈ Q exist so that the allocation in the (p, p′ )-slice mechanism is quasi-bundling or quasi-
flipping. Then the mechanism has infinite approximation ratio.
Proof. By the characterization result (Theorem 35 and Observation 36), the (p, p′ )-slice mechanism
is a (non task independent) relaxed affine minimizer.
    Consider first the case that the affine minimizer is quasi-flipping (Fig. 8 (a)), with height αp,p′
of the flipping boundary (i.e., the height of the 45o boundary). Lemma 29 implies ψp (sp ) → 0 when

                                                                   21
                                                              0
                                                                         t2
                                                       t1




                                                                  t 2′
                                                       t1 ′




                                                                                   s2
                                             s1
                                                   ′                          s2
                                                  s1                               ′

                                         1                                              2


                                    Figure 9: The base case instance


sp → 0, and ψp′ (sp′ ) → 0 when sp′ → 0, hence for (sp , sp′ ) = (ǫ, ǫ) the allocation is still quasi-
flipping. In particular, because 0 < ψp (ǫ) ≤ nǫ, and 0 < ψp′ (ǫ) ≤ nǫ, and the flipping boundary
has height αp,p′ , exactly one of the tasks is given to the root for values (tp , tp′ ) = (αp,p′ /2, αp,p′ /2)
(Fig. 8 (b)). The approximation ratio is Mech/Opt > (αp,p′ /2)/2ǫ → ∞ when ǫ → 0. Finally, in
the quasi-flipping case αpp′ = ∞ can be excluded by Lemma 29 (i) (to put it simply, both R{p,p′ }
and R∅|{p,p′ } must be nonempty).
    Now consider the case that the relaxed affine minimizer is quasi-bundling with height of the
bundling boundary equal to αp,p′ (Fig. 8 (c)). The 2 × 2 characterization implies that αp,p′ is
constant (i.e., independent of the (s, t) values when s large enough, see Observation 36 ). Set sp so
that ψp (sp ) = αp,p′ + ǫ/2 (Fig. 8 (d)). Now for some large sp′ , the allocation is almost half-bundling
at p′ , and by the definition of relaxed affine minimizers, the allocation remains quasi-bundling when
we decrease sp′ . If we set sp′ = ǫ/(2n) and t = (ǫ, ǫ), taking into account that ψp′ (sp′ ) < n sp′ = ǫ/2,
the existence of the bundling boundary guarantees that both tasks are given to the leaf (Fig. 8
(e)). In turn this gives unbounded approximation ratio because Mech ≥ sp > ψp (sp )/n > αp,p′ /n,
while Opt ≤ 2ǫ.
    If in the quasi-bundling case αpp′ = ∞ (e.g., for one-dimensional bundling mechanisms) the
argument is analogous. For sp = 1, sp′ = ǫ/2n and t = (ǫ, ǫ), both tasks are allocated to the leaves
and we obtain unbounded ratio.

Corollary 40. Let T = (t, s̄) be a standard instance, p, p′ be sibling tasks and q be an arbitrary third
task. If the region R{p,p′ ,q} has a bundling facet of equation tp + tp′ + tq = D for some D < αp + αp′ ,
then R{p,p′ } is quasi-bundling, so by Lemma 39 the mechanism has unbounded ratio.

Proof. By definition, in the (p, p′ ) slice the points (αp , 0) and (0, αp′ ) are on the boundary of R{p,p′ } .
On the other hand, in R{p,p′ ,q} the point (αp , αp′ , 0) strictly violates tp + tp′ + tq ≤ D. Therefore,
the point (αp , αp′ ) does not belong in R{p,p′ } so this allocation region can only be quasi-bundling
(See also Figure 10.).

5.3    Base case
In this section we prove the special case of the Box Theorem (Theorem 24) for two leaves. In this
particular case, multiplicity 2 is sufficient.

Theorem 41. For a mechanism with approximation ratio at most n, every standard instance with
2 leaves and 2 tasks per leaf contain a box of 2 leaves.

    The proof of the theorem is given in this section. We consider a multi-star with two leaves and
two tasks per leaf, as shown in Figure 9. We rename the two tasks of leaf 1 as 1,1’ and the two
tasks of leaf 2 as 2,2’.
    The next claim follows directly from the definition of a box. The factor 32 = 2 · 42 comes from
the definition of the box and simple geometric considerations.

                                                              22
Lemma 42. If the pair of tasks {1, 2}, is not a box, then the R{1,2} region of the slice-mechanism
for these two tasks has a bundling boundary. In particular, there exists α12 ≥ 32ν such that the
bundling boundary is defined by the equation t1 + t2 = α1 + α2 − α12 . Similarly for the other pairs
{1, 2′ }, {1′ , 2}, and {1′ , 2′ }.

   We continue with two technical lemmas. We provide some intuition of the base case after the
lemmas. Notice that the first lemma, which is a consequence of Corollary 40, breaks the symmetry
between tasks, i.e., the conclusion does not apply if we exchange the role of the two leaves.

Lemma 43. Assume that α2′ = max{α1 , α1′ , α2 , α2′ }. If there exists some t̄1 ∈ (α1 − α12 , α1 ) such
that the allocation in the slice (2, 2′ ) is half-bundling at task 2, then the mechanism has unbounded
approximation ratio. Analogously, if there exists some t̄1′ ∈ (α1′ −α1′ 2 , α1′ ) such that the allocation
in the slice (2 , 2′ ) is half-bundling at task 2, then the mechanism has unbounded approximation
ratio.

Proof. See Figure 10 for an illustration of the proof. Assume that for t̄1 ∈ (α1 − α12 , α1 ) the
allocation in the slice (2, 2′ ) is half-bundling at task 2. Let the endpoint of the half-bundling
boundary be t̄ = (t̄1 , t̄2 , t2′ = 0). Since this is the boundary point for task 2 (i.e., t̄2 is a critical
value), it also lies on the bundling boundary of R{1,2} , and obviously t̄1 < α1 and t̄2 < α2 hold.
    We will show that the region R{1,2,2′ } must have a bundling facet of equation t1 + t2 + t2′ = D,
for D < α1 + α2 ≤ α2′ + α2 . By Corollary 40 this will imply that the mechanism has infinite
approximation.
    By the geometry of the half-bundling boundary, for an input point t̄′ = (t̄1 , t̄2 − ǫ, t2′ = 2ǫ) the
tasks 2 and 2′ are not allocated to the root player. So t̄′ is outside the region R{1,2,2′ } , and violates
at least one linear constraint defining R{1,2,2′ } .
    What can these constraints be? We will eliminate all other possibilities, by choosing ǫ to be
sufficiently small, concluding that there must exist a bundling facet of equation t1 + t2 + t2′ = D.
Firstly, R{1,2,2′ } may have facets of equations t1 = α1 , t2 = α2 , t2′ = α2′ , but t̄′ does not violate
any of these. Further, there might be a facet of the form t1 + t2 = d. But since t̄ satisfies this
constraint, d ≥ t̄1 + t̄2 > t̄1 + t̄2 − ǫ, so this constraint cannot be violated for t̄′ either. Similarly a
facet of equation t2 + t2′ = e is not violated since e ≥ α2 > t̄2 + ǫ, and finally a facet of equation
t1 + t2′ = f cannot be violated since f ≥ α1 > t̄1 + 2ǫ, for small enough ǫ. The only remaining
possibility is a facet t1 + t2 + t2′ = D, so that D ≤ t̄1 + (t̄2 − ǫ) + 2ǫ = t̄1 + t̄2 + ǫ < α1 + α2 , which
concludes the proof. The proof of the second statement is analogous with task 1′ instead of task
1.

    The claim of the next lemma holds under quite general conditions. We will apply it to different
triples of the four tasks, and even different instances.

Lemma 44. If both R{1,2} and R{1,2′ } are quasi-bundling, then the allocation of the slice mechanism
(2, 2′ ) is non-crossing when we set t1 to any value in (α1 − min{α12 , α12′ }, α1 ), with the possible
exception of a single value in this interval. The same holds for task 1′ instead of 1.

Proof. Towards a contradiction, assume that there are two values t̄1 and t̄′1 with t̄1 < t̄′1 in this
interval, for both of which the allocation in the slice (2, 2′ ) is crossing. This means that for
t1 ∈ {t̄1 , t̄′1 } the slice mechanism for tasks 2 and 2’ is task-independent, i.e., the boundary of
task 2 is unaffected by changing the value of task 2’.
    The fact that these two values of t1 are in (α1 − min{α12 , α12′ }, α1 ) ⊆ (α1 − α12 , α1 ) means
that they fall in the bundling boundary between 1 and 2 (Figure 11). In the interval [t̄1 , t̄′1 ] the
bundling boundary is common between tasks 1 and 2. Since the boundary of task 2 is unaffected

                                                    23
                                                  t2




                                             α2
                                                            t̄ = (t̄1 , t̄2 , 0)


                                                                            t1
                                                            α1          D
                                       α2′
                                 t2′

Figure 10: Illustration of the proof of Lemma 43. The half-bundling boundary in the slice (t2 , t2′ )
for t1 = t̄1 is drawn by the dashed lines. It can exist only if R{1,2,2′ } has a bundling facet on the
plane t1 + t2 + t2′ = D (where D = t̄1 + t̄2 ). Given that D < α2 + α2′ , the allocation of R{2,2′ } (for
t1 = 0) cannot be crossing, even if arbitrary other defining facets for R{1,2,2′ } exist.


by changing the value of task 2’, the boundary of t1 in [t̄1 , t̄′1 ] also remains unaffected by changing
the value of task 2’. In particular, this means that for instances (t1 = t̄1 , t2 = 0, t2′ = x), the
mechanism allocates both task 1 and 2 to the root, for all x.
   But for large x, say x ≥ α2′ , the above points are in the region R∅|{1,2′ } , because t̄1 > α1 − α12′
and the point (t1 = t̄1 , t2 = 0, t2′ = x) is above the bundling boundary of 1 and 2’. This contradicts
the fact that 1 is allocated to the root.

    Now we are ready to state the main lemma of the base case. We will show that if none of the
four stars from {1, 1′ , 2, 2′ } is a box, then the mechanism has high approximation ratio.
    Intuitively, we will argue as follows: By reducing s2 to some positive value s∗2 , we shift the
2-dimensional bundling boundary facets of both R{1,2} and of R{1′ ,2} parallel to themselves until
both of them reach the t2 = 0 plane (i.e., bundling boundaries reach the t1 -axis, and the t1′ -axis,
respectively, but they do not disappear). Hereby we will use that by the previous lemma, the (2, 2′ )
slices are not task-independent, and therefore the boundary positions ψ2 are linear functions of s2 .
    Subsequently, — applying the lemma in another, orthogonal, direction — we reduce s1 , in order
to shift one of the bundling boundaries (say, of R{1,2} ) in the other direction to reach the t2 -axis
and further, until the bundling boundary ’disappears’. This will imply high approximation ratio in
the end, because s∗2 remains positive and bounded from below, but the (t1 , t2 ) ≈ (0, 0) input will
be allocated to the leaves.
    We remark that such a parallel shift of the boundary by linear function of si is trivial for an
affine minimizer, but far from obvious for tasks 1 and 2 that are not siblings, since the 2 × 2
characterization does apply to the (1, 2)-slice mechanism.
    We are now ready to prove the base case (Theorem 41).

Proof of Theorem 41. Consider a standard instance T = (t, s̄), and assume w.l.o.g. that α2′ =
max{α1 , α1′ , α2 , α2′ }. First, we apply Lemma 44 to the triple {1, 2, 2′ }. According to the lemma,
for all but at most one t1 ∈ (α1 −C, α1 ) the corresponding slice mechanism (2, 2′ ) has a non-crossing
allocation, where C = min{α12 , α12′ } ≥ 32ν.
    By the continuity requirement, the (2, 2′ )-slice mechanism cannot be task independent (for t1
rational) because it has a non-crossing allocation. Also, Theorem 37 establishes that it cannot be

                                                       24
                                       t2 t2′
                                      x                         (t1 = t̄1 , t2′ = x)
                                     α2′

                                      α2




                                                            t̄1 t̄′1       α1 t1

Figure 11: High-level argument of the proof of Lemma 44. The blue part depicts the values of tasks 1 and
2 and the green part depicts the values of task 1 and 2’. The blue continuous line shows the boundaries for
tasks 1 and 2 when t2′ = 0. Similarly, the green continuous line shows the boundaries for tasks 1 and 2’ when
t2 = 0. t1 = t̄1 and t1 = t̄′1 are two values on the bundling boundary (i.e., the part with slope −45o ) between
tasks 1 and 2. The lemma shows that the (2,2’) slice mechanism cannot be task independent at both of these
values of t1 . Indeed if tasks 2 and 2’ are independent at t1 ∈ {t̄1 , t̄′1 }, changing t2′ does not change the blue
line at these values, and therefore the boundary between 1 and 2 remains bundling in the interval [t̄1 , t̄′1 ].
This leads to a contradiction, when we consider the allocation of an instance (t1 = t̄1 , t2 = 0, t2′ = x), for
x ≥ α2′ . This instance, depicted as a blue dot at (t1 = t̄1 , t2 = 0) and as a green dot at (t1 = t̄1 , t2′ = x), is
to the west of the blue line (which is the boundary between 1 and 2) and east of the green line (which is the
boundary between 1 and 2’); the first says that task 1 is given to the root and the latter that it is not given
to the root.


a constant mechanism, if the approximation ratio is at most n. Thus the (2, 2′ )-slice mechanism
can only be a relaxed affine minimizer. Lemma 43 excludes the possibility that it is half-bundling
at task 2, for t1 ∈ (α1 − C, α1 ). We conclude that for (all but one) rational t1 ∈ (α1 − C, α1 ) the
(2, 2′ ) slice mechanism is in the linear part of a relaxed affine minimizer, that is, by Observation 36
(iii) it has critical values for t2 that are truncated linear functions of s2 :

                                    ψ2 [t1 ](s2 ) = max(0, λ(t1 ) s2 − γ(t1 ) ).

Recall that this notation omits the parameters that have their original values s̄ and t = 0. In
particular, both λ(t1 ) and γ(t1 ) may depend on values in s−2 , but this dependency will not play
any role in the argument.
    Analogously, we can apply Proposition 44 to the triple {1′ , 2, 2′ }, obtaining that with C ′ =
min{α1′ 2 , α1′ 2′ } for all but at most one, rational t1′ ∈ (α1′ − C ′ , α1′ ) the ψ2 [t1′ ](s2 ) are truncated
linear functions of s2 .
    The following claim is a variant of ([8], Lemma 4); we show that for different points on the same
bundling boundary, due to linearity, the multiplicative constant of ψ2 () must be the same.
Claim (i). In the interval t1 ∈ (α1 − C, α1 ), λ(t1 ) is fixed, i.e., independent of t1 . Similarly λ(t1′ )
is independent of t1′ ∈ (α1′ − C ′ , α1′ ).

Proof. Fix two values t1 , t̂1 ∈ (α1 − C, α1 ) ⊂ (α1 − α12 , α1 ) with t1 < t̂1 . The critical value points
for t2 are on a bundling boundary of R{1,2} , so

                                       ψ2 [t1 ](s̄2 ) − ψ2 [t̂1 ](s̄2 ) = t̂1 − t1 .


                                                           25
           t2                                   t2                                    t2
                               R∅                                 R∅
          α2


                      R{1,2}                   α2                                                R∅
                                                                                      ε
                               α1 t1                            α1 t1                       ε          t1
                (a)                                  (b)                                   (c)

Figure 12: High-level argument of the proof of Theorem 41. Figure (a) shows the (1, 2) slice. Figure (b)
shows how the area of the R1,2 changes when we reduce the values of s2 to s∗2 > 0 and Figure (c) when we
reduce s1 to s∗1 . In Figure (c) none of the tasks is allocated to the root, even for small values of t1 = t2 = ε
which implies an unbounded ratio (see Lemma 39). Note that this shift of the bundling boundary would be
straightforward for an affine-minimizer, because of linearity of the boundaries. But here we need to establish
this carefully, by using the sibling tasks 1′ , 2′ . By applying Lemma 44 first to the triple {1, 2, 2′} and then
to the triple {1′ , 2, 2′ }, we establish linearity of the boundary ψ2 (s2 ) for an interval of t1 values. Figure (b)
illustrates that this allows to shift the bundling boundary by reducing s2 to s∗2 > 0 reaching a half-bundling
position (Claims (i), (ii), (iii)). Then Claim (iv) establishes linearity of ψ1 (s1 ), which allows us to reduce s1
to s∗1 > 0 and obtain an unbounded approximation ratio.


     Assume for contradiction that λ(t1 ) > λ(t̂1 ). Then we slightly increase s2 to s̄2 + ǫ, and obtain
ψ2 [t1 ](s̄2 + ǫ) − ψ2 [t̂1 ](s̄2 + ǫ) = t̂1 − t1 + ǫ(λ(t1 ) − λ(t̂1 )) > t̂1 − t1 , which contradicts the Lipschitz
property (Proposition 32).
     For the other direction, λ(t1 ) < λ(t̂1 ), we slightly decrease the value to s2 − ǫ, and again violate
the Lipschitz property analogously.

    From Claim (i) it follows that ψ2 [t1 ](s2 ) − ψ2 [t′1 ](s2 ) = t′1 − t1 for every s2 for which these ψ2
values are positive. Thus for every s2 the following set of boundary points of R{1,2} ,

                          {(t1 , ψ2 [t1 ](s2 )) : t1 ∈ (α1 − C, α1 ) ∧ ψ2 [t1 ](s2 ) > 0 } ,

remain part of a bundling boundary. An analogous statement holds for the boundary of R{1′ 2} for
t1′ ∈ (α1 − C ′ , α1 ]. Next we give simple bounds for λ and γ.
Claim (ii). Let t1 ∈ (α1 − C, α1 ], and

                                    ψ2 [t1 ](s2 ) = max(0 , λ(t1 ) · s2 − γ(t1 ) );

Then 0 < γ(t1 ) < λ(t1 ) < 2n or the approximation ratio is at least n. Similarly for every t′1 ∈
(α1 − C ′ , α1 ].

Proof. Fix a t1 ∈ (α1 − C, α1 ], and let λ = λ(t1 ) and γ = γ(t1 ).
     First we prove 0 < γ. For every s2 , for which R{1,2} (or R{1′ ,2} ) has a bundling boundary, it
obviously holds that ψ2 (s2 ) > 0 (Lemma 31). On the other hand, by Lemma 29, ψ2 (s2 ) → 0 as
s2 → 0. Therefore, for s2 = 0, no piece of bundling boundary can remain for R{1,2} . Thus for t1
it holds that ψ2 [t1 ](0) = 0, and therefore λ · 0 − γ ≤ 0, which implies 0 ≤ γ. Finally, since by the
same argument γ(t1 − ǫ) ≥ 0, and due to the bundling boundary γ(t1 ) − ǫ = γ(t1 − ǫ) ≥ 0, we even
obtain strict inequality γ(t1 ) > 0 for every t1 ∈ (α1 − C, α1 ].
     Second, we prove γ < λ. By R{1,2} being quasi-bundling, and by the position of t1 , we obviously
have ψ2 [t1 ](s̄2 ) > 0. Since s̄2 ≤ 1, we get γ < λ. Then, λ < 2n follows from the fact that
ψ2 [t1 ](s2 ) < ns2 , for all values of s2 (Lemma 29).

                                                           26
   Let ŝ2 = γ(α1 )/λ(α1 ) > 0. Note that ŝ2 is the largest s2 value such that ψ2 [t1 = α1 ](s2 ) = 0
(that is, for ŝ2 the bundling boundary of R{1,2} touches the t1 axis). Analogously, define ŝ′2 > 0 to
be the largest s2 value such that ψ2 [t1′ = α1′ ](s2 ) = 0. Assume w.l.o.g that ŝ2 ≤ ŝ′2 , that is

                             ψ2 [t1 = α1 ](ŝ2 ) = 0   ⇒     ψ2 [t1′ = α1′ ](ŝ2 ) = 0.

We would like to reduce s2 = s̄2 to some appropriate s2 = s∗2 > 0, where ψ2 [t1 = α1 ](s∗2 ) = 0 and
ψ2 [t1′ = α1′ ](s∗2 ) = 0, but for (t1 , t1′ ) = (0, 0) it still holds that ψ2 [t1 = 0, t1′ = 0](s∗2 ) > 0. The next
claim provides such an s∗2 :
Claim (iii). There exists q ∗ ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 4n/ν} such that for s∗2 := s̄2 − q ∗ ν/(4n) the following hold:

 (a) ψ2 [t1 = α1 ](s∗2 ) = ψ2 [t1′ = α1′ ](s∗2 ) = 0;

 (b) ψ2 [t1 = 0, t1′ = 0](s∗2 ) > 30ν

 (c) s∗2 > 30ν/n.
                                                                                     ν
Proof. For any t1 ∈ [α1 − C, α1 ], consider the sequence of values ψ2 [t1 ](s̄2 − q 4n ), for q = 0, 1, 2, . . . .
By Claim (ii), λ(t1 ) ≤ 2n, so successive values in this sequence differ by at most λ(ν/4n) ≤
2nν/4n = ν/2.
   As above, let ŝ2 be the largest value such that ψ2 [t1 = α1 ](ŝ2 ) = 0. Then for this ŝ2 , over the
whole interval t1 ∈ [α1 − C, α1 ] there is still a bundling boundary of R{1,2} . It follows that

   ψ2 [t1 = α1 − C](ŝ2 ) − 0 = ψ2 [t1 = α1 − C](ŝ2 ) − ψ2 [t1 = α1 ](ŝ2 ) = α1 − (α1 − C) = C ≥ 32ν.

Now we further reduce ŝ2 to the next possible value of the form s̄2 − qν/(4n), and define this to be
s∗2 . We have ψ2 [t1 = 0, t1′ = 0](s∗2 ) ≥ ψ2 [t1 = α1 − C, t1′ = 0](s∗2 ) ≥ 32ν − ν/2 > 30ν, so (b) holds.
Also, (a) holds by the assumption that ψ2 [t1 = α1 ](s2 ) = 0 ⇒ ψ2 [t1′ = α1′ ](s2 ) = 0. Finally,
(c) holds, since by Observation 29 s∗2 · n > ψ2 (s∗2 ) = ψ2 [t1 = 0, t1′ = 0](s∗2 ) > 30ν.

     Let T ∗ denote the instance that we get by changing s̄2 to s∗2 in T = (t, s̄). We claim that in
   ∗             T∗
T the region R{1,2}                                          T∗
                      is half-bundling at 1, and the region R{1                             ′
                                                               ′ ,2} is half-bundling at 1 . This follows

immediately from Claim (iii) (a) and (b). Indeed, if ψ2 [t1 = 0](s∗2 ) > ψ2 [t1 = t′1 ](s∗2 ) = 0 for some
t′1 > 0, then geometry implies that R{1,2} can only be half-bundling (and similarly for R{1′ ,2} ).
     Observe, that T ∗ is a standard instance for leaf set {1}. We apply Lemma 39 to (1, 1′ ), and
obtain that R{1,1′ } (for t2 = 0) must be crossing, otherwise the approximation ratio is ∞.
     Let c = ψ2 [t1 = 0, t1′ = 0](s∗2 ) > 30ν (see also Figure 13). For the critical value of t1 , we will use
the notation α∗1 = ψ1 [T ∗ ](s̄1 ). Analogously, let α∗1′ = ψ1′ [T ∗ ](s̄1′ ). By R{1′ ,2} being half-bundling at
1′ , we have α∗1 ≥ c and α∗1′ ≥ c.
     Consider now the (1, 1′ ) slice allocation for T ∗ for different positive rational values of t2 ∈ (0, c).
What kind of allocations can these be? By Proposition 44 applied to {2, 1, 1′ }, for almost all (in
fact, for all) t2 ∈ (0, c), it cannot be a crossing allocation. The next claim excludes that it is half-
bundling for any t2 ∈ (0, c). The only remaining possibility is, that for every rational t2 ∈ (0, c),
it is (the linear part of) a relaxed affine minimizer. This will imply that for such a t2 , the critical
value fuction ψ1 [t2 ](s1 ) is truncated linear in the variable s1 .
Claim (iv). If the allocation of the slice (1, 1′ ) is half bundling for some t2 ∈ (0, c), then the
approximation ratio of the mechanism is unbounded.




                                                        27
                                             t2
                                         c
                                                               (t̂1 , t̂2 , 0)

                                                                    α∗1          t1
                                α∗1′
                                t1′

Figure 13: Illustration to the proof of Claim iv. The dashed line is a half-bundling boundary in
the slice (t1 , t1′ ). It implies the existence of a bundling facet of R{1,1′ ,2} . Such a facet excludes that
R{1,1′ } (for t2 = 0) is crossing, even if other facets of R{1,1′ ,2} exist.


Proof. The proof is similar to that of Lemma 43. Assume that for some t̂2 ∈ (0, c) the (1, 1′ )
allocation is half-bundling at task 1. Let (t̂1 , t1′ = 0, t̂2 ) denote the endpoint of the half-bundling
boundary (see Figure 13). By definition, this point is on the half-bundling boundary of the slice
(1, 1′ ) (for t2 = t̂2 fixed). On the other hand, (since the critical value t̂1 for task 1 is unique) it is also
on the half-bundling boundary of the slice (1, 2) (for t1′ = 0 fixed), because R{1,2} is half-bundling
at task 1 and t̂2 < c. From the latter it follows that t̂1 + t̂2 = α∗1 .
     We show that the region R{1,1′ ,2} has a bundling facet of equation t1 + t1′ + t2 = α∗1 < α∗1 + α∗1′ .
By Corollary 40 this will imply that the mechanism has unbounded approximation ratio.
     For some small enough ǫ > 0, the point (t̂1 − ǫ, t1′ = 2ǫ, t̂2 ) is not in R{1,1′ ,2} , since (at least)
the tasks 1 and 1′ are not allocated to the root by the definition of the half-bundling boundary of
the slice (1, 1′ ). So this point violates at least one linear constraint defining R{1,1′ ,2} .
     R{1,1′ ,2} may have facets of equations t1 = α∗1 , t1′ = α∗1′ and t2 = c, respectively. The point
(t̂1 − ǫ, t1′ = 2ǫ, t̂2 ) is within these boundaries for 2ǫ < α∗1′ . Further, there might be boundaries of
equations t1 + t2 = d (for some d ≥ α∗1 ), or t1 + t1′ = e (for e ≥ α∗1 ), or t1′ + t2 = f (for f ≥ c).
However, for small ǫ these would not exclude the point (t̂1 − ǫ, t1′ = 2ǫ, t̂2 ) from R{1,1′ ,2} (as follows
from t̂1 + t̂2 = α∗1 ≤ d, and t̂1 < α∗1 ≤ e, and t̂2 < c ≤ f, respectively).
     The only remaining possibility is a facet t1 +t1′ +t2 = D such that t̂1 +ǫ+ t̂2 ≥ D ≥ α∗1 = t̂1 + t̂2 .
Taking ǫ → 0, we obtain D = α∗1 , which concludes the proof.

     We therefore conclude that for every (rational) t2 ∈ (0, c) the (1, 1′ ) slice is (in the linear part
of) an affine minimizer and so the critical value function (at t1′ = 0) for t1 is linear in s1 , that
is ψ1 [t2 ](s1 ) = max(0 , λ(t2 ) · s1 − γ(t2 ) ). With role change between tasks 1 and 2, with precisely
the same argument as in Claim (i), we obtain that λ(t2 ) is equal for all rational t2 ∈ (0, c), and
therefore, for all t2 ∈ (0, c).
     We concentrate only on the (1, 2) allocation now, while every other t-value is 0. Let ψ1 (s1 ) =
ψ1 [t2 = 0](s1 ). We reduce s1 so that s1 → 0. By Observation 29 (ii) applied to T ∗ , we have
ψ1 (s1 ) → 0 (that is, γ(t2 = 0) = 0). Because of linearity of ψ1 with unique λ for every t2 ∈ (0, c),
the R{1,2} has a half-bundling boundary, as long as ψ1 (s1 ) > 0, that is, as long as s1 > 0. This
implies that for every s1 > 0, the point (t1 , t2 ) = (ψ1 (s1 ), ψ1 (s1 )) is in the region R∅|{1,2} , i.e., tasks
1 and 2 are allocated to the leaves. As s1 tends to 0, the point (ψ1 (s1 ), ψ1 (s1 )) tends to (0, 0).
Clearly, Opt → 0, and Mech ≥ s∗2 > 30ν. Taking s1 → 0, we obtain unbounded approximation
ratio.

    Theorem 41 established that every pair of leaves with two tasks per leaf contains a box of size


                                                       28
two. This immediately suggests that there are many boxes of size two. The following statement
makes it precise.
Theorem 45. Let T be a standard instance. If the approximation
                                                           √   ratio is at most n, a random
star of two leaves is not a box with probability at most 2/ ℓ.
Proof. The proof is an immediate consequence√ of the following extremal graph theory result [21]:
Every ℓ × ℓ bipartite graph with at least 2ℓ ℓ edges, contains a cycle C4 .
   Take an ℓ × ℓ bipartite graph with edges indicating that the associated star is not√a box.
Theorem 41 guarantees that there exists no C4 , which implies that there are at most 2ℓ ℓ stars
that are not boxes.

5.4    Induction step
For the induction step, we consider a star of k ≥ 3 tasks, which we call chopped off box, such that
all its subsets of k − 1 tasks are boxes. The precise structure of a chopped off box is detailed in the
following definition.
Definition 46 (Chopped off box). Fix a mechanism. A star P = {p1 , . . . , pk } from a set of leaves
C, for |C| = k ≥ 3 is called a chopped off box for an instance T if T = (t, s̄) is standard for P and
the following conditions hold
   • for every i ∈ [k], P−i = P \ {pi } is a box for T ;

   • for every q = 1, . . . , 4n/ν, such that s̄pk > qν/(4n), the instance that results from T when we
     replace the values of task pk with [tpk = 0, s̄pk − qν/(4n)], the P−k is a box.
If a chopped off box is not a box itself, it will be called strictly chopped off box.
     The definition of a box is about the allocation area RP , in which all tasks are allocated to the
root. Recall that a box is a set of tasks for which RP is (almost) an orthotope (a hyperrectangle).
On the other hand, the first condition in the definition of a chopped off box essentially says that
it is a box from which a simplex was cut off by a diagonal cut (i.e., by a hyperplane of the form
   i∈[k] tpi = c[k] ). While the definition allows the removed simplex to be empty (in which case it is
P

simply a box), when we want to emphasize that it is not empty, we call it a strictly chopped off
box (see Figure 2 (c) and (e)).
     In the rest of this section we establish that the probability that a chopped off box is not a box,
is small. We consider a standard instance T = (t, s) and a star P = {p1 , . . . , pk } from a set of leaves
C = (Q1 , . . . , Qk ), and we assume that P is a strictly chopped off box. Let p′k be a random sibling
of pk , i.e., another task of leaf Qk . The main result of this section establishes that almost all other
sets (P−k , p′k ) are boxes. In particular, we will show via a probabilistic argument that (P−k , p′k ) is
a box with probability at least 1 − 2n3 /ℓξ (Lemma 55). In order to show this result, we consider
the (pk , p′k )-slice mechanism which is a mechanism between two players and two tasks, utilizing the
2 × 2 characterization (Theorem 35 and Observation 36).
     We will focus on input points that lie on a specific area around the allocation region RP , for
which we can establish useful properties when we use the 2 × 2 characterization. In what follows,
two important input points are Tν (P ) and Tν ′ (P ). Recall that by Definition 23, Tν (P ) is an
instance (tν , s) that agrees with T everywhere, except for tasks in P, where tνpi = αpi − 4k ν. We
                         ′                                        ′
define Tν ′ (P ) = (tν , s) similarly, but for ν ′ = ν/4. Then tνP is a point between tνP and (αpi )pi ∈P .
Moreover, Tν (P−k ) is the projection in direction of the pk -axis of Tν ′ (P ), i.e., all tasks pi in P \ pk .
have t-values equal to αpi − 4k−1 ν. We will use the short notation Tν = Tν (P ) and Tν ′ = Tν ′ (P ).

                                                      29
   We proceed with some useful properties of chopped off boxes (Section 5.4.1), and then we
examine the different possibilities for a (pk , p′k )-slice mechanism (Section 5.4.2). Then we conclude
with the main result of this section, that shows that the probability that a chopped off box is not
a box, is small (Section 5.4.3).

5.4.1   General observations.
We will need a few simple observations about weakly monotone mechanisms. First of all, the
following proposition and its corollaries provide some intuition about chopped off box sets.
Proposition 47. Suppose that P = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pk } is a strictly chopped off box for T = (t, s̄).
                                                                                    ′
Consider an arbitrary instance T ′ = [(t′P , t[m]\P ), s̄] such that tνP < t′P < tνP coordinate-wise – and
so, Tν ≤ T ′ ≤ Tν ′ . Then the point t′P obeys every linear constraint defining the region RPT , except
for a single violated non-redundant constraint ki=1 tpi = c for some c ≤ ki=1 αpi − k · 4k · ν, which
                                                  P                             P

defines a bundling boundary facet of RP .
Proof. For input tνP at least one task pi ∈ P is not allocated to the root, otherwise P would be
a box. In other words, (αpi − 4k ν)ki=1 = tνP 6∈ RP ,, and therefore a linear constraint of the form
                                                                              ν
   i∈I tpi ≤ cI for RP is either violated or satisfied with equality by tP . Clearly, then all points
P
 ′      ν
tP > tP violate this constraint as well.
     We need to show that I = [k]. Assume for contradiction that I 6= [k], and let j ∈ [k] \ I. Then
in the (k − 1)-dimensional space of the tasks P−j , the point (tνpi )i∈[k]\{j} violates (at least) the same
                                                           ′
constraint i∈I tpi ≤ cI . But then the higher point (tνpi )i∈[k]\{j} = (αpi − 4(k−1) ν)i∈[k]\{j} strictly
            P

violates the same constraint contradicting the fact, that P−j is a box. By the same argument, no
               ′
point t′P ≤ tνP can violate any other linear constraint of RP , but this single constraint with I = [k].
Remark. We used the fact that a restriction of a constraint for RP to the (hyper-)plane tpj = 0 is a
constraint for RP \{pj } for the same instance T. One short explanation for this is that the constant
terms in the linear constraints for allocation regions correspond to (differences of) payments which
are unique for a given mechanism and given s̄.


Corollary 48. Let the conditions be like in Proposition 47. Then
                                                                            Pk
  (i) the region RP has a non-redundant bundling facet of equation            i=1 tpi = c for some c;

 (ii) for T ′ every task pi ∈ P is allocated to the leaf;
(iii) for each j ∈ [k], if in T ′ we change the t-value of only task pj to 0, then all tasks i ∈ P are
      allocated to the root.
 (iv) in T ′ for the task pk and its critical value ψpk = ψpk (t′−pk , s̄), it holds that ψpk > 0, and the
      point (t′P \{pk } , ψpk ) ∈ Rk is a point of the bundling boundary facet of RP .
Proof. (i) follows trivially by Proposition 47.
    (ii) For Tν (P ) = (tν , s̄) it holds that tνP 6∈ RP , since P is not a box. Therefore, by Proposition 47,
it must be either a point on the bundling facet between RP and R∅|P , or a point in R∅|P , since it
cannot violate any other type of linear constraint (i.e., with I 6= [k]) for RP . By weak monotonicity,
t′P > tνP implies that t′P ∈ R∅|P for T ′ .
    (iii) By definition, since P is a strictly chopped off box, P−j must be a box, and therefore for
                   ′
input (tpj = 0, tν−pj ) all tasks i ∈ P \ {pj } are allocated to the root. Further, by weak monotonicity
                                        ′
the same holds for every t′P ≤ tνP .

                                                     30
    Next we argue that task pj is also allocated to the root, when we change t′pj to 0. The only
                   ′                                                                             ′
constraint that tνP violates, is defined by the bundling facet between RP and R∅|P . Thus, tνP obeys,
and t′P strictly obeys every other constraint defining RP . Obviously, this holds also after the change
to t′pj = 0. Since, by Proposition 47, no other type of constraint is violated (i.e., with I 6= [k]),
after this change to t′pj = 0, the point can be either in RP , or in R∅|P . However, the fact that the
tasks in P \ {pj } are allocated to the root, implies that the point cannot be in R∅|P , and therefore
it must be in RP .
    (iv) ψpk > 0 follows by (iii). The boundary point (t′P \{pk } , ψpk ) ∈ Rk lies on at least one facet
defined by a linear constraint for a set I of tasks such that pk ∈ I. By Proposition 47, this can only
be the constraint with I = [k].

    The next propositions are about points on the bundling boundary facet of RP . We consider
inputs T1 = [(t1P , t[m]\P ), s̄] and T2 = [(t2P , t[m]\P ), s̄] that differ from Tν ′ and Tν only in their
                                                                      ′
coordinates tpi for tasks pi ∈ P, such that tνpi ≤ t1pi < t2pi ≤ tνpi . All other t-coordinates j ∈ [m] \ P
                                          ′
stay the same, i.e., tνj = t1j = t2j = tνj , as well as the s-coordinates.
    Due to the relative position of T1 and T2 , and since the critical value points for task pk are on
a bundling boundary of RP , (Corollary 48 (iv)), it is intuitively clear that the Lipschitz property
(Proposition 32) for any two such points is fulfilled with equality.
Proposition 49 ([9] Lemma 21. Claim (ii)). Let Tν ≤ T1 ≤ T2 ≤ Tν ′ coordinate-wise, and t1pi < t2pi
hold with strict inequality for every pi ∈ P. Then
                    ψpk (t1−pk , s̄) − ψpk (t2−pk , s̄) = |t1−pk − t2−pk |1 =                 (t2pi − t1pi ).
                                                                                    X

                                                                                  i∈[k−1]

Proof. Fix s̄. We know by Corollary 48 (ii) that in the allocation of instance T1 all tasks in P
are given to the leaves. We create another instance T̂1 = [(t̂1P , t[m]\P ), s̄] which is close to T1 that
has the same allocation for the tasks in P : we set t̂1pi = t1pi + ǫ/n, for i ∈ [k − 1] and we set
t̂1pk = ψpk (t1−pk ) + ǫ, for some small ǫ > 0. The allocation of P remains the same, because (1) the
boundary ψpk (t1−pk ) changes by less than (n − 1)ǫ/n < ǫ (due to the Lipschitz property), so the
new t-value of pk , t̂1pk is still above the boundary, and (2) by weak monotonicity, the allocation of
the other tasks remains the same.
      Similarly, we create an instance T̂2 that is very close to T2 : we set t̂2pi = t2pi − ǫ/n, for i ∈ [k − 1]
and t̂2pk = ψpk (t2−pk ) − ǫ. We claim that in T̂2 all tasks are allocated to the root. To see this, observe
that for (t2−pk , tpk = 0) all tasks are allocated to the root (by Corollary 48), and by the Lipschitz
property ψpk (t2−pk ) can decrease by less than ǫ, so pk will be again allocated to the root. Again the
allocation will not change.
      By weak monotonicity we get
                                                                                                                k−1
                                                                                                                  
                (1 − 0)(t̂2pi − t̂1pi ) ≥         (t2pi − t1pi ) + ψpk (t2−pk ) − ψpk (t1−pk ) − 2 +
            X                                X
       0≥                                                                                                           ǫ.
            i∈[k]                           i∈[k−1]
                                                                                                                 n


    On the other hand, the Lipschitz property implies
                                  ψpk (t2−pk ) − ψpk (t1−pk ) ≤             (t2pi − t1pi ),
                                                                   X

                                                                  i∈[k−1]

since T2 ≥ T1 , hence all terms inside the sum on the right hand side are nonnegative. By letting ǫ
tend to 0 we get the equality of the claim.


                                                           31
    The (proof of the) previous proposition shows that ψpk (t1 ) − ψpk (t2 ) = |t1 − t2 |1 , essentially
uses the fact that for i = 1, 2 the points (ti−pk , ψpk (ti )) ∈ Rk are on the bundling boundary of RP
and R∅|P . The next proposition and its corollary show that the reverse also holds: If ψpk (t1−pk ) −
ψpk (t2−pk ) = |t2−pk − t1−pk |1 , then for all points t′ with t1 ≤ t′ ≤ t2 their critical inputs for task pk
are on a bundling boundary of RP .

Proposition 50. Let s be fixed, let t1pi < t2pi for every pi ∈ P, and t1j = t2j for j ∈ [m] \ P. If
ψpk (t1−pk ) − ψpk (t2−pk ) = i∈[k−1] (t2pi − t1pi ), then
                             P


  (i) for (t1−pk , ψpk (t1 ) − ǫ) all tasks pi ∈ P are given to the root for 0 < ǫ < ψpk (t1 ), and

 (ii) for (t2−pk , ψpk (t2 ) + ǫ) all tasks pi ∈ P are given to the leaves for ǫ > 0.

Proof. The proof is almost the same as of Proposition 32. We can ignore the coordinates j ∈ [m]\P,
since here the values of these tasks stay fixed.
    Consider the instances (t1−pk , ψpk (t1−pk ) − ǫ) and (t2−pk , ψpk (t2−pk ) + ǫ). By definition of ψpk , task
pk is allocated to the root in the first instance, but not in the second one. Let a1 and a2 denote
the allocation for these two instances. By weak monotonicity, we have

                         (a1pi − a2pi )(t1pi − t2pi ) + (1 − 0)((ψpk (t1 ) − ǫ) − (ψpk (t2 ) + ǫ)) ≤ 0
                  X

                  i6=k

                                           ψpk (t1 ) − ψpk (t2 ) ≤            (a1pi − a2pi )(t2pi − t1pi ) + 2ǫ.
                                                                       X

                                                                       i6=k

Since ψpk (t1−pk ) − ψpk (t2−pk ) =                2     1                                     1           2
                                         i∈[k−1] (tpi − tpi ), by letting ǫ tend to 0, we get api = 1 and api = 0
                                      P

for all i ∈ [k − 1] as well.

Corollary 51. Assume that t1pi < t2pi for every pi ∈ P, and t1j = t2j for j ∈ [m] \ P, and ψpk (t1−pk ) −
ψpk (t2−pk ) = i∈[k−1] (t2pi − t1pi ). Let t1 ≤ t′ ≤ t2 be so that t1pi < t′pi < t2pi (i ∈ [k]). Then
              P


  (i) for (t′−pk , ψpk (t′ ) − ǫ) all tasks pi ∈ P are given to the root, and

 (ii) for (t′−pk , ψpk (t′ ) + ǫ) all tasks pi ∈ P are given to the leaves.

Proof. Let ψ 1 = ψpk (t1 ), ψ 2 = ψpk (t2 ), and ψ ′ = ψpk (t′ ). Clearly,

    ψ 1 − ψ 2 = (ψ 1 − ψ ′ ) + (ψ ′ − ψ 2 ) ≤           (t′pi − t1pi ) +          (t2pi − t′pi ) =          (t2pi − t1pi ) = ψ 1 − ψ 2 .
                                                 X                         X                         X

                                                 i6=k                      i6=k                      i6=k

The inequality follows from the Lipschitz property, and the last equality by the assumption. We
conclude that equality must hold everywhere, in particular ψ 1 −ψ ′ = i6=k (t′pi −t1pi ) and (ψ ′ −ψ 2 ) =
                                                                         P
         2     ′          ′                      1                                                  ′
  i6=k (tpi − tpi ). So, t can play the role of t in Proposition 50, implying (i). Symmetrically, t can
P
                     2
take the role of t , that implies (ii).

5.4.2    The pk -p′k slice
We now consider a strictly chopped off box P = {p1 , . . . , pk } and choose a random sibling p′k of
pk . We will consider all different possibilities for the (pk , p′k )-slice mechanism based on the 2 × 2
characterization. First, we consider the case that the mechanism is task-independent, establishing
that then (P−k , p′k ) must be a box (Lemma 52). Then we treat the non task-independent case,
excluding almost surely affine minimizers (Lemma 53) and bounding from above the number of p′k
siblings for which the mechanism can be relaxed-affine minimizer (Lemma 54).

                                                               32
The case of task-independent (crossing) allocations. In this paragraph we treat the case
when in at least two points T1 < T2 between Tν and Tν ′ the allocation of the (pk , p′k )-slice is crossing.
We prove that in this case the set (P−k , p′k ) is a box.

Lemma 52. Suppose that P = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pk } is a strictly chopped off box for T = (t, s̄). Fix a
sibling p′k of pk . Assume that there exist two distinct instances T1 , T2 , such that
                                                                                    ′
   • Tν ≤ T1 ≤ T2 ≤ Tν ′ coordinate-wise, and tνpi < t1pi < t2pi < tνpi holds with strict inequality for
     every pi ∈ P ;

   • for both T1 and T2 , in the (pk , p′k ) slice mechanism the allocation of the root is crossing.

Assuming that the approximation ratio is less than n, then (P−k , p′k ) is a box for T.

Proof. The proof is analogous to the proof of ([9] Lemma 27), and a generalization of Proposition 44.
We use the notation t1 = t1P and t2 = t2P for the respective k-dimensional t-vectors over the task
set P. All other t values, as well as s̄ are fixed for all considered inputs, except for tp′k , that we will
change and treat explicitly. We also use the notation α′ = αp′k .
    In both T1 and T2 let us now increase the value of task p′k from tp′k = 0 to t̄p′k = α′ − ǫ for some
small ǫ < 4k ν, to obtain the new instances T̄1 and T̄2 , respectively. Since by assumption of the
lemma, in both T1 and T2 the (pk , p′k ) mechanism has crossing (task independent) allocation, this
change of the t-values does not affect the respective critical values for task pk , i.e., ψpk (T̄1 ) = ψpk (T1 )
and ψpk (T̄2 ) = ψpk (T2 ).
    By Corollary 48 (iv) for T1 and T2 the points (t1−pk , ψpk (t1 )) and (t2−pk , ψpk (t2 )) are on a bundling
boundary facet of RP ; moreover by Proposition 49 (ψpk (T1 ))−ψpk (T2 )) = |t2−pk −t1−pk |1 holds. Since
for T̄1 and T̄2 the critical values do not change, (ψpk (T̄1 )) − ψpk (T̄2 )) = |t2−pk − t1−pk |1 remains true
for t̄p′k = α′ − ǫ.
   We apply now Proposition 50 (i) for T̄1 ≤ T̄2 (for the region RPT̄1 ). Define the instance T̂ by
reducing tpk to zero in T̄1 , i.e., let t̂ := (t1−pk , tpk = 0) and t̂p′k = α′ − ǫ. By Proposition 50 (i), we
obtain that for input T̂ all tasks in P are given to the root.
    We show that also p′k is given to the root for T̂ . Assume for contradiction that this is not the
case. Then we increase t̂p′k to t∗p′ = α′ − ǫ/2, and decrease all other values from t̂pi to t∗pi = 0 and
                                   k
obtain t∗ . Omitting the coordinate tpk (which is 0), by weak monotonicity we get


                                     (âpi − a∗pi )(t̂pi − t∗pi ) + (âp′k − a∗p′ )(t̂p′ − t∗p′ )
                                X
                         0≥
                                                                                k       k     k
                               i∈[k−1]

                                     (1 − a∗pi )(t̂pi ) + (0 − 1)(−ǫ/2).
                                X
                           =
                               i∈[k−1]

   Here the t-values follow from the definition of t∗ ; âpi = 1 by the previous paragraph; âp′k = 0
by the indirect assumption, and a∗p′ = 1 by the definition of α′ = αp′k , since t∗p′ < α′ and the other
                                         k                                                          k
t-values are 0 in t∗ . Since t̂pi > 0 this is a contradiction. All in all, this proves that for input T̂ all
tasks in P−k ∪ {p′k } are allocated to the root.
     Finally, observe that by definition t̂pi = t1pi > αpi − 4k ν, (i ∈ [k − 1]), and t̂p′k = αp′k − ǫ >
αp′k − 4k ν. This implies by weak monotonicity that also for Tν (P−k ∪ {p′k }) the task set P−k ∪ {p′k }
is given to the root, and therefore (P−k , p′k ) is a box for T.



                                                          33
The case of non-crossing allocations. In the remaining part, we need to exclude the case that
between Tν and Tν ′ there are ‘many’ points where the allocation of the slice mechanism (pk , p′k ) is
non-crossing. Allocations of 2 × 2-mechanisms that are non-crossing for the root, occur (1) in the
linear part (linear as function of spk ) of relaxed affine minimizers8 , or (2) they must be half-bundling
at pk (including completely bundling)9 .
    The following paragraphs deal with both of these cases; for any given point T, case (1) – linear
boundary functions – will be excluded to occur in k different points, positioned appropriately,
hence linear functions are excluded almost surely; case (2) is excluded with high probability over
the choice of p′k .

Case 1: Linear boundary functions. Here we exclude the case that in k carefully selected
points T0 , T1 , . . . , Tk−1 the (pk , p′k )-slice mechanism is a (relaxed) affine minimizer, and so that in
each of these points the critical value function ψk (spk ) is truncated linear. This implies that linear
boundary functions are excluded almost surely. The next lemma is a variant of Lemma 21 in [9].

Lemma 53. Assume that the approximation ratio is at most n. Suppose that P = (p1 , . . . , pk )
is a strictly chopped off box for standard instance T = (t, s̄). Fix a sibling p′k of pk . Finally let
h = (5/8) · 4k ν, and let 0 < η < ν/4n be some small number. There exist no distinct instances
T0 = (t0 , s̄), T1 = (t1 , s̄), . . . , Tk−1 = (tk−1 , s̄) such that

   • Tν ≤ Tj ≤ Tν ′ for every j = 0, . . . , k − 1;

   • t0pj + h < tjpj < t0pj + h + η for all j ∈ [k − 1];

   • t0pi + η/2 < tjpi < t0pi + η for all j ∈ [k − 1], and all i 6= j;

   • the boundary function ψpk is truncated linear in spk , that is,

                            ψpk (tj−pk , s̄) = max(0 , λ(tj−pk , s̄−pk )spk − γ(tj−pk , s̄−pk )),

       for each of the instances Tj ,      j = 0, 1, . . . , k − 1.

Proof. Towards a contradiction, suppose that such instances T0 , T1 , . . . , Tk−1 exist. For simplicity of
notation, throughout the proof we write ψkj (spk ) for the critical value function ψ[Tj ]pk (spk ), defined
for the fixed values tj−pk and s̄−pk .
    The high-level idea is the following. Let us ignore all other dimensions, except for those k
coordinates of tasks P. Due to Corollary 48((ii),(iii)and (iv) respectively), we know that in the
allocation of Tj , j = 0, 1, . . . , k − 1, all tasks are given to the leaf, when we change the tpk -value to
0, all tasks pi ∈ P are given to the root, and the respective boundary points (tj−pk , ψkj (s̄pk )) ∈ Rk are
on a bundling boundary facet of RP . Now, as we reduce spk , due to the linearity of each boundary
function ψkj (spk ), these k boundary points move by the same speed λ towards the coordinate-
plane tpk = 0, so that all the time they remain on a bundling boundary. For some positive s∗pk
this bundling boundary facet will reach the plane tpk = 0,10 and there it will ‘form’ a bundling
boundary of dimension k − 1 for the task-set P−k . But this will prove that for this s∗pk the set Pk
cannot be a box, contradicting the fact that P is chopped off box.
   8
     Constant mechanisms are special affine minimizers; or we can exclude them immediately using Lemma 38
   9
     The case of being at some singular point (spk , sp′ ) of a relaxed task independent mechanism is excluded since
                                                       k
the inputs T that we consider satisfy the continuity requirement almost surely.
  10
     Since we discretize (in order to have finitely many reduction steps for spk ), we have to ’stop’ the considered
boundary points slightly above the plane tpk = 0.


                                                         34
    We start with some observations about the critical values ψkj (s̄pk ), and the respective boundary
points of RP when spk = s̄pk . Note that for every j ∈ [k − 1] by definition t0pi < tjpi holds for all
pi ∈ P. Therefore, by Proposition 49

                           ψk0 (s̄pk ) − ψkj (s̄pk ) = |t0−pk − tj−pk |1 =          (tjpi − t0pi ).
                                                                              X

                                                                             i∈[k−1]

Moreover, for every j ∈ [k − 1] this difference roughly equals h, in particular

                                                      (tjpi − t0pi ) < h + n · η.
                                                X
                                         h<
                                              i∈[k−1]

    Therefore, all these critical values are almost the same, that is, for any pair of indices j, j ′ ∈ [k−1]
it holds                                                 ′
                                       |ψkj (s̄pk ) − ψkj (s̄pk )| < n · η.
Next we show that these relative positions remain the same for every spk . The following is a
generalization of Claim (i) in the proof of Theorem 41.
Claim (i). The boundary functions for tj , j = 0, 1, . . . , k − 1,

                                         ψkj (spk ) = λ(tj−pk )spk − γ(tj−pk )
                                                                           k−1
have the same linear coefficient, i.e., λ(t0−pk ) = λ(t1−pk ) = . . . = λ(t−p k
                                                                                ) = λ.

Proof. We prove that all linear coefficients are equal to λ(t0−pk ). Suppose not, and assume that
λ(t0−pk ) > λ(tj−pk ) for some j ∈ [k − 1]. For spk = s̄pk + ǫ, for some ǫ > 0, we get
                                                                                             
      ψk0 (s̄pk + ǫ) − ψkj (s̄pk + ǫ) = ψk0 (s̄pk ) − ψkj (s̄pk ) + λ(t0−pk ) − λ(tj−pk ) ǫ > |t0−pk − tj−pk |1 ,

which violates the Lipschitz property (Proposition 32). The case of λ(t0−pk ) < λ(tj−pk ) is similar,
only that we now consider spk = s̄pk − ǫ.

   As a corollary we obtain that the difference between (positive) critical values ψk0 and ψkj remains
the same for every spk .
Claim (ii). Let j ∈ [k − 1]. For every spk , for which ψkj (spk ) > 0, the following hold:

 (a) ψk0 (spk ) − ψkj (spk ) = |t0−pk − tj−pk |1 ;
                      ′
 (b) |ψkj (spk ) − ψkj (spk )| ≤ n · η for every j ′ ∈ [k − 1];

 (c) the point (tj−pk , ψkj (spk )) ∈ Rk is on a bundling boundary, in particular on a boundary of RPT ,
                                                                                                                    ′


     where T ′ is obtained from T by replacing s̄pk by spk , for j = 0, 1, . . . , k − 1;

Proof. (a) and (b) follow from Claim (i); (c) follows from (a) and from Proposition 50 and Corol-
lary 51.

    Let ψk1 (spk ) = max(0, λ spk − γ). Next we prove lower and upper bounds for γ and λ.
Claim (iii). Let ψk1 (spk ) = max(0, λ spk − γ) for some λ and γ that do not depend on tpk and spk .
Suppose further that the approximation ratio is less than n, then

 (a) 0 ≤ γ < λ;

                                                           35
      1
 (b) 2n < λ < 2n.

Proof. (a) By Corollary 48 (iv) holds that ψk1 (s̄pk ) > 0. Now notice that λ · 1 − γ = ψk1 (1) ≥
ψk1 (s̄pk ) > 0. This implies γ < λ.
     Next we show γ ≥ 0. We claim that ψk1 (spk = 0) = 0. Assume the contrary, that ψk1 (spk = 0) > 0.
Then, by Claim (ii) (c), the (t1−pk , ψk1 (0)) is a point with positive coordinates on a bundling
                    ′
boundary of RPT where T ′ is obtained from T by setting spk = 0. On the other hand, then by
Observation 31 spk > 0 must hold, contradiction. So we have ψk1 (spk = 0) = 0. Consequently,
λ · 0 − γ ≤ 0, so 0 ≤ γ.
     (b) We prove λ < 2n first. Assume that λ ≥ 2n. We set spk = n + 1, t−pk = t1−pk and
tpk = ψk1 (spk ) − ǫ = λspk − γ − ǫ. Then task pk is allocated to the root, and the makespan is
Mech ≥ λspk − γ − ǫ ≥ λspk − λ − ǫ ≥ λ(spk − 1) − ǫ ≥ 2n · n − ǫ.
     The contribution of the tasks [m] \ P to the optimal makespan is 0, since the other leaves are
trivial. We have Opt ≤ spk + i6=k s̄pi ≤ n + 1 + n − 1 = 2n. We obtain Mech/Opt → n when
                                   P

ǫ → 0, which concludes the proof of the upper bound.
     In order to show the lower bound for λ, we assume for contradiction λ ≤ 1/2n, and set spk = 2n2 ,
and tpk = λspk − γ + ǫ, so that the leaf gets task pk .
     Then Mech ≥ 2n2 , and because the contribution of the other tasks is at most n − 1, using
γ ≥ 0, we obtain Opt ≤ tpk + n − 1 ≤ (1/2n) · 2n2 − γ + ǫ + n − 1 ≤ 2n. The approximation factor
is at least n, a contradiction.

Claim (iv). There exists q ∗ ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 4n/ν} such that s̄pk ≥ q ∗ ν/(4n), and ψkj (s̄pk − q ∗ ν/(4n))
is in the interval (0, ν), for every j ∈ [k − 1].

Proof. By Corollary 48 (iv) it holds for every j ∈ [k] that ψkj (s̄pk ) > 0. If also ψkj (s̄pk ) < ν holds
for every j ∈ [k − 1], then the claim holds trivially with q ∗ = 0.
    Otherwise let q̄ ≤ 4n/ν be the largest integer such that s̄pk ≥ q̄ν/(4n) (recall that s̄pk ≤ 1).
                                               ν
Consider the sequence of values ψk1 (s̄pk − q 4n ), for q = 0, 1, . . . , q̄. By Claim (iii), λ < 2n, so
successive values in this sequence differ by at most λ(ν/4n) ≤ 2nν/4n = ν/2. Moreover, because
                                                                                    ν
γ ≥ 0, we have ψk1 (0) = 0. Therefore for some 0 ≤ q ∗ ≤ q̄, the ψk1 (s̄pk − q ∗ · 4n ) falls between ν/4
                                                        j        ∗     ν
and 3ν/4. Finally, by Claim (ii) (b) it follows that ψk (s̄pk − q · 4n ) ∈ (0, ν) for every j ∈ [k − 1],
given that nη < ν/4.

      Let s∗pk := s̄pk − q ∗ ν/(4n) be the value from the previous claim for which ψkj (s∗pk ) ∈ (0, ν), for
every j ∈ [n − 1]. For the rest of the proof we fix (s∗pk , s̄−pk ). We know from Claim (ii) (c) that for
every j ∈ [k − 1], in an arbitrarily small neighborhood of the point (tj−pk , ψkj (s∗pk )) ∈ Rk there are
points tP so that all tasks pi ∈ P are allocated to the root, and also there are points so that none
of the tasks pi ∈ P is allocated to the root.
      Recall that tpi = 0 for every pi ∈ P in the instance T = (t, s̄). Let T ∗ = (t, (s∗pk , s̄−pk )) denote
the instance that we obtain from T by replacing s̄pk by s∗pk . Notice that T ∗ is standard instance for
the star P−k = P \ pk . We need to be careful, because all we know about the allocation of instance
T ∗ are the k shifted points (tj−pk , ψkj (s∗pk )) of a bundling boundary (in particular, the αpj values
may have changed).
      Here is how we finish the proof. For every j ∈ [k − 1] we will define two nearby instances to
(tj−pk , ψkj (s∗pk )), called T j and T j so that for each of them the tpk entry is zero, the spk entry equals
s∗pk , and for T j all tasks pi ∈ P−k are given to the root, and for T j all tasks pi ∈ P−k are given to
the leaves. This will prove in the end, that for tpk = 0 and spk = s∗pk the task set P−k is not a box,
and thus contradict the assumption that P is a chopped off box (the second bullet of Definition 46).


                                                     36
    We will use the notation α∗pj for the (new) α values of the tasks in the instance T ∗ (see Defini-
tion 28). In the next claim we define and use the T j instances to lower bound the α∗pj values for
tasks in P−k and for the instance T ∗ .
Claim (v). α∗pj > t0pj + h for every j ∈ [k − 1].

Proof. Fix an arbitrary j ∈ [k − 1]. For simplicity, we ignore the coordinates [m] \ P. Define
T j = (tj , (s∗pk , s̄−pk )), so that tjpk = 0, and tjpi = tjpi − ǫ, for some small ǫ for every pi ∈ P−pk .
Since tjpi < tjpi for each pi ∈ P−k , and tjpk = 0 < ψkj (s∗pk ), every pi ∈ P must be allocated to the root
for T j , (by Claim (ii) (c), and weak monotonicity). This implies tj−pk ∈ RPT −k , and thus α∗pj ≥ tjpj .
                                                                                    ∗


Given that for ǫ small enough tjpj = tjpj − ǫ > t0pj + h, we obtain α∗pj ≥ tjpj = tjpj − ǫ > t0pj + h.

    In the last claim we define the T j instances and use them to prove that for Tν∗ (P−k ) the jobs
of P−k are all allocated to the leaves (see Definition 23 for Tν∗ ). This contradicts the assumption
that for s∗pk the set P−k is a box, and thus also that P is a chopped off box, which will conclude
the proof.
Claim (vi). For the instance Tν∗ (P−k ) none of the tasks in P−k is allocated to the root.

Proof. We ignore the coordinates [m]\P, and (s∗pk , s̄−pk )) is fixed. Take first an arbitrary j ∈ [k−1].
Let t′ = (tj−pk , ψkj (s∗pk ))P , denote the point on the bundling boundary (by Claim (ii) (c)) and a′ the
respective allocation for t′ . Assume w.l.o.g. that a′ assigns all tasks in P to the leaves (otherwise
we slightly increase all t-values in P by an infinitesimally small amount).
                            j                              j                              j
    We define T j = (t , (s∗pk , s̄−pk )) as follows: let tpk = 0 > ψkj (s∗pk ) − ν, and tpi = tjpi + ν, for each
                                           j                                                    j      T∗
pi ∈ P−pk . We show first that for t every pi ∈ P−k is allocated to the leaves, i.e., t ∈ R∅|P            −k
                                                                                                             . Let
     j
t = tP and a be the allocation for T j . Then by weak monotonicity for the root


                       (ai − a′i )(ti − t′i ) =       (ai − 0)(ti − t′i ) =                  ai · ν + ak (0 − t′k ).
                   X                              X                                 X
              0≥
                   i∈[k]                          i∈[k]                            i∈[k−1]

    The first equality holds because a′i = 0 by assumption that all tasks go to the leaves in t′ ; the
                                                 j
second equality holds by the definition of ti = tpi , and t′i = tjpi .
    Since t′k = ψkj (s∗pk ) < ν it must hold

                                                   X
                                                              ai · ν < ak · ν.
                                                  i∈[k−1]

                                                                                                T                      j   ∗
    But since ai ∈ {0, 1}, the above implies ai = 0 for every i ∈ [k − 1], concluding that t ∈ R∅|P −k
                                                                                                       .
                                                          1   2        (k−1)
    Now let tc be the mean of the points {t , t , . . . , t                    }. That is,
                                                    Pk−1 j
                                                          j=1 tpi
                                          tcpi =                        ∀pi ∈ P.
                                                      k−1
Then tcpk = 0, and for all pi ∈ P−k

                              tcpi < t0pi + h/(k − 1) + η + ν < t0pi + h/2 + 2ν.                                               (6)



                                                                  37
                             α3

                                                                                      ′
                                                                                 tν

                                                                        α∗3

                                                  α1                                         α∗1


                     α2                                        α∗2               t∗ ν

Figure 14: The figure is a high-level illustration of the main argument of the proof of Lemma 53
for k = 3. The left figure corresponds to a strictly chopped off box, for s̄ while the right figure
illustrates the shift of the boundaries when s3 is decreased to s∗3 , which leads to a contradiction, as
the last figure is not a box for tasks 1, 2.

                    j   T   ∗
Moreover, since t ∈ R∅|P    −k
                                 for every j, the same holds for their convex combination tc . We use the
notation Tν∗ (P−k ) = (t∗ν , (s∗pk , s̄−pk )); by Definition 23 t∗ν     ∗
                                                                 pi = αpi − 4
                                                                              k−1 ν for p ∈ P .
                                                                                         i    −k
   We conclude the proof by showing that tcpi < t∗ν         pi for every pi ∈ P−k . This will prove (by weak
monotonicity) that also t∗ν ∈ R∅|P      T∗    , and therefore P−k is not a box for T ∗ , a contradiction. We
                                           −k
have

                        t∗ν    ∗
                         pi = αpi − 4
                                     k−1
                                         ν > t0pi + h − 4k−1 ν > t0pi + h/2 + 2ν > tcpi .

The first inequality holds by Claim (v); the second inequality holds if h = (5/8)4k ν and k ≥ 3; the
last inequality holds by inequality 6. This concludes the proof.




Case 2: Half-bundling boundary functions. We consider the case that for some Tν (P ) ≤ T̂ ≤
Tν ′ (P ), the slice mechanism (pk , p′k ) is non-crossing, and so that it has a boundary half-bundling at
pk (or even fully bundling at both pk and p′k ). Recall that this includes one-dimensional bundling
mechanisms as well as relaxed affine minimizers that might become nonlinear for small spk . Using
a more technically involved argument, it is possible to show that even in this case, the boundary
function ψk (spk ) must be linear, or else the (whole) mechanism has high approximation factor.11
However, for the sake of simpler presentation, instead we argue the same way as in [9]: For arbitrary
fixed Tν (P ) ≤ T̂ ≤ Tν ′ (P ), we exclude that the slice mechanism (pk , p′k ) is half-bundling at pk , for
many different siblings p′k ∈ Qk . The next lemma is a variant of ([9] Lemma 23).

Lemma 54. Suppose that P = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pk } is a strictly chopped off box for standard instance
T = (t, s̄), and corresponding leaf set C = {Q1 , Q2 , . . . Qk }, and the approximation ratio is less than
n. Let Tν (P ) ≤ T̂ ≤ Tν ′ (P ), be an arbitrary input. Then fewer than n2 /ξ siblings p′k ∈ Qk of pk
have a 2 × 2 slice mechanism (pk , p′k ) in T̂ that is half-bundling at pk .
  11
     Exploiting the fact that R{pk ,p′ } must be crossing, and T is in general position, one can argue similarly as in
                                     k
Lemma 43.


                                                         38
                                       tp′k


                                                            T̂
                                                           R∅|{p     ′
                                                                 k ,p }
                                                                    k




                                               T̂
                                              R{p     ′
                                                  k ,p }
                                                     k            t+
                                                              ψpk         tp k

Figure 15: Proof of Lemma 54: The slice (pk , p′k ) in T̂ is half-bundling at pk . For input (t+ , s̄)
neither pk nor p′k is allocated to the root.


Proof. Let T̂ = ((t̂P , t−P ), s̄), (since by definition t−P = t̂−P ). We fix and omit s̄ from the notation
in the rest of the proof. Let ψpk = ψpk [T̂ ] be the critical value of tpk in T̂ .
     Let p′k be an arbitrary sibling of pk , such that the slice (pk , p′k ) in T̂ is half-bundling at pk (see
Figure 15). Then, for the input point slightly above the boundary t+ = (t̂P−k , tpk = ψpk + ǫ, t−P )
neither of the tasks pk or p′k is allocated to the root. This follows from the definition of ψpk , the
fact that tp′k = 0 (because T is standard instance for P ), and that the boundary for pk in the slice
(pk , p′k ) is locally bundling at tp′k = 0 by the definition of half-bundling allocations (Definition 34).
     Assuming by contradiction that pk has at least n2 /ξ different siblings p′k with which it is half-
bundling, for input t+ we obtain that all these p′k tasks are allocated to the same leaf player,
incurring a cost of at least ξ for each of them (because Qk is standard leaf, hence s̄p′k > ξ).
Therefore the makespan achieved by the mechanism is at least (n2 /ξ) · ξ ≥ n2 . On the other hand,
since tasks in [m] \ P are trivial, we have that the makespan of the optimal allocation is at most
maxpi ∈P s̄pi ≤ 1. This would imply approximation ratio higher than n, contradiction.


5.4.3   The main inductive lemma.
The results of Section 5.4.2 culminate in the following lemma.
Lemma 55. Suppose that P = (p1 , . . . , pk ) is a strictly chopped off box for T. Then either P is a
box for T or the number of different siblings p′k of pk for which (P−k , p′k ) is a box for T , is at least
ℓ − 2n3 /ξ.
Proof. Suppose that P is not a box, and take a random sibling p′k of pk . For j = 0, 1, . . . k − 1, we
fix instances Tj , Tj∗ such that
  (i) Tν ≤ Tj ≤ Tj∗ ≤ Tν ′ and all t-coordinates of Tj , Tj∗ are rational;

 (ii) tj∗    j
       pi = tpi + ǫ for some small ǫ for every i ∈ [k];

(iii) the relative position of T0 , T1 , . . . Tk−1 is as defined in the statement of Lemma 53, moreover
      this property holds even if we replace any subset of the Tj by the respective Tj∗ instances.

Observe first that such instances exist: in Lemma 53 h = (5/8) · 4k ν, and η is arbitrarily small;
                      ′
on the other hand, tνpi − tνpi = (4k − 4k−1 )ν = (3/4)4k ν > (5/8)4k ν. So there is enough space for
instances in the prescribed relative position.

                                                         39
    By Lemma 54 and using the union bound, the number of siblings p′k ∈ Qk \ {pk } for which
the (pk , p′k ) slice mechanism is half-bundling in at least one of these 2k instances, is less than
2kn2 /ξ ≤ 2n3 /ξ − 1. Therefore, most of the siblings p′k (at least ℓ − 1 − (2n3 /ξ − 1) = ℓ − 2n3 /ξ
of them) do not have a half-bundling boundary with pk in any of the 2k fixed instances. We focus
now on such a sibling p′k . By Lemma 53, there must exist at least one j ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , k − 1}
such that in both Tj and Tj∗ the ψ[Tj ]pk (spk ) and ψ[Tj∗ ]pk (spk ) functions are not truncated linear.
Altogether, this excludes (non-task independent) relaxed affine minimizer mechanisms, constant,
and one-dimensional bundling mechanisms as well as discontinuities in these two points. The
remaining possibility is that the allocation of the slice (pk , p′k ) is crossing for both Tj and Tj∗ . Then,
by Lemma 52 the star (P−k , p′k ) is a box for T.

5.5    Existence of a box of size n − 1.
We are now ready to show the main result of this section (Corollary 59) that proves existence of a
box of size n − 1. The proof is by induction on the size of the box, and the next definition is handy
to define ‘bad’ events on k leaves.

Definition 56 (Probability bk ). Fix a mechanism, and let 1 ≤ k ≤ n − 1. Suppose that T is a
standard instance for a set C of k leaves. We denote by b(T, C) the probability that a random star
P of k tasks from C is not a box. Let bk denote the supremum of all possible b(T, C) for all choices
of T and C with |C| = k for the given mechanism.

    Next we upper bound the probability that a random star P of k tasks is not a chopped off box,
in terms of bk−1 .

Lemma 57. Fix any instance T which is standard for a set C of k ≥ 3 leaves, and let P be a
random star of k tasks from C. The probability that P is not a chopped off box for T is at most
(5n/ν − 1)bk−1 .

Proof. Take a random star P = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pk } of k tasks from C. For each i ∈ [k] the probability
that P−i is not a box for T is at most bk−1 . Also the probability that P−k is not a box when we set
task pk to (tpk = 0, spk = s̄pk − qν/(4n)), is at most bk−1 for (at most) each of q = 1, . . . , 4n/ν. By
the union bound, the probability that some of these bad events happens is at most (k+4n/ν)bk−1 <
(n + 4n/ν)bk−1 < (5n/ν − 1)bk−1 .

    Finally, the next lemma combines the obtained probabilities.

Lemma 58. Fix a mechanism with approximation ratio less than n, then for 3 ≤ k ≤ n − 1

                                                    5n            2n3
                                                        
                                         bk ≤          − 1 bk−1 + √ .
                                                     ν           ξ ℓ

Proof. Let T be a standard instance for some set of leaves C = {Q1 , . . . , Qk }, and let C−k =
{Q1 , . . . Qk−1 }. Consider a star P ∗ = {p1 , . . . , pk−1 } from C−k . Let’s call the sets P ∗ ∪{pk }, pk ∈ Qk ,
extensions of P ∗ .
    Let 0 ≤ y ≤ ℓ be the number of the extensions of P ∗ that are chopped off boxes. How many
of these extensions are boxes? Either all y extensions are boxes, in which case the number of box
extensions is at least y or some extension is not a box and ℓ − 2n3 /ξ other extensions are boxes
(Lemma 55). Therefore the number of extensions that are boxes is at least min{y, ℓ − 2n3 /ξ} ≥
y(ℓ − 2n3 /ξ)/ℓ = y(1 − 2n3 /ℓξ). Since this holds for every star P ∗ , the probability that a random


                                                        40
star of size k is a box is at least 1 − 2n3 /ξℓ times the probability that a random star of size k is a
chopped off box.
    For a rigorous proof, let R be the set of different stars of k − 1 tasks from C−k . We select
a random star P of k tasks from C, and define the events:             Y : "P is a chopped off box";
                                          ∗
X : "P is a box"; EP ∗ : "P−k = P ". Note that in general X 6⊂ Y. By the above argument
P(X|EP ∗ ) ≥ (1 − 2n3 /ξℓ) · P(Y |EP ∗ ). Therefore we obtain

                                                             X
                                              P(X) =                 P(X|EP ∗ )P(EP ∗ )
                                                            P ∗ ∈R

                                  ≥ (1 − 2n3 /ξℓ)
                                                             X
                                                                     P(Y |EP ∗ )P(EP ∗ )
                                                            P ∗ ∈R
                                                            = (1 − 2n3 /ξℓ) · P(Y ).

By Lemma 57, the probability that a random star of size k is a chopped off box is at least 1 −
(5n/ν − 1)bk−1 ; so we get
                                    !
                              2n3                   5n                2n3                      5n
                                                                                                 
              P(X) ≥       1−             1−           − 1 bk−1 > 1 −     −                       − 1 bk−1 .
                               ξℓ                    ν                 ξℓ                       ν

This further yields

                                          5n            2n3                         5n            2n3
                                                                                      
                 bk = 1 − P(X) <             − 1 bk−1 +     <                          − 1 bk−1 + √ .
                                           ν             ξℓ                          ν           ξ ℓ


Corollary 59. Fix a mechanism with approximation ratio less than n, then for 2 ≤ k ≤ n − 1

                                           5n k−2 2n3
                                                               
                                               bk ≤· √ .
                                            ν        ξ ℓ
                                          √           √
Proof. For k = 2, using Theorem 45 b2 ≤ 3/ ℓ < 2n3 /(ξ ℓ), so the base case holds. Now for k ≥ 3
by induction we obtain

                                          5n            2n3
                                                   
                              bk ≤           − 1 bk−1 + √
                                           ν            ξ ℓ
                                                                  k−3
                                          5n                 5n             2n3 2n3
                                                    
                                  ≤          −1                           · √ + √
                                           ν                  ν            ξ ℓ  ξ ℓ
                                                   k−2                  k−3        !
                                              5n                    5n               2n3
                                                               
                                  =                         −                   +1 · √
                                               ν                     ν              ξ ℓ
                                               k−2
                                          5n            2n3
                                      
                                  ≤                   · √ .
                                           ν           ξ ℓ


   Setting k = n − 1, and using ν < ξ, we obtain the following rough lower bound for ℓ.
                           2n
Corollary 60. If ℓ > 5n   ν     , we get bn−1 < 1, and there exists at least one box of size n − 1 for
every instance T = (t, s̄) standard for {Ci }i∈[n−1] .

                                                                41
References
 [1] Aaron Archer and Éva Tardos. Truthful mechanisms for one-parameter agents. In Proc. of the
     42nd IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 482–491, 2001. 1

 [2] Itai Ashlagi, Shahar Dobzinski, and Ron Lavi. Optimal lower bounds for anonymous scheduling
     mechanisms. Mathematics of Operations Research, 37(2):244–258, 2012. 2, 4

 [3] Vincenzo Auletta, George Christodoulou, and Paolo Penna. Mechanisms for scheduling with
     single-bit private values. Theory Comput. Syst., 57(3):523–548, 2015. 2

 [4] Sushil Bikhchandani, Shurojit Chatterji, Ron Lavi, Ahuva Mu’alem, Noam Nisan, and Arunava
     Sen. Weak monotonicity characterizes deterministic dominant strategy implementation.
     Econometrica, 74(4):1109–1132, 2006. 4

 [5] Shuchi Chawla, Jason D. Hartline, David L. Malec, and Balasubramanian Sivan. Prior-
     independent mechanisms for scheduling. In STOC, pages 51–60. ACM, 2013. 2

 [6] Xujin Chen, Donglei Du, and Luis Fernando Zuluaga. Copula-based randomized mechanisms
     for truthful scheduling on two unrelated machines. Theory Comput. Syst., 57(3):753–781, 2015.
     2

 [7] George Christodoulou, Elias Koutsoupias, and Annamária Kovács. Mechanism design for
     fractional scheduling on unrelated machines. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 6(2), 2010. 2

 [8] George Christodoulou, Elias Koutsoupias, and Annamária Kovács. On the Nisan-Ronen con-
     jecture for submodular valuations. In STOC, pages 1086–1096. ACM, 2020. (Full version
     arXiv:1907.12733). 4, 18, 19, 25

 [9] George Christodoulou, Elias Koutsoupias, and Annamária Kovács. On the Nisan-Ronen con-
     jecture. In FOCS, pages 839–850. IEEE, 2021. 2, 17, 19, 20, 31, 33, 34, 38

[10] George Christodoulou, Elias Koutsoupias, and Annamária Kovács. Truthful allocation in
     graphs and hypergraphs. In ICALP, volume 198 of LIPIcs, pages 56:1–56:20. Schloss Dagstuhl
     - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021. 2, 4

[11] George Christodoulou, Elias Koutsoupias, and Angelina Vidali. A characterization of 2-player
     mechanisms for scheduling. In ESA, volume 5193 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
     297–307. Springer, 2008. 19

[12] George Christodoulou, Elias Koutsoupias, and Angelina Vidali. A lower bound for scheduling
     mechanisms. Algorithmica, 55(4):729–740, 2009. 2, 4

[13] George Christodoulou and Annamária Kovács. A deterministic truthful ptas for scheduling
     related machines. SIAM J. Comput., 42(4):1572–1595, 2013. 1

[14] Edward H. Clarke. Multipart pricing of public goods. Public Choice, 8, 1971. 1

[15] F. Cunningham and Nathaniel Grossman. On Young’s Inequality. The American Mathematical
     Monthly, 78(7):781–783, August 1971. Publisher: Taylor & Francis. 9

[16] Constantinos Daskalakis and S. Matthew Weinberg. Bayesian truthful mechanisms for job
     scheduling from bi-criterion approximation algorithms. In SODA, pages 1934–1952. SIAM,
     2015. 2

                                               42
[17] Shahar Dobzinski and Ariel Shaulker. Improved Lower Bounds for Truthful Scheduling, 2020.
     2, 4

[18] Shahar Dobzinski and Mukund Sundararajan. On characterizations of truthful mechanisms
     for combinatorial auctions and scheduling. In EC, pages 38–47. ACM, 2008. 9, 19

[19] Yiannis Giannakopoulos, Alexander Hammerl, and Diogo Poças. A new lower bound for
     deterministic truthful scheduling. In SAGT, volume 12283 of Lecture Notes in Computer
     Science, pages 226–240. Springer, 2020. 2, 4

[20] Yiannis Giannakopoulos and Maria Kyropoulou. The VCG mechanism for Bayesian scheduling.
     ACM Trans. Economics and Comput., 5(4):19:1–19:16, 2017. 2

[21] Ronald L. Graham, Bruce L. Rothschild, and Joel H. Spencer. Ramsey Theory, 2nd Edition.
     Wiley Series in Discrete Mathematics and Optimization, 1990. 29

[22] Theodore Groves. Incentives in teams. Econometrica, 41(4):617–631, 1973. 1

[23] Elias Koutsoupias and Angelina Vidali. A lower bound of 1+φ for truthful scheduling mecha-
     nisms. Algorithmica, pages 1–13, 2012. 2

[24] Ron Lavi and Chaitanya Swamy. Truthful mechanism design for multidimensional scheduling
     via cycle monotonicity. Games and Economic Behavior, 67(1):99–124, 2009. 2

[25] Pinyan Lu and Changyuan Yu. An improved randomized truthful mechanism for scheduling
     unrelated machines. In STACS, volume 1, pages 527–538, 2008. 2

[26] Pinyan Lu and Changyuan Yu. Randomized truthful mechanisms for scheduling unrelated
     machines. In WINE, volume 5385 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 402–413.
     Springer, 2008. 2

[27] Ahuva Mu’alem and Michael Schapira. Setting lower bounds on truthfulness. Games and
     Economic Behavior, 110:174–193, 2018. 2, 4

[28] Noam Nisan and Amir Ronen. Algorithmic mechanism design. Games and Economic Behavior,
     35:166–196, 2001. 1, 2, 4

[29] Michael E. Saks and Lan Yu. Weak monotonicity suffices for truthfulness on convex domains.
     In EC, pages 286–293. ACM, 2005. 4

[30] William Vickrey. Counterspeculations, auctions and competitive sealed tenders. Journal of
     Finance, 16:8–37, 1961. 1

[31] Angelina Vidali. The geometry of truthfulness. In WINE, volume 5929 of Lecture Notes in
     Computer Science, pages 340–350. Springer, 2009. 17

[32] Changyuan Yu. Truthful mechanisms for two-range-values variant of unrelated scheduling.
     Theoretical Computer Science, 410(21-23):2196–2206, 2009. 2




                                              43
