Global Properties of the Turing Degrees and the
Turing Jump

Theodore A. Slaman∗

Department of Mathematics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3840, USA
slaman@math.berkeley.edu



Abstract

We present a summary of the lectures delivered to the Institute for Mathematical Sci-
ences, Singapore, during the 2005 Summer School in Mathematical Logic. The lectures
covered topics on the global structure of the Turing degrees D, the countability of its
automorphism group, and the definability of the Turing jump within D.


1 Introduction

This note summarizes the tutorial delivered to the Institute for Mathematical Sciences,
Singapore, during the 2005 Summer School in Mathematical Logic on the structure of the
Turing degrees. The tutorial gave a survey on the global structure of the Turing degrees
D, the countability of its automorphism group, and the definability of the Turing jump
within D.
    There is a glaring open problem in this area: Is there a nontrivial automorphism of
the Turing degrees? Though such an automorphism was announced in Cooper (1999),
the construction given in that paper is yet to be independently verified. In this pa-
per, we regard the problem as not yet solved. The Slaman-Woodin Bi-interpretability
Conjecture 5.10, which still seems plausible, is that there is no such automorphism.
    Interestingly, we can assemble a considerable amount of information about Aut (D),
the automorphism group of D, without knowing whether it is trivial. For example, we
can prove that it is countable and every element is arithmetically definable. Further,
restrictions on Aut (D) lead us to interesting conclusions concerning definability in D.
    Even so, the progress that can be made without settling the Bi-interpretability Con-
jecture only makes the fact that it is open more glaring. With these notes goes the hope
that they will spark further interest in this area and eventually a solution to the problems
that they leave open.
   ∗ Slaman was partially supported by the National University of Singapore and by National Science

Foundation Grant DMS-0501167. Slaman is also grateful to the Institute for Mathematical Sciences,
National University of Singapore, for sponsoring its 2005 program, Computational Prospects of
Infinity.




                                                1
2. The coding lemma and the first order theory of the Turing degrees                                      2



1.1 Style
In the following text, we will state the results to be proven in logical order. We will
summarize the proofs when a few words can convey the reasoning behind them. When
that fails, we will try to make the theorem plausible. A complete discussion, including
proofs omitted here, can be obtained in the forthcoming paper Slaman and Woodin
(2005).


2 The coding lemma and the first order theory of the Turing degrees

Definition 2.1      • D denotes the partial order of the Turing degrees. a + b denotes
      the join of two degrees. (A ⊕ B denotes the recursive join of two sets.)
     • A subset I of D is an ideal if and only if I is closed under ≤T (x ∈ I and y ≤T x
       implies y ∈ I ) and closed under + (x ∈ I and y ∈ I implies x + y ∈ I ). A jump
       ideal is closed under the Turing jump (a 7→ a 0 ) as well.

     Early work on D concentrated on its naturally order-theoretic properties. For ex-
ample, Kleene and Post (1954) showed that every finite partial order is isomorphic to a
suborder of D. Sacks (1961) extended this embedding theorem from finite to countable
partial orders. Spector (1956) constructed a minimal nonzero degree, which began a long
investigation into the structure of the initial segments of D. Some of the high points in
that investigation are Lachlan (1968), every countable distributive lattice with a least
element is embeddable as an initial segment, Lerman (1971), every finite lattice with a
least element is embeddable as an initial segment, and Lachlan and Lebeuf (1976), every
countable lattice with a least element is embeddable as an initial segment.
     Our focus will be on the logical properties of D. We can view the results in the
previous paragraph as steps in deciding the low-level fragments of the first order theory
of D. By the Kleene-Post theorem, the existential theory of D is decidable. An existential
statement is true in D if and only if it is true in some finite partial order of size the length
of the sentence. Lerman’s theorem can be combined with a strengthening of the Kleene-
Post theorem to show that the ∃∀-theory of D is decidable; see Lerman (1983) or Shore
(1978).
     One can also come to conclusions concerning undecidability. The theory of distribu-
tive lattices is undecidable, Lachlan’s theorem yields an interpretation of that theory into
the first order theory of D, and so the first order theory of D is undecidable.
     The exact degree of the theory of D was calculated by Simpson (1977). Simpson
showed that the theory of D is recursively isomorphic to the second order theory of
arithmetic. We will obtain a proof of Simpson’s theorem as a corollary to the machinery
we develop here.


2.1 The coding lemma
Definition 2.2 A countable n-place relation R on D is a countable subset of the n-fold
Cartesian product of D with itself. In other words, R is a countable subset of the set of
length n sequences of elements of D.

Theorem 2.3 (The Coding Lemma, Slaman and Woodin (1986)) For every n there is a
first order formula ϕ(x 1 , . . . , x n , y 1 , . . . , y m ) such that for every countable n-place relation
2. The coding lemma and the first order theory of the Turing degrees                               3



R on D there is a sequence of degrees →
                                      −
                                      p = (p 1 , . . . , p m ) such that for all sequences of degrees
→
−
d = (d 1 , . . . , d n ),
                                →
                                −                          →
                                                           − −
                                d ∈ R ⇐⇒ D |= ϕ( d , →          p ).

      By the coding lemma, quantifiers over countable relations on D can be interpreted
in the first order language of D by quantifying over the parameters used to define these
relations. Consequently, the first order theory of D can interpret all of countable mathe-
matics.
      For example, the isomorphism type of the standard model of arithmetic N is char-
acterized in countable terms. There is a finitely axiomitized theory T such that for any
countable model M of T , either there is an infinite decreasing sequence in M (a count-
ably expressed property) or M is isomorphic to N. Similarly, second order quantifiers
over a copy of N are just quantifiers over countable sets. Hence, there is an interpretation
of second order arithmetic in the first order theory of D and Simpson’s theorem follows.
      One can push the application of the coding lemma further in this direction. Rather
than interpreting the second order theory of arithmetic, one can interpret the subsets of
the natural numbers, work with them individually, and associate them with the degrees
that they represent, to the extent that it is possible to do so. This is a principal theme in
what follows.
      Finally, we will have a more metamathematical use of the coding lemma. Every first
order structure has a countable elementary substructure, typically a Skolem hull of the
original. In models of set theory, this fact becomes a reflection property. For example,
if a sentence ϕ is true in L, then it is true in some countable initial segment of L. In the
Turing degrees, we will show that global properties of D can be reflected to countable
jump ideals.
      In retrospect, the coding lemma should be expected. One can construct sets and
directly control everything that is arithmetically definable from them. Consider the
Friedberg (1957) jump inversion theorem. Given a set X ≥T 00 , Friedberg constructs
another set A such that A 0 ≡T X . Though the theory of forcing was only introduced
later, Friedberg uses the ingredients Cohen forcing to decide atomic facts about A 0 . He
alternates between meeting the dense sets associated with building a generic real and
steps to code atomic facts about X .
      One can think of the parameters as sets generically engineered to distinguish be-
tween elements of the relation and elements of it’s complement. The interactions to
be controlled have bounded complexity in the arithmetic hierarchy. Consequently, one
can obtain coding parameters which are uniformly arithmetic in any presentation of the
relation. A sharp analysis of the coding methods in Slaman and Woodin (2005) gives the
following.

Theorem 2.4 Suppose that there is a presentation of the countable relation R which is
recursive in the set R. There are parameters →
                                             −
                                             p which code R in D such that the elements
   →
   −
of p are recursive in R .0


    Similarly, since the coding only involves arithmetic properties of the parameters, the
relation R is arithmetically definable from the parameters which code it.

Theorem 2.5 (Decoding Theorem) Suppose that →      −
                                                   p is a sequence of degrees which lie be-
          →
          −
low y and p codes the relation R. Letting Y be a representative of y, R has a presentation
which is Σ05 (Y ).
3. Properties of automorphisms of D                                                             4



    In the particular case of coding a model of arithmetic with a unary predicate, one
can do much better than Σ05 .

Theorem 2.6 For any degree x and representative X of x, there are parameters →
                                                                             −
                                                                             p such
that the following conditions hold.
    • →−
       p codes an isomorphic copy of N with a unary predicate for X .
    • →
      −
      p is recursive in x + 00 .

     In the other direction, suppose that →
                                          −
                                          p is a sequence of degrees below y, and →
                                                                                  −
                                                                                  p codes
an isomorphic copy of N together with a unary predicate U . As a direct application of the
decoding theorem, for Y a representative of y, U is Σ05 (Y ).


3 Properties of automorphisms of D

3.1 Results of Nerode and Shore
We can apply the coding and decoding theorems to obtain some early results of Nerode
and Shore on the global properties of D.
                                                                   ∼
Theorem 3.1 (Nerode and Shore (1980)) Suppose that π : D →D. For every degree x, if x
is greater than π−1 (00 ) then π(x) is arithmetic in x.

Proof: Let Y be a representative of π(x). Since x ≥T π−1 (00 ), Y ≥T 00 . By Theorem 2.6,
there are parameters → −
                       p which are recursive in Y such that →
                                                            −
                                                            p codes Y . But then, π(→
                                                                                    −
                                                                                    p ) is
                                                                  0
recursive in x and still codes Y . By the decoding theorem, Y is Σ5 (X ).
                                                               ∼
Theorem 3.2 (Nerode and Shore (1980)) Suppose π : D →D is an automorphism of D
and x ≥T π−1 (00 )(5) + π−1 (π(00 )(5) ). Then, π(x) = x. Consequently, π is the identity on a
cone.

Proof: Given x above π−1 (00 )(5) , fix y 1 and y 2 so that y 1 ∨ y 2 = x; π(y 1 ) and π(y 2 ) are
greater than 00 ; and y 1(5) and y 2(5) are recursive in x. By Theorem 2.6, each π(y i ) can
compute a sequence of parameters which codes one of its representatives. The preimages
of these parameters are recursive in Yi . By the decoding theorem, representatives of each
π(y i ) is Σ05 (Yi ) and hence recursive in X . Thus, x ≥T π(y 1 ) ∨ π(y 2 ) = π(x). By symmetry,
π(x) ≥T x.

      The Nerode-Shore theorems pose a challenge. Given an automorphism, where is the
base of the cone on which it is the identity? In the 1980’s, Jockusch and Shore produced
a remarkable sequence of papers on REA-operators, with the conclusion that every
automorphism of D is fixed on the cone above the degrees of the arithmetic sets. See
Jockusch and Shore (1984). We go a step further and show that every automorphism of D
is fixed on the cone above 000 .
      Our final observation on directly applying the coding lemma is due to Odifreddi and
Shore. In brief, the local action of a global automorphism of D is locally definable.

Theorem 3.3 (Odifreddi and Shore (1991)) Suppose that π is an automorphism of D
and that I is an ideal in D which includes 00 such that π restricts to an automorphism of
I . For any real I , if there is a presentation of I which is recursive in I then the restriction
of π to I has a presentation which is arithmetic in I .
4. Slaman and Woodin analysis of Aut (D)                                                5



Proof: Code a counting of I by parameters →  −
                                             p which are arithmetic in I . The action of π
                                        →−
on I is determined by the action of π on p . Since 00 ∈ I , the Nerode and Shore Theorem
implies that π(→
               −
               p ) is arithmetic in I .


4 Slaman and Woodin analysis of Aut (D)

Until indicated otherwise, we will follow the Slaman and Woodin (2005) analysis of
Aut (D).
     If J is an ideal in the Turing degrees (such as D), I is a countable subideal of J
such that 00 ∈ I and J codes a counting of I , and ρ is an automorphism of J that
restricts to an automorphism of I , then ρ  I is definable from the action of ρ on the
parameters which code the counting. Now, suppose that ρ  I is an automorphism of I
such that for any counting of I , ρ  I can be extended to an automorphism of an ideal
which includes that counting. Then ρ  I would be definable from that counting. But,
if ρ  I is definable from every counting of I , then ρ  I is definable from I itself. If
we can apply this analysis to a countable reflection of D, then any automorphism of D
would be definable from the reals, that is be an element of L[R]. We follow just this line
of reasoning in this section.


4.1 Persistent automorphisms
Definition 4.1 An automorphism ρ of a countable ideal I is persistent if and only if for
every degree x there is a countable ideal I1 such that the following conditions hold.
    • x ∈ I1 and I ⊆ I1 .
    • There is an automorphism ρ 1 of I1 such that the restriction of ρ 1 to I is equal to
      ρ.

   We will show that ρ is persistent if and only if ρ extends to a automorphism of D.
One direction of the equivalence is obvious.
                                   ∼
Theorem 4.2 Suppose that π : D →D. For any countable ideal I , if π restricts to an
automorphism π  I of I then π  I is persistent.

   Thus, if D is not rigid, then there is a nontrivial persistent automorphism of some
countable ideal in D.
                                  ∼
Theorem 4.3 Suppose that ρ : I →I , that J is a jump ideal contained in I , and that
ρ(00 ) ∨ ρ −1 (00 ) ∈ J . Then ρ  J is an automorphism of J .

Proof: The theorem follows from the effective coding and decoding theorems. If x ∈ J ,
then ρ(x) is arithmetic in x ∨ ρ −1 (00 ), which is also in J .

Corollary 4.4 Suppose that I is a countable ideal such that 00 is an element of I and
suppose that ρ is a persistent automorphism of I . For any countable jump ideal J
extending I , ρ extends to an automorphism of J .

   To prove the corollary, extend ρ to an automorphism of a countable ideal containing
some upper bound of J and apply Theorem 4.3.
4. Slaman and Woodin analysis of Aut (D)                                                   6



Theorem 4.5 Suppose that I is a countable ideal in D such that 00 is an element of I .
Suppose that there is a presentation of I which is recursive in I . Finally, suppose that
J is a jump ideal which includes the degree of I and ρ is an automorphism of J that
restricts to an automorphism of I . Then, the restriction ρ  I of ρ to I has a presentation
which is arithmetic in I .

Proof: There is a code → −
                         p for a counting of I which is arithmetic in I and hence an
element of the subideal of J consisting of the degrees of sets which are arithmetic in I .
By Theorem 4.3, ρ restricts to an automorphism of this subideal. Consequently, ρ(→−p ) is
arithmetic in I . Now, apply the Odifreddi-Shore argument of Theorem 3.3.

Corollary 4.6 Suppose that I is a countable ideal and 00 is an element of I . If ρ is a
persistent automorphism of I , then ρ is arithmetically definable in any presentation of
I.

   Consequently, persistent automorphisms of I are locally presented and there are at
most countably many of them.


4.2 Persistently extending persistent automorphisms
Theorem 4.7 Suppose that I is a countable ideal and 00 is an element of I . Suppose
that ρ is a persistent automorphism of I . For any countable jump ideal J which extends
I , ρ extends to a persistent automorphism of J .

Proof: Suppose that J were a countable jump ideal such that there is no persistent
automorphism of J which extends ρ. Let J compute a presentation of J . Choose x e so
that the eth arithmetic in J extension of ρ to J cannot be extended further to include
x e . Let x bound the x e ’s. By its persistence, extend ρ to an automorphism ρ 1 of the jump
ideal generated by x. Then, ρ 1  J is arithmetic in J , contradiction.

    We now draw some conclusions about the complexity of ρ’s being persistent.

Theorem 4.8 The property I is a representation of a countable ideal I , 00 ∈ I , and R is
a presentation of a persistent automorphism ρ of I is Π11 .

Proof: ρ is persistent if and only if for every presentation J of a countable jump ideal J
extending I , there is an arithmetic in J extension of ρ to J . This property is Π11 .

Corollary 4.9 The properties R is a presentation of a persistent automorphism and There
                          ∼
is a countable map ρ : I →I such that 00 ∈ I , ρ is persistent, and ρ is not equal to the
identity are absolute between well-founded models of ZFC.

Proof: These properties are Π11 and Σ12 , respectively. The corollary then follows from
Shoenfield (1961) Absoluteness.
4. Slaman and Woodin analysis of Aut (D)                                                    7



4.3 Persistence and Reflection
Let T be the fragment of ZFC in which we include only the instances of replacement and
comprehension in which the defining formula is Σ1 .

Definition 4.10 Suppose that M = (M , ∈M ) is a model of T .
   1. M is an ω-model if and only if NM is isomorphic to the standard model of arith-
      metic.
   2. M is well-founded if and only if the binary relation ∈M is well-founded. That is to
      say that there is no infinite sequence (m i : i ∈ N) of elements of M such that for all
      i , m i +1 ∈M m i .

Theorem 4.11 Suppose that M is an ω-model of T . Let I be an element of M such that

                    M |= I is a countable ideal in D such that 00 ∈ I .

Then, every persistent automorphism of I is also an element of M.

Proof: M is closed under arithmetic definability.

Corollary 4.12 Suppose that M is an ω-model of T and that ρ and I are elements of M
                         ∼
such that 00 ∈ I , ρ : I →I , and I is countable in M. Then,

                          ρ is persistent =⇒ M |= ρ is persistent.

Proof: Persistent automorphisms extend to larger countable jump ideals persistently.
Hence, these extensions belong to M.


4.4 Generic persistence
We now extend the notion of persistence to uncountable ideals. In what follows, V is the
universe of sets and G is a V -generic filter for some partial order in V .

Definition 4.13 Suppose that I is an ideal in D and ρ is an automorphism of I . We
say that ρ is generically persistent if there is a generic extension V [G] of V in which I is
countable and ρ is persistent.
                                    ∼
Theorem 4.14 Suppose that ρ : I →I is generically persistent. If V [G] is a generic exten-
sion of V in which I is countable, then ρ is persistent in V [G].

Proof: Generics for any two forcings can be realized simultaneously. By absoluteness,
persistence is evaluated consistently in the two generic extensions.
                                    ∼
Theorem 4.15 Suppose that π : D →D. Then, π is generically persistent.

Proof: If not, then the failure of π to be generically persistent would reflect to a countable
well-founded model M. One could then add a generic counting of D M to M and obtain
M[G] in which π  D M is not persistent. This would contradict the persistence of π  D M
and Corollary 4.12.
4. Slaman and Woodin analysis of Aut (D)                                                       8



Theorem 4.16 Suppose that V [G] is a generic extension of V . Suppose that π is an
element of V [G] which maps the Turing degrees in V automorphically to itself (that is,
        ∼
π : D V →D V ). If π is generically persistent in V [G], then π is an element of L(RV ). That is,
π is constructible from the set of reals in V .

Proof: π is generically persistent, so π is arithmetically definable relative to any V [G]-
generic counting of D V . Consequently, π must belong to the ground model for such
countings, namely L(RV ).

Theorem 4.17 Suppose that I is a countable ideal in D, 00 is an element of I , and
      ∼                                                                 ∼
ρ : I →I is persistent. Then ρ can be extended to an automorphism π : D →D.

Proof: ρ can be persistently extended to D V in a generic extension of V . By Theorem 4.16,
this extension belongs to L[RV ] and hence to V .

Corollary 4.18 The statement There is a non-trivial automorphism of the Turing degrees
is equivalent to a Σ12 statement. It is therefore absolute between well-founded models of
ZFC.

Theorem 4.19 Let π be an automorphism of D. Suppose that V [G] is a generic extension
of V . Then, there is an extension of π in V [G] to an automorphism of D V [G] , the Turing
degrees in V [G].

Proof: There is a persistent extension π1 of π in any generic extension of V [G] in which
D V [G] is countable. This π1 belongs to V [G].


4.5 Definability of automorphisms of D
Definition 4.20 Given two functions τ : D → D and t : 2ω → 2ω , we say that t represents
τ if for every degree x and every set X in x, the Turing degree of t (X ) is equal τ(x).

    We will analyze the behavior of an automorphism of D in terms of the action of its
extensions on the degrees of the generic reals.

                                   ∼                                →
                                                                    −
Theorem 4.21 Suppose that π : D →D. There is a countable family D of dense open
                                                                                   →
                                                                                   −
subsets of 2<ω such that π is represented by a continuous function f on the set of D -
generic reals.

Proof: The proof has several steps, which we will sketch. We use Π(Z ) to denote a
representative of π(degree(Z )).

1. Let V [G ] be a generic extension of V obtained by adding ω1 -many Cohen reals and
let π1 be an extension of π to D V [G ] .

2. Since π1 ∈ L[RV [G ] ], fix X ∈ RV [G ] so that π1 is ordinal definable from X in L[RV [G ] ].
Work in V [X ] and note that V [G ] is a generic extension of V [X ] obtained by adding
ω1 -many Cohen reals. (The forcing factors.)
4. Slaman and Woodin analysis of Aut (D)                                                                 9



3. Consider a set G, of degree g , which is Cohen generic over V [X ]. π1 (g ) is arithmeti-
cally definable relative to g and π−1 (00 ). We can find an e and a k such that it is forced that
π1 (g ) is represented by {e}((G ⊕ Π−1 (;0 ))(k) ). Since G is Cohen generic, we can assume
that e has the form {e}(G ⊕ Π−1 (;0 )(k) ). Thus, π1 is continuously represented on the set of
V [X ]-generic reals.

4. We make an aside to exploit a phenomenon first observed by Jockusch and Posner
                 →
                 −       →
                         −
(1981). For any D , the D -generic degrees generate D under meet and join. We fix a
mechanism by which this coding can be realized.
    Let G and Y be given. Let G even and G odd be the even and odd parts of G. Construct
C(Y ,G) by injecting the values of Y into G even at those places where G odd is not zero.
That is, we shuffle the bitstreams of G even and Y like a deck of playing cards and use
G odd to determine the points at which the cards in the Y half of the deck are inserted
between the cards in the G even half of the deck.

Lemma 4.22 If G odd is infinite, then C(Y ,G) ⊕G ≡T Y ⊕G.

Lemma 4.23 For any dense open subset of 2<ω , D, there is a dense open set D ∗ , such that
for all D ∗ -generic G and all Y , C(Y ,G) is D-generic. In particular, for all G, Y , and Z , if G
is generic over V [Z ], then so is C(Y ,G).

Definition 4.24 For Y ∈ 2ω , let (Y ) denote the set {Z : Z ≤T Y }.

    Let Y be given with Turing degree y, and let G 1 and G 2 be mutually Cohen generic
over V [X ⊕ Y ]. We can write the ideal generated by Y as the meet of joins of generic
ideals.


                  (C(Y ,G 1 ) ⊕G 1 ) ∩ (C(Y ,G 2 ) ⊕G 2 )   =   (Y ⊕G 1 ) ∩ (Y ⊕G 2 )
                                                            =   (Y )

    Thus, as Jockusch and Posner observed, the degrees of the generic sets generate the
Turing degrees under meet and join.

5. The previous equality is preserved by π1 , as represented on generic reals.

  {Z : the degree of Z belongs to π1 (y) } =
                                     ¡      ¢
                     ³                                                           ´
                      {e}(C(Y ,G 1 ) ⊕ Π−1 (;0 )(k) ) ⊕ {e}(G 1 ⊕ Π−1 (;0 )(k) )
                                      \³                                                            ´
                                         {e}(C(Y ,G 2 ) ⊕ Π−1 (;0 )(k) ) ⊕ {e}(G 2 ⊕ Π−1 (;0 )(k) )

    When Y is also generic:
   ³                      ´
    {e}(Y ⊕ Π−1 (;0 )(k) ) =
                      ³                                                           ´
                       {e}(C(Y ,G 1 ) ⊕ Π−1 (;0 )(k) ) ⊕ {e}(G 1 ⊕ Π−1 (;0 )(k) )
                                       \³                                                            ´
                                          {e}(C(Y ,G 2 ) ⊕ Π−1 (;0 )(k) ) ⊕ {e}(G 2 ⊕ Π−1 (;0 )(k) )

This exhibits the desired representation of π on generic reals Y .
4. Slaman and Woodin analysis of Aut (D)                                                  10



     Sharper results will follow, but we can obtain some preliminary information concern-
ing the definability of π from what we already know.
                                ∼
Corollary 4.25 Suppose π : D →D. Then π has a Borel representation; in fact, π has a
representation that is arithmetic in the real parameter Π−1 (;0 ).

    Next in this line is the proof that for any Z and any sufficiently generic real G,
(G ⊕ Z )00 ≥T Π(Z ). The proof uses two facts. First, for any countable collection of dense
            →
            −                              →
                                           −∗                     →
                                                                  −∗
open sets D , there is another collection D such that if G ∗ is D -generic then there is
  →
  −
a D -generic G with Π(G ∗ ) ≥T G. Second, for any set X , there is an X -recursive partial
order P such that the degrees of any sufficiently generic sets for P form parameters to
code X . The coding is sufficiently effective that X is recursive in the double-jump of
any upper bound on these parameters. We leave the details of the proof to Slaman and
Woodin (2005).
                               ∼
Theorem 4.26 Suppose π : D →D. For every z ∈ D, z 00 ≥T π(z).
                               →
                               −                   →
                                                   −
Proof: Let Z be given. Fix D so that for any D -generic G, Π(Z ) ⊕ G can compute a
                                                                                    →
                                                                                    −
generic set for the partial order to produce parameters which code Π(Z ). Fix D ∗ so
               →
               −                                        →
                                                        −                    →
                                                                             −
that if G ∗ is D ∗ -generic, then Π(G ∗ ) computes a D -generic. Let G ∗ be D ∗ -generic
                →−
and let G be a D -generic recursive in Π(G ∗ ). The coding is preserved by π, so we may
conclude that degree(Π(Z )) ≤T π−1 (degree(Π(Z ) ⊕ G))00 . Hence Π(Z ) ≤T (Z ⊕ G ∗ )00 , and
so Π(Z ) ≤T Z 00 ⊕G ∗ . G ∗ was any sufficiently generic, so Π(Z ) ≤T Z 00 .
                                ∼
Corollary 4.27 Suppose π : D →D. For any 2-generic set G,

                              degree(G) ∨ 000 ≥T π(degree(G)).
                                    ∼
Theorem 4.28 Suppose that π : D →D.
    • For all x ∈ D, x ∨ 000 ≥T π(x).
    • For all x ∈ D, if x ≥T 000 then x = π(x).

Proof: A degree above 000 can be written as a join of 2-generic degrees.
                                    ∼
Theorem 4.29 Suppose that π : D →D.
    • There is a recursive functional {e} such that for all G, if G is 5-generic, then
      π(degree(G)) is represented by {e}(G, ;00 ).
    • There is an arithmetic function F : 2ω → 2ω such that for all X ∈ 2ω , π(degree(X )) is
      represented by F (X ).

Proof: Replay the proof of Theorem 4.21, using the new information that π(degree(G)) is
recursive in G 00 . Conclude that there is a fixed reduction which works for all 5-generic
G’s. Since the 5-generics generate D, the representation on 5-generics propagates to an
arithmetic representation everywhere.

Theorem 4.30 Aut(D) is countable.
                                            ∼
Theorem 4.31 If g is 5-generic and π : D →D, then π is determined by its action on g .

Proof: If G is 5-generic, then {e}(G, ;00 ) ≡T G if and only if the same is true for all 5-
generics.
5. Definability in D                                                                                     11



4.6 Invariance of the double jump
The efficient coding that lies behind the proof of Theorem 4.26 can be sharpened not
just to produce parameters that code z but rather to produce parameters that code z 00 .

                                                                             →
                                                                             −
Theorem 4.32 For every Z ⊆ ω, there is a countable family of dense open sets D such that
                  →
                  −
such that for all D -generic G, π(degree(Z ⊕G))00 ≥T degree(Z 00 )
                                             ∼
Theorem 4.33 Suppose that π : D →D. For all z ∈ D, z 00 = π(z)00 .

Theorem 4.34 The relation y = x 00 is invariant under π.

Proof: Suppose that y = x 00 . Since y ≥T 000 , π(y) = y. By the previous theorem, x 00 = π(x)00 .
Consequently, π(y) = π(x)00 . By the same argument applied to π−1 , if π(y) = π(x)00 then
y = x 00 .


5 Definability in D

5.1 Bi-interpretability
Definition 5.1 An assignment of reals consists of
    • A countable ω-model M of T (T = Σ1 -ZFC).
    • A function f and a countable ideal I in D such that f : D M → I surjectively and
      for all x and y in D M , M |= x ≥T y if and only if f (x) ≥T f (y) in I .

    An assignment of reals to an ideal I is a representation of an isomorphism between
the Turing degrees of the reals in an ω-model M and the elements of I . We can work
with countable assignments within D, via the coding lemma, and we can investigate
which assignments extend, just as we did with persistent automorphism.

Definition 5.2 For assignments (M0 , f 0 , I0 ) and (M1 , f 1 , I1 ), (M1 , f 1 , I1 ) extends
(M0 , f 0 , I0 ) if and only if
    • D M0 ⊆ D M1 ,
    • I0 ⊆ I1 ,
    • and f 1  D M0 = f 0 .

Definition 5.3 An assignment (M0 , f 0 , I0 ) is extendable if

                                   (M1 , f 1 , I1 ) extends (M0 , f 0 , I0 )), z 1 ∈ I1 , and
                                                                                                   

                                     ∀z 2 ∃(M2 , f 2 , I2 )
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
        ∀z 1 ∃(M1 , f 1 , I1 )           (M2 , f 2 , I2 ) extends (M1 , f 1 , I1 ), z 2 ∈ I2 , and 
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                 # 
                                                                     (M3 , f 3 , I3 ) extends
                                                                "                                  
                                           ∀z 3 ∃(M3 , f 3 , I3 )
                                                                                                  
                                                                    (M2 , f 2 , I2 ) and z 3 ∈ I3

                                                                                                ∼
Theorem 5.4 If (M, f , I ) is an extendable assignment, then there is a π : D →D such that
for all x ∈ D M , π(x) = f (x).
5. Definability in D                                                                      12



Proof: One can compare ideals D M and I by considering the sets that are coded within
them. Sets coded in the range I belong to the domain M. Sets in the domain which
together with 00 can only code elements of M must belong to M.
     One shows that if (M, f , I ) is an extendable assignment, then f : D M → I extends
to a persistent automorphism of a larger ideal. Hence, it extends to an automorphism of
D.

Theorem 5.5 If g is the Turing degree of an arithmetically definable 5-generic set, then
the relation R(→
               −c , d ) given by

                     R(→
                       −c , d ) ⇐⇒ →
                                   −c codes a real D and D has degree d

is definable in D from g .

    This is the internal realization of the previous result that every automorphism is
determined by its action on g .

Corollary 5.6 Suppose that R is a relation on D. The following conditions are equivalent.
    • R is induced by a projective, degree invariant relation R 2ω on 2ω .
    • R is definable in D using parameters.

Proof: →
       −
       x satisfies R if and only if there is a correct assignment of representatives to
                            →
                            −               →
                                            −
degrees such that f (degree( Y )) = →
                                    −
                                    x , and Y satisfies R 2ω . (The correctness of the assign-
ment is defined using the arithmetic 5-generic of the previous theorem.)

Theorem 5.7 Suppose that R is a relation on D. The following conditions are equivalent.
    • R is induced by a relation R 2ω on 2ω such that the following conditions hold.
          – R 2ω is definable in second order arithmetic and degree invariant.
          – R 2ω is preserved by Aut(D).
    • R is definable in D.

Proof: →−
        x satisfies R if and only if there is an extendable assignment such that
          →
          −             →
                        −
f (degree( Y )) = →
                  −
                  x and Y satisfies R 2ω .

Definition 5.8 D is bi-interpretable with second order arithmetic if and only if the rela-
tion on →
        −c and d given by

                     R(→
                       −c , d ) ⇐⇒ →
                                   −c codes a real D and D has degree d

is definable in D.

Theorem 5.9 The following are equivalent.
    • D is bi-interpretable with second order arithmetic.
    • D is rigid.

Conjecture 5.10 (Slaman and Woodin (2005)) D is bi-interpretable with second order
arithmetic.

    The Bi-interpretability Conjecture, if true, reduces all the logical questions that one
could ask of D to the exact same questions about second order arithmetic. The structures
would be logically identical, though presented in different first order languages.
6. The Turing Jump                                                                          13



6 The Turing Jump

Theorem 6.1 The function x 7→ x 00 is definable in D.

Proof: We have already shown that the relation y = x 00 is invariant under all automor-
phisms of D. It is clearly degree invariant and definable in second order arithmetic.
Therefore, it is definable in D.

    We now turn to showing that x 7→ x 0 is definable in D. This is an account of work
appearing in Shore and Slaman (1999).
    We show that (∆02 ), the ideal of ∆02 degrees, is definable in D. Our definition is based
on the following join theorem for the double-jump.

Theorem 6.2 (Shore and Slaman, 1999) For A ∈ 2ω , the following conditions are equiva-
lent.
    • A is not recursive in 00 .
    • There is a G ∈ 2ω such that A ⊕G ≥T G 00 .

     Theorem 6.2 is an extension of the Posner and Robinson (1981) Theorem that for
every nonrecursive degree A there is a G such that A ⊕G ≥T G 0 . The proof uses a notion
of forcing introduced by Kumabe and Slaman.
     By Theorem 6.2, (∆02 ) is definable in terms of order, join, and the double jump.
Consequently, it is definable in D.

Theorem 6.3 The functions a 7→ (∆02 (a)) and a 7→ a 0 are definable in D.

Proof: By relativizing the previous theorem. For each degree a and each d greater than
or equal to a, d is not ∆02 relative to a if and only if there is an x greater than or equal to
a such that d + x ≥T x 00 . Again, the double jump is definable in D, and this equivalence
provides first order definitions as required.

    Recently, Shore (2007) has produced an alternate proof of Theorem 6.3. Shore’s proof
replaces the definition of the double jump obtained from the analysis that we have given
for Aut (D) with one that is more arithmetically based. He then argues as here that the
definability of the double jump implies the definability of the Turing jump.


6.1 Recursive enumerability
We have already stated the Bi-interpretability Conjecture, which we regard as the central
question concerning the global structure of the Turing degrees. As we have seen with
the Turing jump, specialized definability results are possible even without settling the
conjecture. We suggest the following.

Question 6.4 Is the relation y is recursively enumerable relative to x definable in D?

   A positive answer would follow from a proof of the Bi-interpretability Conjecture.
Conceivably, it could also lead to a proof.
6. The Turing Jump                                                                         14



References

Cooper, S. B. (1999). Upper cones as automorphism bases. Siberian Advances in
  Math. 9(3), 1–61.

Friedberg, R. M. (1957). A criterion for completeness of degrees of unsolvability. J.
   Symbolic Logic 22, 159–160.

Jockusch, Jr., C. G. and D. Posner (1981). Automorphism bases for degrees of unsolvability.
   Israel J. Math. 40, 150–164.

Jockusch, Jr., C. G. and R. A. Shore (1984). Pseudo-jump operators II: Transfinite iterations,
   hierarchies, and minimal covers. J. Symbolic Logic 49, 1205–1236.

Kleene, S. C. and E. L. Post (1954). The upper semi-lattice of degrees of recursive unsolv-
   ability. Ann. of Math. 59, 379–407.

Lachlan, A. H. (1968). Distributive initial segments of the degrees of unsolvability. Z.
  Math. Logik Grundlag. Math. 14, 457–472.

Lachlan, A. H. and R. Lebeuf (1976). Countable initial segments of the degrees. J. Symbolic
  Logic 41, 289–300.

Lerman, M. (1971). Initial segments of the degrees of unsolvability. Ann. of Math. 93,
  311–389.

Lerman, M. (1983). Degrees of Unsolvability. Perspectives in Mathematical Logic. Heidel-
  berg: Springer–Verlag. 307 pages.

Nerode, A. and R. A. Shore (1980). Reducibility orderings: theories, definability and
  automorphisms. Ann. Math. Logic 18, 61–89.

Odifreddi, P. and R. Shore (1991). Global properties of local structures of degrees. Boll.
  Un. Mat. Ital. B (7) 5(1), 97–120.

Posner, D. B. and R. W. Robinson (1981). Degrees joining to 00 . J. Symbolic Logic 46(4),
  714–722.

Sacks, G. E. (1961). On suborderings of degrees of recursive unsolvability. Z. Math. Logik
  Grundlag. Math. 17, 46–56.

Shoenfield, J. R. (1961). The problem of predicativity. In Essays on the Foundations of
  Mathematics, pp. 132–139. Hebrew University, Jerusalem: Magnes Press.

Shore, R. A. (1978). On the ∀∃-sentences of α-recursion theory. In R. O. G. J. Fenstad
  and G. E. Sacks (Eds.), Generalized Recursion Theory II, Volume 94 of Stud. Logic
  Foundations Math., Amsterdam, pp. 331–354. North–Holland Publishing Co.

Shore, R. A. (2007). Direct and local definitions of the Turing jump. preprint.

Shore, R. A. and T. A. Slaman (1999). Defining the Turing jump. Mathematical Research
  Letters 6, 711–722.

Simpson, S. G. (1977). First order theory of the degrees of recursive unsolvability. Ann. of
  Math. 105, 121–139.
6. The Turing Jump                                                                     15



Slaman, T. A. and W. H. Woodin (1986). Definability in the Turing degrees. Illinois J.
   Math. 30(2), 320–334.

Slaman, T. A. and W. H. Woodin (2005). Definability in degree structures. Unpublished.

Spector, C. (1956). On degrees of recursive unsolvability. Ann. of Math. (2) 64, 581–592.
