                                                          Undecidability in Physics: a Review
                                            Álvaro Perales-Eceizaa , Toby Cubittb , Mile Guc,d , David Pérez-Garcı́ae,f ,
                                                                        Michael M. Wolfg,h
                                            a
                                              Dpto. Automática, Escuela Politécnica, Universidad de Alcalá, 28805, Madrid, Spain
                                                              b
                                                                Department of Computer Science, UCL, London, UK
arXiv:2410.16532v2 [math-ph] 14 Jul 2025




                                            c
                                              Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive
                                                                              2, 117543, Singapore
                                               d
                                                 Nanyang Quantum Hub, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang
                                                                   Technological University, 639673, Singapore
                                            e
                                              Instituto de Ciencias Matemáticas (CSIC-UAM-UC3M-UCM), Madrid, 28049, Spain
                                                      f
                                                        Departamento de Análisis Matemático, Universidad Complutense de
                                                                         Madrid, Madrid, 28040, Spain
                                                         g
                                                           Department of Mathematics, Technical University of Munich,
                                            h
                                              Munich Center for Quantum Science and Technology (MCQST), München, Germany




                                           Abstract
                                           The study of undecidability in problems arising from physics has experienced
                                           a renewed interest, mainly in connection with quantum information prob-
                                           lems. The goal of this review is to survey this recent development. After
                                           a historical introduction, we first explain the necessary results about unde-
                                           cidability in mathematics and computer science. Then we briefly review the
                                           first results about undecidability in physics which emerged mostly in the 80s
                                           and early 90s. Finally, we focus on the most recent contributions, which we
                                           divide in two main categories: many body systems and quantum information
                                           problems.


                                           Contents

                                           1 Introduction                                                                         3
                                             1.1 Complementary readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 7

                                               Email addresses: alvaro.perales@uah.es (Álvaro Perales-Eceiza),
                                           t.cubitt@ucl.ac.uk (Toby Cubitt), mgu@quantumcomplexity.org (Mile Gu),
                                           dperezga@ucm.es (David Pérez-Garcı́a), m.wolf@tum.de (Michael M. Wolf)



                                           Preprint submitted to Physics Reports                                      July 15, 2025
2 The origin. A bit of history                                              8
  2.1 Gödel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
  2.2 Church and Turing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
  2.3 Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
  2.4 Algorithmic Information Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

3 Undecidabilty in Mathematics                                           13
  3.1 Gödel undecidability: axiomatic independence . . . . . . . . . 13
  3.2 Turing Machines and the Halting Problem . . . . . . . . . . . 15
      3.2.1 The Halting Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
      3.2.2 Church’s Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
  3.3 Relation between (Turing) undecidability and (Gödel) axiomatic
      independence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
  3.4 Other undecidable problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
      3.4.1 Diophantine Equations and Hilbert’s Tenth Problem . 20
      3.4.2 Post Correspondence Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
      3.4.3 Matrix mortality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
      3.4.4 Word Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
      3.4.5 Wang tiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
      3.4.6 Cellular Automata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

4 Undecidability in Physics. First Results                                  25

5 Undecidability in Physics. Recent Results                                 29
  5.1 Many-Body Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29
      5.1.1 Classical Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     32
      5.1.2 Quantum Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         32
      5.1.3 Tensor Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       33
      5.1.4 Open questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      37
  5.2 Quantum Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       37
      5.2.1 Measurements and channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         37
      5.2.2 Quantum non-locality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        41
      5.2.3 Open problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       45
  5.3 Fluid mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   46
  5.4 Quantum Field Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      47




                                      2
6 Outlook                                                                     47
  6.1 General view . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      48
  6.2 Infinite undecidable mathematics vs finite decidable nature . .         52
  6.3 The effect of noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   53
  6.4 Undecidability over the real numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        53
  6.5 The positive side . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     54

1. Introduction
   Since Kurt Gödel and Alan Turing introduced undecidability in mathe-
matics and computer science in the early 20th century, there have been many
attempts to extend this concept to physics. The main idea is simple: if math-
ematics has (unavoidably) undecidable statements, and mathematics is the
language of physics, there could be physical models that present undecidable
properties.
   In a note about one of those attempts, C. Bennett wrote ([1]):

         Alluding to the effects on twentieth-century physics of quan-
     tum mechanics and general relativity, the cosmologist John Wheleer
     once remarked that the world is simpler and stranger than we can
     imagine. An analogous dose of strange simplicity was delivered
     to mathematics in the 1930s by the discoveries of Gödel, Turing
     and their contemporaries in the theory of proof and computation.
     Yet, there have been surprisingly few applications of these ideas
     to physics. In particular, the phenomenon of ’undecidability’ has
     not asserted itself in a simple, uncontrived physical setting the
     way that deterministic chaos, a far weaker property, has.

   And some years later, R. Penrose commented ([2] p378):

        It is perhaps remarkable, in view of the close relationship be-
     tween mathematics and physics, that issues of such basic impor-
     tance in mathematics as transfinite set theory and computability
     have as yet had a very limited impact on our description of the
     physical world. It is my own personal opinion that we shall find
     that computability issues will eventually be found to have a deep




                                       3
       relevance to future physical theory, but only very little use of
       these ideas has so far been made in mathematical physics1 .

    Sometimes simple ideas do not have simple implementations, and taking
undecidability to the realm of natural phenomena described by physical laws
did not turn out to be easy at all. One of the goals of this review is to
show that the situation has changed since the words of Bennett and Penrose
were written, as in the last decade an increasing number of central problems
in physics (many of them motivated by quantum information theory), have
been proven undecidable.
    Quantum information theory deals precisely with the problem of how the
laws of quantum physics affect the computing capabilities of a system. It is
thus a very natural framework in which undecidable problems may emerge
in a natural way.
    But what exactly is an undecidable problem?
    In this review, we take the algorithmic point of view of Turing. A problem
in computer science is specified by the input (an arbitrary bit string) and a
series of rules (the program) that specifies how the output depends on the
input. Illustrative examples could be:
 (a) Input: two natural numbers (given in binary). Output: their product.
 (b) Input: an image (given by bit strings specifying the colours of its pix-
     els). Output: Yes or No, depending on whether the image is a dog or
     not.
 (c) Input: the description of an algorithm and an input to it. Output: Yes
     or No, depending on whether the algorithm will halt or loop forever on
     the given input.
   If the output is just one bit (Yes/No answer), the problem is called a
decision problem. Otherwise, it is called a computational problem.
   The way to solve a problem is to find an algorithm that, when receiving
the input, produces the corresponding output.
   A decision problem is called undecidable if no algorithm solves it. Com-
putational problems without algorithms are called uncomputable. It is im-
portant to notice here that this is not a question of efficiency. That is, we

   1
     By computability issues Penrose alluded to undecidability, as he referred to Gödel
and Turing in previous paragraphs, and provided as examples of this very little use the
results of [3] and [4] that will be commented on in chapter 4.


                                           4
are not asking for an algorithm whose runtime is efficient (e.g. polynomial)
with respect to the number of bits of the input. If a problem is undecidable
or uncomputable, there exists no algorithm for it, no matter how inefficient.
Problem (c) above, known as the halting problem, was the first undecidable
problem, discovered independently by A. Church and A. Turing in 1936.
    Of course, to turn undecidability into a rigorous definition, we need to
define first what an algorithm is. This was precisely one of the main achieve-
ments of Turing with his definition of a Turing Machine and, as it is standard
by now, this is the definition we will adopt here.
    There is another (related) notion of undecidability, due to Gödel, in the
context of mathematics. Roughly speaking, a mathematical statement is un-
decidable with respect to a set of axioms if it cannot be proven or refuted
from the axioms. Gödel showed that there are true but unprovable sentences
in mathematics. Informally, provability works “inside” the system, whereas
truth comes from “outside”. To distinguish Gödel undecidability from Tur-
ing’s one, we will call such statements axiomatically independent, instead of
undecidable.
    In his famous first incompleteness theorem, Gödel proved that any rea-
sonably powerful set of axioms will always leave some statements that are
axiomatically independent.
    It is not difficult to see (section 3.3 below) that, under very mild assump-
tions, undecidability (à la Turing) is in some senses a stronger notion than
axiomatic independence, in the following way. If a problem is undecidable,
then (infinitely) many of its instances correspond to independent statements.
Therefore, even though we will comment throughout the review that partic-
ular physics problems are undecidable, it is important to notice that this in
particular implies that many of their instances cannot be proven or disproven
from the axioms of mathematics (whatever they are).
    But what does it mean that a physical problem is undecidable?
    Since mathematics describes physical systems with such unreasonable ef-
fectiveness —as E.P. Wigner wrote in his famous essay [5]— we might think
that we can directly export to physics the undecidability that lives in math-
ematics. It is important to clarify that undecidability is not a feature of the
physical system; it is a feature of the mathematical model we use to describe
that physical system. It might not be possible to prove that a mathematical
model of a physical system has a certain property, or that the property takes
a certain concrete value. Yet that property might be experimentally mea-
surable, and when it is measured on the real physical system, some concrete

                                       5
value must necessarily be obtained. However, this does not imply that phys-
ical systems can solve problems that are “beyond” mathematical reasoning.
It may simply imply that mathematical models of physical systems are often
idealizations that cannot be fully attained by real physical systems. Since
any finite problem is decidable simply by enumerating the solutions, an un-
decidable problem must necessarily conceal an infinite somewhere: infinitely
many instances, infinitely many particles, infinite precision. None of these
idealized limits are directly accessible experimentally. However, as we will
discuss further in section 6.2, undecidability in some idealized mathematical
limit of a physical system can be reflected in surprising – sometimes even
qualitatively new – (but still in principle computable) physical properties in
the real, effectively finite physical system.
    The main path that has been followed to prove that a property of a physi-
cal model is undecidable resembles the way Turing proved the undecidability
of the halting problem. He constructed a simulation of one machine inside
another one—enabled by his invention of Universal Turing machines that can
simulate any other Turing machine on arbitrary inputs. In the same vein,
in order to prove the undecidability of properties of a physical system, one
embeds a universal computer in it. Once embedded, a known undecidable
property of the universal computer (e.g. the halting problem) is mapped to
a property of the physical system, which therefore has to be undecidable as
well.
    However, natural physical systems do not resemble Turing machines very
closely, so in many cases what is embedded is not directly a Universal Turing
Machine, but other structures equivalent to Turing Machines with their own
known undecidable properties, like Diophantine equations, tilings, or cellular
automata.
    In the following sections, we review these works that arguably address
more and more physically relevant problems, both classical and quantum.
    The review is structured as follows.
    We will start (sections 2 and 3) by recalling basic facts about undecid-
ability: its definition, history, and an account of some classic undecidable
problems in mathematics and computer science that will be used later in
this review.
    We will then give a quick summary of the first undecidability results
in physics obtained between the 60s and early 90s (section 4), then pass
to the main part of the review (section 5) where we give a rather detailed
description of the most recent undecidability results in physics. These will

                                      6
be divided mainly in two main categories: many body systems (section 5.1)
and quantum information problems (section 5.2). We will also comment on
some problems in fluid mechanics (section 5.3) and quantum field theories
(section 5.4).
    We will finish this review with an outlook (section 6) in which we will
draw a summary diagram connecting the undecidability results in physics
reviewed in sections 4 and 5 with the corresponding undecidability results
in mathematics they are deduced from. We will also comment that, al-
though undecidability results have an inherent negative flavour –they are
no-go results– they do have a positive side. We will finish with a brief dis-
cussion about the effect of noise, the notion of undecidability over the real
numbers, and the tension between the infinities in mathematics and the finite
physical reality.

1.1. Complementary readings
    While we are not aware of any other comprehensive review that covers
in particular the plethora of undecidability results in physical systems since
the 2010s, there are other excellent articles, reviews and books that we want
to mention.
    K. Svozil has explored for many years the consequences in physics and
philosophy of Gödel’s and Turing’s works (including as well most of the other
mathematical systems discussed here) in various of his articles and books with
plenty of references [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
    The book by G. Chaitin, G. Doria and N. da Costa [12] is an excel-
lent informal introduction to undecidability in mathematics. It starts with
Gödel and Turing, focuses on algorithmic information theory, with conse-
quences in physics (including some of the results reviewed here), and with a
more speculative final chapter on open problems and future developments.
    C. Bennett wrote a number of interesting articles explaining some re-
sults about undecidability in physics that are covered as well in this review
[1, 13]. J.D. Barrow provides interesting “informal thoughts” about the
implications of Gödel’s theorems in physics, wondering whether all their as-
sumptions can be applied to physical theories [14, 15]. There are various
reviews treating undecidability in physics from the point of view of algorith-
mic information theory, such as the articles by C. Calude [16, 17, 18, 19].
One can also find in [20], edited by Cooper and Soskova, a recent essay
by various authors about the relevance of incomputability for the real world
in different disciplines including physics.

                                      7
    Finally, there are plenty of references about undecidability in mathemat-
ics, like the one of Davis [21] or, more recently, the ones by Margenstern
[22] and Poonen [23]. They cover undecidability and universality in different
mathematical systems including Turing Machines, Diophantine equations,
word problems, Post systems, molecular computations, register machines,
neural networks, cellular automata and tilings. Goodman-Strauss covers
in [24] most of these systems in a more informal and didactic way.

2. The origin. A bit of history
    Euclid’s Elements laid the foundations of mathematics in Ancient
Greece and his axiomatic system remained untouched for more than two
millennia. But the famous fifth postulate of geometry (the parallel pos-
tulate) was always under scrutiny2 . In the 19th century mathematicians
discovered that the parallel postulate could be changed or dropped entirely,
leading to non-euclidean geometries. Besides opening a new fascinating world
of curved geometries, mathematicians began to think again about the foun-
dations of mathematics, and about the possibility of establishing a definite
system of axioms and rules of inference powerful enough to construct the
edifice of mathematics with absolute rigor.
    The revolution in the foundations of mathematics that would come in the
early 20th century was initiated in the late 19th century by G. Cantor, with
his work on set theory and—to the great disturbance of the mathematical
establishment of the epoch—with his infinite hierarchy of infinities. Prac-
tically ignored by his contemporaries, his goal of axiomatizing mathematics
based on set theory was continued by G. Frege. After many years of hard
work, Frege finally presented his first book in 1893. While the second one
was being printed in 1903, he received a letter from B. Russell pointing to an
insuperable contradiction in his system, now known as Russell’s Paradox:
The set of all sets that are not members of themselves 3 [26].

   2
      Indeed, the proof of the independence of this postulate from the remaining axioms of
plane geometry can be considered the first example of a mathematical statement which is
proved undecidable with respect to an accepted axiomatic system [25].
    3
      Frege immediately admitted the inconsistency in his system and never recovered from
it. Russell wrote: “As I think about acts of integrity and grace, I realize that there is
nothing in my knowledge to compare with Frege’s dedication to truth. His entire life’s work
was on the verge of completion, much of his work had been ignored to the benefit of men



                                            8
    The most prestigious mathematician at the beginning of 20th century, D.
Hilbert, was a great admirer of Cantor’s and Frege’s work and was determined
to overcome all paradoxes and difficulties. The goal of the so-called Hilbert’s
program was to axiomatize mathematics in a formal system without con-
tradictions (consistency ), in which every mathematical statement could be
proved true or false by following the rules of inference (completeness). The
task would require a tremendous effort from all mathematicians willing to
contribute. B. Russell and A. Whitehead were among those taking this on,
writing the monumental opus Principia Mathematica with that goal.
    There was a general feeling of confidence that the task would be accom-
plished, and in a conference in his hometown Königsberg in 1930, Hilbert
pronounced the famous words We must know, we will know 4 (in opposition
to ignoramus et ignorabimus 5 ).
    But ironically enough, the previous day at the same conference, a young
student from the University of Vienna, Kurt Gödel, had presented the
result that would end Hilbert’s dream.

2.1. Gödel
    Using prime numbers, Gödel managed to construct an ingenious coding
system —the Gödel numbering— to assign a number to any symbol in a
system F, in such a way that any group of symbols —a sentence— is coded
by a unique number. With this powerful tool, he managed to encode into a
number one particular sentence G that refers to itself: G is not provable
in the system F. 6
    This was a well-formed mathematical statement encoded in a number in
a formal mathematical system which includes standard arithmetic, saying

infinitely less capable, his second volume was about to be published, and upon finding that
his fundamental assumption was in error, he responded with intellectual pleasure clearly
submerging any feelings of personal disappointment. It was almost superhuman and a
telling indication of that of which men are capable if their dedication is to creative work
and knowledge instead of cruder efforts to dominate and be known” [26]
     4
       The German original WIR MÜSSEN WISSEN - WIR WERDEN WISSEN is written
on his gravestone.
     5
       ”We do not know and will not know” was written by Emil du Bois-Reymond, a
German physiologist, in his publication ”On the limits of our understanding of nature” in
1872.
     6
       In the original article, Gödel cited the analogy of his result with the liar paradox This
sentence is false [27]


                                               9
about itself that it cannot be proven in that system. In this way he arrived
at his First Incompleteness Theorem: true sentences exist which are not
provable, i.e. the system is not complete. (See section 3.1 for a more formal
statement of the theorem.)
    John von Neumann attended Gödel’s conference in Königsberg and un-
derstood immediately its tremendous impact; later worked on it; and wrote
a letter to Gödel announcing that he had obtained an important corollary.
Gödel replied that the result had been already sent for publication by him-
self [28]: the Second Incompleteness Theorem, which proved that for
any consistent system including elementary arithmetic, the consistency of
the system cannot be proved in itself.
    Although it took a while for the theorems to become known (and even
more to be widely accepted), they are now considered amongst the greatest
achievements in mathematical logic since the ancient Greeks.

2.2. Church and Turing
    Meanwhile, another student in Cambridge, Alan Turing, was working
on the Entscheidungsproblem (decision problem), proposed also by Hilbert
in 1928.

     Decision Problem:
     Is there an algorithm which, given a set of axioms and a mathe-
     matical statement, decides whether it is or is not provable from
     the axioms?

    In tackling this question, the first important step was to precisely define
algorithm, or the recipe to calculate. Two people arrived at two different
solutions: Alonzo Church with his Lambda-calculus [29] and Alan Turing
with his Turing Machine [30]. Both ways of computing were later proved to
be equivalent by Church, Turing and S. Kleene [31], and they served to relate
the abstract mathematical concept of computation with concrete, definable
processes via the Church-Turing Thesis.

     Church-Turing Thesis
     Every (human) computation can be done by a Turing machine.

   Even Gödel was quite convinced of this correspondence. He wrote: “The
resulting definition of the concept of mechanical by the sharp concept of

                                      10
“performable by a Turing machine” is both correct and unique. [...] Moreover
it is absolutely impossible that anybody who understands the question and
knows Turing’s definition should decide for a different concept” [32].
    Since its formulation in the 1930’s there have been many attempts to
prove or refute this thesis, as well as discussions of the status of this “thesis”
and whether or not it is amenable to proof at all. No definitive resolution has
been reached. It remains a thesis, not a theorem, but one widely accepted
to be true by most mathematicians and computer scientists. We refer to
[6, 8, 33, 34, 12, 32, 31] for extensive discussions about the Church-Turing
Thesis and subsequent extensions and variants.
    In the end, it turned out that, despite being equivalent, Turing’s approach
was more convenient and closer to the practical notion of calculating. He
started by thinking of a person with pencil and paper and ended up inventing
the modern computer, a universal machine able to perform any computation,
and Turing Machines became the standard foundation for modern computer
science theory.
    Turing continued to investigate the real-world implications of his inven-
tion and considered the following ordinary problem

      The Halting Problem
      Input: the description of an algorithm.
      Output: YES or NO depending whether the algorithm halts or not.

and showed that it cannot be solved by any algorithm. In other words, it is
undecidable whether a program will halt on a given input.
    Paradoxically, in the very same article where a universal machine that
can compute any algorithm was described, Turing was showing that there
are things that no computer can do; that there are no algorithms for certain
tasks. He formalized as well that most real numbers cannot be computed
by a Turing Machine, which by the Church-Turing thesis means that they
cannot be computed at all.

2.3. Rice
    In 1953, H.G. Rice proved a strong extension of Turing halting problem
for computer science [35]. Turing proved that in general it is impossible to
know whether a program (Turing Machine) will halt or not. With a concep-
tually relatively simple proof, Rice showed that (informally) in general it
is impossible to know what a program does to its input (see [36],

                                       11
[12] for a formal statement of the theorem). If you are given an arbitrary
program the only way to know what it does is running it. For instance, the
questions:
–Does this program print “Hello World”
–Is this computer virus harmful?
are undecidable.
    Of course, this does not mean that these questions are not perfectly de-
cidable for many programs; it means that there is no algorithm capable to tell
what an arbitrary program does when given the program as input. There will
never be a perfect anti-virus, and debugging computer programs will never
be easy.

2.4. Algorithmic Information Theory
    Soon after that, a new incompleteness theorem was proven by G. Chaitin,
in connection with ‘Algorithmic information theory (AIT)’; a theory
founded independently by R. Solomonoff [37], A. Kolmogorov [38] and
G. Chaitin [39] in the 1960s, that revolves around the notion of complexity.
    They managed to establish a precise and formal definition of a previously
vague concept using information theory and computer science7 . Broadly
speaking, the Kolmogorov complexity8 of a string of bits is defined as
the size in bits of the smallest computer program – the elegant program–
that produces that string as output.
    Chaitin’s incompleteness theorem states that deciding if a program
is elegant is in general axiomatically independent (i.e. undecidable in the
Gödel sense). More precisely, to prove that an individual N -bit program
is elegant, you need a theory A containing N bits of axioms (i.e. having
complexity N ). It turns out that any formal axiomatic system with a finite
number of axioms can prove that at most finitely many programs are elegant,
in spite of the fact that there are infinitely many elegant programs9 .
    Using this powerful idea this theory provides another precise definition
of another important concept: A single string of bits is random if the size

   7
      According to Chaitin, “AIT is the result of putting Shannon’s information theory
and Turing’s computability theory into a cocktail shaker and shaking vigorously” [40].
    8
      Also known as Solomonoff-Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity.
    9
      While Gödel’s theorem was inspired by the liar paradox (‘This statement is false’),
Chaitin’s result is better related to Berry’s paradox: ‘The smallest positive integer not
definable in under eleven words’. But the sentence itself contains 10 words...


                                           12
in bits of the elegant program that produces it equals the size in bits of
the string, i.e. the string cannot be compressed by any means and the most
efficient way to produce it is just printing it.
    By approaching incompleteness from the perspective of AIT, Chaitin
showed Gödel undecidability to be pervasive. In an informal way: with
a small amount of information (your formal axiomatic system) you cannot
prove things that contain more information . . . and there are infinitely many
things to prove. In Chaitin’s words [41]:

          With Gödel it looks surprising that you have incompleteness,
      that no finite set of axioms can contain all of mathematical truth.
      With Turing incompleteness seems much more natural. But with
      my approach, when you look at program size, I would say that
      it looks inevitable. Wherever you turn, you smash up against a
      stone wall and incompleteness hits you in the face!

    Four results about undecidability in quantum physics that are based on
AIT are commented on in sections 5.1.2, 5.2.1 ((Brukner (2009) [42]; Paterek
et al. (2010) [43]; Trejo et al. (2023) [44]; Purcell et al. (2024) [45]). General
references about AIT and Kolmogorov complexity can be found in [46], [40],
[47], [12].

3. Undecidabilty in Mathematics
   Since all those pioneering works, many other problems in several areas of
mathematics and computer science have shown to be undecidable. We will
review those which are relevant for this review in section 3.4. But first, we
need to define the notion of undecidability more rigorously.

3.1. Gödel undecidability: axiomatic independence
    Now we provide a more formal statement of Gödel’s theorems, explain
the concept of axiomatic independence closely linked to them, and provide
references for detailed explanation.
    Gödel’s theorems deal with formal systems in mathematical logic. A
formal system consists of a finite set of symbols, a grammar that defines
which combinations of symbols are well-formed formulas, a set of axioms, and
inference rules that describe how theorems can be proven from the axioms.
Moreover, we will assume the formal system to be effectively axiomatized in

                                       13
the sense that there is a mechanistic way of deciding whether a sequence
of symbols is syntactically correct, represents an axiom or displays a valid
proof.
    A version of Gödel’s first incompleteness theorem that is entirely syntac-
tic, which means that it does not involve the semantic concept of ‘truth’, is
the following:

       First Incompleteness Theorem
       Any consistent10 formal system F within which a certain amount
       of elementary arithmetic11 can be carried out is incomplete; i.e.
       there are statements in the language of F which can neither be
       proved nor disproved in F [28].

       Second incompleteness theorem
       For any consistent formal system F within which a certain amount
       of elementary arithmetic11 can be carried out, the consistency of
       F cannot be proven in F itself [28].

     In a formal system, a statement or proposition is said to be independent
if it cannot be proven or disproven from the axioms of the system. If we
now add a semantic layer, i.e. an interpretation that equips sentences with
meaning, this means that the truth or falsity of the statement does not follow
logically from the axioms.
     Axiomatic independence is the key concept in Gödel’s incompleteness
theorems. The first theorem states that in any interpretation of any consis-
tent formal system that includes basic arithmetic, there are true statements
that are independent.
     But a new expanded formal system can be created including one or more
of those statements (or their negations) as new axioms. However, that does
not save the system from incompleteness, since Gödel’s first theorem also
applies to this expanded system, proving that there are also independent
statements in it (a processes that can be carried out ad infinitum).

  10
      Consistent means that there is no sentence such that the sentence and its negation
are both provable.
   11
      See [48, 49, 28] to clarify what certain amount of elementary arithmetic means in
both theorems. In short, anything at least as strong as Robinson arithmetic, a first-order
logic theory with seven axioms, is sufficient. Robinson arithmetic is a fragment of the
standard axiomatization of arithmetic via the Peano axioms.


                                           14
   As famous historical examples of axiomatic independence, we can cite
Euclid’s fifth axiom (see footnote 2), the continuum hypothesis, and the
axiom of choice in set theory (see for instance [50]).
   In this review we are not going to delve deeper into Gödel’s theorems
and their proofs, since undecidability results in physics mostly derive from
Turing’s halting problem. For rigorous and didactic references on Gödel’s
results see [48, 49, 51, 28].

3.2. Turing Machines and the Halting Problem
    Throughout this review, we will see that most of the undecidability results
in physics rely on an embedding of a Turing Machine into a physical system
(see Fig. 1).. Let us now introduce the formal definition of a Turing machine.
There are several equivalent options for that. We will take the definition from
[52]. For other options, we refer for instance to [53].
    A (deterministic) Turing Machine (TM) is defined by a triple (Σ, Q, δ)
where:
   • Σ is a finite alphabet with an identified blank symbol #. We call
     Σ̃ = Σ \ #.

   • Q is a finite set of internal control states with an identified initial state
     q0 and final (or halting) state qf ̸= q0 .
   • δ is a transition function δ : Q × Σ → Σ × Q × {L, R}.
    The TM has a two-way infinite tape of cells that is used to read and
write. It is indexed by Z. The TM also has a head that moves along the
tape, which reads from the tape and writes on it. At any time, only a finite
number of the tape cells may contain non-blank symbols.
    A configuration of the TM is a description of content of the tape, the
location of the head and the internal state q ∈ Q.
    Given a configuration, the transition function δ, evaluated on the current
internal state and tape symbol scanned by the head, completely specifies
what to do next: which symbol from Σ must be written on the tape in
the current head position, which internal state from Q the machine should
transition to, and where the head should move next, either left (L) or right
(R).
    By convention, in the initial configuration:
   • the head is in cell 0,

                                       15
   • the machine is in state q0 , and

   • the tape has all its cells in the blank symbols except for the input
     x ∈ Σ̃∗ , which is written on the tape in positions 0, 1, 2, · · ·

    The TM halts on input x if it eventually enters the final state qf . The
number of steps a TM takes to halt on input x is called the running time.
If a TM halts, then its output is the string written on the tape from the
leftmost non-blank symbol to the rightmost non-blank symbol.
    It is not difficult to see that, given a TM T and an input x, we can define
a new Turing machine T ′ which halts on a blank input if and only if T halts
on x and, in that case, both give the same output. T ′ is just the machine
that, on a blank input, first writes x on the tape and then runs as machine
T.
    It is a remarkable fact, already proven by Turing in [30] that there exist
universal Turing machines. A universal TM is a Turing machine that can
simulate the behavior of any other TM in the sense that, if given as input the
description of a Turing machine T , it halts if and only if T halts on the blank
input and, in that case, its output is identical to that of T . This implies that
a universal TM can simulate the behavior of any other TM initialized in any
possible input.
    We can now define the key notions for this review: (un)decidable prob-
lems and (un)computable functions.
    A function f : Σ̃∗ → Σ̃∗ is computable if there exists a TM with alphabet
Σ which, on input x ∈ Σ̃∗ , halts and leaves as output f (x). A function is
uncomputable if it is not computable.
    An (un)decidable problem is a YES/NO decision problem on the set
Σ̃∗ for some alphabet Σ, for which the decision function f : Σ̃∗ → {YES, NO}
is (un)computable 12 .
    Note that, given a decision function, the set of all elements in Σ̃∗ whose
output is YES gives a one-to-one correspondence between decision functions
and subsets of Σ̃∗ , usually called languages. Using this correspondence, the
problem of determining the output of a decision function is the same as the
problem of determining whether a given string in Σ̃∗ belongs to a language.

  12
    To make this definition match the one just given for (un)computable functions, it is
enough to identify two particular alphabet symbols as YES and NO when produced as
output.


                                          16
3.2.1. The Halting Problem
     The halting problem asks whether a given TM will halt on a given input.
It is one of the most important problems in theoretical computer science, and
its undecidability has profound implications for the limits of computation.

     The Halting Problem
     Given a Turing machine M and a string w ∈ Σ̃, determine
     whether M halts on input w.

   The halting problem is undecidable, meaning that there exists no
algorithm that can solve the halting problem for all possible TM-input pairs.
In other words, there is no program that can take as input a description of
a TM M and an input w, and always correctly determine whether M halts
on w.
   By the comments made in the previous section, it is also undecidable to
determine if a given TM M will halt on the empty input, or whether a fixed
universal TM will halt on a given input w.
   It is relatively simple to provide a non-formal sketch of the proof by
contradiction: Suppose there exist a program H that can solve the halting
problem for every TM M with any input w:
                (
                  YES when M (w) halts
   H(M, w) =
                  NO when M (w) does not halt
   Now we can construct a new Turing machine D(x) with arbitrary input
x that contains H as a function, with the following behaviour:

   • If H(x, x) outputs YES, then D(x) enters an infinite loop.

   • If H(x, x) outputs NO, then D(x) halts.

   Now, what happens if we run D with its own description as input, D(D)?

   • If D(D) halts, then H must have output NO which is a contradiction.

   • If D(D) does not halt, then H must have output YES which is also a
     contradiction.

   Therefore, our assumption that H exists must be false, and the halting
problem is undecidable. For a formal proof see [36, 53].

                                     17
    Note that, as in the case of Gödel’s theorems, an essential ingredient in
the proof is self-reference: a TM with its own description as input, D(D).
    The undecidability of the halting problem is a fundamental limitation of
computation, and it has implications for many areas of computer science, in-
cluding software engineering, program verification, and artificial intelligence.
In this review we are just considering the implications for physical systems.

3.2.2. Church’s Theorem
    In section 2.2 we have mentioned that, in addition to Turing, also Church
found a negative answer to the decision problem with his λ-calculus. In
his 1936 paper “An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory”
he first provided examples in elementary number theory and topology, and
later proved several undecidability theorems in problems with integer recur-
sive functions. (All these results are usually referred together as “Church’s
Theorem” [29]).
    Although Church’s result preceded Turing’s, it is less frequently cited
than Gödel’s and Turing’s, probably because Church and Turing quickly
demonstrated jointly that λ-calculus and Turing machines were equivalent,
and the latter was developed as a description of a real computational machine,
while the mathematical description of the former was more abstract.
    However, we mention it here because Church’s results were used by Shapiro
[54] to prove undecidability of other important decision problems in integer
recursive functions, and in turn, one of those results was used by Komar [3]
to obtain an undecidable problem in quantum field theory (see section 4).

3.3. Relation between (Turing) undecidability and (Gödel) axiomatic inde-
      pendence
    In some sense, (Turing) undecidability implies (Gödel) axiomatic inde-
pendence. In this brief section, we will sketch this connection following the
review by Poonen [23].
    Consider a formal system, which is effectively axiomatized, and a decision
problem with (infinitely many) instances i. As is usually the case, assume
that for each instance of the decision problem, one can construct (algorith-
mically) a statement Yi so that if Yi is provable within the formal system,
then the answer to instance i is YES, and if its negation ¬Yi is provable, then
the answer to instance i is NO.
    One could then design the following algorithm to solve the decision prob-
lem: Given instance i, recursively list all statements provable within the

                                      18
formal system and check whether this list contains Yi or ¬Yi ; the answer
being YES or NO respectively. If Yi or its negation ¬Yi were provable for all
i, this algorithm would halt and decide correctly for any instance i.
    Therefore, if the decision problem is (Turing) undecidable, there must
exist at least one statement Yi (indeed infinitely many) so that Yi is ax-
iomatically independent of the given axiom system.
    As mentioned above, we will mainly focus on (Turing) undecidability.
But using this connection, one obtains (Gödel) axiomatic independence for
each one of the undecidable problems reviewed here. Moreover, if the un-
decidability originates from the halting problem, for any given consistent
formal system one can use this connection in order to pinpoint an individ-
ual instance of the decision problem that cannot be decided on the basis
of the axioms. The reason is that, by Gödel’s second incompleteness the-
orem, consistency of a formal system cannot be proven within that system
(unless it is inconsistent). Hence, we could, at least in principle, set up an
explicit Turing machine that recursively lists all theorems that are provable
from the axioms and halts iff a given inconsistent statement like “0 = 1”
appears. If the formal system is consistent,13 then this Turing machine will
never halt, but this fact will not be provable within the formal system. For
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with the Axiom of Choice (ZFC), the axiomatic
foundation of set theory and the most commonly used foundation of mathe-
matics, this has been worked out by Aaronson and Yedidia (2016) [56] with
an explicit description of a 7910-state Turing machine with one tape and
a two-symbol alphabet that cannot be proved to run forever in ZFC, and
improved by O’Rear (2016) [57].

3.4. Other undecidable problems
    In this section we will describe some other problems in mathematics and
computer science beyond the halting problem that have been proved to be
undecidable and that will constitute the building blocks for the undecidable
problems in physics that we will survey in the forthcoming sections.

  13
     Technically, a somewhat stronger assumption than consistency is needed here to make
this argument go through; namely, that the system cannot prove any false arithmetic
statements. “Rosser’s trick” and related methods allow these types of argument to be
strengthened so that they do not require any such additional assumptions, see e.g. [55].




                                          19
3.4.1. Diophantine Equations and Hilbert’s Tenth Problem
    Diophantine equations14 are polynomial equations with integer coeffi-
cients, with two or more unknowns, in which integer solutions are also sought.
A simple example is the famous Pythagorean equation for triangles with a
right angle
                               x2 + y 2 = z 2                              (1)
The search for solutions and properties of different types of Diophantine
equations has taken place since ancient Greece. In his famous last theorem
of 1637, Pierre Fermat stated that, for the case of three variables, there are
no integer solutions of xn + y n = z n when the exponent is greater than two,
the cases with n = 1 (linear) or n = 2 (Pythagorean) therefore being the
only ones with integer solutions.
    Making an actual theorem out of this conjecture turned out to be an ar-
duous task, and it did not occur until 1995 when Andrew Wiles presented his
celebrated proof [58, 59]. In general, the great difficulty of proving the exis-
tence of solutions for the various types of Diophantine equations led Hilbert
to include this problem in his famous 1900 list of 23 mathematical problems
for the 20th century.

       Hilbert’s Tenth Problem
       Given a Diophantine equation with any number of unknown quan-
       tities and with integral numerical coefficients: To devise a process
       according to which it can be determined in a finite number of op-
       erations whether the equation has an integer solution.

   In other words, Hilbert was asking for the existence of an algorithm to
decide whether any given Diophantine equation has integer solutions.
   In 1971 Matiyasevich [60], using previous results by Davis, Putnam and
Robinson [61], proved that such an algorithm does not exist, i.e. the exis-
tence of integer solutions for the Diophantine equations is unde-
cidable.
   This important result in mathematics has been used to prove undecid-
able questions in different physical systems, such as integrability of classical
Hamiltonians or the existence of chaos in dynamical systems (da Costa and

  14
    After the Hellenistic mathematician of the 3rd century, Diophantus of Alexandria,
who studied algebraic equations.


                                         20
Doria (1991) [62, 25]); and, more recently, solvability of quantum control
problems (Bondar and Pechen (2020) [63]), and supersymmetry breaking in
quantum field theory models (Tachikawa (2023) [64]) (sections 4, 5.2.1, and
5.4, respectively).

3.4.2. Post Correspondence Problem
      The Post Correspondence Problem (PCP) was introduced by E. Post
in 1946 [65] and is very often used in proofs of undecidability because it has
a simpler structure than the halting problem. We follow [53], but this is also
covered in [36], and [24] for a more informal and didactic introduction.
      In the PCP, we are given a finite set of dominoes, each with a top
string and a bottom string. The goal is to determine whether there exists a
sequence of dominoes such that concatenating the top strings produces the
same result as concatenating the corresponding bottom strings. Formally,
given an alphabet Σ with at least two symbols, an instance of the PCP is
a finite set of pairs (ti , bi ) –dominoes– over Σ: {(t1 , b1 ), (t2 , b2 ), . . . , (tn , bn )},
where ti , bi ∈ Σ∗ .15 A solution –called a match– is a sequence of indices
i1 , i2 , . . . , ik (with 1 ≤ ij ≤ n) such that: ti1 ti2 . . . tik = bi1 bi2 . . . bik . If such a
sequence exists, we say the PCP instance has a solution; otherwise, it does
not.

        Post Correspondence Problem –PCP–
        Given an instance of the PCP problem, decide whether its has a
        solution or not.

   By a reduction to the Turing Machine halting problem, E. Post proved
that the PCP is undecidable. The PCP was used as the basis to prove the
undecidability of the Matrix Mortality problem which we comment below.

3.4.3. Matrix mortality
    This problem deals with the question of whether we can determine if, for
a given set of matrices S, there exists a finite sequence of matrices in S such
that their product is the zero matrix.
    To make this more formal, consider a finite set of d × d matrices S =
{M1 , . . . , Mn } ⊂ Md (Z) with integer entries. We call S mortal if there is a

   15
     Σ∗ is defined as the set of all finite strings over symbols from Σ, including the empty
string.


                                                21
non-empty word w ∈ {1, . . . , n}∗ , of length m, say, such that for the corre-
sponding product of matrices:

                             Mw1 Mw2 · · · Mwm = 0.

      Matrix mortality problem (with parameters (d, n)). Given
      a set of d × d matrices S = {M1 , . . . , Mn } ⊂ Md (Z) with integer
      entries, determine whether the set is mortal.

    The Matrix Mortality Problem was proven to be undecidable even with
d = 3 and n = 16 by Paterson in 1970 [66] with a reduction to the PCP.
Improved pairs (d, n) for which the Matrix mortality problem remains unde-
cidable were obtained later by several authors [67].
    This problem has been used to prove undecidability results in tensor net-
works (Kliesch et al. (2014) [68], De las Cuevas et al. (2016) [69]) and quan-
tum measurement theory (Eisert (2012) [70]) that are discussed in sections
5.1.3 and 5.2.1 respectively.

3.4.4. Word Problem
    This problem deals with finitely presented groups. Given a finite
alphabet α = {a, b, c, . . .}, the free group over α is simply the set of all
different words on elements of α and their inverses {a−1 , b−1 , c−1 , . . .}, with
the convention that whenever an element and its inverse appear in the word in
consecutive positions, the corresponding word is considered the same as the
one in which both symbols are erased. For example, the word ac−1 c−1 b−1 ba
is the same as ac−1 c−1 a. One considers also the empty word, equivalent to
the identity element e in the group. The group operation is given by word
concatenation, and the inverse of a word is the inverse of its letters written
in reverse order. For simplicity, one denotes a2 = aa, a3 = aaa, etc.
    One can add to the picture more relations between the different letters,
for instance a2 b = e. This means that, whenever one sees the block a2 b in
a word, one can replace it by the empty word (i.e. erase the block), and the
new word formed by this substitution is considered the same as the initial
one.
    A finitely presented group is given by a finite alphabet α and a finite set
of relations S on the elements of α and their inverses.
    The word problem for a given finitely presented group can then be stated
as follows:


                                        22
      Word Problem. Given a word, decide whether it is equivalent
      to the empty word.

    In the 50s, Novikov [71] and Boone [72] independently proved that there
exist finitely presented groups for which the Word Problem is undecidable.
    Several of the works we will review here, like the ones of Geroch and
Hartle (1986) [4], Morton and Biamonte (2012) [73], Slofstra (2019, 2020)
[74, 75], Fritz (2021) [76], Mancinska and Roberson (2020) [77] and Fu et
al.(2021) [78], are based on the undecidability of the Word Problem.

3.4.5. Wang tiles
     A Wang tile is a square shape with marks (typically colors) along each
edge. A tiling is formed by arranging the tiles in the plane, without rotation
or reflections, so that the colors on adjacent edges match. A tiling problem
is a set of tiles T with which to tile the whole plane Z2 , or a finite region of
it, fulfilling those conditions.
     In 1961 H. Wang conjectured that a finite set of tiles can tile the entire
plane if and only if it can tile the plane periodically ([79]). A corollary of this
is that the decision problem of determining whether or not a given set of Wang
tiles can tile the plane would be decidable. However, in 1966 his student
R. Berger disproved the conjecture by embedding a Turing Machine into a
tile set in such a way that they can tile the plane if and only if the machine
will never halt. Therefore the Wang tiling problem is undecidable.
Berger’s construction was substantially simplified by Robinson (1971) [80].
     With this new universal system at their disposal, researchers tried to
spread undecidability by making different kinds of connections, with cellular
automata being the first candidates due to their similar structure when map-
ping their temporal dimension to one of the spatial dimensions in the tilings
(see next section). The regular structure of tilings in the plane allows as
well for direct mappings to different physical systems, to prove undecidable
properties in them. The results by Kanter (1990) [81] (section 4), Cubitt et
al. (2015) [82] and Scarpa et al. (2020) [83] (section 5), are based on or make
use of mappings between tilings and 2-dimensional Hamiltonians.
     The classical reference for tilings is the book by Grünbaum and Shephard
[84]. See as well [24] for an informal and didactic introduction to undecid-
ability in tiling problems.




                                        23
3.4.6. Cellular Automata
    Cellular Automata (CA) are simple discrete mathematical systems that
evolve in discrete time steps. A CA can be characterized by its dimension,
the number of states each cell can take on, the rule of evolution of each cell
based on the states on neighboring cells and the range of the interaction.
    They were first introduced by John Von Neumann in the 1950s as a new
tool to study discrete dynamical systems particularly suitable to computer
simulation. Since then, even the simpler of these apparently simple systems
have displayed every kind of complex behavior, up to universal computation
and undecidability.
    Conway’s Game of Life was developed by mathematician John Conway
in 1970 and became known thanks to a Scientific American article [85]. From
a finite initial condition in the center of a 2D grid, this CA with two states
(alive and dead ) and first neighbor interactions (range r = 1) can evolve into
very diverse complex behavior, including universal computation [86, 87].
    But there are even simpler examples with this universal capability, such
as rule 110: the simplest so far (1D, two-states, r = 1). This CA was
conjectured to be Turing complete in 1985 by S. Wolfram and proved to
be so in 2004 by emulating cyclic tag systems, in turn proven universal by
embedding a Turing Machine into them [88].
    Stephen Wolfram has been a prominent contributor to the development
and study of CAs since the 1980s [89, 90]. His book “A New Kind of Science”
[91] discusses various results about universal computation and undecidability
in these and other systems, such as universality of rule 110, finding a uni-
versal Turing machine with 2 internal states and an alphabet of size 5, and
proposing an even simpler candidate with 2 internal states and 3 alphabet
symbols (that eventually was proved universal by the undergraduate student
A. Smith in 2007 [92]).
    J. Kari [93] has studied undecidable properties of CA using mappings to
Wang tiles to prove general results such as Rice’s theorem for CAs. The
application is restricted to limit sets, which are configurations that can occur
after arbitrary many computational steps and therefore represent long-term
behaviour. In [94] Kari reviews the main results about undecidability in
CAs considering diverse properties including reversibility, time-symmetry,
conservation laws, chaotic dynamics, and the influence of the dimension in
undecidability.
    It is precisely this diversity, together with their local interactions and their


                                        24
regularity in space, that make CAs well-suited for embedding into planar
physical systems, in which the temporal evolution of a 1D CA is mapped to
a spatial dimension of the ground state of a 2D Ising lattice, for instance.
We will discuss results about undecidability in physical systems obtained in
this way in the next sections (Omohundro (1984) [95], Gu et al. (2009) [96],
Gu and Perales (2012) [97]).
    Let us finally point out that Israeli and Goldenfeld [98, 99] constructed
local coarse-grained descriptions of 1D CAs that can emulate the large-scale
behavior of the original systems without accounting for small-scale details.
They showed that although some of the original CAs present undecidable
properties, the coarse-grained large-scale construction can be predictable and
even decidable at some level of description.

4. Undecidability in Physics. First Results
    There are undecidable questions in mathematics, the language of physics
is mathematics, therefore it is possible that there are undecidable questions
in physics. The conceptual similarities of this simple argument with the
strange uncertainties provided by quantum mechanics at the beginning of
the 20th century were soon noticed by some, but it seems that Gödel himself
did not want to explore this path16 .
    We can consider the very Turing Machine and its halting problem as the
first result of undecidability in the physical world. Except for the idealization
of the infinite tape (see section 6.2), it is a mechanical machine that can be
perfectly built. However, Alan Turing’s motivation was not to consider that
connection either, but to rigorously establish the concept of an algorithm and
universal machine (and as a consequence lay the foundations of theoretical
computer science).
    It was not until a few decades later that philosophers of science first, and
mathematicians and physicists later, began to seriously explore the possibility
of undecidability in physics.
    Among the former, the philosopher of science Karl Popper [100] used
Gödel’s results to describe a mechanical machine called ‘predictor’ with a

  16
      John Wheeler asked Gödel about the connection between his incompleteness and
Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle and “Gödel got angry and threw me out of his office”
[15].



                                          25
‘calculator’17 to hypothesize that “most systems of physics, including clas-
sical physics and quantum physics, are indeterministic in perhaps an even
more fundamental sense than the one usually ascribed to the indetermin-
ism of quantum physics”. Schlegel (1967) [101] treated incompleteness
in all sciences in the light of Gödel’s theorems (in particular uncertainty in
quantum mechanics) and Zwick (1978) [102] and Rothstein (1982) [103]
explored the connections with the measurement problem and irreversibility,
respectively. None of them included mathematical proofs.
    The first rigorous result in the field was obtained by Komar (1964)
[3], proving that the macroscopic distinguishability of two arbitrary states
with infinite degrees of freedom in quantum field theory is undecidable. He
mapped this system into a decision problem about distinguishability of two
infinite sequences of integers that was proven undecidable via a reduction to
Church’s theorem [54] (section 3.2.2).
    The next batch of results were obtained two decades later, in the 1980s
and 1990s. Pour-El and Richards (1981) [104] found non-computable
weak solutions for a particular three-dimensional wave equation with com-
putable initial conditions. Fredkin and Toffoli (1982) [105] managed to
construct a reversible “billiard ball” model of universal computation with
hard frictionless balls that could perform all necessary logic operations by
elastic collisions18 . Omohundro (1984) [95] simulated an arbitrary CA
with a system of partial differential equations, proving therefore that this
system is able to perform universal computation as well (see footnote 18).
    In a work aiming to find a criterion to establish whether a physical theory
should be acceptable by distinguishing between computable and measurable
quantities, Geroch and Hartle (1986) [4] presented as an example an

   17
      With remarkable similarities to a Turing Machine: “A classical mechanical calculating
and predicting machine which is so constructed as to produce permanent records of some
kind (such as a tape with holes punched into it) capable of being interpreted as predictions
of the positions, velocities, and masses of physical particles. It will be shown that such a
machine can never fully predict every one of its own future states . . . Moreover, can never
fully predict, or be predicted by, any sufficiently similar machine with which it interacts.”
[100]
   18
      The authors focus on the computational capabilities of their model, so do not mention
the undecidable questions inherent to any universal system of computation, as first shown
by Turing. Our interest lies in the fact that they prove that a simple physical system,
formally identical to the atomic model of the classical kinetic theory of perfect gases, can
perform universal computation and therefore present undecidable properties.


                                             26
observable in quantum gravity for closed cosmologies –formulated as a sum
over histories–, whose expectation value is not computable19 . They proposed
that the calculation should involve the question of whether two simplicial
4-manifolds are topologically identical, which was proved undecidable via a
reduction to the word problem [106] (section 3.4.4). It is interesting to note
that this example introduces infinite magnitudes in a natural way since the
calculation of the expected value involves the infinite sum over histories (see
section 6.2).
    We have seen in section 3.4.5 that tiling problems are very natural candi-
dates to transfer undecidability to physical systems. This was the approach
that Kanter (1990) [81] took to prove undecidable properties in a 1D spin
system (anisotropic Potts Hamiltonian) using a map to the ’domino snake’
problem, which is a connectivity variation of a Wang tiling problem. The
author also indicated how his arguments could be extended to higher di-
mensions, dynamical evolution, other spin systems, and to some spatial and
temporal correlation functions in these systems. He also introduced an un-
certainty principle for classical systems caused by undecidability20 .
    Around the same time, Moore (1990, 1991) [107, 108] showed how to
embed a universal Turing Machine into a continuous dynamical system of just
three degrees of freedom, corresponding to the motion of a single particle in a
finite-sized, three-dimensional box. His construction uses plane and parabolic
mirrors in the box to modify the chaotic trajectories of the dynamical system
in order to obtain the Turing Machine operations needed for universality.
Virtually any question about its long-term behavior is undecidable. We refer
to [1, 13] for a discussion of this remarkable achievement.
    Taking a very different approach and mapping, da Costa and Doria
(1991) [62, 25] (see as well [12]) encode Diophantine equations in classical
mechanics and prove undecidability of questions about integrability of cer-
tain Hamiltonians and about the existence of chaos in dynamical systems.
They rely on results about undecidability of the existence of roots in cer-
tain classes of real functions, obtained in turn by mapping to Diophantine
equations [109, 110]. But as the authors themselves write, “While we have
given general existential proofs concerning undecidability and incomplete-

  19
      The authors recognized that the mathematics of quantum gravity had not yet been
developed to the point to have a complete mathematical formulation of what the equation
providing the expectation value meant.
   20
      To our knowledge no further work was done in these directions.


                                          27
ness in physics, we have not considered up to now the same questions with
respect to particular physically interesting systems . . . dealing with specific
situations is assuredly much more difficult than to prove general facts”. One
can find an introduction to these results in [111]. Calude et al. (1995)
[16] use the same tools to provide a couple of undecidability results about
integral solutions of the one-dimensional heat equation and the electrostatic
plane problem.
     da Costa et al. (1990) [112] obtained undecidability results in the sense
of Gödel in general relativity. They constructed an axiomatic framework for
it within Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory and showed that some statements are
axiomatically independent. See also [113, 12].
     Blondel et al. (2001) [114, 115] proved that several properties of par-
ticular classes of discrete time dynamical systems (global convergence, global
asymptotic stability, mortality, and nilpotence) are undecidable by simulat-
ing Turing Machines with them.
     Lloyd (1993, 1994) [116, 117] pioneered fruitful interconnections be-
tween quantum information theory and undecidability, which blossomed more
than 15 years later, as we will review in detail in the next section. In [116, 117]
it is argued that certain spectral properties of quantum mechanical operators
are undecidable. The argument is based on the following idea: the unitary
evolution U associated to the time evolution of a universal quantum computer
has invariant subspaces with discrete spectrum, corresponding to computa-
tions that halt, and other invariant subspaces with continuous spectrum,
corresponding to computations that do not halt. Via the undecidability of
the halting problem, Lloyd concludes that it is undecidable to know if the
quantum state associated to a given program (in the infinite-dimensional
space in which U is defined) has overlap, or not, with an invariant subspace
having a discrete spectrum21 .
     Due to its importance in several areas of mathematics and physics, it is in-
teresting to note that there has been an important series of papers devoted to
understanding the exact difficulty (in the sense of “degree of uncomputabil-
ity”) of several problems regarding spectra of infinite dimensional operators.
One approach is classified via the so-called Solvability Complexity Index hier-
archy introduced by Hansen (2011) [121] and it is crucial to understand the
possibility of using some undecidable problems as part of computer assisted

  21
       See [118, 119] for a discussion on the relation between [116, 117] and [82, 120].


                                              28
proofs, as has been done for instance in the solution of Kepler’s conjecture
[122, 123]. We will not delve into this topic here and just point to the work
by Colbrook and Hansen (2022) [124] and the references therein, also for
the long history of the problem of computing spectra of operators, which can
be traced back at least to Schrödinger (1940) [125].

5. Undecidability in Physics. Recent Results
    After those first results, there was a gap of 15 years until the recent
revival of the topic, mainly driven by the development of quantum informa-
tion theory, where physics and theoretical computer science are intrinsically
linked.
    In this (main) part of the review, we will cover undecidability results
proven in the period 2008-2024. We will group the results into two main
categories: many-body systems and quantum information theory; with a
couple of final paragraphs about fluid mechanics and quantum field theories.

5.1. Many-Body Systems
    In this section, we deal with many-body spin systems, both classical and
quantum. The mathematical framework to describe those systems is the
following. We consider particles located on a D-dimensional lattice ZD . To
the particle in position i we associate a d-dimensional complex Hilbert space
Hi = Cd , where we denote by |1⟩, . . . |d⟩ its canonical (or computational)
basis. ΛL will denote the cube ZD ∩ [−L, L]D . Examples of lattices ΛL for
L = 2 and D = 1 and D = 2 are:




   We will restrict to the simplest case of nearest neighbor interactions be-
tween the particles, leading to a Hamiltonian of the form
                                  X         X
                            HL =     hi,j +     ki                        (2)
                                 ⟨i,j⟩        i∈ΛL



                                         29
where ⟨i, j⟩ denotes neighboring positions in the lattice ΛL , and hi,j (resp.
ki ) is a Hermitian operator acting on the Hilbert space Hi ⊗ Hj (resp. Hi ).
     We will also restrict to the case of translational invariant interactions,
with maybe the exception of those single site terms ki for which i is an
element of the boundary of ΛL . That is, in the bulk of ΛL , all interaction
terms ki will be just translations of a fixed Hermitian operator k acting on
Cd , whereas for sites i on the boundary, the corresponding ki will sometimes
be allowed to vary from site to site. For the two-body terms the operators
hi,j and hi′ ,j ′ coincide if i − i′ = j − j ′ . For instance, in 2D all horizontal
interaction terms are translations of a fixed Hermitian operator hrow acting on
Cd ⊗Cd and all vertical interaction terms are translations of a fixed hermitian
operator hcol acting on Cd ⊗ Cd .
     The Hamiltonian is called classical if the interactions hi,j and ki are diag-
onal in the computational basis. The eigenvalues of HL are the energy levels
of the system λ0 (L) < λ1 (L) < λ2 (L) < . . .. In many-body spin systems,
one is often interested in λ0 (L) and λ1 (L). Their corresponding eigenvectors
are called ground states and elementary excitations, respectively, and their
difference γL = λ1 (L) − λ0 (L) is called the spectral gap—typically considered
in the limit L → ∞.
     The most direct way to see that those quantities can be undecidable even
for classical systems is by invoking Wang tiling problems.
     As we saw in Section 3.4.5, in a Wang tiling problem one is given a set
of square-shaped tiles T with marked edges. Tiles cannot be rotated or
reflected, just translated. For simplicity let us assume that the marks are
colours. One is allowed to place one tile next to another one if the colours
match at the common edge. With this simple rule, the tiling problem is
whether one can tile, or not, the whole plane Z2 or, equivalently, due to
Wang’s extension theorem [84], the set of finite regions ΛL . One can consider
other versions of the tiling problem, by restricting to infinite subsets of Z2 ,
like the upper-half plane. We draw here an example of a tile set with three
elements and a valid tiling of size 2 × 5:




                                        30
      It is simple to convert a tiling problem into a classical many-body system
as follows. The number of tiles |T | becomes the dimension of the local Hilbert
space, and the set of tiles corresponds precisely to the set of computational
basis states |t⟩. On a pair of neighboring sites i, j, we say that a pair of tiles
(ti , tj ) ∈ T × T is not allowed if they have different colors in their common
edge, that is, if they cannot be placed together in a valid tiling. This notation
allows us to define, on each pair of neighboring sites i, j, the projector
                                       X
                          Pi,j =                |ti tj ⟩⟨ti tj | ,
                               (ti ,tj ) not allowed


which gives rise to the (translational invariant) classical Hamiltonian
                                       X
                                 HL =      Pi,j
                                            ⟨i,j⟩

that penalizes non-allowed configurations of tiles. This construction leads to
the following statement for the ground state energy λ0 (L) of HL :
    λ0 (L) = 0 if there exists a valid tiling of ΛL . In that case, the set of
ground states corresponds to the set of all possible valid tilings. Otherwise
λ0 (L) ≥ 1.
    Since, as we saw in Section 3.4.5, the tiling problem is undecidable, the
same holds true for the problem of determining whether the ground state
energy λ0 (L) = 0 for all L.
    Note that in this reduction from the tiling problem to the ground state
energy problem, the local dimension (which is the size of the tiling set) is
unbounded. However, one can easily obtain the result for a fixed local di-
mension at the price of adding boundary terms which break translational
invariance. For that we consider the problem of tiling the upper-half plane
where one fixes the tiles in the first row. There is a straightforward way to
encode the evolution of any Turing Machine in a tiling problem so that, once

                                           31
the first row of the tiling is fixed, there is a unique way to complete the tiling,
wherein the t-th row corresponds to the configuration of the Turing Machine
at time t (see e.g. the discussion in Robinson (1971) [80]). By removing
the tiles representing transitioning to the halting state, the problem of tiling
becomes equivalent to the halting problem of a Turing Machine and hence
undecidable. Therefore, if we consider in this construction a Universal Turing
Machine, initialize it to any input and consider the corresponding tiling to
Hamiltonian reduction, it is not difficult to conclude that it is undecidable to
determine whether λ0 (L) = 0 for a sequence of many-body classical Hamil-
tonians HL as in equation (2), which are translational invariant in the bulk,
have a fixed local dimension, but have non-translational invariant boundary
conditions.
    There are several ways in which one can improve this result that essen-
tially dates back to the 80’s 22 in different directions (reducing the dimension,
removing the boundary terms, going to 1D, focusing on particular relevant
quantities of the ground and excited states,. . . ). This is the content of the
next sections.

5.1.1. Classical Systems
    For classical systems, a central question is whether one can obtain un-
decidability for local dimension 2, that is for the standard setup of {0, 1}-
valued classical spin systems, and whether the undecidability of the ground
state energy translates to relevant quantities, like the magnetization. This is
precisely the content of the contributions of Gu et al. (2009) [96] and Gu
and Perales (2012) [97], where the evolution of a 1D cellular automata
is encoded in the ground state of a 2D (non-translationally invariant) Ising
model. Using such an encoding it is shown that the magnetization in the
ground state, its degeneracy, and its correlation length are uncomputable
quantities.

5.1.2. Quantum Systems
    For quantum systems, it is possible to obtain undecidability in the near-
est neighbor and pure translational invariant situation and with a fixed finite
local dimension. In particular, for 2D quantum many-body systems of this
kind, Cubitt et al. (2015, 2022) [82, 120] showed undecidability of the

  22
       The work [81] mentioned in Section 4 also has a similar flavour.



                                             32
spectral gap, the ground state energy density and other physical quantities
like the existence of power-law correlations in the ground state. Moreover,
they showed that undecidability of the spectral gap remains even if the con-
sidered Hamiltonians are arbitrary small perturbations of classical interac-
tions and under the following promise: in the gapped case, the ground state
is unique and a product state and the gap is of the size of the interaction
strength; in the gapless case, the spectrum converges to R in the thermody-
namic limit.
    Building on the techniques developed in [82, 120], this result was gen-
eralized later in several directions. It was shown to hold, with the same
properties, in 1D systems by Bausch et al. (2020) [126]. Bausch et
al. (2021) [127] showed that, in 2D, phase diagrams are uncomputable,
with both the gapped and gapless phases having non-zero measure but inter-
leaved in an uncomputably complicated way. Watson et al. (2022) [128]
showed that the renormalization group construction can also have an un-
computably complex behavior. Cubitt (2021) [129] showed that there is a
simple, direct argument that algorithmic undecidability implies the presence
or absence of a spectral gap is also axiomatically independent. Purcell et
al. (2024) [45] showed that even simple phase diagrams containing a single,
first-order phase transition can be undecidable by constructing a system in
which the phase transition occurs at an uncomputable number.23
    In a different direction, Shiraishi and Matsumoto (2021, 2020) [131,
132] have shown that the problem of thermalization in quantum many-body
systems is also undecidable. In particular, even for the case of 1D nearest-
neighbor interactions, they show that the long-time average of the expecta-
tion value of an observable (which can be taken as a spatial average of a
single-site operator) is uncomputable.

5.1.3. Tensor Networks
    Tensor Networks constitute a quantum information-inspired description
of many-body quantum states since they aim to capture the entanglement
pattern present in the state. They are one of the tools used to understand
and simulate the low energy sector of quantum many-body Hamiltonians.

  23
     In their construction, the phase transition occurs at Chaitin’s constant. This number,
originally constructed by Chaitin [130], can be thought of as the probability that the
universal Turing Machine will halt on a randomly chosen input, where inputs are chosen
with probability inverse-exponentially proportional to their lengths.


                                            33
  edand
     by extended
          linearity. Then,     the and
                      by linearity.
                               and  contraction
                                    extended
                                        Then,
                                          extended byofcontraction
                                                  the     two
                                                       linearity.
                                                        by       indices
                                                             linearity.  ofof
                                                                      Then,    A
                                                                               theis
                                                                           Then,
                                                                            two       carried
                                                                                  indices
                                                                                    contraction
                                                                                     the  contraction
                                                                                            of A isofcarried
                                                                                                       two
                                                                                                        of two
                                                                                                            indices
                                                                                                                 indices
                                                                                                                     of Ao
 ngout
     withbyδacting
              on those
                     with indices
                             δ out and
                               on those
                                   by     with
                                    outacting
                                          by      the
                                            indices
                                               acting
                                                   withidentity
                                                      and
                                                        with
                                                         δ onwith   on
                                                                δthose
                                                                   onthe
                                                J. Ignacio Cirac et al.
                                                                        the
                                                                       those  rest
                                                                         indices
                                                                          identity  of
                                                                               indices
                                                                                    and
                                                                                      onthem.
                                                                                          and
                                                                                          with
                                                                                          the rest
                                                                                               with
                                                                                                the of
                                                                                                     identity
                                                                                                     the
                                                                                                       them.
                                                                                                         identity
                                                                                                              on theon rest
                                                                                                                       the
  ngThetensor   δ ⊗ 1tensor
           resulting   rest (A)    ⊗
                                 δhas
                               The  The1rank
                                      resulting
                                         rest   r −tensor
                                            resulting
                                              (A)     2. tensor
                                                    has   We
                                                          rank   ⊗rδ1−rest
                                                              δ will   ⊗2.1(A)
                                                                       use   the(A)
                                                                            We
                                                                            rest   standard
                                                                                 has
                                                                                  will  has
                                                                                        rank  r − standard
                                                                                         userank
                                                                                              the  r2.−We
                                                                                                        2. We
                                                                                                           will will
                                                                                                                  use use
                                                                                                                      the
  otation
    graphical
  nearity.   of tensors,
           Then, notation  where
                  the contraction   they
                                   of  two are
                             ofgraphical
                                 tensors,
                                    graphical     shapes
                                              notation
                                              where
                                             indices    Aofiswith
                                                   notation
                                                     ofthey         legs
                                                              tensors,
                                                               are
                                                                 of tensors,
                                                              carriedshapesattached,
                                                                           where
                                                                               with
                                                                                where
                                                                                    they each
                                                                                       legs
                                                                                          they
                                                                                           are
                                                                                            attached,
                                                                                                shapes
                                                                                                are shapes
                                                                                                        each
                                                                                                         withwith
                                                                                                               legs legs
                                                                                                                     attach
                                                                                                                         a
 presenting
  δ of
    on those    an index:
        themindices
               representing
                     and withofan them
                                the of
                                    index:
                                        them
                                           representing
                                     identity  onrepresenting
                                                   the rest ofanthem.
                                                                   index:
                                                                    an index:
  or δ ⊗ 1rest (A) has rank r − 2. We will use the standard
   of tensors, where they are shapes with legs attached, each
  ng an index:        We refer to A
                                  [133] for a recentA
                                                    review.                                          A      A
                            Let us start with a directed graph G = (V, E) and denote by deg− (v)
action
   The of    two indices
          contraction  andof degis+ represented
                                The
                                 two(v) The
                                          indices
                                          contraction
                                         the   ingoing   isandas
                                                  contraction     ofa two
                                                                       line
                                                              represented
                                                                 outgoing         connecting
                                                                          of degrees
                                                                                two
                                                                                 indicesasindices
                                                                                           ofaa isline
                                                                                                 vertex  the
                                                                                                       represented
                                                                                                         is   and legs
                                                                                                           connecting
                                                                                                            v represented    asthe
                                                                                                                     by deg(v)    =aasline
                                                                                                                                       legs
                                                                                                                                         a line
                                                                                                                                              connecting
                                                                                                                                                    connec
                     A
 esponding      indices,
   of the corresponding     −
                       degthus       δthe
                                      deg  +
                              (v)of+indices,
                                        of   1
                                         ⊗ (v)
                                             the   the
                                                 rest (A)
                                                        totalδand
                                             corresponding
                                                    thus          ⊗ 1the
                                                      corresponding
                                                                 degree rest    contraction
                                                                           indices,
                                                                           of (A)
                                                                               v.   indices,
                                                                                         andthus
                                                                                     A tensor     the     ⊗   δ1(TN)
                                                                                                       δ between
                                                                                                    thus
                                                                                                   network        ⊗ 1(A)
                                                                                                          contraction
                                                                                                                  rest  rest (A)
                                                                                                                        over  and
                                                                                                                              Gbetween
                                                                                                                                  is and
                                                                                                                                      the thecontraction
                                                                                                                                                   contrac
 f two  indices
different
   indices tensors     defined
                 is represented
                      A and
             of different         by
                               tensorstwo
                                   Basis
                                indices     ingredients.
                                           arepresented
                                        indices
                                              Aline
                                               ofanddifferent
                                                       of B    First,
                                                      connecting       we    associate
                                                                         thetensors
                                                                 is graphically
                                                            differentrepresented
                                                                     tensors     legsA and  to
                                                                                            as:
                                                                                             A  each
                                                                                             graphically
                                                                                                   and  edge   e  of
                                                                                                   B isBrepresented  the
                                                                                                                 is as:   graph
                                                                                                                     represented   a
                                                                                                                                   graphically
                                                                                                                                         graphically as: as
                       dimension      D    and   an  index
 ng indices, thus δ ⊗ 1rest (A) and the contraction between
                                        e                     ie (called    a virtual     index). Second, for each vertex
                                             6                                  v                −                                         J. Ignacio Cirac e
  tensors A and B isvrepresented
                          we select a graphically
                                           complex-valued      as: tensor+ T with deg (v) covariant indices ie ,
                       one for each incoming edge, and deg (v) + 1 contravariant indices ie , one for
⊗ 1rest (A) ≡ δ ⊗ 1rest   (A)
                       each      δ≡⊗ 1rest
                             ,outcoming         δ(A
                                              edge,    1
                                                   ⊗,plus
                                                       ⊗   ⊗
                                                       δδrestan1
                                                             ⊗
                                                            B)    1
                                                                 (A)
                                                                  rest
                                                                  extra ≡
                                                                   ≡rest(A)
                                                                        A (A
                                                                          index ≡jvB)
                                                                                ⊗           ≡, . .δA
                                                                                        ∈Then,
                                                                                           {1,       ,⊗ .1
                                                                                                      ,d},
                                                                                                   . the     ⊗ 1(A
                                                                                                          δcalled
                                                                                                            rest     the⊗(A
                                                                                                                    rest   B)⊗ . ≡B)A≡ A
                                                                                                                         physical
                   A                    A    and    extended        by   linearity.
                                                                               A A                 B       contraction    B of   two indices of A is car  B
A) ≡           , δ ⊗ 1index.
                       rest (A ⊗ The      ≡ out
                                     B)dimension        D   =
                                                A by acting with
                                                                max    .
                                                                      e∈E   D     is
                                                                            δ on those
                                                                              e       called   the    bond   dimension      of  the
                                                                                              indices and with the identity on the rest of th
       A               tensorN  network. The  The tensor            B
                                                                network     T =      (T v
                                                                                          )v∈V (A)
                                                                                                 defines
                                                     resulting       tensor      δ   ⊗   1 rest         hasnaturally
                                                                                                              rank r −   a vector
                                                                                                                            2. We will use the stand
 stThe
    examples
         simplest of tensors
                     examples   Theare of vectors
                                        The
                                         simplest
                                          dvtensors      and
                                                  simplest examples
                                                            are   matrices:
                                                                   examples
                                                                   vectors    of   and
                                                                                     tensors
                                                                                        of  matrices:
                                                                                            tensors
                       ϕT ∈ v∈V C , which is simply the result of contracting (i.e. summing over,  are     vectors
                                                                                                            are    vectors
                                                                                                                         and    and
                                                                                                                                 matrices:
                                                                                                                                       matrices:
mples of tensors are vectors                 graphical
                                  andsummation               notation        of  tensors,      where
                                         matrices:convention) all edge indices ie of the tensors Tv . Note they    are  shapes     with   legs attached, e
                       in Einstein
                                             of them representing
                       that, if N isi the number of vertices
                                                                                an index:
                                                                           in iG, the      number of parameters needed
                  i                                             N   D ∼dv D i                     ∼
  $≡
      i |i$ ≡
              , A≡    , A
                       to  |i$≡≡
                           describe
                                 D
                                  ∈C ⊗Cthe D ,∼
                                             vector
                                                       D
                                                ∈AC≡T ⊗ C|i$
                                                       ϕ
                                                   = MD ,
                                                            ∈      v∈V≡=∈
                                                                        C|i$MC≡D,⊗
                                                                               is      , A
                                                                                   bounded CD,≡by A≡
                                                                                                  =    M D , ∈ CD       ∈⊗ CDCD    ⊗∼ CDM∼
                                                                                                                                      =      =DM , D,
                           A          A                           A                                  AA A
                                                                           maxv∈V deg(v)
                                                                    N ·D
                          ATENEA        The contraction of twoPartindices
                                                                       B2        is represented as a line    Davidconnecting
                                                                                                                   Pérez-García the
 tiplication
 onso
    of the    ofbya avector
           multiplication
       a vector       matrixsoby    a
                               isofthe
                                     so
                                     a matrix
                                       vector
                                        of the
                      which is polynomial
                                                is
                                        multiplication
                                        the  multiplication
                                                by    a  matrix
                                            in Ncorresponding
                                                             of a  is
                                                                   of
                                                                    vector
                                                                      a
                                                  if the graph hasindices,
                                                                          vector
                                                                    bounded
                                                                               by
                                                                             thus   a
                                                                                    δ⊗
                                                                               degree
                                                                                      by
                                                                                       matrix
                                                                                          a
                                                                                        and
                                                                                              matrix
                                                                                          1rest
                                                                                             D= (A)is    is
                                                                                                      and ).the contraction betw
                                                                                                  poly(N
                                                                      Q
                                                                                                          𝒯̂ .
                                        indices  of differentnumber
                                                              tensors A     and    B is represented     graphically     as:
                   Q1:This contrasts
                       The first       with the
                                            N exponential
                           i one is understanding    when φ𝒯 = φ𝒯̂ for two    dv required
                                                                         v∈Vdifferent tensor to        𝒯,an
                                                                                                describe
                                                                                             networks
              A|i$ ≡ arbitrary, vector ϕ ∈ i v∈V C . Therefore
                                                      dv       i tensor networks can beiunderstood   i
                  Q2:asThe   second≡
                         A A|i$                       , the≡
                                                   A|i$
                                      one isoftodescribing
                                                  give      optimal        ,dimension
                                                                      bondof)        A|i$     ≡
                                                                                              largeto≡
                                                                                          inA|i$
                                                                                         required             ,product
                                                                                                        describe      ,
                                                                                                                  or approximate   within a
                                                 vectorδ φ⊗∈1⨂        ℂd≡
                         efficient   ways                     (families        vectors                tensor
                  given precision a given   A                      (A)
                                                                    A
                                                              restv∈V    v by a tensor       ⊗ 1restdescription
                                                                                       , δnetwork      A(A ⊗AB) φ≡𝒯 , Atogether with an .
                      spaces. By a sequence of major results of Hastings                [134, 135], improved later
                  algorithm
 matrix is represented        that produces φ𝒯 based on a given efficient    A description      of φ . A standard example is when φ B       is
                      by as
                         several authors (see         the review [133]) this compressed description is still
aceand
    of athe  tracedefined
          matrix   isof a asmatrix
                      accurate
                  Hamiltonian).
                               the vector that minimizes a given objective function (e.g. the energy of a many body quantum
                       represented
                               and    and
                                      the
                                  enough    as
                                         isThe
                                             trace
                                             represented
                                             the
                                            to        trace
                                                        of a examples
                                                 accurately
                                                  simplest    of
                                                               matrix
                                                                   as
                                                                    a matrix
                                                               approximate  is
                                                                            of represented
                                                                                   is represented
                                                                                thermal
                                                                                tensors     states   ofaslocally
                                                                                            are vectors      as
                                                                                                             andinter-
                                                                                                                    matrices:
                     Aacting quantum systems, and the ground and excited states of 1d locally
                       The. third one
                  Q3:interacting       consists in
                                     quantum         understanding
                                                  systems.    This which
                                                                     is whyproperties   - usually
                                                                              variational          symmetries
                                                                                             algorithms      that- of the tensors T v, called
                                                                                                                    opti-
                                      A                      A              i                   A       A
                                                                                           φ𝒯, called∈global
                  local properties, characterize properties of interest
                      mize within the manifold .        of Tensor|i$ .≡
                                                                           on the, vector
                                                                     Network        A≡
                                                                               states    have   proven. C to be⊗
                                                                                                               .   CD ∼
                                                                                                            D properties.
                                                                                                                  highly= MD ,
                  Those  types of
                      accurate    inquestions
                                     these                                                     A
                                                ared far from trivial and, essentially, their solution and applications are the core of
                                         D cases.
 sider a rank-3 tensor   A ∈ C ⊗ C ⊗ C . This is equivalent
                   this proposal.
                                 D

 nging to MD . We will Before
                           denotegoing further let us give a couple of examples of tensor networks.
                                  eachsoofthe
                                           these  matrices as of a vector by a matrix is
                                              multiplication
                               For that, it is useful to introduce a graphical notation. Tensors will be repre-
 now consider   a Before
        Let us nowrank-3   going further let us giveDa coupleDof examples.
                      consider
                  for sented
                      tensors.by
                                tensor
                                     Let
                                Tensors
                                           A
                                      a rank-3
                                            us
                                            Let
                                    boxeswill
                                           and
                                               ∈nowC     ⊗byClegs
                                                   ustensor
                                                       now
                                              be indices
                                                                A⊗with
                                                         consider
                                                  represented
                                                              consider
                                                              by boxes
                                                                         D For that
                                                                   ∈CaCdand ⊗
                                                                         . This
                                                                         rank-3       ⊗itequivalent
                                                                                CDistensor
                                                                            aorientation.
                                                                               rank-3
                                                                         an indices
                                                                                          is useful
                                                                                          C  d
                                                                                            tensor
                                                                                               .AThis
                                                                                     by legsTensor
                                                                                                     to introduce
                                                                                                        ACisD
                                                                                              with an contraction
                                                                                                                 CD
                                                                                                     ∈orientation. Ca graphical
                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                             ∈equivalent
                                                                                                                ⊗     ⊗⊗  CD Cd⊗notation
                                                                                                                                 .C   d
                                                                                                                                   This
                                                                                                                     Tensor contraction
                                                                                                                                        . This
                                                                                                                                           is e
                   i                                                                                  i denote
  estobelonging
           Ai =
                     M
                towill
       d matrices      beD
                      will   . to
                     belonging
                           just We    will
                                  i d to
                                      to
                                 joining   M
                        ≡then be ,represented
                                              denote
                                       matrices
                                         and  matrices
                                                D . We
                                             outgoing  legeach
                                                       belonging
                                                     just  will
                                                           with
                                                           by   anof
                                                             belongingthese
                                                                  denote
                                                                       to
                                                                   ingoing
                                                              joining      M to
                                                                           one    M
                                                                               matrices
                                                                             each . A|i$
                                                                                (see
                                                                       an outgoing
                                                                               D     We
                                                                                      of
                                                                                      D . these
                                                                                     Figure
                                                                                      leg   will
                                                                                            We asInan
                                                                                             1).
                                                                                           with
                                                                                            ≡       will
                                                                                                    denote
                                                                                                      matrices
                                                                                                     what        each
                                                                                                          , follows
                                                                                                      ingoing    one. aseach
                                                                                                                     we  of remove
                                                                                                                        will these
                                                                                                                                of these
                                                                                                                                       matric
                                                                                                                                     the     ma
                          arrows
                             (In from
                                 whatAthe pictures
                                       follows  weforwill
                                                      simplicity.
                                                          remove the arrows from the pictures A
                                                                                              for simplicity.)
                          A
                                      i                      i                                  i      i
                                 i          andi the itrace of a matrix       i isi represented
                                                                                           i            as        i       i
 bove a leg is meant to  A fix=the index≡    Ato = that label., ≡   The firstA, =A =                   ≡       ≡ , ,
                                        A
 r network state is called MatrixAProduct             A A
                                                    State      B
                                                             (MPS)          A
                                                                       [13,34]                                  A A
                                                                                                AAA
  te placed on a unidimensional lattice. An MPS with periodic                                             .
                      Figure 1: Graphical notation for tensor networks and tensor contraction. The TN at the right is obtaining by
  n where
     (theabove
 label     system  isleg
             the alabelplaced   on
                           isabove
                               meant
                      contracting    aawhere
                                 where  ring)
                                  tensors to
                                         legandisand
                                              fix
                                          A the      the
                                                 B.label
                                                   the
                                                   meantconstructed
                                                            index
                                                          label
                                                              above   to
                                                                 to above
                                                                     fix awith
                                                                            that
                                                                           the      label.
                                                                            lega index
                                                                                  is
                                                                                   legmeant
                                                                                         is to  The
                                                                                              meantto first
                                                                                                  that  fixto
                                                                                                            label.
                                                                                                               the
                                                                                                                fix index
                                                                                                                      the
                                                                                                                       Theindexfirst
                                                                                                                                 to that
                                                                                                                                      to thatlabel.
                                                                                                                                                  la
                                                                        34
 pendent of the site, i.e. translationally invariant, is written
  a example
     tensor network
                of a The state
                      tensor      is called
                           most network
                                 example
                                basic   example
                                       example  Matrix
                                             state
                                               ofof aa of
                                                 Let   TN
                                                       us   isProduct
                                                       tensor
                                                        is anow
                                                            called
                                                               tensor
                                                                   network
                                                                      Matrix
                                                                a Matrix
                                                                  consider  State
                                                                          network
                                                                               a state
                                                                          Product     (MPS)
                                                                                   Product
                                                                                       state
                                                                                   State
                                                                                 rank-3    istensor
                                                                                          (MPS),   [13,34]
                                                                                               called
                                                                                                  is
                                                                                                   State
                                                                                                      called
                                                                                                    also  Matrix
                                                                                                          ∈ (MPS)
                                                                                                      A known CDMatrix
                                                                                                                   ⊗C
                                                                                                                   in   Product
                                                                                                                         D[13,34]
                                                                                                                       the  ⊗ Product
                                                                                                                           numerical State
                                                                                                                               Cd . This  isState
                                                                                                                                     analysis  (MPS(
                                                                                                                                              equiva
                      community as TensortoTrains     [Cichoki17],    which  has  a line  as   associated   graph.  In  Figure  2 we give  the
  esand
      a state  placeda on
          it defines          a unidimensional
                          state  and
                                  placedand
                                        it defines
                                             on         a lattice.
                                              itd defines
                                                  amatrices
                                                      unidimensional
                                                            state       Anplaced
                                                                abelonging
                                                                   state
                                                                     placed   MPS
                                                                                on
                                                                               tolattice.
                                                                                    MaDwith
                                                                                       on
                                                                                        unidimensional
                                                                                          . WeaAnperiodic
                                                                                                 unidimensional
                                                                                                     MPS
                                                                                                   will  denotewith   lattice.
                                                                                                                    each periodic
                                                                                                                            lattice.
                                                                                                                            of    An matrices
                                                                                                                               these
                          graphical representation of a translationally invariant MPS, where the tensor is the same in every vertex.
                                                                                                                                      MPS
                                                                                                                                       An MPS   with
                                                                                                                                                  as
 condition
    boundary   (the    systemboundary
                   condition            is placed
                                       (theboundary
                                              systemon iscondition
                                                         a placed
                                                           ring)(the
                                                   condition       and
                                                                     on  aconstructed
                                                                      (the
                                                                       system
                                                                            ring)
                                                                            systemis andis with
                                                                                      placed
                                                                                           constructed
                                                                                            placed
                                                                                                on aonring)
                                                                                                          a with
                                                                                                            ring)
                                                                                                              and and
                                                                                                                    construc
                                                                                                                        cons
                                                                                      i           i
 rsTr[A
     independent
    local
       i1 tensors       of1 , the
                       independent
         Ai2 ·8· · AiN ]|i            isite,
                              · · · ,local
                                        N$ →
                                             i.e.
                                           local  translationally
                                             tensors
                                               of the
                                                  tensors
                                                      site,
                                                      independent
                                                      ···          . invariant,
                                                            independent
                                                             i.e. translationally
                                                                        of the
                                                                      (2)   Aof
                                                                              i the is site,
                                                                                =site,  written
                                                                                       invariant,
                                                                                        i.e.≡ translationally
                                                                                              i.e. translationally
                                                                                                     ,is writtenJ.
                                                                                                                invariant,
                                                                                                                     invariaC
                                                                                                                   Ignacio  i
    as follows                       as follows
                                           as follows                                            A
     to MDQ3:
            . We   . thirddenote
                Thewill            eachin
                           one consists soof   these
                                             the       matrices
                                                  multiplication
                                            understanding          as of a vector
                                                           which properties   - usuallyby   a matrix- ofisthe tensors T , called
                                                                                        symmetries
                 Before   goingAfurther let  us giveAa couple  of  i
                                                                  examples.   For thatAit is useful
                                                                                             A   D to introduce  a graphical dnotation
    consider   a properties,
     Let uslocal
              nowrank-3
                     consider tensor
                                   Let
                             characterizeA
                                   a rank-3
                                         us
                                         Let     C
                                              ∈now D
                                                 ustensor
                                          properties now  C.by
                                                             D
                                                       ⊗interest
                                                       consider
                                                       of
                 for tensors. Tensors.will be represented |i$     ∈Cthe
                                                                ⊗on  aCand
                                                              consider
                                                              ≡Aboxes  d D
                                                                            ⊗
                                                                         .vector
                                                                           This
                                                                        ,rank-3
                                                                           A    Cφ𝒯is
                                                                                  D
                                                                            a ≡rank-3
                                                                            indices
                                                                                          Ctensor
                                                                                    ,tensor
                                                                                      called d
                                                                                      ⊗equivalent
                                                                                              ..CA  ∈
                                                                                                 This
                                                                                             global
                                                                                     by legs∈with
                                                                                                      ACisD∼ D
                                                                                                           ∈=⊗CM C  D
                                                                                                            equivalent
                                                                                                    properties.
                                                                                                    ⊗  C D
                                                                                                    . orientation.
                                                                                                   an              D   CD
                                                                                                                    ⊗, ⊗
                                                                                                                   Tensor
                                                                                                                          C  ⊗. C   d
                                                                                                                                 This
                                                                                                                          contraction
                                                                                                                                      . This
                                                                                                                                         is equiv
                                                                                                                                              is e
                           i                                                                                        A                   i
   elonging
   d matrices
   nk-3       i Those
           Atensor
                 =
                       to
                        A     M
                             belonging
                           types
                          will∈  be
                                  C≡ Dof .⊗
                                      just
                                      D       iWe
                                              to  CDd,to
                                           questions
                                                  joiningwill
                                                         to
                                                         ⊗    are
                                                              C  M
                                                          matrices
                                                              and    denote
                                                                      matrices
                                                                    .farDfrom
                                                                  doutgoing
                                                                       This  . We  is    each
                                                                                   belonging
                                                                                           will
                                                                                     trivial
                                                                                    leg    with  anof
                                                                                              belonging
                                                                                               and,
                                                                                        equivalent       to M
                                                                                                        these
                                                                                                    denote
                                                                                                     essentially,
                                                                                                     ingoing       to
                                                                                                                 one  theirM
                                                                                                                      matrices
                                                                                                                    each(see
                                                                                                                        D   . A|i$
                                                                                                                               Weof
                                                                                                                                 D . these
                                                                                                                               solution
                                                                                                                               Figure   will
                                                                                                                                        ≡We  asInwill
                                                                                                                                             and
                                                                                                                                           1).     denote
                                                                                                                                                      matrices
                                                                                                                                                           , denote
                                                                                                                                                    applications
                                                                                                                                                    what     follows each
                                                                                                                                                                       areasthe
                                                                                                                                                                         we each
                                                                                                                                                                              ofcore
                                                                                                                                                                             will   these
                                                                                                                                                                                      of
                                                                                                                                                                                       of these
                                                                                                                                                                                   remove      matrices
                                                                                                                                                                                             the    matric a
                  this proposal.
                          arrows from the pictures for simplicity.
 MD . We willAdenote each                        A soofthe     these         matrices as of a vector by a matrix A
                                                                     multiplication                                                              is
  sider
  t us now    a Before
                   rank-3    going further let
                      consider     tensor    Let
                                               a
                  for tensors. iTensors will beand
                                                       ius
                                                       A
                                                    rank-3
                                                        Letus giveDa coupleDiof examples.
                                                             ∈  nowC
                                                                   us  tensor⊗
                                                                           now
                                                                          the
                                                                 represented
                                                                       i
                                                                                  C
                                                                             consider
                                                                                  itrace    ⊗ ∈
                                                                                        consider
                                                                                         A
                                                                                       by boxes
                                                                                                C
                                                                                               of
                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                   d D For that
                                                                                                     .   ⊗
                                                                                                        This
                                                                                                     rank-3
                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                      matrix
                                                                                                    and
                                                                                                              C   D it is useful
                                                                                                              rank-3
                                                                                                              i isby
                                                                                                         indices
                                                                                                                    isi
                                                                                                                        ⊗    C   d i to introduce
                                                                                                                          equivalent
                                                                                                                     tensor    tensor
                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                         represented
                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                       This ∈  AC
                                                                                                                                                i
                                                                                                                                                 as
                                                                                                                                                   isD
                                                                                                                           legsi with an orientation.
                                                                                                                                                           CD   a graphical
                                                                                                                                                               iCTensor
                                                                                                                                                      ∈equivalent
                                                                                                                                                          ⊗        D
                                                                                                                                                                    ⊗⊗     D dnotation
                                                                                                                                                                        iC C   ⊗. CThis
                                                                                                                                                                            contraction
                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                                                                         . This
                                                                                                                                                                                             is equivalen
                                                                                                                                                                                                   is equiv
  a leg isto
 nging
 matrices        meant
                   i
                     M
                     belonging
                  will beD     A
                               to
                               . to
                             just  We  i=
                                     fix  dthe
                                     joining   will
                                               toto    index
                                                       M
                                                  matrices
                                                    and    denote ≡
                                                           matricesAtobelonging
                                                              D . We
                                                         outgoing           =
                                                                            that
                                                                          leg  each
                                                                                 will     , of
                                                                                       label.
                                                                                    belonging
                                                                                 with     an      ≡
                                                                                                  The
                                                                                                  to M
                                                                                                 these
                                                                                             denote
                                                                                              ingoing    first
                                                                                                          to
                                                                                                        one      M. ,A|i$
                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                             matrices
                                                                                                           each
                                                                                                              D(see  We of=Awill
                                                                                                                        D . these
                                                                                                                      Figure   We  =
                                                                                                                                   asInwill
                                                                                                                                  1).        i ≡denote
                                                                                                                                          denote
                                                                                                                                            matrices
                                                                                                                                           what           ≡
                                                                                                                                                    follows each we  ,will
                                                                                                                                                                   aseach    , of these
                                                                                                                                                                       of remove
                                                                                                                                                                            these       matrices
                                                                                                                                                                                      the      matrices
                                                                                                                                                                                                      as a
  A   i
         =
 work state               ≡
                     is called        Matrix   ,         A
                                                         Product               A A
                                                                             State         B
                                                                                         (MPS) [13,34]     A                   ≡                  ,         A        A
                  arrows     from the
                                    A
                                              picturesA     for simplicity.                                                           A  AA    A
 aced on aAunidimensional                             lattice. An MPS with periodic                                                                 .
                          Figure 1: Graphicali                 notation for
                                                                        i      i tensor networks      i     and tensor icontraction.   i         The TN at the right is obtaining by
                                                                                                                                                      i         i(MPS), also
 he     system
  l isabove
 here       the alabelisleg
                          iplacedis
                                  above meant on
                                              where  aa
                                                   Theand ring)
                                                             i the
                                                           most
                                                            to
                                                         where
                                                           leg  the fixand
                                                                         trace
                                                                     isbasic the
                                                                            label
                                                                            the
                                                                            meant constructed
                                                                                      ofindex
                                                                                  example
                                                                                      labela to
                                                                                          abovematrix
                                                                                                  of to
                                                                                                  above
                                                                                                   fix  with
                                                                                                      aaTNis i represented
                                                                                                          that
                                                                                                         the
                                                                                                           leg  is
                                                                                                                a=Aais iMatrix
                                                                                                                       label.
                                                                                                                   index
                                                                                                                     leg  meant
                                                                                                                              is to     as
                                                                                                                                      Product
                                                                                                                                       The
                                                                                                                                    meant that
                                                                                                                                           to ≡  first
                                                                                                                                                 fix  State
                                                                                                                                                     to
                                                                                                                                                      label.
                                                                                                                                                          the
                                                                                                                                                            fix     index
                                                                                                                                                                    the
                                                                                                                                                                     The
         meant        A
                      to  contracting
                           fix=   the
   nt of the site, i.e. translationally
                                            index
                                          known
                                                 tensors≡A to
                                                          in
                                                             A   and
                                                                 =
                                                                 that
                                                                the
                                                                        B.      ,
                                                                             label.
                                                                            invariant,
                                                                        numerical
                                                                                          ≡The
                                                                                                is
                                                                                                  first  A
                                                                                                    written
                                                                                              analysis
                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                          community
                                                                                                                           =    as    a
                                                                                                                                        ≡ Tensor        Train
                                                                                                                                                             ,        , index
                                                                                                                                                                   [136,
                                                                                                                                                                              first
                                                                                                                                                                                to that
                                                                                                                                                                            137],
                                                                                                                                                                                        to thatlabel.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    label.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       The
  nsor
   state network
  ample      is of    a The
                          tensorstate          Ais called
                                            network
                                              example    example       Matrix
                                                                   state
                                                                      ofof aaA   B
                                                                                of
                                                                                tensor  isProduct
                                                                                  isitsanow
                                                                                        called
                                                                                           tensor
                                                                                                network
                                                                                                    Matrix State
                                                                                                        networka state    (MPS)
                                                                                                                     Product state
                                                                                                                                isA  called
                 called      Matrix
                                 most A
                                          which
                                               Product
                                             basic      example
                                                         has     a
                                                                     A
                                                                  State Let
                                                                     line
                                                                               (MPS)
                                                                              as
                                                                                TN
                                                                                 us                 A
                                                                                            a [13,34]
                                                                                               Matrix
                                                                                                consider
                                                                                          associated
                                                                                                        Product
                                                                                                          graph.
                                                                                                                     State
                                                                                                                   rank-3The A (MPS),  Ais
                                                                                                                                  tensor
                                                                                                                                  graphical
                                                                                                                                           [13,34]
                                                                                                                                           State
                                                                                                                                              called
                                                                                                                                               AA
                                                                                                                                            also    Matrix
                                                                                                                                                    ∈ (MPS)
                                                                                                                                                    knownCDA  Matrix
                                                                                                                                                                ⊗C
                                                                                                                                                                in
                                                                                                                                                    representation
                                                                                                                                                                     Product
                                                                                                                                                                    theD[13,34]
                                                                                                                                                                             Product
                                                                                                                                                                         numerical
                                                                                                                                                                          ⊗of         State
                                                                                                                                                                              Cda. This     isState
                                                                                                                                                                                       analysis  (MPS)(MPS
                                                                                                                                                                                                equivalent[1
  on                      community              as  Tensor        Trains      [Cichoki17],         which    has    a   line   as   associated
                                                                                                                                           . MPS      graph.     In  Figure    2  we   give  the
       ita unidimensional
  dstate       placed
           defines          a1:on
                                state
                  Figuregraphical
                                Graphical
                                            lattice.
                                       atranslationally  itAn
                                             unidimensional
                                              andplaced  and
                                                     notation
                                          representation
                                                                     MPS
                                                               defines
                                                                toonit d defines with
                                                                           amatrices
                                                                      of invariant
                                                                     for  atensor
                                                                             translationally
                                                                                            periodic
                                                                                       lattice.
                                                                               unidimensional
                                                                                  a networks
                                                                                        stateabelonging
                                                                                                state
                                                                                             MPS,      An
                                                                                                   placed
                                                                                                      where
                                                                                                    and       MPS
                                                                                                          placed
                                                                                                         tensor
                                                                                                   invariant
                                                                                                                toon
                                                                                                                  lattice.
                                                                                                                 the  M     with
                                                                                                                         awhere
                                                                                                                            on
                                                                                                                            Dunidimensional
                                                                                                                        tensor . We
                                                                                                                    contraction.
                                                                                                                 MPS,
                                                                                                                                   aisAnperiodic
                                                                                                                                       unidimensional
                                                                                                                                          will
                                                                                                                                      thethe
                                                                                                                                         The   TN
                                                                                                                                           tensor
                                                                                                                                                  denote
                                                                                                                                               same   at  with
                                                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                                                         the
                                                                                                                                                      is the
                                                                                                                                                                   lattice.
                                                                                                                                                                  each
                                                                                                                                                               every
                                                                                                                                                                right
                                                                                                                                                               same
                                                                                                                                                                      periodic
                                                                                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                                                                                           lattice.
                                                                                                                                                                          of      Anbymatrices
                                                                                                                                                                              these
                                                                                                                                                                       isvertex,
                                                                                                                                                                          obtaining
                                                                                                                                                                          every vertex.
                                                                                                                                                                                         MPS
                                                                                                                                                                                          An MPS  with
                                                                                                                                                                                                    as with
                                                                                                                                                                                                        per
 ystem
  ove
    the alabel
   ition
  undary      is(the
                leg placed
                        isabove
                           system
                     condition
                  contracting    on
                              meant
                                  where  aisaboundary
                                    tensors      ring)
                                                   to
                                               where
                                                  leg
                                                    A the
                                                   is
                                                  (the
                                                 then      isand
                                                          fix
                                                        placed
                                                         boundary
                                                       and         the
                                                                 label
                                                                 the
                                                                 meant
                                                              system
                                                              B.        constructed
                                                                              index
                                                                            label
                                                                             on above
                                                                           conditionto
                                                                                    isa placedtoawith
                                                                                           above
                                                                                            fix
                                                                                           ring)
                                                                                      condition    that
                                                                                                  the
                                                                                                   legand
                                                                                                   (theaon    label.
                                                                                                          index
                                                                                                           is
                                                                                                            leg
                                                                                                           (the  meant
                                                                                                                    isring)
                                                                                                                          to
                                                                                                                 aconstructed
                                                                                                              system         The
                                                                                                                           meant
                                                                                                                        system  that
                                                                                                                                  toand
                                                                                                                                 is      first
                                                                                                                                         fixto
                                                                                                                                             label.
                                                                                                                                        placed
                                                                                                                                           is   thefix on
                                                                                                                                                with
                                                                                                                                                constructed
                                                                                                                                                 placed    index
                                                                                                                                                           the
                                                                                                                                                            The     index
                                                                                                                                                                  aon  first
                                                                                                                                                                         to
                                                                                                                                                                       ring)  that
                                                                                                                                                                          a with to
                                                                                                                                                                              ring)
                                                                                                                                                                                  and that
                                                                                                                                                                                        label.
                                                                                                                                                                                          and  label.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   The The
                                                                                                                                                                                           constructed  firs
                                                                                                                                                                                                  construc
  f the site, i.e. translationally invariant, is written                                                                                i                    i
 A inetwork
 ple 1 of i2 a The
   dependent
 cal   Atensors   · Aistate
              ·8· tensor
                       Nmost
                           ]|i     ·is· ·called
                             of1network
                                 ,example
                                   the
                           independent
                                 basic         example
                                                isite,
                                              local
                                             ,example
                                                  N$ →
                                                            Matrix
                                                         state
                                                           ofi.e.
                                                         localLet aa of
                                                             tensors
                                                              ofof     tensor isProduct
                                                                        is anow
                                                                             called
                                                                                 tensor
                                                                       translationally
                                                                       the
                                                                        tensors
                                                                       TN
                                                                       us         site, network
                                                                                  independent
                                                                                  a Matrix    MatrixState
                                                                                                 network
                                                                                             independent
                                                                                              i.e.
                                                                                                 Product
                                                                                 · · · consider .a rank-3
                                                                                                         state  (MPS)
                                                                                                            Productstate
                                                                                                          invariant,
                                                                                                     translationally
                                                                                                               of
                                                                                                            State
                                                                                                            (2)       is
                                                                                                                     the oficalled
                                                                                                                      (MPS),
                                                                                                                       Atensor  is
                                                                                                                              =the[13,34]
                                                                                                                                 State
                                                                                                                                    iscalled
                                                                                                                                site,
                                                                                                                                   also    Matrix
                                                                                                                                               (MPS)
                                                                                                                                               C≡DMatrix
                                                                                                                                          written
                                                                                                                                       Asite,
                                                                                                                                          invariant,
                                                                                                                                            i.e.
                                                                                                                                           known
                                                                                                                                           ∈                 Product
                                                                                                                                                               D[13,34]
                                                                                                                                                                   ⊗ Product
                                                                                                                                                     translationally
                                                                                                                                                      i.e.
                                                                                                                                                       ⊗C
                                                                                                                                                       in  the translationally
                                                                                                                                                                  ,is Cwritten
                                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                                  numerical    State   State
                                                                                                                                                                                          (MPS)
                                                                                                                                                                                     invariant,
                                                                                                                                                                                analysis
                                                                                                                                                                           . This    is
                                                                                                                                                                                     J.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (MPS)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     [13,34
                                                                                                                                                                                             invariant,
                                                                                                                                                                                         equivalent
                                                                                                                                                                                          Ignacio
                                                                                                                                                                                                          [1i
                                                                                                                                                                                                      is wr
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cirac
                  community as TensortoTrains                         [Cichoki17],           which has     aM line .asWe
 te    placed
   defines
   follows          a on
                       state  a unidimensional
                                  and
                                    placed     and
                                              asit defines
                                                         on
                                                          itd defines
                                                      follows
                                                         as     follows a lattice.
                                                                amatrices
                                                                     unidimensional
                                                                             state abelonging
                                                                                        state  Anplaced
                                                                                           placed     MPS
                                                                                                        on
                                                                                                       tolattice.
                                                                                                                aD with
                                                                                                                   on     aassociated
                                                                                                                    unidimensional
                  graphical representation of a translationally invariant MPS, where the tensor is the same in every vertex.
                                                                                                                            An periodic
                                                                                                                              unidimensional
                                                                                                                                    MPS
                                                                                                                                 will        graph. In
                                                                                                                                       Adenote   with     AFigure
                                                                                                                                                          lattice.
                                                                                                                                                        each  periodic  2 we give
                                                                                                                                                                    lattice.
                                                                                                                                                                   of             AntheMPS
                                                                                                                                                                          An matrices
                                                                                                                                                                       these     MPS        with
                                                                                                                                                                                               as with
                                                                                                                                                                                                   periodi
                                                                                                                                                                                                        per
 nary (the     systemboundary
          condition            is placed
                              (the  boundary
                                       system
                                     Note    thatonthe
                                                conditiona tensor
                                                               ring)(the
                                                       iscondition
                                                               placed  A and on
                                                                           can  (the aconstructed
                                                                                  system  ring)
                                                                                           system
                                                                                  beperiodic
                                                                                         understoodis and is awith
                                                                                                        placed
                                                                                                          as    constructed
                                                                                                                 placed
                                                                                                                   finite  onsetaon    ofring)
                                                                                                                                             a with
                                                                                                                                                 ring)
                                                                                                                                          matrices  and
                                                                                                                                                      AA j and
                                                                                                                                                          , constructed
                                                                                                                                                                   constructed   wit
               [v] Figure 2:dA translationally         invariant      MPS with            a legboundary i conditions,               defined   by tensor
  endent
  ensors
  2
    ·8· ·8AiN ]|i
                      ∈ ,C
            Aindependent
               of1 , the     isite,
                            local  ⊗
                                  and  (C
                                      i.e.
                                    local
                                      tensors
                                       hence
                     · ·d·generalization
                               N$ →
                                             Dwhere
                                                the
                                                   ⊗4
                                                 ) ·site,
                                             translationally
                                        of the
                                             tensors
                                               example
                                                              the label
                                                              where
                                                     independent
                                                      associated
                                                      · · latticeof a
                                                                             above
                                                                        Matrix
                                                                       tensor
                                                                              each
                                                                          . invariant,
                                                                independent
                                                                  i.e.   translationally
                                                                                   of
                                                                                 (2)
                                                                                   network
                                                                                           [v]
                                                                                          the
                                                                                           ofi =
                                                                                      Product
                                                                                           A
                                                                                                    is meant
                                                                                                    denotes
                                                                                                  the is site,
                                                                                                  site,
                                                                                                    State
                                                                                                J. state
                                                                                                          written
                                                                                                         invariant,
                                                                                                           i.e.
                                                                                                            has≡the
                                                                                                           is
                                                                                                                     to fix
                                                                                                                           aform
                                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                     translationally
                                                                                                                called
                                                                                                                      i.e.
                                                                                                                                    the
                                                                                                                                  vertex   index
                                                                                                                                 translationally
                                                                                                                               Matrix,is(PEPS).
                                                                                                                                          written
                                                                                                                                            Product
                                                                                                                                                    to
                                                                                                                                                  and    that  label. The first
                                                                                                                                                            itinvariant,
                                                                                                                                                                is(MPS)
                                                                                                                                                       invariant,
                                                                                                                                                      J.   Ignacio
                                                                                                                                                         State
                                                                                                                                                                      represent
                                                                                                                                                                         is [13,34]
                                                                                                                                                                             writte
                                                                                                                                                                         Cirac is et
                                                                                                                                                                                   wr
!                    Its
                     !                     to  a regular       ! d    is
                                                                      ! d called    a   Projected    Engangled
                                                                                                    Ignacio   Cirac  Pair
                                                                                                                       et al.  State              In a  square  lattice,
 ows follows              2 as follows
                                    asNfollows                         X                                  iN iN A
                                                                                            i2i1 oni2aAunidimensional
  |ψA $Tr[A = i1dthe Aigraphical   Airepresentation
                             ·D· ·⊗4
                                  Tr[A   i1 and
                                       |ψ]|i
                                           AA  ,i=
                                             1$|ψ      · is,·=
                                                   ···$it
                                                 ·2A          ϕNAiN
                                                              depicted
                                                             defines
                                                             iA   $=→]|iaas  follows.
                                                                           ,state
                                                                         1Tr[A· tr(A  ,iplaced
                                                                                · · Tr[A  Ni·$· →
                                                                                        iiA
                                                                                        1
                                                                                          A     ··A
                                                                                                  ··A·iA·)|j
                                                                                                           · 1·j]|i
                                                                                                                A2 ·1           ·1· ,,·i·N·lattice.
                                                                                                                           ·n··⟩(2)
                                                                                                                     ·.·,·j]|i              $, i→    An
                                                                                                                                                N .$ →  (2)
                                                                                                                                                      (3)  MPS·with · · ·periodic
                                                                                                                                                                          ··        .
           A ∈ C ⊗ (C ) where each
           [v]                                                                                   1     2                        N
                                                              boundary [v] denotes   conditiona vertex(the
                                                                                         j1 ,...jN
                                                                                                              and it       is represented
                                                                                                                       system          is placed     as on a ring) and constructed with
            [v] Figure        2:dNA=1
                                    translationally           invariant        MPS      with   Nperiodic
                                                                                                   =1a legboundary             conditions,
                                                                                                                                      to fix defined          by tensor  A
       A ∈ C ⊗ (C )
    N =1follows       i1 ,...,i                 Dwhere
                                               Its
                                                         ⊗4
                                                      generalization
                                                                    the     label
                                                                       i1 ,...,i
                                                              where|Ψeach          to
                                                                                        above
                                                                                  i1N,...,i
                                                                                        =1
                                                                                         a Aindependent
                                                                                             regular       lattice
                                                                                                                   is meant
                                                                       # =[v] denotes a vertex and, it is represented
                                                              local tensors                                            of
                                                                                                                        is   the site,
                                                                                                                            called       a
                                                                                                                                                   the index
                                                                                                                                                i.e. translationally
                                                                                                                                            Projected
                                                                                                                                                                      to that
                                                                                                                                                              Entangled
                                                                                                                                                                                label. The first
                                                                                                                                                                               invariant, is written
                                                                                                                                                                            Pair
    8              Itsdgeneralization to aexample
                   !                                 regular lattice !  of a!
                                                                        d       tensor
                                                                                isdcalled network
                                                                                                a Projected   J. state      isCirac
                                                                                                                    Engangled
                                                                                                                   Ignacio      calledPair    Matrix
                                                                                                                                         et al.State (PEPS).Product       Statelattice,
                                                                                                                                                                   In a square    (MPS) [13,34]
       follows                           State     |Ψ
                                                    (PEPS).
                                                       A   #  as
                                                              =      follows
                                                                       In   a   square        lattice,       ,
                                                                                                             the    graphical         representation            is depicted    as
       = i1 the
    $Tr[A          Aigraphical
                         2
                                   Airepresentation
                            · · ·Tr[A  N i1 and
                                         |ψ]|iAA   ,i=
                                                1$|ψ
                                         follows.     ·2A    · is,·=
                                                         ···$it    iA   iN aasstate
                                                                     depicted
                                                                   defines
                                                                      N$ →    ]|i1Tr[A, follows. ,iplaced
                                                                                         · · · Tr[A iA
                                                                                                    1     i2i1 oni2a unidimensional
                                                                                                      N ·$·→    ·A· · A· i·N· ]|i
                                                                                                                                Ai1.N,·]|i     ·1· ,,·i·NA·lattice.
                                                                                                                                            ···(2)          $, i→      An MPS·with
                                                                                                                                                                 N .$ →(2)          · · ·periodic
                                                                                                                                                                                         ··       . (2.
    A[v] ∈ Cd ⊗ (CD )⊗4 where                     each      [v]     denotes        a    vertex       and     it   is  represented
                                                   boundary condition (the system is placed on a ring) and constructed with                  as
            i1 ,...,iwe  N =1                                i1 ,...,i  i1N,...,i
                                                                              =1 Nconditions,
                                                                                         =1d
    followswhere we will assume
           where
                                   |Ψ periodic
                                       #=      boundary conditions,
                             will assume periodic
                                                   local         , i.e. a torus, but w
                                                                     boundary
                                                                  tensors        Aindependent
                                                                                          ! definedofbythe
                                                                                                              i.e. a torus, but we will
                                                                                                                            site, i.e. translationally invariant, is written
           not draw Figure  it.       3: A translationally invariant PEPS                                         i1 tensor
                                                                                                                         i2 A iN
                                                # as
                                                   =seefollows       |ψ     $  =                    , dimension· D,
                                                                                                        Tr[A          A        · · A ]|i1 , · · · , iN $ →                         ···         . (2)
           not draw it.
                  It is not To help
                                          |ΨAto
                                  difficult
                                       the reader,       letthat,
                                                                         A
                                                                          for a fixed
                                                               us summarize             in  the bond
                                                                                                   following        table   the      PEPS
                                                                                                                                  tensor          also acronyms that will appear very
                                                                                                                                             network
           fulfill the frequently
                             area law.inHence,             one can modify
                                                                                    i1 ,...,iN =1
                                                                                            slightly the Area Law Conjecture                     A
                It is not difficult to see that, for a fixed bond dimension D, PEPS
                                               this proposal.
       where we will assume periodic boundary conditions, i.e. a torus, but we w
    whereand  we conjecture
                     will assume     theperiodic
                                           existence          of MPS or
                                                         boundary                  PEPS
                                                                              conditions,
                                                                                !  d            with i.e.small
                                                                                                            a torus,bondbut   dimension
                                                                                                                                   we will that
           fulfill the area law. Hence, one can modify slightly the Area Law Conje
    not draw       Figure
           approximate
                    it.      Acronym
                              3: Awell   the OneName
                                    translationally
                                                ground   caninvariant
                                                               state of PEPS
                                                         |ψAre-write
                                                                   $=
                                                                               any        defined
                                                                                        locally
                                                                                  a tiling             byi1 tensor
                                                                                                      interacting
                                                                                                 problem
                                                                                               Tr[A
                                                                                                                       A gapped
                                                                                                            Ai2as· ·a·problem
                                                                                                                                          Hamilto-
                                                                                                                          AiN ]|i1 ,of· ·contracting
                                                                                                                                                · , iN $ → a 2D Tensor       ···           . (2)
       not draw it.
        Itnian.
             is not   This    can
                         difficult  be  seen
                                       to   see as
                                         Network.     the
                                                   that,      practical
                                                               for
                                                             For       a
                                                                      that,    version
                                                                           fixed      bond
                                                                                associated    of   the
                                                                                                 dimension
                                                                                                      to  Area
                                                                                                           each     Law
                                                                                                                      D,
                                                                                                                     tiling Conjecture
                                                                                                                            PEPS
                                                                                                                               set    we  also   since
                                                                                                                                             define     a four-leg     tensor  T very
           and conjecture the existence of MPS or PEPS with small bond dimension
    fulfillitthe
                   To helpTN
                comes
                    areawith
                               the reader, let
                             law.inaHence,
                                       concrete
                                         where
                                                    us    summarize
                                                Tensor Network
                                                        parametrization
                                                 oneoutgoing
                                                          can modify
                                                                              in
                                                                          indices
                                                                                  the
                                                                           i1 ,...,iN =1 following
                                                                                        iof
                                                                                  slightly    the
                                                                                                          table
                                                                                                 thesetArea
                                                                                          e correspond
                                                                                                                   the  tensor
                                                                                                            of (approximate)
                                                                                                                    Law
                                                                                                                                   network
                                                                                                                            Conjecture
                                                                                                                    to possible
                                                                                                                                                  acronyms
                                                                                                                                             ground
                                                                                                                                         colors
                                                                                                                                                                 that will
                                                                                                                                                     of the corresponding
                                                                                                                                                                           appear
           It is not difficult to see that, for a fixed bond dimension D, PEPS al
                   frequently         this   proposal.
           approximate well the ground state of any locally interacting gapped Ham
           states. Indeed,
    and conjecture           the    many
                                   existence
                             MPS side,Matrix  algorithms
                                                    of  MPS
                                                  that we     Product (including
                                                                     or   PEPS
                                                                     denote State        the
                                                                                      with
                                                                                      (Tensor
                                                                                  ℓ, r,          ubiquitous
                                                                                                small
                                                                                          u, d for        bond
                                                                                                    Network          DMRG   up, down. Theofvalue of the tensor
                                                                                                                     dimension
                                                                                                                    on a line)
                                                                                                         left, right,              algorithm
                                                                                                                                         that
       fulfill the area law. Hence, one can modify slightly the Area Law Conjectu
           S.   WhiteAcronym[53,54])
    approximate well the ground         Name
                                          aiming        to
                                         Tiℓ ,ir ,iustate    solve       locally       interacting
                                                                  of any locally interacting gapped Hamilto- Hamiltonians             implement
                                                     ,id is 1 if the tile with colors iℓ , ir , iu , id belongs to the tile set and it is
           nian. This can be seen as the practical version of the Area Law Conjecture
    nian. different
            This can types   PEPS
                            be seen of as       Projected
                                        optimization
                                         0 the                     Entangled
                                                   practicalprocedures
                                             otherwise.               version of to  Pair    State
                                                                                         thefindArea   (Tensor
                                                                                                      theLaw MPS    Network
                                                                                                                       or PEPSsince
                                                                                                                   Conjecture      on   athat
                                                                                                                                           regular
                                                                                                                                                 min-  lattice)
       and conjecture the existence of MPS or PEPS with small bond dimension th
           imizes
     t comes         TN
                   with thea energy.    Tensor
                               concreteThey        Network
                                                     turn
                                              parametrization   outdefinition,
                                                                        to workof thevery itsetis well
                                                                                                   of     inthat
                                                                                                               practice
                                                                                                        (approximate)         (see     [41,42,51,
                                                                                                                                   ground
           it comes with a concrete parametrization of the set of (approximate) gr
           37,33]           Table
                        for many    2:
                              reviews
                                               With
                                        Acronyms
                                          on that),
                                                           this
                                                         used       in
                                                             supporting the  proposal.
                                                                               thethe
                                                                                                   clear
                                                                                           validity on     of
                                                                                                                      the contraction               of the translationally
       approximate well the ground state of any locally interacting gapped Hamilt
    states.   Indeed,MPS              algorithms
                                        Matrix
                                         invariant Product(including
                                                             TNState        (Tensor
                                                                       defined         ubiquitous
                                                                                      by  Network
                                                                                              T is not         athis
                                                                                                            DMRG  line)modified/practical
                                                                                                                 equal    algorithm
                                                                                                                            to zero in       of a given region if and
           states. Indeed, many algorithms (including the ubiquitous DMRG algorith
           Area[53,54])
    S. White          Law Conjecture.
                                  aiming to solve locally interacting Hamiltonians implement
                                         only if there is a valid tiling of that region, which makes the problem of
       nian. This can be seen as the practical version of the Area Law Conjecture sin
                  At PEPS
                       the    level
    different types of optimization  ofProjected
                                          mathematical  Entangled
                                                       procedures          Pair
                                                                      proofs, to State
                                                                                    it has
                                                                                   find      (Tensor
                                                                                            the beenMPS   Network
                                                                                                          proven
                                                                                                              or PEPS    on athat
                                                                                                                       that      regular
                                                                                                                               MPS     min-   lattice)
                                                                                                                                           approxi-
           S. White [53,54]) aiming to solve locally interacting Hamiltonians imple
     mizesmatethe wellenergy. anyThey
                                         tensor contraction of the infinite translationally
                                    ground  turnstateout of   toawork locally very interacting
                                                                                        well in practice         Page
                                                                                                         gapped(see     2
                                                                                                                       Hamiltonian
                                                                                                                                      invariant TN (distinguishing
                                                                                                                             [41,42,51,in 1D
       it comes with a concrete parametrization of the set of (approximate) groun
                   Table
           [20],[5].        2:
                         Also    Acronyms
                                  any    whether
                                        MPS    usedis   in
                                                       theittheis    0 or ≥ 1) unique)
                                                                     proposal.
                                                               (essentially             undecidable.   ground        state    of a locally in-
           different types of optimization procedures to find the MPS or PEPS that
    37,33] for reviews on that), supporting the validity of this modified/practical
                                               Variants            of    this    idea,      with       Word        Problem          as coincides
                                                                                                                                          primitive instead of tiling,
       states. Indeed, many algorithms (including the ubiquitous DMRG algorithm
    Area teracting
            Law Conjecture. gapped Hamiltonian. So one can claim that the set of MPS
           imizes the energy. They turn out to work very well in practice (see [41,4
        Atwiththe thelevelset of of      were
                                     GS of gapped
                                  mathematical     reported            by    Morton
                                                               locallyit interacting
                                                           proofs,            has been proven   and       Biamonte
                                                                                                    Hamiltonians
                                                                                                              that MPS         (2012)
                                                                                                                             and    hence[73],
                                                                                                                                approxi-         giveswhere the first un-
       S. White [53,54]) aiming to solve locally interacting Hamiltonians impleme
    mate an wellefficient
                     any ground          decidable
                                 parametrization
                                        state                problems
                                                  of a locally of it. interacting
                                                                           This  in makes
                                                                                      the context  MPS
                                                                                                gapped  Pageof  2 TN
                                                                                                              the         were analyzed.
                                                                                                                      appropriate
                                                                                                              Hamiltonian             in 1D  mathe-
           37,33] for reviews on that), supporting the validity of this modified/pra
           matical
     20],[5].   Also any  framework
                                 MPS istothe   This
                                                prove     mapping
                                                             statements
                                                     (essentially            from
                                                                             unique)    tiling
                                                                                    about           problems
                                                                                                 1D systems.
                                                                                             ground         state ofInaTN
                                                                                                                      to     2D   was
                                                                                                                             locally       explicitly
                                                                                                                                    dimensions,
                                                                                                                                           in-              used by Scarpa
       different types of optimization procedures to find the MPS or PEPS that mi
           Area Law Conjecture.
           despite
    teracting            someHamiltonian.
                    gapped               et al.results
                                   promising           (2020)
                                                        So one          [83].claim
                                                                    along
                                                                       can     the They
                                                                                      samethat show the that
                                                                                                  lines          ofmany
                                                                                                           [19,31],
                                                                                                           set        MPS thecrucial
                                                                                                                                full picture
                                                                                                                               coincides      properties
                                                                                                                                                      is        for the use of
       imizes the energy. They turn out to work very well in practice (see [41,42,5
    with far
           the fromset ofbeing
                             GS ofcompleted.
                                      gapped locally interacting Hamiltonians and hence gives
    an efficientAt the level of mathematical proofs, it has been proven that MPS app
                  It isparametrization
                          precisely the aim         of of it.this Thismanuscript
                                                                            makes MPS          to formally
                                                                                                     the appropriate state allmathe- these ques-
       37,33] for reviews on that), supporting the validity of this modified/practic
    maticaltions.      We will to
                 framework          separate        the questions
                                        prove statements                   aboutin three         main topics,
                                                                                       1D systems.                35
                                                                                                               In 2Deach          of them pre-
                                                                                                                          dimensions,
           mate well any ground state of a locally interacting gapped Hamiltonian i
       Area Law Conjecture.
    despitesented
                someinpromising
                            a separate        section.
                                           results       along Thethe    first
                                                                             sameonelines deals[19,31],
                                                                                                     with questions             related isto the
                                                                                                                 the full picture
           [20],[5]. Also any MPS is the (essentially unique) ground state of a local
           correspondence
    far from      being completed.    between PEPS and ground states. The second section deals
           At the level of mathematical proofs, it has been proven that MPS approx
        Itwith       the use the
             is precisely         of PEPS
                                       aim oftothis   prove        rigorous results
                                                             manuscript              to formally in condensed-matter
                                                                                                            state all these ques-      problems.
           teracting gapped Hamiltonian. So one can claim that the set of MPS coin
    tions. We will separate the questions in three main topics, each of them pre- in
           The       last   section      collects        some         open      questions           about        PEPS        that      appear
       mate well any ground state of a locally interacting gapped Hamiltonian in 1
    sented with the set of GS of gapped locally interacting Hamiltonians and hence
           different       fields. section. The first one deals with questions related to the
               in a separate
       [20],[5]. Also any MPS is the (essentially unique) ground state of a locally i
    correspondence between PEPS and ground states. The second section deals
PEPS in quantum many-body problems, both analytically and numerically,
are indeed undecidable in the thermodynamic limit. The most paradigmatic
one is whether a given PEPS is invariant under a global on-site symmetry.
That is, given a group G and an associated   N representation Uv (g) for each
vertex v of the graph G, decide whether v Uv (g)ϕT = ϕT for all g ∈ G.
    If one goes to the simplest one-dimensional case, one does not have ac-
cess to undecidable tiling problems. Despite this, there are still important
undecidable problems for the case of Matrix Product States, particularly for
the case of Matrix Product Operators, where the physical index runs over
the matrix units (|j⟩⟨k|)dj,k=1 , and therefore the vector ϕT can be understood
now as an operator acting on N d-dimensional particles. Its graphical repre-
sentation is simply




     In order to analyze and simulate open quantum systems with Tensor
Network techniques, a central question is to know whether a given Matrix
Product Operator represents a valid quantum mixed state and hence whether
it is a positive semidefinite operator for all possible system sizes. In such a
case it is called a Matrix Product Density Operator.
     This problem has been known to be hard in practice for a long time [138]
and the work-around solution was to take arbitrary Matrix Product Opera-
tors Θ and use ΘΘ† as the variational family in the optimization algorithms.
Note that, ΘΘ† is also a Matrix Product Operator as one can easily see from
the graphical notation.
     Those types of Matrix Product Operators are said to have a local pu-
rification. The problem is that they introduce an extra non-linearity in the
optimization algorithm, which then becomes significantly more complex.
     Kliesch et al. (2014) [68] finally proved that deciding whether a given
Matrix Product Operator is positive or not for all system sizes is undecidable.
Given the formula (3), it does not come as a surprise that the result was
obtained by a reduction to matrix mortality problems (see section 3.4.3).
     This result was used later by De las Cuevas et al. (2016) [69] to
prove the existence of Matrix Product Density Operators without a local
purification. The proof uses the quantum version of Wielandt’s inequality
[139] to show that, in case a local purification exists, there is an algorithm


                                      36
that finds it. Therefore, if all Matrix Product Density Operators had a local
purification, checking whether a given Matrix Product Operator was positive
semidefinite would be decidable, contradicting the result in [68].
   Note that undecidability is being used here as proof technique to show
that an exotic object exists (in this case a Matrix Product Density Operator
without a local purification). The very same idea has been used later in two
remarkable directions, which we will comment on below (see section 5.2.2).

5.1.4. Open questions
    Several questions remain still open about the (un-)decidability of (quan-
tum) many-body properties. An important one is what remains undecidable
(if anything) at finite temperature, or under other sources of noise such as
disorder in the interactions (see Section 6.3). For instance, to the best of our
knowledge the following question is still open: given a translational invariant
Hamiltonian, is it decidable or undecidable to determine if the correlations
in the associated thermal state decay exponentially with the distance?

5.2. Quantum Information
    It is argued by Wolf et al. (2011) [140] that, due to the use of quanti-
fiers over the integers in the first-order logic formulation of many interesting
quantities in quantum information theory, it could happen that they are un-
computable in general. By now, this is known to be true in the following
cases:

5.2.1. Measurements and channels
    The link between quantum measurements and undecidability in quantum
information has come in several different directions.
    The first contribution in this direction, due to Van den Nest and
Briegel (2008) [141], is a connection between measurement-based quantum
computation and undecidability.
    In the paradigm of measurement-based quantum computation designed
by Raussendorf and Briegel [142], one starts with a fixed universal resource
quantum state. Then the desired computation is implemented by measuring
sequentially each qubit of the resource state in a basis that depends on the
quantum circuit one wants to implement.
    It is known that there exist resource states for which measurement-based
quantum computation is as powerful as the circuit model of computation.
A central question in this area is then to understand which features of the

                                      37
resource state yield universal quantum computational power (see [143] for
several results in this direction).
    The family of states for which measurement-based quantum computation
is understood best is the set of graph states.
    They are defined on an underlying graph where qubits initialized in |+⟩
are located in the vertices of the graph and controlled-Z operations are im-
plemented on pairs of vertices joint by an edge.
    If the underlying graph is a 2D square lattice, the graph state is called a
cluster state, and it is the paradigmatic universal resource for measurement-
based quantum computation.
    The question analyzed in [141] is the following: which property of a graph
makes measurement-based computation on the associated graph state classi-
cally simulable. Surprisingly there is a clean answer: precisely those graphs
whose associated logic, in a precise sense defined in [144], is decidable (proved
through a reduction to tiling problems [145]).
    A further connection between measurements and undecidability was made
by Brukner (2009) and Paterek et al. (2010) [42, 43] where a link was
established between randomness of outcomes of certain quantum measure-
ments and logical independence of propositions from a given set of axioms. A
somewhat related direction connecting randomness and computability culmi-
nated in the recent result by Trejo et al. (2023) [44] (see references therein
for previous work). A quantum random number generator is proposed for
which, under reasonable hypotheses, no algorithm computing any output bit
can be proved correct. Experimental support is also provided.
    Another connection between undecidability and quantum measurements
can be traced back to the work of Eisert et al. (2012) [70], where an
interpretation of matrix mortality (see section 3.4.3) is given in terms of
quantum measurements. The idea is the following. Any finite number of
matrices A1 , . . . Am represents a quantum measurement if we interpret them
as Kraus operators of a quantum channel. That is, a measurement on state ρ
has outcome j ∈ {1, . . . , m} with probability tr(Aj ρA†j ) and, in such a case,
the final state becomes
                                      Aj ρA†j
                                                 .
                                    tr(Aj ρA†j )
If we repeat the same measurement sequentially, is there a choice of outcomes
that will never occur? This is the quantum measurement occurrence problem
defined in [70]. Note that this is equivalent to asking whether there exist


                                       38
N ∈ N and j1 , . . . jN ∈ {1, . . . , m} so that

                                     Ai1 Ai2 · · · AiN = 0

which is precisely the matrix mortality problem and hence undecidable.
     As observed by Wolf et al. (2011) [140], using the work of Hirvensalo
(2007) [146], matrix mortality problems are also undecidable if one restricts
to quantum channels24 . The associated result is the reachability problem,
which is a problem in quantum control theory. Given an initial state ρ, a
target state |ψ⟩, a parameter 0 < λ < 1, and a set of quantum controls
T1 , · · · Tn (that are quantum channels), it is undecidable to know whether
there is a choice of controls so that

                                   ⟨ψ|TiN · Ti1 (ρ)|ψ⟩ > λ                         (4)

   This connection between quantum control and undecidability was ex-
plored further by Bondar and Pechen (2020) [63].
   Gimbert and Oualhadj (2010) [147] gave a result about the unde-
cidability of control problems that is much stronger than (4). By a gap
amplification technique, they show that, even with the promise that

   • either ⟨ψ|TiN · · · Ti1 (ρ)|ψ⟩ < 12 for all N and all i1 , · · · iN ;

   • or for each ϵ > 0 there is an N and i1 , . . . iN so that ⟨ψ|TiN · · · Ti1 (ρ)|ψ⟩ >
     1 − ϵ,

it is undecidable to know which is the case
     This result was used by Elkouss and Pérez-Garcı́a (2018) [148] to
show that given a classical channel with memory (the result trivially holds
then for the quantum case) and the promise that its capacity is 1 or < 21 ,
it is undecidable to know which is the case. This was generalized later by
Boche et al. (2020) [149], with completely different techniques, to cover
the minimal possible channel size: one bit of input, one bit of output, one
bit of memory.
     Let us recall that a channel with memory is just a channel with two inputs
(the memory and the actual input) and the two associated outputs. It can
therefore be represented by the following tensor

  24
       Indeed classical channels suffices.


                                              39
where the black arrows represent the input-output of the channel and the
blue ones the input-output of the memory.
   Using the channel N times is therefore represented by the corresponding
Matrix Product Operator




    The capacity of the channel is defined similarly as in the memoryless case:
the optimal rate (number of bits per use of the channel) at which information
can be sent if it is optimally encoded before sending.
    There have been two more results regarding undecidability in classical
information theory that we want to mention:
    Boche and Mönich (2021) [150] proved that the bandwidth of a ban-
dlimited signal is uncomputable. The relevance of this result stems from
the fact that, according to the Shannon sampling theorem, the bandwidth
determines the minimum sampling rate which is required for a perfect recon-
struction.
    Boche and Deppe (2021) [151] proved that the zero-error capacity of
a memoryless channel is uncomputable. To define the zero-error capacity,
there is no probability of error allowed in the transmission of information,
as opposed to the standard setup where an error is tolerated, as long as it
vanishes asymptotically (in the number channel uses).
    However, this result comes with a caveat that is worth mentioning as it
is not uncommon to results about “uncomputable” functions on spaces over
the field of computable real numbers. It is a jarring fact about the field
of computable numbers that it is not computably ordered [152]. That is,
statements like x = 0 or x > 1 are undecidable for computable real numbers
in general. As a consequence, every discontinuous function, even a simple
step function, becomes uncomputable. In fact, this is precisely the case for
the zero-error capacity—it is discontinuous by the nature of its definition.
    In such a case, one could argue that the uncomputability might be more
a statement about how the input is presented than a signature of any quality
of the considered property that goes beyond discontinuity.

                                      40
    To circumvent this issue, most of the results mentioned in this review
work with computably ordered subfields like the fields of rational or algebraic
numbers. In the case of the zero-error capacity, one could modify the question
and, for instance, consider the decision problem of whether the capacity is
larger than a given value in cases where everything takes place within a
computably ordered field (e.g. the algebraic numbers). To the best of our
knowledge, it is currently open whether this problem is (un-)decidable.

5.2.2. Quantum non-locality
    We finish this section with some remarkable undecidability results in
quantum information theory that deal with quantum non-locality or, equiv-
alently, Bell inequalities.
    Bell inequalities date back to the famous work of [153], where Einstein,
Podolsky and Rosen raise an apparent dilemma about the completeness of
quantum mechanics as a model for nature. 30 years later, Bell [154] pro-
posed an idealized experiment to test that quantum mechanics is in fact not
compatible with a classical explanation of Nature in terms of local hidden
variables. Implementing this experiment was a challenging task since one
needed to avoid some crucial mismatches –called loopholes– between the re-
quired ideal setup and the actual experiment. The two main loopholes to deal
with were the locality loophole and the detection loophole 25 . The locality
loophole refers to the need to avoid causality relations between the spatially
separated measurement setups of the experiment. Solving the locality loop-
hole requires fast random measurement choices in order to avoid any causal
influence of the measurement choice at one side on the outcome at the other
side. The detection loophole refers to the problem that only a small fraction
of the photons are actually detected and that this fraction could depend on
the configuration of the measurement setups.
    A series of experiments initiated by J. Clauser, A. Aspect and co-authors
in the 70’s culminated in the 1982 experiment led by A. Aspect [156, 157]
which removed the locality loophole, and is widely viewed as the first to

  25
     There are many other loopholes one could consider, as one increases the level of
scrutiny regarding potential ways nature might conspire to invalidate the Bell experiment.
As A. Aspect says [155]: “Yet no experiment, as ideal as it is, can be said to be totally
loophole-free [. . . ]. Since all events have a common past if we go back far enough in time
–possibly to the Big Bang– any observed correlation could be justified by invoking such
an explanation.”.


                                            41
convincingly demonstrating Bell inequality violation and separate quantum
physics from any local hidden variable theory. Finally, in 2015 an experiment
removing simultaneously the locality and detection loopholes was performed
in Delft [158], and independently also in Vienna [159] and NIST [160], again
obtaining the predicted violations of Bell inequalities.
    At the practical level, violations of Bell inequalities are behind some im-
portant applications of quantum information, such as quantum cryptography
[161] and the secure generation of random numbers [162, 163].
    A common way to present and study Bell inequalities in quantum in-
formation theory is via non-local games. In a non-local game, a referee R
samples a pair of questions x, y, with a known probability distribution π(x, y)
from a finite set of N possible questions. He sends question x to Alice and
question y to Bob, the two players of the (cooperative) game. They can
pre-agree on a common strategy, but once the game starts, Alice and Bob
cannot communicate with each other. Alice (resp. Bob) must provide an
answer a (resp. b) to the referee from a finite set of M possible answers. The
referee checks according to a known verification function V (a, b, x, y) ∈ {0, 1}
whether the players win (V (a, b, x, y) = 1) or lose the game.


                                        x                                                                          P
                                                         y
                                            a        b                                             x
                                                                                                               a




    The game G is then given by the pair (π, V ) and its size is max{N, M }.                           a
The value of the game is the optimal probability of winning, optimized among
all allowed strategies26 .
    A strategy is simply a probability distribution p(ab|xy) giving the prob-                              x
                                                                                                               x
ability of answering (a, b) on question (x, y). Which strategies are allowed
                                                                                                   x
                                                                                                                   P
   26
     There are different possible variants. For instance, one can also take V (a, b, x, y) to be
real-valued (interpret it e.g. as the amount of money the players win if they answer (a, b)
on input (x, y)) and the value of the game would then be the maximum expected gain,
when optimized over all possible strategies; one can add more players, or more rounds
of communication between referee and players; one can make questions and/or answers
quantum; one can allow for some type of communication between the players once the
game starts; . . . . We refer to [164, 165] for more details on the topic.


                                                42
depends on the resources given to the players. If they play using only classical
physics, p(ab|xy) will take the form of a hidden-variable model:
                                 X
                     p(ab|xy) =     pλ pA (a|xλ)pB (b|yλ)                    (5)
                                       λ

That is, before the game starts they sample a random variable λ according
to probability pλ , then each one of them answers according to a probability
distribution that depends only on their question and the value of λ.
    The classical value of the game ω(G) is the optimal probability of winning
if the players use classical strategies. That is
                                    X
             ω(G) =        sup           π(x, y)V (a, b, x, y)p(ab|xy)
                     p(ab|xy) as in (5) xyab


   If players are allowed to share an entangled state before the game starts
and can decide their answers based on some measurement made on this state,
the associated value is called the entangled value of the game ω ∗ (G).
   There is however an important subtlety here regarding how the spatial
separation between Alice and Bob is modeled. In principle, this gives rise to
two different types of strategies.
   If we model spatial separation using a tensor product structure, as is
usual in quantum information theory, the allowed strategies are represented
by

                        p(ab|xy) = tr [(Eax ⊗ Fby )ρAB ] ,                  (6)
where HA and HB are finite dimensional Hilbert spaces for Alice and Bob,
respectively, ρAB is a mixed state on HA ⊗ HB , and Eax (resp. Fby ) is a
generalized measurement for Alice (resp. Bob). P That      is, Eax are positive
                                                      x
semidefinite operators acting on HA so that       a Ea = Id for all x. The
                    ∗
entangled value ω (G) refers to those types of strategies and is defined as
follows:
                                 X
             ω ∗ (G) =   sup         π(x, y)V (a, b, x, y)p(ab|xy)          (7)
                      p(ab|xy) as in (6) xyab


   However, spatial separation can also be modeled in the spirit of algebraic
quantum field theory. In this case, there is a single infinite dimensional
Hilbert space H on which both Alice’s and Bob’s operators act, and spatial

                                            43
separation is reflected by imposing that Alice’s and Bob’s operators commute.
This is the commuting-operator paradigm that gives as possible strategies

                            p(ab|xy) = tr [(Eax Fby )ρ] ,                     (8)

where ρ is a state on an infinite dimensional Hilbert space H, and Eax and
Fby are generalized measurements on H so that [Eax , Fby ] = 0 for all x, y, a, b.
We can then define the commuting entangled value:
                                  X
            ωc∗ (G) =    sup         π(x, y)V (a, b, x, y)p(ab|xy)
                      p(ab|xy) as in (8) xyab

    Note that, by definition ω(G) ≤ ω ∗ (G) ≤ ωc∗ (G) since the former strate-
gies are special cases of the latter.
    Bell inequalities deal with the first of those inequalities ω(G) ≤ ω ∗ (G).
A Bell inequality violation in the language of non-local games is nothing but
a game G for which the inequality is strict ω(G) < ω ∗ (G), meaning that
quantum strategies are strictly better than classical ones for that particular
game.
    Whether ω ∗ (G) = ωc∗ (G) for all games or not has been an important open
question, known as Tsirelson’s problem. It asks whether or not both ways to
model spatial separation give the same experimental predictions.
    In a breakthrough paper Slofstra (2020) [75] showed that it is unde-
cidable to know if ωc∗ (G) = 1 for a given game G. In his subsequent paper
Slofstra (2019) [74] showed the same result for ω ∗ (G). The proof goes via
a clever mapping between finitely presented groups and a class of non-local
games. The results are then obtained by invoking the undecidability of the
word problem for groups (see section 3.4.4). Slofstra’s results were used later
by Fritz (2021) [76] to show that quantum logic is undecidable. They were
also used by Mančinska and Roberson (2020) [77] to give a striking un-
decidability result in the context of graph theory. They show that, given
two graphs G, H, knowing whether there exists a planar graph K for which
hom(K, G) ̸= hom(K, H) is an undecidable problem. Here hom(K, G) is the
number of graph homomorphisms from K to G. The reason underlying this
undecidability is indeed the main result of [77]: hom(K, G) = hom(K, H) for
all planar graphs K if and only if G and H are quantum isomorphic (see [166]
for the formal definition). This in turn can be characterized by the existence
of a perfect commuting strategy for a particular non-local game defined in
terms of G and H. The result then can be obtained as a reduction from [75].

                                            44
Fu et al. (2021) [78] strengthened the results of [74, 75] by showing that
undecidability is kept even for a particular fixed game size.
    Finally, in a breakthrough paper, Ji et al. (2020) [167] managed to
prove that, even under the promise that ω ∗ (G) = 1 or ω ∗ (G) ≤ 1/2, it is
undecidable to know which is the case. This has the remarkable consequence
that there exist games for which ω ∗ (G) ̸= ωc∗ (G), giving a negative answer
to Tsirelson’s problem. The way to obtain this consequence is by using
undecidability as a proof ingredient, as already commented in section 5.1.3.
One considers an algorithm that interleaves upper bounds to ωc∗ (G) by using
the semidefinite-program-hierarchy of Navascués et al. (2008) [168], with
lower bounds to ω ∗ (G) by brute-force computing the supremum in (7) for
larger and larger Hilbert space dimensions. If ω ∗ (G) = ωc∗ (G), on input a
game for which ω ∗ (G) = 1 or ω ∗ (G) ≤ 1/2, such an algorithm would always
halt and give the right answer, making the problem decidable, which is the
desired contradiction. We refer to section 8 in [169] for a detailed explanation.
    Using a connection made in [170] and [171] between Tsirelson’s problem
and Connes’ embedding problem, the result in [167] implies also a negative
solution to Connes’ embedding problem. The latter was a major open prob-
lem in the theories of von Nuemann algebras and C ∗ -algebras that is finally
solved using this completely unexpected approach based on undecidability.
    Another consequence of Ji et al. (2020) [167] is the undecidability of the
membership problem for the set of quantum contextual behaviors. This was
obtained in Wright and Farkas (2023) [172] via the construction of an
invertible map between non-locality and contextuality scenarios.
    In a slightly different direction, Bendersky et al. (2017) [173] ana-
lyzed the maximum set of strategies p(ab|xy) that is compatible with special
relativity, in the sense that the output a (resp.P b) cannot contain informa-
tion about
       P      the input y (resp.  x). That   is,   b p(ab|xy) is independent of
y and a p(ab|xy) is independent of x. The set of such strategies is called
non-signaling and it contains all quantum ones.
    By using undecidability results about learnability of functions (in turn re-
duced to the halting problem in [174]), it is proven in [173] that non-signaling
deterministic models for strategies p(ab|xy) have to be uncomputable.

5.2.3. Open problems
    There are several important questions that remain open. Arguably the
most important one is whether the classical or quantum capacities of a mem-
oryless quantum channel are uncomputable. If so, this would imply that

                                       45
there cannot exist any reasonable single-letter formula to compute them, in
analogy to Shannon’s coding theorem for the capacity of a classical channel.
(Note that deciding if the classical capacity of a quantum channel is non-zero
– i.e. whether it has any capacity at all – is straightforward, though com-
puting its value is not. For the quantum capacity, even deciding whether a
channel has any quantum capacity at all may be non-trivial.)
    Currently, the known coding theorem for the quantum capacity in terms
of the coherent information Icoh requires a regularization. That is, given a
quantum channel T , its quantum capacity is given by
                                      1
                      Q(T ) = lim       max Icoh (T ⊗n , ρn ).
                                 n    n ρn
Similarly, the classical capacity of a quantum channel is given by regularizing
the Holevo quantity χ
                                      1
                        C(T ) = lim     max χ(T ⊗n , ρn ).
                                  n   n ρn
   In Cubitt et al. (2015) [175], some evidence is given concerning the
uncomputability of the quantum capacity. It is shown that, for any given n,
there exist channels T with positive quantum capacity that, however, fulfill
                           1
                             max Icoh (T ⊗n , ρn ) = 0.
                           n ρn
5.3. Fluid mechanics
    Tao (2016) [176] started a program to address the regularity problem
for Navier-Stokes equations in fluid mechanics (one of the Clay’s millennium
problems) by showing that fluid mechanics is Turing complete [177, 178,
179, 180]. This would allow encoding a self-replicating machine that blows
up in finite time, into the evolution of a fluid. Indeed, Tao showed this to
be possible for an artificial modification (an averaged version) of the Navier-
Stokes equations [176].
    A major achievement of that program appeared in a work by Cardona
et al. (2021) [181], where they managed to show that there exist Turing
complete fluid flows on a Riemannian 3-dimensional sphere. This is done
however in the simpler case of Euler equations, which model inviscid incom-
pressible fluids, as opposed to the viscid case treated by the Navier-Stokes
equations.

                                         46
    The particular result proven in [181] is the existence of fluid flows X in
the 3-dimensional sphere S3 so that the following problem is equivalent to
the halting problem of a Turing Machine: Given a point p ∈ S3 and an open
set U ⊂ S3 , decide if the orbit of X through p intersects U .
    The proof uses deep results of contact topology, together with the re-
sults of Moore [107, 108] commented in Chapter 4, in his construction of
uncomputable dynamical systems.
    Cardona et al. (2023) [182] have managed to extend the validity of
their result to the Euclidean space R3 .

5.4. Quantum Field Theory
    We already commented in Chapter 4 on the pioneering work of Komar [3]
about undecidability in quantum field theories. Using a different approach
Tachikawa (2023) [64] proved that it is undecidable whether a given 2D
supersymmetric Lagrangian theory breaks supersymmetry or not by making
a connection with the undecidability of Diophantine equations (section 3.4.1).

6. Outlook
    We have first summarized in this review the concept of undecidability in
mathematics from the pioneering works of Gödel and Turing to the extensions
to other mathematical systems that later served to construct mappings to
physical models. In Chapter 4 we have briefly reviewed the first results of
undecidability in physics. In most cases, they were models built ad hoc to
embed in them a Universal Turing Machine or other equivalent systems, but
that, in general, bear little resemblance to physical systems present in nature.
The core of this review was Chapter 5, where we presented the results of the
last decade in which undecidable properties have been proven in more usual
models in physics, both classical and quantum, but with special relevance in
the latter due to the developments in quantum information theory.
    As in any review, there are several topics that we left out. There is still
a rich literature proving undecidability of new problems within mathematics
and computer science. Undecidability in physics has also a natural contin-
uation in the field of philosophy. However, in this review we only focus on
mathematically rigorous results about well established models of physical
systems, without entering into a discussion of their possible philosophical
implications.


                                      47
   In this final outlook chapter we first provide a general view relating un-
decidability in mathematics and physics, discuss the scope of application of
the results that we have covered, the consequences in physics that such an
abstract concept as undecidability can have at a practical level in research,
and some new directions that look promising for future research.

6.1. General view
    In Fig. 1 we provide a relational view of the results we have reviewed in
this article. In the upper part (blue) we can see the undecidability results in
mathematics that have been used in physics, stemming from the core ones:
Gödel, Turing, AIT. At the bottom (red) one can find the undecidability
results in physics grouped into fields, with classical (quantum) systems on
the left (right). Arrows come to each box from the mathematical systems
that have been used to bring undecidability from mathematics to physics.
The labels on the arrows (e.g. DS4) indicate the specific article(s) that can
be found in the following list.




                                      48
                                                      UNDECIDABILITY

      Gödel                                                                                                                   AIT
Incompleteness                                          TM: Halting                                                     Incompleteness

                            Church Th.



                     Recursion
                      Theory
                                                CAs       Tilings        PostCP

                                                                                                         M. Mortality           Word
         Diophantine Eq.


                                                                                                                                        Math
                                                                                                                                        Phys
                                                                       QI7-10
         DS1,2,5                                                                QI2                                             TN3-4
                                                                        QI1                        MB1-2     MB1-3
                                                                                      QI3-6                                   TN2        TN1
 DS4                 SS2   SS1                                  QI11                                                 MB4
               DS3                        FD1
                                                                         Quantum                                                Tensor
   Dynamical            Spin               Fluid                                                     Many-Body
                                                                        Information                                            Networks
    Systems           Systems            Dynamics


                                                                                       QC1                              QG1
 R1                                                                     QF1
                                 WE1
                                                                QF2
                                                                                              Quantum             Quantum
Relativity                       Wave Eq.                              QFT                     Control             Gravity


                                                    Classical Quantum




Figure 1: Diagram showing the connections between systems with undecidable properties
in mathematics (blue) and physics (red - classical and quantum) that are commented on
in this review (see main text).


      CLASSICAL SYSTEMS

      • Dynamical Systems, section 4:
        -DS1. Fredkin and Toffoli (1982) [105].
        -DS2. Moore (1990) [107].
        -DS3. Omohundro (1984) [95].
        -DS4. da Costa and Doria (1991) [62, 25].
        -DS5. Blondel (2001) [114, 115]

      • Spin Systems:
        -SS1. Kanter (1990) [81], section 4.

                                                           49
  -SS2. Gu et al. (2009); Gu and Perales (2012) [96, 97], section 5.1.1.

• Fluid Dynamics, section 5.3:
  -FD1. Cardona et al. (2021); Cardona et al. (2023) [181, 182].

• Relativity, section 4:
  -R1. da Costa et al. (1990) [112].

• Wave Equation, section 4:
  -WE1. Pour-El and Richards (1981) [104].


QUANTUM SYSTEMS

• Quantum Information, section 5.2:
  -QI1. Brukner (2009); Paterek et al. (2010); Trejo et al. (2023) [42,
  43, 44].
  -QI2. Eisert et al. (2012) [70].
  -QI3. Slofstra (2019, 2020) [74, 75].
  -QI4. Fritz (2021) [76].
  -QI5. Mancinska and Roberson (2020) [77].
  -QI6. Fu et al. (2021) [78].
  -QI7. Elkouss and Pérez-Garcı́a (2018 [148].
  -QI8. Ji et al. (2020) [167].
  -QI9. Wright and Farkas (2023) [172].
  -QI10. Bendersky et al. (2017) [173].
  -QI11. Van den Nest and Briegel (2008) [141].

• Many-Body Systems, section 5.1.2:
  -MB1. Cubitt et al. (2015, 2022); Bausch et al. (2021, 2020) [175, 120,
  127, 126].
  -MB2. Watson et al. (2022) [128].
  -MB3. Shiraishi and Matsumoto (2021, 2020) [131, 132].
  -MB4. Purcell et al. (2024) [45].

• Tensor Networks, section 5.1.3:
  -TN1. Morton and Biamonte (2012) [73].
  -TN2. Scarpa et al. (2020 [83].
  -TN3. Kliesch et al. (2014) [68].
  -TN4. De las Cuevas et al. (2016) [69].

                                 50
   • Quantum Field Theory:
     -QF1. Komar (1964) [3], section 4.
     -QF2. Tachikawa (2023) [64], section 5.4.

   • Quantum Control, section 5.2.1:
     -QC1. Bondar and Pechen (2020) [63].

   • Quantum Gravity, section 4:
     -QG1. Geroch and Hartle (1986) [4].

    Let us briefly discuss some conclusions that we can draw from Fig. 1.
First, we can appreciate the great diversity of physical systems in which unde-
cidable properties have been proven, both quantum and classical, with most
of these results obtained in the last 15 years. We also note that most of them
introduce undecidability through mathematical systems derived directly or
indirectly from the halting problem for Turing Machines, as in DS1,2,5,
FD1, QI7-10 and MB1-3. As mentioned above, one reason is that Turing
Machines already resemble real physical systems, whereas Gödel’s or AIT
arguments are of more abstract nature.
    Using the halting problem as starting point, undecidability can be trans-
ferred to other mathematical systems by embedding a Turing Machine into
them. In this way, one obtains undecidable properties in 2D mathematical
systems like cellular automata and tilings that geometrically resemble 2D
physical systems (classical or quantum spin systems, tensor networks), so it
is possible to export, directly or indirectly, undecidable problems, as in DS3,
SS1, SS2, MB1-2, TN2, and Q11.
    In addition to geometric similarity, the frontier between undecidability in
mathematics and physics is crossed by means of other mathematical objects
that appear naturally in physics, such as equations, matrices or groups. This
is the case for DS4, QI2, QI3-6, TN1,3,4, QC1, QG1, QF2, which are
based on Diophantine Equations, Matrix Mortality or the Word Problem.
    There are a few results relying on less exploited connections in Fig. 1,
such as R1, WE1, QF1, QI1 and MB4 . Indeed, the variety and richness
of undecidable properties in mathematical systems (many of which are not
in the figure) suggests that there may still be many more connections to be
discovered that might prove undecidable properties in multiple and diverse
physical systems.



                                      51
6.2. Infinite undecidable mathematics vs finite decidable nature
    When studying a real physical system, by constraints in the measure-
ment precision or in the sample size, one usually needs to consider only a
finite number of possible configurations. Mathematical models to treat those
situations as such are therefore decidable, since it suffices to consider one
by one all the possible configurations. Take, for instance, 10 particles that
are described by an effectively finite configuration space and that interact a
finite number of times. Clearly, there is no way to embed a universal Turing
Machine with its infinite tape into such a system.
    What if instead of 10 particles we consider 1023 ? It is still a decidable
system, although practically intractable. When we take the number of par-
ticles to infinity, statistical mechanics and thermodynamics often allow us
to model it in a simple and tractable way, and to make precise predictions
about their collective behavior. However, as we have seen, there are cases
where this limit is the midwife of undecidability.
    In modeling nature we take limits in other directions as well, which may
be displayed by infinitesimal calculus, or asymptotic times—and again, these
can either simplify the mathematical model or lead to undecidability.
    From this point of view, undecidability seems to be less a feature of the
physical system and more a property of the idealized mathematical model
we use to describe it.
    However, undecidability in the infinite limit often also has implications
for the more realistic situation of a finite-size system. There are “reflections”
of undecidability at finite system sizes. In particular, if undecidability is
proven using an embedding of a universal Turing Machine, two potential
consequences are lurking in the construction:
  1. The associated problem for finite size or finite precision becomes com-
     plete for some computational complexity class. Which complexity class
     will depend on the problem. For instance, the finite-size version of the
     problem to decide whether a Matrix Product Operator is semidefinite
     positive was proven to be NP-hard by Kliesch et al. (2014) [68],
     while the problem of giving an estimate for the ground state energy
     density of a fixed quantum system in the thermodynamic limit, as a
     function of the number of bits of precision, was proven to be hard
     for the complexity class FEXPNEXP (Aharonov and Irani (2022);
     Watson and Cubitt (2022) [183, 184]). It would be desirable to
     have general results that allow to infer finite size/precision complexity

                                       52
     results based on the undecidability of its infinite counterpart. A first
     step in that direction was made by Klingler et al. (2023) [185] and
     discussed further by Wolf (2023) [186].
  2. As we will discuss in more detail in section 6.5, undecidability of infi-
     nite problems may imply unexpected and exotic size-dependent effects
     for their finite-size counterparts. That is, there may be a finite but
     uncomputably large size at which the properties of the system change
     abruptly and dramatically.

6.3. The effect of noise
    There is yet another important ingredient to be considered, which is
present in real physical systems: noise. For instance, it has been shown
by Dong et al. (2023) [187], culminating a series of previous works by Qin
and Yao (2021, 2023) [188, 189], that, under a particular type of noise,
where the players are allowed to share arbitrarily many copies of a single
state with a fixed amount of noise per state, the undecidability of approxi-
mating the quantum value of a non-local game downgrades to (containment
in) the complexity class NEXP. It is an important open question to under-
stand which undecidability results are stable under natural sources of noise
in the corresponding physical problem; and, in case they are not stable, to
determine the exact complexity class to which their noisy versions belong.

6.4. Undecidability over the real numbers
    So far, as becomes clear from this review, the focus of the research in
the area of undecidability in physics has been to prove that concrete relevant
problems in the physics literature are undecidable / uncomputable in the
Turing sense.
    However, in the seminal book by Blum et al. (1998) [190], motivated
by optimization algorithms like Newton’s algorithm, the paradigm of com-
putation over the real numbers (instead of the integers) is formalized. In this
paradigm, decidable sets are tightly connected with algebraic sets (i.e. zeroes
of polynomials). In particular, this allows to show that membership in fractal
sets like the Mandelbrot set are undecidable in this different computational
paradigm.
    The existence of fractal sets in many interesting physical systems, such as
Hofstadter’s Butterfly [191], makes it tempting to suggest that undecidability
over the reals could also be of relevance in physics.


                                      53
6.5. The positive side
    Undecidability puts limits on our ability to reason mathematically about
a system. But it also has a positive side. It shows the existence of “pathologi-
cal” examples that can provide counterexamples to open problems in physics.
That is, undecidability can be used as a proof technique. We have already
seen a couple of examples in this spirit. In section 5.1.3, this technique is used
to show that there exist Matrix Product Density Operators without a local
purification, a question that goes back to [192]. In a similar vein, undecid-
ability of the ground state energy density has been used as a proof element by
Blakaj and Wolf (2024) [193] in a discussion of the set of reduced states of
infinite quantum spin chains. But it is in section 5.2.2 where this technique
shows its real power, providing the solution to Tsirelson’s problem and, even
more remarkably, to Connes’ embedding problem.
    Moreover, those pathological examples could be interesting on their own,
since they can display new physics. One illustrative example in this direction
is the existence of size-driven quantum phase transitions by Bausch et al.
(2018) [194], a new type of quantum effect that is a consequence of the
undecidability of the spectral gap: systems whose thermodynamic properties
in the infinite limit differ radically from the properties they display at any
finite size below a threshold that can be in principle as large as desired.
Finding analogous size-driven results for other undecidable problems could
be very interesting. This could include for instance a communication channel
whose properties change abruptly after a fixed (but arbitrary large) number
of uses. (A step in this direction is shown in [175], but there the result
concerns a family of channels of increasing dimension rather than a single,
fixed communication channel.) Or a non-local game for which the quantum
value enjoys a fixed jump if played with quantum entanglement dimension
larger than a fixed (but arbitrary large, possibly uncomputable) number.

Acknowledgments
   DPG acknowledges support from the Spanish Ministry of Science and
Innovation MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 (grants CEX2023-001347-S
and PID2020-113523GB-I00) and from Universidad Complutense de Madrid
(grant FEI-EU-22-06). MG acknowldges support from the CQT Bridging
Grant, the Singapore Ministry of Education Tier 1 Grants RG77/22 and
RT4/23, the Singapore Ministry of Education Tier 2 Grant MOE-T2EP50221-
0005, grant no. FQXi-RFP-1809 (The Role of Quantum Effects in Simplify-

                                       54
ing Quantum Agents) from the Foundational Questions Institute and Fetzer
Franklin Fund (a donor-advised fund of Silicon Valley Community Foun-
dation). This research was supported in part by Perimeter Institute for
Theoretical Physics. Research at Perimeter Institute is supported by the
Government of Canada through the Department of Innovation, Science, and
Economic Development, and by the Province of Ontario through the Ministry
of Colleges and Universities. MMW has been supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Ger-
many’s Excellence Strategy EXC-2111 390814868, and the SFB/Transregio
TRR 352 – Project-ID 470903074.

References
  [1] C. H. Bennett, Undecidable dynamics, Nature 346 (6285) (1990) 606–
      607.

  [2] R. Penrose, The Road to Reality : A Complete Guide to the Laws of
      the Universe, Random House, London, 2005.

  [3] A. Komar, Undecidability of macroscopically distinguishable states in
      quantum field theory, Physical Review 133 (1964) B542–B544.

  [4] R. Geroch, J. B. Hartle, Computability and physical theories, Founda-
      tions of Physics 16 (6) (1986) 533–550.

  [5] E. P. Wigner, The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the
      natural sciences, Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics
      13 (1) (1960) 1–14.

  [6] K. Svozil, Randomness and undecidability in physics, World Scientific,
      Singapore, 1994.

  [7] K. Svozil,   Undecidability everywhere?,      arXiv:chao-dyn/9509023
      (1995).

  [8] K. Svozil, The Church-Turing thesis as a guiding principle for physics,
      in: Unconventional Models of Computation. Edited by by Cristian S.
      Calude, John Casti and Michael J. Dinneen. Singapore, Springer, 1998.
      pp. 371-385, 1997, pp. 371–385.



                                     55
 [9] K. Svozil, Computational universes, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 25 (4)
     (2005) 845 – 859.

[10] K. Svozil, Physical unknowables, in: M. Baaz, C. H. Papadimitriou,
     H. W. Putnam, D. S. Scott, C. L. Harper (Eds.), Kurt Gödel and the
     Foundations of Mathematics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
     2011, pp. 213–251.

[11] K. Svozil, Physical (A)Causality - Determinism, Randomness and Un-
     caused Events, Springer Cham, 2018.

[12] G. Chaitin, F. Doria, N. da Costa, Gödel’s Way: Exploits into an
     undecidable world, CRC Press, 2011.

[13] C. H. Bennett, Universal computation and physical dynamics, Physica
     D: Nonlinear Phenomena 86 (1-2) (1995) 268–273.

[14] J. D. Barrow, Mathematical jujitsu: Some informal thoughts about
     Gödel and physics, Complexity 5 (5) (2000) 28–34.

[15] J. D. Barrow, Godel and physics, in: M. Baaz (Ed.), Kurt Gödel and
     the Foundations of Mathematics: Horizons of Truth, Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press, 2011, p. 255.

[16] C. S. Calude, D. I. Campbell, K. Svozil, D. Stefanescu, Strong de-
     terminism versus computability, in: The Foundational Debate. Com-
     plexity and Constructivity in Mathematics and Physics. Vienna Circle
     Institute Yearbook, Vol. 3, ed. by Werner DePauli Schimanovich, Eck-
     ehart Koehler and Friedrich Stadler, Springer Dordrecht, 1995, pp.
     115–131.

[17] C. S. Calude, Incompleteness, complexity, randomness and beyond,
     Minds and Machines 12 (4) (2002) 503–517.

[18] C. S. Calude, Algorithmic randomness, quantum physics, and incom-
     pleteness, in: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Ma-
     chines, Computations, and Universality, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Hei-
     delberg, 2005, pp. 1–17.

[19] C. S. Calude, M. A. Stay, From Heisenberg to Gödel via Chaitin, In-
     ternational Journal of Theoretical Physics 46 (8) (2007) 2013–2025.

                                    56
[20] S. Cooper, M. Soskova, The Incomputable: Journeys Beyond the Tur-
     ing Barrier, Springer Cham, 2017.

[21] M. Davis, Unsolvable problems, in: J. Barwise (Ed.), Handbook of
     Mathematical Logic, Vol. 90 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations
     of Mathematics, North-Holland, 1977, pp. 567 – 594.

[22] M. Margenstern, Frontier between decidability and undecidability: a
     survey, Theoretical Computer Science 231 (2) (2000) 217 – 251.

[23] B. Poonen, Undecidable problems: a sampler, in: J. Kennedy (Ed.),
     Interpreting Gödel, Cambridge University Press, 2014, pp. 211–241,
     cambridge Books Online.

[24] C. Goodman-Strauss, Can’t decide? Undecide!, Notices of the Ameri-
     can Mathematical Society 57 (01 2010).

[25] N. C. A. da Costa, F. A. Doria, Undecidability and incompleteness in
     classical mechanics, International Journal of Theoretical Physics 30 (8)
     (1991) 1041–1073.

[26] A. D. Irvine, H. Deutsch, Russell’s Paradox, in: E. N. Zalta (Ed.),
     The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Spring 2021 Edition, Meta-
     physics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2021.

[27] K. Gödel, Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathemat-
     ica und verwandter Systeme I, Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik
     38 (1) (1931) 173–198.

[28] P. Raatikainen, Gödel’s incompleteness theorems, in: E. N. Zalta,
     U. Nodelman (Eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Sum-
     mer 2025 Edition, Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
     2025.

[29] A. Church, An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory, Amer-
     ican Journal of Mathematics 58 (2) (1936) 345–363.

[30] A. Turing, On computable numbers, with an application to the
     Entscheidungsproblem, Proceedings of the London Mathematical So-
     ciety 42 (1) (1936) 230–265.


                                    57
[31] B. J. Copeland, The Church-Turing Thesis, in: E. N. Zalta, U. Nodel-
     man (Eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Winter 2024
     Edition, Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2024.

[32] B. J. Copeland, O. Shagrir, The Church-Turing thesis: Logical limit or
     breachable barrier?, Communications of the ACM 62 (1) (2019) 66–74.

[33] M. Nielsen, Interesting problems: The Church-Turing-Deutsch princi-
     ple (2004).
     URL                             http://michaelnielsen.org/blog/
     interesting-problems-the-church-turing-deutsch-principle/

[34] M. Davis, The Church-Turing thesis: Consensus and opposition, in:
     A. Beckmann, U. Berger, B. Löwe, J. V. Tucker (Eds.), Logical
     Approaches to Computational Barriers, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
     Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 125–132.

[35] H. G. Rice, Classes of recursively enumerable sets and their decision
     problems, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 74 (2)
     (1953) 358–366.

[36] J. E. Hopcroft, R. Motwani, J. D. Ullman, Introduction to Automata
     Theory, Languages, and Computation (3rd Edition), Addison-Wesley
     Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, USA, 2006.

[37] R. J. Solomonoff, A formal theory of inductive inference: Parts 1 and
     2, Information and Control 7 (1964) 1–22, 224–254.

[38] A. N. Kolmogorov, Three approaches to the quantitative definition of
     information, Problems of Information Transmission 1 (1) (1965) 1–7.

[39] G. Chaitin, On the length of programs for computing finite binary se-
     quences, Journal of the Association of Computing Machinery 13 (1966)
     547–569.

[40] C. S. Calude, Information and Randomness: An Algorithmic Perspec-
     tive, 2nd Edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2002.

[41] G. J. Chaitin, P. Davies, Thinking about Gödel and Turing. Essays on
     Complexity, 1970–2007, World Scientific, 2007.


                                   58
[42] C. Brukner, Quantum complementarity and logical indeterminacy,
     Natural Computing 8 (3) (2009) 449–453.

[43] T. Paterek, J. Kofler, R. Prevedel, P. Klimek, M. Aspelmeyer,
     A. Zeilinger, C. Brukner, Logical independence and quantum random-
     ness, New Journal of Physics 12 (1) (2010) 013019.

[44] J. M. A. Trejo, C. S. Calude, M. J. Dinneen, A. Fedorov, A. Kulikov,
     R. Navarathna, K. Svozil, How real is incomputability in physics?,
     arXiv:2311.00908 (2023).

[45] J. Purcell, Z. Li, T. Cubitt, Chaitin phase transition, arXiv:2410.02600
     (2024).

[46] G. J. Chaitin, Algorithmic Information Theory – third printing, Cam-
     bridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003.

[47] M. Li, P. M. Vitnyi, An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and
     Its Applications, 3rd Edition, Springer New York, 2008.

[48] J. R. N. Ernest Nagel, Godel’s Proof, NYU Press, 2001.

[49] T. Franzén, Gödel’s Theorem: An Incomplete Guide to Its Use and
     Abuse, A K Peters/CRC Press, 2005.

[50] P. J. Cohen, Set theory and the continuum hypothesis, Dover Publica-
     tions, 2008.

[51] P. Smith, An Introduction to Gödel’s Theorems, Cambridge University
     Press, New York, 2007.

[52] U. V. E. Bernstein, Quantum complexity theory, SIAM Journal on
     Computing 26 (5) (1997) 1411–1473.

[53] M. Sipser, Introduction to the Theory of Computation (3rd Edition),
     3rd Edition, Wadsworth Publishing Co Inc, 2012.

[54] N. Shapiro, Degrees of computability, Transactions of the American
     Mathematical Society 82 (2) (1956) 281–299.

[55] S. Oberhoff, Incompleteness ex machina, arXiv:1909.04569 (2019).


                                    59
[56] S. Aaronson, A. Yedidia, A relatively small turing machine whose be-
     havior is independent of set theory, Complex Systems 25 (2016).

[57] S.      O’Rear,       https://github.com/sorear/metamath-turing-
     machines/blob/master/zf2.nql (2016).

[58] A. Wiles, Modular elliptic curves and Fermat’s last theorem, Annals
     of Mathematics 141 (3) (1995) 443–551.

[59] R. Taylor, A. Wiles, Ring-theoretic properties of certain Hecke alge-
     bras, Annals of Mathematics 141 (3) (1995) 553–572.

[60] Y. V. Matiyasevich, Hilbert’s Tenth Problem, MIT Press, Cambridge,
     MA, USA, 1993.

[61] M. Davis, H. Putnam, J. Robinson, The decision problem for expo-
     nential Diophantine equations, Annals of Mathematics 74 (3) (1961)
     425–436.

[62] N. C. A. da Costa, F. A. Doria, Classical physics and Penrose’s thesis,
     Foundations of Physics Letters 4 (4) (1991) 363–373.

[63] D. I. Bondar, A. N. Pechen, Uncomputability and complexity of quan-
     tum control, Scientific Reports 10 (1) (2020) 1–10.

[64] Y. Tachikawa, Undecidable problems in quantum field theory, Interna-
     tional Journal of Theoretical Physics 62 (2023) 199.

[65] E. L. Post, A variant of a recursively unsolvable problem, Bulletin of
     the American Mathematical Society 52 (4) (1946) 264 – 268.

[66] M. Paterson, Unsolvability in 3 x 3 matrices, Studies in Applied Math-
     ematics 49 (1970) 105–107.

[67] V. D. Blondel, J. N. Tsitsiklis, A survey of computational complexity
     results in systems and control, Automatica 36 (9) (2000) 1249–1274.

[68] M. Kliesch, D. Gross, J. Eisert, Matrix-Product Operators and States:
     NP-hardness and undecidability, Physical Review Letters 113 (2014)
     160503.



                                    60
[69] G. De las Cuevas, T. S. Cubitt, J. I. Cirac, M. M. Wolf, D. Pérez-
     Garcı́a, Fundamental limitations in the purifications of tensor networks,
     Journal of Mathematical Physics 57 (7) (2016) 071902.

[70] J. Eisert, M. P. Müller, C. Gogolin, Quantum measurement occurrence
     is undecidable, Physical Review Letters 108 (2012) 260501.

[71] P. S. Novikov, On the algorithmic unsolvability of the word problem in
     group theory, Trudy Matematicheskogo Instituta imeni V.A. Steklova
     (Russian) 44 (1955) 3–143.

[72] W. W. Boone, The word problem, Annals of Mathematics 70 (2) (1959)
     207–265.

[73] J. Morton, J. Biamonte, Undecidability in tensor network states, Phys-
     ical Review A 86 (2012) 030301.

[74] W. Slofstra, The set of quantum correlations is not closed, Forum of
     Mathematics, Pi 7 (2019).

[75] W. Slofstra, Tsirelson’s problem and an embedding theorem for groups
     arising from non-local games, Journal of the American Mathematical
     Society 33 (1) (2020) 1–56.

[76] T. Fritz, Quantum logic is undecidable, Archive for Mathematical Logic
     60 (2021) 329–341.

[77] L. Mančinska, D. E. Roberson, Quantum isomorphism is equivalent to
     equality of homomorphism counts from planar graphs, in: 2020 IEEE
     61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
     IEEE, 2020, pp. 661–672.

[78] H. Fu, C. A. Miller, W. Slofstra, The membership problem for constant-
     sized quantum correlations is undecidable, arXiv:2101.11087 (2021).

[79] H. Wang, Proving theorems by pattern recognition – II, The Bell Sys-
     tem Technical Journal 40 (1) (1961) 1–41.

[80] R. M. Robinson, Undecidability and nonperiodicity for tilings of the
     plane, Inventiones Mathematicae 12 (3) (1971) 177–209.



                                     61
[81] I. Kanter, Undecidability principle and the uncertainty principle even
     for classical systems, Physical Review Letters 64 (1990) 332–335.

[82] T. S. Cubitt, D. Perez-Garcia, M. M. Wolf, Undecidability of the spec-
     tral gap, Nature 528 (2015) 207.

[83] G. Scarpa, A. Molnár, Y. Ge, J. J. Garcı́a-Ripoll, N. Schuch, D. Pérez-
     Garcı́a, S. Iblisdir, Projected entangled pair states: Fundamental an-
     alytical and numerical limitations, Physical Review Letters 125 (21)
     (2020) 210504.

[84] B. Grünbaum, G. C. Shephard, Tilings and Patterns, W. H. Freeman
     & Co., New York, NY, USA, 1986.

[85] M. Gardner, Mathematical Games: The fantastic combinations of John
     Conway’s new solitaire game ”life”, Scientific American 223 (1970) 120–
     123.

[86] P. Rendell, Turing Machine Universality of the Game of Life, 1st Edi-
     tion, Springer Cham, 2015.

[87] S. J. Blundell, Emergence, causation and storytelling: condensed mat-
     ter physics and the limitations of the human mind, Philosophica 92 (2)
     (2017).

[88] M. Cook, Universality in elementary cellular automata, Complex Sys-
     tems 15 (2004).

[89] S. Wolfram, Universality and complexity in cellular automata, Physica
     D: Nonlinear Phenomena 10 (1984) 1–35.

[90] S. Wolfram, Undecidability and intractability in theoretical physics,
     Physical Review Letters 54 (1985) 735–738.

[91] S. Wolfram, A New Kind of Science, Wolfram Media Inc., Champaign,
     Ilinois, US, United States, 2002.

[92] A. Smith, The prize is won; the simplest universal turing ma-
     chine is proved, https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2007/10/
     the-prize-is-won-the-simplest-universal-turing-machine-is-proved/
     (2007).


                                     62
 [93] J. Kari, Rice’s theorem for the limit sets of cellular automata, Theo-
      retical Computer Science 127 (2) (1994) 229 – 254.

 [94] J. Kari, Decidability and undecidability in cellular automata, Interna-
      tional Journal of General Systems 41 (6) (2012) 539–554.

 [95] S. Omohundro, Modelling cellular automata with partial differential
      equations, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 10 (1) (1984) 128 – 134.

 [96] M. Gu, C. Weedbrook, A. Perales, M. A. Nielsen, More really is differ-
      ent, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 238 (9–10) (2009) 835 – 839.

 [97] M. Gu, A. Perales, Encoding universal computation in the ground
      states of Ising lattices, Physical Review E 86 (2012) 011116.

 [98] N. Israeli, N. Goldenfeld, Computational irreducibility and the pre-
      dictability of complex physical systems, Physical Review Letters 92
      (2004) 074105.

 [99] N. Israeli, N. Goldenfeld, Coarse-graining of cellular automata, emer-
      gence, and the predictability of complex systems, Physical Review E
      73 (2) (2006) 026203.

[100] K. R. Popper, Indeterminism in quantum physics and in classical
      physics, parts I-II, The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
      1 (2-3) (1950) 117,173.

[101] R. Schlegel, Completeness in Science, Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1967.

[102] M. Zwick, Quantum measurement and Gödel’s proof, Speculations in
      Science and Technology 1 (2) (1978) 35–145.

[103] J. Rothstein, Physics of selective systems: Computation and biology,
      International Journal of Theoretical Physics 21 (3) (1982) 327–350.

[104] M. B. Pour-El, I. Richards, The wave equation with computable ini-
      tial data such that its unique solution is not computable, Advances in
      Mathematics 39 (3) (1981) 215 – 239.

[105] E. Fredkin, T. Toffoli, Conservative logic, International Journal of The-
      oretical Physics 21 (3) (1982) 219–253.


                                      63
[106] W. Haken, Connections between topological and group theoretical de-
      cision problems, in: W. W. Boone, R. C. Lyndon, F. B. Cannonito
      (Eds.), Word problems: Decision problems and the Burnside problem
      in group theory, no. 71 in Studies in Logic and the Foundations of
      Mathematics, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1973, pp. 427–441.
[107] C. Moore, Unpredictability and undecidability in dynamical systems,
      Physical Review Letters 64 (1990) 2354–2357.
[108] C. Moore, Generalized shifts: unpredictability and undecidability in
      dynamical systems, Nonlinearity 4 (2) (1991) 199.
[109] D. Richardson, Some undecidable problems involving elementary func-
      tions of a real variable, Journal of Symbolic Logic 33 (4) (1968) 514–
      520.
[110] P. S. Wang, The undecidability of the existence of zeros of real elemen-
      tary functions, Journal of the ACM 21 (4) (1974) 586–589.
[111] I. Stewart, Deciding the undecidable, Nature 352 (6337) (1991) 664–
      665.
[112] N. C. A. da Costa, F. A. Doria, J. A. de Barros, A Suppes predicate
      for general relativity and set-theoretically generic spacetimes, Interna-
      tional Journal of Theoretical Physics 29 (9) (1990) 935–961.
[113] F. A. Doria, M. Doria, Einstein, Gödel, and the mathematics of time,
      Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 290 (2011) 269–279.
[114] V. D. Blondel, O. Bournez, P. Koiran, C. H. Papadimitriou, J. N. Tsit-
      siklis, Deciding stability and mortality of piecewise affine dynamical
      systems, Theoretical Computer Science 255 (1) (2001) 687–696.
[115] V. D. Blondel, O. Bournez, P. Koiran, J. N. Tsitsiklis, The stability
      of saturated linear dynamical systems is undecidable, Journal of Com-
      puter and System Sciences 62 (3) (2001) 442–462.
[116] S. Lloyd, Quantum-mechanical computers and uncomputability, Phys-
      ical Review Letters 71 (1993) 943–946.
[117] S. Lloyd, Necessary and sufficient conditions for quantum computation,
      Journal of Modern Optics 41 (12) (1994) 2503–2520.

                                      64
[118] S. Lloyd, On the uncomputability of the spectral gap, arXiv:1602.05924
      (2016).

[119] T. S. Cubitt, D. Perez-Garcia, M. M. Wolf, Comment on “on the un-
      computability of the spectral gap”, arXiv:1603.00825 (2016).

[120] T. Cubitt, D. Perez-Garcia, M. M. Wolf, Undecidability of the spectral
      gap (full version), Forum of Mathematics, Pi 10 (2022) e14.

[121] A. Hansen, On the solvability complexity index, the n-pseudospectrum
      and approximations of spectra of operators, Journal of the American
      Mathematical Society 24 (1) (2011) 81–124.

[122] T. C. Hales, A proof of the Kepler conjecture, Annals of Mathematics
      (2005) 1065–1185.

[123] T. Hales, M. Adams, G. Bauer, T. D. Dang, J. Harrison, H. Le Truong,
      C. Kaliszyk, V. Magron, S. McLaughlin, T. T. Nguyen, et al., A formal
      proof of the Kepler conjecture, Forum of Mathematics, Pi 5 (2017) e2.

[124] M. J. Colbrook, A. C. Hansen, The foundations of spectral compu-
      tations via the solvability complexity index hierarchy, Journal of the
      European Mathematical Society 25 (12) (2022) 4639–4718.

[125] E. Schrödinger, A method of determining quantum-mechanical eigen-
      values and eigenfunctions, Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy.
      Section A: Mathematical and Physical Sciences 46 (1940) 9–16.

[126] J. Bausch, T. S. Cubitt, A. Lucia, D. Perez-Garcia, Undecidability of
      the spectral gap in one dimension, Physical Review X 10 (3) (2020)
      031038.

[127] J. Bausch, T. S. Cubitt, J. D. Watson, Uncomputability of phase dia-
      grams, Nature Communications 12 (2021) 452.

[128] J. D. Watson, E. Onorati, T. S. Cubitt, Uncomputably complex renor-
      malisation group flows, Nature Communications 13 (2022).

[129] T. S. Cubitt, A note on the second spectral gap incompleteness theo-
      rem, arXiv:2105.09854 (2021).



                                    65
[130] G. J. Chaitin, A theory of program size formally identical to informa-
      tion theory, Journal of the ACM (JACM) 22 (3) (1975) 329–340.

[131] N. Shiraishi, K. Matsumoto, Undecidability in quantum thermaliza-
      tion, Nature Communications 12 (2021) 5084.

[132] N. Shiraishi, K. Matsumoto, Undecidability of the fate of relaxation in
      one-dimensional quantum systems, arXiv:2012.13890 (2020).

[133] J. I. Cirac, D. Perez-Garcia, N. Schuch, F. Verstraete, Matrix prod-
      uct states and projected entangled pair states: Concepts, symmetries,
      theorems, Reviews of Modern Physics 93 (4) (2021) 045003.

[134] M. Hastings, Solving gapped hamiltonians locally, Physical Review B
      73 (8) (2006) 085115.

[135] M. Hastings, An area law for one-dimensional quantum systems, Jour-
      nal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2007 (08) (2007)
      P08024.

[136] A. Cichocki, N. Lee, I. Oseledets, A.-H. Phan, Q. Zhao, D. P. Mandic,
      Tensor networks for dimensionality reduction and large-scale opti-
      mization: Part 1 low-rank tensor decompositions, Foundations and
      Trends® in Machine Learning 9 (4-5) (2016) 249–429.

[137] A. Cichocki, A.-H. Phan, Q. Zhao, N. Lee, I. V. Oseledets,
      M. Sugiyama, D. Mandic, Tensor networks for dimensionality reduction
      and large-scale optimizations: Part 2 applications and future perspec-
      tives, Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning 9 (6) (2017)
      431–673.

[138] F. Verstraete, J. J. Garcia-Ripoll, J. I. Cirac, Matrix product density
      operators: Simulation of finite-temperature and dissipative systems,
      Physical Review Letters 93 (20) (2004) 207204.

[139] M. Sanz, D. Perez-Garcia, M. M. Wolf, J. I. Cirac, A quantum version
      of Wielandt’s inequality, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory
      56 (9) (2010) 4668–4673.

[140] M. M. Wolf, T. S. Cubitt, D. Perez-Garcia, Are problems in quantum
      information theory (un)decidable?, arXiv:1111.5425 (2011).

                                     66
[141] M. Van den Nest, H. J. Briegel, Measurement-based quantum com-
      putation and undecidable logic, Foundations of Physics 38 (5) (2008)
      448–457.

[142] R. Raussendorf, H. J. Briegel, A one-way quantum computer, Physical
      Review Letters 86 (22) (2001) 5188.

[143] D. Gross, J. Eisert, N. Schuch, D. Perez-Garcia, Measurement-based
      quantum computation beyond the one-way model, Physical Review A
      76 (5) (2007) 052315.

[144] B. Courcelle, S.-i. Oum, Vertex-minors, monadic second-order logic,
      and a conjecture by Seese, Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B
      97 (1) (2007) 91–126.

[145] D. Seese, The structure of the models of decidable monadic theories of
      graphs, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 53 (2) (1991) 169–195.

[146] M. Hirvensalo, Improved undecidability results on the emptiness prob-
      lem of probabilistic and quantum cut-point languages, in: International
      Conference on Current Trends in Theory and Practice of Computer Sci-
      ence, Springer, 2007, pp. 309–319.

[147] H. Gimbert, Y. Oualhadj, Probabilistic automata on finite words: De-
      cidable and undecidable problems, in: International Colloquium on
      Automata, Languages, and Programming, Springer, 2010, pp. 527–538.

[148] D. Elkouss, D. Pérez-Garcı́a, Memory effects can make the transmission
      capability of a communication channel uncomputable, Nature Commu-
      nications 9 (2018) 1149.

[149] H. Boche, R. F. Schaefer, H. V. Poor, Shannon meets Turing: Non-
      computability and non-approximability of the finite state channel ca-
      pacity, Communications in Information and Systems 20 (2) (2020) 81–
      116.

[150] H. Boche, U. J. Mönich, Algorithmic computability of the signal band-
      width, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 67 (4) (2021) 2450–
      2471.



                                     67
[151] H. Boche, C. Deppe, Computability of the zero-error capacity of noisy
      channels, in: 2021 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), IEEE,
      2021, pp. 1–6.

[152] H. Rice, Recursive real numbers, Proceedings of the American Mathe-
      matical Socciety (1954) 784–791.

[153] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, N. Rosen, Can quantum-mechanical de-
      scription of physical reality be considered complete?, Physical Review
      47 (10) (1935) 777.

[154] J. S. Bell, On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox, Physics Physique
      Fizika 1 (3) (1964) 195.

[155] A. Aspect, Closing the door on Einstein and Bohr’s quantum debate,
      Physics 8 (2015) 123.

[156] A. Aspect, P. Grangier, G. Roger, Experimental tests of realistic local
      theories via bell’s theorem, Physical Review Letters 47 (7) (1981) 460–
      463.

[157] A. Aspect, J. Dalibard, G. Roger, Experimental test of bell inequalities
      using time-varying analyzers, Physical Review Letters 49 (25) (1982)
      1804–1807.

[158] B. Hensen, H. Bernien, A. E. Dréau, A. Reiserer, N. Kalb, M. S. Blok,
      J. Ruitenberg, R. F. Vermeulen, R. N. Schouten, C. Abellán, et al.,
      Loophole-free Bell inequality violation using electron spins separated
      by 1.3 kilometres, Nature 526 (7575) (2015) 682–686.

[159] M. Giustina, M. A. Versteegh, S. Wengerowsky, J. Handsteiner,
      A. Hochrainer, K. Phelan, F. Steinlechner, J. Kofler, J.-Å. Larsson,
      C. Abellán, et al., Significant-loophole-free test of bell2̆019s theo-
      rem with entangled photons, Physical Review Letters 115 (25) (2015)
      250401.

[160] L. K. Shalm, E. Meyer-Scott, B. G. Christensen, P. Bierhorst, M. A.
      Wayne, M. J. Stevens, T. Gerrits, S. Glancy, D. R. Hamel, M. S. All-
      man, et al., Strong loophole-free test of local realism, Physical Review
      Letters 115 (25) (2015) 250402.


                                     68
[161] V. Zapatero, T. van Leent, R.Arnon-Friedman, W.-Z. Liu, Q. Zhang,
      H. Weinfurter, M. Curty, Advances in device-independent quantum key
      distribution, npj quantum information 9 (1) (2023) 10.

[162] S. Pironio, A. Acin, S. Massar, A. de La Giroday, D. Matsukevich,
      P. Maunz, S. Olmschenk, D. Hayes, L. Luo, T. Manning, et al., Random
      numbers certified by Bell’s theorem, Nature 464 (7291) (2010) 1021–
      1024.

[163] Y. Liu, Q. Zhao, M.-H. Li, J.-Y. Guan, Y. Zhang, B. Bai, W. Zhang,
      W.-Z. Liu, C. Wu, X. Yuan, et al., Device-independent quantum
      random-number generation, Nature 562 (7728) (2018) 548–551.

[164] H. Buhrman, R. Cleve, S. Massar, R. De Wolf, Nonlocality and com-
      munication complexity, Reviews of Modern Physics 82 (1) (2010) 665.

[165] C. Palazuelos, T. Vidick, Survey on nonlocal games and operator space
      theory, Journal of Mathematical Physics 57 (1) (2016).

[166] A. Atserias, L. Mančinska, D. E. Roberson, R. Šámal, S. Severini,
      A. Varvitsiotis, Quantum and non-signalling graph isomorphisms,
      Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B 136 (2019) 289–328.

[167] Z. Ji, A. Natarajan, T. Vidick, J. Wright, H. Yuen, MIP*= RE,
      arXiv:2001.04383 (2020).

[168] M. Navascués, S. Pironio, A. Acı́n, A convergent hierarchy of semidef-
      inite programs characterizing the set of quantum correlations, New
      Journal of Physics 10 (7) (2008) 073013.

[169] J. Fitzsimons, Z. Ji, T. Vidick, H. Yuen, Quantum proof systems for
      iterated exponential time, and beyond, in: Proceedings of the 51st
      Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, 2019,
      pp. 473–480.

[170] M. Junge, M. Navascues, C. Palazuelos, D. Perez-Garcia, V. B. Scholz,
      R. F. Werner, Connes’ embedding problem and Tsirelson’s problem,
      Journal of Mathematical Physics 52 (1) (2011) 012102.

[171] T. Fritz, Tsirelson’s problem and Kirchberg’s conjecture, Reviews in
      Mathematical Physics 24 (05) (2012) 1250012.

                                     69
[172] V. J. Wright, M. Farkas, Invertible map between Bell nonlocal and con-
      textuality scenarios, Physical Review Letters 131 (22) (2023) 220202.

[173] A. Bendersky, G. Senno, G. de la Torre, S. Figueira, A. Acin, Non-
      signaling deterministic models for non-local correlations have to be
      uncomputable, Physical Review Letters 118 (2017) 130401.

[174] T. Zeugmann, S. Zilles, Learning recursive functions: A survey, Theo-
      retical Computer Science 397 (1) (2008) 4–56.

[175] T. Cubitt, D. Elkouss, W. Matthews, M. Ozols, D. Pérez-Garcı́a,
      S. Strelchuk, Unbounded number of channel uses may be required to
      detect quantum capacity, Nature Communications 6 (1) (2015) 1–4.

[176] T. Tao, Finite time blowup for an averaged three-dimensional Navier-
      Stokes equation, Journal of the American Mathematical Society 29 (3)
      (2016) 601–674.

[177] T. Tao, On the universality of potential well dynamics, Dynamics of
      Partial Differential Equations 14 (3) (2017) 219–238.

[178] T. Tao, On the universality of the incompressible Euler equation
      on compact manifolds, Discrete & Continuous Dynamical Systems-A
      38 (3) (2018) 1553.

[179] T. Tao, On the universality of the incompressible Euler equation on
      compact manifolds II. Non-rigidity of Euler flows, arXiv:1902.06313
      (2019).

[180] T. Tao, Searching for singularities in the Navier–Stokes equations, Na-
      ture Reviews Physics 1 (7) (2019) 418–419.

[181] R. Cardona, E. Miranda, D. Peralta-Salas, F. Presas, Constructing
      Turing complete Euler flows in dimension 3, Proceedings of the Na-
      tional Academy of Sciences 118 (19) (2021) e2026818118.

[182] R. Cardona, E. Miranda, D. Peralta-Salas, Computability and Bel-
      trami fields in Euclidean space, Journal de Mathématiques Pures et
      Appliquées 169 (2023) 50–81.




                                     70
[183] D. Aharonov, S. Irani, Hamiltonian complexity in the thermodynamic
      limit, in: Proceedings of the 54th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium
      on Theory of Computing, 2022, pp. 750–763.
[184] J. D. Watson, T. S. Cubitt, Computational complexity of the ground
      state energy density problem, in: Proceedings of the 54th Annual ACM
      SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2022), 2022, pp.
      764–775.
[185] A. Klingler, M. van der Eyden, S. Stengele, T. Reinhart, G. de las
      Cuevas, Many bounded versions of undecidable problems are NP-hard,
      SciPost Physics 14 (2023) 173.
[186] M. Wolf, Gödel-Turing barriers for microscopic descriptions of the
      macroscopic world (2023).
[187] Y. Dong, H. Fu, A. Natarajan, M. Qin, H. Xu, P. Yao, The com-
      putational advantage of MIP* vanishes in the presence of noise,
      arXiv:2312.04360 (2023).
[188] M. Qin, P. Yao, Nonlocal games with noisy maximally entangled states
      are decidable, SIAM Journal on Computing 50 (6) (2021) 1800–1891.
[189] M. Qin, P. Yao, Decidability of fully quantum nonlocal games with
      noisy maximally entangled states, in: 50th International Colloquium
      on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2023), Schloss
      Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023, p. 97:1–97:20.
[190] L. Blum, F. Cucker, M. Shub, S. Smale, Complexity and real compu-
      tation, Springer New York, 1998.
[191] D. Hofstadter, Energy levels and wave functions of Bloch electrons in
      rational and irrational magnetic fields, Physical Review B 14 (6) (1976)
      2239.
[192] M. Fannes, B. Nachtergaele, R. F. Werner, Finitely correlated states
      on quantum spin chains, Communications in Mathematical Physics
      144 (3) (1992) 443–490.
[193] V. Blakaj, M. M. Wolf, On the set of reduced states of translation
      invariant, infinite quantum systems, Letters in Mathematical Physics
      114 (1) (2024) 28.

                                     71
[194] J. Bausch, T. S. Cubitt, A. Lucia, D. Perez-Garcia, M. M. Wolf,
      Size-driven quantum phase transitions, Proceedings of the National
      Academy of Sciences 115 (1) (2018) 19–23.




                                  72
