                                        Aspects of Nonabelian Group Based Cryptography:
                                                   A Survey and Open Problems
arXiv:1103.4093v2 [cs.CR] 22 Mar 2011




                                                                       Benjamin Fine
                                                               Department of Mathematics
                                                                     Fairfield University
                                                       Fairfield, Connecticut 06430, United States
                                                                   fine@mail.fairfield.edu
                                                                    Maggie Habeeb
                                                               Department of Mathematics
                                                              City University of New York
                                                            New York, NY 10016,United States
                                                                 mhabeeb@gc.cuny.edu
                                                                  Delaram Kahrobaei
                                                            Department of Computer Science
                                                              City University of New York
                                                            New York,Ny 10016, United States
                                                                dkahrobaei@gc.cuny.edu
                                                                  Gerhard Rosenberger
                                                                Fachbereich Mathematik
                                                                     TU Dortmund
                                                               Dortmund 44227, Germany
                                                       gerhard.rosenberger@math.dortmund-uni.de

                                                                             Abstract
                                            Most common public key cryptosystems and public key exchange protocols presently
                                        in use, such as the RSA algorithm, Diffie-Hellman, and elliptic curve methods are num-
                                        ber theory based and hence depend on the structure of abelian groups. The strength
                                        of computing machinery has made these techniques theoretically susceptible to attack
                                        and hence recently there has been an active line of research to develop cryptosystems
                                        and key exchange protocols using noncommutative cryptographic platforms. This line
                                        of investigation has been given the broad title of noncommutative algebraic cryp-
                                        tography. This was initiated by two public key protocols that used the braid groups,
                                        one by Ko, Lee et.al.and one by Anshel, Anshel and Goldfeld. The study of these
                                        protocols and the group theory surrounding them has had a large effect on research


                                                                                  1
      in infinite group theory. In this paper we survey these noncommutative group based
      methods and discuss several ideas in abstract infinite group theory that have arisen
      from them. We then present a set of open problems.
                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
    1. Introduction and Nonabelian Group Cryptography
    2. The Basics of Public Key Cryptography
    3. Fundamentals of Free Group Cryptography
    4. Public Key Exchange Using Nonabelian Groups
    5. A Key Transport Protocol Based on a Shamir Three Pass
    6. Digitial Signatures, Authentication and Password Verification
    7. Braid Group Cryptography and General Platform Groups
    8. Cryptography with Polycyclic Groups
    9. Generic Complexity and Asymptotic Density
    10. The Generic Free Group Property
    11. Open Problems in Nonabelian Group Based Cryptography


1     Introduction and Nonabelian Group Based Cryptog-
      raphy
Traditionally cryptography is the science and/or art of devising and implementing secret
codes or cryptosystems. Cryptanalysis is the science and/or art of breaking cryptosys-
tems while cryptology refers to the whole field of cryptography plus cryptanalysis. In most
modern literature cryptography is used synonomously with cryptology. Presently there is
an increasing need for secure cryptosystems due to the use of internet shopping, electronic
financial transfers and so on.
Most common public key cryptosystems and public key exchange protocols presently in use,
such as the RSA algorithm, Diffie-Hellman, and elliptic curve methods are number theory
based and hence theoretically depend on the structure of abelian groups. Although there
have been no successful attacks on the standard protocols there is a feeling that the strength
of computing machinery has made these techniques less secure. As a result of this there has
been an active line of research to develop and analyze new cryptosystems and key exchange
protocols based on noncommutative cryptographic platforms. This line of investigation has
been given the broad title of noncommutative algebraic cryptography (see [MSU]).
Up to this point the main sources for noncommutative cryptographic platforms has been
nonabelian groups. In cryptosystems based on these objects algebraic properties of the
platforms are used prominently in both devising cryptosystems and in cryptanalysis. In
particular the difficulty, in a complexity sense, of certain algorithmic problems in finitely
presented groups, such as the conjugator search problem, has been crucial in encryption and
decryption.
The main sources for nonabelian groups are combinatorial group theory and linear group
theory. Braid group cryptography (see [D]), where encryption is done within the classical


                                               2
braid groups, is one prominent example. The one way functions in braid group systems are
based on the difficulty of solving group theoretic decision problems such as the conjugacy
problem and conjugator search problem. Although braid group cryptography had initial
spectacular success, various potential attacks have been identified. Borovik, Myasnikov,
Shpilrain [BMS] and others have studied the statistical aspects of these attacks and have
identitifed what are termed black holes in the platform groups outside of which present
cryptographic problems. Baumslag. Fine and Xu in [BFX] and [X] suggested potential
cryptosystems using a combination of combinatorial group theory and linear groups and a
general schema for these types of cryptosystems was given. In [BFX 2] a public key version of
this schema using the classical modular group as a platform was presented. A cryptosystem
using the the extended modular group SL2 (Z) was developed by Yamamura ([Y]) but was
subsequently shown to have loopholes ([BG], [S], [HGS]). In [BFX 2] attacks based on these
loopholes were closed.
The study and cryptanalysis of potential platform groups has had a strong positive effect on
both group theory and complexity theory. Motivated in large part by cryptography, there
has been tremendous interest in asymptotic group theory and generic properties (see
sections 9 and 10).
In this article we will present an overview of these combinatorial group theoretic methods.
We will introduce free group cryptography and then the seminal Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld
and Ko-Lee Protocols. We will further discuss how to use combinatorial group theory in
digital signatures and password verification. Then we will discuss potential platform groups
and give a brief review of braid group cryptography. Next we introduce asymptotic density
and its application to cryptanalysis and evaluation of cryptosystems. In particular we will
look at some theoretical results concerning the generic free group property. Finally a list of
open problems (in no way exhaustive) in this area will be presented.
There are several recent books on this area. The most comprehensive is by Myasnikov,
Shpilrain and Ushakov [MSU]. In this article we touch on several topics that are not men-
tioned in that book, for example polycylic group cryptography, digital signature protocols
and password authentication and the generic free group property.


2    Basics of Public Key Cryptography
In this section we describe the standard terminology used in cryptography and then intro-
duce the two most common public key methods, the Diffie-Hellman protocol and the RSA
protocol.
In general both the plaintext message (uncoded message) and the ciphertext message
( coded message) are written in some N -letter alphabet which is usually the same for both
plaintext and code. The method of coding or the encoding algorithm is then a transformation
of the N -letters. The most common way to perform this transformation is to consider the
N letters as N integers modulo N and then perform a number theoretical function on
them. Therefore most encoding algorithms use modular arithmetic and hence cryptography
is closely tied to number theory.


                                              3
Modern cryptography is usually separated into classical or symmetric key cryptography
and public key cryptography. In the former, both the encoding and decoding algorithms
are supposedly known only to the sender and receiver, usually referred to as Bob and Alice.
In the latter, the encryption method is public knowledge but only the receiver knows how
to decode.
The process of putting the plaintext message into code is called enciphering or encryption
while the reverse process is called deciphering or decryption. Encryption algorithms
partition the plaintext and ciphertext message into message units. These are single letters
or pairs of letters or more generally k-vectors of letters. The transformations are done on
these message units and the encryption algorithm is a mapping from the set of plaintext
message units to the set of ciphertext message units. Putting this into a mathematical
formulation we let

                      P = {set of all plaintext message units } and
                        C = { set of all ciphertext message units }.
The encryption algorithm is then the application of an invertible function

                                        f : P 7→ C.

The function f is the encryption map. The inverse

                                       f −1 : C 7→ P

is the decryption or deciphering map. The triple {P, C, f }, consisting of a set of plain-
text message units, a set of cipertext message units and an encryption map is called a
cryptosystem.
Breaking a code is called cryptanalysis. An attempt to break a code is called an attack.
Most cryptanalysis starts with a statistical frequency analysis of the plaintext language
used. Cryptanalysis depends also on a knowledge of the form of the code, that is, the type
of cryptosystem used (see [K] or [MSU]).
Most classical cryptosystems are number theoretically derived crytosystems. In applying
a cryptosystem to an N letter alphabet we consider the letters as integers mod N . The
encryption algorithms then apply number theoretic functions and use modular arithmetic
on these integers.
We usually do not use a single letter at a time but rather a sequence of k letters. The k
letters are then a message unit. An encryption algorithm is then a function

                                       f : ZkN 7→ Zm
                                                   N


Presently there are many instances where secure information must be sent over open com-
munication lines. These include for example banking and financial transactions, purchasing
items via credit cards over the internet and similar things. This led to the development of
public key cryptography. Roughly, in classical cryptography only the sender and receiver

                                             4
know the encoding and decoding methods. Further it is a feature of such cryptosystems
that if the encrypting method is known the decrypting can be carried out.
In public key cryptography the encryption method is public knowledge but only the
receiver knows how to decode. More precisely in a classical cryptosystem once the encrypting
algorithm is known the decryption algorithm can be implemented in approximately the same
order of magnitude of time. In a public the decryption algorithm is much more difficult to
implement. This difficulty depends on the type of computing machinery used ( much as
primality testing) and as computers get more powerful, new and more secure pulic key
cryptosystems become necessary.
The basic idea in a public key cryptosystem is to have a one-way function. That is a
function which is easy to implement but very hard to invert. Hence it becomes simple to
encrypt a message but very hard, unless you know the inverse, to decrypt.
The standard model for a public key cryptosystem is the following. Alice wants to send
a message to Bob. The encrypting map fA for Alice is public knowledge as well as the
encrypting map fB for Bob. On the other hand the decryption algorithms fA−1 and fB−1 are
secret and known only to Alice and Bob respectively. Let P be the message Alice wants to
send to Bob. She sends fB fA−1 (P). To decode Bob applies first fB−1 , which only he knows.
This gives him fB−1 (fB fA−1 (P)) = fA−1 (P). He then looks up fA which is publically available
and applies this fA (fA−1 (P)) = P to obtain the message.
Alice sends fB fA−1 (P) rather than just fB (P) for authentication, that is being certain
from Bob’s point of view that the message really came from Alice. Suppose P is Alice’s
verification; signature, social security number etc.. If Bob receives fB (P) it could be sent by
anyone since fB is public. On the other hand since only Alice supposedly knows fA−1 getting
a reasonable message from fA (fB−1 fB fA−1 (P)) would verify that it is from Alice. Applying
fB−1 alone should result in nonsense.
Getting a reasonable one way function can be a formidable task. The most widely used (at
present) public key systems are based on the difficulty of inverting certain number theoretic
functions. The first real public key protocol was developed in 1976 by Diffie and Hellman
using the difficulty of the discrete log problem.
In modular arithmetic it is easy to raise an element to a power but difficult to determine,
given an element, if it is a power of another element. Specifically if G is a finite group, such
as the cyclic multiplicative group of Zp where p is a prime, and h = g k for some k then
the discrete log of h to the base g is any integer t with h = g t . The rough form of the
Diffie-Helman public key system is as follows.
Bob and Alice will use a classical cryptosystem based on a key k with 1 < k < q − 1 where q
is a prime. It is the key k that Alice must send to Bob. Let g be a multiplicative generator
of Z⋆q . Alice chooses an a ∈ Zq with 1 < a < q − 1. She makes public g a . Bob chooses a
b ∈ Z⋆q and makes public g b . The secret key is g ab . Both Bob and Alice, but presumably
noone else, can discover this key. Alice knows her secret power a and the value g b is public
from Bob. Hence she can compute the key g ab = (g b )a . The analogous situation holds
for Bob. An attacker however only knows g, g a and g b . Unless the attacker can solve the
discrete log problem, that is finding a or b the key exchange is secure.

                                               5
Notice that this depends upon
                                         (g a )b = (g b )a
As we will see, the Ko-Lee protocol exactly mimics the Diffie-Hellman protocol within a
nonabelian group by interpreting powers as conjugation.
In 1997 it became known that the ideas of public key cryptography were developed by
British Intelligience Services prior to Diffie and Hellman.
In 1977 Rivest, Adelman and Shamir developed the RSA Algorithm which is presently
the most widely used public key cryptosystems. It is based on the difficulty of factoring
large integers and in particular on the fact that it is easier to test for primality than to
factor. In basic outline at the simplest level it works as follows.
Alice chooses two large primes pA , qA and an integer eA relatively prime to Φ(pA qA ) =
(pA − 1)(qA − 1). It is assumed that these integers are chosen randomly to minimize attack.
The primes she chooses should be quite large. Originally RSA used primes of approximately
100 decimal digits, but as computing and attack have become more sophisticated, larger
primes have had to be utilized. Once Alice has obtained pA , qA , eA she lets nA = pA qA
and computes dA , the multiplicative inverse of eA modulo Φ(nA ). That is dA satisfies
eA dA ≡ 1 mod (pA − 1)(qA − 1). She makes public the enciphering key KA = (nA , eA ) and
the encryption algorithm known to all is

                                   fA (P) = P eA mod nA

where P ∈ ZnA is a message unit.
It can be shown that if (eA , (pA − 1)(qA − 1)) = 1 and eA dA ≡ 1 mod (pA − 1)(qA − 1) then
P eA dA ≡ P mod nA Therefore the decryption algorithm is

                                   fA−1 (C) = C dA mod nA .

Notice then that fA−1 (fA (P)) = P eA dA ≡ P mod nA so it is the inverse.
Now Bob makes the same type of choices to obtain pB , qB , eB . He lets nB = pB qB and
makes public his key KB = (nB , eB ).
If Alice wants to send a message to Bob that can be authenticated to be from Alice she
sends fB (fA−1 (P)). An attack then requires factoring nA or nB which is much more difficult
than obtaining the primes pA , qA , pB , qB .
Again notice the use of commutativity.
There have been many extensions and enhancements of these basic public key protocols.
Elliptic curve cryptography uses the discrete log problem within the group of an elliptic
curve. This group is a finite abelian group and has certain advantages over the cyclic groups
used in the standard Diffie-Hellman protocol. The book by Koblitz [K] has a thorough
description of elliptic curve methods.
The El-Gamal cryptosystem is a technique to use the Diffie-Hellman key exchange method
to do encryption. The method works as follows. Suppose that Bob and Alice want to


                                                6
communicate openly. They have exchanged a secret key k that supposedly only they know.
Let fk be an encryption function or encryption algorithm based on the key k. Alice wants
to send the message m to Bob and m is given as a binary bit string. Alice sends to Bob

                                            fk (m) ⊕ k

where k is a bit string for the key k and ⊕ is addition modulo 2.
Bob knows the key k and hence can compute it as a bibary string. He now computes

                                          fk (m) ⊕ k ⊕ k

Since addition modulo 2 has order 2 we have

                                     fk (m) ⊕ k ⊕ k = fk (m).
                                            −1
Bob now applies the decryption algorithm fK    to decode the message. In practice a hash
function is usually applied to k (see [B]).


3     The Fundamentals of Free Group Cryptography
The extension of all these ideas to noncommutative platforms is the subject of noncom-
mutative algebraic cryptography. This involves the following ideas,
    (1) General Algebraic Techniques for Developing Cryptosystems
   (2) Potential Algebraic Platforms (Specific Groups, Rings, Etc.) for implementing the
Techniques
    (3) Cryptanalysis and Security Analysis of the Resulting Systems
The main source for noncommutative platforms are nonabelian groups and the main method
for handling nonabelian groups in cryptography is combinatorial group theory. This refers to
the branch of group theory that studies groups by using group presentations, that is sets of
generators and relations between them. The basic idea in using combinatorial group theory
for cryptography is that elements of groups can be expressed as words in some alphabet. If
there is an easy method to rewrite group elements in terms of these words and further the
technique used in this rewriting process can be supplied by a secret key then a cryptosystem
can be created. The simplest example is perhaps a free group cryptosystem. This can
be described in the following manner.
Consider a free group F on free generators x1 , ..., xr . Then each element g in F has a
unique expression as a word W (x1 , ..., xr ). Let W1 , ..., Wk with Wi = Wi (x1 , ..., xr ) be a set
of words in the generators x1 , ..., xr of the free group F . At the most basic level, to construct
a cryptosystem, suppose that we have a plaintext alphabet A. For example suppose that
A = {a, b, ...} are the symbols needed to construct meaningful messages in English. To
encrypt, use a substitution ciphertext

                                        A 7→ {W1 , ..., Wk }.

                                                 7
That is
                                       a 7→ W1 , b 7→ W2 , ....
Then given an word W (a, b, ...) in the plaintext alphabet form the free group word W (W1 , W2 , ....).
This represents an element g in F . Send out g as the secret message.
In order to implement this scheme we need a concrete representation of g and then for
decryption a way to rewrite g back in terms of W1 , ..., Wk . This concrete representation is
the idea behind homomorphic cryptosystems.
The decryption algorithm in a free group cryptosystem then depends on the Reidemeister-
Schreier rewriting process. This is a method to rewrite elements of a subgroup of a free
group in terms of the generators of that subgroup. We refer to [MKS] or [GB 1] for a complete
description of the technique. Roughly it works as follows. Assume that W1 , ..., Wk are free
generators for some subgroup H of a free group F on {x1 , ..., xn }. Each Wi is then a reduced
word in the generators {x1 , ..., xn }. A Schreier transversal for H is a set {h1 , ..., ht , ...} of
(left) coset representatives for H in F of a special form (see [MKS]). Any subgroup of a free
group has a Schreier transversal. The Reidemeister-Schreier process allows one to construct a
set of generators W1 , ..., Wk for H by using a Schreier transversal. Further given the Schreier
transversal from which the set of generators for H was constructed, the Reidemeister-
Schreier Rewriting Process allows us to algorithmically rewrite an element of H. Given
such an element expressed as a word W = W (x1 , ..., xr ) in the generators of F this algorithm
rewrites W as a word W ⋆ (W1 , ..., Wk ) in the generators of H.
The knowledge of a Schreier transversal and the use of Reidemeister-Schreier rewriting
facilitates the decoding process in the free group case but is not essential. Given a known
set of generators for a subgroup the Stallings Folding Method to develop a subgroup graph
can also be utilized to rewrite in terms of the given generators. The paper by Kapovich and
Myasnikov [KM] is now a standard reference for this method in free groups. At present there
is an ongoing study of the complexity of Reidemeister-Schreier being done by Baumslag,
Brukhov, Fine and Troeger.
Pure free group cryptosystems are subject to various attacks and can be broken easily.
However a public key free group cryptosystem using a free group representation in the
Modular group was developed by Baumslag, Fine and Xu [BFX 1 2]. The most successful
attacks on free group cyrpotsystems are called length based attacks. Here an attacker
multiplies a word in ciphertext by a generator to get a shorter word which could possibly
be decoded.
Baumslag, Fine and Xu in [BFX 1] described the following general encryption scheme using
free group cryptography. A further enhancement was discussed in the paper [BFX 2].
We start with a finitely presented group

                                           G =< X|R >

where X = {x1 , ..., xn } and a faithful representation

                                            ρ : G 7→ G.


                                                  8
G can be any one of several different kinds of objects - linear group, permutation group,
power series ring etc.
We assume that there is an algorithm to re-express an element of ρ(G) in G in terms of
the generators of G. That is if g = W (x1 , ..., xn , ...) ∈ G where W is a word in the these
generators and we are given ρ(g) ∈ G we can algorithmically find g and its expression as
the word W (x1 , ..., xn ).
Once we have G we assume that we have two free subgroups K, H with

                                           H ⊂ K ⊂ G.

We assume that we have fixed Schreier transversals for K in G and for H in K both of which
are held in secret by the communicating parties Bob and Alice. Now based on the fixed
Schreier transversals we have sets of Schreier generators constructed from the Reidemeister-
Schreier process for K and for H.

                                     k1 , ...km , ...     for K

and
                                     h1 , ..., ht , ...   for H.

Notice that the generators for K will be given as words in x1 , ..., xn , the generators of G
while the generators for H will be given as words in the generators k1 , k2 , .... for K. We
note further that H and K may coincide and that H and K need not in general be free but
only have a unique set of normal forms so that the representation of an element in terms of
the given Schreier generators is unique.
We will encode within H, or more precisely within ρ(H). We assume that the number of
generators for H is larger than the set of characters within our plaintext alphabet. Let
A = {a, b, c...} be our plaintext alphabet. At the simplest level we choose a starting point
i, within the generators of H, and enclode

                                  a 7→ hi , b 7→ hi+1 , .... etc.

Suppose that Bob wants to communicate the message W (a, b, c...) to Alice where W is a
word in the plaintext alphabet. Recall that both Bob and Alice know the various Schreier
transversals which are kept secret between them. Bob then encodes W (hi , hi+1 ...) and
computes in G the element W (ρ(hi ), ρ(hi+1 ), ..) which he sends to Alice. This is sent as a
matrix if G is a linear group or as a permutation if G is a permutation group and so on.
Alice uses the algorithm for G relative to G to rewrite W (ρ(hi ), ρ(hi+1 ), ..) as a word
W ⋆ (x1 , ...xn ) in the generators of G. She then uses the Schreier transversal for K in G
to rewrite, using the Reidemeister-Schreier process, W ⋆ as a word W ⋆⋆ (k1 , ..., ks ..) in the
generators of K. Since K is free or has unique normal forms this expression for the element
of K is unique. Once she has the word written in the generators of K she uses the transver-
sal for H in K to rewrite again, using the Reidemeister-Schreier process, in terms of the
generators for H. She then has a word W ⋆⋆⋆ (hi , hi+1 , ...) and using hi 7→ a, hi+1 7→ b, ...
decodes the message.

                                                    9
In actual implementation an additional random noise factor is added.
In [FBX 1,2] an inplementation of this process was presented that used for the base group G
the classical modular group M = P SL(2, Z). Further it was a polyalphabetic cipher which
was secure.
The system in the modular group M was presented as follows. A list of finitely generated free
subgroups H1 , ..., Hm of M is public and presented by their systems of generators (presented
as matrices). In a full practical implementation it is assumed that m is large. For each Hi
we have a Schreier transversal
                                        h1,i , ..., ht(i),i
and a corresponding ordered set of generators

                                       W1,i , ..., Wm(i),i

constructed from the Schreier transversal by the Reidemeister-Schreier process. It is as-
sumed that each m(i) >> l where l is the size of the plaintext alphabet, that is each
subgroup has many more generators than the size of the plaintext alphabet. Although Bob
and Alice know these subgroups in terms of free group generators, what is made public are
generating systems given in terms of matrices.
The subgroups on this list and their corresponding Schreier transversals can be chosen in a
variety of ways. For example the commutator subgroup of the Modular group is free of rank
2 and some of the subgroups Hi can be determined from homomorphisms of this subgroup
onto a set of finite groups.
Suppose that Bob wants to send a message to Alice. Bob first chooses three integers (m, q, t)
where
                            m = choice of the subgroup Hm
                      q = starting point among the generators of Hm
                        for the substitution of the plaintext alphabet
                               t = size of the message unit .
We clarify the meanings of q and t. Once Bob chooses m, to further clarify the meaning of
q, he makes the substitution

                                 a 7→ Wm,q , b 7→ Wm,q+1 , .....

Again the assumption is that m(i) >> l so that starting almost anywhere in the sequence
of generators of Hm will allow this substitution. The message unit size t is the number of
coded letters that Bob will place into each coded integral matrix.
Once Bob has made the choices (m, q, t) he takes his plaintext message W (a, b, ...) and groups
blocks of t letters. He then makes the given substitution above to form the corresponding
matrices in the Modular group;
                                         T1 , ..., Ts .



                                               10
We now introduce a random noise factor. After forming T1 , ..., Ts Bob then multiplies on
the right each Ti by a random matrix in M , say RTi ( different for each Ti ). The only
restriction on this random matrix RTi is that there is no free cancellation in forming the
product Ti RTi . This can be easily checked and ensures that the freely reduced form for
Ti RTi is just the concatenation of the expressions for Ti and RTi . Next he sends Alice the
integral key (m, q, t) by some public key method (RSA, Anshel-Goldfeld etc.). He then sends
the message as s random matrices

                                  T1 RT1 , T2 RT2 , ..., Ts RTs .

Hence what is actually being sent out are not elements of the chosen subgroup Hm but rather
elements of random right cosets of Hm in M . The purpose of sending coset elements is two-
fold. The first is to hinder any geometric attack by masking the subgroup. The second
is that it makes the resulting words in the Modular Group generators longer, effectively
hindering a brute force attack.
To decode the message Alice first uses public key decryption to obtain the integral keys
(m, q, t). She then knows the subgroup Hm , the ciphertext substitution from the gener-
ators of Hm and how many letters t each matrix encodes. She next uses the algorithms
described above to express each Ti RTi in terms of the generators of M . She has knowl-
edge of the Schreier transversal, which is held secretly by Bob and Alice, so now uses the
Reidemeister-Schreier rewriting process to start expressing this freely reduced word in terms
of the generators of Hm . The Reidemeister-Schreier rewriting is done letter by letter from
left to right (see [MKS]). Hence when she reaches t of the free generators she stops. Notice
that the string that she is rewriting is longer than what she needs to rewrite in order to
decode as a result of the random matrix RTi . This is due to the fact that she is actually
rewriting not an element of the subgroup but an element in a right coset. This presents a
further difficulty to an attacker. Since these are random right cosets it makes it difficult to
pick up statistical patterns in the generators even if more than one message is intercepted.
In practice the subgroups should be changed with each message.
The initial key (m, q, t) is changed frequently. Hence as mentioned above this method
becomes a type of polyalphabetic cipher. Polyalphabetic ciphers have historically been very
difficult to decode.
A further variation of this method using the Magnus representation in a formal power series
ring in noncommuting variables over a field was described in [BBFR].


4    Public Key Exchange Using Nonabelian Groups
Among the first attempts to use nonabelian groups in cryptography were the schemes of
Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld[AAG] and Ko-Lee et.al.[KoL]. Both sets of authors, at about the
same time, proposed using nonabelian groups and combinatorial group theory for public
key exchange. The security of these systems depended on the difficulty of solving certain
”hard” group theoretic problems.



                                                11
The methods of both Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld and Ko-Lee can be considered as group the-
oretic analogs of the number theory based Diffie-Hellman method. The basic underlying
idea is the following. If G is a group and g, h ∈ G we let g h denote the conjugate of g by
h, that is g h = h=1 gh. The simple observation is that this behaves like ordinary exponen-
tiation in that (g h1 )h2 = g h1 h2 . From this straightforward idea one can exactly mimic the
Diffie-Hellman protocol within a nonabelian group.
Both the Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld protocol and the Ko-Lee protocol start with a platform
group G given by a group presentation. A major assumption in both protocols is that the
elements of G have nice unique normal forms that are easy to compute for given group
elements. However it is further assumed that given normal forms for x, y ∈ G, the normal
form for the product xy, does not reveal x or y.
We describe the Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld public key exchange protocol first. Let G be the
platform group given by a finite prsentation and with the assumptions on normal forms as
described above.
Alice and Bob want to communicate a shared secret. First, Alice and Bob choose random
finitely generated subgroups of G by giving a set of generators for each.

                              A = {a1 , ..., an }, B = {b1 , ..., bm }

and make them public. The subgroup A is Alice’s subgroup while the subgroup B is Bob’s
subgroup.
Alice chooses a secret group word a = W (a1 , ..., an ) in her subgroup while Bob chooses a
secret group word b = V (b1 , ..., bm ) in his subgroup. For an element g ∈ G we let N F (g)
denote the normal form for g. Alice knows her secret word a and knows the generators bi
of Bob’s subgroup. She makes public the normal forms of the conjugates

                                     N F (bai ), i = 1, ..., m.

Bob knows his secret word b and the geerators ai of Alice’s subgroup and makes public the
normal forms of the conjugates

                                     N F (abj ), j = 1, ..., n).

The common shared secret is the commutator

                            [a, b] = a−1 b−1 ab = a−1 ab = (ba )−1 b

Notice that Alice knows ab since she knows a in terms of generators ai of her subgroup and
she knows the conjugates by b since Bob has made the conjugates of the generators of A by
b public. Since Alice knows ab she knows [a, b] = a−1 ab .
In an analogous manner Bob knows [a, b] = (ba )−1 b. An attacker would have to know the
corresponding conjugator, that is the element that conjugates each of the generators. Given
elements g, h in a group G where it is known that g k = k −1 gk = h the conjugator search
problem is to determine the conjugator k. It is known that this problem is undecidable in

                                                 12
general, that is there are groups where the conjugator cannot be determined algorithmically.
On the other hand there are groups where the conjugator search problem is solvable but
”difficult”, that is the complexity of solving the conjugator search problem is hard. Such
groups become the ideal platform groups for the Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld protocol.
The security in this system is then in the difficulty of the conjugator search problem.
Anshel, Anshel, Goldfeld suggested the Braid Groups as potential platforms and use for
example B80 with 12 or more generators in the subgroups. Their suggestion and that of
Ko and Lee led to development of braid group cryptography. There have been various
attacks on the Braid group system. However some have been handled by changing the
parameters. In general the ideas remain valid despite the attacks. We will discuss this
further in section 7.
Ko, Lee et. al. [KoL] developed a similar system that is a direct translation of the Diffie-
Hellman protocol to a nonabelian group theoretic setting. Its security is based on the
difficulty of the conjugacy problem. We again assume that the platform group has nice
unique normal forms that are easy to compute for a given group element but hard to recover
the group element. Recall again that g h means the conjugate of g by h
In the Ko-Lee protocol, Alice and Bob choose commuting subgroups A and B of the platform
group G. A is Alice’s subgroup while Bob’s subgroup is B and these are secret. Now they
completely mimic the classical Diffie-Hellman technique. There is a public element g ∈ G,
Alice chooses a random secret element a ∈ A and makes public g a . Bob chooses a random
secret element b ∈ B and makes public g b . The secret shared key is g ab . Notice that ab = ba
since the subgroups commute. It follows then that (g a )b = g ab = g ba = (g b )a just as if
these were exponents. Hence both Bob and Alice can determine the common secret. The
difficulty is in the difficulty of the conjugacy problem.
The conjugacy problem for a group G, or more precisely for a group presentation for G,
is given g, h ∈ G to determine algorithmically if they are conjugates. As with the conjugator
search problem it is known that the conjugacy is undecidable in general but there are groups
where it is but hard. These groups then become the target platform groups for the Ko-Lee
protocol. As with the Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld protocol, Ko and Lee suggest the use of the
Braid groups.
The conjugacy problem and the conjugator search problem are only two of the group theo-
retic search and decision problems that have been employed to construct one way functions
in a cryptogrpahic setting. We recall several other important such problems and then ref-
erence their use in encryption and public key exchange .
Definition 4.1 (Word Problem). Given a finitely presented group G, does there exist an
algorithm to decide whether or not a word in the generators is the trivial word?
Definition 4.2 (Decision Conjugacy Problem). Given a group G with a finite presentation,
does there exist an algorithm to decide whether or not an arbitrary pair of words u and v in
the generators of G are conjugate? That is, is there an x ∈ G such that x−1 ux = v?
Definition 4.3 (Decomposition Problem). Let G be a finitely presented group with sub-
groups A, B ≤ G. Given two elements u and v of G, is there an algorithm to find two
elements a ∈ A and b ∈ B such that aub = v?

                                              13
Definition 4.4 (Simultaneous Search Conjugacy problem). Let G be a finitely presented
group. Given u1 , · · · , uk , v1 , · · · , vk ∈ G with x−1 ui x = vi for each i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , k}, is there
an algorithm to find z ∈ G satisfying z −1 ui z = vi for each i ∈ {1, 2, ..., k}?

We now reference some uses for these problems. Wagner, Birget, Magliaveras and Sramka
developed key exchange protocols based on the word problem. Kurt developed a protocol
based on the decomposition problem. Shpilrain and Ushakov developed a protocol based
on the twisted conjugacy problem while Shpilrain and Zapata developed several encryption
protocols based on various decision problems. Complete descriptions of these protocols
can be found in [MSU]. More recently Anshel and Kahrobaei developed a noncommutative
analog of the Cramer-Shoup key exchange method [AK].
We close this section by describing a noncommutative analog of the El Gamal public key
exchange system based on the search conjugacy problem. It was proposed by Kahrobaei
and Khan [KKh]. As with the Ko-Lee and Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld protocols we start with
a finitely presented platform group G given by a group presentation. As before the major
assumptions are that the elements of G have nice unique normal forms that are easy to
compute for given group elements. However it is further assumed that given normal forms
for x, y ∈ G the normal form for the product xy does not reveal x or y. Further G contains
two commuting finitely generated proper subgroups S and T . The cryptographic goal is for
Alice and Bob to establish a session key over an unsecured network.
Bob chooses a secret element s ∈ S and an arbitrary element b ∈ G. Bob publishes b and
c = bs . Suppose Alice wants to send x ∈ G as a session key to Bob. Then,
                                                                     t
    1. Alice chooses a random t ∈ T and sends E = x(c ) to Bob along with the header
       h = bt .
    2. Bob then calculates (bt )s = (bs )t = ct .
    3. Now, Bob may calculate E ′ = (ct )−1 , allowing him to decrypt the session key since
           t    ′      t     t −1
       (x(c ) )E = (x(c ) )(c ) = x.

The feasibility of this scheme relies on the assumption that products and inverses in G
can be computed efficiently. Determining Bob’s private key s entails solving the search
conjugacy problem for G. That is given c, b, and c = bs , determine s. Hence, the security
of this scheme is based on the assumption that there is no practical algorithm for solving
the search conjugacy problem for G.
A second El Gamal analog based on the search power conjugay problem was also proposed
by Kahrobaei and Khan (see [KKh]).


5      The Shamir Three Pass and Key Transport Protocols
A key transport protocol is a method that allows the sending of a key (telling for example
what encryption system to use) from one user to another over a public airway. A group

                                                     14
theoretic key transport protocol based on the Diffie-Hellman scheme can be developed in
the following manner. Suppose that we have a finitely presented group G with the same
assumptions made as in the Anshel-Anhsel-Goldfeld and Ko-Lee protocols. That is, G is
given by a presentation and the elements of G have nice normal forms. Further it is assumed
that G has two large subgroups A1 ,A2 that commute elementwise. Alternatively we could
use one large abelian subgroup A of G. The meaning of large is of course hazy but here
means that within G it is difficult to determine when an arbitrary element is in A (or A1 , A2 )
and further A (or A1 , A2 ) is large enough so that random choices can be made from them.
Now suppose that Bob wants to communicate with Alice via an open airway. The secret key
telling them which encryption system to use is encoded within the finitely generated group
G with the properties given above. The two subgroups A1 , A2 which commute elementwise
are kept secret by Bob and Alice. A1 is the subgroup for Bob and A2 the subgroup for Alice.
Bob wants to send the key W ∈ G to Alice. He chooses two random elements B1 , B2 ∈ A1
and sends Alice the message ( in encrypted form) B1 W B2 . Alice now chooses two random
elements C1 , C2 ∈ A2 and sends C1 B1 W B2 C2 back to Bob. These messages appear in the
representation of G and hence for example as matrices or as reduced words in the generators
so they don’t appear as solely concatenation of letters. Since A1 commutes elementwise with
A2 we have
                                C1 B1 W B2 C2 = B1 C1 W C2 B2 .
Further since Bob knows his chosen elements B1 and B2 he can multiply by their inverses to
obtain C1 W C2 which he then sends back to Alice. Since Alice knows her chosen elements
C1 , C2 she can multiply by their inverses to obtain the key W . It is assumed that for each
message Bob and Alice would choose different pairs of random elements from either A1 or
A2 . This method is known as a Shamir Three-Pass which was introduced by Shamir for
general algebraic objects.
Notice that although this is roughly based on the Diffie-Hellman method it is not symmetric
in the communicating parties. In the present scheme the secret key is completely determined
by Bob, who then communicates it to Alice. The scheme then falls into the class of key
transport protocols rather than public key exchange protocols. Key transport protocols are
in most cases designed assuming that an underlying encryption system (and usually also a
signature verification system) is in place. The security of the key transport protocol will rely
on the security of these auxillary schemes. In the group theoretic proposal the encryption
scheme is suggested to be done within the same group as the key transport protocol alhtough
this is not essential. In the group theortic key transport protocol an attacker has knowledge
of the overall group G and a view of encrypted messages. The security lies in the difficulty
of determining the elementwise commuting subgroups A1 , A2 , which are kept secret by Bob
and Alice, and in the security of the actual encryption scheme.
A group G is a candidate platform group for this type of key transport protocol if it has either
a nice finite presentation G =< X, R > with workable normal forms and has either a large
abelian subgroup A or two large subgroups A1 ,A2 that commute elementwise. Although the
word large here is ambiguous we mean large enough so that random choices can be made from
them. In particular, for example, cyclic subgroups are inappropriate. There also should be
some tie between the group used for the key exchange and the encryption method although


                                              15
this is not essential. The standard braid groups, that will be described in the section 7 have
several possibilitiess for normal forms and have large commuting subgroups. Hence they
are excellent candidates for this method. In [BCFRX] several additional potential platform
groups were suggested. These include the full automorphism group of a finitely generated
free group, the matrix group SL(4, Z) and the surface braid groups. Shpilrain and Ushakov
[SU] used this method employing Thompson’s group F as a platform. A length based attack
on their system was attempted by Tsaban (see [MSU]). Further work on this method in the
surface braid groups was done by Camps[C].


6     Digital Signatures, Authentication and Password Se-
      curity
Authentication is the process of determining that a message, supposedly from a given
person, both does come from that person and has not been tampered with. Authentication
plays a major role in transmitting encrypted messages. Often this takes the form of a digital
signature. A signature scheme provides a way for each user to sign messages so that the
signatures can later be verified by anyone else. More specifically, each user can create a
matched pair of private and public signature for the message (using the signer’s public key).
The verifier can convince himself that the message contents have not been altered since the
message was signed. Also the signer cannot later repudiate having signed the message, since
no one but the signer possesses his private key. By analogy with the paper world, where
one might sign a letter and seal it in an envelope, one can sign an electronic message using
one’s private key, and then seal the result by encrypting it with the recipient’s public key.
The recipient can perform the inverse operations of opening the letter and verifying the
signature to electronic mail are quite widespread today already (see [GoB])
A digital signature scheme within the public key framework, is defined as a triple of algo-
rithms (A, σ, V ) such that

    • Key generation algorithm A is a probabilistic, polynomial-time algorithm which on
      input a security parameter 1k , produces pairs (P, S) where P is called a public key
      and S a secret key. (We use the notation (P, S) ∈ G(1k ) to indicate that the pair
      (P, S) is produced by the algorithm A.)
    • Signing algorithm σ is a probabilistic polynomial time algorithm which is given a
      security parameter 1k , a secret key S in range A(1k ), and a message m ∈ {0, 1}k
      and produces as output string s which we call the signature of m. (We use notation
      s ∈ σ(1k , S, m) if the signing algorithm is probabilistic and s = σ(1k , S, m) otherwise.
      As a shorthand when the context is clear, the secret key may be omitted and we will
      write s ∈ σ(S, m) to mean that s is the signature of message m.)
    • Verification algorithm V is a probabilistic polynomial time algorithm which given
      a public key P , a digital signature s, and a message m, returns 1 (i.e ”true”) or
      0 (i.e ”false”) to indicate whether or not the signature is valid. We require that


                                              16
      V (P, s, m) = 1 if s ∈ σ(m) and 0 otherwise. (We may omit the public key and
      abbreviate V (P, s, m) as V (s, m) to indicate verifying signature s of message m when
      the context is clear.)
   • The final characteristic of a digital signature system is its security against a proba-
     bilistic polynomial time forger. We delay this definition until later.

We present a digital signature procedure based on nonabelian groups developed by Ko, Lee
et al(see [KCCL]. Here is the scheme:
Let G be a non-abelian group in which the search conjugacy problem is infeasible and the
                                                      ∗
decision conjugacy problem is solvable. Let h : {0, 1} → G be a hash function.

Key Generation: Alice wants to sign and send a message, m, to Bob. Alice begins by
choosing two conjugate elements u, v ∈ G with conjugator a. The conjugate pair (u, v) is
public information while the conjugator a is Alice’s secret key.

Signature Generation: Alice chooses arbitrary b ∈ G, and computes α = ub and
y = h(mα). Then a signature σ on the message m is the triple (α, β, γ) where β = y b
           −1
and γ = y a b . She sends this to Bob for verification and acceptance.

Verification: Upon receiving the signature, Bob checks whether or not the following hold:

  1. ∃c1 ∈ G such that u = αc1 .
  2. ∃c2 , c3 ∈ G such that γ = β c2 and y = γ c3 .
  3. ∃c4 ∈ G such that uy = (αβ)c4 .
  4. ∃c5 ∈ G such that vy = (αγ)c5 .

Bob accepts the signature if and only if 1-4 hold.
The security of this scheme lies in the assumption that given a pair of conjugate elements
u, v ∈ G finding elements α, β, γ such that 1-4 above hold is infeasible. If the conjugator
                                                       −1
a could be found then, then (α, β, γ) = (ub , y b , y a b ) satisfy properties 1-4 for any b ∈ G.
Hence, the conjugacy search problem need be infeasible.

We mention that there is digital signature scheme proposed by Anjaneyulu et. al [AVRR]
that uses a noncommutative platform but outside of group theory. In this proposal the
basic cryptographic platform is a commutative division semiring and uses what is teremed
the polynomial syemmtrical decompisiton problem as the one way function. The reader can
refer to the paper [AVVR] for details.
Closely related to digital signatures is the problem of secure password verification. With
the increased use of bank cards and internet credit card transactions there is at present

                                               17
more than ever a need for secure password identification. For many online purchases this is
being carried out by a challenge response system (see [W]) accompanying the password.
In the simplest systems this takes the form of secondary password questions such as the
user’s mother’s maiden name or place of birth. There are inherent difficulties with these
types of challenge response systems. First of all there is the trivial problem of the users
remembering their responses. More critical is the problem that this type of information
for many people is readily available and easily found or guessed by would-be attackers or
eavesdroppers. Challenge response systems are also subject to middleman attacks and replay
attacks (see [CRW]. There have been several attempts to alleviate these problems, including
zero-knowledge password proofs and challenged responses somewhat based on RSA as well as
timed out responses (see CRAM-MD5, Password Authenticated Key Agreement, [CRRSA]
and [W]).
In [BBFT] an alternative method for challenge response password verification using combi-
natorial group theory was developed which is provably secure against cipher-text only, man
in the middle and replay attacks. In particular this method depends upon the difficulty of
solving the word problem within a given finitely presented group without knowing the pre-
sentation and the difficulty of solving systems of equations within free groups. This latter
problem has been proved to be NP-hard. The method uses the group randomizer system
which is a computer program that is a subset of MAGNUS a much larger computer algebra
system designed to handle algorithm problems in combinatorial group theory, MAGNUS
was developed at CAISS, the Center for Algorithms and Interactive Scientific Software, a
research laboratory housed at City College of the City University of New York and under
the direction of the first author. The group randomizer system can be placed on a simple
hand held computer device presently under development at CAISS. The system can also be
used from computer to computer (see [BBFT]).
These group theoretic techniques have several major advantages over other challenge re-
sponse systems. We will call the password presenter the prover and the presentee the
verifier. The methods we present can be used for two-way authentication. That is the
same method can both authenticate the prover to the verifier and authenticate the verifer to
the prover. To each prover in conjunction with a standard password there will be assigned a
finitely presented group with a solvable word problem. This is the challenge group. This
will be done randomly by the group randomizer system and will be held in secret by the
prover and the verifier. Cryptographically we assume the adversary can steal the encrypted
form of the group theoretic responses. Probabilistically this does not present a problem.
Each challenge response set of questions forms a virtual one time key pad. Therefore the
adversary must steal three things - the original password, the challenge group and the group
randomizer. Hence there is almost total security in the challenge response system. Further
there is an infinite supply of finitely presented groups to use as challenge groups and an
infinite supply of challenge response questions that never have to be duplicated.
The theoretical security of the system is provided by several results in asymptotic group
theory. In particular a result of Lysenok [L] implies that stealing the challenge group is NP-
hard while a result of Jitsukawa [J] says that the asymptotic density of using homomorphisms
to attack the group randomizer protocol is zero (see sections 9 and 10)



                                             18
In brief outline the system works as follows. We assume that each prover has a group
randomizer system. At the most basic level the group randomizer system has the ability to
do the following things:
   (1) Recognize a finite presentation of a finitely presented group with a solvable word prob-
lem and manipulate arbitrary words in the alphabet of generators according to the rewriting
rules of the presentation. In particular if the group is automatic the group randomizer can
rewrite an arbitrary word in the generators in terms of its group normal form.
   (2) Given a finite presentation of a group with a solvable word problem recognize whether
two free group words have the same value in the given group when considered in terms of
the given generators of the group
   (3) Randomly generate free group words on an alphabet of any finite size
   (4) Recognize and store sets of free group words W1 , ..., Wk on an alphabet x1 , ..., xn and
rewrite words W (W1 , ..., Wk ) as the corresponding word in x1 , ..., xn .
   (5) Given a free group of finite rank on x1 , ..., xn and a set of words W1 , ..., Wk on an
alphabet x1 , .., xn solve the membership problem in F relative to H =< W1 , ..., Wk >, the
subgroup of F generated by W1 , ..., Wk .
     (6) Given a stored finitely presented group or a stored set of free group words the
randomizer can accept a random free group word and rewrite it as a normal form in the
finitely presented group in the former case or as a word in the ambient free group in the
latter case.
Each prover further has a standard password. Suppose that F is a free group on {x1 , ..., xn }.
The prover’s password is linked to a finitely generated subgroup of a free group given as
words in the generators - that is the prover’s password is linked to W1 , ..., Wk where each
Wi is a word in x1 , ..., xn . The group G =< W1 , ..., Wk > is called the challenge group.
In general k 6= n. The prover doesn’t need to know the generators. The randomizer can
randomly choose words from this subgroup and then freely reduce them. The verifier has
the challenge group or subgroup also stored in its randomizer. From the viewpoint of
cryptology this is a symmetric key protocol with both prover and verifier having a common
shared secret, (P, G), where P is a standard password and G is the challenge group. The
shared secret is set at initialization of the protocol by some direct communication. This is
the most common model for password security.
The prover submits his or her standard password to the verifier. This activates the verifier’s
randomizer to the prover’s set of words. The verifier now submits a random free group
word on y1 , ..., yk to the prover’s randomizer say W (y1 , ..., yk ). The prover’s randomizer
treats this as W (W1 , ..., Wk ) and then reduces it in terms of the free group generators
x1 , ..., xn and rewrites it as W ⋆ (x1 , ..., xn ). The verifier checks that this is correct - that is
W (W1 , ..., Wk ) = W ⋆ (x1 , ..., xn ) on the free group on x1 , ..., xn . If it is the verifier continues
and does this three (or some other finite number) of times. There is one proviso. The verifier
submits a word to the prover only once so that a submitted word can never be reused. The
prover’s randomizer will recognize if it has (this is a verification to the prover of the verifier).
To verify that the verifier is legitimate the process is repeated from the prover’s randomizer
to the verifier.

                                                    19
In [BBFT] several variations of this basic outline using more general finitely presented groups
were presented. Using some results from asymptotic group theory it was shown that this
method is provably secure.


7    Braid Group Cryptography and Platform Groups
As platform groups for their respective protocols, both Ko-Lee and Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld
suggested the braid groups Bn (see [Bi]). The groups in this class of groups possess the
desired properties for the key exchange and key transport protocols; they have nice presen-
tations with solvable word problems and conjugacy problems; the solution to the conjugacy
and conjugator search problem is ”hard”; there are several possibilities for normal forms
for element and they have many choices for large commuting subgroups. Initially the braid
groups were considered so ideal as platforms that many other cryptographic applications
were framed within the braid group setting. These included authentication and digital
signatures. There was so much enthusiasm about using these groups that the whole area of
study was named braid group cryptography. A comprehensive and well-written article
by Dehornoy [D] provides a detailed overview of the subject and we refer the reader to that
for technical details.
After the initial successes with braid group cryptographic schemes there were some sur-
prisingly effective attacks. There were essentially three types of attacks; an attack using
solutions to the conjugacy and conjugator search problems, an attack using heuristic proba-
bility within Bn and an attack based on the fact that there are faithful linear representations
of each Bn (see [D]). What is most surprising is that the Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld method
was susceptible to a length based attack. In the Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld method the pa-
rameters are the specific braid group Bn and the rank of the secret subgroups for Bob
and Alice. A length based attack essentially broke the method for the initial parameters
suggested by Anshel, Anshel and Goldfeld in [AAG]. The parameters were then made larger
and attacks by this method were less successful. However this led to research on why these
attacks on the conjugator search problem within Bn were successful, What was discovered
was that generically (see sections 9 and 10) a random subgroup of Bn is a free group and
hence length based attacks are essentially attacks on free group cryptography and therefore
successful. What this indicated was that although randomness is important in cryptography
in using the braid groups as platforms subgroups cannot be chosen purely randomly.
Braid groups arise in several different areas of mathematics and have several equivalent
formulations. What we do in the remainder of this section is describe the braid groups. A
complete topological and algebraic description can be found in the book of Joan Birman
[Bi].
A braid on n strings is obtained by starting with n parallel strings and intertwining them.
We number the strings at each vertical position and keep track of where each individual
string begins and ends. We say that two braids are equivalent if it is possible to move the
strings of one of the braids in space without moving the endpoints or moving through a
string and obtain the other braid. A braid with no crossings is called a trivial braid. We


                                              20
form a product of braids in the following manner. If u is the first braid and v is the second
braid then uv is the braid formed by placing the starting points for the strings in v at the
endpoints of the strings in u. The inverse of a braid is the mirror image in the horizontal
plane. It is clear that if we form the product of a braid and its mirror image we get a braid
equivalent to the trivial braid. With these definitions, the set of all equivalence classes of
braids on n strings forms a group Bn . We let σi denote the braid that has a single crossing
from string i over string i + 1. Since a general braid is just a series of crossings it follows
that Bn is generated by the set σi ; i = 1, ..., n − 1.
There is an equivalent algebraic formulation of the braid group Bn . Let Fn be a free group
on the n generators x1 , ..., xn with n > 2. Let σi , i = 1, ..., n − 1 be the automorphism of Fn
given by
                                σi : xi 7→ xi+1 , xi+1 7→ x−1
                                                           i+1 xi xi+1

                                       σi ; xj 7→ xj , j 6= i, i + 1.
Then each σi corresponds precisely to the basic crossings in Bn . Therefore Bn can be
considered as the subgroup of Aut(Fn ) generated by the automorphisms σi , Artin proved
[A] (see also [MKS]) that a finite presentation for Bn is given by

  Bn =< σ1 , ..., σn−1 ; [σi , σj ] = 1 if |i − j| > 1, xi+1 xi xi+1 = xi xi+1 xi , i = 1, ..., n − 1 > .

This is now called the Artin presentation. The fact that Bn is contained in Aut(Fn ) provides
an elementary solution to the word problem in Bn since one can determine easily if an
automorphism of Fn is trivial on all the generators. We note that although the braid groups
Bn are linear ( the Lawrence-Krammer representation is faithful (see[D]) it is known that
Aut(Fn ) is not linear (see [F]).
There are several possibilities for normal forms for elements of Bn . The two most commonly
used are the Garside normal form and the Dehornoy normal form. These are described
in [D] and [MSU].
From the commuting relations in the Artin presentation it is clear that each Bn has the
requisite collection of commuting subgroups.
The conjugacy problem for Bn was originally solved by Garside and it was assumed that
it was hard in the complexity sense. Recently there has been significant research on the
complexity of the solution to the conjugacy problem (see [MSU] and [D]).
In general, platform groups for the non-commutative protocols that we have discussed re-
quire certain properties. Most are present in the braid groups. The first is the existence
of a normal form for elements in the group. Normal forms provide an effective method of
disguising elements. Without this, one can determine a secret key simply by inspection
of group elements. The existence of a normal form in a group implies that the group has
solvable word problem, which is essential for these protocols. For purposes of practicality,
the group also needs an efficiently computable normal form, which ensures an efficiently
solvable word problem.
In addition to the platform group having normal form, ideally, it would also exhibit ex-
ponential growth. That is, the growth function for G, γ : N → R defined by γ(n) =

                                                    21
# {w ∈ G : l(w) ≤ n}, has an exponential growth rate. Exponential growth is a necessity
since this ensures that the group will provide a large key space, making a brute force search
for the secret key an infeasible algorithm.
The other property which is necessary in most of the proposed cryptosystems is the conjuga-
tor search problem for the platform group ideally should have exponential time complexity.
In addition to these, for the Ko-Lee type protocols, we need large commuting subgroups
wihtin the platform group.
Currently, there are many potential platform groups that have been suggested. The following
are some of the proposed platform groups:

    • Braid groups(Ko-Lee, Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld)
    • Thompson Groups (Shpilrain-Ushakov) [SU]
    • Polycyclic Groups (Eick-Kahrobaei) [EK]
    • Linear Groups (Baumslag-Fine-Xu) [BFX 1,2]
    • Free metabelian Groups (Shpilrain-Zapata) [SZ]
    • Grigorchuk Groups (Petrides) [P]
    • Groups of Matrices (Grigoriev-Ponomarenko) [GP]
    • Surface Braid Groups (Camps) [C]

Many of these are discussed in [MSU].


8     Cryptography With Polycyclic Groups
In this section we briefly discuss polycyclic group cryptography which has not been exten-
sively studied but has many of the essential features for ideal platform groups. A cryptosys-
tem using polycyclic groups was developed in [EK].
A group G is called polycyclic if it has a series G = Gn+1 ≥ Gn ≥ · · · ≥ G2 ≥ G1 = 1
in which each Gi is a normal subgroup of Gi+1 and Gi+1 /Gi is cyclic for i = 1, 2, · · · , n.
A series of this type is called a polycyclic series. Polycyclic groups are a natural non-
commutative generalization of cyclic groups. The book of Holt et,al. [HEO] is a good
reference for information about polycyclic groups.
Every polycyclic group G has a finite presentation of the form:
                                                                    
                                       aj         a−1
                                                   j         rk
                     a1 , · · · , an |ai = wij , ai = vij , ak = ukk


for 1 ≤ j < i ≤ n where ri ∈ N ∪ ∞, ri < ∞ if i ∈ I ⊆ {1, 2, · · · , n} and wij , vij , ujj
are words in the generators aj+1 , · · · , an . If ri = [Gi+1 : Gi ] for each i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , n}

                                                22
then this presentation is called a consistent polycyclic presentation. Every element in the
group defined by this consistent polycyclic presentation may be written uniquely in the form
ae11 · · · aenn with ei ∈ Z and 0 ≤ ei < ri if i ∈ I. This unique representation of each element
g ∈ G is called the normal form of G. It is known that every polycyclic group exhibits a
consistent polycyclic presentation. Hence, every polycyclic group has a normal form. This
is used as a basis for computations with polycyclic groups.
The word problem can be solved effectively using the collection algorithm in a group G
given by a consistent polycyclic presentation. The collection algorithm computes the unique
normal form for an element, g, in the group given by a word in the generators. This is
done by repeatedly applying the power and conjugacy relations given in the presentation to
subwords of g, transforming g to an equivalent word. The nature of the relations ensures
that this process must terminate, producing the unique normal form for g. The collection
algorithm is known to be a practical and effective method for solving the word problem in
consistent polycyclic presentations.
Every polycyclic group can be embedded in GL(n, Z), which reveals important properties
about polycyclic groups. Since matrix multiplication is solvable in polynomial time, group
multiplication in polycyclic groups is efficient. As polycyclic groups have a normal form,
efficiently solvable group multiplication implies that the word problem is also efficiently
solvable. It has been proven that the search conjugacy problem in any subgroup of a general
linear group is solvable. Because every polycyclic group can be embedded as a subgroup of
GL(n, Z), the search conjugacy problem in polycyclic groups is solvable. The complexity of
the search conjugacy problem in polycyclic groups is unknown, but widely conjectured to
be exponential time.
Recall that the Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld key exchange can be broken if the simultaneous
search conjugacy problem is solvable. In polycyclic groups, the simultaneous search conju-
gacy problem reduces to the search conjugacy problem.


9    Generic Complexity and Asymptotic Density
In cryptanalysis involving group theoretic decision problems what is important is not just
the solution to the problem but the computational complexity, polynomial or exponential
for example, of the algorithm to solve the problem. The problem may be hard or even
undecidable on some inputs but actually easy on most inputs. This is in reality a problem
in many braid group schemes. The conjugator search problem is hard on some inputs but
actually easy for many chosen subgroups. A problem may be very hard on some inputs.
This is called worst case complexity. More important for cryptanalysis is average case
complexity, that is the complexity on average over all inputs. Generic complexity refers
to the complexity of the solution to a particular algorithm over most inputs. Generic and
average case complexity and their uses in cryptanalysis are discussed in detail in [MSU].
There they show that generic complexity is a more useful tool in most cryptographic ap-
plications. There they show that in many cases if an algorithm is easy on average it is
also easy generically. They also show that the opposite is not true and provide examples of
algorithms that are exponential on average but polynomial time generically.

                                              23
The problem with some braid group cryptographic algorithms is that random subgroups of
Bn are generically free. We now describe what this means.
Asymptotic density is a general method to compute densities and/or probabilities on infinite
discrete sets where each individual outcome is tacitly assumed to be equally likely. The
method can also be used where some probability distribution is assumed on the elements. It
has been effectively applied to determining densities within infinite discrete finitely generated
groups where random elements are considered as being generated from random walks on the
Cayley graph of the group. The paper by Borovik, Myasnikov and Shpilrain [BMS] provides
a good general description of this method in group theory. Let P be a group property and
let G be a finitely generated group. We want to determine the measure of the set of elements
which satisfy P. For each positive integer n let Bn denote the n-ball in G. Let |Bn | denote
the actual size of Bn (which is an integer since G is finitely generated) or the measure of
|Bn | if a distribution has been placed on the elements of G. Let S be the set of elements in
G satisfying P. The asymptotic density of S is then
                                               |S ∩ Bn |
                                         lim
                                        n→∞      |Bn |
provided this limit exists. We say that the property P is generic in G if the asymptotic
density of the set S of elements satisfying P is one, P is called an asymptotic visible prop-
erty, if the corresponding asymptotic density is strictly between 0 and 1. If the asymptotic
density is 0, then P is called negligible.
This concept can be easily extended to properties of finitely generated subgroups, We con-
sider the asymptotic density of finite sets of elements that generate subgroups that have a
considered property. For example to say that a group has the generic free group property
we mean that
                                          |Sm ∩ Bm,n |
                                    lim                 =1
                                  m,n→∞      |Bm,n |
where Sm is the collection of finite sets of elements of size m that generate a free subgroup
and Bm,n is the collection of m element subsets within the n-ball.
If P is a group property and G is a group then we say that subgroups of G are generically
P if a generic randomly chosen subgroup H of G has property P. Equivalently this means
that the asymptotic density of subgroups H of G that have property P is one.


10     The Generic Free Group Property
In general we say that a group G has the generic free group property if a finitely
generated subgroup is generically a free group. A result of Epstein [E] shows that the group
GL(n, R) satisfies the generic free group property. Further G has the strong generic free
group property if given randomly chosen elements g1 , ..., gn in G then generically they
are a free basis for the free subgroup they generate. Jitsukawa [J] showed that finitely
generated nonabelian free groups have the strong generic free group property while Gilman,
Myasnikov and Osin [GMO] showed that torsion-free hyperbolic groups also have the generic

                                               24
free group property. Myasnikov and Ushakov [MU] showed that pure braid groups Pn with
n ≥ 3 also have the strong generic free group property. A recent result of Carstensen, Fine
and Rosenberger [CFR] shows that all Fuchsian groups of finite co-volume and all braid
groups Bn with n ≥ 3 have the strong generic free group property,
This result of Myasnikov and Ushakov on the pure braid groups has applications to the
cryptanalysis of both the Ko-Lee cryptosystem and the Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld cryptosys-
tem (see [SU] and [MU]). Both cryptosystems were usually suceptible to length based attacks
if the parameters chosen in the braid groups Bn were small. The reason for this is that ran-
dom choices of subgroups within the braid groups are actually free groups. This does not
disqualify the braid groups as platforms but rather says that subgroups cannot be chosen
entirely randomly.
Extremely useful in proving that a group has the generic or strong generic free group prop-
erty is the following.
Theorem 10.1. Let G be a group and N a normal subgroup. If the quotient G/N satisfies
the strong generic free group property then G also satisfies the strong generic free group
property.

In [FMR] it was shown that many group amalgams - free products, free products with
amalgamtion and HNN groups, satisfy the strong generic free group property. In particular
the most general result is the following.
Theorem 10.2. Let A and B be arbitrary finitely generated infinite groups and let G =
A ⋆ B be their free product. Let {x1 , ..., xn } be n randomly chosen elements from G. Then
generically these elements are a free basis for the subgroup they generate, that is G satisfies
the strong generic free group property.

This can be extended to more general amalgams in many ways (see [FMR])
Theorem 10.3. Let A and B be arbitrary finitely generated infinite groups and let G = A ⋆ B
                                                                                            H
be their amalgamated free product with amalgamated subgroup H. Let H1 and H2 be the copy
of H in A and B respectively. Suppose that A/N (H1 ) is infinite and B/N (H2 ) is infinite
where N (Hi ) is the normal closure of Hi in the respective factors. Then G satisfies the
strong generic subgroup property.

Recall that a cyclically pinched one-relator group is a amalgamated free product of
the form
                                  G = F1 ⋆ F2
                                               {U=V }

where F1 , F2 are finitely generated free groups and U, V are nontrivial words in the respective
free groups. If U is not a power of a primitive element in F1 and V is not a power of a
primitive element in F2 then the quotient of F1 and F2 by the normal closure of U and V
respectively is a nontrivial, infinite one-relator group.
Corollary 10.1. Let G be a cyclically pinched one-relator group as above. Assume that U
and V are not a power of a primitive element in F1 and F2 respectively. Then G satisfies
the strong generic subgroup property.

                                              25
In particular any orientable surface group of genus g ≥ 2 falls into the class of cyclically
pinched one-relator groups.
Corollary 10.2. Any orientable surface group of genus g ≥ 2 and any nonorientable surface
group of genus g ≥ 4 satisfies the strong generic subgroup property.

The situation with HNN groups becomes even more complicated but some things can be
proved as consequences of the amalgam result above. Notice first however that any HNN
group with free part of rank ≥ 2 must have a free quotient of rank ≥ 2 and hence satisfy
the strong generic subgroup property. Therefore only the case where the free part has rank
1 must be considered.
Theorem 10.4. Let G be an HNN extension of the group B with a presentation

                              G =< t, B; rel(B), t−1 U t = V >

with U, V nontrivial isomorphic subgroups of B. Let NB (< U, V >) be the normal closure
of the subgroup < U, V > in B. Then if B/NB (< U, V >) is infinite, G satisfies the strong
generic subgroup property.

Extensions of centralizers play a large role in the study of the elementary theory of free
groups. Recall that if B is a group and U ∈ B then a rank one extension of centralizers
of B is a group with a presentation

                             G =< t, B; rel(B), t−1 U T = U > .

Theorem 10.5. Let G be a rank one extension of centralizers of the group B. Suppose G
has a presentation
                         G =< t, B; rel(B), t−1 U t = U >
wihere U is a nontrivial element of B. If B/NB (U ) is infinite, where NB (U ) is the normal
closure of U in B, then G satisfies the strong generic subgroup property .

In the situation where the factors are finite we must be careful even for free products. The
infinite dihedral group Z2 ⋆ Z2 is solvable so cannot satisfy the strong generic free group
property. However if at least one factor has order greater than 2, an analysis based on
Kurosh bases yields the weaker generic free group property.
Theorem 10.6. Let G = A ⋆ B be a nontrivial free product. If at least one factor has order
greater than 2 then G satisfies the generic free group property.

In [CFR] it was shown that a finitley generated group satisfies the strong generic free group
property if and only if subgroups of fintie index do also. We call a group property P suitable
for a finitely generated group G if it is preserved under isomorphisms and its asymptotic
density is independent of finite generating systems. From a result in [MSU] the strong
generic free group property is suitable in any group that has a nonabelian free quotient.
The main result in [CFR] is the following called the inheritance theorem.

                                             26
Theorem 10.7. Let G be a finitely generated group and H < G a subgroup of finite index
[G : H] = n < ∞. Let P be the strong generic free group property. Then:

  1. If P is a suitable and generic property in H then it is also suitable and generic in G.
  2. If P is a suitable and generic property in G then it is also suitable and generic in H.

An interesting consequence of this is that all braid groups have the strong generic free group
property.


11     Open Problems
We now give a nonexhaustive list of problems related to the rest of this article.
General:

  1. What is the most appropriate platform group for non-commutative cryptography?
  2. Should the group the be finite or infinite?
  3. How can we show a group is provably secure for the new non-commutative schemes
     such as public key exchanges, digital signatures and authentication?
  4. Can we design more public keys based on other search and decision problems in com-
     binatorial group theory?
  5. Can we analyze the security of this protocols?
  6. what should be the measure of the security? (practicality, complexity, average case
     complexity, generic complexity?)
  7. So far there are three known non-commutative digital signatures have been designed,
     can we design more non-commutative digital signatures?
  8. What about the authentication schemes?
  9. What is the appropriate choice of commuting subgroups in polycyclic groups which
     makes the described schemes secure?

Complexity Analysis and Security:

  1. What is the complexity of the search conjugacy problem in polycyclic groups?
  2. What is the complexity of the decision conjugacy problem, for example in Eick-
     Ostheimer algorithm [EO]?
  3. What is the complexity of the collection algorithm to find the normal form of elements
     in polycyclic groups?

                                             27
  4. What is the complexity of the twisted search conjugacy problem in polycyclic groups?
  5. What is the complexity of the Reidemeister-Schreier rewriting algorithm in free groups?
  6. What is the generic case complexity of the search conjugacy problem in polycyclic
     groups?

Quantum Algorithms and Quantum Complexity:
Another problem to think in this direction is quantum computational approaches to these
cryptosystems. Quantum algorithms for finite solvable groups (which are polycyclic) has
been studied, particularly by J. Watrous (2001) [Wa]. He found a quantum algorithm to
compute the order of a finite solvable group in polynomial time. Algorithm works in the
setting of black-box groups none of them have polynomial-time classical algorithms. Can we
design quantum algorithms for solving other decision problems in polycyclic groups (both
for finite and infinite ones); especially the ones we use in cryptography.

  1. Is there any quantum algorithm for solving the search conjugacy problem for polycyclic
     group that reduces the complexity of the algorithm?

Implementation:

  1. How can we implement the proposed cryptosystems?
  2. Can the computer algebra system GAP, could we use this for practical and secure
     cryptography?


12     Acknowledgment
Benjamin Fine has been supported by a Gambrinus Grant. Delaram Kahrobaei has been
supported by a grant from the research foundation of CUNY (PSC-CUNY) and the Faculty
Fellowship Publication Program Award from City University of New York.


13     References
[AVRR] G.S.G.N.Anjaneyulu and P.Vasudeva Reddy and U.M.Reddy, Secured Digital Sig-
nature Scheme using Polynomials over Non-Commutative Division Semirings , IJCSNS
- International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, 8, (2008),
278–284.
[AAG] I.Anshel,M.Anshel,D.Goldfeld, An Algebraic Method for Public Key Cryptography,
Math.Res.Lett, 6, 1999, 287-291 Springer Verlag
[AK] M.Anshel and D.Kahrobaei, A Noncommutative Analog of the Cramer-Shoup Public
Key Exchange Protocol, Groups, Complexity, Cryptology,1, 2009, 217-225

                                            28
[Ar] G.Arzhanseva, Generic Properties of Finitely Presented Groups and Howson’s Theorem,
Comm. Alg, 26, 1998, 3783-3792
[AO] G.Arzhanseva and A. Olshanskii, Genericity of the Class of Groups in Which Subgroups
with a Lesser Number of Generators are Free Mat. Zametki, 59, 1996, 489-496
[BBDR] M. Batty, S. Braunstein, A. Duncan, S. Rees, Quantum algorithms in group theory,
Cont. Math. 349, 2003, 1–62.
[GB 1] G.Baumslag, Topics in Combinatorial Group Theory,Birkhauser 1993
[BBFR] G. Baumslag, Y.Brjukhov, B.Fine and G.Rosenberger Some Cryptoprimitives for
Noncommutative Algebraic Cryptography Aspects of Infinite Groups, World Scientific
Press, 2009, 26-44
[BCFRX] G. Baumslag, Y.Brjukhov, B.Fine and D.Troeger, Challenge Response Password
Security Using Combinatorial group Theory to appear J.Groups, Complexity and Cryp-
tology
[BFX 1] G. Baumslag, B.Fine, and X.Xu, Cryptosystems Using Linear Groups          Appl.
Alg. in Engineering, Communication and Computing 17, 2006, 205-217
[BFX 2] G. Baumslag, B.Fine, and X.Xu, A Proposed Public Key Cryptosystem Using the
Modular Group Cont.Math. 421, 2007, 35-44
[BCFRX] G. Baumslag,T.Camps, B.Fine,G.Rosenberger and X.Xu, Designing Key Trans-
port Protocols Using Combinatorial Group Theory , Cont. Math. 418, 2006, 35-43
[Bi] J.Birman, Braids, Links and Mapping Class Groups Annals of Math Studies Vol.
82, Princeton University Press, 1975
[BMS] A.Borovik, A.G. Myasnikov and V.Shpilrain, Measuring Sets in Infinite Groups
Cont.Math. 298, 2002, 21-42
[B] J.A. Buchmann, Introduction to Cryptography , Springer 2004
[Ca] P.J. Cameron, Aspects of infinite permutation groups, in Groups St Andrews 2005,
Vol.1 (C.M. Campbell et al., eds.), London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. 399 (CUP,
Cambridge 2007), 1–35
[C] T.Camps, Surface Braid Groups as Platform Groups and Applications in Cryptography
PhD Dissertation Universitat Dortmund 2009
[CFR] C. Carstensen, B.Fine and G.Rosenberger, On Asymptotic Densities and Generic
Properties in Finitely Generated Groups preprint
[CR] CRAM-MD5 Password Authenticated Key Agreement
[CRRSA] Challenge-Response System Based on RSA (http:www.cag.lcs.mit.edu/ rugina/ssh-
procedures
[D] P.Dehornoy, Braid-Based Cryptography    Cont. Math., 360, 2004,5–34
[EK] B.Eick, D.Kahrobaei, Polycyclic groups: A new platform for cryptology? math.GR/0411077
(2004), 1–7.


                                           29
[EO] B.Eick, G.Ostheimer, On the orbit-stabilizer problem for integral matrix actions of
polycyclic groups, textbfMath. Comp. (electronic) 72, 2003, 1511–1529.
[E] D.B.A. Epstein, Almost all Subgroups of Lie Group are Free J. Alg., 19, 1971, 261-262
[FMR] B.Fine, A.Myasnikov and G.Roseberger, Generic Subgroups of Amalgams J.Groups,
Complexity and Cryptology, 1, 2009, 51–61
[GMO] R.Gilman, A.G. Myasnikov and D.Osin, Bounded Nielsen Property in Hyperbolic
Groups to appear
[GP] D.Grigoriev and I. Ponomarenko, Homomorphic Public-Key Cryptosystems Over Groups
and Rings Quaderni di Matematica, 2005
[HGS] C.Hall, I. Goldberg, B. Schneier, Reaction attaacks Against Several Public Key Cryp-
tosystems Proceedings of Information and Communications Security ICICS 99
, Springer-Verlag, 1999, 2-12
[HEO] D.Holt, B.Eick, E.O’Brien, Handbook of computational group theory (Discrete Math-
ematics and its Applications (Boca Raton), Chapman and Hall/CRC 2005)
[J] T. Jitsukawa, Malnormal Subgroups of Free Groups , Cont. Math. 298, 2002, 83-96
[KKh] D.Kahrobaei and B.Khan, A Non-Commutative Generalization of the ElGamal Key
Exchange using Polycyclic Groups Proceeding of IEEE, GLOBECOM, 2006, 1–5
[KCCL] K.Ko, D.Choi, M.Cho and J.Lee, New signature scheme using conjugacy problem
Cryptology ePrint Archive, 168, 2002, 1–13.
[KoL] K.Ko, J.Lee, J.H. Cheon, J.W. Han, J.Kang, C.Park, New Public-Key Cryptosystem
Using Braid Groups , Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2000 Santa Barbara CA
, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer 1880, 2000 166-183
[KM] I.Kapovich and A. Myasnikov, Stallings Foldings and Subgroups of Free Groups J.
Algebra 248, 2003, 665-694.
[Ko] N.Koblitz, Algebraic Methods of Cryptography, Springer, 1998
[M] W. Magnus, Rational Representations of Fuchsian Groups and Non-Parabolic Subgroups
of the Modular Group , Nachrichten der Akad Gottingen, 1973, 179-189
[MKS] W. Magnus, A. Karass and D. Solitar Combinatorial Group Theory, Wiley
Interscience,New York, 1968
[MU] A.D.Myasnikov and A.Ushakov, Length Based Attack and Braid Groups:Cryptanalysis
of Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld Key Exchange Protocol Public Key Cryptography - PKC
2007 , Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer , 2007
[MSU] A.G. Myasnikov, V.Shpilrain and A. Ushakov, Group-Based Cryptography Ad-
vanced Courses in Mathematics, CRM Barcelona, 2007
[MSU 1] A.G. Myasnikov, V.Shpilrain and A. Ushakov, A Practical Attack on Some Braid
Group Based Cryptographic Protocols CRYPTO 2005 Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 3621, 2005, 86-96


                                           30
[P] G.Petrides, Cryptanalysis of the Public Key System Based on the Grigorchuk Groups ,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2898, springer Verlag, 2003, 234-244.
[SU] V.Shpilrain and A. Ushakov, The Conjugacy Search Problem in Public Key Cryptog-
raphy; Unnecessary and Insufficient Applicable Algebra in Engineering, Communi-
cation and computing, 17, 2006 285-289
[SZ] V.Shpilrain and A. Zapata, Using the Subgroup Memberhsip Problem in Public Key
Cryptography Cont. Math. 418, 2006, 169-179
[St] R. Steinwandt, Loopholes in two public key cryptosystems using the modular groups
preprint Univ. of Karlsruhle, 2000
[W] Challenge-response Authentication Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ch
[X] Xiaowei Xu, Cryptography and Infinite Group Theory , Ph.D. Thesis, CUNY, 2006
[Y] A.Yamamura, Public Key cryptosystems using the modular group , Lecture Notes in
Comput. Sci. 1431, 1998, 203-216




                                          31
