                                               Truly Tight-in-∆ Bounds for Bipartite
                                               Maximal Matching and Variants

                                               Sebastian Brandt · brandts@ethz.ch · ETH Zurich
                                               Dennis Olivetti1 · dennis.olivetti@cs.uni-freiburg.de · University of Freiburg
arXiv:2002.08216v1 [cs.DC] 19 Feb 2020




                                                   In a recent breakthrough result, Balliu et al. [FOCS’19] proved a deterministic
                                               Ω(min(∆, log n/ log log n))-round and a randomized Ω(min(∆, log log n/ log log log n))-
                                               round lower bound for the complexity of the bipartite maximal matching problem on
                                               n-node graphs in the LOCAL model of distributed computing. Both lower bounds are
                                               asymptotically tight as a function of the maximum degree ∆.
                                                   We provide truly tight bounds in ∆ for the complexity of bipartite maximal matching
                                               and many natural variants, up to and including the additive constant. As a by-product,
                                               our results yield a considerably simplified version of the proof by Balliu et al.
                                                   We show that our results can be obtained via bounded automatic round elimination,
                                               a version of the recent automatic round elimination technique by Brandt [PODC’19] that
                                               is particularly suited for automatization from a practical perspective. In this context,
                                               our work can be seen as another step towards the automatization of lower bounds in
                                               the LOCAL model.




                                           1
                                             Part of this work was done while this author was supported by Aalto University, and the Academy of Finland,
                                         Grant 285721.
1    Introduction
The maximal matching (MM) problem has been studied extensively in the field of distributed graph
algorithms. In the LOCAL model of distributed computing [20, 24], the recent breakthrough by
Balliu et al. [2] provided lower bounds for the complexity of MM that are asymptotically tight
in the maximum degree ∆. More precisely, for n-node graphs, the authors prove lower bounds
of Ω(min(∆, logloglogn n )) rounds for deterministic algorithms and Ω(min(∆, logloglogloglogn n )) rounds for
randomized algorithms, while an upper bound of O(∆ + log∗ n) is known since almost two decades
due to a result by Panconesi and Rizzi [23].
    In other words, it is possible to solve MM in linear-in-∆ time by paying a small dependency on
n, and we cannot do better as a function of ∆, unless we pay a high dependency on n. The lower
bound results have been obtained by using the so-called round elimination technique to show that
on infinite regular 2-colored trees the MM problem requires Ω(∆) rounds. This way of proving the
lower bounds guarantees that they hold even for the bipartite maximal matching (BMM) problem.

Our contributions In this work, we prove truly tight bounds for the complexity of BMM, i.e.,
we prove that exactly 2∆ − 1 rounds are required. Moreover, we also prove tight bounds for
natural variants of MM by showing that our lower bound technique is robust to changes in the
description of the considered problem, and providing optimal algorithms to obtain tight upper
bounds. As a by-product, we obtain a much simplified version of the proof for the celebrated lower
bounds presented in [2], both in terms of the technical issues and the intuition behind the proof.
Finally, we consider our work as an important step towards the automatization of lower bounds:
we introduce the notion of bounded automatic round elimination, a special variant of the round
elimination technique amenable to automatization, and show that our bounds can be obtained in a
(semi-)automatable fashion via bounded automatic round elimination. This also provides another
step in better understanding the round elimination technique—a tool that is responsible for most of
the lower bounds in the LOCAL model [1, 2, 4, 7–10, 20, 21], but still poorly understood.

Maximal matching and its variants               In this work, we will consider the following natural
problem family (in the bipartite setting).

Definition 1.1. (x-maximal y-matching) Given a graph G = (V, E), a set M ⊆ E is an x-maximal
y-matching if the following conditions hold:

    • Every node is incident to at most y edges of M ;

    • If a node v is not incident to any edge of M , then at least min{deg(v), ∆ − x} neighbors of v
      are incident to at least one edge of M .

    This family of problems contains MM (by setting x = 0 and y = 1), and many interesting
variants of it, obtained by relaxing the covering or the packing constraint of MM. While the results
presented in [2] showed asymptotically tight bounds for MM as a function of ∆, no tight bounds
are provided for relaxed variants of matchings.
    How much easier does MM become if we allow each node to be matched with a constant number
of neighbors, instead of just one? We know, for example, that in the non-bipartite setting Ω(log∗ n)
rounds are required to solve MM [20], while as soon as we allow nodes to have two incident edges
in the matching, the problem becomes solvable without any dependency on n [25], but it is not
clear how this affects the dependency on ∆. How much easier does the problem become if we don’t
require strict maximality? We will address these kinds of questions in this work and prove truly


                                                     1
tight bounds for MM and the whole family of x-maximal y-matching problems, in the bipartite
setting. Note that tightness results of this kind require that the considered problems can be solved
independently of n, which is the reason for our restriction to the bipartite setting.

Round elimination In order to prove our lower bounds, we will make use of the round elimination
technique, which works as follows. Start from a locally checkable problem Π, i.e., a problem where
all nodes must output labels from some finite set, subject to some local constraints. Try to define a
problem Π0 that is at least one round easier than Π (i.e., can be solved strictly faster in the LOCAL
model). Then, repeat the process. If we prove that the result that we get after T steps of this
process cannot be solved in 0 rounds of communication, then we directly obtain a lower bound of
T + 1 rounds for the original problem Π.
    This is not a new technique: it has been used by Linial roughly 30 years ago to prove a lower
bound for 3-coloring a cycle [20]. However, after Linial’s result, the technique was apparently
forgotten until it re-emerged in 2016, when it was used to prove lower bounds for sinkless orientation,
∆-coloring, and the Lovász Local Lemma [8–10]. Since then, round elimination has been used to
prove lower bounds for a number of different problems [1, 2, 4, 7]. More importantly, though, this
technique can be automated in a certain sense.

Automatic round elimination In a recent breakthrough result, Brandt [7] showed that, under
certain conditions, given any locally checkable problem Π, we can automatically define a problem
Π0 that is exactly one round easier than Π. Conceptually, this tremendously simplifies the task
of applying round elimination to prove lower bounds in the LOCAL model: instead of having to
find each subsequent problem that is one round easier than the previous one by hand, we can do
the same by just mechanically applying certain operations. The main issue with automatic round
elimination, and the reason why the result by Brandt does not immediately provide new lower
bounds for all kinds of problems, is the growing description complexity inherent in each of the round
elimination steps: If we start from a problem Π defined via a set of labels L (and certain output
constraints), then the problem Π0 obtained after one step is defined via a subset of the label set
2L . In other words, even if Π is some simple problem that can be described in a compact way, the
description of the problem Π0 can be exponentially larger, and it may be difficult for a human being
to understand and feasibly deal with the problems obtained after applying only a few of these steps.
     The main approach for dealing with this issue is to find good relaxations, i.e., to reduce the
description complexity of the obtained problem Π0 without losing too much round complexity: the
goal is to transform Π0 into a problem Π∗ such that on one hand, Π∗ has a much simpler description
than Π0 , while on the other hand, Π∗ is provably at least as easy as Π0 , but not much easier. If
we can find such a relaxation after each round elimination step (and use the relaxed problem as
the starting point for the next step), then the number of steps until we obtain a 0-round solvable
problem still constitutes a lower bound for the problem.

Bounded automatic round elimination One natural way to ensure that problems do not grow
beyond some description complexity threshold is to fix a constant c, and after each step of automatic
round elimination, relax the problem in a way that ensures that the obtained problem uses at most
c labels in its description.
    We propose the study of round elimination lower bounds that only require a constant number of
labels as a major research program. Understanding better for which problems we can obtain lower
bounds using this technique, and how good the lower bounds achieved in such a way can be, would
not only help us to get a better handle on general automatic round elimination, but also has another


                                                  2
advantage: the bound on the number of labels ensures (in some sense) that the lower bound can be
found automatically by a computer. The basic idea is that while the automatic round elimination
technique can be used in theory to define a problem that is exactly k rounds easier than the original
problem, for any k, this may be really hard to do in practice, since in each step the problem that
we obtain can have an exponentially larger description than the old one. However, if we bound the
number of labels to some (reasonably small) constant c, a computer can actually try all possible
relaxations that give problems with at most c labels. If at least one obtained relaxation results in a
sufficiently hard problem, by repeating this process we can obtain lower bounds automatically also
in practice. We discuss this automatization in more detail in Section 7.
    The bottom line is that understanding for which problems a round elimination proof with a
restricted number of labels works would allow us to decide which problems to attack with the help
of computers and for which problems this would simply be a waste of resources. Moreover, a more
fine-grained understanding of which constant c (depending on the chosen problem) is required to
obtain the largest possible lower bound, or more generally, how the obtained lower bound depends
on the chosen constant c, would help to direct the use of resources in the most efficient way.
    A very interesting example case is provided by the recent Ω(∆)-round2 lower bound for BMM
by Balliu et al. [2]. Here, the authors use automatic round elimination with label number   √ restricted
by a constant as part of their proof, but this part only yields a lower bound of Ω( ∆) rounds,
that is subsequently lifted to a bound of Ω(∆) rounds by applying another technique on top of
it. One important ingredient in our new lower bounds is to increase the chosen constant from 4
to 5, which results in a direct Ω(∆)-round lower bound. Besides proving that bounded automatic
round elimination can yield the full Ω(∆)-round lower bound, our result highlights how sensitive
the achieved lower bound can be to the exact number of used labels. While the change from 4 to 5
labels increases the difficulty in finding good relaxations after each round elimination step due to
the substantially increased number of possible relaxations, the behavior of the obtained problem
sequence is actually much easier to understand than   √ the one given in [2]. Together with the fact
that we can omit the step in [2] that lifts their Ω( ∆)-round lower bound to Ω(∆) rounds, we
obtain a considerably simplified proof for both the deterministic Ω(min(∆, logloglogn n ))-round and the
randomized Ω(min(∆, logloglogloglogn n ))-round lower bound.

Upper bounds Automatic round elimination is not only a tool to prove lower bounds; it can
also be used to prove upper bounds. While, for technical reasons, the obtained upper bounds only
hold on high-girth graphs, they can still give valuable insight into how a problem could possibly
be solved in general. Furthermore, studying bounded automatic round elimination is also very
interesting from an upper bound perspective, due to the fact that the bounded number of labels
ensures that the resulting algorithm is bandwidth efficient, i.e., we do not only obtain an upper
bound automatically, but the bound directly applies to the CONGEST model as well! While we
will not prove it, we remark that the upper bounds that we provide in this work can be obtained
using bounded automatic round elimination.

Our results      We prove tight bounds for x-maximal y-matchings. Let
                                (
                                 2d(∆ − x)/ye,       if d∆/ye > d(∆ − x)/ye
                    T∆ (x, y) =
                                 2d(∆ − x)/ye − 1,   if d∆/ye = d(∆ − x)/ye .
We will start by proving the following theorem.
  2
    Note that bounds obtained by round elimination are usually bounds in ∆. In order to transform these bounds
into bounds in n, we simply have to consider graphs with suitably chosen ∆ (as a function of n).


                                                      3
Theorem 1.2. The x-maximal y-matching problem requires exactly T∆ (x, y) rounds for deterministic
algorithms in the port numbering model, even on 2-colored ∆-regular balanced trees.

    While an upper bound for the port numbering model directly implies also an upper bound for
the LOCAL model, the same is not true for lower bounds. However, we will show that these bounds
can be lifted to the LOCAL model, and obtain truly tight bounds in the LOCAL model for all
combinations of x,y, and ∆. Moreover, we will examine how large ∆ can be, as a function of n,
such that our lower bounds still hold:

Theorem 1.3. For any k ≥ 1, and for large enough ∆ and n, any randomized algorithm for
bipartite x-maximal y-matching that fails with probability at most 1/n in the LOCAL model requires
                                               1 log log n                        1/k .
at least T∆ (x, y) rounds, unless T∆ (x, y) ≥ 3k log log log n , or T∆ (x, y) ≤ ∆

    Note that this theorem implies tight bounds for problems such as the ∆2 -maximal log ∆-matching
problem, for graphs where ∆ is not too large as a function of n. While a randomized lower bound
directly implies the same deterministic lower bound, we will show that we can get better deterministic
bounds by relaxing our tightness requirements in ∆ from truly tight to asymptotically tight.

Theorem 1.4. For any k ≥ 1, and for large enough ∆ and n, any deterministic algorithm for
bipartite x-maximal y-matching in the LOCAL model requires Ω(min(T∆ (x, y), k1 log n/ log log n),
unless T∆ (x, y) ≤ ∆1/k .

1.1   Related Work
The maximal matching problem has been widely studied in the literature of distributed computing.
We know since the 80s that MM cannot be solved in constant time. In fact, the Ω(log∗ n) lower
bound by Linial for 3-coloring a cycle [20] implies a lower bound also for MM. Naor proved that
this lower bound holds also for randomized algorithms [21] .
    Concerning upper bounds, we also know since the 80s that MM can be solved in O(log n) rounds
using a randomized algorithm [16], and there has been a lot of effort in trying to obtain also
good deterministic complexities. The first polylogarithmic deterministic algorithm was provided by
Hanckowiak et al. [13], who showed that MM can be solved in O(log7 n) rounds. The same authors
later improved the upper bound to O(log4 n) [14]. More recently, Fischer substantially improved
this bound to O(log2 ∆ log n) [11]. If the degree of the input graph is small, there is a very efficient
algorithm by Panconesi and Rizzi [23], that runs in O(∆ + log∗ n) rounds and thus matches, as a
function of n, Linial’s lower bound. In the meantime, also the upper bound on the randomized
complexity of MM has been improved. Barenboim et al. [5, 6] and Fischer [11] showed that MM
can be solved in poly log log n time, by paying only an additive log ∆ dependency.
    In 2004, Kuhn et al. [17, 18, p19] substantially improved Linial’s lower bound: they showed
that MM cannot be solved in o( log n/ log log n + log ∆/ log log ∆), and this bound holds also for
randomized algorithms. After that, different works made progress in obtaining a better understanding
of the complexity of MM as a function of ∆. First, Hirvonen and Suomela [15] proved that if we
are only given an edge coloring (but no IDs and no randomness) then indeed this problem requires
Ω(∆) rounds. Then, a similar technique has been used to show an Ω(∆) lower bound for fractional
matchings, under the assumption that the running time of the algorithm does not depend on n at
all [12]. Finally, a lower bound for the LOCAL model has been proved by Balliu et al. [2], who
showed that MM cannot be solved in o(∆ + log log n/ log log log n) by randomized algorithms and
o(∆ + log n/ log log n) by deterministic ones.



                                                   4
2     Preliminaries
2.1    Model of Computing
In this work, we will mainly consider two different models of distributing computing, namely, the
port numbering model and the LOCAL model.
    In the port numbering model, we are given a graph G = (V, E), where nodes represent computing
entities, and edges represent communication links. The computation is synchronous: all nodes start
in the same round, and in each round each node can send a different message to each neighbor,
receive messages sent by the neighbors, and perform some local computation. In this model, nodes
are anonymous, that is, they have no IDs, but they can distinguish neighbors using port numbers.
Each node v has deg(v) ports, and each edge is connected to a specific port. If an edge {u, v} ∈ E
is connected to port i of node u and port j of node v, then node u can decide to send a message to
its port number i, and the message will be received by node v on port j. That is, nodes can refer to
ports.
    Depending on the context, we may assume that nodes initially know the size of the graph n = |V |,
and the maximum degree of the graph ∆. Also, in a randomized algorithm in the port numbering
model, each node is provided with an unbounded number of private random bits. We say that a
randomized algorithm succeeds with high probability if the output of all nodes is globally correct
with probability at least 1 − 1/n. The running time of an algorithm is the number of communication
rounds required before all nodes output their part of the solution.
    The LOCAL model is defined similarly. The only difference is that in this case nodes are not
anonymous, that is, they are provided with unique IDs in {1, . . . , nc } for some constant c ≥ 1.

2.2    Automatic Round Elimination
In order to obtain our lower bounds we will make use of the automatic round elimination framework
developed in [7], in the bipartite formulation used first in [2]. For any problem we will consider, the
input will be a ∆-regular bipartite graph. As we will prove lower bounds, this does not restrict the
generality of our results. We refer to the nodes on one side of the bipartition as white nodes and
the nodes on the other side as black nodes. Each node is aware of the bipartition, i.e., it knows
whether it is a white or a black node.

Problems In the bipartite round elimination framework (which, for simplicity, we will describe
only for ∆-regular graphs), a problem Π is formally given by an alphabet Σ, a white constraint W ,
and a black constraint B. Both W and B are a collection of words of length ∆ over the alphabet Σ,
where technically each word is to be considered as a multiset, i.e., the order of the ∆ elements in a
word does not matter and the same element can appear repeatedly in a word. A correct output for
Π is a labeling of the edges of the input graph with one label from Σ per edge such that

    1. the white constraint is satisfied, i.e., for each white node u, the output labels assigned to the
       ∆ edges incident to u form a word from W , and

    2. the black constraint is satisfied, i.e, for each black node v, the output labels assigned to the ∆
       edges incident to v form a word from B.

Each word in W is called a white configuration, and each word in B a black configuration. To
succinctly represent multiple configurations in one expression, we will make use of regular expressions,
e.g., we will write [M ][P O]∆−1 to describe the collection of all configurations consisting of exactly one
M , and a P or an O at every other position. For simplicity, we will also call such a regular expression

                                                    5
a (white or black) configuration. Where required, we will clarify which kind of configuration is
considered by using the terms single configuration and condensed configuration (the latter indicating
a regular expression). Moreover, we will use the term disjunction to refer to parts of a regular
expression describing that each choice of a subset of labels is valid, such as [P O]. Notice that the
encoding of a problem can look quite different if its configurations are condensed in different ways.
This is just a syntactic difference: if two different sets of condensed configurations generate the
same set of single configurations, then the two sets encode the same constraint.
    We remark that even though we only consider ∆-regular graphs, it is possible to also encode
locally checkable problems that are not only defined on ∆-regular graphs in a similar way. We also
note that if we restrict attention to trees or high-girth graphs, any locally checkable problem can
be described in this form. In fact, by increasing the number of labels, it is possible to encode any
output constraint that depends on the constant-radius neighborhood of each node. In the remainder
of the paper, we will use the term “locally checkable problem” (or simply “problem”) to refer to
problems of the above kind.

Example Let us look at an example that shows how to encode BMM. In BMM we basically have
to ensure two constraints: a node cannot have two incident edges in the matching, and if a node
does not have any incident edge in the matching, then all its neighbors must have at least one.
    We start by defining the white constraints as follows:

                                              MO∆−1
                                              P∆


In other words, a white node either outputs M on an edge (the matched edge) and O on all the
others, or it outputs P (pointer) on all edges. We now need to ensure that the pointers reach only
matched black nodes. Thus, we define black constraints as follows:

                                             M[OP]∆−1
                                             O∆


That is, a black node accepts a pointer only if one of its edges is labeled as M. Clearly, a solution
satisfying these constraints is a matching (two Ms are never allowed). Maximality is guaranteed by
the following observations:

   • In order for white nodes to not be matched, they need to write P on all edges. These Ps must
     reach matched black nodes, since on the black side Ps are accepted only if an M is present.

   • In order for black nodes to not be matched, they need to have all edges marked with the label
     O, and Os are written by white nodes only if they are matched.

Technically, what we defined is not exactly BMM: if we are given a solution for BMM, where the
edges are either marked to be part of the matching or not, we do not have edges marked with
pointers. Nevertheless, white nodes can produce these pointers in 0 rounds. That is, the problem
that we defined is equivalent to BMM.




                                                   6
Algorithms We will distinguish between white algorithms and black algorithms. In a white
algorithm, each white node decides on the output labels for all incident edges whereas black nodes
take part in the usual communication but have no say in deciding on the output; in a black algorithm,
the roles are reversed. The white complexity (resp. black complexity) of a given problem is the
usual time complexity of the problem where we restrict attention to white algorithms (resp. black
algorithms). White and black complexities cannot differ by more than one round as any white node
can inform any black neighbor of the intended output label for the connecting edge, and vice versa.
    Notice that if we consider, e.g., a white algorithm, black nodes do not actually need to know the
output given by white nodes. If we consider the more standard assumption where both nodes that
are incident to the same edge know the output for that edge, we see that such an algorithm requires
at most one round more than what is required by either a white or a black algorithm. However, in
the bipartite round elimination framework, such algorithms require an extra step of argumentation
which we omit for simplicity, by considering only white and black algorithms. We emphasize that
the tightness of our MM bound does not depend on this choice, just the bound itself: in the setting
where both endpoints of an edge have to know the output for that edge, the tight bound is 2∆,
instead of 2∆ − 1.

Round Elimination Theorems The automatic round elimination theorem given in [7, Theorem
4.3], roughly speaking, states that for any locally checkable problem Π, there exists another locally
checkable problem Π0 that can be solved exactly one round faster if we restrict attention to high-girth
graphs, i.e., graphs where the cycle of smallest length is sufficiently long. A useful fact observed in
[2] is that the given proof also extends to the case of hypergraphs, and hence can also be phrased in
the context of bipartite graphs, by interpreting nodes as one side of the bipartition and hyperedges
as the other side. In order to satisfy the conditions of [7, Theorem 4.3], we will restrict our attention
to the class of regular, bipartite graphs with a girth of at least 4∆ + 2, for the remainder of the
paper. We will see that our lower bounds hold already for this restricted graph class. Now, we can
formulate [7, Theorem 4.3] in our setting as follows.3
Theorem 2.1 ([7], rephrased). Let Π be a locally checkable problem with white (resp. black)
complexity T (n, ∆). Then there exists a locally checkable problem RB (Π) (resp. RW (Π)) with black
(resp. white) complexity min{0, T (n, ∆) − 1}.
   The problem RB (Π) is constructed explicitly in [7]. Translated to our setting, we obtain RB (Π)
from Π as follows.
   Let ΣΠ , WΠ , and BΠ denote the alphabet, white constraint, and black constraint of Π. The
alphabet ΣRB (Π) of RB (Π) is simply the set 2ΣΠ of all subsets of ΣΠ . In order to describe the
black constraint of RB (Π), we first construct an intermediate collection B 0 of configurations over
ΣRB (Π) . Let B 0 be the collection of all configurations F1 , . . . , F∆ with Fi ∈ 2ΣΠ such that for each
choice f1 ∈ F1 , . . . , f∆ ∈ F∆ of labels from ΣΠ , it holds that f1 , . . . , f∆ is a configuration in BΠ .
We now obtain BRB (Π) from B 0 by removing all configurations F1 , . . . , F∆ that are not maximal,
   3
    For the reader interested in the technical subtleties of our rephrasing, four remarks are in order: 1) The edge
orientations prescribed in [7, Theorem 4.3] are simply given by the port numberings (of the nodes on one side of the
bipartition) in our setting. 2) In our setting the nodes do not see the port numbering of adjacent nodes in a 0-round
algorithm, while the nodes in [7] do see the edge orientations; however, it is straightforward to check that the proof is
not affected by this change. 3) If Π can be solved in 0 rounds, then the proof of [7, Theorem 4.3] ensures that this
also holds for Π0 ; hence we can replace the condition of a strictly positive complexity of Π by a minimum expression.
4) As the nodes on one side of the bipartition in our setting correspond to (hyper)edges in the original setting, the
step from Π to RB (Π) (resp. RW (Π)) in our setting corresponds either to the first step from Π to the intermediate
problem Π1/2 given in the proof of [7, Theorem 4.3], or to the step from Π1/2 to the final problem Π1 (depending on
whether we consider white or black nodes as (hyper)edges).


                                                           7
i.e., for which it is possible to obtain another configuration from B 0 by adding elements to the Fi
(more precisely, at least one element to at least one of the Fi ). Since the above removal process
ensures that for each non-maximal configuration there always remains a “super-configuration” in
the collection, the order in which the non-maximal configurations are removed does not matter.
     Similarly, to obtain WRB (Π) , we first construct an intermediate collection W 0 of configurations
over ΣRB (Π) . Let W 0 be the collection of all configurations F10 , . . . , F∆
                                                                              0 with F 0 ∈ 2ΣΠ such that
                                                                                               i
there exists a choice f10 ∈ F10 , . . . , f∆
                                           0 ∈ F 0 of labels from Σ such that f 0 , . . . , f 0 is a configuration
                                                ∆                  Π           1             ∆
in WΠ . We now obtain WRB (Π) from W 0 by removing each configuration that contains some set Fi0
that does not appear in any of the configurations in the black constraint BRB (Π) .
     So, roughly speaking, apart from some simplifications on top of it, we obtain the new black
constraint by “applying” the universal quantifier to the old black constraint, and the new white
constraint by “applying” the existential quantifier to the old white constraint.
     We define RW (Π) analogously to RB (Π), with the only difference that the role of white and
black is reversed. The following observation follows immediately from the definition of our functions
RB () and RW ().
Observation 2.2. Let Π be some problem, and assume we have already computed the black constraint
of RB (Π) (resp. the white constraint of RW (Π)). Then the white constraint of RB (Π) can be obtained
by iterating through the white configurations of Π and replacing in each configuration each label L by
the disjunction of all sets that occur in the black constraint of RB (Π) and contain label L. Similarly,
the black constraint of RW (Π) can be obtained by iterating through the black configurations of Π
and replacing in each configuration each label L by the disjunction of all sets that occur in the white
constraint of RW (Π) and contain label L.
    As the alphabet of a problem obtained by applying the function RB () (resp. RW ()) consists of
sets of the original labels, we will need to be careful with notation. In order to clearly distinguish the
set consisting of some labels X, Y, Z from the disjunction [XYZ], we will write it as XYZ . Moreover,
we say that a configuration F1 , . . . , F∆ consisting of sets of labels can be extended to a configuration
C if C can be obtained from F1 , . . . , F∆ by adding (potentially everywhere 0) elements to the sets Fi .

Example We will now show an example of the application of this technique. We will consider
the bipartite sinkless orientation problem [8], where white constraints can be simpliy described as
B[AB]∆−1 , and black constraint can be described as A[AB]∆−1 . Intuitively, the label A represents
an edge oriented from black to white, while B represents an edge oriented from white to black, and
the constraints require both black and white nodes to have at least an outgoing edge: B for white
nodes and A for black nodes.
    We start by applying the universal quantifier on the black constraint. Essentially, we must forbid
all words where all the ∆ sets contain a B, otherwise it would be possible to pick the configuration
B∆ that is not allowed by the black constraint. Hence, we obtain the following:
                                                            ∆−1
                                                A [ A B AB ]

We can now apply maximality, and since in the disjunction [ A B AB ] the label AB strictly contains
all the others, we get the following:
                                                            ∆−1
                                                    A AB

We can now apply the existential quantifier on the white constraint. The white constraint basically
requires to be able to pick at least one B, hence, we now need at least one set containing a B:
                                            [ B AB ][ A B AB ]∆−1


                                                        8
By removing labels that are not used in the universal step, we get the following:
                                                        ∆−1
                                             AB [ A AB ]


We can now rename the sets to obtain something more readable. We can use the following renaming:

                                                 A   →A
                                                AB   →B

Thus, the black constraint of RB (Π) can be described as AB∆−1 , while the white constraint can be
described as B[AB]∆−1 .

Relaxations As mentioned in the introduction, a crucial part of successfully applying automatic
round elimination is to find good relaxations of problems. We say that a problem Π0 is a white
relaxation of a problem Π if there is a 0-round white algorithm that transforms any arbitrary correct
output for Π into a correct output for Π0 . More specifically, in this 0-round algorithm, each white
node sees, for all incident edges e, the given output label (for Π) on e, and its task is to relabel each
incident edge (possibly with the same label as before) such that the global output is correct. We
define a black relaxation analogously. It immediately follows from the definition that the relaxation
of a relaxation of a problem is again a relaxation of the problem.
    A simple way to find a relaxation of a problem is to replace a fixed label everywhere by another
label. Any white or black node can solve the new problem in 0 rounds given a solution to the old
problem, by just performing the corresponding relabeling everywhere.

Observation 2.3. Let Π be a problem, and K, L ∈ ΣΠ labels. Then replacing all occurrences of
label K in both WΠ and BΠ by label L results in a problem Π0 that is a relaxation of Π.

    A more interesting way to find relaxations of problems given via white and black constraints
starts by ordering the labels occuring in the constraints according to their strength, which roughly
corresponds to their usefulness for outputting a correct configuration. Consider the black constraint
BΠ of some problem Π. For two labels K, L ∈ ΣΠ , we say that L is at least as strong as K (according
to BΠ ) if for each K appearing in some configuration in BΠ , replacing that K by an L results again
in some configuration in BΠ . Equivalently, we say that K is at least as weak as L (according to BΠ ),
and write K ≤B L. If K is at least as weak as L, but L is not at least as weak as K, then we say
that L is stronger than K, and K weaker than L. If K is at least as weak as L, and L is at least
as weak as K, we say that K and L are equally strong. We define these concepts and notations
analogously for white constraints. Now, we can use the strengths of labels to find relaxations as
follows.

Lemma 2.4. Let Π be a problem, and K, L ∈ ΣΠ labels such that L is at least as strong as K
according to BΠ (resp. WΠ ). Then replacing an arbitrary number of labels K in WΠ (resp. BΠ ) by
label L results in a problem Π0 that is a white (resp. black) relaxation of Π.

Proof. For reasons of symmetry it is sufficient to prove the lemma for the case of replacing the
labels in WΠ . We obtain a 0-round algorithm as required in the definition of a relaxation as follows.
Given a solution to Π (on each incident edge), each white node v simply replaces as many incident
occurrences of label K by L as have been replaced in the configuration the solution of Π around v
corresponds to. This satisfies the white constraint by definition. But also the black constraint is
satisfied since replacing occurrences of label K by L preserves that a configuration is contained in
BΠ due to the fact that L is at least as strong as K, and BΠ0 = BΠ .

                                                     9
   Recall that the labels used to describe a problem obtained by applying the function RB () (resp.
RW ()) to some problem Π are sets of labels of Π. The following observation follows immediately
from the definition of RB () (resp. RW ()).
Observation 2.5. Let Π be a problem, and K, L ∈ 2ΣΠ labels of the problem RB (Π) (resp. RW (Π)).
If K ⊆ L, then L is at least as strong as K according to the white constraint of RB (Π) (resp. to the
black constraint of RW (Π)).
   To visualize the strengths of the labels according to the black (resp. white) constraint of a
problem, we can draw a diagram as follows. For any two labels K, L ∈ ΣΠ , we draw an arrow from
K to L if
   1. K and L are equally strong, or

   2. L is stronger than K and there is no label M such that M is stronger than K, and L is
      stronger than M .
We call the obtained diagram the black (resp. white) diagram of Π.

Example Consider the following problem Π (for the curious reader, this problem is exactly 2
rounds easier than BMM). The white constraint is the following:

                                              MO∆−1
                                              YP∆−1
                                              XZO∆−2

The black constraint is the following:

                                         [MYX][PYOX]∆−1
                                         [ZMPYOX][OX]∆−1

The black diagram of Π is the following:
                                              M        Y


                                         Z                 X


                                              P        O


Notice that there is an arrow from Y to X, since each time Y is allowed in a black configuration, the
label X is allowed as well. We can thus simplify the problem Π according to Lemma 2.4 using labels
X and Y. In particular, we can replace all occurences of Y with X in the white constraint, and thus
get rid of Y also in the black constraint. We obtain the following new white constraint:

                                              MO∆−1
                                              XP∆−1
                                              XZO∆−2

The new black constraint is the following:

                                         [MX][POX]∆−1
                                         [ZMPOX][OX]∆−1

                                                  10
White-Black Dualism So far, we have seen a number of definitions and results that have two
versions: one for white nodes, algorithms, configurations, etc., and one for the black equivalent. In
fact, the white and black versions are completely dual: they only differ in exchanging the role of
white and black. Moreover, this behavior will hold throughout the entirety of the paper. Hence, we
will use the following convention in the remainder of the paper.
Convention 2.6. For simplicity, we will formulate any theorem and lemma for which there is a
white and a black version only in one of the two versions. Moreover, by giving a theorem and lemma
for which all ingredients are defined if we exchange the terms “white” and “black”, we implicitly
state that also its dual version holds. We will refer to the dual of a stated theorem or lemma by
simply referring to the theorem or lemma in its original version; the context in which the statement
is referred indicates which version is meant.

From the port numbering model to the LOCAL model The round elimination theorem
can be used to get lower bounds for deterministic algorithms in the port numbering model, where it
is assumed that nodes have no IDs and no access to random bits. The usual way [1, 2] to lift lower
bounds obtained with this technique to the LOCAL model is the following. First, we incorporate
the analysis of failure probabilities in the round elimination theorem, i.e., we show that if Π can be
solved in T rounds using a white randomized algorithm with some failure probability p, then RB (Π)
can be solved in T − 1 rounds using a black randomized algorithm with some failure probability p0 ,
where p0 is not much larger than p. Using this version of the theorem, we can repeatedly apply round
elimination, until either we get a 0 round solvable problem or we get a too large failure probability.
This allows us to obtain a lower bound for randomized algorithms for the port numbering model,
and since by using randomness it is also possible to generate unique IDs with high probability of
success, then the same lower bound holds in the LOCAL model as well.
    Notice that we do not have to actually prove a randomized version of Theorem 2.1: a randomized
version of the round elimination theorem has been shown in [1], where it has also been shown that, if
the number of labels is bounded at each step, then we can automatically lift a lower bound obtained
with this technique to the LOCAL model.
    Also, since a lower bound for randomized algorithms implies also a lower bound for deterministic
algorithms, we immediately get as a corollary a lower bound for the LOCAL model for deterministic
algorithms.
    We can then get even better lower bounds for deterministic algorithms by exploiting known gap
results: we know that for locally checkable problems some complexities are not possible, and if we
get as lower bound a complexity T that falls into one of these gaps, we immediately get as new
lower bound the smallest complexity T 0 , larger than T , for which the gap does not hold anymore.


3    Roadmap
In √
   the breakthrough result of Balliu et al. [2], the round elimination technique yielded only an
Ω( ∆) lower bound for BMM, and different techniques were necessary to lift the result to an Ω(∆)
lower bound. One of our contributions is to show the reason why a full Ω(∆) lower bound was
not achieved via round elimination: the relaxations performed at each step were too severe. In
fact, the main issue of the approach in [2] is the following. After each step of round elimination,
some simplifying relaxations are performed in order to obtain a problem that can be described
using just 4 labels. By performing such simplifications, a special label called wildcard appears:
this is a powerful label that can replace any other label in any configuration without invalidating
the configuration. The issue is now the following: by performing a round elimination step on

                                                 11
a problem where valid configurations contain some number of wildcards, the obtained resulting
problem contains configurations with√many more wildcards. In particular, the number of wildcards
grows quadratically. Hence, after O( ∆) round elimination steps the obtained problem description
contains so many wildcards that the problem is 0-round solvable.
    What we can show is that, if we allow just one more label at each step, hence 5 instead of 4, then
the number of wildcards does not grow at all; instead we obtain a linear growth on some parameter
that controls how easy the problem is. In this way, for BMM, we can perform 2∆ − 1 steps of
round elimination before getting to a 0-rounds solvable problem. Since we can also provide an upper
bound with the same number of rounds, this implies that the simplifications that we perform are
not making the problem easier at all: they produce a problem that is easier to describe but that
has the same round complexity as the one before the respective simplification. We will actually
prove a stronger result: using 5 labels we can prove exact bounds for the whole family of bipartite
x-maximal y-matchings.
    Hence, the family of problems that we provide in the lower bound proof really captures the
essence of BMM and its variants: for each given variant of BMM and any i, we describe in a compact
form a problem that is exactly i rounds easier than the given variant.

Round elimination We start by defining a family of problems Ψ∆ (a, b, c), described by 3
parameters. Then, we prove that the problem Ψ∆ (y, x, 0) is exactly 2 rounds easier than the
bipartite x-maximal y-matching problem (recall that bipartite 0-maximal 1-matching is standard
BMM). Then, we relate problems in the family: we will show that the problem Ψ∆ (a, c + a, b) is at
least one round easier than Ψ∆ (a, b, c) (the results that we provide in the upper bound section will
imply that Ψ∆ (a, c + a, b) is actually exactly one round easier than Ψ∆ (a, b, c)). In this way, we get
a full characterization of all the problems in the family. Crucially, all the problems of the family are
described using only 5 labels, and while the result of the round elimination technique may contain
more than 5 labels, we will provide relaxations that allow us to map these problems back to this
family.

Lower bounds for bipartite x-maximal y-matchings We will then prove that, for some values
of a, b, c, the problem Ψ∆ (a, b, c) cannot be solved in 0 rounds, and we will then show what lower
bounds this implies for bipartite x-maximal y-matchings. In particular, we will obtain tight-in-∆
lower bounds for the port numbering model.

Upper bounds Then, we will prove upper bounds for the whole family of bipartite x-maximal
y-matchings. These upper bounds will match exactly the lower bounds that we provided.

Lifting the bounds to the LOCAL model At this point we have lower bounds for plenty of
variants of matchings, for the port numbering model. We now need to lift these bounds to the
LOCAL model. The first step is to prove a randomized lower bound for the port numbering model,
that directly implies a lower bound for the LOCAL model as well, since it is possible to generate
unique IDs in constant time. Then, while a randomized lower bound directly implies a deterministic
lower bound, we will obtain a better deterministic lower bound using standard techniques.

Behind the scenes We will then informally discuss about what we mean by automatic lower
and upper bounds. We will briefly explain how, part of our results concerning both lower and upper
bounds can be actually obtained automatically, not in theory but also in practice.



                                                  12
Open questions We will finally conclude with some open questions regarding round elimination,
and in particular about how different can be lower bounds obtained by using bounded automatic
round elimination, compared to what can be obtained by using the standard version of round
elimination for the same problem.


4    Lower Bounds
In this section, we will prove a lower bound for BMM that we will show to be tight in the LOCAL
model in Sections 5 and 6. In particular, our lower bound holds even in the restricted setting of
∆-regular trees. In order to obtain this bound, we will define a family F of problems that will help
us to describe the behavior of BMM in the round elimination framework. As it turns out, our way
of proving a lower bound via such a family of problems is very robust: we can also obtain tight lower
bounds for very natural variants of BMM by generalizing our problem family. In fact, we believe
that the general lower bound idea should also work for many other variants of BMM; however we
will only give an explicit proof for the variants we consider to be the most natural extensions of
BMM, namely those obtained by relaxing the packing and/or covering constraint used to define
BMM. To be more precise, if we relax the packing constraint, we allow each node to be matched
with up to y many neighbors, for some parameter y, and if we relax the covering constraint, we
allow each unmatched node to have up to x neighbors that are unmatched themselves, giving rise
to the already defined notion of x-maximal y-matchings. BMM appears as a special case in this
family, where we set x = 0 and y = 1; hence we will only give a general proof for the whole family
and obtain the proof for BMM as a special case.
     In order to obtain the desired lower bounds for all problems in this family, we define the
aforementioned problem family F (or more precisely, its extension that also describes the behavior
of all bipartite x-maximal y-matching problems), parameterized (for each fixed ∆) by three values
a, b, c. For each 1 ≤ a ≤ ∆ − 1 and 0 ≤ b, c ≤ ∆ such that a + b ≤ ∆ and a + c ≤ ∆, denote by
ΨW                    B
  ∆ (a, b, c) (resp. Ψ∆ (a, b, c)) the problem given by the white (resp. black) configurations

                                              Xa−1 MO∆−a
                                              Xa Ob P∆−a−b
                                              Xa ZO∆−a−1
and the black (resp. white) configurations
                                      [MZPOX]a−1 [MX][POX]∆−a
                                      [MZPOX]a [POX]c [OX]∆−a−c
                                      [MZPOX]a [X][POX]∆−a−1 .
The black diagram of ΨW  ∆ (a, b, c) is represented in Figure 1. For extreme values of a, b, c additional
arrows may be present.
    We now proceed as follows. In Lemma 4.2 and Lemma 4.3 we will prove that ΨW              ∆ (x, y, 0) is
exactly two rounds easier than the bipartite x-maximal y-matching problem. In Lemma 4.4 we
will prove that for most parameter values, the problems in the family ΨW     ∆ (a, b, c) are not 0-round
solvable. Finally, in Theorem 4.5 we will combine all the results of this section to prove a lower
bound for the bipartite x-maximal y-matching problem. We will now start by relating problems
in the family that we just defined, by showing in Lemma 4.1 that by applying Theorem 2.1 on
ΨW∆ (a, b, c) and performing some relaxations, we obtain a problem that is still in the same family,
but with different parameters.

                                                    13
                                                          M


                                              Z                          X


                                                      P            O


                                 Figure 1: The black diagram of ΨW
                                                                 ∆ (a, b, c).



Lemma 4.1. For any ∆ ≥ 2, 1 ≤ a ≤ ∆ − 1, 0 ≤ b ≤ ∆ − a, and 0 ≤ c ≤ ∆ − a, problem ΨB
                                                                                    ∆ (a, d, b)
is a black relaxation of RB (ΨW
                              ∆ (a, b, c)), where d = min{c + a, ∆ − a}.

Proof. Recall the definition of extending a configuration, and let d = min{c + a, ∆ − a}. We start
by showing that any configuration in the black constraint of RB (ΨW  ∆ (a, b, c)) can be extended to
one of the configurations
                                                  a−1                    ∆−a
                                          MZPOX           MX POX
                                                  a            d        ∆−a−d
                                          MZPOX       POX          OX
                                                  a                ∆−a−1
                                          MZPOX       X POX                  .

Consider an arbitrary configuration C in the black constraint of RB (ΨW           ∆ (a, b, c)), and recall that
the black constraint of RB (ΨW ∆  (a, b, c)) is obtained   by applying   the universal  quantifier to the white
                W
constraint of Ψ∆ (a, b, c). We distinguish three cases.
    If C contains the set X , then at most a of the other ∆ − 1 sets in C can contain an M or Z
since in each black configuration of ΨW    ∆ (a, b, c) there are at most a labels from {M, Z}. Hence the
remaining ∆ − a − 1 labels must be subsets of POX each. It follows that C can be extended to
 MZPOX a X POX ∆−a−1 .
    If C contains the set MX , then at most a − 1 of the other ∆ − 1 sets in C can contain an M or Z
since otherwise we would again be able to choose a + 1 labels contained in {M, Z} from a + 1 sets
in C which cannot result in a black configuration of ΨW       ∆ (a, b, c), no matter which labels are picked
from the remaining ∆ − a − 1 sets. Hence the remaining ∆ − a labels must be subsets of POX each,
and similarly to the previous case, we see that C can be extended to MZPOX a−1 MX POX ∆−a .
    Consider the last remaining case, i.e., that C contains neither the set X nor the set MX . Since
X is a label that is at least as strong as M according to the black constraint of ΨW         ∆ (a, b, c), any set
in C that contains M must also contain X as otherwise adding X to that particular set would still
result in a black configuration of RB (ΨW      ∆ (a, b, c)) which would violate the maximality condition
in the definition of RB (). It follows that C does not contain the set M . By a similar argument to
the previous one, any set in C containing Z must also contain P, and any set containing P must
also contain O, due to P being a label as strong as Z and O being a label as strong as P. Hence, it
follows that each set in C must contain the label O, since if a set does not contain O then it must
not contain P and Z as well, and this in turn would imply that the set is either X or MX , and
this case has already been covered. This implies that at most a + c sets in C can contain the label
P as otherwise we could choose a + c + 1 times the label P and ∆ − a − c − 1 times the label O
from the sets in C which does not yield a black configuration of ΨW           ∆ (a, b, c). Moreover, with an
argumentation analogous to the one in the first case, we see that at most a sets in C can contain an
M or Z, and we can extend these sets to MZPOX . The other ∆ − a sets must be subsets of POX ,
and at most d = min{c + a, ∆ − a} of them can contain a P. We extend these sets to POX . All
other sets are extended to OX . It follows that C can be extended to MZPOX a POX d OX ∆−a−d .
    Now, Lemma 2.4 in conjunction with Observation 2.5 tells us that replacing the black constraint



                                                          14
of RB (ΨW
        ∆ (a, b, c)) by the configurations

                                               a−1                  ∆−a
                                       MZPOX         MX POX
                                               a          d        ∆−a−d
                                       MZPOX       POX        OX
                                               a              ∆−a−1
                                       MZPOX       X POX               .

will result in a black relaxation of RB (ΨW   ∆ (a, b, c)). What is left to be done is to compute the
white constraint of this relaxation. As we performed the above relaxation, formally we cannot
directly apply Observation 2.2, but the same idea works: the definition of our function RB () still
ensures that we can obtain the white constraint of the relaxation by iterating through the white
configurations of ΨW ∆ (a, b, c) and replacing in each configuration each label L by the disjunction of
all sets that occur in the black constraint of the relaxation and contain label L. We obtain that the
white constraint is given by the configurations

                  [ X MX OX POX MZPOX ]a−1 [ MX MZPOX ][ OX POX MZPOX ]∆−a
                  [ X MX OX POX MZPOX ]a [ OX POX MZPOX ]b [ POX MZPOX ]∆−a−b
                  [ X MX OX POX MZPOX ]a [ MZPOX ][ OX POX MZPOX ]∆−a−1 .

Finally, renaming the sets in the black and white constraint of the relaxation according to

                                                     X   →Z
                                                   OX    →P
                                               POX       →O
                                                   MX    →M
                                             MZPOX       →X ,

shows that the relaxation is identical to ΨB
                                           ∆ (a, d, b), thereby proving the lemma.

    In order to relate the x-maximal y-matching problem with the family F, we now redefine the
bipartite x-maximal y-matching problem in a way that conforms to the formalism used in Theorem
2.1. We will then prove that by applying Theorem 2.1 twice on this encoded version of x-maximal
y-matching and performing some relaxations, we get some problem in the family F. We will use 4
labels: M, O, X, and P. The label M represents a matched edge, and for both black and white nodes
it can appear on at most y incident edges. Also, we want unmatched white nodes to prove that they
have enough matched neighbors. Thus, we require that they output at least ∆ − x pointers using
the label P. Then, they can output X on all the other incident edges, where the label X represent a
wildcard. The P pointers must be incident to only black matched nodes. In order to require that
also unmatched black nodes have enough matched white neighbors, we limit the number of labels X
incident to an unmatched black node to x. The label O represents an unmatched edge, where no
pointer nor wildcard has been used. More formally, we define the bipartite x-maximal y-matching
problem as follows.
    For any 0 ≤ x ≤ ∆ and 1 ≤ y ≤ ∆, denote by ΦW                     B
                                                     ∆ (x, y) (resp. Φ∆ (x, y)) the problem given by
the white (resp. black) configurations

                                        [MOX]y−1 [M][OX]∆−y
                                        [PX]x [P]∆−x ,



                                                     15
                                                  M


                                          P       O         X


                               Figure 2: The black diagram of ΦW
                                                               ∆ (x, y).



and the black (resp. white) configurations

                                      [MPOX]y−1 [M][POX]∆−y
                                      [OX]x [O]∆−x .

The black diagram of ΦW  ∆ (x, y) is represented in Figure 2. For extreme values of x and y additional
arrows may be present.
    We now argue that the problem that we just defined is the x-maximal y-matching problem
previously defined in the introduction. In particular, this definition correctly encodes the bipartite
x-maximal y-matching problem, where the solution is given by edges labeled M. In fact, first, note
that each node is incident to at most y edges labeled M, hence the packing constraint is not violated.
Then, note that unmatched white nodes are incident to at least ∆ − x Ps, and since black nodes
incident to a P must also be incident to an M, then each white node has at most x unmatched
neighbors. Finally, note that unmatched black nodes are incident to at least ∆ − x Os, and since
white nodes incident to an O must also be incident to an M, then each black node has at most x
unmatched neighbors. Thus, the covering constraint is not violated. We now need to show that
given a solution to the bipartite x-maximal y-matching problem we can output a solution for this
problem with the encoding that we defined. This can be performed in 1 round of communication,
required by white nodes to be aware of which black neighbors are actually matched. Matched
white nodes output M on all matched edges and O on all the others, while unmatched white nodes
output P on all edges connecting them to matched black nodes, and X on all the others. This is
a valid solution, since the number of Ms incident to each node is at most y, at most x neighbors
of unmatched white nodes are also unmatched and thus white nodes are incident to at most x Xs,
and at most x neighbors of unmatched black nodes are also unmatched and thus at most x white
nodes output X on their ports. Notice that the bipartite x-maximal y-matching problem now has
two different meanings:
   • The natural and intuitive version where both black and white nodes know which edges are
     part of the matching, and nothing else.

   • The locally checkable encoded version, where only white nodes need to know the output, but
     they need to know which edges are part of the matching and which edges must be marked
     with P.
All the results that we prove in the paper about x-maximal y-matchings will refer to the locally
checkable encoded version. As we have seen, there is at most a 1-round difference between the
two versions. We remark that it is possible to show that any algorithm that solves the problem
in the original definition must in fact be aware of enough matched neighbors that it can output
the required pointers without the 1-round penalty, implying that these two problems are actually
equivalent.
    We now show how to connect the bipartite x-maximal y-matching problem (with the encoding
described above) to the family of previously defined problems. In particular, we define an intermediate
problem, and we apply Theorem 2.1 twice, once in Lemma 4.2 and once in Lemma 4.3, to show that
ΨW∆ (x, y, 0) is exactly two rounds easier than the bipartite x-maximal y-matching problem. The


                                                  16
                                                  M


                                                                     X


                                            P              O

                                Figure 3: The white diagram of Φ0 (x, y).


white diagram of the intermediate problem Φ0 (x, y) that we define is represented in Figure 3. For
extreme values of x and y additional arrows may be present.
Lemma 4.2. For any ∆ ≥ 2, 0 ≤ x ≤ ∆ and 1 ≤ y ≤ ∆ − 1, the problem Φ0 (x, y) given by the
black configurations

                                                Xy−1 MO∆−y
                                                Xy P∆−y ,

and the white configurations

                                      [MPOX]y−1 [MX][POX]∆−y
                                      [POX]x [OX]∆−x .

is a black relaxation of RB (ΦW
                              ∆ (x, y)).

Proof. Similarly to the proof of Lemma 4.1, we start by showing that any configuration in the black
constraint of RB (ΦW∆ (x, y)) can be extended to one of the configurations
                                                  y−1                ∆−y
                                           MPOX         M POX
                                                  y        ∆−y
                                           MPOX       OX         .

Consider an arbitrary configuration C in the black constraint of RB (ΦW   ∆ (x, y)). We distinguish two
cases.
    If C contains the set M , then at most y − 1 of the other ∆ − 1 sets in C can contain an M since
in each black configuration of ΦW ∆ (x, y), there are at most y labels M. Hence, the remaining ∆ − y
labels must be subsets of POX each, and it follows that C can be extended to MPOX y−1 M POX ∆−y .
    If C does not contain the set M , then each set in C cannot contain P as otherwise we could
choose one P and ∆ − 1 further labels that are all different from M from the ∆ sets in C, which does
not yield a black configuration of ΦW ∆ (x, y). Using, again, the fact that in each black configuration
of Φ∆ (x, y) there are at most y labels M, it follows that C can be extended to MPOX y OX ∆−y .
     W

    By applying Lemma 2.4 and Observation 2.5, we obtain that replacing the black constraint of
RB (ΦW ∆ (x, y)) by the configurations
                                                  y−1                ∆−y
                                           MPOX         M POX
                                                  y        ∆−y
                                           MPOX       OX         ,

will result in a black relaxation of RB (ΦW
                                          ∆ (x, y)). Computing the white configurations of the
relaxation in an analogous manner to the approach in Lemma 4.1, we obtain the configurations

                       [ M OX POX MPOX ]y−1 [ M MPOX ][ OX POX MPOX ]∆−y
                       [ OX POX MPOX ]x [ POX MPOX ]∆−x .


                                                        17
Finally, renaming the sets in the black and white constraint of the relaxation according to
                                                  M    →M
                                                 OX    →P
                                                 POX   →O
                                             MPOX      →X ,
shows that the relaxation is identical to Φ0 (x, y), thereby proving the lemma.
Lemma 4.3. For any ∆ ≥ 2, 0 ≤ x ≤ ∆ and 1 ≤ y ≤ ∆ − 1, problem ΨW
                                                                ∆ (y, x, 0) is a white
                   0
relaxation of RW (Φ (x, y)).
Proof. Similarly to the proof of Lemma 4.1, we start by showing that any configuration in the white
constraint of RW (Φ0 (x, y)) can be extended to one of the configurations
                                             y−1                 ∆−y
                                      MPOX         MX POX
                                             y         x        ∆−y−x
                                      MPOX       POX       OX
                                             y             ∆−y−1
                                      MPOX       X POX              .
Consider an arbitrary configuration C in the white constraint of RW (Φ0 (x, y)). We distinguish three
cases.
     Analogously to the argumentation in the case distinction in the proof of Lemma 4.1, we obtain
that if C contains the set X , then C can be extended to MPOX y X POX ∆−y−1 , and if C contains the
set MX , then C can be extended to MPOX y−1 MX POX ∆−y . Hence, consider the last remaining case,
i.e., that C contains neither the set X nor the set MX . Again, analogously to the argumentation in
the proof of Lemma 4.1, we see that each set in C must contain the label O, which in turn implies
that at most x sets in C can contain the label P. Since at most y sets in C can contain an M, it
follows that C can be extended to MPOX y POX x OX ∆−y−x .
     Continuing analogously to the proof of Lemma 4.1, by applying Lemma 2.4 and Observation 2.5,
and computing the black constraint, we obtain a white relaxation of RW (Φ0 (x, y)) that is given by
the white configurations
                                             y−1                 ∆−y
                                      MPOX         MX POX
                                             y         x        ∆−y−x
                                      MPOX       POX       OX
                                             y             ∆−y−1
                                      MPOX       X POX              .
and the black configurations
                    [ X MX OX POX MPOX ]y−1 [ MX MPOX ][ OX POX MPOX ]∆−y
                    [ X MX OX POX MPOX ]y [ POX MPOX ]∆−y .
Now adding the black configuration [ X MX OX POX MPOX ]y [ MPOX ][ OX POX MPOX ]∆−y−1 (which
can only relax the problem further) and renaming the sets according to
                                                   X   →Z
                                                 OX    →P
                                                 POX   →O
                                                 MX    →M
                                             MPOX      →X ,
yields a relaxation that is identical to ΨW
                                          ∆ (y, x, 0), thereby proving the lemma.


                                                   18
    We now prove that, if the parameters a, b, and c are not too large, then the problem ΨW
                                                                                          ∆ (a, b, c)
is not 0-round solvable.

Lemma 4.4. For any ∆ ≥ 2, 1 ≤ a ≤ ∆ − 1, 0 ≤ b ≤ ∆ − a − 1, and 0 ≤ c ≤ ∆ − a − 1, there is
no deterministic white algorithm that solves ΨW
                                              ∆ (a, b, c) in 0 rounds.

Proof. For a contradiction, assume that such a white algorithm exists. As it is deterministic, and
in the port numbering model each node has exactly the same information in the beginning, i.e.,
after 0 rounds, each white node will necessarily choose the same configuration C from the white
constraint and output the ∆ labels contained in C on the ∆ incident edges according to a fixed
bijective function that maps the set of port numbers (or, in other words, the set of incident edges)
to the (multi)set of ∆ labels in C. For each edge e, call the port number that the white endpoint of
e assigns to edge e the white port of e. From the above, it follows that for each label L in C, there
is a fixed port number γ such that each edge whose white port equals γ will receive the output L.
Therefore, w.l.o.g., we can assume the following. If C = Xa−1 MO∆−a , then each edge whose white
port equals 1 receives output label M; if C = Xa Ob P∆−a−b , then each edge whose white port equals
1 receives output label P; if C = Xa ZO∆−a−1 , then each edge whose white port equals 1 receives
output label Z. Note that for the second case, our choice of parameters ensures that C contains at
least one P.
    Now, consider a black node v such that the white port of each edge incident to v equals 1.
Clearly, there exist input graphs in which such a node occurs. Depending on which of the white
configurations was chosen as C, the multiset consisting of the output labels of the ∆ edges incident
to v is M∆ , P∆ , or Z∆ . As, due to our choice of parameters, none of these multisets is a black
configuration of ΨW ∆ (a, b, c), we obtain a contradiction to the correctness of the algorithm, which
proves the lemma.

   We finally combine all the results obtained above to prove a lower bound for the bipartite
x-maximal y-matching problem in the port numbering model.

Theorem 4.5. In the port numbering model, for any 0 ≤ x ≤ ∆ and 1 ≤ y ≤ ∆ − 1, the white
round complexity of bipartite x-maximal y-matching is at least

                         2d(∆ − x)/ye ,        if d∆/ye > d(∆ − x)/ye , and
                     2d(∆ − x)/ye − 1 ,        if d∆/ye = d(∆ − x)/ye .

In particular, the white round complexity of BMM is at least 2∆ − 1.

Proof. By Lemmas 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3, we obtain the following sequence of problems in the round
elimination framework if we start with bipartite x-maximal y-matching:
               0
  ΦW                      W              B              W                  B
   ∆ (x, y) → Φ (x, y) → Ψ∆ (y, x, 0) → Ψ∆ (y, y, x) → Ψ∆ (y, x + y, y) → Ψ∆ (y, 2y, x + y) → . . .

Each problem in the sequence is obtained from the previous problem by applying the function RB ()
or the function RW (), and additionally relaxing the obtained problem. By Theorem 2.1, it follows
that each problem has a black, resp. white complexity that is at least one round less than the
white, resp. black, complexity of the previous problem, depending on which of the two functions
was applied in the respective step.
    With an analogous argumentation to the one in the proof of Lemma 4.4, we can see that ΦW
                                                                                           ∆ (x, y)
has white round complexity 0 if and only if x = ∆ or y = ∆, and also Φ0 (x, y) has black round
complexity 0 if and only if x = ∆ or y = ∆. As the lemma assumes y < ∆ and only promises a


                                                 19
0-round lower bound for the case where x = ∆, the lemma statement holds for these cases. Hence,
assume that x < ∆ (and y < ∆).
    Consider first the case that d∆/ye > d(∆ − x)/ye, i.e., d(∆ − x)/ye ≤ d∆/ye − 1. Due to the
growth behavior of the parameters in the above sequence promised by Lemma 4.1, the problem
ΨB                                                                  W
  ∆ (y, b, c) obtained after 2d(∆ − x)/ye − 1 steps, starting from Φ∆ (x, y), satisfies

           b = (d(∆ − x) /ye − 1) · y ≤ ((d∆/ye − 1) − 1) · y ≤ ∆ − 1 − y ,            and
           c = x + (d(∆ − x) /ye − 2) · y ≤ x + (∆ − x − 1 − y) = ∆ − 1 − y .

By Lemma 4.4, we obtain that, for these parameters b and c, problem ΨB  ∆ (y, b, c) cannot be solved in
0 rounds by a black algorithm, which implies that the complexity of bipartite x-maximal y-matching
must be at least 2d(∆ − x)/ye.
    Now, consider the case that d∆/ye = d(∆ − x)/ye. Similarly to the previous case, we obtain
that the problem ΨW ∆ (y, b, c) in the above sequence obtained after 2d(∆ − x)/ye − 2 steps satisfies

         b = x + (d(∆ − x) /ye − 2) · y ≤ x + (∆ − x − 1 − y) = ∆ − 1 − y ,              and
         c = (d(∆ − x) /ye − 2) · y ≤ (d∆/ye − 2) · y ≤ ∆ − 1 − y .

Again, by Lemma 4.4, we obtain that, for these parameters b and c, problem ΨW ∆ (y, b, c) cannot be
solved in 0 rounds by a white algorithm, which implies that the complexity of bipartite x-maximal
y-matching must be at least 2d(∆ − x)/ye − 1.

   Note that for the case y = ∆, there is a trivial 0-round upper bound, which is why we do not
cover this case in Theorem 4.5.


5    Upper bounds
We will now prove upper bounds for the family of bipartite x-maximal y-matching problems. The
algorithm we provide is very similar to the proposal algorithm of Hanckowiak et al. [13], that works
as follows: for i = 1, . . . , ∆, at round 2i − 2, white nodes propose to be matched to their i-th
neighbor (if it exists), and black unmatched nodes accept a proposal and reject all the others. This
algorithm requires 2∆ rounds, but it can be made 1 round faster by making black nodes propose
and white nodes output. For the special case of BMM, i.e., bipartite 0-maximal 1-matching, the
algorithm that we propose achieves the same running time of the proposal algorithm. The main
difference is that, in the general case, our algorithm achieves a better intermediate state than the
proposal algorithm, i.e., the partial solution that it maintains at each step is better than the one
maintained by the original proposal algorithm, and this allows us to get exact bounds for the whole
family of problems. In the following, we will consider only the case where 1 ≤ y < ∆, since for
y = ∆ there exists a trivial 0-rounds algorithm that simply puts each edge into the matching.
    The high level idea of the algorithm is the following. White nodes start sending matching
proposals to y arbitrary black neighbors. Black nodes that receive proposals accept one and reject
the others. Black nodes that did not receive any proposal, send proposals to y white neighbors that
have not previously sent a proposal to the black node (but can be chosen arbitrarily apart from
that). White nodes that receive proposals and are not matched, accept one and reject the others.
By repeating this procedure for a sufficiently large number of rounds, we can ensure that if a black
or white node is still unmatched, then a large number of neighbors are already matched. This is the
main difference with the standard proposal algorithm, where only one side proposes: if we stop the
execution of the algorithm before its natural termination and we look at the partial solution that


                                                  20
it maintains, we see that the partial solution of the standard proposal algorithm maintains good
guarantees for one side only.
    We will now formally describe the procedure. Each node keeps track of the state of each incident
edge, by maintaining four sets:
   • The set F contains all free edges, i.e., the edges over which no request has ever been sent or
     received.

   • The set M contains all edges that are already part of the matching.

   • The set S contains all edges where the node sent a proposal.

   • The set R contains all edges where the node received a proposal.
Note that the design of the algorithm will ensure that each edge will be used for at most one
proposal in total, which implies that the set S and the set R are disjoint. In the beginning, each
node initializes the set F with all incident edges, and all the other sets as empty sets. Then, nodes
apply the following 1-round procedure repeatedly. Each round the role of active and passive is
reversed between black and white nodes. Initially, white nodes are active.
  1. Active nodes with M = ∅ do the following:

       (a) If R contains at least one edge e, send an acceptance over the edge e, and put e into the
           set M .
      (b) Otherwise, remove y edges from the set F (or all edges if |F | < y), add them to the set
          S, and send proposals over these edges.

  2. Passive nodes with M = ∅ do the following:

       (a) If acceptances are received over a set of edges E, add elements of E to M
      (b) If requests are received over a set of edges E, add elements of E to R.

If at some point M 6= ∅ for some node v, then v terminates.
    In the following, we prove that, by applying this procedure 2k times, we obtain a solution (known
by white nodes) for the bipartite x-maximal y-matching problem, where x = max{0, ∆ − ky}.
    Regarding the maximum number of incident edges in the matching, note that a node sends at
most y proposals in parallel, and if at least one is accepted, then the node stops participating in the
following phases. Thus, a node is matched with at most y neighbors.
    Next, we show that, for each node v, if M is empty after 2k steps, then min{deg(v), ky} neighbors
of v are matched (i.e., have non-empty M ). Notice that a node that is still unmatched after 2k
steps has been active for k steps, and in those steps it added a total of min{deg(v), ky} different
edges to the set S, and hence sent min{deg(v), ky} proposals. If all the proposals are rejected, it
means that the receivers of those proposals are matched with different nodes, and thus if a node v is
unmatched, then at least min{deg(v), ky} neighbors are matched. Notice that black nodes may not
know if they are matched or not: the proposals that they sent in round 2k are received by white
nodes that output the solution without informing black nodes about their decisions.
    Hence, if we want to solve the bipartite x-maximal y-matching problem, we can set k = d ∆−x    y e
                                  ∆−x
and obtain a running time of 2d y e. In order to satisfy the formal specifications of (the encoded
version of) the bipartite x-maximal y-matching problem, white matched nodes output M on matched
edges and O on all the others, while white unmatched nodes output P on all the edges where they
sent a proposal and X on all the others. This clearly bounds the number of X given as output by

                                                  21
white nodes correctly. Concerning black nodes, since an X cannot be given as output by a white
node on an edge where a black node sent a proposal, the number of X incident to black nodes is
also correctly bounded.
    Finally, note that if d∆/ye = d(∆ − x)/ye then we can save one round. In fact, in this case
we can solve the harder case where x = 0 and thus obtain strict maximality. For this purpose, we
can use the previously described algorithm (setting x = 0) and modify it as follows: black nodes
start and white nodes output. Notice in fact that if we run the original algorithm for just 2k − 1
rounds, instead of obtaining the maximality guarantee for both sides, we obtain the maximality
guarantee for one side only. But for x = 0, this is enough, since if one side is matched or proposed
to all neighbors, then there is no reason for the other side to send additional proposals.
    Thus, the bipartite x-maximal y-matching problem can be solved by a white algorithm in
                             2d(∆ − x)/ye ,          if d∆/ye > d(∆ − x)/ye , and
                         2d(∆ − x)/ye − 1 ,          if d∆/ye = d(∆ − x)/ye .


6       Lifting the lower bounds to the LOCAL model
In the previous sections we proved lower and upper bounds for the port numbering model. While
upper bounds for the port numbering model are trivially also upper bounds for the LOCAL model,
the same is not true for lower bounds. Hence, in this section we show how to lift the obtained lower
bounds to the LOCAL model. The proof ideas that we use are heavily inspired by the proofs in [2].
    In Sections 4 and 5 we proved that, on graphs with maximum degree ∆, the bipartite x-maximal
y-matching problem in the port numbering model requires exactly
                                (
                                  2d(∆ − x)/ye,         if d∆/ye > d(∆ − x)/ye
                    T∆ (x, y) =
                                  2d(∆ − x)/ye − 1,     if d∆/ye = d(∆ − x)/ye
rounds. In order to show this result, we applied the round elimination technique for exactly
T∆ (x, y) − 1 times, and at each time we performed simplifications that reduced the number of labels
to 5. We thus obtained a sequence of problems Π∆,x,y 0    , . . . , Π∆,x,y
                                                                     T∆ (x,y)−1 , where the first problem
Π∆,x,y
  0     is the initial problem ΦW                            0                      W
                                    ∆ (x, y), the second is Φ (x, y), the third is Ψ∆ (y, x, 0), and the last
is a problem that is still not solvable in 0 rounds (in the following we will omit the superscript and
just write Π0 , . . . , ΠT −1 ). We will not consider the exact problem sequence of Section 4, where for
problems with even index a white algorithm is considered and for problems with odd index a black
algorithm is considered. Instead, for simplicity, we will only consider white algorithms, and we will
consider a new sequence of problems that can be obtained by starting from the original sequence
and swap black and white constraints on problems with odd indexes. Notice that this is equivalent,
by just reversing the roles of black and white nodes on problems with odd indexes. Also, let S(Π)
be the problem obtained by swapping the black and the white constraints of Π.
    In order to get a lower bound for the LOCAL model, we first show how to obtain a randomized
lower bound for the port numbering model, and then we argue about what this bound implies for
the LOCAL model.
    In order to obtain a randomized lower bound for the port numbering model, the only thing that
we need to do is to replace the application of the round elimination theorem with a randomized
version of it: additionally to the problem sequence (that is the same as in the deterministic case),
we also have local failure probabilities 4 assigned to the problems in the sequence. In particular, we
    4
    While a global failure probability of at most 1/n implies that with probability at least 1 − 1/n no node of the
graph fails, a local failure probability of 1/n just requires that each node fails with probability at most 1/n.


                                                        22
will consider the sequence of problems Π0 , . . . , ΠT −1 and prove that if we assume that Π0 can be
solved in T − 1 rounds with some small local failure probability, then we obtain that ΠT −1 can be
solved in 0 rounds with some larger but still small enough local failure probability. We will then
prove that this last problem cannot be solved with small local failure probability, hence obtaining a
contradiction with the initial assumption.
    We do not need to prove a randomized version of the round elimination theorem: in [1] it has
been shown that for each subsequent problem in the sequence, we can give a bound on the local
failure probability as a function of ∆, the number of labels used to describe the previous problem,
and the bound on the local failure probability for the previous problem, i.e., we do not have to
take into account the black and white constraints, and we can hence use this result in a blackbox
manner. In particular, [1] showed the following result (rephrased for our purposes):

Lemma 6.1 (Lemma 41 of [1]). Let A be a white (resp. black) randomized t-round algorithm for
Π with local failure probability at most p in the port numbering model. Then there exists a black
(resp. white) randomized (t − 1)-round algorithm A0 for RB (Π) (resp. RW (Π)), with local failure
probability at most 21/(∆+1) (∆|ΣΠ |)∆/(∆+1) p1/(∆+1) + p.

    We can use this lemma to incorporate the given local failure probability analysis into the sequence
of problems Πi that we obtained. Since |ΣΠi | ≤ 5 for all problems in the family, we can rewrite the
upper bound on the local failure probability as

                        21/(∆+1) (∆|ΣΠ |)∆/(∆+1) p1/(∆+1) + p ≤ K∆p1/(∆+1)

for some constant K. Also, since we can reverse the roles of black and white nodes, we obtain the
following corollary:

Corollary 6.2. Let A be a white randomized t-round algorithm for Π with local failure probability
at most p in the port numbering model. Then there exists a white randomized (t − 1)-round algorithm
A0 for S(RB (Π)) with local failure probability at most K∆p1/(∆+1) , for some constant K.

   We will now prove the following lemma, that bounds the local failure probability after multiple
round elimination steps.

Lemma 6.3. Let A be a white t-round randomized algorithm for Π0 with local failure probability at
most p in the port numbering model. Then there exists a white randomized (t − j)-round algorithm
                                                               j
A0 for Πj with local failure probability at most (K∆)2 p1/(∆+1) for some constant K, for all j ≤ t.

Proof. We can apply Corollary 6.2 multiple times to get an upper bound on the local failure
probability after j steps of round elimination. We can prove by induction that the failure probability
pj after j steps is at most
                                                         j
                                          (K∆)2 p1/(∆+1) .
The base case holds trivially. For the induction step we have that
                                                       1/(∆+1)
                                        pj+1 ≤ K∆pj              .

By applying the induction hypothesis, we get that pj+1 is at most
                              j                                      j+1                  j+1
         K∆((K∆)2 p1/(∆+1) )1/(∆+1) ≤ (K∆)1+2/(∆+1) p1/(∆+1)               ≤ (K∆)2 p1/(∆+1)     .




                                                  23
   We now lower bound the local failure probability of a 0 rounds algorithm solving ΠT −1 .
Lemma 6.4. There is no white randomized algorithm that solves ΠT −1 in 0 rounds with local failure
probability p ≤ 1/∆2∆ in the port numbering model.
Proof. To show this lemma we will prove a stronger statement, namely, that for any problem
that does not admit a white deterministic algorithm in the port numbering model, there is no
white randomized algorithm solving it with local failure probability smaller than 1/∆2∆ in the port
numbering model. Let Π = (W, B) be a problem having white constraint W and black constraint B
using labels over the set L. Let W = {c1 , . . . , ck }. Notice that for the family of problems under
consideration k = O(∆), and |L| = 5.
    Any 0 rounds algorithm is just a probability assignment to each             P ci , that is, any 0 rounds
algorithm must output ci with some probability 0 ≤ pi ≤ 1, such that               pi = 1. By the pigeonhole
principle there must exist a configuration c̄ = ci such that pi ≥ 1/k. Hence, all white nodes output
the configuration c̄ with probability at least 1/k. Also, conditioned on the fact that a white node
outputs the configuration c̄, for each label ` ∈ L that appears in c̄ there must be a port number j
where ` is written with probability at least 1/∆.
    Since Π is not 0 rounds solvable in the port numbering model, then there exists a configuration
b̄ = {`1 , . . . , `∆ } that is not in B, such that `j ∈ c̄ for all j. Let us now consider a black node and
let us connect ∆ white nodes w1 , . . . , w∆ to it in some specific way. Node wi will output `i on some
                                        1
port j with probability at least k∆       . We connect port j to port i of the black node. Thus, the black
node will be incident to the bad configuration b̄ with probability at least
                                                    1
                                                  (k∆)∆

Since in our case the white constraint contains O(∆) configurations (actually O(∆) for the first
problem of the sequence and then 3 for all the others), for large enough ∆ the claim follows.

    We now lower bound the local failure probability of a randomized algorithm for Π0 running in
t = T − 1 rounds, in order to show that if an algorithm for Π0 runs “too fast” then it must fail with
large probability.
    By applying Lemma 6.3 and setting j = t = T − 1 we get that if there is a (T − 1)-algorithm
for Π0 fails with probability at most p, then there is a 0-round algorithm for ΠT −1 that fails with
                                   t
probability at most (K∆)2 p1/(∆+1) for some constant K. Now, by applying Lemma 6.4 we obtain
that
                                                     t
                                     (K∆)2 p1/(∆+1) ≥ 1/∆2∆
For large enough ∆, we get that
                                                1             1
                                   p≥                      ≥ ∆2t+3
                                        ((K∆)2 ∆2∆ )(∆+1)t  2
Hence, we obtain the following result:
Lemma 6.5. A white randomized algorithm for bipartite x-maximal y-matching for graphs of
maximum degree ∆ that runs in strictly less than T = T∆ (x, y) rounds must fail with probability at
        1
least ∆2T +1 in the port numbering model.
     2

   We are now ready to prove lower bounds for the LOCAL model. Our goal will be to show
lower bounds for randomized algorithms in the LOCAL model, for all ∆ ≤ ∆,  ¯ where we will try
to make ∆¯ as large as possible, as a function of n. Since in the port numbering model we can

                                                    24
easily generate unique IDs with high probability of success, a lower bound for this model directly
implies a lower bound for the LOCAL model. Thus, the only thing that we need to take care of
is to show the largest possible lower bound, as a function of ∆ and n, that does not violate the
previous assumptions, that is, in order to apply the round elimination technique our lower bound
graph family must contain a large enough tree-like neighborhood, and we need to choose the right
value of ∆ such that we can apply Lemma 6.5 (in particular, if ∆, as a function of n, is too large,
Lemma 6.5 would not imply large failure probability).
    By definition, any randomized algorithm in the LOCAL model has a global failure probability
of at most 1/n, hence also each node must have a local failure probability of at most 1/n. In order
to get the best possible lower bound in terms of n, we can choose the largest possible value of ∆ (as
a function of n) such that:

   • There is a graph containing a tree-like ∆-regular neighborhood of radius T∆ (x, y) + 1 (a
     necessary condition to apply the round elimination theorem).

   • By applying Lemma 6.5 we get a local failure probability that is larger than 1/n (implying
     that T∆ (x, y) − 1 rounds are not enough to solve the problem with local failure probability at
     most 1/n).

We will prove the following lemma, that states that bipartite x-maximal y-matchings that are not
too relaxed are hard in the LOCAL model.

Lemma 6.6. For any k ≥ 1, and for large enough ∆ and n, a white randomized algorithm for
bipartite x-maximal y-matching that fails with probability at most 1/n in the LOCAL model requires
                                               1
at least T∆ (x, y) rounds, unless T∆ (x, y) ≥ 3k log log n/ log log log n, or T∆ (x, y) ≤ ∆1/k .
                                                       1 log log n                     1 log log n
                                                                                                      k
Proof. Consider any ∆ satisfying T = T∆ (x, y) < 3k      log log log n , that is, ∆ > 3k log log log n .
   Assume for a contradiction that a faster algorithm exists, that is, it runs in t < T∆ (x, y) rounds
                1 log log n
such that t < 3k  log log log n . We can construct a graph where there is a neighborhood that locally
looks like a tree up to distance T + 1 (since for large enough n, ∆T +1 < n), and by Lemma 6.5
nodes there must fail with probability at least
                    1              1                                  1                                 1             1
                           ≥                ≥                                                   ≥                 ≥
                 2∆2T +1       223T log ∆            3k 1
                                                           log log n
                                                    2 3k log log log n
                                                                       log( 1
                                                                                log log n
                                                                           3k log log log n
                                                                                            )       22log log n       n
                                                2
for large enough n.

    This result directly implies the same lower bound for deterministic algorithms in the LOCAL
model. Nevertheless, we can prove deterministic lower bounds for even larger values of n. For
this purpose, we use the same idea as in [2, Theorem 25], that is, we assume to have a too fast
deterministic algorithm, and we use it to define a too fast randomized algorithm, that would
contradict the previously shown lower bound. Unfortunately, while doing so, we lose the tight-in-∆
dependency, but notice that this happens only for n = Ω( logloglogloglogn n ), since for smaller values the
previous result applies.

Lemma 6.7. For any k ≥ 1, and for large enough ∆ and n, a white deterministic algorithm for
bipartite x-maximal y-matching in the LOCAL model requires Ω(min(T∆ (x, y), k1 log n/ log log n)
rounds, unless T∆ (x, y) ≤ ∆1/k .




                                                                 25
                                                                                                 1
Proof. Assume that there is a faster algorithm A that runs in t = t(n, ∆) < min(T∆ (x, y), 4k      log n/ log log n))
rounds; we will prove that this leads to a contradiction. Let us fix ∆ as in the proof of Lemma
                       1 log log n
                                       k
6.6, that is, ∆ > 3k      log log log n . We now set N = log n. The goal is to execute A by lying
about the size of the graph, claiming it is of size N . Notice that this gives a running time
                1                         1
t̄ = t(N, ∆) ≤ 4k  log N/ log log N ≤ 4k    log log n/ log log log n. In order to do so, we need to compute
a new small enough ID assignment, such that A cannot detect the lie, that is, the ID assignment
must be locally valid: in each radius t̄ neighborhood the new ID assignment must be unique. For
this purpose, we compute a c = O(∆2t̄+2 (log log N + log ∆2t̄+2 ))-coloring of G2t̄+2 , the (2t̄ + 2)-
th power of G, in O(t̄) rounds [2, Theorem 25]. The algorithm A cannot detect the lie, since
           3
c = O(log 4 n) · logo(1) n < N for large enough n.
     Thus we can now run A and get a solution for the problem in o(T∆ (x, y) + log N/ log log N )
rounds, and since N = log n, we get a contradiction with Lemma 6.6, since we used the same graph
family.

    Both Lemma 6.6 and Lemma 6.7 assume ∆ to be larger than some constant. Notice that
tight-in-∆ bounds can be actually obtained in the LOCAL model also for smaller values of ∆, as we
needed large values of ∆ only to be able to obtain good in n dependencies. In fact, for fixed values
of ∆, we need to apply the randomized round elimination theorem only a constant number of times,
and thus we obtain that an algorithm for ΠT −1 that runs in 0 rounds must fail with local failure
probability f (n) = o(1); hence by taking large enough values of n we still get a contradiction, since
any 0 rounds algorithm for ΠT −1 must fail with constant probability, if ∆ is constant. In particular,
for any combination of integers x ≥ 0, y ≥ 1, ∆ ≥ 2, our bound of T∆ (x, y) is truly tight.


7    Behind the scenes
In the introduction we claimed that in some sense, bounded automatic round elimination can be
automated in practice. We will discuss now how this automatization works, using the example of
(bipartite) MM.
    Concerning lower bounds, we can actually feed BMM, for small values of ∆ (such as 3, 4 and 5),
to a computer program and get a lower bound of 2∆ − 1 automatically [22]. This does not directly
give a proof for all values of ∆, but it gives good ideas that can help us to prove a lower bound
for all values of ∆. The important output we obtain from a computer program in this respect is a
sequence of simplifications for each problem Π0 obtained after a round elimination step. For each Π0 ,
ideally these simplifications transform Π0 into a problem Π∗ that is just a tiny bit easier to solve,
but much simpler to describe.
    Sometimes, the obtained simplifications are very specific to the chosen value of ∆, and thus they
do not generalize, i.e., they do not help in extracting general relaxation patterns for arbitrary ∆.
For instance, this is what happens by feeding non-bipartite MM to the program: we get something
very different for the limited small values of ∆ that the program can handle, and it is quite hard
to see the pattern. However, at other times, there is some common pattern in the simplification
that the program performs for different values of ∆, and by understanding those we can then try to
design a general proof. This is exactly what happens with bipartite MM.
    This, in turn, allowed us to handle the entire family of problems of bipartite x-maximal y-
matchings: we could not feed this whole family of problems to a computer program and get an
automatic lower bound, but after having obtained a deep understanding of BMM, we managed to
manually design the right simplifications that worked for this much larger family of problems.
    Concerning upper bounds, by feeding specific variants of the bipartite x-maximal y-matching


                                                     26
problem to a computer program (for small ∆, x anx y), we noticed that we could obtain an automatic
upper bound via round elimination by using only three labels at each step. These upper bounds were
matching the exact round complexity that we obtained as lower bounds; before that we thought
that the lower bounds are not tight since by modifying the standard proposal algorithm to handle
bipartite x-maximal y matchings we could only obtain upper bounds that were a factor of two larger
than the lower bounds. Unfortunately, while automatic lower bounds can be somehow understood
by a human being, automatic upper bounds obtained via round elimination are still eluding human
interpretation. Thus, at this point we knew that some better upper bound exists, but we could not
understand it, much less generalize it. Still, the mere fact of knowing that there is a better upper
bound really helped us to finally find it.


8    Open Problems
The round elimination technique allows us to define a problem that is exactly one round easier
than the given one. Unfortunately, this comes with a high cost: the description complexity of the
problem that we obtain can be exponentially larger than the one from which we start. Most of the
lower bounds obtained using this technique can be grouped in two types:

    • Those where the number of labels grows really fast, like in the case of 3-coloring [20], and
      weak colorings [4, 7].

    • Those where the number of labels is kept constant at each step, like in the case of sinkless
      orientation [8] and BMM [2].

Bounded automatic round elimination makes it easy to prove lower bounds of the second type, and
understanding for which kind of problems it is possible to obtain lower bounds in this way is a
major open question. More concretely, we think that addressing the following open question would
help to make significant progress in the process of proving distributed lower bounds.

Open Problem 8.1. Characterize the dependency between the maximum number of labels and the
best lower bound that can be achieved by using bounded automatic round elimination.

    While this question is admittedly (and intentionally) vague, we give a more concrete open
question in the following. It seems to be significantly harder to prove lower bounds by using the
round elimination technique on non-2-colored graphs. We informally mention that a lower bound
for non-bipartite MM can be actually obtained by using bounded automatic round elimination, but
the lower bound looks significantly different from the one presented in this paper. For MM we can
use a bipartition, but for some other problems we cannot, such as the maximal independent set
(MIS) problem, as the problem is trivial in such a setting. While a lower bound for MIS is directly
implied by the maximal matching lower bound of Balliu et al. [2], a lower bound obtained directly
via round elimination is not known. Understanding whether even a bounded number of labels might
be enough to obtain the same lower bound would be an important step forward.

Open Problem 8.2. Prove or disprove that the best lower bound for MIS achievable by automatic
round elimination is asymptotically larger than the best lower bound achievable by using bounded
automatic round elimination.

    While for most of the problems it is it true that the problem obtained by applying one step
of round elimination is much larger, some other problems, called fixed points, are an exception:
they constitute a fascinating special case of bounded automatic round elimination in which the

                                                27
number of labels does not grow at all, allowing us to apply this technique as many times as we want.
Most of the Ω(log n) lower bounds for the LOCAL model have been shown by relaxing the given
problem and obtaining a fixed point, with one clear exception [3]. We think that understanding
when and how it is possible to obtain fixed points would help a lot in better understanding the
Ω(log n) complexity spectrum.
Open Problem 8.3. Prove or disprove that for all problems that require Ω(log n) rounds in the
LOCAL model it is possible to prove such a lower bound by obtaining a fixed point via round
elimination and/or suitable relaxations.


References
 [1] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Yuval Efron, Juho Hirvonen, Yannic Maus, Dennis Olivetti,
     and Jukka Suomela. 2019. Classification of distributed binary labeling problems. CoRR
     abs/1911.13294 (2019). arXiv:1911.13294 http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.13294
 [2] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Juho Hirvonen, Dennis Olivetti, Mikaël Rabie, and Jukka
     Suomela. 2019. Lower Bounds for Maximal Matchings and Maximal Independent Sets. In
     60th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2019, Baltimore,
     Maryland, USA, November 9-12, 2019. 481–497. https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2019.00037
 [3] Alkida Balliu, Juho Hirvonen, Christoph Lenzen, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela. 2019.
     Locality of Not-so-Weak Coloring. In Structural Information and Communication Complexity -
     26th International Colloquium, SIROCCO 2019, L’Aquila, Italy, July 1-4, 2019, Proceedings
     (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), Vol. 11639. Springer, 37–51.
 [4] Alkida Balliu, Juho Hirvonen, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela. 2019. Hardness of Minimal
     Symmetry Breaking in Distributed Computing. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium
     on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2019, Toronto, ON, Canada, July 29 - August
     2, 2019. 369–378. https://doi.org/10.1145/3293611.3331605
 [5] Leonid Barenboim, Michael Elkin, Seth Pettie, and Johannes Schneider. 2012. The Locality of
     Distributed Symmetry Breaking. In Proc. 53rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
     Science (FOCS 2012). IEEE, 321–330. https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2012.60
 [6] Leonid Barenboim, Michael Elkin, Seth Pettie, and Johannes Schneider. 2016. The Locality of
     Distributed Symmetry Breaking. J. ACM 63, 3 (2016), 1–45. https://doi.org/10.1145/2903137
 [7] Sebastian Brandt. 2019. An Automatic Speedup Theorem for Distributed Problems. In
     Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2019,
     Toronto, ON, Canada, July 29 - August 2, 2019. 379–388. https://doi.org/10.1145/3293611.
     3331611
 [8] Sebastian Brandt, Orr Fischer, Juho Hirvonen, Barbara Keller, Tuomo Lempiäinen, Joel
     Rybicki, Jukka Suomela, and Jara Uitto. 2016. A lower bound for the distributed Lovász local
     lemma. In Proc. 48th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2016). ACM Press,
     479–488. https://doi.org/10.1145/2897518.2897570
 [9] Yi-Jun Chang, Qizheng He, Wenzheng Li, Seth Pettie, and Jara Uitto. 2018. The Complexity
     of Distributed Edge Coloring with Small Palettes. In Proc. 29th ACM-SIAM Symposium on
     Discrete Algorithms (SODA 2018). Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2633–2652.
     https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611975031.168

                                                28
[10] Yi-Jun Chang, Tsvi Kopelowitz, and Seth Pettie. 2016. An Exponential Separation be-
     tween Randomized and Deterministic Complexity in the LOCAL Model. In Proc. 57th
     IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS 2016). IEEE, 615–624.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2016.72

[11] Manuela Fischer. 2017. Improved Deterministic Distributed Matching via Rounding. In Proc.
     31st International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC 2017). 17:1–17:15. https:
     //doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.DISC.2017.17

[12] Mika Göös, Juho Hirvonen, and Jukka Suomela. 2017. Linear-in-∆ lower bounds in the
     LOCAL model. Distributed Computing 30, 5 (2017), 325–338. https://doi.org/10.1007/
     s00446-015-0245-8

[13] Michal Hanckowiak, Michal Karonski, and Alessandro Panconesi. 1998. On the Distributed
     Complexity of Computing Maximal Matchings. In Proc. 9th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
     on Discrete Algorithms (SODA 1998). ACM/SIAM, 219–225.

[14] Michal Hanckowiak, Michal Karonski, and Alessandro Panconesi. 2001. On the Distributed
     Complexity of Computing Maximal Matchings. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics 15, 1
     (2001), 41–57. https://doi.org/10.1137/S0895480100373121

[15] Juho Hirvonen and Jukka Suomela. 2012. Distributed maximal matching: greedy is optimal. In
     Proc. 31st Annual ACM SIGACT-SIGOPS Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing
     (PODC 2012). ACM Press, 165–174. https://doi.org/10.1145/2332432.2332464

[16] Amos Israeli and A. Itai. 1986. A fast and simple randomized parallel algorithm for maximal
     matching. Inform. Process. Lett. 22, 2 (1986), 77–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/0020-0190(86)
     90144-4

[17] Fabian Kuhn, Thomas Moscibroda, and Roger Wattenhofer. 2004. What cannot be computed
     locally!. In Proc. 23rd Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC
     2004). ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, 300. https://doi.org/10.1145/1011767.1011811

[18] Fabian Kuhn, Thomas Moscibroda, and Roger Wattenhofer. 2006. The price of being near-
     sighted. In Proc. 17th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA 2006).
     ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, 980–989. https://doi.org/10.1145/1109557.1109666

[19] Fabian Kuhn, Thomas Moscibroda, and Roger Wattenhofer. 2016. Local Computation: Lower
     and Upper Bounds. J. ACM 63, 2 (2016), 1–44. https://doi.org/10.1145/2742012

[20] Nathan Linial. 1992. Locality in Distributed Graph Algorithms. SIAM J. Comput. 21, 1 (1992),
     193–201. https://doi.org/10.1137/0221015

[21] Moni Naor. 1991. A lower bound on probabilistic algorithms for distributive ring coloring.
     SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics 4, 3 (1991), 409–412. https://doi.org/10.1137/0404036

[22] Dennis Olivetti. 2019. Round Eliminator: a tool for automatic speedup simulation.     https:
     //github.com/olidennis/round-eliminator

[23] Alessandro Panconesi and Romeo Rizzi. 2001. Some simple distributed algorithms for sparse
     networks. Distributed Computing 14, 2 (2001), 97–100. https://doi.org/10.1007/PL00008932



                                               29
[24] David Peleg. 2000. Distributed Computing: A Locality-Sensitive Approach. Society for Industrial
     and Applied Mathematics. https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9780898719772

[25] Jukka Suomela. 2014 - 2019. Distributed Algorithms. Online Textbook. https://users.ics.aalto.
     fi/suomela/da/




                                                30
