Volume 15, Issue 5, May 2025

Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures (Dagstuhl Seminar 25191)
Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

AUTOBIZ: Pushing the Boundaries of AI-Driven Process Execution and Adaptation
(Dagstuhl Seminar 25192)
Giuseppe De Giacomo, Marlon Dumas, Fabiana Fournier, Timotheus Kampik,
and Lior Limonad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

Computational Geometry (Dagstuhl Seminar 25201)
Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger . . . . . . . . .

64

Generative Models for 3D Vision (Dagstuhl Seminar 25202)
Laura Neschen, Bernhard Egger, Adam Kortylewski, William Smith,
and Stefanie Wuhrer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

96

The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability (Dagstuhl
Seminar 25211)
Manuel Bodirsky, Venkatesan Guruswami, Dániel Marx, Stanislav Živný,
and Žaneta Semanišinová . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms for Geometric and Topological Graphs
(Dagstuhl Seminar 25212)
Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković . . . . . . . . . . . 134

D a g s t u h l R e p or t s , Vo l . 1 5 , I s s u e 5

ISSN 2192-5283

ISSN 2192-5283
Published online and open access by
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik
GmbH, Dagstuhl Publishing, Saarbrücken/Wadern,
Germany. Online available at
https://www.dagstuhl.de/dagpub/2192-5283
Publication date
December, 2025

Aims and Scope
The periodical Dagstuhl Reports documents the
program and the results of Dagstuhl Seminars and
Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshops.
In principal, for each Dagstuhl Seminar or Dagstuhl
Perspectives Workshop a report is published that
contains the following:
an executive summary of the seminar program
and the fundamental results,

an overview of the talks given during the seminar
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche
(summarized as talk abstracts), and
Nationalbibliothek
summaries from working groups (if applicable).
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; detailed This basic framework can be extended by suitable
bibliographic data are available in the Internet at contributions that are related to the program of the
https://dnb.d-nb.de.
seminar, e. g. summaries from panel discussions or
open problem sessions.
License
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Editorial Board
Attribution 4.0 International license (CC BY 4.0).
Elisabeth André
In brief, this license authorizes each
Franz Baader
and everybody to share (to copy,
Goetz Graefe
distribute and transmit) the work under the followReiner Hähnle
ing conditions, without impairing or restricting the
authors’ moral rights:
Barbara Hammer
Attribution: The work must be attributed to its
Lynda Hardman
authors.
Steve Kremer
The copyright is retained by the corresponding authors.

Rupak Majumdar
Heiko Mantel
Lennart Martens
Albrecht Schmidt
Wolfgang Schröder-Preikschat
Holger Hermanns (Editor-in-Chief )
Heike Wehrheim
Verena Wolf
Martina Zitterbart
Editorial Office
Michael Wagner (Managing Editor)
Michael Didas (Managing Editor)
Jutka Gasiorowski (Editorial Assistance)
Dagmar Glaser (Editorial Assistance)
Thomas Schillo (Technical Assistance)
Christina Schwarz Editorial Assistance

Digital Object Identifier: 10.4230/DagRep.15.5.i

Contact
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik
Dagstuhl Reports, Editorial Office
Oktavie-Allee, 66687 Wadern, Germany
reports@dagstuhl.de
https://www.dagstuhl.de/dagrep

Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25191

Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures
Michael A. Bender∗1 , John Iacono∗2 , László Kozma∗3 ,
Eva Rotenberg∗4 , and Justin Dallant†5
1
2
3
4
5

Stony Brook University, US. bender@cs.stonybrook.edu
ULB – Brussels, BE. john.iacono@ulb.be
FU Berlin, DE. lkozma@zedat.fu-berlin.de
Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK. eva@rotenberg.dk
ULB – Brussels, BE. justindallant@gmail.com

Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 25191 “Adaptive
and Scalable Data Structures”. Data structures govern the organization and manipulation of
data in computing systems across a broad range of applications. The efficiency and scalability of
data structures has profound implications, motivating continued research on the entire spectrum
from theoretical to practical. As the size and complexity of data sets increases and as the
underlying computing infrastructure changes, data structures need to be continually redesigned
with scalability in mind. Classical data structures also need reevaluation to better fit the
requirements of modern applications. Adaptivity offers a way to design data structures that
automatically take advantage of features of the underlying hardware, specific structure and biases
in their usage, or side-information, and the limits of data structure adaptivity pose deep research
questions. The goal of this seminar was to reflect on these complementary aspects of data structure
research and to identify promising research questions. The program provides a snapshot of the
current state of research and establishes possible future directions for the field.
Seminar May 4–9, 2025 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/25191
2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Data structures design and analysis;
Theory of computation → Design and analysis of algorithms; Theory of computation →
Parallel algorithms
Keywords and phrases Data structures, Algorithms, Big data, Computational models
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.5.1

1

Executive summary

Michael A. Bender (Stony Brook University, US)
John Iacono (ULB – Brussels, BE)
László Kozma (FU Berlin, DE)
Eva Rotenberg (Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg

About the seminar
Data structures are fundamental building blocks of computing systems and are deployed in
applications of increasing size and sophistication. The design and analysis of scalable data
structures has been a central goal of computer science from the beginnings of the field. Yet,
the study of data structures remains as active as ever, as it reflects changes in the underlying
computational infrastructure, as well as the evolving needs of applications.
∗
†

Editor / Organizer
Editorial Assistant / Collector

Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15, Issue 5, pp. 1–20
Editors: Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg
Dagstuhl Reports
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany

2

25191 – Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures

Adaptivity is a multi-faceted goal that can refer to: data structures seamlessly taking
advantage of resources offered by the underlying hardware, or restrictions thereof; the usage
of application-specific insights or side-information to improve data structure efficiency; the
extent to which the data generating process can adversarially adapt to the data structure.
Some of these aspects pose long-standing open questions that continue to inspire research
(e.g., the dynamic optimality conjecture asks whether binary search trees can optimally
adapt to their usage pattern). More recent directions of adaptivity to side-information, e.g.,
from machine learning advice, pose fresh research questions, and can also relate to past
work on data structures that are locality-adaptive, robust to errors, or that make use of
imprecise or unreliable comparisons. A refined notion related to adversarial adaptivity is
that of history-independence: the question of whether data structures can avoid leaking
information about their past sequence of operations. Besides the clear motivation from the
point of view of security and privacy, this concept has recently played a key role in designing
state-of-the-art data structures for the prototypical list labeling problem. Participants in the
seminar have further explored to what extent history independence can be reconciled with
optimal efficiency in fundamental data structures such as priority queues.
This seminar was the 16th in a series of loosely related Dagstuhl Seminars on data
structures. It brought together a diverse group of researchers with complementary expertise
and varying levels of seniority, to illuminate different aspects of data structure scalability
and adaptivity. We also aimed to include researchers who are experts in adjacent, applied
areas (data structures in computational geometry, data structures for strings, etc.), to inspire
and inform each other and to identify relevant research directions.
The organizers of the seminar put a strong emphasis on discussion and collaboration.
Participants were asked to give short (10-15 minutes) or medium (20-25 minutes) talks. Most
participants spoke, and the format allowed everyone who wished to speak to do so. We
explicitly encouraged forward-thinking talks that include open problems, interesting new
directions or challenges, focusing on informal, open-ended discussion, rather than polished
presentations of past work. In the program we made a deliberate effort to leave space for
loosely structured discussion and collaboration, reserving most of the afternoons for this
purpose, and having brief status-report sessions where we all met to discuss what people had
been discussing.

Topics
The presentations and discussions covered a broad range of topics in classical data structures
and diverse applications, as well as new directions inspired by various aspects of scalability
and adaptivity.
Models of computation were an important theme of the seminar. Afshani (Section 4.10)
discussed possible separations concerning I/O operations and total work, Bille (Section 4.1)
discussed data structures in the ultra-wide word RAM model, and Meyer (Section 4.2) talked
about unstructured parallel I/O on SSDs in the context of graph algorithms.
Parallelism and distributed computing were also the focus of further talks: King (Section 4.4) presented work on a problem in distributed setting with many Byzantine participants,
and Chechik (Section 5.8) discussed the maximum independent set problem in the congested
clique model.
Several talks focused on questions (old and new) on graph algorithms: Wein (Section 4.8)
talked about a new concept of a “DAG cover” extending classical notions of tree covers, Liu
(Section 4.9) discussed a batch version of the dynamic connectivity problem, van der Hoog

Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg

3

(Section 5.2) raised a question about greedy chain decomposition on DAGs, Bilò (Section 4.15)
revisited the problem of single-source shortest p-disjoint paths, Gudmundsson (Section 4.16)
talked about approximate distance oracles for a special class of sparse graphs, and Fineman
(Section 4.17) talked about open questions about incremental topological sorting.
Relating to online problems, Agrawal (Section 5.6) discussed results and open questions
concerning a scheduling problem with DAG constraints, and Munro (Section 4.11) talked
about a (paired) variant of the paging problem.
On compression and compact data structures, Navarro talked about dynamic bitvectors
(Section 4.5) and on a graph problem related to grammar-based compression (Section 5.9),
and Gawrychowski (Section 5.4) discussed open problems related to Lempel-Ziv compression.
The analysis of data structures and related notions of adaptivity were a key focus of
the seminar. Conway (Section 4.3) gave an overview of results and open questions on
history-independent priority queues, while Iacono (Section 5.1) discussed the working set
property of priority queues in conjunction with efficient decrease-key. Brodal (Section 4.6)
highlighted a simple and efficient data structure for storing integers, and Tarjan (Section 5.3)
drew attention to the different analyses of path compression, raising the question of an
alternative proof; Kuszmaul (Section 4.14) talked about recent results and open questions on
quadratic probing hash tables. Kozma (Section 5.10) pointed out a remaining open question
in the analysis of classical selection algorithms, and Farach-Colton (Section 5.5) raised a
question related to the Karp-Rabin fingerprinting algorithm.
In his talk, Sedgewick (Section 4.13) advocated for an “algorithms science”, using cardinality estimation as a case study. Zamir (Section 4.7) presented recent work on using
cryptographic techniques to design asymptotically faster algorithms. Bercea (Section 4.18)
discussed a possible new model for Bloom filters with predictions. Storandt (Section 5.7)
presented data structure questions arising in the context of geometric intersection problems. Goodrich (Section 4.12) presented computational geometry problems in a setting with
probabilistic errors, and raised the question of designing data structures that are robust to
probabilistic deletions.
Collaboration was structured around informal working groups, with focus on some of the
concrete open problems identified during the seminar. These notably included questions on
simultaneous work and I/O optimality (see Section 4.10), fully dynamic graph connectivity
(see Section 4.9), history independent heaps (see Section 4.3), heaps with the working set
property (see Section 5.1) and greedy chain decompositions of DAGs (see Section 5.2). Several
promising directions were explored, and results were obtained already during the seminar. It
is expected that the collaborations started at the seminar will lead to publications.

Final Thoughts
The organizers would like to thank the Dagstuhl team for their continuous support and also
thank all participants for their contributions to the seminar. The current (16th) seminar was
part of a long-running series that has co-evolved with the field, both tracking and inspiring
its trends and developments throughout the years.
The seminar fills a unique niche in the computer science research landscape. Although
data structural topics are well represented at major venues of theoretical computer science,
this series provides essentially the only opportunity for core data structures researchers from
around the world to meet and exchange ideas in an informal, collaborative setting, having
data structures as the primary focus. (Some other fields, such as computational geometry
have a broader tradition of specialized workshops focusing on problem-solving.)

25191

4

25191 – Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures

The appreciation by the community for the seminar and the opportunity it offers to
personally meet and interact is reflected by the very strong response to invitations and the
highly positive subsequent feedback. Respondents particularly praised the relaxed, informal
atmosphere and the focus on short talks and loosely structured collaboration around open
questions, validating the organizers’ efforts in this direction.
Earlier seminars in the series had few female participants. An important focus of the last
three seminars was to significantly increase female attendance. In the current seminar, 43%
of the invited participants were female, resulting in a 35% female attendance.
Another important goal of the seminar is to encourage the interaction between senior
and early career researchers, the latter comprising around a third of the invited participants
and eventual attendees. We also made a deliberate effort to include researchers who have
not attended the previous seminar(s), these making up a slight majority of both the inviteeand participant lists; we find this to be particularly important for a long-running seminar.
All the aspects mentioned were strongly appreciated by the participants in the postseminar survey. The survey respondents also praised the coverage of a diverse range of
research topics, and the continued efforts by the organizers to refine and improve the seminar
format.

Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg

2

5

Table of Contents

Executive summary
Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg . . . . . . . .

1

Seminar program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

Overview of Talks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Data Structures on the Ultra-Wide Word RAM
Philip Bille . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Rethinking unstructured (parallel) I/O for SSDs
Ulrich Carsten Meyer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

History independent priority queues
Alexander Conway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Distributed collaboration to share the cost of obtaining external data even when
the fraction of Byzantine players is large
Valerie King . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Dynamic representation of bitvectors
Gonzalo Navarro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
A Simple Integer Successor-Delete Data Structure
Gerth Stølting Brodal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Improving Algorithmic Efficiency using Cryptography
Or Zamir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

Covering Approximate Shortest Paths with DAGs
Nicole Wein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

Monte Carlo Batch-Dynamic Connectivity
Quanquan C. Liu and Valerie King . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

Simultaneous Work And I/O Optimality
Peyman Afshani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Minimizing Cache Misses with Repeated Data: The Cache Pair Problem
Ian Munro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Computational geometry with probabilistically noisy primitive errors
Michael T. Goodrich . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Cardinality Estimation: A Poster Child for Algorithm Science
Robert Sedgewick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Quadratic probing hash tables
William Kuszmaul . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

Single-source shortest p-disjoint paths: fast computation and sparse preservers
Davide Bilò . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

A well-separated pair decomposition for low density graphs
Joachim Gudmundsson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Incremental topological sort
Jeremy Fineman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

25191

6

25191 – Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures

Data structures and predictions
Ioana-Oriana Bercea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Open problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Working set heaps with decrease-key
John Iacono . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Greedy chain decomposition on DAGs
Ivor van der Hoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Top-down analysis of path compression
Robert Endre Tarjan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

Two problems on Lempel-Ziv compression
Paweł Gawrychowski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

Detecting collisions in Karp-Rabin fingerprinting
Martin Farach-Colton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

Scheduling parallel jobs with a DAG of constraints
Kunal Agrawal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Some Intersection Problems
Sabine Storandt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Maximum independent set in the congested clique model
Shiri Chechik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
A graph problem with applications to grammar compression
Gonzalo Navarro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Median of medians in small groups
László Kozma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg

3

7

Seminar program
Sunday May 4, 2025
18:00 Dinner buffet
Monday May 5, 2025
7:30
Breakfast
9:00

Opening & Introductions

9:45

Coffee break

10:30

Short presentations (10-15 minutes max.)
Philip Bille, Ultrawide word RAM
Ulrich Meyer, Utilizing latency on parallel operations on SSDs
Alex Conway, History independent priority queues
Valerie King, Distributed collaboration to share the cost of obtaining external data
even when the fraction of Byzantine players is large
Gonzalo Navarro, Dynamic representation of bitvectors
John Iacono, Working set heaps with decrease-key
Gerth Stølting Brodal, Simple data structures with slightly worse bounds

12:15

Lunch

14:00

Medium presentations (20-25 minutes + questions)
Or Zamir, Improved runtimes using cryptography
Nicole Wein, Covering approximate shortest paths with DAGs
Quanquan Liu, Monte Carlo batch-dynamic connectivity

15:30

Coffee & Cake

16:00

Collaboration time

18:00

Dinner

Tuesday May 6, 2025
7:30
Breakfast
9:30

Short presentations (10-15 minutes max.)
Peyman Afshani, Separations between I/O and work
Ian Munro, Minimizing cache misses with repeated data
Ivor van der Hoog, Greedy chain decomposition on DAGs
Robert Endre Tarjan, On the recurrence in Top-down analysis of path compression by
Seidel and Sharir
Pawel Gawrychowski, Two problems on Lempel-Ziv compression
Michael Goodrich, Computational geometry with probabilistically noisy primitive errors

10:30

Coffee break

11:00

12:15
13:30

Medium presentations (20-25 minutes + questions)
Bob Sedgewick, Cardinality estimation, a poster child for algorithm science
William Kuszmaul, Quadratic probing hash tables
Lunch
Collaboration time

15:30

Coffee & Cake and status update

18:00

Dinner

25191

8

25191 – Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures

Wednesday May 7, 2025
7:30
Breakfast
9:00

10:15

Short presentations
Martin Farach-Colton, Detecting collisions in Karp-Rabin fingerprinting
Kunal Agrawal, Scheduling parallel jobs with a DAG of constraints
Sabine Storandt, Some intersection problems
Coffee break

10:45

Short presentations
Shiri Chechik, Maximum independent set in the congested clique model
Davide Bilò, Single-source shortest p-disjoint paths; Fast computation and sparse
preservers
Joachim Gudmundsson, Approximate distance oracles for lambda-low density graphs

12:00

Group picture

12:15

Lunch

14:00

Hike (Lake Noswendl)

15:30

Coffee & Cake

18:00

Dinner

Thursday May 8, 2024
07:30 Breakfast
9:00

Short presentations
Jeremy Fineman, Incremental topological sort
Gonzalo Navarro, A graph problem with applications to grammar compression
Ioana Oriana Bercea, Oracles for Bloom filters with predictions
László Kozma, Median of medians selection

10:30

Coffee break

11:00

Collaboration time

12:15
13:30

Lunch
Collaboration time

15:30

Coffee & Cake and status update

18:00

Dinner

Friday May 9, 2023
7:30
Breakfast and Check-out
9:00
10:30
12:15

Wrap-up session: outcomes of discussions and future directions
Coffee Break
Lunch

Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg

4

Overview of Talks

4.1

Data Structures on the Ultra-Wide Word RAM

9

Philip Bille (Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Philip Bille

We give an overview of the ultra-wide word RAM and recent data structural results in it.

4.2

Rethinking unstructured (parallel) I/O for SSDs

Ulrich Carsten Meyer (Goethe University – Frankfurt am Main, DE)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Ulrich Carsten Meyer

In my talk I highlighted the differences between I/O accesses on traditional hard disks
versus flash memory. It appears that there is a potential to use hidden parallelism in many
algorithms in order to achieve better performance in the context of unstructured I/O patterns
– for example when graph algorithms like SSSP perform random accesses to adjacency lists,
which normally only fill a small fraction of the available block size each.

4.3

History independent priority queues

Alexander Conway (Cornell Tech – New York, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Alexander Conway

History-independence is a property of some data structures by which their memory layout
does not reveal any information about the history of specific operations that lead to its
current state. Here we consider this concept applied to priority queues, and ask how efficient
a history-independent priority queue can be made. We give a short overview of the best
known bounds.

4.4

Distributed collaboration to share the cost of obtaining external
data even when the fraction of Byzantine players is large

Valerie King (University of Victoria, CA)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Valerie King
Joint work of Valerie King, John Augustine, Soumyottam Chatterjee, Valerie King, Manish Kumar, Shachar Meir,
David Peleg
Main reference John Augustine, Soumyottam Chatterjee, Valerie King, Manish Kumar, Shachar Meir, David Peleg:
“Distributed Download from an External Data Source in Faulty Majority Settings”, CoRR,
Vol. abs/2412.19649, 2024.
URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2412.19649
License

We consider the Download problem in the Data Retrieval Model, introduced in (DISC’24),
where a distributed set of peers, some of which may be Byzantine, seek to learn n bits of
data stored at a trustworthy external data source. Each bit of data can be learned by a peer

25191

10

25191 – Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures

either through a direct (costly) query of the source or through other peers that have already
learned it; the goal is to design a collaborative protocol that reduces the maximum number
of bits queried by any one peer (“query complexity”). We achieve optimal query complexity
in a synchronous fully connected network with resilience to any constant fraction β < 1 of
Byzantine peers, under varying assumptions regarding time and message size.

4.5

Dynamic representation of bitvectors

Gonzalo Navarro (University of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Gonzalo Navarro
Main reference Gonzalo Navarro: “Adaptive Dynamic Bitvectors”, in Proc. of the String Processing and Information
Retrieval – 31st International Symposium, SPIRE 2024, Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, September 23-25,
2024, Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 14899, pp. 204–217, Springer, 2024.
URL https://doi.org//10.1007/978-3-031-72200-4_16
License

I presented a technique to maintain a bitvector B[1..n] within n + o(n) bits of space, so that
operations access, rank, and select, as well as updates to the bitvector (write position, insert
bit, delete bit) can all be solved within O(log(n/q)/ log log n) amortized time, when there are
q queries per update on average. This turns out to be optimal in the cell probe model. This
basic tool can be used to obtain similar results on many compact data structures that build
on bits. I also showed some experimental results on an implementation of this technique,
which show that it is indeed practical. I think the result can be useful for other scenarios,
and the main ideas can be inspiring.

4.6

A Simple Integer Successor-Delete Data Structure

Gerth Stølting Brodal (Aarhus University, DK)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Gerth Stølting Brodal
Main reference Gerth Stølting Brodal: “A Simple Integer Successor-Delete Data Structure”, in Proc. of the 23rd
International Symposium on Experimental Algorithms, SEA 2025, July 22-24, 2025, Venice, Italy,
LIPIcs, Vol. 338, pp. 8:1–8:16, Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.SEA.2025.8
License

A very simple decremental data structure for maintaining a set of integers was presented,
that supports initializing the set followed by d deletions and s successor queries in arbitrary
order in total time O(n + d + s(1 + logmax(2,s/n) min(s, n)). The data structure consists
of a single array of integers. The data structure is essentially a special case of the classic
union-find data structure with path compression but with unweighted linking (i.e., without
linking by rank or size).

Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg

4.7

11

Improving Algorithmic Efficiency using Cryptography

Or Zamir (Tel Aviv University, IL)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Or Zamir
Joint work of Vinod Vaikuntanathan, Or Zamir
Main reference Vinod Vaikuntanathan, Or Zamir: “Improving Algorithmic Efficiency using Cryptography”, CoRR,
Vol. abs/2502.13065, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2502.13065
License

Cryptographic primitives have been used for various non-cryptographic objectives, such as
eliminating or reducing randomness and interaction. We show how to use cryptography to
improve the time complexity of solving computational problems. Specifically, we show that
under standard cryptographic assumptions, we can design algorithms that are asymptotically
faster than existing ones while maintaining correctness in a black-box manner.

4.8

Covering Approximate Shortest Paths with DAGs

Nicole Wein (University of Michigan – Ann Arbor, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Nicole Wein
Joint work of Sepehr Assadi, Gary Hoppenworth, Nicole Wein
Main reference Sepehr Assadi, Gary Hoppenworth, Nicole Wein: “Covering Approximate Shortest Paths with
DAGs”, in Proc. of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2025,
Prague, Czechia, June 23-27, 2025, pp. 2269–2280, ACM, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3717823.3718298
License

I will talk about our newly defined notion of a “DAG cover”. It is a directed analog of a tree
cover, which is closely related to a probabilistic tree embedding. A DAG cover of a general
directed graph G is a small collection of DAGs so that for all pairs of vertices s,t, some DAG
in the collection provides low distortion for dist(s, t). I will discuss upper and lower bounds
for DAG covers in various parameter regimes, and pose some open problems.

4.9

Monte Carlo Batch-Dynamic Connectivity

Quanquan C. Liu (Yale University – New Haven, US) and Valerie King (University of
Victoria, CA)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Quanquan C. Liu and Valerie King
Joint work of Lalia Cann, Valerie King, Quanquan C. Liu
License

Connectivity is an important problem with countless real-world applications. In particular,
the graphs we perform connectivity queries on are often dynamic where edges are inserted
or deleted with high frequency. The dynamic connectivity problem then seeks to answer
connectivity queries while an online sequence of edge insertions and deletions occur in the
graph. In this paper, we give the first parallel batch-dynamic implementation with provably
large efficiency and parallelism guarantees. Furthermore, our guarantees show that the
runtimes are small, even in the worst case. To do this, we simplify, adapt, and parallelize
the sequential Monte Carlo algorithms of Kapron, King, and Mountjoy [SODA 2013], Gibb,
Kapron, King, and Mountjoy [2015], and Wang for the batch-dynamic setting. These
algorithms provably require very small, poly(log n) time per update and query even in the

25191

12

25191 – Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures

worst-case. Our simplification uses only Euler Tour (ET) trees, rather than more complicated
path compression data structures, making it simultaneously simpler to implement and faster
than more complicated structures.
We present an open problem regarding whether we can eliminate the level data structure
altogether in both the sequential dynamic algorithm and our algorithm.

4.10

Simultaneous Work And I/O Optimality

Peyman Afshani (Aarhus University, DK)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Peyman Afshani

We study a number of algorithmic problems in the I/O model of computation, aiming to
obtain an algorithm which achieves the optimal number of I/O operations in the I/O model
as well as achieving the optimal amount of CPU work in the classical RAM model. In some
cases, this is already known to be impossible (Afshani, Brodal, Sitchinava, manuscript, 2025).
However, if that is the case, the goal would be to obtain an optimal work-I/O trade-off. The
problems that we study are the following: deferred data structures and red-blue sorting.
For the first problem, the input is an unsorted list of values which needs to be stored for
online queries. However, the total number of queries is not known and the goal is to minimize
the total amount of preprocessing time done. It is a classical result of Karp and Motwani
(SIAM JoC’88) that if the total number of queries is k (which is unknown in advance), then
this can be done in O(n log k) time for a number of different queries such as predecessor
search queries. A similar performance can be achieved in the I/O model however, achieving
both seems to be impossible and thus this leads to work-I/O trade-off for this problem.
For the second problem, the input is a set of n values, each associated with one of the two
colors, red or blue. The goal is to sort the items using the minimum number of comparisons,
however, for two elements u and w if there is no other element of the opposite color that lies
between them, then the determining the order of u and w is not necessary. When there is
only one value v of one color, then the problem reduces to simply the splitting the values
with respect to pivot v which can be done in linear time, as well as linear I/Os and thus
simultaneous work and I/O optimality is possible in this case. It has been observed that in
the worst-case, this can be done in general. However, obtaining an adaptive bound on the
number of comparisons is a more interesting problem for which obtaining such a simultaneous
optimality does not seem possible.

4.11

Minimizing Cache Misses with Repeated Data: The Cache Pair
Problem

Ian Munro (University of Waterloo, CA)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Ian Munro
Joint work of Ian Munro, Amin Khodaee
License

We consider the generalization of the problem of minimizing cache misses in the situation in
which data items are stored on multiple cache lines across memory (i.e. there are multiple
copies of the same objects). The issue is, then what line to evict when a new one must be

Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg

13

uploaded. In the usual (single copy) situation, it is well known that (i) the minimum number
of cache misses for the off line problem (i.e. all requests are known in advance) can easily be
determined and (ii) in the on line case, one can come within a factor of two of this bound
given twice the number of cache lines. We show that if each datum is stored on two cache
lines (so we have a “choice” of which line to bring in,) the off line version of the problem
is NP-hard, and indeed, assuming the unique games conjecture, coming within twice the
optimal using twice the given number of line is also NP-hard. We give an easy solution
to the on line version that is within four times as many cache misses as the optimal given
quadruple the space.

4.12

Computational geometry with probabilistically noisy primitive errors

Michael T. Goodrich (University of California – Irvine, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Michael T. Goodrich
Joint work of David Eppstein, Michael T. Goodrich, Vinesh Sridhar
Main reference David Eppstein, Michael T. Goodrich, Vinesh Sridhar: “Computational Geometry with
Probabilistically Noisy Primitive Operations”, in Proc. of the 19th International Symposium on
Algorithms and Data Structures, WADS 2025, August 11-15, 2025, York University, Toronto,
Canada, LIPIcs, Vol. 349, pp. 24:1–24:20, Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.WADS.2025.24
License

Much prior work has been done on designing computational geometry algorithms that
handle input degeneracies, data imprecision, and arithmetic round-off errors. We take a
new approach, inspired by the noisy sorting literature, and study computational geometry
algorithms subject to noisy Boolean primitive operations in which, e.g., the comparison “is
point q above line L?” returns the wrong answer with some fixed probability. We propose a
novel technique called path-guided pushdown random walks that generalizes the results of
noisy sorting. We apply this technique to solve point-location, plane-sweep, convex hulls in
2D and 3D, dynamic 2D convex hulls, and Delaunay triangulations for noisy primitives in
optimal time with high probability.

4.13

Cardinality Estimation: A Poster Child for Algorithm Science

Robert Sedgewick (Princeton University, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Robert Sedgewick
Joint work of Svante Janson, Jérémie O. Lumbroso, Robert Sedgewick
Main reference Svante Janson, Jérémie O. Lumbroso, Robert Sedgewick: “Bit-Array-Based Alternatives to
HyperLogLog”, in Proc. of the 35th International Conference on Probabilistic, Combinatorial and
Asymptotic Methods for the Analysis of Algorithms, AofA 2024, June 17-21, 2024, University of
Bath, UK, LIPIcs, Vol. 302, pp. 5:1–5:19, Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.AOFA.2024.5
License

This talk emphasizes the role of algorithm science in the decades-long development of state-ofthe-art cardinality estimation algorithms, from the seminal papers of Flajolet and coauthors
to the recent bit-array based methods of Lumbroso, Janson and Sedgewick.

25191

14

25191 – Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures

4.14

Quadratic probing hash tables

William Kuszmaul (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© William Kuszmaul
Joint work of William Kuszmaul, Zoe Xi
Main reference William Kuszmaul, Zoe Xi: “Towards an Analysis of Quadratic Probing”, in Proc. of the 51st
International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2024, July 8-12, 2024,
Tallinn, Estonia, LIPIcs, Vol. 297, pp. 103:1–103:19, Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für
Informatik, 2024.
URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.ICALP.2024.103
License

Since 1968, one of the simplest open questions in the theory of hash tables has been to
prove anything nontrivial about the correctness of quadratic probing. We make the first
tangible progress towards this goal, showing that there exists a positive-constant load factor
at which quadratic probing is a constant-expected-time hash table. Our analysis applies
more generally to any fixed-offset open-addressing hash table, and extends to higher load
factors in the case where the hash table examines blocks of some size B = ω(1).

4.15

Single-source shortest p-disjoint paths: fast computation and
sparse preservers

Davide Bilò (University of L’Aquila, IT)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Davide Bilò
Joint work of Davide Bilò, Gianlorenzo D’Angelo, Luciano Gualà, Stefano Leucci, Guido Proiett, Mirko Rossi
Main reference Davide Bilò, Gianlorenzo D’Angelo, Luciano Gualà, Stefano Leucci, Guido Proietti, Mirko Rossi:
“Single-Source Shortest p-Disjoint Paths: Fast Computation and Sparse Preservers”, in Proc. of the
39th International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS 2022, March
15-18, 2022, Marseille, France (Virtual Conference), LIPIcs, Vol. 219, pp. 12:1–12:21, Schloss
Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.
URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.STACS.2022.12
License

Let G be a directed graph with n vertices, m edges, non-negative edge costs, and a fixed
source vertex s. Given a target vertex t, the problem of computing a set St of p pairwise
edge-disjoint (simple) paths from s to t in G having minimum total cost (if such paths exist)
can be solved in O(p(m + n log n)) time using the Successive Shortest Path algorithm. We
are interested in constructing a compact data structure that, when queried with any target
vertex t, can quickly return St .
For p = 1, we can precompute a shortest-path tree of G rooted at s and build a data
structure of size O(n) that answers queries in time linear in the size of the output. The
preprocessing time is O(m + nlogn) when using Dijkstra’s algorithm. For p = 2, Suurballe
and Tarjan [Networks 1984] designed a data structure with the same asymptotic trade-offs
among preprocessing time, query time, and size. For general values of p, Bilò et al. [STACS
2022] designed a O(pn(pn + n log n))-time algorithm that computes a subgraph H of G
of size at most p(n − 1) containing St for every target vertex t. The size of H is optimal
when G is p-edge-outconnected from s. This result implies the existence of a data structure
with preprocessing time O(pn(pn + n log n)), size O(pn), and query time O(p(pn + n log n)).
Improving the preprocessing and query times remains an interesting open problem.

Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg

4.16

15

A well-separated pair decomposition for low density graphs

Joachim Gudmundsson (The University of Sydney, AU)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Joachim Gudmundsson
Joint work of Joachim Gudmundsson, Sampson Wong
License

Low density graphs are considered to be a realistic graph class for modelling road networks.
It has advantages over other popular graph classes for road networks, such as planar graphs,
bounded highway dimension graphs, and spanners. We believe that low density graphs have
the potential to be a useful graph class for road networks, but until now, its usefulness is
limited by a lack of available tools. In this talk, we show two new fundamental tools for low
density graphs, that is, a well-separated pair decomposition and an approximate distance
oracle. We believe that by expanding the algorithmic toolbox for low density graphs, we can
help provide a useful and realistic graph class for road networks, which in turn, may help
explain the many efficient and practical heuristics available for road networks.

4.17

Incremental topological sort

Jeremy Fineman (Georgetown University – Washington, DC, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Jeremy Fineman

This talk gives a short overview on incremental topological sort. Here m edges are added to
an n-vertex graph incrementally, and the goal is to maintain a topological sort. The current
state of the art includes the following total update times, ignoring log factors:
Dense graphs (large m): Õ(n2 ) from Bender, Fineman, Gilbert, and Tarjan. This work
also includes an extension to maintain a strongly connected components (SCCs).
Sparse graphs (small m): Õ(m4/3 ) from Battacharya and Kulkarni. Bernstein, Dudeja,
and Pettie later obtained the same bound for SCCs.
Finally, Chen, Kyng, Liu, Meierhans, and Probst Gutenberg obtained an algorithm that has
total update time of m1+o(1) for the related problem of cycle detection, but their algorithm
does not maintain a topological sort. Moreover, their algorithm is not combinatorial.
√
We have reason to believe that it should be possible to obtain a bound of Õ(n m) for
incremental topological sort with a combinatorial algorithm. Ignoring log factors, this would
be at least as good as the best dense algorithm for all m and n, and it would beat the best
sparse algorithm for graphs of sufficient density.

4.18

Data structures and predictions

Ioana-Oriana Bercea (KTH Royal Institute of Technology – Stockholm, SE)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Ioana-Oriana Bercea

The Daisy Bloom filter is an approximate memembership data structure (filter) that has
access to knowledge of the distribution of the input and query distribution. While we
understand how to set optimal parameters in this setting, this has yet to translate into
practical gains. We highlight some questions in this direction, with the exciting prospect of
bridging the gap between classical results on instance optimality and emerging directions
such as algorithms with predictions.
25191

16

25191 – Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures

5

Open problems

5.1

Working set heaps with decrease-key

John Iacono (ULB - Brussels, BE)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© John Iacono

Priority queues are one of the oldest abstract data types in computer science, and those that
support the decrease-key operation, such a Fibonacci Heaps, have been instrumental in a
number of efficient graph algorithms such as single source shortest paths (SSSP). Recent
progress in the beyond-worst-case analysis of SSSP has shown the utility of having a priority
queue that supports constant time-decrease key as well as the working set property, one
variant of which requires that the cost of an extract-min be proportional to the logarithm
of the number of operations performed on the heap while that data item was present in
it. No such pointer-model data structure exists with both the working-set property and
constant-time decrease-key. Also briefly discussed were some variants of what the working
set could mean for priority queues.

5.2

Greedy chain decomposition on DAGs

Ivor van der Hoog (Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Ivor van der Hoog

Given a directed graph G with n vertices and m edges, we consider the problem of computing
a longest directed path decomposition: a recursive partitioning of the graph into sets of
vertices, where each set consists of the vertices along some longest directed path in the
remaining graph. Observe that, since the longest path need not be unique, the decomposition
is not unique either.
We present a simple two-stage algorithm that computes such a decomposition in time
O(nm), improving over the previous best-known bound of O(n2.5 ) when the number of edges
m is subquadratic. The algorithm proceeds as follows:
First, perform a DFS to find a longest directed path in O(m) time. If its length is at
least n, remove its vertices and recurse.
Otherwise, the graph has height at most n. We compute a height decomposition and
construct a flow-DAG by connecting a super-source to all sources in G, and a super-sink
to all vertices of maximum height. A blocking flow in this DAG can be computed in
Õ(m) time, and its removal eliminates all longest paths. Since the height decreases by at
√
√
least one per iteration and is initially at most n, this phase takes Õ(m n) time overall.

Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg

5.3

17

Top-down analysis of path compression

Robert Endre Tarjan (Princeton University, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Robert Endre Tarjan
Main reference Raimund Seidel, Micha Sharir: “Top-Down Analysis of Path Compression”, SIAM J. Comput.,
Vol. 34(3), pp. 515–525, 2005.
URL https://doi.org//10.1137/S0097539703439088
License

Seidel and Sharir gave a proof of the inverse-Ackermann-function upper bound for path
compression based on a beautiful top-down recurrence. The analysis does not use Ackermann’s
function explicitly, but uses a related function they call “J.” Problem: Give a simple, direct
proof of the inverse-Ackermann function bound using their top-down recurrence and the
classical definition of Ackermann’s function.

5.4

Two problems on Lempel-Ziv compression

Paweł Gawrychowski (University of Wroclaw, PL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Paweł Gawrychowski

We ask two questions about the widely used Lempel-Ziv compression algorithm, and give an
overview of some known results relating to these questions:
Can pattern matching on a Lempel-Ziv compressed text be done in O(n + m) time, for a
string of compressed length n and a pattern of length m?
Can we design a data-structure using O(n) space which allows for O(log N )-time indexing
of characters in a string of length N with a Lempel-Ziv compressed representation of
length n?

5.5

Detecting collisions in Karp-Rabin fingerprinting

Martin Farach-Colton (NYU – New York, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Martin Farach-Colton

The Karp-Rabin Fingerprint method is a clean and simple way to achieve fast algorithms
for many string matching problems. The idea is to treat the characters of a string as the
coefficients of a polynomial and to take the value of this polynomial evaluated at Σ, the size
of the alphabet. In order to keep the number of bits down (and thus to be able to perform
constant-time manipulations), the value is computed modulo a prime number whose value is
some polynomial of n, the size of the longest string under consideration. For any substring,
this modular evaluation of the induced polynomial is the Karp-Rabin fingerprint of that
substring.
Although taking the mod does speed up the fingerprinting algorithm, it induces collisions
where two substrings of the same length might evaluate to the same fingerprint even though
they do not match.

25191

18

25191 – Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures

The open question is: how quickly can one take a string and a prime and check of any
pair of substrings (of the same length) of the string have colliding fingerprints? In other
words, are there two distinct substrings for which the given prime induces a collision? A
quadratic-time algorithm is straightforward using suffix trees. Can we achieve a linear time
algorithm or at least an O(n log n)-time algorithm?
It’s ok if we reject some polynomials that don’t, in fact, induce a collision, as long as we
do it with small probability.

5.6

Scheduling parallel jobs with a DAG of constraints

Kunal Agrawal (Washington University – St. Louis, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Kunal Agrawal

We give an overview of known results and open questions regarding the scheduling of parallel
tasks, each of which is represented as a directed acyclic graph of precedence constraints (thus
allowing for both parallelism between tasks as well as intra-task parallelism).

5.7

Some Intersection Problems

Sabine Storandt (Universität Konstanz, DE)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Sabine Storandt

The talk introduces the following problems in the realm of intersection reporting data
structures:
Construct an efficient segment-circle intersection data structure under the assumption
that the n input segments form a connected graph. The general data structure requires
O(n1.5 ) preprocessing time and O(n0.5 + k) query time where k is the output size.
Given a set of geometric objects, preprocess it such that for a given query range pairs
of input objects intersection inside the query range can be reported efficiently. While
for many types of objects and ranges, 3-SUM hardness can be shown, half-plane queries
for segments and lines escape that lower bound. However, faster query times might be
possible in that case and more general scenarios as the input objects being polylines is
wide open.

5.8

Maximum independent set in the congested clique model

Shiri Chechik (Tel Aviv University, IL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Shiri Chechik

We ask how many rounds of communication are necessary to compute a maximum independent
set of a graph G in a particular model of distributed computation, known as the congested
clique model. In this model there are n players identified with the vertices of G, each player

Michael A. Bender, John Iacono, László Kozma, and Eva Rotenberg

19

initially knows the vertices adjacent to itself, and can send b bits of information to every
other player in each round of communication.
We give a short overview of the known results.

5.9

A graph problem with applications to grammar compression

Gonzalo Navarro (University of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Gonzalo Navarro

One can represent a text T [1..u] with a context-free grammar of size n that produces (only)
T . This representation requires O(n log n) bits. However, every structure providing random
access to T using the grammar requires Θ(n log u) further bits of space, to record the
expansion length of the nonterminals. The question is whether we can remove this term
and still access the text efficiently. One choice is to sample o(n) nodes so that the others’
expansion lengths can be obtained in polylog time from the sampled ones. This boils down
to a problem sparse on acyclic graphs.

5.10

Median of medians in small groups

László Kozma (FU Berlin, DE)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© László Kozma

I briefly mentioned an open problem raised by Chen and Dumitrescu in connection to the
“median of medians” selection algorithm of Blum, Floyd, Pratt, Rivest, and Tarjan from
1973. This linear time selection algorithm is based on arranging the input elements in groups
of five, leading to the natural question of whether groups of three are also sufficient. The
classical analysis only yields a superlinear bound in this case. Chen and Dumitrescu point
out that contrary to common belief, this does not necessarily imply that the running time
with groups of three is indeed superlinear, and constructing a “difficult instance” appears to
be difficult; thus, a gap remains in our understanding of this fundamental algorithm.

25191

20

25191 – Adaptive and Scalable Data Structures

Participants
Peyman Afshani
Aarhus University, DK
Kunal Agrawal
Washington University –
St. Louis, US
Hideo Bannai
Institute of Science Tokyo, JP
Michael A. Bender
Stony Brook University, US
Ioana Oriana Bercea
KTH Royal Institute of
Technology – Stockholm, SE
Philip Bille
Technical University of
Denmark – Lyngby, DK
Davide Bilò
University of L’Aquila, IT
Gerth Stølting Brodal
Aarhus University, DK
Shiri Chechik
Tel Aviv University, IL
Alexander Conway
Cornell Tech – New York, US
Justin Dallant
UL – Brussels, BE
Aditi Dudeja
Paris Lodron Universität
Salzburg, AT
Faith Ellen
University of Toronto, CA
Martin Farach-Colton
NYU – New York, US
Jeremy Fineman
Georgetown University –
Washington, DC, US

Pawel Gawrychowski
University of Wroclaw, PL
Michael Goodrich
University of California –
Irvine, US
Joachim Gudmundsson
The University of Sydney, AU
Inge Li Gørtz
Technical University of
Denmark – Lyngby, DK
John Iacono
ULB – Brussels, BE
Rob Johnson
Broadcom – San Jose, US
Valerie King
University of Victoria, CA
Tomasz Kociumaka
MPI für Informatik –
Saarbrücken, DE
Hanna Komlós
NYU – New York, US
László Kozma
FU Berlin, DE
William Kuszmaul
Carnegie Mellon University –
Pittsburgh, US
Jingxun Liang
Carnegie Mellon University –
Pittsburgh, US
Quanquan C. Liu
Yale University – New Haven, US
Ulrich Carsten Meyer
Goethe University –
Frankfurt am Main, DE
Ian Munro
University of Waterloo, CA

Gonzalo Navarro
University of Chile –
Santiago de Chile, CL
Eva Rotenberg
Technical University of
Denmark – Lyngby, DK
Robert Sedgewick
Princeton University, US
Marek Sokolowski
MPI für Informatik –
Saarbrücken, DE
Teresa Steiner
Technical University of
Denmark – Lyngby, DK
Sabine Storandt
Universität Konstanz, DE
Robert Endre Tarjan
Princeton University, US
Ivor van der Hoog
Technical University of
Denmark – Lyngby, DK
Stefan Walzer
KIT – Karlsruher Institut für
Technologie, DE
Nicole Wein
University of Michigan –
Ann Arbor, US
Huacheng Yu
Princeton University, US
Or Zamir
Tel Aviv University, IL
Renfei Zhou
Carnegie Mellon University –
Pittsburgh, US

Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25192

AUTOBIZ: Pushing the Boundaries of AI-Driven Process
Execution and Adaptation
Giuseppe De Giacomo∗1 , Marlon Dumas∗2 , Fabiana Fournier∗3 ,
Timotheus Kampik∗4 , and Lior Limonad∗5
1
2
3
4
5

University of Oxford, GB. giuseppe.degiacomo@cs.ox.ac.uk
University of Tartu, EE. marlon.dumas@ut.ee
IBM Research Israel – Haifa, IL. fabiana@il.ibm.com
SAP Berlin, DE & Umeå University, SE. timotheus.kampik@sap.com
IBM Research Israel – Haifa, IL. liorli@il.ibm.com

Abstract
Advances in AI are enabling the shift toward Autonomous Business Processes (ABPs), where
systems not only suggest actions but also take proactive steps within defined constraints. This
concept was introduced in the AI-Augmented Business Process Management Systems (ABPMSs)
manifesto, which outlines their lifecycle, features, and research challenges. The “AutoBiz” 25192
Dagstuhl Seminar brought together experts from AI and BPM to collaborate on advancing this
vision. The seminar’s main goal was to define a research agenda for the realization of ABP
systems.
Seminar May 4–9, 2025 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/25192
2012 ACM Subject Classification Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence; Information systems → Information systems applications; Applied computing → Business process
management; Computer systems organization → Self-organizing autonomic computing; General and reference → Surveys and overviews
Keywords and phrases AutoBiz, Artificial Intelligence, Business Process Management, Autonomous Business Processes, Dagstuhl Seminar
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.5.21

1

Executive Summary

Fabiana Fournier (IBM Research Israel – Haifa, IL, fabiana@il.ibm.com)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Fabiana Fournier

Advances in AI make it possible to push the boundaries of automation into the realm of
Autonomous Business Processes (ABPs). In ABPs, AI-based systems not only recommend predefined interventions, as in prescriptive process execution, but they also proactively
trigger interventions to respond to unforeseen changes within user-defined constraints. The
initial vision towards ABPs was recently introduced in the “AI-Augmented Business Process
Management Systems: A Research Manifesto” paper. This manifesto coined the concept of
AI-Augmented Business Process Management Systems (ABPMSs), their lifecycle,
core characteristics, and the research challenges they present. An ABPMS enhances the
execution of business processes with the aim of making these processes more: Adaptable,
proactive, explainable, and context-sensitive.

∗

Editor / Organizer

Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
AUTOBIZ: Pushing the Boundaries of AI-Driven Process Execution and Adaptation, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15,
Issue 5, pp. 21–63
Editors: Giuseppe De Giacomo, Marlon Dumas, Fabiana Fournier, Timotheus Kampik, and Lior Limonad
Dagstuhl Reports
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany

22

25192 – AutoBiz

The most advanced form of ABPs is manifested by ABP systems. This Dagstuhl
Seminar brought together leading academic and industrial researchers from the AI and BPM
communities to collaboratively advance the vision of ABP systems and address the challenges
outlined in the manifesto. These include framed autonomy, situation-aware explainability,
automated process adaptation, and actionable conversations. The seminar was structured
into corresponding working groups, each focusing on one of these aspects.
The discussions in these groups led to the development of four dedicated publications,
presented at the PMAI workshop at ECAI 2025. These publications build upon the original
manifesto by elaborating on the concrete challenges and technical foundations required to
realize different characteristics of ABPMSs. The seminar thus marks a significant step
toward a comprehensive research agenda for Agentic BPM systems—systems that integrate
autonomous agents capable of reasoning, learning, and acting within framed constraints.
The results of this seminar, as elaborated in this report, form a bold call to action
for realizing the vision of Agentic BPM systems. These systems embody the architectural
principles and core ideas initially sketched in the manifesto and now further developed
through collaborative research and discussion.
For further details, readers are encouraged to consult the full report.

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

2

23

Table of Contents

Executive Summary
Fabiana Fournier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

Overview of Talks
AI-Augmented BPM – The manifesto and its key characteristics
Marlon Dumas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

Framed Autonomy in AI-Augmented Business Process Management Systems
Marco Montali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

Uncertainty Quantification and its role in AI-Augmented BPM
Niek Tax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
AI-augmented Process Mining
Stefanie Rinderle-Ma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Causal business processes: A new paradigm for agentic observability
Lior Limonad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Generative AI for process explainability
Fabiana Fournier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

AI-Assisted Prescriptive Business Process Monitoring
Andreas Metzger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Foundations of Agentic AI: GenAI meets Strategic Reasoning and Planning
Giuseppe De Giacomo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Working Groups
Working Group on Framed Autonomy
Giuseppe De Giacomo, Andrea Marrella, Yves Lesperance, Andrea Matta, Timotheus
Kampik, and Diego Calvanese . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Working Group on Adaptive / Uncertainty Quantification
Estefania Serral, Achiya Elyasaf, Andreas Metzger, Niek Tax, Sebastian Sardina,
and Arik Senderovich . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Working Group on Conversational Actionability
Daniel Amyot, Marco Comuzzi, Marlon Dumas, Marco Montali, and Irene Teinemaa 45
Working Group on Explainability
Peter Fettke, Fabiana Fournier, Lior Limonad, Andreas Metzger, Stefanie RinderleMa, and Barbara Weber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

51

AUTOBIZ Dissemination
Embedding of ABPMS-related Training into University Curricula . . . . . . . . . .

61

Related Publications and Future Venues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63

25192

24

25192 – AutoBiz

3

Overview of Talks

3.1

AI-Augmented BPM – The manifesto and its key characteristics

Marlon Dumas (University of Tartu, EE, marlon.dumas@ut.ee)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Marlon Dumas

AI-Augmented Business Process Management Systems (ABPMSs) are an emerging class of
process-aware information systems, empowered by trustworthy AI technology. An ABPMS
enhances the execution of business processes with the aim of making these processes more
adaptable, proactive, explainable and context-sensitive. This talk presents a vision for
ABPMSs and discusses research challenges that ought to be surmounted to realize this vision.
To this end, we define the concept of ABPMS, we outline the lifecycle of processes within an
ABPMS, we discuss core characteristics of an ABPMS, and we derive a set of challenges to
realize systems with these characteristics.
Details are given in [1] and [2].
References
1
Marlon Dumas, Fabiana Fournier, Lior Limonad, Andrea Marrella, Marco Montali, JanaRebecca Rehse, Rafael Accorsi, Diego Calvanese, Giuseppe De Giacomo, Dirk Fahland,
Avigdor Gal, Marcello La Rosa, Hagen Völzer, and Ingo Weber. Ai-augmented business
process management systems: A research manifesto. ACM Trans. Manag. Inf. Syst.,
14(1):11:1–11:19, 2023.
2
David Chapela-Campa and Marlon Dumas. From process mining to augmented process
execution. Softw. Syst. Model., 22(6):1977–1986, 2023.

3.2

Framed Autonomy in AI-Augmented Business Process Management
Systems

Marco Montali (Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, IT, montali@inf.unibz.it)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Marco Montali

Process framing is about defining suitable boundaries of execution within which AI agents
and humans can operate and collaborate to enact one or more work processes. The talk summarized a long-standing line of research aiming at providing an explicitly formal description
of the frames, which can be effectively employed in computational terms, e.g., for reasoning,
verification, execution, and analysis. Temporal logics on finite traces, together with their
automata-theoretic characterization, are the basis of this approach, which has been widely
explored within process science to provide a declarative way for process specification and
management (cf., in particular the Declare language). The talk started by showing how this
approach can be effectively used for process framing using declarative process mining tools
for frame elicitation and deviation analysis. It then innovatively expanded the approach to
deal with:
Frames that can be broken – providing anticipatory monitoring techniques to promptly
detect deviations at runtime
Uncertain frames, where “a portion” of traces may violate some constraints
Data-aware frames, dealing with data attributes or more complex objects and their mutual
relationships

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

25

All these settings come with suitable extensions of temporal logics on finite traces, with
corresponding foundational and practical results on computation. Finally, how agents
operating within the frame can employ the repertoire of techniques to operate and enact
processes, discussing several open challenges within and across artificial intelligence and
process science.

3.3

Uncertainty Quantification and its role in AI-Augmented BPM

Niek Tax (Meta – London, GB, niek@meta.com)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Niek Tax

Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) plays a pivotal role in enhancing the reliability, safety,
and adaptability of AI-augmented Business Process Management (BPM) systems. This
presentation explores the connection between UQ and several key BPM tasks. Various forms
of UQ are discussed, including probability calibration and the modeling of the full posterior
predictive distribution (beyond point estimates) and its applications in risk-aware decision
making, ensuring fairness, and enabling adaptability through guided exploration (e.g., active
learning). The talk also presents recent advances in UQ from the Meta Central Applied
Science team, including:
InfoShap [1] A SHAP-based method for explaining uncertainty estimates.
AdaptiveWeightSampling [2] A theoretically grounded active learning method that scale
to industrial applications.
TCE [3] A calibration error metric suitable for imbalanced domains.
MCE [4] A metric to quantify the extent to which predictions are simultaneously calibrated
across multiple subpopulations (i.e., multicalibrated [5]).
References
D. Watson, J. O’Hara, N. Tax, R. Mudd, and I. Guy. Explaining predictive uncertainty
1
with information theoretic shapley values. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 36, pages 7330–7350, 2023.
2
Daniel Haimovich, Dima Karamshuk, Fridolin Linder, Niek Tax, and Milan Vojnovic. On
the convergence of loss and uncertainty-based active learning algorithms. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:122770–122810, 2024.
3
Takuo Matsubara, Niek Tax, Richard Mudd, and Ido Guy. Tce: A test-based approach
to measuring calibration error. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 1390–1400.
PMLR, 2023.
4
Ido Guy, Daniel Haimovich, Fridolin Linder, Nastaran Okati, Lorenzo Perini, Niek Tax, and
Mark Tygert. Measuring multi-calibration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11251, 2025.
5
Ursula Hébert-Johnson, Michael Kim, Omer Reingold, and Guy Rothblum. Multicalibration:
Calibration for the (computationally-identifiable) masses. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 1939–1948. PMLR, 2018.

25192

26

25192 – AutoBiz

3.4

AI-augmented Process Mining

Stefanie Rinderle-Ma (TU Munich, DE, stefanie.rinderle-ma@tum.de)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Stefanie Rinderle-Ma

Process mining and automation have emerged as technological megatrends, largely driven
by recent advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI). Among these, generative AI and particularly large Language Models (LLMs) hold significant promise for transforming process
discovery from textual data and enabling the creation of process models by domain experts
in conversation with a chatbot. Furthermore, process technologies facilitate the collection
of contextualized data, especially event log data augmented with IoT data, which can be
leveraged to optimize the prediction of process behaviour by, e.g., including sensor data,
targeting, for example, enhanced compliance checks.
The presentation introduces the concepts of conversational process mining and redesign,
showcases the collection of contextualized data, and outlines key research directions.

3.5

Causal business processes: A new paradigm for agentic observability

Lior Limonad (IBM Research Israel – Haifa, IL, liorli@il.ibm.com)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Lior Limonad
Joint work of Lior Limonad, Fabiana Fournier
License

“A rooster’s crow does not cause the sun to rise, even though it always precedes it.” (The
book of Why, Mackenzie & Pearl, 2018). This quote captures a common fallacy – post hoc
ergo propter hoc – our tendency to infer causation from mere sequences: after this, therefore
because of this.
In the presentation, I argued that time-correlated events do not necessarily imply a causal
execution relationship. As an example, we presented a simple mortgage application process
in which the acceptance decision is followed by informing the customer and archiving the
application. While conventional process mining might depict the latter two activities as a
direct sequence, this does not imply that informing the customer causes archiving, or vice
versa.
Understanding true causal execution dependencies is essential for meaningful process
improvement. It helps avoid costly empirical interventions by identifying which outcomes
stem from specific changes. Our presented method introduces a novel technique for analyzing
activity execution times in business processes, based on logs. We extend recent causal
discovery methods – originally designed for continuous variables – and adopt them to
timestamped events, while aligning with realistic assumptions about process execution. This
enables a new paradigm: Causal Business Processes.
The talk presented our foundational work on discovering causal execution dependencies
from process event logs and modeling them in a unified framework. This approach augments
traditional process mining by enabling predictive insights about the effect of interventions,
critical for informed process optimization.
Further details about this work is available in [1] and [2].

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

27

References
1
F. Fournier, L. Limonad, I. Skarbovsky, and Y. David. The why in business processes:
Discovery of causal execution dependencies. Künstliche Intelligenz, 1 2025.
2
Yuval David, Fabiana Fournier, Lior Limonad, and Inna Skarbovsky. The why in business
processes: Unification of causal process models. In BPM Forum in BPM Conference (to
appear), 9 2025.

3.6

Generative AI for process explainability

Fabiana Fournier (IBM Research Israel –Haifa, - IL, fabiana@il.ibm.com)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Fabiana Fournier
Joint work of Fabiana Fournier, Lior Limonad
License

This talk tackles the interpretability aspect of SAX explanations and explore the question
on how effectively large language models (LLMs) can explain outcomes and decisions in
business processes (e.g., loan rejection, parking fines) as perceived by users. In the SAX
framework, a set of knowledge extractors analyses an input log (a historical record of process
executions within an organization) and generates key perspectives – or “views” – of the
process. These three views are then combined into a prompt for an LLM, along with the
user’s inquiry (e.g., why my loan application was rejected?). The LLM uses this input to
generate an explanation tailored to the user’s specific question. To assess this, we conducted
a user study with 50 participants with the goal to assess both perceptions of fidelity and
interpretability, while also considering the roles of trust and curiosity as experienced by
the users. Our results show that adding different perspectives does, in fact, improve the
perceived fidelity of the generated explanations. However, our study concluded that adding
knowledge views improves perceived fidelity, but such improvement can actually come at
the cost of perceived interpretability. Once we had developed a scale to assess the quality of
explanations generated by LLMs, we began exploring if we can leverage the developed scale
for LLM selection and refinement. To address this challenge, we launched another study –
this time focused on evaluating how our scale could be used to quantify user perceptions
and enable a meaningful comparison between different LLMs. The experiment centered on a
tax refund process and included 128 participants, who were asked to rate explanations for
various tax refund decisions using our evaluation scale.
Further details about this work is available in [1] and [2].
References
1
Lior Limonad, Fabiana Fournier, Hadar Mulian, George Manias, Spiros Borotis, and Danai
Kyrkou. Selecting the right llm for egov explanations, 2025.
2
Dirk Fahland, Fabiana Fournier, Lior Limonad, Inna Skarbovsky, and Ava J. E. Swevels.
How well can large language models explain business processes as perceived by users? Data
& Knowledge Engineering, 157:102416, 2 2025.

25192

28

25192 – AutoBiz

3.7

AI-Assisted Prescriptive Business Process Monitoring

Andreas Metzger (University of Duisburg-Essen, DE, andreas.metzger@paluno.uni-due.de)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Andreas Metzger
Main reference Andreas Metzger, Tristan Kley, Aristide Rothweiler, Klaus Pohl: “Automatically reconciling the
trade-off between prediction accuracy and earliness in prescriptive business process monitoring”, Inf.
Syst., Vol. 118, p. 102254, 2023.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.IS.2023.102254
License

Prescriptive business process monitoring aims to guide process managers on adapting processes
to avoid negative outcomes.
A key challenge is to balance prediction accuracy with tardiness: earlier predictions
provide more time for adaptations, but are often less reliable.
This talk explores existing methods for managing this trade-off and compares their
performance by using real-world datasets. By evaluating their cost savings, this talk identifies factors influencing effectiveness and provides practical recommendations for selecting
appropriate approaches.
Based on these insights, the talk explores directions & opportunities for future research,
involving emerging topics, such as explainable AI and Large Language Models (LLMs).
See: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2023.102254

3.8

Foundations of Agentic AI: GenAI meets Strategic Reasoning and
Planning

Giuseppe De Giacomo (University of Oxford, GB, giuseppe.degiacomo@cs.ox.ac.uk)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Giuseppe De Giacomo

We are entering an era where businesses adopt AI agents to transform operations, drive
impact across functions, and accelerate value realization. AI agents are software entities
with goal-directed autonomy, capable of choosing and executing actions using AI techniques,
see e.g., the 2025 IBM white paper “AI agents: Opportunities, risks, and mitigations”.
AI agents have long been studied in Reasoning about Actions (KR), Planning (ICAPS),
and Autonomous Agents (AAMAS). Recently, LLM-based agents have emerged, combining
language models with agency and showing strong potential of bringing about “open-endedness”
and “common sense”, as suggested by John McCarthy in his 1959 paper “Programs with
Common Sense”. Agentic AI systems combine AI agents with tools, planners, memory, and
data to pursue goals autonomously, often including hardware control. In this talk, we discuss
various opportunities and challenges that Agentic AI could deliver.

4

Working Groups

Seminar facilitation methodology adhered to an adapted design-thinking style. Overall, the
agenda included four major phases: talks-&-ideation, working groups, presentations, and
writ-a-thon (see Figure 1).

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

29

Figure 1 “Design-thinking”-like seminar structure.

4.1

Working Group on Framed Autonomy

Giuseppe De Giacomo (University of Oxford, GB, giuseppe.degiacomo@cs.ox.ac.uk)
Andrea Marrella (Sapienza Università di Roma, IT, marrella@diag.uniroma1.it)
Yves Lesperance (York University – Toronto, CA, lesperan@eecs.yorku.ca)
Andrea Matta (Politecnico di Milano, IT, andrea.matta@polimi.it)
Timotheus Kampik (SAP Berlin, DE & Umeå University, SE, timotheus.kampik@sap.com)
Diego Calvanese (Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, IT, diego.calvanese@unibz.it)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Giuseppe De Giacomo, Andrea Marrella, Yves Lesperance, Andrea Matta, Timotheus Kampik,
and Diego Calvanese

Framed autonomy refers to agents acting and interacting with maximal flexibility within
potentially dynamic frames consisting of rules, restrictions, and regulations. With the
increased deployment of AI-based technologies – recently and most notably large language
models – framing the autonomy of agents that enact business processes can be expected to
be a key challenge. In this working group report, we sketch problem scenarios and provide a
conceptual architecture for framing autonomy in business processes. We highlight a list of
practical challenges for the framing of autonomous business process behaviors and conclude
with the sketch of a research roadmap.

4.1.1

Introduction

Software systems providing the operational backbone of organizations are becoming increasingly autonomous [1], partially driven by advances in deep learning-based technologies such
as Large Language Models (LLMs) [2]. While in this context, autonomy may pertain to an
overall and potentially tightly coupled system, the distributed and complex nature of large
organizations requires intelligence at the level of autonomous submodules, reflecting how
intelligent business decisions are made by humans. In order to deploy autonomous software
agents safely and effectively, one must ensure that they comply with normative requirements,
while still utilizing their substantial degrees of autonomy to accomplish their goals to the
best possible extent [3].

25192

30

25192 – AutoBiz

As abstractions for managing guardrails, we propose the notion of (normative) frames
that – in contrast to the more operational notions of declarative or procedural business
processes and rules – focus only on deontic requirements of how organizations should run.
Frame representation and reasoning can draw from a wealth of research on deontic logic [4, 5],
temporal reasoning [6], planning [7, 8], and normative multi-agent systems [9]. We provide
informal definitions of frames and position them in the context of related abstractions, and
sketch scenario types describing how frames can be applied to agents enacting business
processes. These partially subsymbolic AI agents must then be augmented with symbolic
capabilities for synthesizing plans that guarantee frame compliance, reasoning about their
own, others’, and process-level goals in order to maximize objectives within the frames.
Accordingly, on a fundamental level these agents require capabilities for plan and behavior
synthesis [10, 11, 12, 13, 14], as well as for goal reasoning [15]. We also highlight a list of
practical challenges that require solving to (better) utilize frames in large organizations.
Considering these challenges, we outline a research roadmap for framing autonomous business
process execution.
As our motivating example, we introduce a simple excerpt of a (fictional) order-to-cash
process (Figure 2). A customer sends a natural language wishlist to a retailer, which then
generates a symbolic order proposal from it. If all items in the proposal are available,
the proposal is sent to the customer. If some items are not available, a gift is added to
the proposal. The retailer chooses between chocolate or wine as the gift and sends the
gift-augmented proposal to the customer. Upon receiving the answer, the retailer assesses
whether the answer is positive or negative. In the former case, the retailer acknowledges
the acceptance of the proposal; in the latter, the retailer generates a new order proposal.
However, in total not more than three proposals will be generated for a given incoming
request. The process – i.e., the retailer pool – is enacted by one or several agents that can
autonomously generate proposals (including alternative proposals) and decide on the type of
gift to add to a proposal. The objective of the process is to maximize the margins of order
proposals that are accepted by customers, also considering the cost of gifts.
Some frame constraints for this example are:
If the customer is underaged, do not add wine as the gift (i.e., a gift containing alcohol).
This constraint can be easily specified using linear temporal logic and verified on finite
traces (LT Lf ).
Once an item has been added to an order proposal, the item’s price must not increase in
a subsequent proposal. This constraint is harder to verify, as it requires reasoning over
quantities over time.
Notice that we may have a single agent taking these decisions, or multiple agents, with
different agents taking decisions in various moments during the execution of a single process
instance. This gives rise to different scenarios that are discussed in the next section.

4.1.2

Framed Autonomy in Business Processes

Framed autonomy requires that the autonomous system operates within its current frame.
Intuitively, a frame is a set of rules, restrictions, and regulations, which may evolve over time.
The frame establishes the boundaries within which the system may operate with maximal
flexibility, making autonomous decisions. In BPM, frames may exist – at least – on agent
type, process, and organization level (as well as potentially across organizations).
More analytically, frames are normative, i.e., they specify deontic requirements to the
process; in contrast, classical process specification languages, such as BPMN and DECLARE
are operational, i.e., they specify behavior required to accomplish a business goal. In terms

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

31

Figure 2 An excerpt of an order-to-cash process, in which a retailer turns a natural language
wishlist into an order proposal.

of strategies, operational specifications require choosing a strategy to achieve a goal, while
the frame requires, in principle, identifying the entire set of strategies that are compatible
with the norm and then ensuring that the strategy chosen for the goal is one of them.
Notice that sometimes the operational specifications have been called frames as well [1].
Indeed, they can be considered a sort of operational frame. In this document, however, we
our focus of “frames” is on the normative specification. When we need to distinguish, we
call the two frames normative frame and operational frame, respectively.
Observe that if there are no choices to be made (no autonomous decision-makers), then
the normative frame is just an additional condition over the operational frame; but if decisionmaking is possible then the operational frame requires finding a strategy to satisfy the
objective, whereas the normative frame requires choosing a strategy that remains within
what is allowed (with respect to the frame).
Strategies for achieving goals under framed autonomy are associated with decision-makers,
including software agents. This gives rise to several problem setups, reflecting centralized as
well as distributed intelligence.
Centralized intelligence. We consider the “AI agents” as a single entity that orchestrates
the process that is executed in a mutually fully observable and coordinated manner. The
environment may be stochastic and not fully observable. The frame is over the process.
The single entity may have active or passive responsibility for the frame. If we have
multiple agents we may break down the problem into several of the above scenarios.
Distributed intelligence. We consider AI agents as distributed entities that enact the process
as resources. This has wide-ranging implications:
A resource has partial observability of what other resources do.
Coordination may be effortful and not always possible.
Agents may have individual goals that may not be consistent with process-level goals.
We can frame resources or the entire process.
We need to assign responsibility to individual agents or groups thereof, and there may
be strategic interactions affecting responsibility.
From these problem setups, we can derive three different blueprint scenarios for framed
autonomy in business processes (Figure 3):
1. We have a single decision-maker and place a frame on process behavior.
2. We have multiple decision-makers and place frames on individual decision-makers.
3. We have multiple decision-makers and place frame(s) on process behavior or parts thereof.

25192

32

25192 – AutoBiz

Figure 3 Different scenarios of framed autonomy in business processes.

In practice, there may be additional variance to the scenarios. For example, normative
frames may be partially represented within operational process specifications, restricting
overall agent autonomy. An example is a purchasing process where purchase orders can only
be created and paid through a central IT system that enforces normative rules, e.g. regarding
four-eyes approval policies. Other parts of the global normative frame can potentially be
projected to local agent-level norms. For example, overall spending limits may apply on
the global level, but could be operationalized locally. Also, from a process perspective,
operationalizing some frame constraints (such as the spending limits from above) may require
very broad case notions; e.g., a case may be all purchases executed by a specific business unit
within a given month.

4.1.3

Practical Challenges

Achieving framed autonomy in business processes comes with practical challenges. Below,
we list (and briefly discuss) three that we consider of particular importance.
1. What is a pragmatic notion of an agent in the context of business process execution?
Before the broad adoption of LLMs, the notion of an agent did not play a major
role in the engineering of business information systems and the processes that run
them. Consequently, practitioners cannot be expected to be familiar with the depth and
sophistication of agent-related abstractions. To the contrary, a practitioner may consider
as an agent a software tool that makes use of an LLM, without much thought about
further properties. Defining a more precise and robust notion of an agent that is still
intuitively understandable by business process practitioners can thus be considered a key
prerequisite. See also Working Group Report 4.2.
2. How to elicit and specify frames? Next, approaches for eliciting and specifying frames
need to be devised. This requires a meta-model for frames, and one or several specification
languages. To this end, existing specification languages can be reused; potentially several
languages and their underlying concepts can be combined. For example, declarative

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

33

approaches to process specification – such as DECLARE [16] and in more practical
contexts business rule and query languages with temporal reasoning capabilities [17] –
can be augmented with deontic notions in order to promote normativity to a first-class
abstraction. For elicitation, both symbolic and subsymbolic approaches can be used and
fused. LLMs can generate frames or parts thereof from natural language text, whereas
rule mining approaches can be applied to infer normative constraints from the traces of
well-behaved agents and multi-agent systems. See also Working Group Report 4.3.
3. How to operationalize frames on real-world symbolic data? Once specified, frames need to
be integrated with business information systems, to ensure systems’ frame-compliance
during runtime. A short- to mid-term prerequisite is the operationalization of frames
using technologies that do in fact run in large organizations. Here, explainability is a
necessity, considering the practical intricacy of normative requirements, as well as the
scale of real-world symbolic queries and data. See also Working Group Report 4.4.

4.1.4

Research Roadmap

Given our conceptual architecture of frames for autonomous business process execution, as
well as the practical challenges outlined above, we define a research roadmap. The roadmap
is divided into four broad categories, each of which comes with a set of simply phrased “how
to?” research questions.
4.1.4.1

Frame Representation & Reasoning

The key prerequisite for applying frames to autonomous business process execution is devising
ways to represent them and reason about them. Accordingly, our questions are the following:
How to combine declarative and procedural paradigms when specifying frames?
How to decide what to model in a trace view versus what to model in a transition system
(with choice points)?
How to model agents and integrate agent models with process- and organization-level
models?
How to operationalize frames in real-world information systems?
How to ensure responsibility and accountability with respect to outcomes as well as to
deontic notions such as obligations, permissions, and prohibitions?
4.1.4.2

LLMs and Framed Autonomy

The emergence of LLMs as widely applicable natural language processing tools has led to
the re-emergence of agents as mainstream abstractions in information systems engineering.
Accordingly, a key problem is the assurance of normative compliant LLM agent behavior
(frames for LLMs), as well the application of LLMs to generate both normative frames and
frame-compliant operational behavior specifications (LLMs for frames). We consider the
former direction more relevant than the latter, reflecting the overall objective of frames
to maximize autonomy while still ensuring compliance. However, both are covered by the
questions below:
How to implement LLM agents that can comply with frames?
How to symbolically augment LLM agents to ensure compliance with frames?
How to generate frames from sources in several modalities using LLMs, as well as symbolic
approaches?
How to elicit goals in business processes with LLMs?
How to leverage LLMs as tools that help us reason about frames?

25192

34

25192 – AutoBiz

4.1.4.3

Goal Reasoning

While goals are central to informal definitions of business process notions, they are typically
not treated as first-class abstractions: the goal of a process or instance thereof is assumed to
be implicitly defined by the behavioral specification. However, considering that agents enact
processes autonomously, behavioral specification alone is insufficient, as these specifications
are necessarily at least partially synthesised from agent and process goals. Accordingly, a
range of research questions about goal reasoning in business processes emerge, such as:
How to elicit goals in business processes?
How to align agent-level and process-level goals?
How to represent goals in business processes?
How to manage goals (e.g., instantiate, drop, revise, prioritize) in business processes?
How to anticipate future goals?
How to maintain most options open in anticipation of future goals when strategizing and
acting?
4.1.4.4

Meta Frames and Reframing

Finally, we are interested in representing and reasoning about multiple frames, as well as as
frames that change:
How to compose and decompose different process frames?
How to adopt meta-level frames, e.g., as provided by third-party organizations?
How to navigate through different frames?
How to manage conflicts between frames?
How to revise frames over time?
How to verify that the entity revising the frame has the authority to do so?

4.1.5

Conclusions

When autonomy is included in a business process execution system, the notion of normative
frame becomes essential to guardrail autonomous decision-making. Normative frames have
a deontic nature and are concerned with the sets of strategies that an agent can choose
from while satisfying the frame. Accordingly, when goal-oriented agents synthesize their
operational strategies, these strategies are implicitly mapped to those at the normative level
and checked against the frame. AI agents – whether based on symbolic or subsymbolic
methods – that enact business processes must be able to synthesize such strategies so that
frame compliance can be guaranteed and exceptional violations can be justified.
References
1 Marlon Dumas, Fabiana Fournier, Lior Limonad, Andrea Marrella, Marco Montali, JanaRebecca Rehse, Rafael Accorsi, Diego Calvanese, Giuseppe De Giacomo, Dirk Fahland,
Avigdor Gal, Marcello La Rosa, Hagen Völzer, and Ingo Weber. Ai-augmented business
process management systems: A research manifesto. ACM Trans. Manag. Inf. Syst.,
14(1):11:1–11:19, 2023.
2 Timotheus Kampik, Christian Warmuth, Adrian Rebmann, Ron Agam, Lukas Egger,
Andreas Gerber, Johannes Hoffart, Jonas Kolk, Philipp Herzig, Gero Decker, Han van der
Aa, Artem Polyvyanyy, Stefanie Rinderle-Ma, Ingo Weber, and Matthias Weidlich. Large
process models: A vision for business process management in the age of generative ai. KI Künstliche Intelligenz, 2024.

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

3

4

5

6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

14
15
16

17

35

Timotheus Kampik, Adnane Mansour, Olivier Boissier, Sabrina Kirrane, Julian Padget,
Terry R. Payne, Munindar P. Singh, Valentina Tamma, and Antoine Zimmermann. Governance of autonomous agents on the web: Challenges and opportunities. ACM Trans.
Internet Technol., 22(4), 2022.
Dov Gabbay, John Horty, Xavier Parent, Ron Van der Meyden, Leendert van der Torre,
et al. Handbook of Deontic Logic and Normative Systems, Volume 1. College Publications,
2013.
Dov Gabbay, John Horty, Xavier Parent, Ron Van der Meyden, Leendert van der Torre,
et al. Handbook of Deontic Logic and Normative Systems, Volume 2. College Publications,
2021.
Giuseppe De Giacomo and Moshe Y. Vardi. Linear temporal logic and linear dynamic logic
on finite traces. In IJCAI, pages 854–860, 2013.
Giuseppe De Giacomo and Sasha Rubin. Automata-theoretic foundations of FOND planning
for ltlf and ldlf goals. In IJCAI, pages 4729–4735. ijcai.org, 2018.
Malik Ghallab, Dana S. Nau, and Paolo Traverso. Acting, Planning and Learning. Cambridge
University Press, 2025.
A. Chopra, L. van der Torre, and H. Verhagen. Handbook of Normative Multiagent Systems.
College Publications, 2018.
Amir Pnueli and Roni Rosner. On the synthesis of a reactive module. In POPL, pages
179–190. ACM Press, 1989.
Bernd Finkbeiner, Felix Klein, and Niklas Metzger. Live synthesis. Innov. Syst. Softw. Eng.,
18(3):443–454, 2022.
Giuseppe De Giacomo and Moshe Y. Vardi. Synthesis for LTL and LDL on finite traces. In
IJCAI, pages 1558–1564, 2015.
Shufang Zhu and Giuseppe De Giacomo. Act for your duties but maintain your rights. In
Gabriele Kern-Isberner, Gerhard Lakemeyer, and Thomas Meyer, editors, Proceedings of the
19th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning,
KR 2022, Haifa, Israel, July 31 - August 5, 2022, 2022.
Shufang Zhu and Giuseppe De Giacomo. Synthesis of maximally permissive strategies for
LTLf specifications. In IJCAI, pages 2783–2789. ijcai.org, 2022.
David W. Aha. Goal reasoning: Foundations, emerging applications, and prospects. AI
Mag., 39(2):3–24, 2018.
Claudio Di Ciccio and Marco Montali. Declarative process specifications: Reasoning,
discovery, monitoring. In Wil M. P. van der Aalst and Josep Carmona, editors, Process
Mining Handbook, volume 448 of Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, pages
108–152. Springer, 2022.
Timotheus Kampik and Cem Okulmus. Expressive power and complexity results for signal,
an industry-scale process query language. In Andrea Marrella, Manuel Resinas, Mieke Jans,
and Michael Rosemann, editors, Business Process Management Forum - BPM 2024 Forum,
Krakow, Poland, September 1-6, 2024, Proceedings, volume 526 of Lecture Notes in Business
Information Processing, pages 3–19. Springer, 2024.

25192

36

25192 – AutoBiz

4.2

Working Group on Adaptive / Uncertainty Quantification

Estefania Serral (KU Leuven, BE, estefania.serralasensio@kuleuven.be)
Achiya Elyasaf (Ben-Gurion University of the Negev – Beer Sheva, IL, achiya@bgu.ac.il)
Andreas Metzger (paluno – The Ruhr Institute for Software Technology, University of
Duisburg-Essen, DE, andreas.metzger@paluno.uni-due.de)
Niek Tax (Meta – London, GB, niek@meta.com)
Sebastian Sardina (RMIT University – Melbourne, AU, sebastian.sardina@rmit.edu.au)
Arik Senderovich (York University, Toronto, CA, sariks@yorku.ca)
License

4.2.1

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Estefania Serral, Achiya Elyasaf, Andreas Metzger, Niek Tax, Sebastian Sardina, and Arik
Senderovich

Introduction

In today’s dynamic digital landscape, business processes (BPs) are expected to operate
autonomously and adapt their structure and behavior to evolving goals, conditions, or
constraints [4]. Such systems are known as autonomous business process systems (ABPs),
whose key capability is self-modification.
Modifications in ABPs fall into two main categories [21]:
Adaptation: Short-term, instance-specific changes to handle unforeseen conditions
without altering the overall process schema. These real-time adjustments ensure continuity
and resilience, for example by rerouting workflows, reallocating resources, or integrating
new data sources during execution.
Evolution: Long-term changes to process logic or models, affecting all future instances.
These deliberate updates are driven by recurring issues or strategic shifts and may involve
redesigning decision logic or updating policies.
Without these capabilities, ABPs risk brittleness and reduced responsiveness. Thus,
engineering self-modifying capabilities is essential for robust, flexible process management.
The importance of adaptive and evolving BPM systems has long been recognized [3, 21, 11],
with prior work exploring both adaptation [16, 20, 10, 6, 23, 26] and evolution [12, 28, 27].
In this report, we provide:
A definition of self-modification in ABPs, distinguishing adaptation and evolution.
A structured view of the dimensions, goals, and triggers of modifications in ABPs.
An outline of key challenges in governance, uncertainty, and continuous learning.

4.2.2

Running Example: Automated Warehouse

To illustrate self-modifying ABPs, consider an automated warehouse where fleets of robots
transport shelves to human pickers across a high-throughput environment.
If a robot fails during the busy holiday season, nearby robots reroute around the blockage,
and the order is reassigned. Workers receive updated instructions, ensuring minimal disruption. This short-term response (adaptation) resolves the immediate issue without changing
the overall process model.
The system also logs the failure and, after noticing similar breakdowns after about
1,000 picks, introduces a maintenance rule requiring inspection every 900 operations. This
mid-term, model-level change (evolution) refines policies to prevent recurrence.
Together, these examples show how ABPs span from localized adaptations to deliberate
evolution, implemented with varying degrees of automation.

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

4.2.3

37

Types of Modifications in ABPs

Modifications in ABPs can be classified along several dimensions:
D1: Adaptation vs. Evolution
We introduced this central dimension already in Section 1, referring to adaptations as shortterm, instance-specific modifications, and evolution as long-term, multi-instance modifications
of the process logic and/or model itself [22].
The concept of adaptation in ABPs strongly connects to work in the software engineering
community on self-adaptive software systems [32]. Here, the MAPE-K loop has established
itself as a widely adopted conceptual model [1, 2]. This model is depicted in Figure 4.

Figure 4 Conceptual model of self-adaptation.

The self-adaptation logic is structured into four main activities (MAPE) that leverage a
shared knowledge base (K). The knowledge base includes adaptation goals (requirements),
strategies, and rules. The four activities are:
Monitoring: Observing the system and its environment via sensors.
Analysis: Interpreting monitoring data to determine the need for adaptation.
Planning: Deciding on adaptation actions.
Execution: Implementing adaptation actions via actuators.
The concept of evolution in ABPs, in contrast, focuses on systematic, long-term modifications that affect the process model and logic across multiple future instances. Rather
than responding to immediate runtime conditions, evolution is driven by aggregated insights
from monitoring and analysis over time – such as recurring performance issues, changes
in strategic direction, or compliance updates. These insights inform deliberate revisions of
process design, typically through:
Assessment of existing outcomes.
Planning of structural or behavioral improvements.
Implementation of changes.
Validation to ensure alignment with long-term goals.
While adaptation enables resilience and responsiveness, evolution ensures strategic alignment, sustainability, and optimization.

25192

38

25192 – AutoBiz

D2: Task vs. Flow vs. Process
Another critical dimension concerns what is modified [22]:
Task-level changes: Modify how individual tasks are performed or configured (e.g.,
adjusting duration, logic, input/output data, or resource assignments).
Control Flow-level changes: Adjust control flow or routing of tasks (e.g., rerouting
orders, skipping steps).
Process-level changes: Alter the structure or central resources of the entire process
(e.g., introducing new roles, shifting coordination logic, or replacing subsystems).
These levels often interact. For example, rerouting in the warehouse involves flow-level
change, while a new rule for reassigning malfunctioning robots might affect task performance.
Revising the maintenance schedule constitutes a process-level change. This dimension also
affects implementation complexity: task-level changes can often be handled locally, while
process-level changes typically require coordination across components.
D3: Reactive vs. Proactive
Another important distinction concerns the trigger of modifications:
Reactive: Occur in response to specific events or failures, such as a robot malfunction
triggering rerouting.
Proactive: Initiated based on forecasts or insights from predictive analytics. Examples
include predictive and prescriptive business process monitoring [17], such as scheduling
preventive maintenance or restricting robot access during peak loads.
D4: Human-Driven vs. Autonomous
Changes may be:
Human-driven: Users detect, decide, and implement modifications.
Autonomous: The system identifies issues and enacts changes independently.
In the warehouse example, creating a maintenance rule might initially be human-driven, but
an advanced ABPS could learn similar patterns and implement them autonomously.
D5: Planned vs. Emergent
Planned: Result from deliberate, top-down redesign (e.g., rolling out a maintenance
policy across sites).
Emergent: Arise bottom-up, as patterns learned from execution lead to adaptations or
eventual model evolution.
An ABPS that generalizes from local failure logs to propose global improvements exemplifies
emergent capability.
Characterizing the Running Example
All key dimensions play out in the warehouse scenario:
Rerouting around a malfunctioning robot is a short-term, instance-level adaptation.
Introducing a maintenance rule is a deliberate, model-level evolution.
Rerouting is reactive when triggered by an event but can be proactive if anticipated via
predictive monitoring.
Initially, the maintenance policy is human-driven and planned.
Over time, an advanced ABPS could autonomously propose and implement similar rules,
making the change emergent.

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

4.2.4

39

Toward Self-modifying ABPS

Today’s business process systems typically operate at an augmented level of autonomy,
where intelligent components assist human workers but do not independently drive process
execution or change. To move toward truly autonomous business process systems (ABPS),
we propose a structured roadmap of autonomy levels, inspired by the SAE J3016 standard
for driving automation [24]. While Sheridan’s Levels of Automation [29] offer an alternative,
they focus on isolated task automation rather than holistic process-level behavior, making
them less suitable for ABPS.
We define autonomy levels as follows:
Level 0: No Automation – Execution and orchestration of all tasks are fully manual.
Level 1: Process Assistance – The system provides recommendations or highlights
anomalies to human workers (e.g., predictive monitoring [18]).
Level 2: Partial Autonomy – The system independently executes isolated tasks (e.g.,
call routing, task assignment) within predefined boundaries, but without contextual or
adaptive behavior.
Level 3: Contextual Autonomy – The system autonomously performs most tasks
and orchestrates flows in a context-aware manner, requiring human intervention only in
exceptional cases.
While most current systems lie at Level 1 or 2, we envision Level 3 as the target state
for ABPS. Achieving this level necessitates the development of self-modifying capabilities.
Specifically, a Level 3 ABPS must:
1. Detect changes in the operating environment (e.g., concept drift detection [8, 14, 25]).
2. Decide whether the detected change requires adaptation or evolution.
3. Select an appropriate modification strategy based on goals, context, and system history.
4. Learn from prior adaptations and generalize successful strategies.
5. Communicate its decisions, rationale, and uncertainty to human stakeholders.
Goals and Capabilities Across Autonomy Levels
The extent and nature of these capabilities depend on the object of modification: task, flow, or
process. For instance, at Level 1, task-level modifications might involve recommending better
parameter configurations; at Level 3, the system may autonomously reassign or skip tasks.
Similarly, flow-level autonomy ranges from highlighting bottlenecks (Level 1) to real-time
rerouting (Level 3), while process-level autonomy progresses from alerting on coordination
issues to full reconfiguration of goals, roles, or policies.
In the warehouse scenario, task-level changes may involve altering how picking or navigation tasks are performed; flow-level changes may include rerouting due to blocked paths;
and process-level autonomy could entail adjusting global maintenance policies. Thus, progressing toward Level 3 autonomy requires integrating sensing, reasoning, learning, and
communication across abstraction levels while minimizing reliance on human oversight.

4.2.5

Challenges in Enabling Autonomous Modifications

In this section, we discuss three challenges related to governance and human oversight,
continual learning for adaptation management, and uncertainty quantification and communication.

25192

40

25192 – AutoBiz

Table 1 Goals and capabilities for autonomy at different levels and modification objects.
Object of Modification

Level 1: Process
Assistance

Level 2: Partial
Autonomy

Level 3: Contextual Autonomy

Task

Recommending task
performers or configurations (e.g., duration, cost).

Automating
task
assignment or execution in narrow
scopes.

ABPS decides and
executes full task
reconfiguration
autonomously, with
human fallback only
in edge cases.

Flow

Suggesting alternative paths or detecting bottlenecks.

Automating routing
based on real-time
conditions or rules.

Rerouting
and
dynamically altering
execution
paths
with learned policies
under uncertainty.

Process

Flagging
processwide issues (e.g.,
coordination
delays).

Automating subprocesses, such as resource pooling or exception handling.

Reconfiguring processes, modifying
policies or goals,
and
coordinating
across stakeholders
with minimal human oversight.

Challenge 1: Governance, Oversight, and Human Interaction
To operate safely, ABPs must embed governance and human oversight. A central question
is when to refrain from automation and return control to humans, especially in ambiguous
or high-risk situations. AI planning and runtime monitoring can help define thresholds for
escalation, while prediction with a reject option [7] offers approaches for “learning to defer.”
Determining how users validate proposed changes requires explainable adaptation, where
the system justifies its modifications. Methods from explainable AI [5] or simulations of
expected outcomes can support transparency.
Table 2 Challenge mapping across modification levels.
Object of Modification

Governance
Oversight

&

Continuous
Learning & Adaptation Mgmt.

Modeling & Uncertainty

Task

When should execution shift from
autonomous
to
manual?

How can the system
learn improved task
performance?

How confident is the
system in altering
task strategies?

Flow

Who approves new
routing decisions?

Can routing rules
generalize without
overfitting?

What risks arise
when rerouting or
skipping tasks?

Process

When must humans
approve structural
redesign?

How to record and
evolve process-level
modifications?

How is uncertainty
modeled across processes?

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

41

Aligning ABP goals with those of human stakeholders remains complex. Multi-objective
optimization [15] can help balance performance, cost, compliance, and satisfaction, but
resolving conflicting objectives is difficult.
In fully autonomous scenarios, ABPs need internal mechanisms to evaluate whether
adaptations succeed. Techniques such as anomaly detection, causal reasoning, and formal
verification are promising. LLMs may also support human audits by generating decision
justifications [33].
Human input for validation is often costly, motivating efficient solutions like active
testing [13]. Lastly, systems must be able to assess whether they have sufficient context to
act safely or should defer decisions.
Core Research Questions:
When should control shift between autonomous processes and humans in self-modifying
systems?
How can user validation be incorporated in real-time adaptation without bottlenecking
autonomy?
How can systems optimize multiple objectives while remaining within formal and ethical
constraints?
How can ABPs evaluate the success or failure of modifications when human validation is
unavailable?
What are the data quality and coverage thresholds for safe, autonomous decision-making?
Challenge 2: Continuous Learning and Adaptation Management
A core capability of self-modifying ABPs is learning from experience to improve behavior
over time. This requires continuously recording adaptations – reactive and proactive – and
assessing their impact both per instance and across instances. Such meta-knowledge enables
feedback loops where effective modifications are reinforced and ineffective ones discarded. AI
planning and reinforcement learning [20], especially when combined with causal modeling,
are promising for managing these loops.
Evaluating generalization poses another challenge. An adaptation that works once may
fail under different conditions. Systems must infer when learned strategies apply and calibrate
their confidence accordingly. For example, if a task is often skipped under heavy load, the
ABP may learn to skip it when similar patterns arise, but must avoid overgeneralizing.
Formal guarantees and validation frameworks are needed to ensure safe transfer of learned
policies. This also relates to interpretability, as stakeholders expect explanations for behavior
shifts.
Finally, ABPs operating over long periods or at high volume face limits of memory
and context. They must build bounded knowledge representations – such as compressed
summaries, predictive abstractions, or sliding windows of relevant history. Techniques like
stream reasoning, process mining, and transformer-based models can help. Deciding what to
remember, forget, or query is essential for scalable, continuous learning.
Core Research Questions:
How can ABPs continuously record adaptations and assess their effectiveness over time?
What metrics and techniques enable safe generalization of learned behavior across varying
contexts?
How can bounded knowledge representations be maintained for long-running or highfrequency processes?

25192

42

25192 – AutoBiz

Challenge 3: Modeling and Measuring Uncertainty
ABPs must handle both aleatoric (inherent randomness) and epistemic (lack of knowledge)
uncertainty [9]. Aleatoric uncertainty can be modeled with probabilistic distributions over
durations and outcomes, while epistemic uncertainty often requires exploration or additional
sensing to reduce ambiguity. Identifying which type is present guides whether to gather more
data or hedge decisions probabilistically. Probabilistic modeling, Bayesian inference, and
fuzzy logic are key tools for representing uncertainty.
Quantification combines qualitative thresholds set by experts and quantitative measures
like Bayesian models or ensemble predictions [16]. ABPs must integrate both, relying
on statistical models when data are sufficient and heuristics when information is limited.
Hybrid approaches that combine fuzzy logic and ensemble learning can improve robustness
in uncertain domains.
Uncertainty modeling links closely to Challenges 1 and 2. For Challenge 1, quantifying
uncertainty informs when to defer to humans [7]. For Challenge 2, accurate epistemic
estimates are essential for learning adaptive policies efficiently [19, 30].
Finally, communicating uncertainty effectively is critical. Operators must grasp what the
system plans to do and how confident it is. Explainable AI [31], visual confidence intervals,
and natural language outputs can help convey this information, along with potential impacts
on risks and service quality.
Core Research Questions:
How can ABPs differentiate between epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty during execution?
How can qualitative and quantitative uncertainty metrics be combined for robust decisionmaking?
What are effective representations for modeling uncertainty using probabilistic or fuzzy
paradigms?
How should ABPs communicate uncertainty and associated risk to users in a transparent
and actionable way?

4.2.6

Conclusion and Outlook

In this paper, we have laid the conceptual groundwork for understanding and engineering
self-modifying capabilities in autonomous business process systems (ABPS). We defined
what it means for an ABPS to self-modify, distinguished between the short-term reactivity
of adaptation and the long-term reconfiguration of evolution, and introduced a structured
framework for levels of business process autonomy. We further mapped these autonomy
levels across different objects of modification – task, flow, and process – and connected them
to system goals and capabilities.
As ABPS strive toward higher levels of autonomy, we identified three core research challenges that must be addressed to enable safe, intelligent, and human-aware self-modification:
1. Establishing robust governance mechanisms and human oversight.
2. Managing continuous learning to support sustainable and generalizable adaptations.
3. Modeling and communicating uncertainty in ways that foster trust and informed decisionmaking.
Together, these challenges highlight a critical insight: autonomy is not simply about
replacing humans but about redesigning systems that can responsibly decide when to act,
when to adapt, and when to defer. The path forward requires integrating techniques from
AI planning, machine learning, explainable AI, causal inference, process mining, and humancomputer interaction into coherent architectures that balance autonomy with accountability.

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

43

We envision ABPS of the future not as black-box automation engines but as collaborative
agents capable of engaging with their environments and human counterparts in a transparent,
contextual, and goal-aligned manner. To that end, we encourage the community to build
benchmarks, share evaluation frameworks, and develop modular toolkits that bring us closer
to truly self-modifying, trustworthy, and adaptive business processes.
References
1 Y. Brun, G. Di Marzo Serugendo, C. Gacek, H. Giese, H. Kienle, M. Litoiu, H. Müller,
M. Pezzè, and M. Shaw. Engineering self-adaptive systems through feedback loops. In
Software Engineering for Self-Adaptive Systems, pages 48–70. Springer, 2009.
2 IBM Computing. An architectural blueprint for autonomic computing. Technical Report 31,
IBM White Paper, 2006.
3 P. Dadam and M. Reichert. The adept project: a decade of research and development
for robust and flexible process support: challenges and achievements. Computer Science Research and Development, 23:81–97, 2009.
4 M. Dumas, F. Fournier, L. Limonad, A. Marrella, M. Montali, J.-R. Rehse, R. Accorsi,
D. Calvanese, G. De Giacomo, and D. Fahland. Ai-augmented business process management
systems: a research manifesto. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems,
14:1–19, 2023.
5 R. Dwivedi, D. Dave, H. Naik, S. Singhal, R. Omer, P. Patel, B. Qian, Z. Wen, T. Shah,
G. Morgan, et al. Explainable ai (xai): Core ideas, techniques, and solutions. ACM
Computing Surveys, 55:1–33, 2023.
6 D. Greenwood and R. Ghizzioli. Goal-oriented autonomic business process modelling and
execution. In Multiagent Systems. IntechOpen, 2009.
7 K. Hendrickx, L. Perini, D. Van der Plas, W. Meert, and J. Davis. Machine learning with a
reject option: A survey. Machine Learning, 113:3073–3110, 2024.
8 F. Hinder, V. Vaquet, and B. Hammer. One or two things we know about concept drift – a
survey on monitoring in evolving environments. part a: detecting concept drift. Frontiers
in Artificial Intelligence, 7:1330257, 2024.
9 E. Hüllermeier and W. Waegeman. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learning:
An introduction to concepts and methods. Machine Learning, 110:457–506, 2021.
10 K. Jander, L. Braubach, A. Pokahr, W. Lamersdorf, and K.-J. Wack. Goal-oriented processes
with gpmn. International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools, 20:1021–1041, 2011.
11 N. R. Jennings, P. Faratin, M. Johnson, T. J. Norman, P. O’Brien, and M. E. Wiegand.
Agent-based business process management. International Journal of Cooperative Information
Systems, 5:105–130, 1996.
12 H. Kir and N. Erdogan. A knowledge-intensive adaptive business process management
framework. Information Systems, 95:101639, 2021.
13 J. Kossen, S. Farquhar, Y. Gal, and T. Rainforth. Active testing: Sample-efficient model
evaluation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, pages 5753–5763, 2021.
14 J. Lu, A. Liu, F. Dong, F. Gu, J. Gama, and G. Zhang. Learning under concept drift: A
review. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 31:2346–2363, 2018.
15 R. T. Marler and J. S. Arora. Survey of multi-objective optimization methods for engineering.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 26:369–395, 2004.
16 A. Metzger, T. Kley, and A. Palm. Triggering proactive business process adaptations
via online reinforcement learning. In Business Process Management - 18th International
Conference, BPM 2020, volume 12168 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 273–290.
Springer, 2020.

25192

44

25192 – AutoBiz

17

18
19
20

21
22
23
24
25
26

27

28

29

30
31

32
33

A. Metzger, T. Kley, A. Rothweiler, and K. Pohl. Automatically reconciling the tradeoff between prediction accuracy and earliness in prescriptive business process monitoring.
Information Systems, 118:102254, 2023.
A. E. Márquez-Chamorro, M. Resinas, and A. Ruiz-Cortés. Predictive monitoring of business
processes: a survey. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 11:962–977, 2017.
V.-L. Nguyen, M. H. Shaker, and E. Hüllermeier. How to measure uncertainty in uncertainty
sampling for active learning. Machine Learning, 111:89–122, 2022.
A. Palm, A. Metzger, and K. Pohl. Online reinforcement learning for self-adaptive information systems. In Advanced Information Systems Engineering - 32nd International Conference,
CAiSE 2020, volume 12127 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 169–184. Springer,
2020.
M. Reichert and B. Weber. Enabling Flexibility in Process-Aware Information Systems:
Challenges, Methods, Technologies, volume 54. Springer, 2012.
H. A. Reijers. Process design and redesign. In Process-Aware Information Systems: Bridging
People and Software through Process Technology, pages 205–234. Wiley, 2005.
L. Sabatucci, C. Lodato, S. Lopes, and M. Cossentino. Towards self-adaptation and evolution
in business process. In AIBP@AI*IA, pages 1–10, 2013.
SAE International. Taxonomy and definitions for driving automation systems for on-road
motor vehicles. Technical report, SAE Recommended Practice J3016, 2021.
D. M. V. Sato, S. C. De Freitas, J. P. Barddal, and E. E. Scalabrin. A survey on concept
drift in process mining. ACM Computing Surveys, 54:1–38, 2021.
E. Serral, J. De Smedt, M. Snoeck, and J. Vanthienen. Context-adaptive petri nets:
Supporting adaptation for the execution context. Expert Systems with Applications, 42:9307–
9317, 2015.
E. Serral, P. Valderas, and V. Pelechano. Supporting runtime system evolution to adapt
to user behaviour. In Advanced Information Systems Engineering: 22nd International
Conference, CAiSE 2010, volume 6051 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 378–392.
Springer, 2010.
E. Serral, P. Valderas, and V. Pelechano. Addressing the evolution of automated user
behaviour patterns by runtime model interpretation. Software & Systems Modeling, 14:1387–
1420, 2015.
T. B. Sheridan. Adaptive automation, level of automation, allocation authority, supervisory
control, and adaptive control: Distinctions and modes of adaptation. IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics-Part A: Systems and Humans, 41:662–667, 2011.
A. Tharwat and W. Schenck. A survey on active learning: State-of-the-art, practical
challenges and research directions. Mathematics, 11:820, 2023.
D. Watson, J. O’Hara, N. Tax, R. Mudd, and I. Guy. Explaining predictive uncertainty
with information theoretic shapley values. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 36, pages 7330–7350, 2023.
D. Weyns. An Introduction to Self-Adaptive Systems: A Contemporary Software Engineering
Perspective. John Wiley & Sons, 2020.
L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin, Z. Li, D. Li,
E. Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pages 46595–46623, 2023.

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

4.3

45

Working Group on Conversational Actionability

Daniel Amyot (University of Ottawa, CA, damyot@uottawa.ca)
Marco Comuzzi (Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, KR,
mcomuzzi@unist.ac.kr)
Marlon Dumas (University of Tartu, EE, marlon.dumas@ut.ee)
Marco Montali (Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, IT, marco.montali@unibz.it)
Irene Teinemaa (Google DeepMind – London, GB, iteinemaa@google.com)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Daniel Amyot, Marco Comuzzi, Marlon Dumas, Marco Montali, and Irene Teinemaa

The discussions in this working group focused on the use cases that drive the requirement
of conversational actionability in AI-Augmented Business Process Management Systems
(ABPMS), the key functions an architecture of a conversationally actionable ABPMS, and
various concerns and challenges related to the realization of such systems.

4.3.1

Definitions and Use Cases

An ABPMS is conversationally actionable if it can interact with users or external agents
using a conversational interface to support, trigger, or guide actions related to business
processes. Depending on the user and use case, this conversational interface can support
communications using natural language, textual abstractions of process related artifacts,
images and graphical models, or specific agent communication protocols.
We identify four principal use cases in a conversationally actionable ABPMS:
1. Creation. This use case is concerned with the elicitation of knowledge leading to the
creation of business process related artifacts, such as imperative or declarative business
process models, constraints, etc. The ABPMS creates the artifacts via several means,
including from conversations with domain experts [1], from manually-created process
documentation and maps, through discovery from event logs [2], or a combination thereof.
2. Query. This use case is concerned with answering questions about the past and current
states of business processes and their executions. Besides process monitoring information,
e.g., KPI dashboards, constraint violations, and related explanations, queries may also
address design time concerns, e.g. process model updates and explanations of process
changes. The queries can be issued by users using natural language and other communication means or by agents using some mutually agreed upon protocol. A query can return
answers in natural language, as a graphical output (dashboard, annotated process model,
etc.) or using a specific agent communication protocol.
3. Recommendation. This use case is concerned with generating recommendations for process
instance adaptation and process evolution (future states). The ABPMS can provide such
recommendations based on internal parametric knowledge or it can combine its knowledge
with output retrieved from external components, such as simulators, optimizers, and
solvers. Recommendations can be issued proactively by the ABPMS or requested by
users or agents through a conversational interface. A recommendation can be presented
to users in natural language or sent directly to an automation component to be directly
implemented.
4. Automation. This use case is concerned with business process execution and evolution,
which can be triggered by the user through natural language, automatically by an
agent after the creation of a process-related artefact, or as the implementation of a

25192

46

25192 – AutoBiz

recommendation. Depending on the type of action to be taken, automation is delegated
to a suitable component, e.g., an RPA bot for automating the execution of an activity or
an agent updating the business rules of an ERP system.
Figure 5 maps the use cases to the phases of the traditional BPM lifecycle.

Figure 5 BPM lifecycle annotated with use cases of a conversationally actionable ABPMS.

4.3.2

Architecture

We envision an architecture for a conversationally actionable ABPMS consisting of four
subsystems (see Figure 6): a data layer, an intelligence layer, an action layer, and a
conversational fabric.

Figure 6 Architecture of a conversationally actionable ABPMS.

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

47

The data layer brings together structured and unstructured data about a business
operation, including event logs of business processes, other business data (financial data, time
series), business process documentation (including text documents and process models), as
well as data from physical systems relayed via IoT sensors. This layer allows the ABPMS to
sense the current state and evolution of the business process and its environment. It provides
a querying interface allowing other layers to leverage business process data and metadata
from a variety of sources.
On top of the data layer sits a process intelligence layer, which provides capabilities for
process discovery and performance analysis (process mining), predictive capabilities (e.g.
based on simulation and machine learning), as well as prescriptive capabilities (recommending
intervention). In other words, the process intelligence layer provides capability to describe
and explain the current state of the process and to predict future states of the process under
different scenarios.
Next to the process intelligence layer, the action layer provides capabilities for triggering
actions affecting one or more business processes, or interactions with external actors (suppliers,
customers, etc.). Example of actions include: (1) creating or altering the state of a case
in a business process orchestrated by a Business Process Management System (BPMS);
(2) triggering a software bot; (3) sending notifications via a communication platform; (4)
updating records in a CRM, ERP or other System of Records.
The fourth component is the conversational fabric. This layer makes available the
capabilities of the data layer, process intelligence layer, and action layer to different types of
agents. The capabilities of the lower layers are exposed via tools. These tools are exposed
to agents via a Model Context Protocol (MCP) [3] layer, which provides semantically rich
descriptions of the tools for consumption by agents
An agent may leverage some of these tools to, for example, detect degradations in the
performance of a process that may lead to a violation of a Service Level Agreement (SLA).
Having detected this risk, the agent may leverage the process intelligence tools to determine
interventions that may be triggered to prevent this SLA violation, and it may then leverage
the tools coming from the action layer to trigger actions or notifications.
The agents in the conversational fabric receive instructions and goals from end users,
directly via for example a chat interface, or indirectly via agents operating in other systems,
such as an agent running in a CRM platform.
Some agents rely on general-purpose LLMs, others are based on fine-tuned or domainspecific models, and some possess explicit planning or reasoning capabilities. Each agent
operates autonomously but may collaborate with other agents by passing tasks, sharing
context, or requesting specific operations.

4.3.3

On Actions and their Composition

Conversations do not only happen when external (human or artificial) agents interact with
the ABPMS to obtain information, insights, and explanations about the current state or the
history of the ABPM itself. They are also central to enable actionability, that is, to support
actions in a broad sense. Actions may pertain to:
The very execution of the process, e.g., approving a purchase order request, or sending a
warehouse replenishment request.
Process (re)framing, e.g., adding or removing constraints, and (re)modelling, e.g., evolving
a model due to changing requirements.
Decisions and interventions for process improvement, e.g., hiring a new resource to
improve cycle time, or deciding to cancel an order because of economic considerations)

25192

48

25192 – AutoBiz

In this context, conversating is essential to gather information and insights before taking
– or deciding whether to take – an action. For example, an agent would need to ponder the
impact of hiring a new resource before committing to do so, or may decide to cancel an
order depending on the corresponding penalty. This can only be achieved with good quality
guarantees if the agent can conversate with other agents, as well as it can invoke the tools
needed for the task at hand.

Figure 7 A component with its inputs, outputs, and metadata.

In general terms, a component is conceived as a deterministic, verifiable unit of software
that realises a certain task and/or produces some result given some inputs and preconditions.
A tool may be a manually crafted software or it may rely on generative AI, but in any case,
it is deemed to have gone through sufficient quality control to be trusted.
As shown in Figure 7, to enable agents in using components and interpreting the obtained
results, some key aspects must be described:
Input – an input object (possibly with some preconditions) necessary to invoke the
component; for example, the process model required by a simulator.
Parameter – an auxiliary input used to tune the component; for example, hyperparameters
used to configure the simulator.
Result – an output object produced by the component; for example, the process cycle
time produced by the simulator.
Auxiliary output – an auxiliary output produced by the component to help interpreting
the output; for example, quantified uncertainty associated to a prediction.
Manifest – a description of the component, its behaviour, and its inputs and outputs; the
manifest relates to MCP, as its main purpose is to enable agents to discover and properly
consume the component.
Behavioral indicator – a quantitative or qualitative indicator characterising the (functioning of the) component along a key functional or non-functional concern (cf. Section 4.3.4),
such whether the component produces analytical or approximate results, or whether it
guarantees data privacy, whether it requires a rigid description of the input, and the like;
relevant aspects that cannot be clearly described as indicators could still be included in
the manifest of the component.
An agent may jointly employ multiple tools through different usage patterns, like concatenating two components to obtain a new functionality, or invoking two components in parallel
and then aggregating their results. In addition, as pointed out before, it may conversate
with other agents. This could lead to an autonomous decision taken by the agent relying on
the result of the conversation and of the employed software components, or in an even more
complex setting, resulting from collective decision making (akin to multi-agent systems [4]).
A crucial aspect of this architecture is trust. Agents are only deemed trustworthy if
they can transparently explain their outputs. This is achieved by enabling agents to trace
and articulate how they invoked specific components, what input they provided, and how

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

49

the resulting outputs contributed to their decisions or responses have been used. This
traceability, which relates to the more general concept of ABPMS explainability, ensures
that agent outputs are not opaque, but grounded in reproducible and verifiable actions.
In other words, trust propagates from tools to agents if the agents are able to trace their
own outputs to outputs obtained from the components. Actionability is in the components,
while conversationality is provided by the agents. This trust propagation approach from
tools to agents is sketched in Figure 8.
In the context of an ABPMS, tools provide access to descriptions about the current state
of the process, diagnosis for issues, predictions, explanations, and recommendations, among
others. Other components may provide actions, e.g. executed by rule-based bots, or by bots
driven by automated planners, which perform actions on top of systems that have an impact
on the “real world” such as transactional systems (which maintain ground-truth of reality)
or communication systems (e.g. sending an email).

Figure 8 Trust propagates from tools to agents, which are connected in a network.

Figure 9 Important conversationally actionable ABPMS concerns.

25192

50

25192 – AutoBiz

4.3.4

Key Concerns and Challenges

We have identified a non-exhaustive list of key concerns (mostly non-functional in nature)
closely relevant to the conversational actionability of ABPMS (Figure 9 and Table 3). These
concerns (except Training and probably Strategy Flexibility and Knowledge Representation)
are expected to be specified, tracked, and composed using measurable indicators (e.g., in
components), as has been done in other areas such as Service-Oriented Architecture [5].
Table 3 Key concerns for conversationally actionable ABPMS.
Concern
Performance
Cost

Trust

Training
Usability
Helpfulness
Quality
Transparency
Strategy Flexibility
Knowledge
Elicitation
Uncertainty
Privacy

Description
The extent to which the ABPMS meets time, throughput, and capacity
requirements.
The financial impact of invoking external tools and services (including
LLMs) on the architecture (e.g., smaller but specialized LLMs) and
operation of the ABPMS.
The degree to which users and agents believe that the ABPMS outputs
(e.g., models, recommendations, automations) are true, accurate, and
dependable.
The level of effort and education required for users to effectively learn
and utilize the ABPMS and its conversational capabilities.
The degree to which the ABPMS interface and interaction mechanisms
enable users to accomplish their goals efficiently and satisfactorily.
The extent to which the outputs of the ABPMS support users in
completing or improving their tasks and decision-making.
The accuracy, correctness, and completeness of the results provided by
the ABPMS in support of user and agent tasks.
The extent to which the ABPMS provides understandable and traceable
explanations for its outputs, actions, or reasoning.
The degree to which the ABPMS can support the tailoring of human
requests to generic or specific strategies (e.g., by specifying which
external tools to use and combine).
The ability of the ABPMS to query and integrate external or internal
knowledge sources (e.g., web, databases, ontologies) to enhance its
reasoning or task performance.
The extent to which the ABPMS can represent, communicate, and act
upon confidence levels of its outputs and outputs.
The degree to which the ABPMS respects and enforces privacy constraints arising from its frame (laws, policies, or user preferences) during
its operations and model fine-tuning.

Stemming from these concerns and the previous discussion, we identify important challenges for the development of conversationally actionable ABPMS. Most are short-term, but
the last two are longer-term.
1. How are actionable conversations defined and evolved?
2. How can conversation needs and mechanisms (e.g., MCP) be elicitated and specified to
enable an ABPMS to use discover, understand, and invoke the capabilities of other tools
and services (e.g., simulators or AI-based agents)?
3. How can the concerns identified in Table 3, and especially trust, be understood and
increased in an ABPMS?

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

51

4. How can indicators for these concerns be specified, measured, and aggregated within the
ABPMS but also within component contexts (e.g., with MCP)?
5. How can unreliable AI-based components and certified tool components be composed
dynamically to contribute towards satisfying the goals of an actionable conversation while
addressing the identified concerns?
6. How can an ABPMS itself become a component (MCP-based or other) that can be used
by larger ecosystems?
7. (Long-term) How can we support the automated generation of automations (RPA, AI
agents, others) from within an APBMS?
8. (Long-term) How can frames related to conversations and to interactions with external
services/tools be flexibly managed?
References
1 Nataliia Klievtsova, Timotheus Kampik, Juergen Mangler, and Stefanie Rinderle-Ma.
Conversationally actionable process model creation. In Marco Comuzzi, Daniela Grigori,
Mohamed Sellami, and Zhangbing Zhou, editors, Cooperative Information Systems - 30th
International Conference, CoopIS 2024, Porto, Portugal, November 19-21, 2024, Proceedings,
volume 15506 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 39–55. Springer, 2024.
2 Wil M. P. van der Aalst and Josep Carmona, editors. Process Mining Handbook, volume
448 of Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing. Springer, 2022.
3 Xinyi Hou, Yanjie Zhao, Shenao Wang, and Haoyu Wang. Model context protocol (MCP):
landscape, security threats, and future research directions. CoRR, abs/2503.23278, 2025.
4 Ali Dorri, Salil S. Kanhere, and Raja Jurdak. Multi-agent systems: A survey. IEEE Access,
6:28573–28593, 2018.
5 Hanane Becha and Daniel Amyot. Consented consumer-centric non functional property
description and composition for SOA-based applications. Int. J. Web Eng. Technol.,
10(4):355–392, 2015.

4.4

Working Group on Explainability

Peter Fettke (Saarland University – Saarbrücken, DE & German Research Center for
Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) – Saarbrücken, DE, peter.fettke@dfki.de)
Fabiana Fournier (IBM Research Israel – Haifa, IL, fabiana@il.ibm.com)
Lior Limonad (IBM Research Israel –Haifa, IL, liorli@il.ibm.com)
Andreas Metzger (University of Duisburg-Essen, DE, andreas.metzger@paluno.uni-due.de)
Stefanie Rinderle-Ma (TU Munich, DE, stefanie.rinderle-ma@tum.de)
Barbara Weber (University of St. Gallen, CH, barbara.weber@unisg.ch)
License

4.4.1

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Peter Fettke, Fabiana Fournier, Lior Limonad, Andreas Metzger, Stefanie Rinderle-Ma, and
Barbara Weber

Introduction

An autonomous business process (ABP) is the next generation of AI-Augmented Business
Process Management System (ABPMS) [1], which is a self-executing ABPMS that leverages
advanced technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) to
operate with minimal to no human intervention. ABPs can sense and respond to various
inputs, reason, make decisions, and adapt to changing circumstances in real time, all without

25192

52

25192 – AutoBiz

relying on manual triggers or continuous oversight. Think of it like a self-driving car for
your business operations. Instead of a human driver controlling all aspects, the system uses
sensors, data analysis, and intelligent algorithms to navigate and achieve its objectives.
The notion of ABPs was recently introduced at the AutoBiz Dagstuhl seminar1 , during
which the core material for this paper was jointly developed.
One reason for realizing ABPs is to improve operational efficiency, reduce errors, lower
costs, improve response times, and free human workers for more strategic and creative work.
However, despite the promises that ABPs offer, their characteristics can lead to particular
concerns in the context of BPM:
ABPs may erode trust among stakeholders – including process owners, business analysts,
end-users, and customers – who may be hesitant to rely on or adopt AI-based process
recommendations or automated decisions if they cannot understand the rationale behind
them.
The opacity of ABPs may make it difficult to debug process models, as well as identify
potential failures, or understand why a process might be under-performing.
Using ABPs may hinder accountability; if an ABP leads to a failure or an unfair outcome,
the inability to explain its underlying decisions makes it challenging to assign responsibility
or implement corrective actions.
ABPs may perpetuate hidden biases of their underlying AI and ML components. Such
biases may lead to discriminatory or unfair process outcomes, which can be difficult to
detect and mitigate.
Demonstrating the compliance of ABPs with regulatory frameworks, such as the EU’s
GDPR and AI Act, requires an increasing level of transparency, particularly in high-risk
domains like finance, healthcare, and human resources, which are common areas for BPM
applications.
We argue that explainability will be a key characteristic of ABP systems to address the
aforementioned concerns [1, 2], leading to the notion of eXplainable ABPs (XABPs).
XABPs are particularly relevant when ABPs are realized in the form of Agentic BPM
systems. An Agentic BPM system is an advanced approach to managing and automating
complex business workflows by integrating autonomous AI agents. Unlike traditional BPM or
Robotic Process Automation (RPA) systems that follow rigid, predefined rules and workflows,
agentic BPM leverages AI to enable systems to make independent decisions, adapt to changing
conditions, and learn from experience with minimal human intervention. Here, explainability
offers a central mechanism through which agents can articulate the rationale behind their
behavior. As such, explainability becomes a first-class citizen in the realization of Agentic
BPM systems, supporting agent autonomy from two perspectives:
Enabling agents to independently resolve misalignments in other agents’ behavior.
Reducing human intervention by making agent behavior understandable and transparent.
Employing state-of-the-art explainable AI (XAI) techniques [3] for XABPs pose several
limitations:
1. Inability to express business process model constraints [4].
2. Failure to capture the richness of contextual situations that affect process outcomes [5].

1

See https://www.dagstuhl.de/25192. We express our gratitude to the Scientific Directorate and staff
of Schloss Dagstuhl for their invaluable support. We also thank our fellow participants for their engaging
discussions.

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

53

Explanandum
explains

Explainer
“Who is doing
the explanation?”

“What is
explained?”

produces
Key to symbols:
Actor
(system
or human)

questions

Explainee

is perceived by

Artefact/
LEGEND
Component
/System

Document

Explanans
“What is the
explanation?”

“Whom is it
explained to?”

Figure 10 Explainability Concepts.

3. Inability to reflect causal execution dependencies among activities in the business process [6].
www.adaptive-systems.org
7
4. Explanations are often nonsensical or not interpretable for human users [7].

4.4.2

Characterization and Needs of XABPs

We start with a generic conceptualization of explainability and then refine this to particular
concerns in the BPM setting.
4.4.2.1

Fundamental Explainability Concepts

Figure 10 illustrates the key explainability concepts.
The explainer provides an explanation of the explanandum (explanation subject) by
offering one or more explanans/explanantia (explanation/explanations). The explanation is
generated by the explainer using a specific explanation mechanism at a defined generation
time, and is delivered to the explainee in a particular presentation format – typically visual
or textual. In its simplest form, the explanantia produced by the explainer should provide
information about the causes of the explained phenomenon (explanandum) [8]. The content
of the explanation must align with both the nature of the explanandum and the needs of the
explainee. Furthermore, interaction of the explainee with the explanation can follow different
modes, ranging from one-shot explanations to conversational or multi-round interactions.
4.4.2.2

Explanandum: Explanation Subjects “what is explained?”

Figure 11 shows the key types of aspects of an explanandum that may be explained, as
elaborated below.

Explanandum
"What is explained?"

Process Instance

AI Component

Process Flow • Decision Points
Resource Assignment • Outcome Justification

Model Behavior • AI Decisions
"Why did the AI make this recommendation?"

Process Model

Framed Autonomy Constraints

Model Structure • Policy Compliance
"Why is the process structured this way?"

Design Autonomy • Delegation Rules • AI Authority
"Why is the system allowed to behave this way?"

Figure 11 Explainability Concepts.

25192
www.adaptive-systems.org

3

54

25192 – AutoBiz

Process Instance Explanation: “Why did this specific process execution take the
path and produce the result it did?”
Process Flow - The sequence of activities, decisions, and events in the business process.
Example: “Why did the invoice approval take 5 days?”
Decision Points – Why certain paths or outcomes were chosen during process execution.
Example: “Why was a customer’s request escalated instead of being resolved at Tier 1?”
Resource Assignment – Why specific tasks were assigned to certain roles or individuals.
Example: “Why was this case handled by the senior team?”
Outcome Justification Why a specific result occurred.
Example: “Why was this loan application rejected by the process?”
Process Model Explanation: “Why is the process structured the way it is?”
Model Structure: Why are certain activities, decisions, or flows included?
E.g., “Why do we have a credit history check as a decision point?”
Policy Compliance: Whether and how policies shaped the model or its execution
E.g., “Was the data retention policy followed?”
AI Component Explanation: “Why did an AI component make this recommendation or decision?”
Note, that this here very much refers to explainable AI (XAI). In more detail:
AI Model Outcome: “Why did the AI component predict deviations or prescribe proactive
adaptations?” [9] E.g., “Why was an alarm raised for process event ej ?”
AI Model Behavior: “Why does the AI model have certain characteristics or properties?”
E.g., “Why does the LSTM prediction model have a Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of only
.35 for the given process domain?”
Framed Autonomy Explanation: “Why is the system or process allowed to behave
as it does?”
Design Autonomy: “Why can the process bypass manual review?”
Delegation Rules: “Why do Tier 1 agents have approval authority?”
AI Authority: “Why can the AI act without a human in the loop?”
Escalation Thresholds: “Why is escalation triggered only after 3 attempts?”
Compliance Limits: “Why is this exception allowed under the GDPR?”
4.4.2.3

Explainer

XABPs involve a range of human and system actors that either generate or consume
explanations. Some actors – especially autonomous systems or agents – may fulfill both roles,
such as generating explanations for others while also using explanations for self-reflection or
system adaptation.
Figure 12a shows the key aspects of the explainer, elaborated below.

ems.org

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

55

Table 4 Explanation Providers in Business Processes (Explainers).
(a) System Explainers: systems providing or formalizing explanations

Actor Type

Role in Ecosystem

Explanation About

Mechanism
Method

or

AI Agents

Intelligent assistants,
bots

Predictions, task outcomes, alerts

SHAP, LIME, rule-based
reasoning, counterfactuals

Monitoring
Components

Process mining engines, workflow monitors

Process events, performance, exceptions

Temporal rules, KPI
tracking, log analysis

Connected
Systems

External APIs or services

State changes, synchronization info

Metadata contracts, semantic logging

(b) Human Explainers: humans providing or formalizing explanations

Actor Type

Role in Ecosystem

Explanation About

Communication
Mechanism

Domain
Experts

Analyst specifying
business rules

Process logic, decision criteria, exception handling

Process documentation,
model
annotations,
verbal explanation

Supervisors /
Managers

Operations or compliance manager

Justification for overrides, escalations, or decisions

Reports, notes, emails,
verbal feedback

Trainers /
Annotators

Labelers or human-inthe-loop operators

Ground truth or feedback
to train explainable systems

Annotation tools, structured forms, chat interfaces

Explainee

Explainer

"Whom is it explained to?"

“Who is doing the explanation?”

System Actors

Human Actors

AI Models/Agents

Domain Experts

Monitoring
Components

Supervisors

Human Actors

Trainers

Connected
Systems

The System Itself

Process Participants

Connected Systems

Process Managers

AI Agents

Business Analysts

Annotators

(a) Aspects of Explainer

System Actors

End Users

Compliance Officers

(b) Aspects of Explainee

Figure 12 Overview of explainer and explainee aspects.

www.adaptive-systems.org

3

25192

56

25192 – AutoBiz

4.4.2.4

Explainee

Figure 12b shows the key aspects of the explainee, elaborated below.
Table 5 Explanation Recipients in Business Processes (Explainees).
(a) Human Explainees: humans consuming explanations.

Actor Type

Example Role

Needs from
planations

Ex-

Preferred Explanation Style

End Users

Customer
for a loan

applying

Understand decisions
about them (e.g., rejections, delays)

Simple,
focused,
language

Process Participants

Agent handling loan
verification

Know what task to do
next and why

Step-by-step task rationale, alerts, realtime updates

Process Managers

Operations lead, shift
manager

Monitor KPIs, react
to anomalies, adapt
resources

Dashboards, alerts,
summaries, what-if
analysis

Business Analysts /
Domain Experts

Person modeling the
process

Improve efficiency, detect bottlenecks, validate rule logic

Process mining results, causal analysis,
counterfactuals

Compliance Officers /
Auditors

Internal or external
auditors

Ensure traceability,
legality, policy adherence

Audit trails, rule execution logs, exception
reports

outcomenatural

(b) System Explainees: self-reflective systems consuming explanations.

Actor Type

Role in the Ecosystem

Needs from
planations

The System Itself

Autonomous BPM or
AI component

Self-monitoring, internal diagnosis, reconfiguration

Logs, symbolic reasoning, anomaly detection

Connected Systems

CRM, ERP, or DMS
components

Data or process synchronization with semantic clarity

API
contracts,
structured
events,
semantic metadata

4.4.2.5

Ex-

Communication
Mechanism

Explanans

Figure 13 shows the key aspects of an explanans, elaborated below.
Explanation Mechanism: “How is the explanation generated?”
The explanation mechanism refers to the approach employed by the explainer to generate
an explanation – such as attributing feature importance, selecting representative examples, deriving symbolic rules, constructing interpretable approximations, identifying counterfactuals,
or visualizing model behavior.
Feature Attribution: Assigns contribution (credit or blame) to input features. Examples:
SHAP, LIME, Saliency Maps
Example-Based: Uses similar or contrasting examples to justify a decision. Examples:
k-NN, Prototypes, Counterfactuals

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

57

Explanans
"How is the explanation provided?"

Explanation Mechanism
Feature Attribution • Example-Based •
Rule-Based • Counterfactual Model Simplification
• Visual Explanations

Presentation Format
Visual explanations • Verbal explanations

Time of Generation
Ex-ante • Run-time • Post-hoc

Interaction Mode

Explanation Quality
Clarity • Accuracy • Completeness
• Relevance • Usefulness • Actionability • …

One-shot • Conversational

Figure 13 Aspects of an Explanans.

Rule-Based Derives symbolic or logical rules from data or models. Examples: Decision
Trees, Rule Lists, Association Rules
Model Simplification: Approximates complex models with interpretable surrogates. Examples: Surrogate Decision Trees, Linear Proxies
Counterfactual: Explains what minimal input change would alter the outcome [10].
Example: “If income were $5,000 higher, the outcome would have changed.”
Visual Explanations: Uses visual indicators to represent decision logic or model behavior.
www.adaptive-systems.org
Examples:
Heatmaps, Partial Dependence Plots

6

Time of Explanation Generation: “When is the explanation produced?”
The timing of an explanation determines its role in the lifecycle of decision-making
systems. Explanations may be generated before, during, or after system execution:
Ex-ante Explanations (Before Execution): Provided before the system executes or makes
a decision to validate models or justify decisions before deployment.
Run-time Explanations (During Execution): Delivered while the process is running to
support human-in-the-loop oversight or adaptive user feedback.
Post-hoc Explanations (After Execution): Generated after the process completes its
actions or decisions in order to audit, debug, or help users understand outcomes.
Presentation Format of Explanation: “How is the explanation presented to the
user?”
The chosen presentation method has a direct effect on user comprehension and, therefore,
on the success of the explanations [11].
Visual explanations: Heatmaps, charts, dashboards, saliency maps
Verbal explanations: Natural-language output, written rules, factual/counterfactual statements
Interaction with Explainee: “How does the user interact with the explanation?”
Interaction of the explainee with the explanation refers to the mode and extent of user
involvement in the explanation process:
One-shot explanations: Explanation provided once, passively
Query-based explanations: Explanation provided on-demand, actively
Multi-round / Conversational: Interactive, iterative, potentially adaptive dialogue [12]

25192

58

25192 – AutoBiz

Explanation Quality: “How to assess the quality of explanations?”
Explanation quality may be assessed along two complementary dimensions:
Technical quality: This relates to the technical properties of the explanation method
itself. Examples include fidelity aka. faithfulness aka. soundness (which measures how
accurately the explanation reflects the reasoning or behavior of the explanans), and
stability (an explainer should provide similar explanations for similar input or minor
perturbations of the input).
User-centric quality: This relates to how the explanation is perceived by humans (in the
role of explainees). Examples include usefulness (which quantifies how well it helps the
explainee to solve a problem, understand a concept better, or apply the knowledge in a
new situation) and meaningfulness (explanation is relevant to the specific explainee and
the question or topic at hand and avoids unnecessary tangents or irrelevant information
that could confuse the explainee).

4.4.3

Challenges for Explainable ABPs

We structure the challenges along the four main explainability concepts as well as along
overarching concerns.
4.4.3.1

Challenges Related to Explainee

Challenge 1: How to specify preferences regarding explanations? Specifying
preferences for explanations presents multifaceted challenges. First, input mechanisms
must effectively capture preferences through various channels, whether explicitly declared
upfront, interactively elicited through dialogue, or implicitly inferred from user behavior.
Systems must accommodate both static preferences that remain consistent and those that
dynamically adapt to changing contexts, while supporting the natural evolution of preferences
as the explainee’s understanding develops. Second, inevitable preference conflicts need to
be navigated. This involves carefully balancing competing dimensions, such as detail versus
conciseness and speed versus accuracy. This requires finding trade-offs without sacrificing
critical explanatory qualities.
4.4.3.2

Challenges Related to Explanandum

Challenge 2: What explanation subjects are needed for ABPMs? Explainability related to AI components are rather well understood - not so for ABPM. From our
understanding, explanation subjects such as process instance, process models, and framed
autonomy constraints are interesting and relevant. However, a more mature taxonomy of
explanation types might evolve.
4.4.3.3

Challenges Related to Explainer

Challenge 3: Which techniques are needed for the explainer to generate explanations? In the broader field of XAI, several techniques for XAI are known. In addition,
in the field of BPM, several techniques are emerging. On this foundation, new techniques
should be developed, e.g., what-if analysis, process outcome analysis. All these techniques
should take causality into account. In the future, it should be clarified how existing BPM
techniques can be integrated, e.g., visualization, and be exploited for creating explanations.
Explainability of frames is a nearly unexplored field.

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

4.4.3.4

59

Challenges Related to Explanans / Explanantia

Challenge 4: How may one articulate actionable explanations (e.g., to other
agents) to preserve autonomy?
While the explanans is constructed to make an
explanation informative about the circumstances that may led to the situation being inquired
(i.e., the explanandum), in the context of XABPs, the explanans may also adopt an actionable
style – indicating to the explainee which corrective or mitigating actions could be taken
to alter the state of the explanandum, particularly without escalating the situation to any
external agent. In this way, the explainee may be able to autonomously act upon the
condition at hand. However, further work is needed to devise a systematic approach that
enables the explainer to determine the most effective content for the explainee, to elicit such
corrective action – taking into account both the explanandum and the behavioral intentions
of the explainee.
Challenge 5: When to generate explanations (generation time) and how long to
preserve them [13]? The question here is whether explanations should be generated upfront, whenever possible, or whether we can or should be more conscious about the generation
time of the explanation. Another question is when to discard outdated explanations.
Challenge 6: How can explanations automatically adapt their form to suit the
identity of the explainee? The question is how the explanation can be presented in
a way that is easily understandable for the explainee, e.g., leads to low cognitive load for
human explainees, and answers the explanation needs of the explainee. This could also be
motivated by organizational motivation and goals.
Challenge 7: How can we accommodate explanations that consider (why) certain
behaviors did not occur?
Explaining non-occurring behavior is more challenging
than explaining occurring behavior and requires capturing or acquiring knowledge about
non-occurring behavior. Causal analysis might be helpful here.
Challenge 8: How may we synthesize a variety of perspectives (e.g., data,
contextual, exogenous) into the explanation? The first challenge here is to collect and
create data sets that cover different perspectives and are of sufficient quality. It is essential to
be able to link the synthesized data to process instances. Moreover, providing explanations
on synthesized data might also require selecting and filtering the data adequately again to
provide adequate explanations.
Challenge 9: How to identify causal explanations? Causality vs. correlation: Not
every correlation between two variables has a causal explanation. It is therefore important
to distinguish between spurious correlations and causality. This classical distinction is well
known, but must also be observed in the context of explainable ABPMN. The explainer
can provide the explainee with information about the degree of certainty of the explanation
offered.
Challenge 10: How do explanations evolve over time based on feedback or
changing context? Explanations might have to be updated based on changing context and
feedback, e.g., if sensor data starts to deviate. The first question is how to detect that an
explanation that (partly) takes into account the sensor data has to be updated? Another
question is when to present the updated explanation to the user, i.e., directly after a changing
context was detected or at another, possibly better fitting moment? This question is related
to the question of explanation update frequency. Here, the challenge is to find the sweet spot
between keeping explanations up to date and not confusing the explainee. Finally, we have

25192

60

25192 – AutoBiz

to think about when and how to provide full versus incremental explanation updates.
Challenge 11: How does the realization of the “frame” in ABPMSs affect the
one of explainability? i.e., with autonomous agents, it may be the means for the agents
to share with other agents the rationale for their own behavior.
4.4.3.5

Overarching Challenges

Challenge 12: How may one assess the quality of the explanations? Evaluating
explanation quality presents a fundamental challenge requiring both empirical and theoretical
approaches. From an empirical perspective the question needs to be answered how can we
effectively measure explanation quality when objective and subjective dimensions must both
be considered? Objective measures include, for example, factual accuracy and completeness,
while user-centered aspects cover, for example, comprehensibility, usefulness, effectiveness
and efficiency (e.g., see [14]), as well as being actionable.
Challenge 13: Which kind of datasets are needed to serve as explainability
benchmarks? Benchmarking is a typical approach to evaluating system performance. We
expect that such an idea can also promote the development of the field of accountability.
However, benchmarking typically relies on adequate benchmark data. In principle, such data
can be generated in a laboratory setting. But adequate data are also needed for benchmarking
explainability systems in the field.
Challenge 14: How to ensure that explanations do not reveal information that
may be privacy-sensitive, reveal business-critical IPR, or make it easier to
undermine the security of the system? In essence, the challenge lies in providing enough
information to satisfy the need for explainability without compromising other crucial aspects
of the business, such as data privacy, competitive advantage, and system security.

4.4.4

Conclusion

An autonomous business process (ABP) represents a paradigm shift towards self-executing
workflows driven by AI and ML Yet ABPs introduce challenges related to trust, transparency,
accountability, bias, and regulatory compliance within BPM. To address these issues, this
paper introduced the notion of explainable ABPs (XABPs), which can articulate the rationale
behind their actions and underlying models. Current explainable AI (XAI) techniques fall
short in capturing the complexities of the BPM setting. We therefore introduced a set of
challenges to stimulate further research on XABPs.
References
1 Marlon Dumas, Fabiana Fournier, Lior Limonad, Andrea Marrella, Marco Montali, JanaRebecca Rehse, Rafael Accorsi, Diego Calvanese, Giuseppe De Giacomo, Dirk Fahland,
Avigdor Gal, Marcello La Rosa, Hagen Völzer, and Ingo Weber. AI-augmented business
process management systems: A research manifesto. ACM Trans. Manag. Inf. Syst.,
14(1):11:1–11:19, 2023.
2 Nijat Mehdiyev, Maxim Majlatow, and Peter Fettke. Interpretable and explainable machine
learning methods for predictive process monitoring: A systematic literature review, 2023.
3 Amina Adadi and Mohammed Berrada. Peeking inside the black-box: A survey on explainable artificial intelligence (xai). IEEE Access, 6, 2018.
4 Guy Amit, Fabiana Fournier, Shlomit Gur, and Lior Limonad. Model-informed lime
extension for business process explainability. In PMAI@IJCAI’22. CEUR, 2022.

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

5

6
7

8
9

10

11

12

13

14

5

61

Guy Amit, Fabiana Fournier, Lior Limonad, and Inna Skarbovsky. Situation-aware explainability for business processes enabled by complex events. In BPM-W 2022, volume 460 of
LNBIP, pages 45–57. Springer, 2022.
F. Fournier, L. Limonad, I. Skarbovsky, and Y. David. The why in business processes:
Discovery of causal execution dependencies. Künstliche Intelligenz, 1 2025.
Dirk Fahland, Fabiana Fournier, Lior Limonad, Inna Skarbovsky, and Ava J. E. Swevels.
How well can large language models explain business processes as perceived by users? Data
& Knowledge Engineering, 157:102416, 2 2025.
Peter Lipton. Causation and Explanation, pages 619–631. Oxford University Press, 1 2010.
Andreas Metzger, Tristan Kley, Aristide Rothweiler, and Klaus Pohl. Automatically
reconciling the trade-off between prediction accuracy and earliness in prescriptive business
process monitoring. Inf. Syst., 118:102254, 2023.
Tsung-Hao Huang, Andreas Metzger, and Klaus Pohl. Counterfactual explanations for
predictive business process monitoring. In Marinos Themistocleous and Maria Papadaki,
editors, EMCIS 2021, volume 437 of LNBIP, pages 399–413. Springer, 2021.
Lorenzo Malandri, Fabio Mercorio, Mario Mezzanzanica, and Navid Nobani. Convxai: a
system for multimodal interaction with any black-box explainer. Cogn. Comput., 15(2):613–
644, 2023.
Andreas Metzger, Jone Bartel, and Jan Laufer. An AI chatbot for explaining deep reinforcement learning decisions of service-oriented systems. In ICSOC 2023, volume 14419 of
LNCS, pages 323–338. Springer, 2023.
Nijat Mehdiyev and Peter Fettke. Explainable artificial intelligence for process mining: A
general overview and application of a novel local explanation approach for predictive process
monitoring. In Interpretable Artificial Intelligence: A Perspective of Granular Computing,
pages 1–18. Springer, 2021.
Andreas Metzger, Jan Laufer, Felix Feit, and Klaus Pohl. A user study on explainable
online reinforcement learning for adaptive systems. ACM Trans. Auton. Adapt. Syst.,
19(3):15:1–15:44, 2024.

AUTOBIZ Dissemination

This section gives a brief overview of how existing and new knowledge of AUTOBIZ is and
will be disseminated. In the former case, the focus is on education (covered by Subsection 5.1,
whereas in the latter case, the focus is on venues for the dissemination of novel results, i.e.,
workshops, journals, and conferences (Subsection 5.2).

5.1

Embedding of ABPMS-related Training into University Curricula

With the rise of “agentic AI” in enterprise software, autonomous business process execution
has reached the mainstream. However, there is substantial uncertainty on how to achieve
autonomy in a reliable and sustainable manner, with analysts such as Gartner using the term
“agent washing” to describe pseudo-autonomous enterprise subsystems and predicting that 40%
of agent deployment projects will fail by 20272 . In order to provide an education foundation
for effective, efficient, and sustainable AUTOBIZ, it is crucial to adjust both business process

2

Cf. http://s.cs.umu.se/ni2riq (Gartner press release, URL shortened), accessed at 2025-07-18.

25192

62

25192 – AutoBiz

management and applied AI curricula as soon as possible. This should happen on both
undergraduate and graduate levels; just as important are continuous education offerings for
the professionals who are exposed to autonomous process execution systems already now.
Many of the seminar participants are prolific educators, having, for example, co-authored
widely used textbooks on business process management and related topics. Accordingly,
the expectation is that the seminar content will be integrated not only into local education
offerings at participants’ universities but also into materials that are more widely distributed.
Materials are expected to be tailored to different educational needs, based on the educational
level as well as technical and practical skills and experience of several target audiences (e.g.,
business students vs. engineering students vs. seasoned practitioners). Specific first steps for
developing course materials have been taken. For example, at Umeå University (Sweden),
funding has been secured to develop a course on “Sustainable AI Transformation”.

5.2

Related Publications and Future Venues

The discussions of the working groups, as presented in this report, have matured into four
accepted papers to appear in the CEUR proceedings of the PMAI workshop, held at the
ECAI 2025 conference. In addition, a tutorial at BPM 2025 is planned for presentation by
Prof. Andreas Metzger on the topic of “AI-Assisted Business Process Monitoring”, including
insights drawn directly from the discussions in this seminar. For novel and strong technical
results that participants and other researchers in the BPM and AI communities produce on
the topic, a special issue in the Information Systems journal – the prime journal venue for
technical BPM research results – has been announced, guest-edited by the seminar organizers.
Given the prevalence of AI in BPM research, further steps may be taken to facilitate
the continued dissemination of AUTOBIZ-related research results. For example, discussions
have started regarding the establishment of a new AIXBPM forum at the Business Process
Management conference, the prime conference venue of BPM research.
Future research on AUTOBIZ is expected to enjoy substantial funding success. Notably,
seminar co-organizer Marlon Dumas has secured an ERC grant for the AI-Assisted Optimization of Business Processes 3 . Also, the organizations of many of the industry participants
are expected to continue to fund and drive AUTOBIZ research and its transfer into practice
at scale.

3

https://cs.ut.ee/en/news/university-tartu-researcher-was-awarded-erc-grant-turnfrontier-science-practical-solutions, accessed at 2025-07-18.

Giuseppe De Giacomo et al.

63

Participants
Daniel Amyot
University of Ottawa, CA

Fabiana Fournier
IBM Israel – Haifa, IL

Diego Calvanese
Free University of
Bozen-Bolzano, IT

Timotheus Kampik
SAP Berlin, DE & Umeå
University, SE

Marco Comuzzi
Ulsan National Institute of
Science and Technology, KR

Yves Lesperance
York University – Toronto, CA

Giuseppe De Giacomo
University of Oxford, GB
Marlon Dumas
University of Tartu, EE
Achiya Elyasaf
Ben Gurion University –
Beer Sheva, IL
Peter Fettke
DFKI – Saarbrücken, DE

Lior Limonad
IBM Israel – Haifa, IL
Andrea Marrella
Sapienza University of
Rome, IT
Andrea Matta
Polytechnic University of
Milan, IT
Andreas Metzger
Universität Duisburg –
Essen, DE

Marco Montali
Free University of
Bozen-Bolzano, IT
Stefanie Rinderle-Ma
TU München, DE
Sebastian Sardiña
RMIT University –
Melbourne, AU
Arik Senderovich
York University – Toronto, CA
Estefania Serral Asensio
KU Leuven, BE
Niek Tax
Meta – London, GB
Irene Teinemaa
Google DeepMind – London, GB
Barbara Weber
Universität St. Gallen, CH

25192

Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25201

Computational Geometry
Maarten Löffler∗1 , Eunjin Oh∗2 , Jeff M. Phillips∗3 , and
Alexandra Weinberger†4
1
2
3
4

Utrecht University, NL. m.loffler@uu.nl
POSTECH – Pohang, KR. eunjin.oh@postech.ac.kr
University of Utah – Salt Lake City, US. jeffp@cs.utah.edu
FernUniversität in Hagen, DE. alexandra.weinberger@fernuni-hagen.de

Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 25201 “Computational
Geometry”. The seminar program spanned the days from 11th May to 16th May 2025, and
39 participants from various countries were on site. Recent advances in computational geometry
were presented and discussed, and new challenges were identified, in particular in relation to the
two themes “parameterized complexity” and “the interplay between theory and implementation”.
This report collects the abstracts of the talks and the open problems presented at the seminar, an
excerpt from the panel discussion, and partial progress from the active working groups.
Seminar May 11–16, 2025 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/25201
2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Computational geometry; Theory
of computation → Design and analysis of algorithms; Mathematics of computing → Discrete
mathematics
Keywords and phrases algorithms, combinatorics, complexity, geometric computing, implementation
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.5.64

1

Executive Summary

Maarten Löffler (Utrecht University, NL)
Eunjin Oh (POSTECH – Pohang, KR
Jeff M. Phillips (University of Utah – Salt Lake City, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, and Jeff M. Phillips

This Dagstuhl Seminar constituted a biennial gathering of computational geometers and
topologists at the Dagstuhl venue to share recent results, and further research on some of
the most important problems of the time in this field. This year the seminar focused on
two central challenges within computational geometry and topology: (1) the emergence of
parameterized algorithms, and (2) the interaction between implementation and theory in
geometry. Within the parameterized algorithms theme, two enlightening overview talks were
given. The first was on parameterized techniques in computational geometry, focusing on
clustering, covering, and geometric intersection graphs. The second was on parameterized
complexity and its role in geometric topology, focusing on triangulated topological manifolds.
The second theme on the interplay between implementation and theory covered a broader set
of topics from motion planning to persistence homology to geometric software engineering to
geometric topology software to non-metric high-dimensional geometries to using Haskell for
∗
†

Editor / Organizer
Editorial Assistant / Collector

Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Computational Geometry, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15, Issue 5, pp. 64–95
Editors: Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger
Dagstuhl Reports
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

65

low-dimensional geometry. A highlight was a panel discussion on the state of the challenges
of promoting implementation-driven research in a field dominated by primarily theoretical
results. Finally, an open problem session promoted a variety of intriguing unsolved issues
in the field; many are stated within this report. These problems occupied many of the
participants throughout the week as they were interrogated in small working groups. Some
research resolution during the week, and we expect others to lead to publications soon after.

Changes to the Lottery
The Computational Geometry Dagstuhl Seminar series is the longest-running series of
Dagstuhl seminars, starting in 1990 with Dagstuhl Seminar 9041 (see https://www.dagstuhl.
de/9041) and the current seminar 25201 being its 19th iteration.
In 2013, the organizers of Dagstuhl Seminar 13101 introduced a lottery to select participants. The reason for this was that a steadily growing number of established names in the
community being invited each time limited access for more junior researchers to this series.
While this is not necessarily a bad thing and is indeed a sign of a healthy and expanding
community, the organizers felt this conflicted with Dagstuhl’s unique opportunity for junior
and senior researchers to interact. They reported in 2013:
We believe that the lottery created space to invite younger researchers, rejuvenating
the seminar, while keeping a large group of senior and well-known scholars involved.
The seminar was much “younger” than in the past, and certainly more “family-friendly.”
Five young children roaming the premises created an even cosier atmosphere than we
are used in Dagstuhl. Without decreasing the quality of the seminar, we had a more
balanced attendance than in the past. Feedback from both seminar participants and
from researchers who were not selected was uniformly positive.
Since 2013, the lottery has been used each time to select most of the participants. Over
time, though, the task of maintaining an accurate list of “the community” has proven
challenging, and through its lack of transparency the series also acquired some mystery,
specifically surrounding the questions how one enters the lottery.
This year, we have for the first time not used the hand-curated list, and instead automatically generated a list of names as input to the lottery. Here we report on how the lottery
was run this year.
A large Dagstuhl Seminar has space for about about 45 participants. The organizers
reserved 10 seats for hand-selected invitees based on the chosen themes for the seminar. The
remaining 35 seats were selected through the lottery. The organizers have used DBLP’s
SparQL interface https://sparql.dblp.org/ to generate a list of names to enter the lottery.
The query used this year was:
“all people who have at least 3 publications in SoCG, of which at least 1 appeared in
the last 5 years”.
From this list, a weighted random selection was made, taking into account Dagstuhl’s
requirements on geographical and gender diversity, the themes of the seminar, and invitations
to previous Dagstuhl Seminars.

25201

66

25201 – Computational Geometry

2

Table of Contents

Executive Summary
Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, and Jeff M. Phillips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

64

Overview of Talks
Parametrized Algorithms in Geometry
Sayan Bandyapadhyay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Lessons Learned in Implementation
Benjamin Burton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Better Late than Never: The Complexity of Arrangements of Polyhedra
Otfried Cheong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Fast Persistence for 1D Functions (In Gudhi)
Marc Glisse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
The Practice and Theory of Sampling-Based Motion Planning
Dan Halperin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Maximal 2-Planar Graphs: A Computational Proof for a Graph Drawing Problem
Michael Hoffmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Implementing (Geometric) Algorithms as a Less-Initiated Software Engineer
Gert Meijer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

71

Motion Planning for Introverts: Social Distancing in Various [F/N]orms
Valentin Polishchuk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

71

The Geometry of the Set of Equivalent Linear Neural Networks
Jonathan Shewchuk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Parameterised Complexity in Geometric Topology
Jonathan Spreer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
hgeometry: Experience Report Implementing CG Algorithms
Frank Staals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Google, Balls, and Technology
Hubert Wagner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A Free Lunch: Manifolds of Positive Reach Can Be Smoothed Without Decreasing
the Reach
Mathijs Wintraecken . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Panel Discussion: On the Interplay Between Implementing Geometric Algorithms and Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Open Problems and Working Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Covering by Double Disks
Sayan Bandyapadhyay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Is Finding Positive Euler Characteristic Normal Surfaces FPT?
Benjamin Burton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Turning Planar Triangulations Inside Out
Jeff Erickson and Birgit Vogtenhuber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

77

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

67

Morphing Long-Geodesic Embeddings on the Sphere
Jeff Erickson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Approximate Simplification of Flag Filtrations
Marc Glisse, Jeff M. Phillips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Sub-Alpha-Complex in High Dimension
Marc Glisse, Jeff M. Phillips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Treewidth of 3-Manifolds
Benjamin Burton, Kristóf Huszár, Jonathan Spreer, Yelena Yuditsky . . . . . . . .

81

WSPD for Low Density Graphs
Joachim Gudmundsson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

84

Consistent System of Shortest Paths
Francis Lazarus, Jeff Erickson, Raimund Seidel, Ling Zhou . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Graph Tiles
Oswin Aichholzer, Robert Ganian, Phillip Keldenich, Maarten Löffler, Gert Meijer,
Alexandra Weinberger, Carola Wenk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

87

Approximate Minlink Paths in Subquadratic Time
Valentin Polishchuk, Sayan Bandyapadhyay, Mark de Berg, Joachim Gudmundsson,
André Nusser, Frank Staals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Alexander Theorem for Knotted Spheres
Mathijs Wintraecken and Kristóf Huszár . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

91

Universal Point Sets
Alexander Wolff, Stefan Felsner, Michael Hoffmann, Maarten Löffler, Fabrizio
Montecchiani, Yoshio Okamoto, Jonathan Spreer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95

25201

68

25201 – Computational Geometry

3

Overview of Talks

This section contains abstracts of talks that were given during the seminar. Sayan Bandyapadhyay and Jonathan Spreer were invited to speak on the topic of parameterized computational
geometry and topology, respectively, one of the two themes of the seminar. For the theme
of theoretical questions arising in implementing geometric Benjamin Burton, Marc Glisse,
Danny Halperin, Gert Meijer, Frank Staals, and Hubert Wagner were invited to give a talk.
Additionally, Ottfried Cheong, Michael Hoffmann, Valentin Polishchuk, Jonathan Shewchuk,
Mathijs Wintraecken, gave talks in the area of computational geometry.

3.1

Parametrized Algorithms in Geometry

Sayan Bandyapadhyay (Portland State University, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Sayan Bandyapadhyay

The design of parameterized algorithms for geometric problems has become a well-established
area of research, driven in part by the many natural parameters that arise in these settings.
While the field has a rich history, earlier efforts were often fragmented, with only a few
problems receiving systematic attention. In contrast, recent work has adopted a more unified
approach, focusing on the development of general frameworks that can address a broader
class of problems. In this talk, we explore three central topics – clustering, covering, and
geometric intersection graphs – where parameterized complexity has played a significant
role. We review the literature in these areas, highlight key techniques, and pose several open
questions for future investigation.

3.2

Lessons Learned in Implementation

Benjamin Burton (University of Queensland – Brisbane, AU)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Benjamin Burton

We talk through some of the lessons learned through 26 years of working on the topological
software package Regina, and from major computational projects including the tabulation
of prime knots up to 20 crossings. Regina implements exact algorithms for 3-manifolds,
4-manifolds, knots and links, and is freely available from regina-normal.github.io.

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

3.3

69

Better Late than Never: The Complexity of Arrangements of
Polyhedra

Otfried Cheong (Scalgo, DK)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Otfried Cheong
Joint work of Boris Aronov, Sang Won Bae, Sergio Cabello, Otfried Cheong, David Eppstein, Christian Knauer,
Raimund Seidel
Main reference Boris Aronov, Sang Won Bae, Sergio Cabello, Otfried Cheong, David Eppstein, Christian Knauer,
Raimund Seidel: “Better Late than Never: the Complexity of Arrangements of Polyhedra”, CoRR,
Vol. abs/2506.03960, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2506.03960
License

Let A be the subdivision of Rd induced by m convex polyhedra having n facets in total. We
prove that A has combinatorial complexity O(m⌈d/2⌉ n⌊d/2⌋ ) and that this bound is tight.
The bound is mentioned several times in the literature, but no proof for arbitrary dimension
has been published before.
An earlier version of the paper appeared in EuroCG 2025, with a proof for general position
only.

3.4

Fast Persistence for 1D Functions (In Gudhi)

Marc Glisse (INRIA – Orsay, FR)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Marc Glisse
Main reference Marc Glisse: “Fast persistent homology computation for functions on R”, CoRR,
Vol. abs/2301.04745, 2023.
URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2301.04745
License

0-dimensional persistent homology is known, from a computational point of view, as the
easy case. Indeed, given a list of n edges in non-decreasing order of filtration value, one
only needs a union-find data structure to keep track of the connected components and we
get the persistence diagram in time O(nα(n)). The running time is thus usually dominated
by sorting the edges in Θ(n log(n)). A little-known fact is that, in the particularly simple
case of studying the sublevel sets of a piecewise-linear function on R or S1 , persistence can
actually be computed in linear time. This talk presents a simple algorithm that achieves this
complexity and an extension to image persistence. An implementation is available in Gudhi.

25201

70

25201 – Computational Geometry

3.5

The Practice and Theory of Sampling-Based Motion Planning

Dan Halperin (Tel Aviv University, IL)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Dan Halperin
Main reference Oren Salzman: “Sampling-based robot motion planning”, Commun. ACM, Vol. 62(10), pp. 54–63,
2019.
URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3318164
Main reference Kiril Solovey, Dan Halperin: “Sampling-Based Bottleneck Pathfinding with Applications to Fréchet
Matching”, in Proc. of the 24th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms, ESA 2016, August
22-24, 2016, Aarhus, Denmark, LIPIcs, Vol. 57, pp. 76:1–76:16, Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum
für Informatik, 2016.
URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.ESA.2016.76
Main reference Kiril Solovey, Dan Halperin: “Efficient sampling-based bottleneck pathfinding over cost maps”, in
Proc. of the 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, IROS
2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada, September 24-28, 2017, pp. 2003–2009, IEEE, 2017.
URL https://doi.org//10.1109/IROS.2017.8206019
License

Since their introduction in the 1990s, sampling-based (SB) planners have become a central
tool for solving motion planning problems, both in robotics and beyond. In this talk, I will
give a brief introduction to SB planning, highlighting major milestones in its development
and the types of theoretical guarantees these methods often provide. I will then discuss the
application of SB planning to Fréchet-type problems, as well as its implementation in our
DiscoPygal platform – a suite of tools designed for rapid development and experimentation
with motion planning in 2D environments. DiscoPygal is built using Python bindings over
CGAL. I will conclude with several open problems in SB planning.

3.6

Maximal 2-Planar Graphs: A Computational Proof for a Graph
Drawing Problem

Michael Hoffmann (ETH Zürich, CH)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Michael Hoffmann
Joint work of Michael Hoffmann, Meghana Mallik Reddy, Shengzhe Wang
Main reference Michael Hoffmann, Meghana M. Reddy: “The Number of Edges in Maximal 2-Planar Graphs”, in
Proc. of the 39th International Symposium on Computational Geometry, SoCG 2023, June 12-15,
2023, Dallas, Texas, USA, LIPIcs, Vol. 258, pp. 39:1–39:15, Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für
Informatik, 2023.
URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.SOCG.2023.39
License

One of the main meta questions in the study of beyond-planar graphs is: Which of the many
nice properties of planar graphs carry over to a more general setting? One of these properties
is sparsity and one of the most natural and well-studied classes of beyond-planar graphs is
the family of k-planar graphs. A graph is k-planar if it can be drawn in the plane such that
every edge has at most k crossings. It is known √
that every k-planar graph on n vertices has
at most ck n edges, for some constant ck ≤ 3.81 k. However, several other nice properties
of planar graphs do not carry over to k-planar graphs. For instance, every maximal planar
graph (adding any edge yields a nonplanar graph) on n vertices has exactly 3n − 6 edges.
Such a correspondence does not hold for maximal k-planar graphs, with k ≥ 1.
We studied the case k = 2 specifically, and could show that every maximal 2-planar graph
on n ≥ 5 vertices has at least 2n edges. Compared to the upper bound of 5n − 10 from the
literature, and also compared to the 3n − 6 bound for planar graphs, this may not sound
too impressive. Thus, we also tried to find examples of maximal 2-planar graphs with few

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

71

edges. Indeed, it is not too difficult to come up with some plausible candidates. Certifying 2planarity is easy: Just describe a corresponding drawing. But proving maximality turns out
to be a challenge. The reason is that – in contrast to planarity – testing if a given graph
is k-planar, for k ≥ 1, is known to be NP-complete.
Our attempts to prove maximality using pencil and paper quickly turned into a mess
of case distinctions. Thus – in the spirit of the focus theme about the interplay between
theory and implementation – it seemed much more reasonable to let a computer check all
these cases. But also for a computer-based proof it is not really obvious how to proceed:
Our graphs form a conceptually infinite family, where already initial slices are quite large for
an exhaustive computation. In this talk I briefly discuss how we overcame these challenges
so as to obtain a computational proof of the following statement: For every n there exists
a maximal 2-planar graph on n vertices with 2n + c edges, where c ≤ 350 is an absolute
constant, independent of n.

3.7

Implementing (Geometric) Algorithms as a Less-Initiated Software
Engineer

Gert Meijer (NHL Stenden Hogeschool – Leeuwarden, NL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Gert Meijer

This talk gives an overview of my experience implementing theoretical algorithms in an
applied software engineering context. This potential audience has a lower mathematical
background. I present the challenges we face when trying to translate papers into ‘mortal’
language, as well as the problems that arise during the implementation phase. I advocate for
more accessible papers and end with a comparison of software engineering trends. I hope
these insights contribute to making theoretical work more accessible and impactful.

3.8

Motion Planning for Introverts: Social Distancing in Various
[F/N]orms

Valentin Polishchuk (Linköping University, SE)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Valentin Polishchuk
Joint work of Reilly Browne, Kevin A. Buchin, Omrit Filtser, Mayank Goswami, Mart Hagedoorn, Prahlad
Narasimham Kasthurirangan, Joseph S. B. Mitchell, Valentin Polishchuk, Roman Voronov
License

Maintaining separation/invisibility for static/moving agents is the goal in various applications,
motivated by security/privacy and similar considerations. I will present several recent results
on the topic, ranging from introduction of a new path (dis)similarity measure to gender-aware
science to resolving long-standing open problems.
Based on FoCS23, WADS25, ITCS23, SoCG20, FUN18 work with R. Browne, P. Kasthurirangan, J. Mitchell, M. Hagedoorn, O. Filtser, M. Goswami, K. Buchin, L. Sedov, R.
Voronov.

25201

72

25201 – Computational Geometry

3.9

The Geometry of the Set of Equivalent Linear Neural Networks

Jonathan Shewchuk (University of California – Berkeley, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Jonathan Shewchuk
Joint work of Sagnik Bhattacharya, Jonathan Shewchuk
Main reference Jonathan Richard Shewchuk, Sagnik Bhattacharya: “The Geometry of the Set of Equivalent Linear
Neural Networks”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2404.14855, 2024.
URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2404.14855
License

A linear neural network computes a linear transformation of its input vector. Given a
fully-connected linear network, the set of all weight vectors for which the network computes
the same linear transformation is an algebraic variety in weight space, called a fiber under
the matrix multiplication map. Sometimes this variety a manifold, but usually not. The rank
stratification of a fiber is a natural partition of the fiber into manifolds of various dimensions
called strata. We characterize how these strata are connected to each other. They satisfy the
frontier condition: if a stratum intersects the closure of another stratum, then the former
stratum is a subset of the closure of the latter stratum. This subset relationship can be
expressed as a partial order with a single minimal element, a stratum that is included in
the closure of every other stratum. Our main result describes the relationship between this
partial order and the ranks of certain matrices in the network. Each stratum represents
a different pattern of information flow through the network, and moves up the hierarchy
may offer neural network training algorithms more opportunities to succeed. To support
this construction, we propose a candidate for the “fundamental subspaces of a linear neural
network”, analogous to the four fundamental subspaces of a matrix.

3.10

Parameterised Complexity in Geometric Topology

Jonathan Spreer (University of Sydney, AU)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Jonathan Spreer

A major goal in the field of geometric topology is the algorithmic study of topological
manifolds, typically represented by triangulations. Specifically, we want to answer topological
questions about manifolds by running discrete algorithms on their triangulations.
Methods from parameterised complexity play an important role in the development of
these algorithms: On the one hand, parameterised hardness results precisely state how
complicated triangulations can obstruct efficient solutions to algorithmic problems; on the
other hand, a host of fixed-parameter tractable algorithms exist to solve hard topological
problems efficiently for well-behaved manifolds and/or triangulations.
In my talk I will survey hardness results as well as practical algorithms. Some of these
are implemented in the low-dimensional topology software Regina. The algorithms are fixedparameter tractable in the first Betti number of the underlying manifold, or the treewidth
of the dual graph of the input triangulation. I will then go on to survey theoretical results
about how topological properties of a manifold influence the treewidth of the dual graph of
its triangulations.

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

3.11

73

hgeometry: Experience Report Implementing CG Algorithms

Frank Staals (Utrecht University, NL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Frank Staals

hgeometry is a pure Haskell library implementing some textbook computational geometry
algorithms “from scratch”. In the talk I will discuss some of the lessons learned while
implementing these algorithms. The main points are:
the easy things are hard (or at least annoying),
degeneracies are a real problem,
implementing the algorithm itself was only 1/3rd of the work,
property testing was very useful.
Two challenges in property testing with which the theory community could help (i) are
generating a good distribution of test data (that includes corner cases and degeneracies) and
(ii) developing approaches for efficiently shrinking (simplifying) a data set containing a bug.

3.12

Google, Balls, and Technology

Hubert Wagner (University of Florida – Gainesville, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Hubert Wagner
Joint work of Herbert Edelsbrunner, Hana Dal Poz Kouřimská, Tuyen Pham, Žiga Virk, Hubert Wagner
License

I start from a computational geometry problem arising from my work on the google alerts
service (https://www.google.com/alerts). Specifically, nearest neighbour and ball search
in spaces that are not metric spaces. One example is the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence
which is used to compare pairs of discrete probability distributions (in applications, e.g. a
text document is often represented as a discrete probability distribution.) This is mostly a
pretext to describe certain nice properties of Bregman divergences, whose one member is the
KL divergence. I show several standard geometric constructions (Delaunay triangulation,
Čech filtration, k-means clustering, kd-trees) that naturally extend to the Bregman setting.
Additionally, this talk serves as a starting point to a discussion about the interplay between
practical applications and theory of computational geometry – which is relevant to the
ongoing addition of a second, practical track to the SoCG conference.

3.13

A Free Lunch: Manifolds of Positive Reach Can Be Smoothed
Without Decreasing the Reach

Mathijs Wintraecken (Centre Inria d’Université Côte d’Azur, FR)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Mathijs Wintraecken
Joint work of André Lieutier, Hana Dal Poz Kouřimská, Mathijs Wintraecken
License

Assumptions on the reach are crucial for ensuring the correctness of many geometric and
topological algorithms, including triangulation, manifold reconstruction and learning, homotopy reconstruction, and methods for estimating curvature or reach. However, these

25201

74

25201 – Computational Geometry

assumptions are often coupled with the requirement that the manifold be smooth, typically at
least C 2 . In this paper, we prove that any manifold with positive reach can be approximated
arbitrarily well by a C ∞ manifold without significantly reducing the reach, by employing
techniques from differential topology – partitions of unity and smoothing using convolution
kernels. This result implies that nearly all theorems established for C 2 or manifolds with a
certain reach naturally extend to manifolds with the same reach, even if they are not C 2 , for
free!

4

Panel Discussion: On the Interplay Between Implementing
Geometric Algorithms and Theory

Moderator: Jeff M. Phillips
Panelists: Dan Halperin, Jonathan Shewchuk, Carola Wenk, Benjamin Burton
The panel was convened to discuss the challenges in implementing geometric algorithms,
and how that led to developments in the theoretical advancements and understanding. While
this was in planning for over a year before the Dagstuhl Seminar, it became very timely
after a large discussion on Implementation and Application focused papers at the 2024
International Symposium on Computational Geometry (SoCG), which led to a Task Force
on the topic, which released a report a month before seminar.
The panel started with discussion on successes in and surprising outcomes from implementing geometric algorithms. Where did these outcomes differ from what was expected. Halperin
and Burton referred to their earlier talks about how methods in robotics or enumerative
topology changed the course of the field. In robotics, it was how simple sample-based motion
planning made complicated geometry analysis overly detailed, and in the topology space, it
was how by reimplementing (and optimizing!) worst-case expensive methods (eventually) led
to really fast approaches in practice. Wenk talked about the surprise in the complexity in
working with real-world GPS data, which led to eventually enough material to write a book.
And Shewchuk talked about how certain lingering challenges in constrained triangulations
took over a decade until only recently what seems like the “right” solution was published.
The panel was also asked about the interplay between experimental and theoretical
explorations of the same topic led to advancements in both. Halperin described how the
theory communities formalization of the motion planning problem paved the way of the
simpler sampling-based methods. Burton mentioned that parameterized algorithms were
linked to the topology problems to explain how they could run so fast, and formalize the
sort of optimizations that would be possible in practice.
The discussion turned to the challenges implementation-driven work faces, how it is valued,
and where it should be published. The challenges of publishing papers on the influential
CGAL library were brought up. There were no definitive answers, but the proposed second
track at SoCG was discussed, and those working on implementation complements to geometric
work were encouraged to continue, and to submit their work for publication.
Finally, the panel was asked what lessons could be learned from their experience on
the interaction between implementation and theoretical approaches to geometric problems.
While Shewchuk argued that more should be taken from these interactions, Halperin ended
on the note that despite it being a struggle, these different approaches had done a lot to
move the field forward.

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

5

75

Open Problems and Working Groups

This section contains open problems that have been proposed on the start of the seminar.
Many of the open problems have then be discussed in more depth during the week, two even
resolved in full. We expect the working groups that have formed to continue their joined
research on the problems beyond the seminar and potentially further collaboration will form
still afterwards. A short overview of some of the ideas and discussions happening during the
week has also been added to this section (to the respective open problem).

5.1

Covering by Double Disks

Sayan Bandyapadhyay (Portland State University, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Sayan Bandyapadhyay

We are given m access points and n client points. At each access point, one can place a disk
of radius 1 or 2. The goal is to pick a radius (i.e., a disk) for each access point so that (1)
the chosen disks cover each client point, and (2) the number of client points covered by the
radius 1 disks is maximized.
This problem is known to be NP-hard, and there are two polynomial-time approximation
algorithms:
4-approximations [1]
2.5-approximations [2], FPT in sparsity and the number of radius 2 disks in an optimal
solution, also W[1]-hard in the number of radius 2 disks.
Questions.
1. What is the best approximation possible in polynomial time?
2. Is the problem FPT in the number of radius 1 disks in an optimal solution?

5.1.1

Progress

This problem appears to be equivalent to discrete unit disk cover (given a set of points and a
set of equal-radius disks, choose the smallest set of disks that covers all the points) by the
following observations:
All clients that are within distance at most 1 from at least 1 access point will be covered
anyway, so we might as well throw them away.
All access points that are at distance larger than 2 from any remaining client point will
never be a radius 2 disk, so we might as well throw them away.
For the remaining access points, placing radius 1 disks will not cover any more clients, so
all remaining clients must be covered by radius 2 disks.
Minimizing the number of radius 2 disks now is the same as maximizing the number of
radius 1 disks in the original question.
However, we are now approximating or parameterizing w.r.t. the number of non-chosen
disks rather than the number of chosen disks, so known results for DUDC do not necessarily
carry over.

25201

76

25201 – Computational Geometry

References
1
Sayan Bandyapadhyay, Anil Maheshwari, Sasanka Roy, Michiel Smid, and Kasturi R.
Varadarajan. Geometric covering via extraction theorem. In Venkatesan Guruswami,
editor, 15th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS), volume
287 of LIPIcs, pages 7:1–7:20. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
doi:10.4230/LIPICS.ITCS.2024.7.
2
Sayan Bandyapadhyay and Eli Mitchell. Approximation and parameterized algorithms
for covering with disks of two types of radii. In Pat Morin and Eunjin Oh, editors, 19th
Algorithms and Data Structures Symposium (WADS), 2025. To appear.

5.2

Is Finding Positive Euler Characteristic Normal Surfaces FPT?

Benjamin Burton (University of Queensland – Brisbane, AU)
License

5.2.1

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Benjamin Burton

Problem Statement

The setting is a 3-manifold triangulation. A normal surface is a properly embedded surface
that meets each tetrahedron in some collection of triangles and/or quadrilaterals (e.g., no
tubes, no bubbles, no octagons, etc.).
The main bottleneck for unknot recognition, 3-sphere recognition, prime decomposition
and some other core 3-manifold algorithms is this: find a non-trivial connected normal surface
with positive Euler characteristic, or determine that no such surface exists. Here non-trivial
means that the surface is not just a collection of triangles that build a sphere around a vertex
(in other words, there is at least one quadrilateral).
Currently the best known running time is O(3n · poly(n)), where n is the number of
tetrahedra. However, it seems plausible that this could be FPT in the treewidth of the dual
graph of the triangulation. If so, this would give immediate FPT results for several important
topological algorithms (e.g., those listed earlier).
Some further notes: normal surfaces are described by vectors in R7n (each entry counts
the number of triangles or quadrilaterals in some position in some tetrahedron). These vectors
must satisfy some linear equations, linear inequalities, and combinatorial constraints. The
inequalities and combinatorial constraints are local to each tetrahedron, and the equations
come from gluings between adjacent tetrahedra. In this sense, the structure of the equations
mirrors the structure of the dual graph, which is one reason such an FPT result might be
plausible.
It is also an open problem to prove that this same problem is NP-hard.

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

5.3

77

Turning Planar Triangulations Inside Out

Jeff Erickson (University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, US) and Birgit Vogtenhuber (TU
Graz, AT)
License

5.3.1

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Jeff Erickson and Birgit Vogtenhuber

Problem Statement

Let T be an arbitrary planar straight-line triangulation, with a triangular outer face, such
that the origin (0, 0) lies in the interior of some bounded face, and no two vertices lie on the
same line through the origin. An eversion of T is another planar straight-line triangulation
satisfying three conditions:
T and T ′ are embeddings of the same maximal planar graph G.
Every vertex of G lies on the same ray from the origin in both T and T ′ .
For every ray r from the origin, the sequence of edges of T that r intersects is the reversal
of the sequence of edges of T ′ that r intersects. Equivalently, every face of T , except
the outer face and the face containing the origin, has the opposite orientation of the
corresponding face of T ′ . (The outer face of T must be the face containing the origin in
T ′ , and vice versa.)
Prove or disprove. Every planar straight-line triangulation has an eversion.
We know how to construct an eversion of a given n-vertex triangulation T , if one exists, in
O(nω/2 ) time, by solving a certain system of linear equations. (The variables in this system
are reciprocals of distances of vertices from the origin.) This is also the fastest algorithm we
know to decide whether an eversion of T exists.
This problem can be viewed as a radial variant of the hierarchical planar graph drawing
problem, which asks whether a given planar graph has a straight-line embedding where each
vertex lies on a prescribed y-coordinate. This problem has a long history, culminating in a
linear-time algorithm by Klemz [1].
This problem comes out of work by Erickson and Howard [3] on spherical morphing. The
problem can be equivalently formulated in terms of spherical embeddings as follows: Given
a shortest-path triangulation T in the open northern hemisphere, is there an isomorphic
shortest-path triangulation T ′ in the open southern hemisphere, such that every vertex lies
on the same longitude in both T and T ′ ? (In the language of our paper: Is every northern
triangulation T , is there a θ-equivalent southern triangulation T ′ ?)

5.3.2

Progress

A structure that might cause complications are “rotors” or “lens-shutters”. Essentially, this
is a sequence of e0 , . . . , ek of disjoint line segments that cyclically overlap, such that for each
i along the ray through of one endpoint of ei , the intersection with ei+1 mod k lies closer to
the origin than the endpoint. I’ll call this endpoint the “far endpoint” fi of ei . Equivalently,
every edge of a rotor also has a “near endpoint” ci . Less formally, all near endpoints are
visible from the origin, but no far endpoints.
Rotors are the simplest sets of segments that do not have a radial shelling order. A radial
shelling order indexes the segments s1 , s2 , . . . , sn , so that if any line segment from the origin
to any segment si crosses another segment sj , then j < i. Arguments of of Awartani and
Henderson [2, 3] imply that any set of segments that is radially shellable has an eversion.

25201

78

25201 – Computational Geometry

An argument of Pallazi and Snoeyink [4] implies that if any ray from the origin misses
all the segments, then the segments are radially shellable. Thus, rotors must surround the
origin.
Further, we asked whether it might be that a rotor can be drawn with straight edges but
needs a very specific shape of the polygon F = f0 , . . . , fk formed by the far endpoints. We
think that we can prove the following: If there is a realization in which F is a star-shaped
polygon, then there is also a realization where the vertices of F lie on a circle, or any other
convex polygon. Likewise, there should be one for any star-shaped polygon F (with the
vertices obeying the given angle condition).
It is still unclear whether a proof that every rotor can be everted would imply that any
planar straight-line graph, or even every set of disjoint segments, can be everted.
References
Boris Klemz. Convex drawings of hierarchical graphs in linear time, with applications to
1
planar graph morphing. In Petra Mutzel, Rasmus Pagh, and Grzegorz Herman, editors,
29th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms, ESA 2021, September 6-8, 2021, Lisbon,
Portugal (Virtual Conference), volume 204 of LIPIcs, pages 57:1–57:15. Schloss Dagstuhl –
Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.ESA.2021.57.
2
Marwan Awartani and David W. Henderson. Spaces of geodesic triangulations of the
sphere. Transactions of the Americal Mathematical Society, 304(2):721–732, 1987. doi:
10.2307/2000738.
3
Jeff Erickson and Christian Howard. Shelling and sinking graphs on the sphere. In Oswin
Aichholzer and Haitao Wang, editors, 41st International Symposium on Computational
Geometry (SoCG), volume 332 of LIPIcs, pages 47:1–47:18. Schloss Dagstuhl – LeibnizZentrum für Informatik, 2025. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.SoCG.2025.47.
4
Larry Palazzi and Jack Snoeyink. Counting and reporting red/blue segment intersections.
Graphical Models and Image Processing, 56(4):304–310, 1994. doi:10.1006/cgip.1994.
1027.

5.4

Morphing Long-Geodesic Embeddings on the Sphere

Jeff Erickson (University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, US)
License

5.4.1

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Jeff Erickson

Problem Statement

A geodesic on the sphere is any arc of a great circle. A geodesic is long if it contains two
antipodal points and short otherwise; every short geodesic is the unique shortest path between
its endpoints. (Classically, the word “geodesic” refers only to shortest paths on the sphere;
here I’m using the more general definition from Riemannian geometry.)
A geodesic embedding of a graph G on the sphere maps the vertices of G to distinct points
and the edges of G to interior-disjoint geodesics. A geodesic embedding is short if each of its
edges is short, and long otherwise.
Prove or disprove. Any two isomorphic geodesic embeddings of the same planar graph on
the sphere are connected by a continuous family of geodesic embeddings.
In 1944, Cairns [1] proved that any two short geodesic triangulations of the sphere
are connected by a continuous family of short geodesic triangulations. Cairns’s proof can
be generalized to short geodesic embeddings of 3-connected planar graphs. Using ad-hoc
arguments, we can show that the space of all geodesic embeddings of K4 is connected, but
nothing else appears to be known.

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

79

One significant complication is that if an edge of G is short in one embedding but long in
the other, the endpoints of that edge must be exactly antipodal at some moment during the
morph. Another complication is that specifying the motion of the vertices is not sufficient;
the same vertex coordinates and rotation system can be consistent with multiple geodesic
embeddings, even if no two vertices are antipodal.
Morphs are known to exist between isomorphic straight-line planar embeddings (starting
with Cairns), between isotopic geodesic embeddings on the flat torus [2], and between isotopic
geodesic embeddings on any surface with negative curvature [3]. In fact, for all of those
surfaces, the space of all geodesic embeddings of a given graph, within each isotopy class of
embeddings, modulo rigid motions on the surface, is simply connected. The only orientable
surface for which this problem is open is the sphere!
References
Stewart S. Cairns. Isotopic deformations of geodesic complexes on the 2-sphere and on
1
the plane. Annals of Mathematics, 45(2):207–217, 1944. URL: http://www.jstor.org/
stable/1969263.
2
Erin Wolf Chambers, Jeff Erickson, Patrick Lin, and Salman Parsa. How to morph graphs
on the torus. In Dániel Marx, editor, ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
(SODA), pages 2759–2778, 2021. doi:10.1137/1.9781611976465.164.
3
Yanwen Luo, Tianqi Wu, and Xiaoping Zhu. The deformation space of geodesic triangulations
and generalized Tutte’s embedding theorem. Geometry & Topology, 7:3361–3385, 2023.
doi:10.2140/gt.2023.27.3361.

5.5

Approximate Simplification of Flag Filtrations

Marc Glisse (INRIA – Orsay, FR), Jeff M. Phillips (University of Utah – Salt Lake City, US)
License

5.5.1

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Marc Glisse, Jeff M. Phillips

Problem Statement

Computing persistent homology usually takes time linear in the number of cells of the filtered
complex involved. To speed things up, one then needs a small complex. The first (geometric)
approach is to define a small complex to begin with. The second (combinatorial) approach,
the one I am interested in today, is to simplify a filtration before computing its persistent
homology. This only makes sense if we can simplify the complex without actually listing
its cells explicitly (same cost as computing PH). A common case is flag filtrations (like
Vietoris-Rips), which can be represented by a graph with a filtration value for each vertex
and edge, and where higher dimensional cells are implicitly defined as the cliques of the
graph. The goal of the simplification is then to replace the graph with a smaller graph before
listing its simplices to compute PH (so there are fewer simplices to list).
Glisse and Pritam [1] provide an approach for simplifying the graph while exactly
preserving its PH. However, in many cases, we would be happy with an approximation.
Question. How can we simplify the graph, more than in the exact case, but still with
guarantees on the error?

25201

80

25201 – Computational Geometry

5.5.2

Progress

The following approaches and questions arose during the seminar.
Forcibly reintroduce some geometry, embedding in dim log n.
Could rounding to a grid be more efficient than what the paper does, sometimes, because
it gives some edges the same value and thus helps jump over them? Needs experiments;
but initial experiments showed this did not provide an improvement.
Simplification with Morse matching (not at the graph level, just a first step to understand
what is possible?)
References
1
Marc Glisse and Siddharth Pritam. Swap, shift and trim to edge collapse a filtration. In
Xavier Goaoc and Michael Kerber, editors, 38th International Symposium on Computational
Geometry (SoCG), volume 224 of LIPIcs, pages 44:1–44:15. Schloss Dagstuhl – LeibnizZentrum für Informatik, 2022. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.SOCG.2022.44.

5.6

Sub-Alpha-Complex in High Dimension

Marc Glisse (INRIA – Orsay, FR), Jeff M. Phillips (University of Utah – Salt Lake City, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Marc Glisse, Jeff M. Phillips

5.6.1

Problem Statement

Goal.

compute (persistent) homology of low dimension of a union of balls in high dimension.

Usual approaches.
1. Cech (or Rips) of size n(k+1) .
2. Alpha-complex which “requires” computing the full Delaunay triangulation of size (up
to) n(d/2) . This is only better than Approach 1 for small d.
3. Handle each simplex using linear/quadratic programming [1].
Question. Can we improve on it?
we don’t specifically need the alpha-complex, something closer to the wrap complex would
be even better
more output sensitive?
use more LP before QP?
etc

5.6.2

Progress

It was also suggested to maybe we use function approximation coresets to get some sort of
approximation relevant for persistence (diagram) approximation using function approximation
coresets. For instance in the line of work by Langberg and Schulmann [2] or and more
recently (and perhaps more generally) by Alishahi and Phillips [3]. Constructions like
Growing Neural Gas [4] could be viewed as an approximation of what we want, and could be
further generalized. Funke and Ramos work on smooth-surface reconstruction [5] might also
be helpful.

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

81

References
1
Erik Gunnar Carlsson and John Carlsson. Computing the alpha complex using dual active set
quadratic programming. arXiv report, 2023. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.00536.
2
Michael Langberg and Leonard J. Schulman. Universal epsilon-approximators for integrals.
In Moses Charikar, editor, 21st Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
(SODA), pages 598–607, 2010. doi:10.1137/1.9781611973075.50.
3
Meysam Alishahi and Jeff M. Phillips. No dimensional sampling coresets for classification.
In 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). OpenReview.net, 2024.
URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=jS3CMHtYJD.
4
Bernd Fritzke. A growing neural gas network learns topologies. In Gerald Tesauro,
David S. Touretzky, and Todd K. Leen, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 7, [NIPS Conference, Denver, Colorado, USA, 1994], pages 625–632. MIT
Press, 1994. URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/1994/hash/
d56b9fc4b0f1be8871f5e1c40c0067e7-Abstract.html.
5
Stefan Funke and Edgar A. Ramos. Smooth-surface reconstruction in near-linear time. In
David Eppstein, editor, Proceedings of the 13th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
Algorithms (SODA), pages 781–790, 2002. URL: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=
545381.545484.

5.7

Treewidth of 3-Manifolds

Benjamin Burton (University of Queensland – Brisbane, AU), Kristóf Huszár (TU Graz,
AT), Jonathan Spreer (University of Sydney, AU), Yelena Yuditsky (ULB-Brussels, BE)
License

5.7.1

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Benjamin Burton, Kristóf Huszár, Jonathan Spreer, Yelena Yuditsky

Problem Statement

The treewidth tw(M ) of a compact 3-manifold M is defined as the smallest treewidth the
dual graph Γ(T ) of any generalized triangulation T of M may have. In other words
tw(M ) = min{tw(Γ(T )) : T is a triangulation of M }.
The study of tw(M ) is motivated by existing fixed-parameter tractable (FPT) algorithms
to efficiently compute various 3-manifold invariants from triangulations with dual graph of
bounded treewidth [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] – several of which are known to be NP-hard in general.
The treewidth has been related to various other properties of 3-manifolds, such as Heegaard
genus [7, 9], hyperbolic volume [10] (cf. [6]), or JSJ decompositions [8], but several fundamental
questions remain to be answered.
Question 1. What is the complexity of computing the treewidth of a 3-manifold?
It is natural to ask, what is the computational complexity of the treewidth of a 3-manifold
given by a triangulation. We believe that it is at least as hard as computing the treewidth of a
graph, which is known to be NP-hard. We know that any algorithm to compute the treewidth
of a 3-manifold yields (via a polynomial-time reduction) a constant-factor approximation
algorithm for the treewidth of bounded-degree graphs, see [8, Remark 15].
Question 2. What is the treewidth of the 3-torus?
The 3-torus T3 = S × S × S is defined as the Cartesian product of three circles. Perhaps
surprisingly, the exact value of tw(T3 ) is unknown. It is known that it is at least two (since

25201

82

25201 – Computational Geometry

3-manifolds with treewidth at most one have been classified [7, Theorem 2]) and at most
four (as shown by its minimal triangulation, which has treewidth four [12, Closed Census]).
Question 3. Can we classify closed 3-manifolds of treewidth two?
Given the classification of closed 3-manifolds with treewidth one, it is natural to ask for
a similar result regarding 3-manifolds with treewidth two. We know that all Seifert fibered
spaces over the 2-sphere or a non-orientable surface have treewidth of at most two [7, Section
5]. Answering Question 3 would also help us get closer to answering Question 2.
Question 4. What is the relationship between minimal triangulations of 3-manifolds and
triangulations with minimal treewidth?
We know that minimal triangulations of 3-manifolds (as measured by the number of
tetrahedra) are not always of minimal treewidth: the minimal triangulation of the Poincaré
homology sphere consists of five tetrahedra and its dual graph is K5 , whose treewidth is
four. At the same time, the Poincaré homology sphere is a Seifert fibered space over the
2-sphere, and as such it has a (larger) triangulation with a dual graph of treewidth two [7,
Corollary 20]. This is the only example of this kind that we know of.
Question 5. Is the Homeomorphism Problem of triangulated 3-manifolds FPT in the
parameter k = max{tw(Γ(T1 )), tw(Γ(T2 ))}?
The Homeomorphism Problem is a fundamental decision problem in computational
topology. It asks whether two given triangulated d-manifolds T1 and T2 are homeomorphic.
For d = 2, the problem can be solved in polynomial time, but for d ≥ 4 it is undecidable. In
dimension d = 3 it is known to be at least as hard as the Graph Isomorphism Problem,
but is elementary recursive. See [11, Section 3.1] for context and details.

5.7.2

Progress

During the seminar, we focused primarily on Questions 2 and 3.
Question 2. With the help of Regina [12], we ran through all 9, 944, 398 triangulations
of the 3-torus that can be accessed from its minimal triangulation using Pachner moves
(bistellar flips) never exceeding 14 tetrahedra at any step. For each triangulation, we used
a greedy algorithm to compute a small-width tree decomposition of its dual graph. This
greedy algorithm probably finds the real treewidth for such small graphs, though this is not
guaranteed. We did not find anything with width less than 4 in this list. The following code
was used to perform this task in regina-python.
def test ( sig , tri ):
print ( TreeDecomposition ( tri ). width () , sig )
return False
Example3 . threeTorus (). retriangulate (8 , 1 , test )

The first parameter 8 above means at most eight extra tetrahedra at any stage (so at most 14
in total, since the minimal triangulation has 6 tetrahedra). The second parameter 1 instructs
the program to run in single-thread mode.
Question 3. In regard to the classification of closed 3-manifolds with treewidth two the
following result may serve as a starting point.

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

83

▶ Theorem 1 (folklore; adapted from [13, Theorem 3(i)]). If a multigraph G = (V, E) has
treewidth at most two and is not the empty graph, then G has a vertex of degree at most two.
(Here the degree of a vertex v ∈ V denotes the number of other vertices in V adjacent to v.)
Based on Theorem 1 we started exploring the following approach. Given a triangulation
T of a closed 3-manifold with tw(Γ(T )) = 2, pick a vertex v in Γ(T ) of degree at most two.
Observe that, for the 1-neighborhood of v in Γ(T ) there are five possibilities (Figure 1). Each
of these five cases corresponds to a finite number of admissible substructures within a valid
triangulation of a 3-manifold. Using Regina, we enumerated these substructures. Aiming for
a recursive classification method, our next goal is to understand how the topology of the
underlying manifold changes when we “reduce” the triangulation T around the tetrahedron
corresponding to the vertex v.

v

v

v

v

v

Figure 1 The five possible local pictures around a vertex v ∈ Γ(T ) of degree at most two.

References
1 Benjamin A. Burton and Rodney G. Downey. Courcelle’s theorem for triangulations. J.
Comb. Theory A, 146:264–294, 2017. doi:10.1016/J.JCTA.2016.10.001.
2 Benjamin A. Burton, Thomas Lewiner, João Paixão, and Jonathan Spreer. Parameterized
complexity of discrete Morse theory. ACM Trans. Math. Softw., 42(1):6:1–6:24, 2016.
doi:10.1145/2738034.
3 Benjamin A. Burton, Clément Maria, and Jonathan Spreer. Algorithms and complexity
for Turaev–Viro invariants. J. Appl. Comput. Topol., 2(1-2):33–53, 2018. doi:10.1007/
S41468-018-0016-2.
4 Benjamin A. Burton and William Pettersson. Fixed parameter tractable algorithms in
combinatorial topology. In Zhipeng Cai, Alex Zelikovsky, and Anu G. Bourgeois, editors,
20th International Conference Computing and Combinatorics (COCOON), volume 8591 of
LNCS, pages 300–311. Springer, 2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-08783-2\_26.
5 Benjamin A. Burton and Jonathan Spreer. The complexity of detecting taut angle
structures on triangulations. In Sanjeev Khanna, editor, Proceedings 24th Annual
ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 168–183, 2013. doi:
10.1137/1.9781611973105.13.
6 Kristóf Huszár. On the pathwidth of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Comput. Geom. Topol., 1(1):1:1–
1:19, 2022. URL: https://www.cgt-journal.org/index.php/cgt/article/view/4.
7 Kristóf Huszár and Jonathan Spreer. 3-manifold triangulations with small treewidth. In
Gill Barequet and Yusu Wang, editors, 35th International Symposium on Computational
Geometry (SoCG), volume 129 of LIPIcs, pages 44:1–44:20. Schloss Dagstuhl – LeibnizZentrum für Informatik, 2019. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.SOCG.2019.44.
8 Kristóf Huszár and Jonathan Spreer. On the width of complicated JSJ decompositions.
In Erin W. Chambers and Joachim Gudmundsson, editors, 39th International Symposium
on Computational Geometry (SoCG), volume 258 of LIPIcs, pages 42:1–42:18. Schloss
Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.SOCG.2023.42.
9 Kristóf Huszár, Jonathan Spreer, and Uli Wagner. On the treewidth of triangulated 3manifolds. J. Comput. Geom., 10(2):70–98, 2019. URL: https://doi.org/10.20382/jogc.
v10i2a5, doi:10.20382/JOGC.V10I2A5.
10 Clément Maria and Jessica S. Purcell. Treewidth, crushing and hyperbolic volume. Algebr.
Geom. Topol., 19(5):2625–2652, 2019. doi:10.2140/agt.2019.19.2625.

25201

84

25201 – Computational Geometry

11

12
13

Marc Lackenby. Algorithms in 3-manifold theory. In Surveys in differential geometry 2020.
Surveys in 3-manifold topology and geometry, volume 25 of Surv. Differ. Geom., pages
163–213. Int. Press, Boston, MA, 2022.
Benjamin A. Burton, Ryan Budney, William Pettersson, et al. Regina: Software for
low-dimensional topology. http://regina-normal.github.io/, 1999–2023.
Hans L. Bodlaender, Benjamin A. Burton, Fedor V. Fomin, and Alexander Grigoriev. Knot
diagrams of treewidth two. In Isolde Adler and Haiko Müller, editors, 46th International
Workshop Graph-Theoretic Concepts in Computer Science (WG), volume 12301 of LNCS,
pages 80–91. Springer, 2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-60440-0\_7.

5.8

WSPD for Low Density Graphs

Joachim Gudmundsson (The University of Sidney, AU)
License

5.8.1

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Joachim Gudmundsson

Problem Statement

Given a geometric graph G = (V, E) where the vertices are points in the plane and the edge
weights is the Euclidean distance between its endpoints, the main goal is to construct a
(1 + ε)-approximate distance oracle (O(1)) query time) using linear space and O(m + n log n)
preprocessing.
Of course this is not possible for arbitrary geometric graphs, instead we want to investigate
restricted graph classes. In particular, we want to investigate graph classes that include
road networks (think about queries in Google maps). Such a graph class should allow for
edge intersections and include naturally occurring graphs such as grid graphs or “cul-de-sac”
graphs. There are a number of “realistic” graph classes, e.g. planar, low-dilaton, c-packed,
small highway dimension, small skeleton dimension, and small doubling dimensions that
allow for approximate distance oracles, but these graph classes do not include road networks.
There are a few graph classes that include road networks, e.g. disk neighbourhood,
crossing degeneracy, and bounded growth graphs but they do not have efficient algorithmic
tool sets. Our favourite natural graph class that includes road networks is λ-low density
graphs or the more general class of τ -lanky graphs. A geometric graph is λ-low density if for
every p and r the ball B(p, r) with centre at p and radius r intersects at most λ edges of E
of length at least r.
In a recent paper [1] we showed that O(1)-low-density graphs have a (1 + ε)-approximate
distance oracle using O(n log n) space and O(n3/2 polylogn) preprocessing. The key insight
used to obtain this result is a Well-Separated Pair Decomposition (WSPD) of V in the graph
metric of O(n log n) size (which gives the space bound). There are two natural techniques
that could be used to improve this result:
1. Improve the size of the WSPDs for low density graphs. No non-trivial lower bound is
known. Can we close the gap between Ω(n) and O(n log n)? Unit disk graphs (UDG)
have the same bounds. Even subgraphs of a grid graph would be interesting (or even a
tree in a grid graph). In dimensions greater than 2 the lower bound for the WSPD for
UDG is Ω(n2−2/d ).
2. Find a tree cover T1 , . . . , Tk of G of constant size and (1 + ε) dilation. A tree cover
is a set of trees s.t. for every pair of points p and q (a) there exists a tree Ti with
dTi (p, q) ≤ (1 + ε) · dG (p, q) and (b) for every tree Ti dTi (p, q) ≥ dG (p, q). If such a tree
cover exists we would probably get a (1 + ε)-approximate distance oracle of linear space.

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

85

Any results for 1 or 2 would give improved results.
References
1
Joachim Gudmundsson and Sampson Wong. A well-separated pair decomposition for low
density graphs. CoRR, abs/2411.08204, 2024. doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2411.08204.

5.9

Consistent System of Shortest Paths

Francis Lazarus (CNRS, Grenoble, FR), Jeff Erickson (University of Illinois – UrbanaChampaign, US), Raimund Seidel (Universität des Saarlandes – Saarbrücken, DE), and Ling
Zhou (Duke University, Durham, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Francis Lazarus, Jeff Erickson, Raimund Seidel, Ling Zhou

This problem has been resolved during the seminar. More precisely, the problem was already
solved by several authors, starting with Hartvigsen and Mardon [6].

5.9.1

Problem Statement

Given a graph G = (V, E) with a weight function w : E 7→ R+ , the problem is to compute
a consistent system P of shortest paths w.r.t. to w, so that for every u, v ∈ V there is a
shortest path from u to v in P and for every paths p, q ∈ P their intersection is connected
(possibly empty), i.e. is a commmon subpath.
If shortest paths are unique for the weight function, then the set of shortest paths is
consistent. There are various perturbation schemes that ensure uniqueness of shortest paths,
either non-deterministic or deterministic but with an extra overhead in complexity (see
discussion below). The goal here is to produce a consistent system of shortest paths in a
deterministic way with no overhead cost compared to the traditional all-pair-shortest-paths
algorithms. The hope is to compute a consistent system in a more efficient way, without
enforcing uniqueness of shortest paths...
Computing a consistent system of shortest paths appears to be equivalent to compute a
consistent system of rooted shortest path trees. Here, consistent means that for every u, v ∈ V ,
the (shortest) path from u to v in the tree Tv rooted at v is the reverse of the path from v to
u in the tree Tu rooted at u, i.e. Tv (u) = (Tu (v))−1
This last characterization is itself equivalent to the following: for every u, v ∈ V
1. Tv (u) and Tu (v) have the same number of edges, and
2. denoting by πu the parent pointer in Tu , either πv (u) = v or πv (u) = ππu (v) (u).
The first condition is easily enforced by adding a constant perturbation to the edge
weights. The second is “local” in the sense that it only involves pointer comparisons (as
opposed to compare the paths Tv (u) and Tu (v)).

5.9.2

Progress

A simple randomized perturbation of the edge weights provides uniqueness of shortest
paths with high probability. The perturbations are obtained by drawing independently and
uniformly at random an integer in [1, n4 ] for every of the n edges. See [1, Sec 6.1] for a full
description of this non-deterministic perturbation scheme based on the Isolating Lemma of
Mulmeley, Vazirani and Vazirani [2].

25201

86

25201 – Computational Geometry

There are two known deterministic approaches to compute weight perturbations to
guarantee uniqueness of shortest paths for graphs embedded on surfaces.
One uses lexicographic perturbation, incurring a O(log n) overhead [1]. This perturbation
scheme assigns a unique index to each edge in the graph, and then breaks ties between
shortest paths by comparing the lexicographically smallest index where the two paths
differ. The scheme uses a dynamic-forest data structure to maintain a shortest-path tree
during its construction via Dijkstra’s algorithm. In addition to uniqueness, this scheme
guarantees that shortest paths are symmetric: The reversal of any shortest path is also a
shortest path.
The other scheme uses homology and incurs a O(g)-factor overhead [3]. This “holiest”
perturbation scheme uses a vector of 2g + 1 perturbation terms for each edge, 2g of which
are homology signatures, and the last of which stores the number of vertices in a fixed
dual spanning tree on one side of the edge. Path lengths are vectors of length 2g + 2,
which are added as vectors and compared lexicographically. This is a generalization of
the leftmost-shortest path tie-breaking rule for planar graphs, originally proposed by
Ford and Fulkerson. Like the leftmost shortest paths in planar graphs, holiest shortest
paths are not necessarily symmetric. Consider two opposite corner vertices in a square
unweighted grid graph.
It should be emphasized that the main problem here is not making individual edge weights
distinct, but making certain sums of edge weights distinct.
Raimund Seidel points out that the Floyd-Warshall all-pairs shortest path algorithm
computes a consistent set of shortest paths. Recall that the ith iteration of Floyd-Warshall
computes the shortest path from each vertex u to each vertex v whose intermediate vertices
have index at most i. It follows that FW computes shortest paths that lexicographically
minimize the sorted vector of vertex indices.
Unfortunately, Floyd-Warshall runs in O(n3 ) time, which is more than we want to spend
for most surface-graph algorithms.
It appears that Wullf-Nilsen already described a similar perturbation scheme for arbitrary
graphs that allows Dijkstra to compute paths that minimize length, then the number of
edges, and finally the sorted vector of vertex indices, all in O(n log n) time [4] for a single
shortest path tree. By repeating Dijkstra from every vertex we thus obtain a consistent
system of shortest paths in O(n2 log n) time. Note that Wullf-Nilsen uses O(log n) extra
pointers per vertex, so that running a single (modified) Dijkstra actually uses O(n log n)
space instead of the usual linear space implementation. In fact, Hartvigsen and Mardon [6]
formerly described an implementation that runs all the Dijsktra’s in parallel in O(n2 log n)
time without using extra pointers.
See also Borradaile, Sankowski, and Wulff-Nilson [5, Sec. 7] for an implementation using
top trees.
This is the basis for the O(log n)-factor lexicographic perturbation scheme described
above; the O(log n) overhead does not apply to Dijkstra’s algorithm, but rather to the
pivots inside our multiple-source shortest paths algorithm. Similarly, Borradaile, Sankowski,
and Wulff-Nilson show that more modern shortest-path algorithms based on dense-distance
graphs incur a O(log2 n) overhead.
References
1
Sergio Cabello, Erin W. Chambers, and Jeff Erickson. Multiple-source shortest paths in
embedded graphs. SIAM Journal on Computing, 42(4):1542–1571, 2013. https://arxiv.
org/pdf/1202.0314.

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

2
3

4
5

6

87

Ketan Mulmuley, Umesh V. Vazirani, and Vijay V. Vazirani. Matching is as easy as matrix
inversion. Combinatorica, 7(1):105–113, 1987.
Jeff Erickson, Kyle Fox, and Luvsandondov Lkhamsuren. Holiest minimum-cost paths
and flows in surface graphs. In 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
Computing (STOC), 2018. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1804.01045, doi:10.1145/
3188745.3188904.
Christian Wulff-Nilsen. Minimum cycle basis and all-pairs min cut of a planar graph in
subquadratic time. arXiv report, 2009. doi:10.48550/arXiv.0912.1208.
Glencora Borradaile, Piotr Sankowski, and Christian Wulff-Nilsen. Min st-cut oracle for
planar graphs with near-linear preprocessing time. ACM Transactions on Algorithms,
11(3):1–29, 2015. doi:10.1145/2684068.
David Hartvigsen and Russell Mardon. The all-pairs min cut problem and the minimum
cycle basis problem on planar graphs. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 7(3):403–418,
May 1994. doi:10.1137/s0895480190177042.

5.10

Graph Tiles

Oswin Aichholzer (TU Graz, AT), Robert Ganian (TU Wien, AT), Phillip Keldenich (TU
Braunschweig, DE), Maarten Löffler (Utrecht University, NL), Gert Meijer (NHL Stenden
Hogeschool – Leeuwarden, NL), Alexandra Weinberger (FernUniversität in Hagen, DE),
Carola Wenk (Tulane University – New Orleans, US)
License

5.10.1

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Oswin Aichholzer, Robert Ganian, Phillip Keldenich, Maarten Löffler, Gert Meijer, Alexandra
Weinberger, Carola Wenk

Problem Statement

In a graph tiling problem, we are given as input a set of square tiles with pieces of graph
drawn (embedded) on them, and the output is an arrangement of those tiles into a larger
area, like in Figure 2.
Now, we are interested in output arrangements that satisfy certain properties.
Tiles should “match up” on the sides.
We may want that the resulting graph is connected.
We may want to minimize the length of longest path between any two vertices in the
resulting graph.
We may want to minimize the area of the largest face, or maximize the area of the smallest
face.
In general, even satisfying the first property alone is already NP-hard. However, this is
not the case when there is only a single type of tile. Can we parametrize this problem by
the number and/or complexity of the tiles? And for really simple sets of tiles, how many of
these properties can we still test for efficiently?
The following variants and limitations might also be interesting to consider, and may
influence to complexity of the problem.
One can consider the tiles to be arranged into different shapes.
A square
A rectangle
A polygon without holes
A polygon with holes
...

25201

88

25201 – Computational Geometry

4×

4×

4×

4×

Figure 2 A graph tiling.

For the boundary of the form (where tiles do not meet other tiles and so are not restricted
by having to match another tile) we can . . .
allow everything.
prescribe something (natural would be that all are empty or all have a path going in
or there is a prescription for each).
avoid having a boundary by putting the tiles on a torus.
...
Restrictions on the graph other than (or in addition to) connectedness could also be
made. For example, one could require the graph to be a tree.

5.10.2

Progress

During the seminar, we considered the following setting: Given n2 tiles that have constantly
many different types. Can all the tiles be arranged into one square such that the sides of the
tiles match and the boundary is arbitrary?
When we restrict the tile types to the six types of tiles from Figure 3 and allow rotation,
then if all tiles are of the same type, it is always possible to arrange them into a valid square.
If tiles are of exactly two types, then we have polynomial time algorithms to decide if they
can be arranged into a square. (For most combinations, the answer is always yes or always
no.) For three types most cases still give easy polynomial time algorithms, but some cases
are still open.

Type I

Type II

Figure 3 Six types of tiles.

Type III

Type IV

Type V

Type VI

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

5.11

89

Approximate Minlink Paths in Subquadratic Time

Valentin Polishchuk (Linköping University, SE), Sayan Bandyapadhyay (Portland State
University, US), Mark de Berg (TU Eindhoven, NL), Joachim Gudmundsson (The University
of Sydney, AU), André Nusser (CNRS, FR), Frank Staals (Utrecht University, NL)
License

5.11.1

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Valentin Polishchuk, Sayan Bandyapadhyay, Mark de Berg, Joachim Gudmundsson, André
Nusser, Frank Staals

Problem Statement

Let P be a polygonal domain with n vertices. A minlink path between points s,t in P is
√
an s-t path with fewest edges (links). Computing the path is 3SUM-hard, and an O( n)
approximation can be found in subquadratic time [1]. Can a better approximation be
computed in subaquatic time?

5.11.2

Progress

The following are sketches of ideas that arose during the seminar.
O(n log n) space, O(log n) query, +2 approx
Build a balanced hierarchical subdivision. For the bottom endpoint; construct a SPM with
respect to the link distance (which uses O(n) space). Recurse.
Space: O(n log n)
Query: For LCA(s, t), and all its ancestors v1 , . . . , vk , query the min-link path from s to vi
and from vi to t. Report the cheapest path.Beschreibung
▶ Claim 1. This is a +2 approx.
Proof. Look at min-link path from s to t: If s, t are on opposite sides of chord through vi ,
the approx ratio is +2. If s, t are on same side of vi , the approx is +1.
◀
O(n2 ) space, O(log n) query
Let v be the first vertex on the geodesic shortest path from s to t.
▶ Claim 2. There exists a min-link path from s to t that passes through v.
Consider the (geodesic) SPM of v, and consider the min-link diagram LP M (v, ϕ)v, in
which the first link has fixed orientation ϕ.
▶ Claim 3. Any edge of LP M (v, ϕ) is contained in a triangle of SP M (v).
Proof sketch. Assume by contradiction that e = wq of SP M (v) intersects an edge of
LP M (v, ϕ) in some point p. Now consider two points p1 and p2 on e on opposite sides of p.
This mean the min-link distance from v (with orientation ρ) to p1 is i, and the min-link
distance from v to p2 is j ̸= i.
However, by Claim 2 there exists a min-link path from p1 to v or s that goes through w.
Similarly, there exists a min-link path from p2 to v or s that goes through w. They must
have the same length. Contradiction.
◀
(We may want to argue that an edge of LM D(s) cannot intersect an edge of SP M (v).)
So, for any triangle of SP M (v), there is at most one edge e(ϕ) of LP M (v, ϕ) in it.
▶ Claim 4. e(ϕ) rotates monotonically as a function of ϕ (or it is fixed).

25201

90

25201 – Computational Geometry

So, for any triangle; we store the interval (−∞, ϕ1 ] on which the triangle is simply
contained in a “length i + 1” LPM region, and the interval [ϕ2 , ∞) in which it is “length
i + 1”. In the interval [ϕ1 , ϕ2 ] we store the function describing how e(ϕ) moves.
▶ Claim 5. For any point q, the link-distance from v to q whose first link has orientation ϕ is
either i or i + 1 (over all ϕs.)
Hence, for every vertex v we have some O(n) space structure. (The SPM, and per triangle
the description of one LP M (v, phi) edge).
So O(n2 ) in total. In addition we store the Guibas Hershberger structure. Space remains
O(n2 ).
Query: We locate v using the Guibas Hershberger structure. This also gives us the
orientation ϕ. We now point locate t in the SP M (v); we then compare ϕ against the interval
[phi1 , phi2 ] and report either i or i + 1.
O(n) space O(k log n) query
Main idea. We simulate the min-link propagation using the Guibas Hershberger structure.
Store the Guibas Hershberger structure: Compute the first vertex v on geodesic shortest
path from s to t. There exists a min-link path through v.
Consider the window w1 = vq on the ray from s through v. Consider the weak visibility
polygon V of w1 . We essentially want to compute which pocket of P \ V contains t. Let w2
be the window (of V ) separating s from t.
Query the funnel from t to v and q (that has apex a).
▶ Claim 6. a is a vertex of w2 .
Main idea. We can use the Guibas Hershberger structure to actually find a in O(log n)
time. We can then use a ray shooting query to compute the other endpoint of w2 (i.e. by
extending the “middle” triangle of the funnel in the other direction”). So, we simulate one
step of the visibility propagation in O(log n) time; this gives us O(k log n) query time.
O(n2 ) space, O(log n) query, +4 approx
For every pair of vertices, store the minimum link distance.
Store a triangulation of the free space.
Locate the triangles containing s and t. Let v and w be vertices incident to these triangles.
Report 2+ length min-link path (v, w).
▶ Claim 7. This is a +4 approx for d(s, t).
O(n4 ) space, O(logc n) query, +2 approx
Rather than picking some arbitrary first vertex v and last vertex w, we actually find the best
pair.
Let v, w be the pair of vertices (v visible from s, w visible from t) for which min-link
distance from v to w is minimum. We will report the path s to v to . . . w to t.
▶ Claim 8. This is a +2 approx.
Main idea. We build some three-level structure to efficiently find v and w.
For every vertex, compute its visibility polygon, store it in a DS for stabbing queries, so
that we can report the polygons stabbed by s as O(log n) canonical subsets. For each such
canonical subsets we again store a structure for stabbing queries with t as log n canonical
subsets. As a third level structure: simply store the link distance.

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

91

(This is very similar to the 2 − pt geodesic query structure Sarita de Berg, Tillmann
Miltzow, and Frank Staals [2] constructed before.)
O(n8 ) space, O(log n) query, +1 approx
The vague idea is the following: We do the same as above, except that for every vertex v,
we compute its minimum link map (which has O(n4 ) complexity or so); we throw all these
regions into our stabbing structure. (This may also require us to pick the right angle from
which we leave v.)
O(n1+1/k ) space, O(log n) query, ∗2 approx
Main idea. Same as our O(n2 ) space structure, except that we store approximate distances
between every pair of vertices.
There exists an O(n1+1/k ) space structure to store distances in an arbitrary graph [3].
We use this on the complete graph whose edge lengths are the link-distances.
References
1
Joseph S. B. Mitchell, Valentin Polishchuk, and Mikko Sysikaski. Minimum-link paths
revisited. Comput. Geom., 47(6):651–667, 2014. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
comgeo.2013.12.005, doi:10.1016/J.COMGEO.2013.12.005.
2
Sarita de Berg, Tillmann Miltzow, and Frank Staals. Towards space efficient two-point
shortest path queries in a polygonal domain. In Wolfgang Mulzer and Jeff M. Phillips,
editors, 40th International Symposium on Computational Geometry (SoCG), volume 293
of LIPIcs, pages 17:1–17:16. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
doi:10.4230/LIPICS.SOCG.2024.17.
3
Shiri Chechik. Approximate distance oracles with constant query time. In David B. Shmoys,
editor, Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2014, New York, NY, USA, May 31 –
June 03, 2014, pages 654–663. ACM, 2014. doi:10.1145/2591796.2591801.

5.12

Alexander Theorem for Knotted Spheres

Mathijs Wintraecken (Centre Inria d’Université Côte d’Azur, FR) and Kristóf Huszár (TU
Graz, AT)
License

5.12.1

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Mathijs Wintraecken and Kristóf Huszár

Problem Statement

Alexander [1] proved that every knot or even link can be represented as a closed braid, that
is, a braid with ends identified. This result is known as the Alexander theorem. The question
is if this has a generalisation to knotted spheres in the following sense: Can every knotted
2-sphere in R4 be embedded sufficiently close to the standard symmetrically embedded 2sphere S2 ⊂ R3 ⊂ R4 such that the closest point projection onto the symmetrically embedded
2-sphere is a local diffeomorphism? Has this question been answered before?

5.12.2

Progress

With the help of ChatGPT, Kristóf Huszár found the appropriate literature references, of
which [2, Chapter 1] already contains this result with a pedagogical explanation.

25201

92

25201 – Computational Geometry

References
1
James W. Alexander. A lemma on systems of knotted curves. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 9(3):93–95, 1923. doi:10.1073/pnas.9.3.93.
2
Scott Carter, Seiichi Kamada, and Masahico Saito. Surfaces in 4-Space. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2004. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-10162-9.

5.13

Universal Point Sets

Alexander Wolff (Universität Würzburg, DE), Stefan Felsner (TU Berlin, DE), Michael Hoffmann (ETH Zürich, CH), Maarten Löffler (Utrecht University, NL), Fabrizio Montecchiani
(University of Perugia, IT), Yoshio Okamoto (The University of Electro-Communications,
JP), Jonathan Spreer (University of Sydney, AU)
License

5.13.1

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Alexander Wolff, Stefan Felsner, Michael Hoffmann, Maarten Löffler, Fabrizio Montecchiani,
Yoshio Okamoto, Jonathan Spreer

Problem Statement

A set S of points in the plane is called universal with respect to a given drawing style and
an integer n if every graph on n vertices admits a drawing in the given style such that the
vertices are mapped to the points of S. For planar graphs, for example, the drawing style
could require crossing-free straight-line edges. When considering drawings where the edges
are circular arcs [1] or polygonal lines [4], the encoding of the edges may also need to be
considered; for instance, a third point on an arc or the bends of a polygonal line. Also
the number of edges can be a relevant parameter, which leads to the notion of universal
geometric (or topological) graphs [2]. Another direction is to study universal point sets for
restricted classes of planar graphs, such as planar 3-trees [3].

5.13.2

Progress

Higher dimensions. One possible way to transfer the problem of universal point sets into
higher dimensions is the following: Can we find a universal point set in 3-space for all n-vertex
triangulations of the 2-sphere?
By a classical result due to Steinitz, every triangulated 2-sphere can be embedded into
3-space in convex position (in particular, as a polyhedral embedding – that is, with straightline edges and flat triangles). Moreover, we know that all of these embeddings can be chosen
to have integer coordinates.
By a result of André Schulz [5], the maximum coordinate of such an integer embedding is
O(27.55n ), where n is the number of vertices. This trivially yields a universal point set of
3
size c · 27.55n . This result holds for arbitrary polytopes. The hope is that the bound for
simplicial polytopes (triangulations of the 2-sphere) would be much smaller. There might be
hints in the proof of the above result that can help us.
This touches on a famous problem in discrete geometry: The polyhedral realization
problem for triangulated (or polyhedral) surfaces. Not every triangulation of an orientable
surface has a polyhedral embedding into 3-space. In fact, an n-vertex triangulation of an
orientable surface can have genus quadratic in n, but the highest genus surfaces that are
known to be polyhedrally embeddable have genus n log(n). Even more, deciding polyhedral
embeddability for a given triangulation is likely a hard problem in general. See [6] for a nice
overview of the polyhedral realization problem.

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

93

Central vertices in Schnyder woods. To construct universal point sets in the plane, it
seems natural to find a central vertex in the given planar graph, map it to a central point of
the point set, split the graph into, say, three regions that meet in the central vertex, split
the point set accordingly, and recurse. In fact, in a Schnyder wood of a 3-connected plane
graph G, every vertex does have three associated regions, which form a partition of the inner
faces of G; see the regions Rr , Rg , and Rb of vertex v in Figure 4c. A vertex is δ-central if
each of its regions contains at most (1 − δ)f0 faces of G, where f0 is the number of inner
faces of G. The centrality of the outer vertices is 0. Here we show that every Schnyder wood
has a 1/3-central vertex.

a1

b2

b3

z
a3

v

Rg

Rb

Rr

a2
b1

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 4 The two Schnyder woods of the octahedron (a,b) and the three regions of a vertex v (c).

▶ Proposition 1. If S is a Schnyder wood of a plane 3-connected graph G with f0 bounded
faces, then there is a vertex c that is 1/3-central with respect to S.
The proof, which we omit here, uses Sperner’s Lemma (see “Proofs from the book” by
Aigner and Ziegler). Next we show that the above centrality bound is tight.
▶ Proposition 2. For every ε > 0, there exists a planar triangulation T with f0 bounded faces
such that, in every Schnyder wood of T , no vertex has centrality greater than (1/3 + ε).
Proof. Consider the skeleton of the octahedron; see Figure 4. We first consider a weighted
version of the partition problem where we assign a weight wf to each face f among the seven
inner faces; namely w(z) = w(b1 ) = w(b2 ) = w(b3 ) = 1 and w(a1 ) = w(a2 ) = w(a3 ) = α for
some real α > 0. The total weight of the faces is 3α + 4. Each inner vertex has a region
of weight 2α + 2. Hence, with increasing α, the weight of a region of each vertex can get
arbitrarily close to 2/3 of the total weight of the faces of the graph.
We can subdivide the faces of the octahedron and use the weights to count the number of
(sub)faces in each original octahedron face. To this end, we place a triangulation with k inner
vertices into each of the faces a1 , a2 , and a3 , and set α = 2k + 5. In every Schnyder wood
of the new triangulation with 3k + 6 vertices, the edges of the original octahedron are still
colored and oriented in one of the two ways shown in Figures 4a and 4b. Let i ∈ {1, 2, 3}. If
u is a vertex of the triangulation that refines the octahedron face ai , then the largest region
of u contains z, bi , and all the faces in the triangulations subdividing ai−1 and ai+1 . Hence
u has a region whose weight exceeds 2α + 2.
◀
References
1 Patrizio Angelini, David Eppstein, Fabrizio Frati, Michael Kaufmann, Silvain Lazard,
Tamara Mchedlidze, Monique Teillaud, and Alexander Wolff. Universal point sets for
drawing planar graphs with circular arcs. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 18(3):313–324, 2014.
doi:10.7155/jgaa.00324.

25201

94

25201 – Computational Geometry

2

3
4

5
6

Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Csaba D. Tóth. Universal geometric graphs.
Combinatorics, Probability and Computing, 32(5):742–761, 2023.
doi:10.1017/
S0963548323000135.
Radoslav Fulek and Csaba D. Tóth. Universal point sets for planar three-trees. J. Discrete
Algorithms, 30:101–112, 2015. doi:10.1016/J.JDA.2014.12.005.
Maarten Löffler and Csaba D. Tóth. Linear-size universal point sets for one-bend
drawings. In Emilio Di Giacomo and Anna Lubiw, editors, 23rd Int. Symp. Graph
Drawing & Network Vis. (GD), volume 9411 of LNCS, pages 423–429. Springer, 2015.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-27261-0\_35.
André Schulz. Lifting planar graphs to realize integral 3-polytopes and topics in pseudotriangulations. PhD thesis, Freie Universität Berlin, 2008. doi:10.17169/refubium-16284.
Günter M. Ziegler. Polyhedral Surfaces of High Genus, pages 191–213. Birkhäuser Basel,
2008. doi:10.1007/978-3-7643-8621-4_10.

Maarten Löffler, Eunjin Oh, Jeff M. Phillips, and Alexandra Weinberger

95

Participants
Oswin Aichholzer
TU Graz, AT
Sayan Bandyapadhyay
Portland State University, US
Benjamin Burton
University of Queensland –
Brisbane, AU
Otfried Cheong
Scalgo, DK
Mark de Berg
TU Eindhoven, NL
Jeff Erickson
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, US
Fedor V. Fomin
University of Bergen, NO
Robert Ganian
TU Wien, AT
Joachim Gudmundsson
The University of Sidney, AU
Dan Halperin
Tel Aviv University, IL
Michael Hoffmann
ETH Zürich, CH
Kristóf Huszár
TU Graz, AT
Phillip Keldenich
TU Braunschweig, DE
David G. Kirkpatrick
University of British Columbia –
Vancouver, CA

Francis Lazarus
CNRS – Grenoble, FR

Jonathan Shewchuk
University of California –
Berkeley, US

Jim Little
University of British Columbia –
Vancouver, CA

Diane Souvaine
Tufts University – Medford, US

Maarten Löffler
Utrecht University, NL

Jonathan Spreer
University of Sydney, AU

Gert Meijer
NHL Stenden Hogeschool –
Leeuwarden, NL

Frank Staals
Utrecht University, NL

Fabrizio Montecchiani
University of Perugia, IT

Birgit Vogtenhuber
TU Graz, AT

Ian Munro
University of Waterloo, CA

Hubert Wagner
University of Florida –
Gainesville, US

André Nusser
CNRS – Sophia Antipolis, FR
Eunjin Oh
POSTECH – Pohang, KR
Yoshio Okamoto
The University of
Electro-Communications –
Tokyo, JP
Jeff M. Phillips
University of Utah –
Salt Lake City, US
Valentin Polishchuk
Linköping University, SE
Raimund Seidel
Universität des Saarlandes –
Saarbrücken, DE

Alexandra Weinberger
FernUniversität in Hagen, DE
Carola Wenk
Tulane University –
New Orleans, US
Mathijs Wintraecken
Centre Inria d’Université Côte
d’Azur – Sophia Antipolis, FR
Alexander Wolff
Universität Würzburg, DE
Yelena Yuditsky
ULB-Brussels, BE
Ling Zhou
Duke University – Durham, US

25201

Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25202

Generative Models for 3D Vision
Laura Neschen∗1 , Bernhard Egger†2 , Adam Kortylewski†3 ,
William Smith†4 , and Stefanie Wuhrer†5
1
2

INRIA Rhône-Alpes, FR. laura.neschen@inria.fr
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, DE.
egger.bernhard@gmail.com
Universität Freiburg, DE and MPI für Informatik – Saarbrücken, DE.
akortyle@mpi-inf.mpg.de
University of York, GB. william.smith@york.ac.uk
INRIA – Grenoble, FR. stefanie.wuhrer@inria.fr

3
4
5

Abstract
Generative models that allow synthesis of realistic 3D models have been of interest in computer
vision and graphics for over 2 decades. While traditional methods use morphable models for
this task, more recent works have adopted powerful tools from the 2D image domain such as
generative adversarial networks, neural fields and diffusion models, and have achieved impressive
results. The question of which tools are most suitable for applications such as reconstructing 3D
geometry from partial data, and creating digital 3D content remains open. This report documents
the program and outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 25202 titled “Generative Models for 3D Vision”.
This meeting of 25 researchers covered a variety of topics such as generative models and priors for
2D tasks, medical applications, and digital representations of humans, including how to evaluate
and benchmark different methods. We summarise the discussions, presentations, and results of
this seminar.
Seminar May 11–16, 2025 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/25202
2012 ACM Subject Classification Computing methodologies → 3D imaging; Computing methodologies → Computer vision; Computing methodologies → Computer graphics
Keywords and phrases 3D Computer Vision, Computer Graphics, Generative Models, Implicit
Representations, Neural Rendering, Statistical Modelling
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.5.96

1

Executive Summary

Bernhard Egger (Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, DE)
Adam Kortylewski (Universität Freiburg, DE and MPI für Informatik – Saarbrücken, DE)
Laura Neschen (INRIA Rhône-Alpes, FR)
William Smith (University of York, GB)
Stefanie Wuhrer (INRIA – Grenoble, FR)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Bernhard Egger, Adam Kortylewski, Laura Neschen, William Smith, and Stefanie Wuhrer

The rise of purely data-driven generative models, in particular generative adversarial networks,
auto-regressive models, neural fields and diffusion models, has led to a step change in image
synthesis quality. It is now possible to create photorealistic images with high level semantic
control and solve many desirable use cases such as 2D inpainting. Whilst prior models were
∗
†

Editorial Assistant / Collector
Editor / Organizer

Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Generative Models for 3D Vision, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15, Issue 5, pp. 96–113
Editors: Laura Neschen, Bernhard Egger, Adam Kortylewski, William Smith, and Stefanie Wuhrer
Dagstuhl Reports
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany

L. Neschen, B. Egger, A. Kortylewski, W. Smith, and S. Wuhrer

97

object specific (e.g. 3D Morphable Models of Faces), we now have generative models for
images and videos that can represent various object classes and generate a huge variety of
objects and scenes, even in different styles. The drawback of purely data-driven approaches is
that the control and explainability provided by 3D and physically-based parameters is lost. It
is also difficult (and perhaps prohibitively inefficient) to learn 3D consistent representations
without prior models purely from 2D data alone.
For this seminar, a total of 58 researchers were invited, and 25 of them attended.
Participants came from both academia and industry and at varying stages of their careers.
Thirteen participants presented their work in around 15-30 minute presentations, and an
abstract of each presentation is included in this report. We started the seminar with a short
introduction of each participant. Everyone was given one slide to introduce themselves and
asked to prepare a question, challenge or goal to discuss during the seminar.
In addition to traditional presentations, multiple slots were left for research discussions
with the full group or sub-groups of the participants. The first set of these slots was filled
with topics that participants proposed before the start of the seminar. Five participants
led research discussions of about 1 hour each about a topic or a problem they considered
important. Some of these discussions were led with the full group, while others were discussed
in sub-groups, and the resulting conclusions were shared with the full group afterwards.
Additionally, two 2 hour discussion slots were initially reserved to be filled with suggestions
that came up during the seminar. These two long discussions concerned research questions
that were identified as being important for the research community in the course of the
seminar, namely the topics of metrics and capture, and hard problems in the research
community that merit being studied more. All proposed topics led to lively discussions about
vaious problems around generative models. Summaries of the results of these flexible sessions
are contained in this report. In addition to these organized discussions, there were numerous
informal discussions during both the Wednesday outing and free time slots that are not
summarized in this report.

25202

98

25202 – Generative Models for 3D Vision

2

Table of Contents

Executive Summary
Bernhard Egger, Adam Kortylewski, Laura Neschen, William Smith, and Stefanie
Wuhrer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Overview of Talks
Synthetic Data for Generative AI
Thabo Beeler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
Learning to Infer Parametric Representations for 3D Plants from Scans
Samara Ghrer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
Statistical Approaches to Internal Anatomy Prediction
Marilyn Keller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
On Learning to Reconstruct Shape using World Priors, Handling Topological
Inconsistencies, and Edge Integration as a Model of Choice
Ron Kimmel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Towards Photorealistic 3D Head Avatars
Tobias Kirschstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Understanding Self-Supervised Learning
Adam Kortylewski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Leveraging 3D Representations for Multi-view Synthesis and Editing with 2D
Generative Models
Or Patashnik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Scaling Digital Humans
Shunsuke Saito . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Clever Data Curation for Smart Supervision
William Smith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Generating 3D Human Motion with Language
Gül Varol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
3D Foundation Models for Enhanced Geometry in Gaussian Splatting
Yaniv Wolf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
D-Garment: Physics-Conditioned Latent Diffusion for Dynamic Garment Deformations
Stefanie Wuhrer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Open problems
Interpolation of Shapes with Topological and Structural Variability
Andreea Ardelean and Samara Ghrer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Exploring problems with infinite data
Timotei Ardelean . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Benchmarking Monocular Reconstruction Discussion
James Gardner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Capturing useful datasets for 3D vision tasks
Samara Ghrer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111

L. Neschen, B. Egger, A. Kortylewski, W. Smith, and S. Wuhrer

99

Believe Propagation over Spatial Domains with Generative Models
Jan Eric Lenssen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
Hard problems in computer vision and the necessity of modeling
Yaniv Wolf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113

25202

100

25202 – Generative Models for 3D Vision

3

Overview of Talks

3.1

Synthetic Data for Generative AI

Thabo Beeler (Google Research – Zürich, CH)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Thabo Beeler

Inspired by the seminal “Fake It Til You Make It” paper published in 2021, people have
successfully trained ML models on synthetic data for research and product alike, demonstrating that the infamous domain gap can be overcome, even though the generated data still
falls short in visual quality. Research has produced models trained on synthetic data that
not only achieve parity with models trained on real data, but by now even surpass models
trained on real data due to the full control (i.e. multiview data), additional modalities (i.e.
depth and normals) and pixel perfect annotations (i.e. 3D keypoints). Research such as the
seminal “Sapiens” work has further demonstrated success by finetuning foundational models
trained on real data with synthetic data, to enable generalization despite limited amounts of
synthetic assets.
All of those models are discriminative – they analyze real images to derive higher order
semantics from it, such as keypoints, segmentations, or surface normals. On the generative
side people have been considerably less successful, due to the remaining domain gap in the
data generated, causing domain shifts as visible for example in “Rodin”. Recent works, such
as “Cafca” or “SynShot”, have proposed to overcome this domain shift by fine-tuning on
real data, typically following a three-step approach: 1) pretrain a prior on synthetic data, 2)
invert sparse views into that prior, 3) employ a fine-tuning strategy to go off model. While
this can produce results without domain shift, it’s of course not a fully generative model
anymore, and as such has its own limitations – for example one cannot unconditionally
sample from it. Looking forward we predict the development to trend towards fusing high
quality 3D synthetic data with the emerging large scale image or video foundational models
to overcome the domain gap for generative 3D models.

3.2

Learning to Infer Parametric Representations for 3D Plants from
Scans

Samara Ghrer (University of Grenoble, FR)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Samara Ghrer
Joint work of Samara Ghrer, Christophe Godin, Stefanie Wuhrer
Main reference Samara Ghrer, Christophe Godin, Stefanie Wuhrer: “Learning to Infer Parameterized
Representations of Plants from 3D Scans”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2505.22337, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2505.22337
License

Reconstructing faithfully the 3D architecture of plants from unstructured observations is a
challenging task. Plants frequently contain numerous organs, organized in branching systems
in more or less complex spatial networks, leading to specific computational issues due to
self-occlusion or spatial proximity between organs. Existing works either consider inverse
modeling where the aim is to recover the procedural rules that allow to simulate virtual plants,
or focus on specific tasks such as segmentation or skeletonization. We propose a unified
approach that, given a 3D scan of a plant, allows to infer a parameterized representation of
the plant. This representation describes the plant’s branching structure, contains parametric
information for each plant organ, and can therefore be used directly in a variety of tasks.

L. Neschen, B. Egger, A. Kortylewski, W. Smith, and S. Wuhrer

3.3

101

Statistical Approaches to Internal Anatomy Prediction

Marilyn Keller (MPI für Intelligente Systeme – Tübingen, DE)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Marilyn Keller
Joint work of Marilyn Keller, Keenon Werling, Soyong Shin, Scott L. Delp, Sergi Pujades, C. Karen Liu, Michael J.
Black, Silvia Zuffi, Vaibhav Arora, Abdelmouttaleb Dakri, Shivam Chandhok, Jürgen Machann,
Andreas Fritsche
Main reference Marilyn Keller, Keenon Werling, Soyong Shin, Scott L. Delp, Sergi Pujades, C. Karen Liu, Michael J.
Black: “From Skin to Skeleton: Towards Biomechanically Accurate 3D Digital Humans”, ACM
Trans. Graph., Vol. 42(6), pp. 253:1–253:12, 2023.
URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3618381
Main reference Marilyn Keller, Silvia Zuffi, Michael J. Black, Sergi Pujades: “OSSO: Obtaining Skeletal Shape from
Outside”, in Proc. of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
CVPR 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, June 18-24, 2022, pp. 20460–20469, IEEE, 2022.
URL https://doi.org//10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01984
Main reference Marilyn Keller, Vaibhav Arora, Abdelmouttaleb Dakri, Shivam Chandhok, Jürgen Machann,
Andreas Fritsche, Michael J. Black, Sergi Pujades: “HIT: Estimating Internal Human Implicit
Tissues from the Body Surface”, in Proc. of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2024, Seattle, WA, USA, June 16-22, 2024, pp. 3480–3490, IEEE, 2024.
URL https://doi.org//10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.00334
License

Personalized anatomical digital twins are essential for medicine, computer graphics, and
biomechanics, but serving internal anatomy usually requires expensive medical imaging.
Instead, we can leverage the correlation between external body shape and internal structures
to predict the anatomy directly from a subject’s appearance. Learning this correlation
raises three key challenges: building datasets with paired observations of body shapes and
internal anatomy, annotating these datasets, and learning models that capture the correlation
between external and internal features. In this talk, I will showcase how we became able to
predict skeleton geometry, bone location, and soft tissue distribution solely from external
body shape.

3.4

On Learning to Reconstruct Shape using World Priors, Handling
Topological Inconsistencies, and Edge Integration as a Model of
Choice

Ron Kimmel (Technion – Haifa, IL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Ron Kimmel

Deep learning is a disruptive line of research that continues to reshape how computational
problems are formulated and solved. While remarkable advances have been made in tasks
involving classification, segmentation, and reconstruction, certain fundamental limitations
remain – especially when handling geometric data not suited to traditional convolutional
structures. This note outlines our ongoing efforts to address shape reconstruction and analysis
in such scenarios, drawing inspiration from differential geometry, spectral theory, and human
vision.
Deep learning architectures are designed around the notion of shift-invariance and lowdimensional latent structures. These assumptions empower convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) to generalize well across a range of problems. However, for geometric structures
where no natural shift-invariant coordinate system exists, standard methods often fall short.
In our group, we have been exploring new avenues that combine classical geometry with
modern machine learning to reconstruct and analyze shapes – even when those shapes are
partially occluded, topologically noisy, or nonrigid. These include tools for shape matching,
geodesic measurement, and the design of semi-supervised learning techniques rooted in
axiomatic geometric principles.
25202

102

25202 – Generative Models for 3D Vision

One of geometry’s grand challenges is explaining the world we live in. Shape comparison,
particularly of nonrigid objects, exemplifies this. Unlike rigid objects, nonrigid shapes lack a
universal parameterization, complicating comparison. Over the past two decades, we have
developed methods for analyzing and matching such shapes using the Gromov Hausdorff
(GH) distance, which quantifies discrepancies between metric spaces. We have advanced this
from theoretical abstraction to practical approximation using spectral embeddings.
Traditionally, computer vision (CV) aimed to extract geometry from images, while
computer graphics (CG) sought to generate images from geometry. Today, these domains
converge. A fundamental question we address is: Can neural networks help discover invariants
or derive parameterizations of geometric data? To this end, we showed that the Gromov
distance between metric spaces offers a powerful framework for non-rigid shape analysis.
Classical computer vision focused on “shape from X” problems: shape from shading
(often solved using eikonal solvers), shape from stereo (requiring correspondence resolution),
and shape from auto-stereograms. A compelling example comes from stereoscopic vision.
Consider looking through a cardboard tube with one eye, while the other eye is blocked by
one hand – this creates a visual illusion of a “hole” in the hand, as the brain attempts to force
a false correspondence between views. Such hallucination phenomena motivated the study
of auto-stereograms generation, see [2], and geometric reconstruction from such data using
methods described in [1]. It motivates the concept of prior based geometry reconstruction as
recently adopted and adapted in [3]. It demonstrates how prior knowledge of image formation
models captured by neural network trained to solve the shape from stereo problem, can
significantly improve reconstruction accuracy integrating Gaussian splatting with synthetic
stereo pairs.
Recently, our attention has turned to shape invariants, especially under partial observation.
We introduced the Wormhole Loss [4], designed for robust partial matching by emphasizing
topological consistency. This follows our earlier work on partial shape correspondence using
functional maps [5], which outperforms previous efforts such as [6, 7] by incorporating both
local and global topology sensitive invariants into the learning objective.
Finally, another classical idea that should be re-examined through the lens of deep
learning is edge detection. The variational model for optimal edge integration via regularized
Laplacian zero-crossings [8] raises an intriguing question: can such elegant mathematical
formulations be embedded into a neural network framework? If so, which applications would
benefit most, and how could these formulations serve as loss functions or regularizers in
modern computer vision applications?
References
1
Ron Kimmel. 3D Shape Reconstruction from Autostereograms and Stereo. Journal of
Visual Communication and Image Representation, 13:324-333, 2002.
2
A. M. Bruckstein, R. Onn, and T. J. Richardson. Improving the vision of magic eyes: A
guide to better autostereograms. In Advances in Image Understanding, A Festschrift for
Azriel Rosenfeld, IEEE Comput. Sci., 1996.
3
Y. Wolf, A. Bracha, and R. Kimmel. Gs2mesh: Surface reconstruction from Gaussian
splatting via novel stereo views. European Conference on Computer Vision, 2024.
4
A. Bracha, T. Dagès, and R. Kimmel, “Wormhole Loss for Partial Shape Matching,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.22899
5
A. Bracha, T. Dagès, and R. Kimmel, “On Partial Shape Correspondence and Functional
Maps,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.14692

L. Neschen, B. Egger, A. Kortylewski, W. Smith, and S. Wuhrer

6

7
8

3.5

103

G. Rosman, M. M. Bronstein, A. M. Bronstein, and R. Kimmel. Nonlinear dimensionality
reduction by topologically constrained isometric embedding. International Journal of
Computer Vision, 2010.
A. M. Bronstein, M. M. Bronstein, and R. Kimmel. Topology-invariant similarity of nonrigid
shapes. International Journal of Computer Vision, 2009.
R. Kimmel and A. M. Bruckstein. Regularized Laplacian zero crossings as optimal edge
integrators. International Journal of Computer Vision, 2003.

Towards Photorealistic 3D Head Avatars

Tobias Kirschstein (TU München – Garching, DE)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Tobias Kirschstein

In recent years, 3D head avatars have become ever more realistic, leading to their integration
into first commercial products. In this talk, we will explore some of the key developments that
drive research in this area, including datasets, methods, and efforts to standardize evaluation.
Studio-level multi-view video datasets such as the NeRSemble dataset enable creating high
quality animatable reconstructions of human heads. For example, the current state-of-theart method, Neural Parametric Gaussian Avatars, combines multi-view supervision with
a detailed 3D face model to produce lifelike digital doubles. In the future, the field is
moving toward learning larger generative 3D priors which could help tackle under-constrained
scenarios such as reconstructing 3D head avatars from single images. Ultimately, we will
have to answer the question whether the future lies in recording more data in controlled
studio environments or exploring new paradigms, like 3D GANs, that can infer 3D priors
from 2D data alone.

3.6

Understanding Self-Supervised Learning

Adam Kortylewski (Universität Freiburg, DE and MPI für Informatik – Saarbrücken, DE)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Adam Kortylewski

SSL methods gave us general-purpose visual features like DinoV2 that perform well as
backbone for a variety of tasks, like classification, segmentation and even low-level 3D tasks
like depth or normal estimation. Interestingly, these features emerge despite being trained
with pre-text objectives that are rather unrelated to actual (3D) vision tasks, like making
image crops of the same image similar to each other. In this talk, I will discuss some initial
ideas about the connection between SSL of visual features and visual correspondence tasks.
I will discuss experiments that show how current SSL features are not just good at 2D vision
but also 3D vision tasks, and how we could possibly develop pre-text objectives that explicitly
optimize semantic correspondence capabilities of visual features, ultimately leading to the
emergence of more advanced visual features.

25202

104

25202 – Generative Models for 3D Vision

3.7

Leveraging 3D Representations for Multi-view Synthesis and Editing
with 2D Generative Models

Or Patashnik (Tel Aviv University, IL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Or Patashnik

While 2D generative models have achieved remarkable success in image synthesis and
editing, extending their power to multi-view and 3D tasks often leads to inconsistencies
and limited control. In this talk, I will discuss a line of work showing how incorporating
3D representations, ranging from explicit 3D shapes to emergent 3D feature fields, can
significantly enhance the capabilities of 2D generative models for multi-view generation and
editing. I will first demonstrate how explicit geometric structures, such as rough meshes
or low-fidelity 3D models, can guide and stabilize the generation process, enabling better
control and consistency. I will then discuss how, even without an explicit shape, constructing
a 3D-aware feature field during generation can substantially improve multi-view coherence.
Together, these approaches show that introducing 3D representations, whether provided
upfront or learned during the process, fundamentally amplifies the capabilities of 2D diffusion
models and enables high-quality, controllable 3D content creation.

3.8

Scaling Digital Humans

Shunsuke Saito (Codec Avatars Lab – Pittsburgh, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Shunsuke Saito

In this talk, we discuss how to put the modeling of 3D Digital Humans on the table of
large-scale training. In particular, we share our recent experiments to see the potential benefit
and risk of pre/post-training regime. Self-supervised learning with large scale data and then
finetuning on small but clean data leads to generalization and high-quality at scale. This
shows surprising generalization to the domain outside the post-training data distribution. We
also discuss the importance of 3D in the era of powerful 2D generative models. By presenting
our recent work on efficient 3D Gaussian avatar decoding, we illustrate how efficiency plays
a critical role in content creation with 3D-based approaches.

3.9

Clever Data Curation for Smart Supervision

William Smith (University of York, GB)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© William Smith

This talk summarised work from the past 10 years that opportunistically repurposed data
collected for one purpose to provide supervision for a 3D vision task. The purpose of the
talk was to: 1. highlight that there are likely many more datasets available that have not yet
been tapped for such purposes, 2. to try to categorise previous methods and 3. to stimulate
discussion around ideas for problems or datasets that could benefit from or be used in this
way. The proposed initial categorisation along with representative methods was:

L. Neschen, B. Egger, A. Kortylewski, W. Smith, and S. Wuhrer

105

Multiview curation at training time for single view task supervision [1, 2, 3, 4]
Two view curation at training time for two view task supervision [5, 6, 7]
Compositing [8]
Wide FOV to supervise beyond cropped narrow FOV [9]
Diffusion-based editing [10]
In the discussion that followed, many sources of interesting supervision were proposed. Aging
or fitness journey timelapse videos can be used to understand changes in appearance with a
fixed identity. Zipline or rollercoaster videos provide smooth fly throughs that are repeated
in many different conditions with almost the same camera trajectory. Ice bucket challenge
videos provide examples of the same clothes dry and wet. Flash photography, for example
at red carpet events, provides photometric stereo cues. Google streetview provides many
lighting conditions for the same scene. Object press videos show how different materials
deform. Slow TV such as railway journeys provide revisits of slowly changing landscapes.
References
1 Zhengqi Li and Noah Snavely. MegaDepth: Learning Single-View Depth Prediction from
Internet Photos. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 2041-2050, 2018.
2 Zhengqi Li, Tali Dekel, Forrester Cole, Richard Tucker, Noah Snavely, Ce Liu, and William T.
Freeman. Learning the Depths of Moving People by Watching Frozen People. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
4521-4530, 2019.
3 Zhengqi Li and Noah Snavely. Learning Intrinsic Image Decomposition from Watching the
World. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 9039-9048, 2018.
4 Ye Yu and William A. P. Smith. InverseRenderNet: Learning single image inverse rendering.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 3155-3164, 2019.
5 Philippe Weinzaepfel, Thomas Lucas, Vincent Leroy, Yohann Cabon, Vaibhav Arora, Romain
Brégier, Gabriela Csurka, Leonid Antsfeld, Boris Chidlovskii, and Jérôme Revaud. Croco
v2: Improved cross-view completion pre-training for stereo matching and optical flow. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
6 Shuzhe Wang, Vincent Leroy, Yohann Cabon, Boris Chidlovskii, and Jerome Revaud.
DUSt3R: Geometric 3D Vision Made Easy. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 20697-20709, 2024.
7 Linyi Jin, Richard Tucker, Zhengqi Li, David Fouhey, Noah Snavely, and Aleksander
Holynski. Stereo4D: Learning How Things Move in 3D from Internet Stereo Videos. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2025.
8 Finlay G. C. Hudson and William A. P. Smith. Track Anything Behind Everything: ZeroShot Amodal Video Object Segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19210, 2024.
9 Rundong Luo, Matthew Wallingford, Ali Farhadi, Noah Snavely, and Wei-Chiu Ma. Beyond
the Frame: Generating 360° Panoramic Videos from Perspective Videos. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.07940, 2025.
10 Alex Trevithick, Ruihan Yang, Rundi Wu, Ruiqi Gao, Ben Poole, Aleksander Holynski,
Jonathan T. Barron, Noah Snavely, and Angjoo Kanazawa. SimVS: Simulating World
Inconsistencies for Robust View Synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2025.

25202

106

25202 – Generative Models for 3D Vision

3.10

Generating 3D Human Motion with Language

Gül Varol (ENPC – Marne-la-Vallée, FR)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Gül Varol

Text-driven 3D human motion generation methods have recently evolved to synthesize
language-controllable avatars. My talk briefly shows results of motion generation with
various levels of granularity and presents recent extensions to motion editing and hand
motion generation. An obvious challenge in this domain is the scarcity of data. We will
discuss ways to scale up the data to train these models, with a particular focus on noise vs
scale trade-off.

3.11

3D Foundation Models for Enhanced Geometry in Gaussian
Splatting

Yaniv Wolf (Technion – Haifa, IL)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Yaniv Wolf
Joint work of Yaniv Wolf, Amit Bracha, Ron Kimmel
Main reference Yaniv Wolf, Amit Bracha, Ron Kimmel: “GS2Mesh: Surface Reconstruction from Gaussian
Splatting via Novel Stereo Views”, in Proc. of the Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 – 18th European
Conference, Milan, Italy, September 29-October 4, 2024, Proceedings, Part LXXXIX, Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, Vol. 15147, pp. 207–224, Springer, 2024.
URL https://doi.org//10.1007/978-3-031-73024-5_13
License

In recent years, Gaussian Splatting (GS) has emerged as an efficient and accurate method
for scene representation. However, while GS excels in novel view synthesis, it struggles
with accurately representing geometry, as appearance and geometry are often conflicting
objectives for the Gaussian representation itself (consider a colorful flat wall, or a textureless
round surface). Attempts to simultaneously optimize both appearance and geometry often
lead to suboptimal compromises. To bridge the gap between appearance and geometry,
we introduce GS2Mesh, a novel pipeline that extracts accurate surface geometry from any
optimized GS scene without degrading its visual quality. Rather than directly optimizing
the Gaussians for both appearance and geometry, we leave the Gaussians optimized for
appearance, and leverage a robust 3D data-driven prior, in the form of a pre-trained stereo
matching foundation model, for the geometry extraction. Specifically, we render stereoaligned image pairs from the optimized GS scene and feed them to the pre-trained stereo
model, resulting in high-quality disparity maps. These maps are then scaled according to
the camera parameters to form multi-view consistent depth maps, which are fused together
to reconstruct accurate 3D surfaces. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on
popular 3D reconstruction benchmarks, as well as robust performance on in-the-wild scenes
captured via smartphones. Due to the modularity of the approach, performance is expected
to improve as better GS and stereo matching models emerge.

L. Neschen, B. Egger, A. Kortylewski, W. Smith, and S. Wuhrer

3.12

107

D-Garment: Physics-Conditioned Latent Diffusion for Dynamic
Garment Deformations

Stefanie Wuhrer (INRIA – Grenoble, FR)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Stefanie Wuhrer
Joint work of Antoine Dumoulin, Adnane Boukhayma, Laurence Boissieux, Bharath Bhushan Damodaran, Pierre
Hellier, Stefanie Wuhrer
Main reference Antoine Dumoulin, Adnane Boukhayma, Laurence Boissieux, Bharath Bhushan Damodaran, Pierre
Hellier, Stefanie Wuhrer: “D-Garment: Physics-Conditioned Latent Diffusion for Dynamic Garment
Deformations”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2504.03468, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2504.03468
License

Adjusting and deforming 3D garments to body shapes, body motion, and cloth material is
an important problem in virtual and augmented reality. Applications are numerous, ranging
from virtual change rooms to the entertainment and gaming industry. This problem is
challenging as garment dynamics influence geometric details such as wrinkling patterns,
which depend on physical input including the wearer’s body shape and motion, as well as
cloth material features. Existing work studies learning-based modeling techniques to generate
garment deformations from example data, and physics-inspired simulators to generate realistic
garment dynamics. The presentation covered our recent learning-based approach trained on
data generated with a physics-based simulator. Compared to prior work, our 3D generative
model learns garment deformations for loose cloth geometry, especially for large deformations
and dynamic wrinkles driven by body motion and cloth material. Furthermore, the model
can be efficiently fitted to observations captured using vision sensors. We propose to leverage
the capability of diffusion models to learn fine-scale detail: we model the 3D garment in a
2D parameter space, and learn a latent diffusion model using this representation independent
from the mesh resolution. This allows to condition global and local geometric information
with body and material information. The presentation concluded with some open questions
that benefitted from discussions in the diverse group of the seminar.

4

Open problems

4.1

Interpolation of Shapes with Topological and Structural Variability

Andreea Ardelean (Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, DE) and Samara
Ghrer (University of Grenoble, FR)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Andreea Ardelean and Samara Ghrer

This open discussion centers on the problem of representing and understanding the structural
topology of growing plants, raising foundational questions about how plant morphology
evolves over time and how it can be modeled computationally. Participants explored whether
plant topology – particularly the branching structure – changes during growth, and if so,
how to model this dynamic nature in a consistent and analyzable way. Analogies to human
anatomy (e.g., variability in tooth roots or spinal structure) highlighted similar topological
ambiguity in biological systems.
A range of modeling strategies were discussed. Neural implicit representations such as
NeuralSDF offer a powerful tool for interpolating between shapes, after which a skeleton
can be extracted. However, challenges arise when interpolations generate non-physical or

25202

108

25202 – Generative Models for 3D Vision

biologically invalid intermediate states – for example, a plant structure with a fractional
number of branches, or a tooth with an unrealistic root configuration. In this context,
skeleton extraction and branching modeling must be grounded in biological plausibility.
Stochastic modeling was proposed as an effective alternative to rule-based procedural
methods. While procedural modeling requires the system to strictly follow hand-crafted rules,
stochastic models can learn from data, making them more flexible for capturing the natural
variability in plant structures. Parameters of branching processes (e.g., angles, lengths,
probabilities of bifurcation) can be learned directly from real plant data, enabling more
realistic simulations.
There was a shift in perspective proposed: rather than thinking in purely topological
terms, plant structures may be better understood as graph-like entities, where branches and
junctions form a structured hierarchy. This aligns better with biological reality and allows
for more intuitive comparisons between different plant forms.
To compare plant structures across stages of growth or between individuals, several
mathematical tools were proposed. Diffusion distances were suggested as a more robust
alternative to geodesic distances, offering smoother and more meaningful metrics for shape
comparison. In cases where the structure contains holes or discontinuities, Fourier-based
approaches might offer better representations. Still, the core challenge remains: how to
define meaningful correspondences between topologically diverse structures, especially when
interpolations between them don’t represent real physical states (e.g., morphing between
different glyph forms of the letter “g”).
From an application-driven standpoint, several motivations for understanding plant
topology were discussed. These include:
Monitoring and diagnosing plant health (e.g., detecting disease via structural anomalies).
Understanding growth patterns of individual plants versus species-level trends (nature vs.
nurture).
Predicting future states or motions of plants based on current observations.
The discussion emphasized the importance of discrete vs. continuous modeling, particularly in cases like the transition from flower to fruit, which represents a discrete structural
change atop a generally continuous growth process. Mixture models or hybrid representations
(continuous shapes with discrete categorical states) were considered useful for capturing this
dual nature.
Drawing parallels to 3D morphable models (3DMMs) used in face reconstruction, the
conversation highlighted the trade-off between model complexity and usability. While complex
models may better capture biological variance, they are harder to fit and interpret. 3DMMs
benefit from disentanglement and controllability, features that plant models currently lack
due to the high diversity and complexity of plant morphologies.
Throughout the discussion, there was a recurring theme: the purpose of the model
should drive its design. For instance, determining a person’s eye color is more efficiently
done through observation than genetic analysis – a metaphor for focusing modeling efforts
on efficient, goal-aligned representations. Similarly, there’s a risk in over-parameterizing
models, leading to poor generalization, or under-parameterizing, resulting in loss of essential
structure.
Ultimately, effective plant topology modeling must balance generative and discriminative
approaches, provide biologically grounded constraints, and respect the discrete-continuous
duality of natural structures. The goal is not just to simulate growth but to create meaningful,
applicable models that align with real-world use cases such as agriculture, ecology, and
evolutionary biology.

L. Neschen, B. Egger, A. Kortylewski, W. Smith, and S. Wuhrer

4.2

109

Exploring problems with infinite data

Timotei Ardelean (Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, DE)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Timotei Ardelean

In order to explore the interplay between data, compute, and algorithms, it was proposed
to analyze our current methods and training methodologies on constrained, well-defined
tasks where perfect training data can be easily generated. By generating synthetic data
without restrictions, the effect of scaling w.r.t to data and training time could more easily
be disentangled, and algorithmic limitations could be identified. The discussions produced
several suggestions of Computer Vision problems where shortcomings of the current models
could be investigated, including maze solving, the n-queens puzzle, and Sudoku (as inspired by
the previous talk of this seminar: Believe Propagation over Spatial Domains with Generative
Models). A very simple example we considered is Conway’s Game of Life, which we analyzed
with a quick hands-on experiment, by training a model to predict the update rule of the
game. The model quickly learned the rules of the game using synthetic randomly generated
boards, supervised by the true update rule. We also tested for generalization by excluding
certain patterns from training. For the simple cases tested, the model was able to generalize
to these unseen patterns, suggesting the network learns more than a simple look-up table
operation.

4.3

Benchmarking Monocular Reconstruction Discussion

James Gardner (University of York, GB)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© James Gardner

The Limitations of Current Benchmarking
It was noted that existing metrics, especially for generative tasks like single-view 3D reconstruction, are fundamentally flawed. An analogy was drawn to image compression, where
metrics such as PSNR failed to capture perceptual artifacts, this led to the development of new
perceptual metrics, which themselves became targets for optimization, not always resulting in
genuinely better qualitative outcomes. A similar pattern is evident in LLM evaluation, where
comprehensive benchmark suites are still critiqued for fostering optimization towards specific
metrics over broader user satisfaction. This phenomenon, often described by Goodhart’s
Law – where a metric ceases to be effective once it becomes a target – is a significant point
of concern. Consequently, reviewers often find it necessary to look beyond numerical scores,
emphasizing qualitative aspects and the soundness of the proposed methods.
Proposed Directions for Better Benchmarks
Several approaches for enhancing benchmarks were put forward:
Focus on Failure Modes and Use Cases: It was proposed that new metrics should not
be designed merely to show a method’s superiority, but should instead arise from an
understanding of how and why current methods fail. If a particular artifact, such as
object interpenetration, is identified as problematic, metrics should be formulated to quantify
it. This, however, introduces complexities, including the definition of object separability (e.g.,

25202

110

25202 – Generative Models for 3D Vision

determining if cushions are distinct from a sofa). The specific application or use case was
highlighted as critically important, metrics must align with the intended outcome, whether
for applications like 3D printing (where plausibility might be prioritized over exact scale) or
interactive scene manipulation (where object decomposition is vital).
Plausibility and Perceptual Evaluation: For ill-posed problems that involve substantial
hallucination or completion, the plausibility of the generated 3D geometry or novel views is
of paramount importance. Proposals included:
More extensive user studies.
The leveraging of other sophisticated models, such as Video Models or Vision-Language
Models (VLMs), to evaluate the consistency and “common sense” of reconstructed scenes
(e.g., how objects might interact or react to physical phenomena like an earthquake). The
underlying principle is that if novel views are plausible and internally consistent, the
geometry might be deemed adequate for many applications, even if precise geometric
accuracy remains elusive. Embracing Ambiguity and Distributions: Given that many 3D
vision tasks are ill-posed and possess multiple valid solutions (e.g., completing an occluded
part of an object), it was argued that models should predict a distribution of potential
solutions. Evaluation methodologies would then need to assess the likelihood of the
ground truth under this predicted distribution. This approach necessitates considerably
larger and more varied test datasets to adequately probe ambiguous scenarios.
Identifying the “Next Frontier”: It was stated that effective benchmarks should delineate
the “next significant problem.” When current methodologies begin to saturate existing
benchmarks, this is considered a signal to identify new, more demanding tasks that will cause
the performance of existing state-of-the-art methods to decline, thereby stimulating further
advancements.
Contentious Metrics and Community Influence
The discussion also briefly addressed alternative, non-traditional indicators of a method’s
utility, such as the number of GitHub stars. It was argued by some that this reflects
real-world adoption, the quality of the accompanying code, and overall impact. However,
strong counter arguments were presented, noting that such indicators lack scientific rigor,
can be disproportionately influenced by “hype,” may not accurately reflect true scientific
merit or superior performance (particularly for less mainstream research areas), and could
disadvantage robust methods that have less polished codebases or are not aligned with
current popular trends.
In summary, there was an agreement that current benchmarking practices within 3D
vision are insufficient. The proposed way forward involves the development of metrics that
are more intimately aligned with specific use cases, effectively capture perceptual plausibility,
appropriately account for the inherent ambiguity present in many 3D tasks, and are derived
from an understanding of current model limitations rather than focusing on simple numerical
rankings. The intrinsic difficulty is in the creation of metrics that are simultaneously robust,
meaningful, and resistant to superficial optimization.

L. Neschen, B. Egger, A. Kortylewski, W. Smith, and S. Wuhrer

4.4

111

Capturing useful datasets for 3D vision tasks

Samara Ghrer (University of Grenoble, FR)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Samara Ghrer

Dataset propositions and ideas to be collaboratively captured:
4D human motion dataset with a large number of markers to capture motions that cannot
be captured by cameras, or by other motion capture datasets with lower number of
markers that lead to smoothed motions.
Large volumetric dataset of humans in motion with multi-people, self and object interactions.
Multi view face dataset in both indoor and outdoor lighting conditions with marker
alignment (invisible markers on the back of the head, or using sunscreen).
MRI + volumetric dynamic or multi-pose captures.
Large and diverse dataset that is captured across different labs with an agreed setting.
DagMark: A 3D vision (different tasks) benchmarking challenge where people can
submit datasets, evaluation schemes and metrics. Once submitted, the benchmarks are
automatically compared to existing ones and added to the collection. This challenge can
be hosted on a website for worldwide contributions.
Raised questions:
Is it possible to simultaneously capture MRI scans and real-life images using a combination
of MRI scanners and cameras?
Plausibility vs accuracy: Can we design a dataset that supports both ends?

4.5

Believe Propagation over Spatial Domains with Generative Models

Jan Eric Lenssen (MPI für Informatik – Saarbrücken, DE)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Jan Eric Lenssen
Joint work of Christopher Wewer, Bartlomiej Pogodzinski, Bernt Schiele, Jan Eric Lenssen
Main reference Christopher Wewer, Bartlomiej Pogodzinski, Bernt Schiele, Jan Eric Lenssen: “Spatial Reasoning
with Denoising Models”, in Proc. of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
2025.
URL https://geometric-rl.mpi-inf.mpg.de/srm/
License

Video and Multi-View Generation Models are taking over (3D) Computer Vision. We are
expecting them to model extremely complex, high-dimensional distributions. However, in
many cases they spectacularly fail and collapse to hallucinations. I’d like to pose the question:
is scaling up data and compute the best or only solution to solve this problem? And is it a
good idea to keep up with exponential growth of distribution complexity? Bayesian inference
came up with intelligent ways to simplify distribution complexity in the past. It might be a
good time to explore similar ideas for continuous generative models in spatial domains. In
this talk, I would introduce these discussion points and present some preliminary results we
obtained in recent investigations.

25202

112

25202 – Generative Models for 3D Vision

4.6

Hard problems in computer vision and the necessity of modeling

Yaniv Wolf (Technion – Haifa, IL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Yaniv Wolf

The group discussed what defines a “hard problem” in computer vision and how models
should be designed to solve them. While some problems benefit from large-scale “big hammer”
solutions, others require specialized tools. In that context, neural networks were recognized
as convenient, but also problematic in post-data regimes due to heavy data dependence,
limited explainability, and robustness issues.
The discussion focused on two main issues:
The first issue discussed was whether a “hard problem” is defined by the amount of data
required to train a model to solve it, and whether any problem can be solved without
the need for generalization if enough data is available. Several examples were presented,
such as training NeRFs with synthetic/real data, learning geometric consistency in video
models, understanding grammar in LLMs, and solving complex puzzles such as 3D mazes
and Sudoku.
The second issue discussed was the impact of explainability in models. Some participants
argued that explainability is essential for humans, as the designers of these models, to
understand what they are designing. Others believed that introducing parametric models
might negatively affect model performance. An example discussed was self-driving cars,
and whether they should adhere strictly to theoretical traffic laws or learn from actual
human driving behavior.
Finally, caution was expressed regarding overly complex solutions (“big hammers”) that
risk memorization instead of genuine generalization.

L. Neschen, B. Egger, A. Kortylewski, W. Smith, and S. Wuhrer

113

Participants
Andreea Ardelean
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, DE
Timotei Ardelean
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, DE
Thabo Beeler
Google Research – Zürich, CH
Timo Bolkart
Google Research – Zürich, CH
Neill Campbell
University of Bath, GB
Rishabh Dabral
MPI für Informatik –
Saarbrücken, DE
Olaf Dünkel
MPI für Informatik –
Saarbrücken, DE
Bernhard Egger
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, DE

James Gardner
University of York, GB
Samara Ghrer
University of Grenoble, FR
Marilyn Keller
MPI für Intelligente Systeme –
Tübingen, DE
Ron Kimmel
Technion – Haifa, IL
Tobias Kirschstein
TU München – Garching, DE
Adam Kortylewski
Universität Freiburg, DE & MPI
für Informatik – Saarbrücken, DE
Jan Eric Lenssen
MPI für Informatik –
Saarbrücken, DE
Ruoshi Liu
Columbia University –
New York, US

Laura Neschen
INRIA Rhône-Alpes, FR
Or Patashnik
Tel Aviv University, IL
Ryan Po
Stanford University, US
Shunsuke Saito
Codec Avatars Lab –
Pittsburgh, US
William Smith
University of York, GB
Christian Theobalt
MPI für Informatik –
Saarbrücken, DE
Gül Varol
ENPC – Marne-la-Vallée, FR
Yaniv Wolf
Technion – Haifa, IL
Stefanie Wuhrer
INRIA – Grenoble, FR

25202

Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25211

The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and
Approximability
Manuel Bodirsky∗1 , Venkatesan Guruswami∗2 , Dániel Marx∗3 ,
Stanislav Živný∗4 , and Žaneta Semanišinová†5
1
2
3
4
5

TU Dresden, DE. manuel.bodirsky@tu-dresden.de
University of California – Berkeley, US. venkatg@berkeley.edu
CISPA – Saarbrücken, DE. marx@cispa.de
University of Oxford, GB. standa.zivny@cs.ox.ac.uk
TU Dresden, DE. zaneta.semanisinova@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
Constraint satisfaction has always played a central role in computational complexity theory;
appropriate versions of CSPs are classical complete problems for most standard complexity
classes. CSPs constitute a very rich and yet sufficiently manageable class of problems to give a
good perspective on general computational phenomena. For instance, they help to understand
which mathematical properties make a computational problem tractable (in a wide sense, e.g.,
polynomial-time solvable, non-trivially approximable, etc.). One of the most striking features of
this research direction is the variety of different branches of mathematics (including algebra and
logic, combinatorics and graph theory, probability theory and mathematical programming, and
most recently topology) that are used to achieve deep insights in the study of the CSP, and this
seminar will contribute towards further synergy in the area. In the last 20 years, research activity
in this area has significantly intensified and hugely impressive progress was made. The Dagstuhl
Seminar 25211 “The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability” was
aimed at bringing together researchers using all the different techniques in the study of the CSP
so that they can share their insights obtained during the past four years. This report documents
the material presented during the course of the seminar.
Seminar May 18–23, 2025 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/25211
2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Problems, reductions and completeness
Keywords and phrases computational complexity, constraint satisfaction problem, hardness of
approximation, parameterized complexity, semidefinite programming
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.5.114

1

Executive summary

Manuel Bodirsky (TU Dresden, DE)
Venkatesan Guruswami (University of California – Berkeley, US)
Dániel Marx (CISPA – Saarbrücken, DE)
Stanislav Živný (University of Oxford, GB)
The constraint satisfaction problem, or CSP in short, provides a unifying framework in which
it is possible to express, in a natural way, a wide variety of computational problems dealing
with mappings and assignments, including satisfiability, graph colorability, and systems of
equations. The CSP framework originated over 40 years ago independently in artificial
∗
†

Editor / Organizer
Editorial Assistant / Collector

Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15, Issue 5, pp.
114–133
Editors: Manuel Bodirsky, Venkatesan Guruswami, Dániel Marx, Stanislav Živný, and Žaneta Semanišinová
Dagstuhl Reports
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany

M. Bodirsky, V. Guruswami, D. Marx, S. Živný, and Ž. Semanišinová

115

intelligence, database theory, and graph theory, under three different guises, and it was
realised only in the late 1990s that these are in fact different faces of the same fundamental
problem. Nowadays, the CSP is extensively used in theoretical computer science, being a
mathematical object with very rich structure that provides an excellent laboratory both for
classification methods and for algorithmic techniques, while in AI and more applied areas
of computer science this framework is widely regarded as a versatile and efficient way of
modelling and solving a variety of real-world problems, such as planning and scheduling,
software verification and natural language comprehension, to name just a few. An instance
of CSP consists of a set of variables, a set of values for the variables, and a set of constraints
that restrict the combinations of values that certain subsets of variables may take. Given
such an instance, the possible questions include (a) deciding whether there is an assignment
of values to the variables so that every constraint is satisfied, or optimising such assignments
in various ways; e.g., (b) finding an assignment satisfying as many constraints as possible,
or (c) finding an assignment that violates as few constraints as possible. There are many
important modifications and extensions of this basic framework, e.g., those that deal with
counting assignments or involve soft or global constraints.
Constraint satisfaction has always played a central role in computational complexity
theory; appropriate versions of CSPs are classical complete problems for most standard
complexity classes. CSPs constitute a very rich and yet sufficiently manageable class of
problems to give a good perspective on general computational phenomena. For instance, they
help to understand which mathematical properties make a computational problem tractable
(in a wide sense, e.g. polynomial-time solvable or non-trivially approximable, fixed-parameter
tractable or definable in a weak logic). One of the most striking features of this research
direction is the variety of different branches of mathematics (including universal algebra and
logic, combinatorics and graph theory, probability theory and mathematical programming,
and most recently topology) that are used to achieve deep insights in the study of the CSP,
and the proposed seminar will contribute towards further synergy in the area.
After about 20 years of intense research activity and hugely impressive progress, the
culmination of the algebraic-approach to fixed-template CSPs was the resolution of the
Feder-Vardi conjecture independently by Bulatov and Zhuk in 2017. While some fundamental
questions (such as a fine-grained understanding of tractable CSPs) remain open, new research
directions on generalizations of CSPs started emerging. One such direction is the fixedtemplate Min-CSP studied with respect to fixed-parameter tractability. Another is the
fixed-template promise CSP (PCSP), which is motivated by the goal to better understand
the approximability of problems with perfect completeness. PCSPs are a vast generalization
of CSPs. A prime and well-known example is the approximate graph coloring problem:
distinguish k-colorable graphs from graphs that are not even c-colorable, for some fixed c ≥ k.
The main topic of this Dagstuhl Seminar is PCSPs, a highly ambitious research directions
with intriguing connections to both old open problems (such the approximate graph coloring
problem) and new research directions (such as new algorithms for CSPs) and its connections
to gems of computational complexity (such as Håstad’s optimal inapproximability results)
and fixed-parameter tractability of Min-CSPs, which has recently seen some remarkable
progress.
The recent flurry of activity on the topic of the seminar is witnessed by six previous
Dagstuhl Seminars, titled “Complexity of constraints” (06401) and “The CSP: complexity and
approximability” (09441, 12541, 15301, 18231, 22201), that were held in 2006, 2009, 2012, 2015,
2018, and 2022, respectively. This seminar was a follow-up to the 2009, 2012, 2015, 2018, and
2022 seminars. Indeed, the exchange of ideas at the 2009, 2012, 2015, 2018, and 2022 seminars

25211

116

25211 – The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability

has led to ambitious new research projects and to establishing regular communication channels.
There is clearly the potential for further systematic interaction that will keep on crossfertilising the areas and opening new research directions. The 2025 seminar brought together
47 researchers from different highly advanced areas of constraint satisfaction and involved
many specialists who use universal-algebraic, combinatorial, geometric, and probabilistic
techniques to study CSP-related algorithmic problems. The participants presented, in 24
talks and 2 tutorial series, their recent results on a number of important questions concerning
the topic of the seminar. One particular feature of this seminar is a significant increase in the
number of talks involving multiple subareas and approaches within its research direction – a
definite sign of the growing synergy, which is one of the main goals of this series of seminars.
Concluding remarks and future plans. The seminar was well received as witnessed by the
very high rate of accepted invitations (many more researchers would have liked to participate,
but we were unable to accommodate them) and the great degree of involvement by the
participants. Because of a multitude of impressive results reported during the seminar and
active discussions between researchers with different expertise areas, the organisers regard this
seminar as a great success. With steadily increasing interactions between such researchers, we
foresee another seminar focusing on the interplay between different approaches to studying
the complexity and approximability of the CSP. Finally, the organisers wish to express their
gratitude to the Scientific Directors of the Dagstuhl Centre for their support of the seminar.

Description of the topics of the seminar
Following the two independent proofs of the finite-domain CSP dichotomy in 2017 by Bulatov
and Zhuk, the research in the area of constraint satisfaction problems focuses on various
generalizations of the CSP framework and on uniformizing the approaches to these variants
of CSPs. We list the concrete topics of the talks in the seminar below.

Uniform algorithms for finite-domain CSPs
On the topic of understanding better the polynomial-time algorithms for finite-domain CSPs
with the hope of getting a uniform algorithm, Dmitriy Zhuk gave an overview talk. He
discussed the algorithms for finite-domain CSPs arising from the combination of consistency
checking with basic linear programming and affine integer programming, and their singleton
variants. He also provided polymorphism conditions for these algorithms to be correct, some
of which were not known before.

Infinite-domain CSPs
One of the most natural and intensely studied generalizations of finite-domain CSPs are CSPs
with infinite-domain ω-categorical templates. The workshop contained a 2-hour tutorial on
such CSPs given by Antoine Mottet.
In the first part, Mottet presented a template-free approach, showing the similarity
between the finite- and infinite-domain CSPs.
In the second part, he outlined more recent results in the area, in particular the theory
of smooth approximations and the connections of infinite-domain CSPs to promise CSPs.
There were 5 contributed talks on recent results in the area of infinite-domain CSPs and
related topics.

M. Bodirsky, V. Guruswami, D. Marx, S. Živný, and Ž. Semanišinová

117

Jakub Rydval talked about fundamental questions in infinite-domain constraint satisfaction such as the structural assumptions that can be imposed on the templates in the
scope of the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture.
Michał Wrona gave a talk about the complexity of infinite-domain CSPs with bounded
strict width in the scope of Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture.
Johanna Brunar presented a result on pseudo loops in smooth digraphs.
Michael Pinsker talked about a necessary polymorphism condition for tractability of
CSPs that applies to a large class of finite and ω-categorical templates.
Maximilian Hadek gave a talk about the connection between König’s tree lemma and
Ramsey’s theorem, two important tools for infinite-domain CSPs.

Promise CSPs
Following the trend of the previous workshops, the topic of promise CSPs, which can be
viewed as a framework for qualitative approximation in CSPs, was addressed in 3 contributed
talks and touched in several more talks.
Andrei Krokhin presented a proof that PCSP(LO2 , LO3 ) is NP-hard.
Santiago Guzmán Pro presented his result showing that if the tractability of a finitetemplate PCSP is explained by a GMSNP sandwich, then it is also explained by a finite
sandwich.
Per Austrin introduced the concept of usefulness for PCSPs, focusing on Boolean PCSPs.

Topological methods for CSPs and PCSPs
Continuing the newly emerging topological approach to classifying complexity of CSPs and
PCSPs, there were 2 contributed talks concerning this topic.
Jakub Opršal gave an introduction to homomorphism complexes and their use in classifying
the complexity of CSPs.
Uli Wagner presented a topological proof that it is NP-hard to distinguish between
graphs that are G-colorable and graphs that are not even 4-colorable, where G is any
non-bipartite, 4-colorable graph.

Approximability of CSPs
Another prominent topic of the seminar is the quantitative approximability of CSPs, sometimes combined with the setting of promise CSPs to obtain, in some sense, both quantitative
and qualitative approximation results. The seminar started with a 3-hour tutorial given by
Amey Bhangale.
In the first part, he presented approximation algorithms and known results on hardness
of approximation.
The second part of the tutorial was focused on Raghavendra’s characterization of the
approximability of almost satisfiable Max-CSPs.
In the third part, he discussed the recent work on the approximability of satisfiable CSPs
including the hybrid algorithm that combines SDP rounding and Gaussian elimination
algorithms.
There were 8 contributed talks devoted to this topic:
Silvia Butti presented a result on inapproximability of promise equations over finite
groups.
Libor Barto talked about the framework of valued PCSPs and reduction between them
based on the minor condition problem.

25211

118

25211 – The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability

Konstantin Makarychev gave a talk on approximability of phylogenetic CSPs.
George Osipov presented results on optimal approximation factors for Boolean MinCSPs.
Euiwoong Lee presented results on approximability of MinCSPs on complete instances.
Tamio-Vesa Nakajima introduced a new approximation framework called maxPCSPs and
presented some complexity results for such problems.
Santhoshini Velusamy talked about approximability of constraint satisfaction problems
in the streaming model.
Anuj Dawar gave a talk about undefinability of approximation in the sense that hardness
is captured by undefinability in FPC.

Other variants of CSPs
There were 3 contributed talks concerning other variants of CSPs than those mentioned
above.
Yury Makarychev presented results on algorithms for CSPs with ML oracle advice.
Barnaby Martin talked about about a new concept of restricted CSPs on digraphs and a
connection to CSPs of digraphs with a restricted class of instances.
Žaneta Semanišinová gave a talk on valued CSPs and their connection with resilience
problems from database theory.

Applications
Two speakers gave talks on applications of CSPs to other areas in combinatorics and coding
theory.
Pravesh Kothari gave a talk on using a method based on k-XOR CSPs to resolve extremal
combinatorial problems, including advances on the hypergraph Moore bound, lower
bounds for locally decodable and correctable codes, and other applications.
Xuandi Ren presented results on inapproximability for the problems of Nearest Code
Word and Minimum Distance.

M. Bodirsky, V. Guruswami, D. Marx, S. Živný, and Ž. Semanišinová

2

119

Table of Contents

Executive summary
Manuel Bodirsky, Venkatesan Guruswami, Dániel Marx, and Stanislav Živný . . . 114
Overview of Talks
On the Usefulness of Promises
Per Austrin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
The Rise of Plurimorphisms: Algebraic Approach to Approximation
Libor Barto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
On Approximability of Satisfiable Max-P-CSPs
Amey Bhangale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
The sorrows of a smooth digraph: lifting finite to infinite
Johanna Brunar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
Optimal Inapproximability of Promise Equations over Finite Groups
Silvia Butti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
Undefinability of Approximations
Anuj Dawar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
GMSNP and finite-template PCSPs
Santiago Guzmán Pro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
Kőnig = Ramsey
Maximilian Hadek . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
Spectral Refutations and Their Applications to Algorithms and Combinatorics
Pravesh K. Kothari . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
PCSP(LO2 ,LO3 ) is NP-hard
Andrei Krokhin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Min-CSPs on Complete Instances
Euiwoong Lee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Phylogenetic CSPs are Approximation Resistant
Konstantin Makarychev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
Constraint Satisfaction Problems with Advice
Yury Makarychev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
Restricted CSPs and H-free Digraph Algorithmics
Barnaby Martin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Constraint satisfaction with orbit-finite constraint languages
Antoine Mottet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
An invitation to maxPCSP
Tamio-Vesa Nakajima . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
An introduction to homomorphism complexes (in the context of CSPs)
Jakub Opršal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
Optimal FPT-Approximation Factors for some CSPs
George Osipov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128

25211

120

25211 – The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability

Binary symmetries of tractable non-rigid structures
Michael Pinsker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
PCP-free Inapproximability of Nearest Codeword and Minimum Distance
Xuandi Ren . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
Fundamental Questions in Modern Infinite-Domain Constraint Satisfaction
Jakub Rydval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
Valued CSPs and Resilience in Database Theory
Žaneta Semanišinová . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
Approximability of Constraint Satisfaction Problems in the Streaming Setting
Santhoshini Velusamy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
Topology and Hardness of 4-Coloring G-colorable graphs
Uli Wagner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
On Bounded Strict Width and NL over Homogeneous Structures with Finite Duality
Michal Wrona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
A characterization of singleton algorithms for the Constraint Satisfaction Problem
Dmitriy Zhuk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133

M. Bodirsky, V. Guruswami, D. Marx, S. Živný, and Ž. Semanišinová

3

Overview of Talks

3.1

On the Usefulness of Promises

121

Per Austrin (KTH Royal Institute of Technology - Stockholm, SE)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Per Austrin
Joint work of Per Austrin, Johan Håstad, Njörn Martinsson
License

We introduce the concept of usefulness for PCSPs. A promise A is said to be useful if
PCSP(A,B) is tractable for some non-trivial B. We then initiate investigations of this notion,
focusing on the setting of folded Boolean PCSPs. This exploration leads us to revisit and
generalize the “(2+eps)-Sat” problem.
While we do not obtain complete characterizations, we are able to characterize all but
a tiny fraction of promises. Perhaps surprisingly, this is achieved using existing general
algorithms and hardness results, and the main technical challenge is to prove that those
results are applicable.
Along the way we encounter a number of curious concrete Boolean PCSPs which can
serve as challenges for pushing existing algorithms and hardness criteria further.

3.2

The Rise of Plurimorphisms: Algebraic Approach to Approximation

Libor Barto (Charles University - Prague, CZ)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Libor Barto
Joint work of Libor Barto, Silvia Butti, Alexandr Kazda, Caterina Viola, Stanislav Zivný
Main reference Libor Barto, Silvia Butti, Alexandr Kazda, Caterina Viola, Stanislav Zivný: “Algebraic Approach to
Approximation”, in Proc. of the 39th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science,
LICS 2024, Tallinn, Estonia, July 8-11, 2024, pp. 10:1–10:14, ACM, 2024.
URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3661814.3662076
License

Following the success of the so-called algebraic approach to the study of decision constraint
satisfaction problems (CSPs), exact optimization of valued CSPs, and most recently promise
CSPs, we propose an algebraic framework for valued promise CSPs.
To every valued promise CSP we associate an algebraic object, its so-called valued minion.
Our main result shows that the existence of a homomorphism between the associated valued
minions implies a polynomial-time reduction between the original CSPs. We also show that
this general reduction theorem includes important inapproximability results, for instance,
the inapproximability of almost solvable systems of linear equations beyond the random
assignment threshold.

25211

122

25211 – The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability

3.3

On Approximability of Satisfiable Max-P-CSPs

Amey Bhangale (University of California - Riverside, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Amey Bhangale
Joint work of Amey Bhangale, Subhash Khot, Dor Minzer, Yang P. Liu
Main reference Amey Bhangale, Subhash Khot, Dor Minzer: “On Approximability of Satisfiable k-CSPs: V”, in
Proc. of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2025, Prague, Czechia,
June 23-27, 2025, pp. 62–71, ACM, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3717823.3718127
License

This tutorial explores past and recent advances in understanding the approximability of
Max-CSPs. In the first tutorial, I will discuss the approximation algorithms and the known
hardness of approximation results. In the second tutorial, I will go over Raghavendra’s
characterization of the approximability of almost satisfiable Max-CSPs. Finally, in the last
tutorial, I will discuss the recent work on the approximability of satisfiable CSPs including
the hybrid algorithm that combines SDP rounding and Gaussian elimination algorithms in
a non-trivial way. Inverse theorems are the theorem statements that find a structure on
correlated functions. I will discuss the statement of the inverse theorems for 3-ary correlations
and how to use them in the analysis of the hybrid algorithm.

3.4

The sorrows of a smooth digraph: lifting finite to infinite

Johanna Brunar (TU Wien, AT)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Johanna Brunar
Main reference Johanna Brunar, Marcin Kozik, Tomás Nagy, Michael Pinsker: “The sorrows of a smooth digraph:
the first hardness criterion for infinite directed graph-colouring problems”, CoRR,
Vol. abs/2501.17060, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2501.17060
License

As powerful as algebraic methods are for finite-domain CSPs, they exhibit challenges to be
generalised for infinite, countably categorical structures. Rather than lifting the algebraic
notions tailored for finite algebras, it is often easier to extend combinatorial constructions
to the infinite setting. The broader goal, therefore, is to recast known finite structural
dichotomies as combinatorial proofs that can then be lifted to the countably categorical case.
Pursuing this programme, we overcome previous obstacles to lifting structural results for
digraphs in this context from the finite to the omega-categorical realm – the strongest lifting
results hitherto not going beyond a generalisation of the Hell-Nešetřil theorem for undirected
graphs.

M. Bodirsky, V. Guruswami, D. Marx, S. Živný, and Ž. Semanišinová

3.5

123

Optimal Inapproximability of Promise Equations over Finite Groups

Silvia Butti (University of Oxford, GB)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Silvia Butti
Joint work of Silvia Butti, Alberto Larrauri, Stanislav Zivný
Main reference Silvia Butti, Alberto Larrauri, Stanislav Zivný: “Optimal Inapproximability of Promise Equations
over Finite Groups”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2411.01630, 2024.
URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2411.01630
License

A celebrated result of Håstad established that, for any constant ε > 0, it is NP-hard to find an
assignment satisfying a (1/|G| + ε)-fraction of the constraints of a given 3-LIN instance over
an Abelian group G even if one is promised that an assignment satisfying a (1 − ε)-fraction of
the constraints exists. Engebretsen, Holmerin, and Russell showed the same result for 3-LIN
instances over any finite (not necessarily Abelian) group. In other words, for almost-satisfiable
instances of 3-LIN the random assignment achieves an optimal approximation guarantee. We
prove that the random assignment algorithm is still best possible under a stronger promise
that the 3-LIN instance is almost satisfiable over an arbitrarily more restrictive group.

3.6

Undefinability of Approximations

Anuj Dawar (University of Cambridge, GB)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Anuj Dawar
Joint work of Anuj Dawar, Bálint Molnár
Main reference Anuj Dawar, Bálint Molnár: “Undefinability of Approximation of 2-To-2 Games”, in Proc. of the
33rd EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic, CSL 2025, February 10-14, 2025,
Amsterdam, Netherlands, LIPIcs, Vol. 326, pp. 16:1–16:21, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
Informatik, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.CSL.2025.16
License

In this talk, I review work on the hardness of defining the approximation of optimization
problems in a logic such as fixed-point logic with counting (FPC), which corresponds to a
natural symmetric fragment of P. Decision problems in FPC include those solvable by linear
and semidefinite programming, yet we are able to show unconditional lower bounds against
it. In recent work with Bálint Molnár, we establish the undefinability of approximation of
2-to-2 games by showing that no FPC class separates the satisfiable instances from those
that are no more than epsilon-satisfiable. This has significant implications for promise graph
colouring problems

3.7

GMSNP and finite-template PCSPs

Santiago Guzmán Pro (TU Dresden, DE)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Santiago Guzmán Pro
Main reference Santiago Guzmán-Pro: “GMSNP and Finite Structures”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2406.13529, 2024.
URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2406.13529
License

CSPs expressible in guarded monotone strict NP (GMSNP) remain one of the most prominent
open cases within the scope of the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture about infinite-domain CSPs.
A conjecture of Brakensiek and Guruswami about promise CSPs implies that if G is an

25211

124

25211 – The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability

infinite non-bipartite graph with finite chromatic number, then CSP(G) is NP-hard. In this
talk we are interested in the interplay between CSPs expressible in GMSNP and promise
CSPs. We will we see that for every template S of a CSP expressible in GMSNP, there is a
finite-domain “approximation” C of its CSP. Using this approximation we show the following.
1) If G is a non-bipartite graph with finite chromatic number whose CSP is in GMSNP, then
CSP(G) is NP-complete.
2) If the tractability of a finite-template PCSP is explained by a GMSNP sandwich, then it
is also explained by a finite sandwich.

3.8

Kőnig = Ramsey

Maximilian Hadek (Charles University - Prague, CZ)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Maximilian Hadek

Ramsey’s theorem and Kőnig’s tree lemma are two famous combinatorial results from the
early 20th century, the former talks about colouring subsets of finite sets, while the latter is
more akin to a choice principle, allowing us to find infinite paths within trees. At first glance
they seem unrelated, though they share one moral similarity: both establish order within
seemingly chaotic, infinite objects. We make this precise, by proving that a generalized
Kőnigs lemma holds on a category if and only if it has the Ramsey property.

3.9

Spectral Refutations and Their Applications to Algorithms and
Combinatorics

Pravesh K. Kothari (Princeton University, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Pravesh K. Kothari

I will present a method to reduce extremal combinatorial problems to establishing the
unsatisfiability of k-sparse linear equations mod 2 (aka k-XOR CSP) with a limited amount
of randomness. This latter task is then accomplished by bounding the spectral norm of
certain “Kikuchi” matrices built from the k-XOR formulas. In these talks, I will discuss a
couple of applications of this method from the following list.
1. Proving hypergraph Moore bound (Feige’s 2008 conjecture) – the optimal trade-off
between the number of equations in a system of k-sparse linear equations modulo 2 and
the size of the smallest linear dependent subset. This theorem generalizes the famous
irregular Moore bound of Alon, Hoory and Linial (2002) for graphs (equivalently, 2-sparse
linear equations mod 2).
2. Proving a cubic lower bound on 3-query locally decodable codes (LDCs), improving on a
quadratic lower bound of Kerenedis and de Wolf (2004) and its generalization to q-query
locally decodable codes for all odd q,
3. Proving an exponential lower bound on linear 3-query locally correctable codes (LCCs).
This result establishes a sharp separation between 3-query LCCs and 3-query LDCs that
are known to admit a construction with a sub-exponential length. It is also the first result
to obtain any super-polynomial lower bound for >2-query local codes.

M. Bodirsky, V. Guruswami, D. Marx, S. Živný, and Ž. Semanišinová

125

Time permitting, I may also discuss applications to strengthening Szemeredi’s theorem,
which asks for establishing the minimal size of a random subset of integers S such that every
dense subset of integers contains a 3-term arithmetic progression with a common difference
from S, and the resolution of Hamada’s 1970 conjecture on the algebraic rank of binary
4-designs.

3.10

PCSP(LO2 ,LO3 ) is NP-hard

Andrei Krokhin (Durham University, GB)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Andrei Krokhin
Joint work of Andrei Krokhin, Danny Vagnozzi
License

We prove NP-hardness of a PCSP with a specific small template, which concerns linearly
ordered colourings of 3-uniform hypergraphs. This PCSP was often mentioned as a specific
obstacle in the project of classifying the complexity of “approximate 1-in-3-SAT” problems.
Our proof uses a well-known sufficient condition for NP-hardness of PCSPs, but exhibits a
new interesting behaviour of polymorphisms.

3.11

Min-CSPs on Complete Instances

Euiwoong Lee (University of Michigan - Ann Arbor, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Euiwoong Lee
Joint work of Aditya Anand, Euiwoong Lee, Jason Li, Yaowei Long, Thatchaphol Saranurak
Main reference Aditya Anand, Euiwoong Lee, Jason Li, Yaowei Long, Thatchaphol Saranurak: “Unbreakable
Decomposition in Close-to-Linear Time”, in Proc. of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2025, New Orleans, LA, USA, January 12-15, 2025, pp. 1464–1493,
SIAM, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.1137/1.9781611978322.46
License

Given a fixed arity k ≥ 2, Min-k-CSP on complete instances is the problem whose input
consists of a set of n variables
V and one (nontrivial) constraint for every k-subset of

variables (so there are nk constraints), and the goal is to find an assignment that minimizes
the number of unsatisfied constraints. Unlike Max-k-CSP that admits a PTAS on more
general dense or expanding instances, the approximability of Min-k-CSP has not been well
understood. Moreover, for some CSPs including Min-k-SAT, there is an approximationpreserving reduction from general instances to dense and expanding instances, leaving
complete instances as a unique family that may admit new algorithmic techniques.
In this paper, we initiate the systematic study of Min-CSPs on complete instances.
First, we present an O(1)-approximation algorithm for Min-2-SAT on complete instances,
the minimization version of Max-2-SAT. Since O(1)-approximation on dense or expanding
instances refutes the Unique Games Conjecture, it shows a strict separation between complete
and dense/expanding instances.
Then we study the decision versions of CSPs, whose goal is to find an assignment that
satisfies all constraints; an algorithm for the decision version is necessary for any nontrivial
approximation for the minimization objective. Our second main result is a quasi-polynomial
time algorithm for every Boolean k-CSP on complete instances, including Min-k-SAT. We
complement this result by giving additional algorithmic and hardness results for CSPs with
a larger alphabet, yielding a characterization of (arity, alphabet size) pairs that admit a
quasi-polynomial time algorithm on complete instances.
25211

126

25211 – The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability

3.12

Phylogenetic CSPs are Approximation Resistant

Konstantin Makarychev (Northwestern University - Evanston, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Konstantin Makarychev
Joint work of Vaggos Chatziafratis, Konstantin Makarychev
License

In this talk, I will introduce a class of constraint satisfaction problems known as Phylogenetic
Constraint Satisfaction Problems. We will consider specific examples from this class, including
MaxTriplets and MaxQuarters, which are motivated by applications in computational biology
and database theory. We will explore the notions of approximation resistance and biased
random assignment. Finally, we will examine the relationship between phylogenetic CSPs
and ordering CSPs and show that phylogenetic CSPs are approximation resistant building on
the seminal result of Guruswami, Håstad, Manokaran, Raghavendra, and Charikar (2011).

3.13

Constraint Satisfaction Problems with Advice

Yury Makarychev (TTIC - Chicago, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Yury Makarychev
Joint work of Suprovat Ghoshal, Konstantin Makarychev, Yury Makarychev
Main reference Suprovat Ghoshal, Konstantin Makarychev, Yury Makarychev: “Constraint Satisfaction Problems
with Advice”, in Proc. of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA
2025, New Orleans, LA, USA, January 12-15, 2025, pp. 1202–1221, SIAM, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.1137/1.9781611978322.36
License

We initiate the study of algorithms for constraint satisfaction problems with ML oracle
advice. We introduce two models of advice and then design approximation algorithms for
Max Cut, Max 2-Lin, and Max 3-Lin in these models. In particular, we show the following.
1. For Max-Cut and Max 2-Lin, we design an algorithm that yields a near-optimal
solution when the average degree is larger than a threshold degree, which only depends on
the amount of advice and is independent of the instance size. We also give an algorithm for
nearly satisfiable Max 3-Lin instances with quantitatively similar guarantees.
2. Further, we provide impossibility results for algorithms in these models. In particular,
under standard complexity assumptions, we show that Max 3-Lin is still 1/2 + η hard to
approximate given access to advice, when there are no assumptions on the instance degree
distribution. Additionally, we also show that Max 4-Lin is 1/2 + η hard to approximate even
when the average degree of the instance is linear in the number of variables.
Based on joint work with Suprovat Ghoshal and Konstantin Makarychev.

M. Bodirsky, V. Guruswami, D. Marx, S. Živný, and Ž. Semanišinová

3.14

127

Restricted CSPs and H-free Digraph Algorithmics

Barnaby Martin (Durham University, GB)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Barnaby Martin
Joint work of Santiago Guzmán-Pro, Barnaby Martin
Main reference Santiago Guzmán-Pro, Barnaby Martin: “Restricted CSPs and F-Free Digraph Algorithmics”, in
Proc. of the 52nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP
2025, July 8-11, 2025, Aarhus, Denmark, LIPIcs, Vol. 334, pp. 158:1–158:21, Schloss Dagstuhl Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.ICALP.2025.158
License

In recent years, much attention has be placed on the complexity of graph homomorphism
problems when the input is restricted to Pk -(subgraph)-free graphs. We consider the directed
version of this research line, by addressing the question: is it true that digraph homomorphism
problems CSP(H) have a P versus NP-complete dichotomy when the input is restricted to
DPk -(subgraph)-free digraphs (where DPk is the directed path on k vertices)? We build on
the theory of constraint satisfaction problems to address this question.
Our first main results are a P versus NP-complete classification of CSPs when the input is
restricted to F-homomorphism-free digraphs, or restricted to CSP(H ′ ) for some finite digraph
H ′ . We then use the established connection to constraint satisfaction theory to show our third
main result (and partial answer to the question above): if CSP(H) is NP-complete, then there
is a positive integer N such that CSP(H) remains NP-hard even for DPN -(subgraph)-free
digraphs. Moreover, CSP(H) remains NP-hard for DPN -(subgraph)-free acyclic digraphs,
and becomes polynomial-time solvable for DPN −1 -(subgraph)-free acyclic digraphs.
Another contribution of this work is verifying the question above for digraphs on three
vertices and a family of smooth tournaments.

3.15

Constraint satisfaction with orbit-finite constraint languages

Antoine Mottet (TU Hamburg, DE)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Antoine Mottet

In this tutorial, I give an introduction to the type of problems that are studied in the
area of infinite-domain constraint satisfaction with omega-categorical templates. With a
template-free approach first, I show that the finite and infinite-domain CSPs are very similar
and that infinite-domain CSPs are easily motivated by certain coloring problems for graphs.
In a second part, I outline some of the more recent results concerning infinite-domains CSPs,
in particular the recent theory of smooth approximations, used to study questions of hardness
for infinite-domain CSPs, as well as some of my recent results showing how to think about
infinite-domain CSPs in terms of associated promise CSPs with finite templates.

25211

128

25211 – The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability

3.16

An invitation to maxPCSP

Tamio-Vesa Nakajima (University of Oxford, GB)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Tamio-Vesa Nakajima
Joint work of Tamio-Vesa Nakajima, Stanislav Zivný
Main reference Tamio-Vesa Nakajima, Stanislav Zivný: “Maximum Bipartite vs. Triangle-Free Subgraph”, in Proc.
of the 52nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2025,
July 8-11, 2025, Aarhus, Denmark, LIPIcs, Vol. 334, pp. 121:1–121:16, Schloss Dagstuhl Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.ICALP.2025.121
License

We present a new framework of approximation problems, combining quantitative and qualitative approximation. We explore several new tractability and hardness results within this
framework: maximum dicut vs. cut, maximum dicut vs. acyclic subgraph, maximum k vs. l
colouring, and maximum cut vs. triangle-free subgraph.
This is joint work with Standa Živný.

3.17

An introduction to homomorphism complexes (in the context of
CSPs)

Jakub Opršal (University of Birmingham, GB)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Jakub Opršal
Joint work of Sebastian Meyer, Jakub Opršal
Main reference Sebastian Meyer, Jakub Oprsal: “A topological proof of the Hell-Nešetřil dichotomy”, in Proc. of the
2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2025, New Orleans, LA, USA,
January 12-15, 2025, pp. 4507–4519, SIAM, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.1137/1.9781611978322.154
License

The talk included some topology in an emerging new application of homotopy theory in
CSPs and promise CSPs. This approach is build on the question: How does the topology
of the solution space of a computational problem influence its complexity? I presented an
introduction to a key notion of homomorphism complexes used in this line of work, and a
brief overview of what have we done with it so far.

3.18

Optimal FPT-Approximation Factors for some CSPs

George Osipov (Linköping University, SE)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© George Osipov
Joint work of George Osipov, Konrad K. Dabrowski, Peter Jonsson, Sebastian Ordyniak, Magnus Wahlström
License

In MinCSP(A), we are given an instance of CSP(A), and the goal is to compute its cost, which
is the minimum number of constraints violated by any assignment to its variables. For many
choices of A, MinCSP(A) is notoriously hard. For example, even in the Boolean case where A
consists solely of binary disequality, the Unique Games Conjecture rules out constant-factor
approximation in polynomial time. We study FPT-algorithms for this problem with the
natural parameter being the cost.
For every Boolean bijunctive language A, we show that there exists a constant c = c(A)
such that: – MinCSP(A) admits a factor-c FPT-approximation, and – MinCSP(A) does
not admit a factor – (c − ε) FPT-approximation for any ε > 0, unless the ETH is false.

M. Bodirsky, V. Guruswami, D. Marx, S. Živný, and Ž. Semanišinová

129

Note that the case with c = 1 is equivalent to finding an exact solution, so our result refines
part of the Boolean MinCSP FPT dichotomy by Kim, Kratsch, Pilipczuk and Wahlström
[SODA’2023]. In fact, their FPT-algorithm with a small modification in the last step is
sufficient to achieve optimal approximation factors, so our main contribution is proving
matching lower bounds under the ETH. Our reduction builds upon the W[1]-hardness proof
by [Marx & Razgon, IPL’2009] for, essentially, Boolean MinCSP with constant unary relations
and a 4-ary relation (a → b) ∧ (c → d). We use a generalization of k-Clique - the Densest
k-Subgraph problem - combined with the recent breakthrough of Guruswami, Lin, Ren, Sun
& Wu [STOC’2024] proving Parameterized Inapproximability Hypothesis under ETH and a
densification result due to Bafna, Karthik & Minzer [STOC’25]. As a corollary, we obtain
that several FPT-approximation algorithms in the literature achieve optimal approximation
factors under the ETH.

3.19

Binary symmetries of tractable non-rigid structures

Michael Pinsker (TU Wien, AT)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Michael Pinsker
Main reference Paolo Marimon, Michael Pinsker: “Minimal operations over permutation groups”, CoRR,
Vol. abs/2410.22060, 2025
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.22060
License

It is well-known that finite or omega-categorical tractable CSP templates must have an
essential polymorphism, i.e. a polymorphism that depends on more than one variable. In
fact, it is folklore that they must have a ternary such polymorphism. Well-known examples
of ternary essential polymorphisms are those satisfying the (ternary) majority or minority
identities; these examples also show that in general, one cannot expect binary essential
polymorphisms for tractable templates.
We report on a recent result stating that if a template is a finite or omega-categorical core,
and its automorphisms do not happen to form a Boolean group acting freely, then tractability
of its CSP implies the existence of a binary essential polymorphism. The proof of this result
builds on a new generalization/improvement of results of Rosenberg and Bodirsky+Chen on
minimal clones.

3.20

PCP-free Inapproximability of Nearest Codeword and Minimum
Distance

Xuandi Ren (University of California - Berkeley, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Xuandi Ren
Joint work of Vijay Bhattiprolu, Vanketasan Guruswami, Euiwoong Lee, Xuandi Ren
License

We present simple deterministic gap-producing reductions from the canonical NP-hard
problem of solving systems of quadratic equations to the approximate versions of the
Nearest Codeword Problem (NCP) and the Minimum Distance Problem (MDP)—achieving
inapproximability within arbitrary constant factors. Our reductions and proofs are short and
conceptually clean, relying primarily on linear codes in which all codewords have roughly
equal weight.

25211

130

25211 – The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability

3.21

Fundamental Questions in Modern Infinite-Domain Constraint
Satisfaction

Jakub Rydval (TU Wien, AT)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Jakub Rydval
Joint work of Michael Pinsker, Jakub Rydval, Moritz Schöbi, Christoph Spiess
Main reference Michael Pinsker, Jakub Rydval, Moritz Schöbi, Christoph Spiess: “Three Fundamental Questions in
Modern Infinite-Domain Constraint Satisfaction”, in Proc. of the 50th International Symposium on
Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science, MFCS 2025, August 25-29, 2025, Warsaw, Poland,
LIPIcs, Vol. 345, pp. 83:1–83:20, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.MFCS.2025.83
License

The Feder-Vardi dichotomy conjecture for Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs) with finite
templates, confirmed independently by Bulatov and Zhuk, has an extension to certain wellbehaved infinite templates due to Bodirsky and Pinsker which remains wide open. In this talk,
I motivate several fundamental questions on the scope of the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture and
provide answers to some of them. This concerns, e.g., identifying model-theoretic assumptions
that can be added without loss of generality or finding general connections to finite-domain
promise CSPs. The presented material stems from joint work with Michael Pinsker, Moritz
Schöbi, and Christoph Spiess.

3.22

Valued CSPs and Resilience in Database Theory

Žaneta Semanišinová (TU Dresden, DE)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Žaneta Semanišinová
Joint work of Manuel Bodirsky, Colin Jahel, Carsten Lutz, Žaneta Semanišinová
Main reference Manuel Bodirsky, Žaneta Semanišinová, Carsten Lutz: “The Complexity of Resilience Problems via
Valued Constraint Satisfaction Problems”, in Proc. of the 39th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on
Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2024, Tallinn, Estonia, July 8-11, 2024, pp. 14:1–14:14, ACM, 2024.
URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3661814.3662071
License

A recent research topic in database theory is the computational complexity of resilience of
queries. For a fixed conjunctive query, the problem is to compute the number of facts that
need to be removed from a given database so that it does not satisfy the query. In this talk, I
will explain how resilience problems can be viewed as valued constraint satisfaction problems
(VCSPs) of structures that are finite or at least finite-like (in the sense that they have an
oligomorphic automorphism group). Building on the known results about VCSPs on finite
domains, we explore how the setting can be generalized to infinite domains and give some
general powerful hardness and tractability conditions for the resilience problem. We also
present recent results for queries over a signature consisting of a single binary relation, and
results on the existence and uniqueness of cores of valued structures stemming from resilience
problems. This is based on joint work with Manuel Bodirsky, Colin Jahel, and Carsten Lutz.

M. Bodirsky, V. Guruswami, D. Marx, S. Živný, and Ž. Semanišinová

3.23

131

Approximability of Constraint Satisfaction Problems in the
Streaming Setting

Santhoshini Velusamy (TTIC - Chicago, US)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Santhoshini Velusamy
Joint work of Chi-Ning Chou, Alexander Golovnev, Madhu Sudan, Santhoshini Velusamy
Main reference Chi-Ning Chou, Alexander Golovnev, Madhu Sudan, Santhoshini Velusamy: “Sketching
Approximability of All Finite CSPs”, J. ACM, Vol. 71(2), pp. 15:1–15:74, 2024.
URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3649435
License

Streaming model is one of the most successful models for solving combinatorial optimization
problems involving big data. In this talk, we explore the topic of approximability of constraint
satisfaction problems in the streaming model. The main theorem that we cover is a dichotomy
theorem from the joint work of Chi-Ning Chou, Alexander Golovnev, Madhu Sudan, and
Santhoshini Velusamy, in the dynamic streaming model, where constraints can be added to or
deleted from the stream. For any γ > β, consider the promise problem where the Max-CSP
value is promised to be either larger than γ or smaller than β. The dichotomy theorem
states that the problem of distinguishing the promise instances can either be solved using
logarithmic space or requires at least polynomial space, and gives a PSPACE characterization
to decide them. This characterization is discussed in detail for the special case of Boolean
CSPs and the talk concludes with some interesting open problems in this area.

3.24

Topology and Hardness of 4-Coloring G-colorable graphs

Uli Wagner (IST Austria - Klosterneuburg, AT)
Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Uli Wagner
Joint work of Sergey Avvakumov, Marek Filakovský, Jakub Opršal, Gianluca Tasinato, Uli Wagner
Main reference Sergey Avvakumov, Marek Filakovský, Jakub Oprsal, Gianluca Tasinato, Uli Wagner: “Hardness of
4-Colouring k-Colourable Graphs”, in Proc. of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing, STOC 2025, Prague, Czechia, June 23-27, 2025, pp. 72–83, ACM, 2025.
URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3717823.3718154
License

Let G be a non-bipartite, 4-colorable graph. We show that it is NP-hard to distinguish
between graphs that are G-colorable and graphs that are not even 4-colorable. This is a
common generalisation of previous results of Khanna, Linial, and Safra [Comb. 20(3), 393-415
(2000)] and of Krokhin and Opršal [FOCS 2019] and Wrochna and Živný [SODA 2020].
The proof combines the algebraic theory of promise constraint satisfaction problems
developed by Barto, Bulín, Krokhin, and Opršal [J. ACM 68(4), 28:1–66 (2021)] with methods
of topological combinatorics and equivariant obstruction theory.

25211

132

25211 – The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability

3.25

On Bounded Strict Width and NL over Homogeneous Structures
with Finite Duality

Michal Wrona (Jagiellonian University - Kraków, PL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Michal Wrona

The celebrated result of Barto, Kozik and Willard states that every finite-domain CSP with
bounded strict width is in NL. We prove that the same holds for a large class of structures
within Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture. The class consists of first-order expansions of structures
with finite duality with natural restrictions on the transitivity, homogeneity and algebraicity
of the underlying group of automorphisms. In particular, the class contains first-order
expansions of homogeneous graphs, digraphs and hypergraphs studied in the literature.

3.26

A characterization of singleton algorithms for the Constraint
Satisfaction Problem

Dmitriy Zhuk (Charles University - Prague, CZ)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Dmitriy Zhuk

We consider singleton versions of standard universal algorithms for the (Promise) Constraint
Satisfaction Problem, such as Arc Consistency, Basic Linear Programming (BLP), and Affine
Integer Programming (AIP). The only difference is that, for every constraint and every tuple
(or for every variable and every element of the domain), we fix the tuple, run one of the
above algorithms, and rule out the value if the algorithm returns “No”. If all tuples are ruled
out, we return “No”; otherwise, we return “Yes”.
The minions characterizing the power of these algorithms have been known for some
time, but they were too complicated to verify the existence of a minion homomorphism.
Using the Hales-Jewett theorem, we showed that the existence of a minion homomorphism is
equivalent to the existence of palette block functions with certain properties. As a result,
we obtained a characterization of the singleton versions of Arc Consistency, BLP, AIP, and
their combinations in terms of symmetric polymorphisms of the constraint language. As a
side result, we also showed that the two ways of defining singleton - by fixing a tuple of a
constraint or by fixing a value for a variable - have the same power.

M. Bodirsky, V. Guruswami, D. Marx, S. Živný, and Ž. Semanišinová

133

Participants
Per Austrin
KTH Royal Institute of
Technology – Stockholm, SE
Libor Barto
Charles University – Prague, CZ
Arash Beikmohammadi
Simon Fraser University –
Burnaby, CA
Amey Bhangale
University of California –
Riverside, US
Manuel Bodirsky
TU Dresden, DE
Zarathustra Brady
Setauket, US
Johanna Brunar
TU Wien, AT
Andrei A. Bulatov
Simon Fraser University –
Burnaby, CA
Silvia Butti
University of Oxford, GB
Karthik C. S.
Rutgers University –
New Brunswick, US
Siu On Chan
Hong Kong, HK
Victor Dalmau
UPF – Barcelona, ES
Anuj Dawar
University of Cambridge, GB
Dmitry Feichtner-Kozlov
Universität Bremen, DE
Florian Frick
Carnegie Mellon University –
Pittsburgh, US

Venkatesan Guruswami
University of California –
Berkeley, US
Santiago Guzmán Pro
TU Dresden, DE
Maximilian Hadek
Charles University – Prague, CZ
Prahladh Harsha
TIFR – Mumbai, IN
Johan Hastad
KTH Royal Institute of
Technology – Stockholm, SE
Peter Jonsson
Linköping University, SE
Eun Jung Kim
KAIST – Daejeon, KR & CNRS –
Paris, FR
Pravesh K. Kothari
Princeton University, US
Marcin Kozik
Jagiellonian University –
Kraków, PL
Andrei Krokhin
Durham University, GB
Euiwoong Lee
University of Michigan –
Ann Arbor, US
Konstantin Makarychev
Northwestern University –
Evanston, US
Yury Makarychev
TTIC – Chicago, US
Barnaby Martin
Durham University, GB
Dániel Marx
CISPA – Saarbrücken, DE
Antoine Mottet
TU Hamburg, DE

Tomáš Nagy
Jagiellonian University –
Kraków, PL
Tamio-Vesa Nakajima
University of Oxford, GB
Jakub Opršal
University of Birmingham, GB
George Osipov
Linköping University, SE
Marcin Pilipczuk
University of Warsaw, PL
Michael Pinsker
TU Wien, AT
Aaron Potechin
University of Chicago, US
Xuandi Ren
University of California –
Berkeley, US
Jakub Rydval
TU Wien, AT
Žaneta Semanišinová
TU Dresden, DE
Santhoshini Velusamy
TTIC – Chicago, US
Uli Wagner
IST Austria –
Klosterneuburg, AT
Magnus Wahlström
Royal Holloway, University of
London, GB
Michal Wrona
Jagiellonian University –
Kraków, PL
Dmitriy Zhuk
Charles University – Prague, CZ
Stanislav Živný
University of Oxford, GB

25211

Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 25212

Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms for Geometric
and Topological Graphs
Sujoy Bhore∗1 , Jie Gao∗2 , Hung Le∗3 , Csaba D. Tóth∗4 , and
Lazar Milenković†5
1
2
3
4
5

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay – Mumbai, IN. sujoy@cse.iitb.ac.in
Rutgers University – Piscataway, US. jg1555@cs.rutgers.edu
University of Massachusetts Amherst, US. hungle@cs.umass.edu
California State University Northridge – Los Angeles, US. csaba.toth@csun.edu
Tel Aviv University, IL. milenkovic.lazar@gmail.com

Abstract
Sketching is a basic technique to handle big data: Compress a big input dataset into a small
dataset, called a sketch, that (approximately) preserves the important information in the input
dataset. A metric space is often given as a distance matrix with Ω(n2 ) entries, and metric
sketching techniques aim to reduce the space to linear. One goal of this Dagstuhl Seminar was to
understand different sketching techniques and metric spaces that admit small sketches. Another
common approach to handling big datasets is dynamic algorithms. Typically, large datasets
do not arrive in a single batch; instead, they are updated over time in small increments. The
objective of dynamic algorithms is to respond to data updates quickly, ideally with an update
time that is polylogarithmic in the size of the whole dataset.
In this Dagstuhl Seminar “Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms for Geometric and
Topological Graphs” (25212), we considered sketching and dynamic algorithms in the context
of geometric intersection graphs and topological graphs. Geometric intersection graphs have
been used to model many real-world massive graphs, such as wireless networks. Topological
graphs, including planar graphs, have been used in applications such as geographic information
systems and motion planning. While geometric intersection graphs and topological graphs are
seemingly different, they have common structural properties that allow the transfer of algorithmic
techniques between the two domains, which was the motivation of this seminar: Uncovering
deeper connections between metric sketching, dynamic algorithms, geometric intersection graphs,
and topological graphs. More concretely, we studied: (1) the construction of sketching structures,
such as spanners, tree covers, distance oracles, and emulators with optimal parameters for
various metrics and graphs, including geometric and topological graphs; (2) dynamic problems in
geometric intersections graphs, including connectivity, spanners, shortest paths; and (3) dynamic
maintenance of metric sketching structures in topological graphs.
Seminar May 18–23, 2025 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/25212
2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Computational geometry; Mathematics of computing → Discrete mathematics; Theory of computation → Design and analysis
of algorithms
Keywords and phrases geometric spanners, geometric intersection graphs, planar metrics, metric
covering, computational geometry
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.15.5.134

∗
†

Editor / Organizer
Editorial Assistant / Collector

Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms for Geometric and Topological Graphs, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 15,
Issue 5, pp. 134–157
Editors: Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković
Dagstuhl Reports
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany

Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković

1

135

Executive Summary

Sujoy Bhore (Indian Institute of Technology Bombay – Mumbai, IN)
Jie Gao (Rutgers University – Piscataway, US)
Hung Le (University of Massachusetts Amherst, US)
Csaba D. Tóth (California State University – Northridge, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, and Csaba D. Tóth

Our goal was to bring together world-renowned researchers in Computational Geometry,
Graph Theory, Data Structures, and Algorithms and collaboratively advance the research
agenda for the study of metric sketching, and dynamic algorithms for geometric and topological
graphs. The participants identified and investigated fundamental open problems and research
directions. In particular, we worked on specific open problems about metric sketching,
geometric intersection graphs, geometry of topological graphs, and their applications to
dynamic algorithms.
This Dagstuhl Seminar “Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms for Geometric and
Topological Graphs” (25212) brought together researchers from four research domains,
and harvested the benefits of the significant interplay between fundamental geometric &
topological structures, and modern algorithmic paradigms. The general objectives of the
seminar were:
1. To advance knowledge on metric sketching and dynamic algorithms for geometric and
topological graphs, and investigate fundamental open problems and research directions.
2. To stimulate inter-disciplinary collaboration between Computer Science (computational
geometry, data structure and algorithms) and Mathematics (combinatorics and topological
graph theory).
3. To catalog the state of the art, and distill major open problems on metric sketching and
dynamic algorithms for geometric and topological graphs.
In addition to identifying fundamental research problems on metric sketching and dynamic
algorithms for geometric and topological graphs, we shall studied concrete problems chosen
by the participants during the seminar. The specific scientific aims of this seminar were:
1. Structural properties: Identify key characteristics of classes of geometric and topological
graphs, and leverage those understandings to address fundamental challenges of metric
sketching.
2. Trade-offs: Provide the best possible trade-offs among fundamental aspects for metric
sketching mechanisms, e.g., lightness, sparsity, diameter, degree, and others.
3. Efficient Algorithms: Develop efficient and robust algorithms for fundamental problems
defined on geometric and topological graphs, in both static and dynamic regimes.
Behind the scientific challenges of this seminar lies the pragmatic need for better understanding the complex network systems, such as, banking, education, transportation,
healthcare, among others. The scale of the data in any present day network system is huge.
Hence, sparsifcation is a natural mechanism of handing such big networks. Moreover, the
data is constantly changing. With a huge amount of data, recoumputation is not an option
anymore. Recent progress on dynamic/online algorithms led to the development of the
current best tools to address some of these problems. Hence, a deeper understanding of
geometric data structures helps improve tradeoffs between resource utilization and solution
quality.

25212

136

25212 – Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms

2

Table of Contents

Executive Summary
Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, and Csaba D. Tóth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
Overview of Talks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
Metric Embeddings into Trees and its Various Spin-offs
Arnold Filtser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
Developments in Geometric Intersection Graphs
Édouard Bonnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
Dynamic Algorithms in Geometry
Wolfgang Mulzer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
Constructing and Routing on Plane Constant Spanners
Prosenjit Bose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
Bicriteria Approximation for Minimum Dilation Graph Augmentation
Sampson Wong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
Tree Covers for Euclidean and Planar Metrics and Their Applications
Lazar Milenković . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
VC Dimension and Their Applications in Topological and Geometric Graphs
Da Wei Zheng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
Distance Approximating Structures for Planar and Minor-Free Graphs
Jonathan Conroy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
Open Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
DAG Covers for Directed Graph Classes
Nicole Wein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
Plane (1 + ε)-spanners in R2
Csaba D. Tóth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
Vantage Point Selection
Jie Gao, Nicole Wein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
Fat Minors
Michał Pilipczuk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
Planar Spanners
Prosenjit Bose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
Patterns in Unweighted Planar Graphs
Da Wei Zheng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
Sparse (1 + ϵ)-emulator for Euclidean Point Sets
Hung Le . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
Tree Cover for Unit Ball Graphs
Jie Gao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Similarity of Curves (Fréchet Distance)
Omrit Filtser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152

Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković

137

Dynamic Subgraph Connectivity
Liam Roditty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
Sparse and Light (k-)Banyans
Sándor Kisfaludi-Bak . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
Online Spanners in Metric Spaces
Sujoy Bhore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
Steiner (1 + ε)-spanners in Rd
Csaba D. Tóth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
Working Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157

25212

138

25212 – Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms

3

Introduction

Sujoy Bhore (Indian Institute of Technology Bombay – Mumbai, IN)
Jie Gao (Rutgers University – Piscataway, US)
Hung Le (University of Massachusetts Amherst, US)
Csaba D. Tóth (California State University – Northridge, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, and Csaba D. Tóth

In the last several years multiple new techniques have been developed along separate lines of
metric sketching (spanners and tree covers), geometry of topological graphs, and geometric
intersection graphs. These new techniques have allowed for new ways to solve problems that
were deemed challenging previously. For example, geometric tools such as VC-dimension
and additive Voronoi diagram have been used to solve problems in planar graphs or graphs
of forbidden minors. These ideas then feed back progress on geometric intersection graphs
which were studied mainly in the geometry community. We also believe that these new data
structures will inspire further development in handling dynamic settings.
Below we briefly review both recent developments in the four topics and also list directions
and open problems we tackled.
Metric Sketching. The goal of metric sketching is, given a set P of n points in a metric
space (X, δX ), construct a compact (or low space) structure to (approximately) represent the
distances between the points in P . Ideally, we would like the structure to have a linear space
of O(n). There are many sketching structures; here, we highlight the two most important
structures: spanners and tree covers.
A t-spanner is a graph G whose vertex set is P and edge set contains pairs of points in
P with weight to be the metric distance between the endpoints, and furthermore, δG (x, y) ≤
t · δX (x, y) for any two points x, y ∈ P . Spanners with t = 1 + ϵ have been studied extensively
for low dimensional Euclidean and doubling metrics. It was known in the 90s that one
can construct Euclidean (1 + ϵ)-spanners which are sparse [1], light [2], and have a small
diameter [3]. A recent line of work determines exactly the dependency of sparsity [6],
lightness [6], and hop bounds [8] on the distance error parameter ϵ as well as the role of other
points in (X, δX ) in these constructions [4, 6].
Another important sketching structure is a tree cover. Informally, a tree cover for P is a
collection of trees such that the distance between any two points in P is preserved in at least
one of the trees in the cover. Formally, a t-tree cover is a collection T of trees such that for
every two points x, y ∈ P , δX (x, y) ≤ minT ∈T δT (x, y) ≤ t · δX (x, y). Tree covers are stronger
than spanners in the sense that they are not only compact but also allow querying distances
quickly (in constant time); in this sense, tree covers are closer to an ideal metric sketching.
On the other hand, constructing a small tree cover is a very difficult problem. Small tree
covers were constructed for low-dimensional Euclidean point sets in the 90s [3], but only
recently, the number of trees needed was determined [9], and the result was extended to
doubling metrics [7]. Remarkably, it was recently shown that metrics induced by shortest
distances in topological graphs have a tree cover with a small number of trees [10, 11, 12].
In the context of the developments above, there are a number of questions we have
explored in this Dagstuhl Seminar with the aim of pushing the frontier in this topic much
further. Which metrics admit a compact distance sketching? Can we construct a sketching
structure for high-dimensional Euclidean spaces? What is the precise dependency between
the number of trees in the tree cover for topological metrics on the distance error parameter
ϵ? Could the existing distance sketching structures be dynamized efficiently when points are
inserted/deleted?

Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković

139

Geometric Intersection Graphs. Given a set O of n objects in Rd , a geometric intersection
graph G× for O has each vertex corresponding to an object in O and an edge between two
vertices if their corresponding objects intersect. Geometric intersection graphs have been
successfully used to model many practical networks, such as wireless networks and map
labeling. Geometric intersection graphs share certain interesting structures as some other
well-studied graph families, such as planar graphs – specifically, planar graphs are geometric
intersection graphs of disks by the circle packing theorem (a.k.a. the Koebe–Andreev–Thurston
theorem). However, geometric intersection graphs can be dense, which makes them quite
different from planar graphs from a computational perspective. To obtain efficient algorithms,
typically, one would like to avoid computing all the edges explicitly. Examples of such
algorithms include single source shortest paths in such graphs. On the other hand, useful
structures such as balanced separators for planar graphs need to be modified/augmented
and may lose the nice bound on the small size [13].
Many problems that are easy for point sets in Rd become extremely hard for G× even for
simple, uniform, fat objects. One example is the diameter problem: can we compute the
diameter of unit disk graphs, i.e., intersection graphs of unit disks, in truly subquadratic
time? This problem remains wide open despite many attempts [14, 15]. Related to metric
sketching, it is not known if unit disk graphs have a tree cover with a constant number of
trees [5] or spanners of small hop diameters [16, 18].
Another interesting perspective of geometric intersection graphs is that the existence of
efficient algorithms on such graphs sometimes crucially depends on the shape, size, dimension,
and topological properties of the objects. Of particular interest in this family is to understand
how far one can push on efficient algorithms with only topological properties of how two
objects intersect (e.g., geometric intersection graphs of pseudo-disks versus disk graphs).
We also investigated dynamic algorithms for geometric intersection graphs. In the
dynamic settings, objects are inserted and deleted from time to time. The insertion/deletion
of an object implicitly induces the insertion/deletion of up to Ω(n) edges incident to the
object. However, the goal of the dynamic algorithm is to handle each update in (amortized)
O(polylog(n)) time. The massive number of implicit updates makes the design of dynamic
algorithms extremely challenging. We focused on fundamental problems such as dynamic
connectivity [17], dynamic shortest paths [19], and dynamic optimization problems, including
independent sets [20, 21] and matching [22], and shortest paths [23, 24].
Geometry of Topological Graphs. Topological graphs are graphs equipped with topological
properties, for example, planar graphs, surface-embedded graphs, and, more generally,
minor-free graphs. Research on topological graphs has largely focused on understanding
the structural properties of these graphs and hopes to exploit structural insights to develop
efficient algorithms. The separator theorem by Lipton and Tarjan [25] for planar graphs and
the graph minor project by Robertson and Seymour are representative examples of this line
of research. A recent line of research focuses on understanding the geometry of topological
graphs, specifically the shortest path metrics of these graphs. A representative question is: To
what extent does a planar metric resemble the Euclidean plane? Research on this question
has produced deep results, including tree cover of constant size [11, 12], VC dimension [26],
and low-treewidth embedding [27], with a large number of algorithmic applications. In this
seminar, we sought a better understanding of the geometry of topological graphs by drawing
connections to research in metric sketching. For example, techniques in constructing spanners
were crucial in developing the first linear-space constant query-time distance oracle in planar
graphs [28]. A concrete question was to determine the best trade-offs between the distance
error parameter ϵ and the number of trees, the treewidth, or the size of the metric sketches.

25212

140

25212 – Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms

Dynamic Algorithms. In dynamic algorithms, the input is updated over time, often involving
insertions and deletions of new “data points”, for example, inserting/deleting points from a
point set or edges from a graph. The goal is to quickly update the solution of an algorithm
task when the input is updated. Handling dynamic updates brings an extra (and often very
challenging) dimension to algorithm design in the three aforementioned topics. We have
touched upon designing dynamic algorithms for metric sketching and geometric intersection
graphs. Designing dynamic algorithms for topological graphs under edge updates is an
emerging line of research that has not been duly explored.
On the negative side it is known that for exact problems, such as exact shortest paths and
exact all pairs shortest paths, any dynamic algorithm must spend polynomial update time or
query time under popular fine-grained hypotheses [29]. However, these lower bounds do not
hold when we seek an approximation, which is often good enough for applications. Basic
problems we explored include approximate single source shortest paths, approximate distance
oracles, and approximate optimization problems, such as independent sets and matching [30].
References
1 J. Mark Keil. Approximating the complete Euclidean graph. In SWAT, volume 318 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 208–213. Springer, 1988.
2 Barun Chandra, Gautam Das, Giri Narasimhan, and José Soares. New sparseness results
on graph spanners. Int. J. Comput. Geom. Appl., 5:125–144, 1995.
3 Sunil Arya, Gautam Das, David M. Mount, Jeffrey S. Salowe, and Michiel H. M. Smid.
Euclidean spanners: Short, thin, and lanky. In STOC, pages 489–498. ACM, 1995.
4 Sujoy Bhore and Csaba D. Tóth. Euclidean Steiner spanners: Light and sparse. SIAM J.
Discret. Math., 36(3):2411–2444, 2022.
5 Haim Kaplan, Wolfgang Mulzer, Liam Roditty, and Paul Seiferth. Routing in unit disk
graphs. Algorithmica, 80(3):830–848, 2018.
6 Hung Le and Shay Solomon. Truly optimal Euclidean spanners. In FOCS, pages 1078–1100.
IEEE Computer Society, 2019.
7 Yair Bartal, Ora Nova Fandina, and Ofer Neiman. Covering metric spaces by few trees. J.
Comput. Syst. Sci., 130:26–42, 2022.
8 Hung Le, Lazar Milenkovic, and Shay Solomon. Sparse Euclidean spanners with optimal
diameter: A general and robust lower bound via a concave inverse-Ackermann function.
In SoCG, volume 258 of LIPIcs, pages 47:1–47:17. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
Informatik, 2023.
9 Hsien-Chih Chang, Jonathan Conroy, Hung Le, Lazar Milenkovic, Shay Solomon, and Cuong
Than. Optimal Euclidean tree covers. In SoCG, volume 293 of LIPIcs, pages 37:1–37:15.
Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
10 Sujoy Bhore, Balázs Keszegh, Andrey Kupavskii, Hung Le, Alexandre Louvet, Dömötör
Pálvölgyi, and Csaba D. Tóth. Spanners in planar domains via Steiner spanners and
non-Steiner tree covers. In SODA, pages 4292–4326. SIAM, 2025.
11 Hsien-Chih Chang, Jonathan Conroy, Hung Le, Lazar Milenkovic, Shay Solomon, and
Cuong Than. Covering planar metrics (and beyond): O(1) trees suffice. In FOCS, pages
2231–2261. IEEE, 2023.
12 Hsien-Chih Chang, Jonathan Conroy, Hung Le, Lazar Milenkovic, Shay Solomon, and
Cuong Than. Shortcut partitions in minor-free graphs: Steiner point removal, distance
oracles, tree covers, and more. In SODA, pages 5300–5331. SIAM, 2024.
13 Mark de Berg, Sándor Kisfaludi-Bak, Morteza Monemizadeh, and Leonidas Theocharous.
Clique-based separators for geometric intersection graphs. Algorithmica, 85(6):1652–1678,
2023.

Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković

14

15

16

17

18
19
20

21

22
23

24

25
26
27

28
29
30

141

Karl Bringmann, Sándor Kisfaludi-Bak, Marvin Künnemann, André Nusser, and Zahra
Parsaeian. Towards sub-quadratic diameter computation in geometric intersection graphs.
In SoCG, volume 224 of LIPIcs, pages 21:1–21:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
Informatik, 2022.
Hsien-Chih Chang, Jie Gao, and Hung Le. Computing diameter+2 in truly-subquadratic
time for unit-disk graphs. In SoCG, volume 293 of LIPIcs, pages 38:1–38:14. Schloss
Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
Timothy M. Chan and Zhengcheng Huang. Constant-hop spanners for more geometric
intersection graphs, with even smaller size. In SoCG, volume 258 of LIPIcs, pages 23:1–23:16.
Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023.
Timothy M. Chan and Zhengcheng Huang. Dynamic geometric connectivity in the plane
with constant query time. In SoCG, volume 293 of LIPIcs, pages 36:1–36:13. Schloss
Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
Jonathan B. Conroy and Csaba D. Tóth. Hop-spanners for geometric intersection graphs.
J. Comput. Geom., 14(2):26–64, 2022.
Timothy M. Chan and Dimitrios Skrepetos. All-pairs shortest paths in geometric intersection
graphs. J. Comput. Geom., 10(1):27–41, 2019.
Sujoy Bhore, Martin Nöllenburg, Csaba D. Tóth, and Jules Wulms. Fully dynamic maximum
independent sets of disks in polylogarithmic update time. In SoCG, volume 293 of LIPIcs,
pages 19:1–19:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
Monika Henzinger, Stefan Neumann, and Andreas Wiese. Dynamic approximate maximum
independent set of intervals, hypercubes and hyperrectangles. In SoCG, volume 164 of
LIPIcs, pages 51:1–51:14. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.
Sujoy Bhore and Timothy M. Chan. Fully dynamic geometric vertex cover and matching.
CoRR, abs/2402.07441, 2024.
Peyman Afshani, Mark de Berg, Kevin Buchin, Jie Gao, Maarten Löffler, Amir Nayyeri,
Benjamin Raichel, Rik Sarkar, Haotian Wang, and Hao-Tsung Yang. Approximation
algorithms for multi-robot patrol-scheduling with min-max latency. In WAFR, volume 17
of Springer Proceedings in Advanced Robotics, pages 107–123. Springer, 2021.
Jie Gao, Mayank Goswami, Karthik C. S., Meng-Tsung Tsai, Shih-Yu Tsai, and Hao-Tsung
Yang. Obtaining approximately optimal and diverse solutions via dispersion. In LATIN,
volume 13568 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 222–239. Springer, 2022.
Richard J. Lipton and Robert Endre Tarjan. A separator theorem for planar graphs. SIAM
Journal on Applied Mathematics, 36(2):177–189, 1979.
Hung Le and Christian Wulff-Nilsen. VC set systems in minor-free (di)graphs and applications. In SODA, pages 5332–5360. SIAM, 2024.
Vincent Cohen-Addad, Hung Le, Marcin Pilipczuk, and Michal Pilipczuk. Planar and minorfree metrics embed into metrics of polylogarithmic treewidth with expected multiplicative
distortion arbitrarily close to 1. In FOCS, pages 2262–2277. IEEE, 2023.
Hung Le and Christian Wulff-Nilsen. Optimal approximate distance oracle for planar graphs.
In FOCS, pages 363–374. IEEE, 2021.
Amir Abboud and Søren Dahlgaard. Popular conjectures as a barrier for dynamic planar
graph algorithms. In FOCS, pages 477–486. IEEE Computer Society, 2016.
Tuukka Korhonen, Wojciech Nadara, Michal Pilipczuk, and Marek Sokolowski. Fully
dynamic approximation schemes on planar and apex-minor-free graphs. In SODA, pages
296–313. SIAM, 2024.

25212

142

25212 – Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms

4

Overview of Talks

4.1

Metric Embeddings into Trees and its Various Spin-offs

Arnold Filtser (Computer Science Department, Bar Ilan University – Ramat Gan, IL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Arnold Filtser

Given a metric space (X, dX ), a stochastic metric embedding into trees is a distribution over
dominating embeddings of the points X into a tree with polylogarithmic expected distortion.
We will begin be describing the classic Bartal’96 embedding, and it’s construction of padded
decompositions. We will then discuss how this approach can be utilized to obtain online
metric embedding (in particular deterministic into Euclidean space). We will then present
the padded decomposition of Miller, Peng and Xu, and see how it can be used to obtain
stochastic metric embedding into spanning trees. We will finish by mentioning some of the
recent works of embedding structured graph families into bounded treewidth graphs.

4.2

Developments in Geometric Intersection Graphs

Édouard Bonnet (Laboratoire de l’Informatique du Parallélisme, ENS de Lyon, FR)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Édouard Bonnet

We survey some recent developments in algorithmic graph theory for geometric intersection
graphs, and present some conjectures in the novel topic of induced minor theory.

4.3

Dynamic Algorithms in Geometry

Wolfgang Mulzer (Institut für Informatik, Freie Universität Berlin, DE)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Wolfgang Mulzer

I will present some classic results and recent advances in dynamic algorithms for geometric
problems. In particular, I will focus on algorithms for dynamic lower envelopes in two and
three dimensions, for lines, planes, and more general objects. I will also discuss applications
for dynamic geometric intersection graphs.

4.4

Constructing and Routing on Plane Constant Spanners

Prosenjit Bose (School of Computer Science, Carleton University – Ottawa, CA)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Prosenjit Bose

Given a weighted graph and a real number t, a t-spanner of G is a spanning subgraph H with
the property that for every edge xy ∈ G, there exists a path between x and y in H whose
weight is no more than t times the weight of the edge xy. An online routing algorithm is an

Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković

143

algorithm that finds a short path in a graph without having full knowledge of the graph. We
review results and present open problems on different variants of the problem of constructing
and routing on plane geometric t-spanners.

4.5

Bicriteria Approximation for Minimum Dilation Graph Augmentation

Sampson Wong (University of Copenhagen, DK)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Sampson Wong

Spanner constructions focus on the initial design of the network. However, networks tend to
improve over time. In this paper, we focus on the improvement step. Given a graph and a
budget k, which k edges do we add to the graph to minimise its dilation? Gudmundsson and
Wong [1] provided the first positive result for this problem, but their approximation factor is
linear in k.
√
Our main result is a (2 r 2 k 1/r , 2r)-bicriteria approximation that runs in O(n3 log n)
time, for all r ≥ 1. In other words, if t∗ is the minimum dilation after adding any k edges to
a graph, then our algorithm adds O(k 1+1/r ) edges to the graph to obtain a dilation of 2rt∗ .
Moreover, our analysis of the algorithm is tight under the Erdős girth conjecture.
References
1
Joachim Gudmundsson and Sampson Wong. Improving the dilation of a metric graph by
adding edges. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 18(3):20:1–20:20, 2022.

4.6

Tree Covers for Euclidean and Planar Metrics and Their Applications

Lazar Milenković (Tel Aviv University, IL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Lazar Milenković

I will survey some recent results on tree covers for Euclidean and planar graphs [1, 2, 3]. Due
to their structural simplicity, tree cover are suitable for various algorithmic applications. In
this talk I will highlight some of the applications, such as compact routing schemes [1, 2] and
construction of spanners with optimal tradeoff between hop-diameter and other parameters,
including sparsity [4, 5] and lightness [6].
References
1
Hsien-Chih Chang, Jonathan Conroy, Hung Le, Lazar Milenkovic, Shay Solomon, and
Cuong Than. Covering planar metrics (and beyond): O(1) trees suffice. In FOCS, pages
2231–2261. IEEE, 2023.
2
Hsien-Chih Chang, Jonathan Conroy, Hung Le, Lazar Milenkovic, Shay Solomon, and Cuong
Than. Optimal Euclidean tree covers. In SoCG, volume 293 of LIPIcs, pages 37:1–37:15.
Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
3
Hsien-Chih Chang, Jonathan Conroy, Hung Le, Lazar Milenkovic, Shay Solomon, and
Cuong Than. Shortcut partitions in minor-free graphs: Steiner point removal, distance
oracles, tree covers, and more. In SODA, pages 5300–5331. SIAM, 2024.

25212

144

25212 – Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms

4

5

6

4.7

Hung Le, Lazar Milenkovic, and Shay Solomon. Sparse Euclidean spanners with tiny
diameter: A tight lower bound. In SoCG, volume 224 of LIPIcs, pages 54:1–54:15. Schloss
Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.
Hung Le, Lazar Milenkovic, and Shay Solomon. Sparse Euclidean spanners with optimal
diameter: A general and robust lower bound via a concave inverse-Ackermann function.
In SoCG, volume 258 of LIPIcs, pages 47:1–47:17. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
Informatik, 2023.
Sujoy Bhore and Lazar Milenkovic. Light spanners with small hop-diameter. In ICALP,
volume 334 of LIPIcs, pages 30:1–30:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
2025.

VC Dimension and Their Applications in Topological and Geometric
Graphs

Da Wei Zheng (University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Da Wei Zheng

Minor-free graphs and geometric intersection graphs are two classes of graphs that share
a surprisingly geometric property: they have very natural set systems that have bounded
VC-dimension. We can algorithmically exploit these set systems to design algorithms and
data structures not possible in general graphs such as subquadratic time algorithms for
diameter and subquadratic space data structures for distance oracles.

4.8

Distance Approximating Structures for Planar and Minor-Free
Graphs

Jonathan Conroy (Dartmouth College – Hanover, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Jonathan Conroy

In this talk, I will discuss several ways in which one can transform planar/minor-free metrics
into some simpler object. One helpful tool in this area is the “buffered cop decomposition”,
a new way of partitioning minor-free graphs which we recently introduced [1]. I will
try to convey some intuition about this structural result, and additionally sketch several
applications including O(1)-distortion Steiner point removal [1] and optimal O(log r) padded
decomposition for Kr -minor-free graphs [2].
References
1
Hsien-Chih Chang, Jonathan Conroy, Hung Le, Lazar Milenkovic, Shay Solomon, and Cuong
Than. Optimal Euclidean tree covers. In SoCG, volume 293 of LIPIcs, pages 37:1–37:15.
Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
2
Jonathan Conroy and Arnold Filtser. How to protect yourself from threatening skeletons:
Optimal padded decompositions for minor-free graphs. In STOC, pages 2281–2292. ACM,
2025.

Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković

5

Open Problems

5.1

DAG Covers for Directed Graph Classes

145

Nicole Wein (University of Michigan – Ann Arbor, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Nicole Wein

This is an open-ended problem based on a recent paper of mine with Sepehr Assadi and Gary
Hoppenworth [1]. In this paper we define the notion of a DAG Cover, which is a directed
analog of a tree cover. Given a directed graph, the goal is to construct a small collection
of DAGs so that for all s, t: (1) no DAG in the collection underestimates dist(s, t), and (2)
some DAG in the collection gives a good approximation for dist(s, t).
In the paper we study the problem when the input is a general directed graph, and get
some upper and lower bound results that I will describe below. But first, I will state the
problem.
Problem. Can we get interesting/useful DAG covers for special classes of directed graphs?
Specifically, since tree covers have been very useful for classes of geometric graphs, it is
natural to wonder whether DAG covers could be useful for geometric classes of directed
graphs. As for what classes of graphs would be natural, I haven’t thought about this at all!
Prior Work: I will outline the results that we get for general graphs, to help contextualize
potential questions to ask about special classes of graphs.
First, one could ask: Do the DAGs need to be subgraphs of the original graph? This
turns out to be a consequential question. If “yes” then a directed cycle shows that you need
n DAGs in the cover even if you just want to preserve reachability. If “no”, then there’s a
simple construction (that I can show you) that achieves only 2 DAGs and preserves exact
distances. So, the interesting question is when you allow only a limited number of additional
edges. Here are our results.
1. Lower bound: You can’t have O(n2−ε ) added edges and O(n1−ε ) DAGs, and preserve
even reachability (i.e. essentially the strongest possible lower bound for when the number
of added edges is a function of the number of vertices n. Thus, we turn out attention to
the number of edges m.
2. Upper bound: With O(m) added edges, you can get only 2 DAGs and preserve reachability.
(This one is simple and I can show it to you.)
3. Main upper bound: With Õ(m) added edges, you can get polylog n DAGs and polylog n
approximation factor. (Similar to the known tree cover result of log n trees and log n
approximation factor.)
4. Lower bound: With Õ(m) added edges, for preserving exact distances you can’t get
n1/6−ε DAGs.
References
1
Sepehr Assadi, Gary Hoppenworth, and Nicole Wein. Covering approximate shortest paths
with DAGs. In STOC, pages 2269–2280. ACM, 2025.

25212

146

25212 – Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms

5.2

Plane (1 + ε)-spanners in R2

Csaba D. Tóth (California State University Northridge – Los Angeles, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Csaba D. Tóth

For n points in Euclidean plane, several constructions are known for (1 + ε)-spanners:
Θ-graphs, Yao-graphs, Greedy spanners, and WSPD-based spanners. As ε → 0 an (1 + ε)spanner will inevitably have many edge crossings. If we allow Steiner points, we can subdivide
the edges at crossing points and obtain a plane (1 + ε)-spanner. How many Steiner points do
we really need?
Let s(n, ε) be the minimum integer such that every set of n points in the plane admits a
plane (1 + ε)-spanner with at most s(n, ε) Steiner points.
Problem 1. Determine s(n, ε).
We know that for n points in the plane, there are (1 + ε)-spanners with O(ε−1 n) edges;
and Steiner (1 + ε)-spanners with O(ε−1/2 n) edges. However, if the edges pairwise cross
(naively), this would give O(ε−1 n2 ) crossings, hence s(n, ε) ≤ O(ε−1 · n2 ). It is not difficult
to improve this naive bound and show that s(n, ε) is closer to linear in n The goal is to
find a bound of the form s(n, ε) = O(f (ε) · n) for some function f (.) with the best possible
function f (.).
One can also require the Steiner (1 + ε)-spanner to minimize the number of Steiner point
and meet other optimization criteria (e.g., small weight or small hop diameter).
Problem 2. Determine the minimum number of Steiner points for a Steiner (1 + ε)-spanner
of weight O(ε−1 · w(M ST )) on n points in the plane.
To show that s(n, ε) is linear in n one can use the planarization of a greedy (1+ε)-spanner.
It is known that the crossing graph is O(f (ε))-degenerate [1]. For a nontrivial lower bound,
one might be able to use the so-called degenerate crossing number [2, 3] if Steiner points are
modeled as degenerate crossings. But perhaps they can be modeled by bundled crossings
[4, 5].
References
1
David Eppstein and Hadi Khodabandeh. On the edge crossings of the greedy spanner. In
SoCG, volume 189 of LIPIcs, pages 33:1–33:17. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
Informatik, 2021.
2
Eyal Ackerman and Rom Pinchasi. On the degenerate crossing number. Discret. Comput.
Geom., 49(3):695–702, 2013.
3
János Pach and Géza Tóth. Degenerate crossing numbers. Discret. Comput. Geom.,
41(3):376–384, 2009.
Md. Jawaherul Alam, Martin Fink, and Sergey Pupyrev. The bundled crossing number. In
4
GD, volume 9801 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 399–412. Springer, 2016.
5
Alan Arroyo and Stefan Felsner. Approximating the bundled crossing number. J. Graph
Algorithms Appl., 27(6):433–457, 2023.

Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković

5.3

147

Vantage Point Selection

Jie Gao (Rutgers University – Piscataway, US)
Nicole Wein (University of Michigan – Ann Arbor, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Jie Gao, Nicole Wein

Problem Setup: We have an undirected graph G. (You can assume the graph is either
weighted or unweighted, whichever is more convenient for what you’re trying to prove.)
Assume that for every pair of vertices there is one unique shortest path. Each edge also has
a unique “capacity” that is hidden from us. We are allowed to choose vertices to “query”.
When we query a vertex s then for every vertex t the capacity of the minimum capacity edge
on the shortest st-path is revealed.
Let OPT be the maximum number of edges that could be revealed by performing a single
query in G. Note that OPT < n since any shortest paths tree has < n edges.
Question. How many queries do we need in the worst case to reveal the capacity of Ω(OPT)
√
edges? It is known that the correct answer is between Ω̃( n) and O(n). We think it should
be possible to get O(n1−ε )
Alternate version of question. We don’t have a proof that this question is equivalent to
the original question, but we would be happy to answer either one. Given an instance of
the problem, let ALG1 be the number of edges we can reveal with just one single query
(in expectation if the algorithm is randomized). What is the minimum competitive ratio
OPT/ALG1 that we can guarantee? The known bounds are the same as the original problem.
I.e., if we can reveal ≥ nε edges in expectation with a single query, then we’ve achieved the
desired n1−ε upper bound.
Motivation. This problem was recently defined by people who work in the theory and
practice of networking, in the context of “internet bandwidth estimation”. Direct all of your
questions about motivation to Jie.
Prior Work. Very little is known about this problem. The trivial upper bound is n. There
√
√
√
is also a simple lower bound of Ω̃( n). Consider n paths of length n each. One of the
paths (we don’t know which) has capacities ordered smallest to largest along the path. All
√
of the other paths have capacities in a random order. In this case, OPT= n by picking
the first vertex of the special path. However, if we query a vertex on a non-special path,
in expectation we only reveal roughly log n capacities. Since we don’t know which path is
√
special, we need Ω( n) queries to find it.
Observations and simplifying assumptions. Let’s say we are trying to achieve an upper
bound of n1−ε for any small constant ε. Notice that if we query a vertex v all of vs incident
edges are revealed. So, if G has a vertex of degree at least nε then we are done. In fact, we
may want to assume that every vertex in G has constant degree, since we don’t know how to
solve that case.
If OPT = O(n1−ε ) then we’re done because we can pick O(n1−ε ) arbitrary vertices to
query, each of which reveals at least one edge. As a simplifying assumption, we may want to
assume that OPT reveals Ω(n) capacities.
Another simplifying assumption under which we don’t know the answer: Diameter is
Θ(log n).

25212

148

25212 – Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms

5.4

Fat Minors

Michał Pilipczuk (University of Warsaw, PL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Michał Pilipczuk

All graphs are unweighted. For a graph G and a vertex subset X ⊆ G we call X (k, r)coverable if X can be covered by k balls of radius r in G. Motivated by the talk of Édouard,
we pose the following.
Conjecture. For every graph H there exist constants c, r ∈ N such that the following holds:
Every n-vertex graph G that excludes H as an induced minor has a 2/3-balanced separator
√
that is (c n, r)-coverable.
More generally, the suspicion is that exclusion of an induced minor could be relaxed to
exclusion of a fat minor. We say that G contains H as a d-fat minor, for a parameter d ∈ N
if there are connected subgraphs {Bu : u ∈ V (H)} and {Be : e ∈ E(H)} of G such that
whenever u is an endpoint of e the subgraphs Bu and Be intersect; and
except for the above, all the subgraphs in {Bf : f ∈ V (G) ∪ E(G)} are pairwise disjoint
and at distance more than d in G.
Clearly, if G contains H as a d-fat minor for any d ≥ 1 then G contains H as an induced
minor. Therefore, exclusion of a fat minor is a weaker assumption than exclusion of an induced
minor. We conjecture that the statement above should also hold under the assumption that
G excludes H as a d-fat minor for some fixed d ∈ N then c and r may also depend on d.
To give some background, Georgakopoulos and Papasoglu [1] conjectured that if G
excludes H as a d-fat minor for some constant d then G is quasi-isometric to some graph G′
that is H ′ -minor-free, for some H ′ depending only on H and d. (This is not exactly how
they stated it, and their original formulation was disproved. See [2] for a discussion.) If
the conjecture of Georgakopoulos and Papasoglu was true, then the conjecture above would
follow even for fat minors, because the balanced separator of G′ could be pulled back through
the quasi-isometry. But the conjecture above can be also attacked without trying to verify
the conjecture of Georgakopoulous and Papasoglu in full generality (the feeling is that this
conjecture may well be just false).
References
1
Agelos Georgakopoulos and Panos Papasoglu. Graph minors and metric spaces. Comb.,
45(3):33, 2025.
2
James Davies, Robert Hickingbotham, Freddie Illingworth, and Rose McCarty. Fat minors
cannot be thinned (by quasi-isometries). CoRR, abs/2405.09383, 2024.

5.5

Planar Spanners

Prosenjit Bose (Carleton University – Ottawa, CA)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Prosenjit Bose

Given a set P of n points in the plane, a geometric graph G(P, E) is a graph whose vertex
set is P whose edges are segments joining pairs of vertices and edges are typically weighted
by their length. A geometric graph H is a t-spanner of G if H is a subgraph of G and
∀xy ∈ E, dH (x, y) ≤ t|xy| for some t ≥ 1, where dH (x, y) is the length of the shortest path

Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković

149

from x to y in H. The smallest value of t that satisfies this property is called the spanning
ratio of H. The graph G is the underlying graph of the t-spanner H. In this setting the
underlying graph is the complete geometric graph.
An online routing algorithm A is an algorithm that forwards a message from its current
vertex s to a destination vertex t where the forwarding decision is made as a function of
s, t, I(s) and M where s is the coordinates of the current vertex, t is the coordinates of
the destination vertex, I(s) is information stored with vertex s in G and M is some bits
of information stored in A. Typically, I(s) is the set of vertices adjacent to s in G but
sometimes some additional information is stored. The routing ratio of an algorithm A is the
maximum spanning ratio among all s, t pairs of the path followed by A from s to t in G.
Thus the routing ratio is an upper bound on the spanning ratio.
The following are some questions regarding spanners where G is the complete geometric
graph and H is a planar spanning subgraph of G.
The spanning ratio of the standard Delaunay triangulation on a set of points is at most
1.998 and in some cases it is at least 1.59. Can we improve the upper or lower bound?
For points in convex position, the upper bound is 1.83 and the lower bound remains 1.59.
Can we improve either bound?
Is there a plane spanner with maximum degree 3 and constant spanning ratio? The lowest
known degree bound is 4.
Can we find a bounded degree plane spanner with spanning ratio better than 2.91.
Currently, the best known bound is degree 14 and spanning ratio 2.91. The best known
upper bound on the spanning ratio for spanners with maximum degree less than 10 is a
degree bound of 8 and spanning ratio 4.41.
For standard Delaunay graphs, the routing ratio is at most 3.5 and at least 1.7. Can
these bounds be improved?
Tight spanning ratios of 2.6 and 2 are known for Delaunay graphs where the empty circle
is replaced√by a square and hexagon, respectively. However, the routing ratio on these
graphs is 10 and 6.4 respectively which leaves a large gap with the spanning ratio.

5.6

Patterns in Unweighted Planar Graphs

Da Wei Zheng (University of Illinois – Urbana-Champaign, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Da Wei Zheng

Let G = (V, E) be an undirected unweighted planar graph with n vertices, and let S =
{s1 , . . . , sk } be the (ordered clockwise) vertices of one face of G. Let d(·, ·) denote the shortest
path metric of G The pattern pv of a vertex v ∈ V is the vector
pv = ⟨d(v, s2 ) − d(v, s1 ), d(v, s3 ) − d(v, s2 ), . . . , d(v, sk ) − d(v, sk−1 )⟩.
Note that as the graph is unweighted and the vertices s1 , . . . , sk are adjacent on one face
of G the entries of pv are in {1, 0, −1}. Since there are n vertices in G there are n patterns.
However, Li and Parter [3] showed (using VC dimension type arguments) that there are only
at most O(k 3 ) many distinct patterns:
Theorem. The number of distinct patterns over all vertices of a graph G is O(k 3 )
An alternative proof is given in [1], along with a Ω(k 2 ) lower bound (a grid graph can
also give the same lower bound) and the following conjecture:

25212

150

25212 – Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms

Conjecture. The number of distinct patterns over all vertices of a graph G is O(k 2 ).
What is the true answer? I suspect the conjecture is true and the answer should be Θ(k 2 )
Motivation and Consequences. This set system has been generalized to directed minor-free
graphs [2, 4] and geometric intersection graphs [5]. Resolving the conjecture either way give
use interesting new tools to work with in these settings.
If the conjecture is true, it would imply a simple algorithm (using separators) to compute
the diameter of an unweighted planar graph in O(n5/3 ) time (matching the best known
algorithm using Voronoi diagrams).
References
1
Shay Mozes, Nathan Wallheimer, and Oren Weimann. Improved compression of the
Okamura-Seymour metric. In ISAAC, volume 248 of LIPIcs, pages 27:1–27:19. Schloss
Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.
Adam Karczmarz and Da Wei Zheng. Subquadratic algorithms in minor-free digraphs:
2
(weighted) distance oracles, decrementai reachability, and more. In SODA, pages 4338–4351.
SIAM, 2025.
3
Jason Li and Merav Parter. Planar diameter via metric compression. In STOC, pages
152–163. ACM, 2019.
4
Hung Le and Christian Wulff-Nilsen. VC set systems in minor-free (di)graphs and applications. In SODA, pages 5332–5360. SIAM, 2024.
5
Hsien-Chih Chang, Jie Gao, and Hung Le. Computing diameter+2 in truly-subquadratic
time for unit-disk graphs. In SoCG, volume 293 of LIPIcs, pages 38:1–38:14. Schloss
Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.

5.7

Sparse (1 + ϵ)-emulator for Euclidean Point Sets

Hung Le (University of Massachusetts Amherst, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Hung Le

Given an Euclidean point set P say in R2 an emulator for P with stretch 1 + ϵ is a graph
G = (V, E) where P ⊆ V such that ∥x, y∥2 ≤ dG (x, y) ≤ (1 + ϵ) · ∥x, y∥2 for every pair of
points x, y ∈ P How many edges does G have to have?
Note that vertices in V \ P do not have to be points in R2 .
√
If V \ P are restricted be points in R2 then we know the answer: O(n/ ϵ) edges are both
necessary and sufficient. Nothing is known when V \ P are not restricted to be points in R2 .
Here is an embarrassingly simple case: points in P are on two opposite sides of a unit
√
square, and for each side, there are n = O(1/ ϵ) points, where the distance between any
√
two consecutive points is ϵ. The complete bipartite graph, which only use points in P and
√
has stretch 1 has O(1/ϵ) = O(n/ ϵ) edges. Could we beat this bound, using points that are
not in P (and also not in R2 )?

Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković

5.8

151

Tree Cover for Unit Ball Graphs

Jie Gao (Rutgers University – Piscataway, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Jie Gao

A tree cover for a metric space (X, d) is a collection of trees T such that for any two points
p, q ∈ X the following two conditions are true:
for every tree T ∈ T d(p, q) ≤ dT (p, q);
there is a tree T ∈ T such that dT (p, q) ≤ α · d(p, q).
The tree cover is called to have distortion α.
Tree covers are known to exist for many settings:
(−d+1)
d-dimensional Euclidean space: (1 + ϵ)-tree cover with O(ϵ 2 log( 1ϵ )) trees. [1]
Doubling metrics: (1 + ϵ)-tree cover with O(ϵ−d log( 1ϵ )) trees. [2]
Planar graphs: (1 + ϵ)-tree cover with O(1) trees. [3]
For unit disk graphs, notice that by using the tree cover of planar graphs, one can
immediately construct a O(1)-tree cover with O(1) trees, by using a constant planar spanner
and then results on planar graphs (e.g., [3]). Naturally one can ask, can we find a (1 + ϵ)-tree
cover for unweighted unit disk graphs? Through personal communication during the seminar,
there seems to be already ongoing work towards resolving the aforementioned question. What
is still open is whether such a tree cover can be found for unit ball graphs.
A second question to ask is, what is the best stretch factor one can get to approximate a
unit disk graph (or a general geometric intersection graph) by a planar graph?
For unit disk graphs, if we want to take a planar spanner graph (using only edges from
the input unit disk graph), the known constructions give a stretch factor such as 449 [4] and
341 [5]. Recently we could get a stretch factor of 286 if we allow Steiner vertices. But these
stretch factors are still fairly large. Can we do better? What is a lower bound?
References
1
Hsien-Chih Chang, Jonathan Conroy, Hung Le, Lazar Milenkovic, Shay Solomon, and Cuong
Than. Optimal Euclidean tree covers. In SoCG, volume 293 of LIPIcs, pages 37:1–37:15.
Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
Yair Bartal, Ora Nova Fandina, and Ofer Neiman. Covering metric spaces by few trees. J.
2
Comput. Syst. Sci., 130:26–42, 2022.
3
Hsien-Chih Chang, Jonathan Conroy, Hung Le, Lazar Milenkovic, Shay Solomon, and
Cuong Than. Covering planar metrics (and beyond): O(1) trees suffice. In FOCS, pages
2231–2261. IEEE, 2023.
4
Nicolas Catusse, Victor Chepoi, and Yann Vaxès. Planar hop spanners for unit disk graphs.
In ALGOSENSORS, volume 6451 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 16–30.
Springer, 2010.
5
Ahmad Biniaz. Plane hop spanners for unit disk graphs: Simpler and better. Comput.
Geom., 89:101622, 2020.

25212

152

25212 – Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms

5.9

Similarity of Curves (Fréchet Distance)

Omrit Filtser (The Open University of Israel – Ra’anana, IL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Omrit Filtser

A polygonal curve A : [0, n] → Rd consists of n line segments ai ai+1 for i = {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}
where ai = A(i).
The Fréchet distance between two polygonal curves A : [0, m] → Rd and B : [0, n] → Rd is
often described (informally) by the following analogy. Consider a person and a dog connected
by a leash, each walking along a curve from its starting point to its end point. Both can
control their speed but they are not allowed to backtrack. The Fréchet distance between the
two curves is the minimum length of a leash that is sufficient for traversing both curves in
this manner (for a formal definition, see below).
The discrete Fréchet distance (DFD for short) is a popular variant in which the two
curves are replaced by two sequences of points, and the person and dog are replaced by two
frogs, hopping from one point to the next along their respective sequences. The discrete
Fréchet distance is defined as the smallest maximum distance between the frogs that can be
achieved in such a joint sequence of hops.
Some background. The Fréchet distance can be computed in Õ(n2 ) time, and the discrete
version in O(n2 ) time, via DP approach. For both variants there is a lower bound of O(n2−ε )
(conditioned on SETH), even in 1D, and for an approximation factor of up to 3. The
best known approximation algorithm is a very recent breakthrough result [1]: a (7 + ε)approximation (w.h.p) in Õ(n1.99 ) time. Prior to that, the best approximation algorithms
presented trade-offs between approximation quality and running time (see e.g. [2, 3]).
Proximity queries. In short: Construct an efficient NNS data structure or a distance oracle,
under the (discrete) Fréchet distance.
Nearest Neighbor Search. Construct a compact data structure over a set C of n input
curves, each of length at most m such that given a query curve Q of length k one can
efficiently find the curve from C (approximately) closest to Q.
Distance oracle. Preprocess a curve of length m into a data structure such that given a
query curve of length k < m returns its (approximated) distance to the input curve in Õ(k)
time.
For both problems, under DFD, a (1 + ε) approximation and (near) linear query time
can be achieved, but with space exponential in k n · O( 1ε )kd for NNS [4], O( 1ε )kd for distance
oracle [5]).
Open questions. Can we avoid the exponential dependence on k in the space bound, by
allowing a constant approximation factor (instead of 1 + ε) and a slightly larger query time?
Or, by allowing O(log log n) approximation factor? Is the O( 1ε )kd factor in the space bound
necessary if we wish to have a small query time and an approximation factor of 1 + ε?
For the (continuous) Fréchet distance the situation is much more complicated. Recently
there has been some development in 1D case (see [6]).
Exat distance: For k ∈ {1, 2, 3} there are exact distance oracle with near linear size
√
and polylogarithmic query time [7]. For k = 4 the query time becomes O( n). Can it be
improved? (See also [8] for exact NNS under L∞ for k = 2.)

Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković

153

References
1
Siu-Wing Cheng, Haoqiang Huang, and Shuo Zhang. Constant approximation of Fréchet
distance in strongly subquadratic time. In STOC, pages 2329–2340. ACM, 2025.
2
Thijs van der Horst and Tim Ophelders. Faster Fréchet distance approximation through
truncated smoothing. In SoCG, volume 293 of LIPIcs, pages 63:1–63:15. Schloss Dagstuhl Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
3
Timothy M. Chan and Zahed Rahmati. An improved approximation algorithm for the
discrete Fréchet distance. Inf. Process. Lett., 138:72–74, 2018.
4
Arnold Filtser, Omrit Filtser, and Matthew J. Katz. Approximate nearest neighbor for
curves: Simple, efficient, and deterministic. Algorithmica, 85(5):1490–1519, 2023.
5
Arnold Filtser and Omrit Filtser. Static and streaming data structures for Fréchet distance
queries. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 19(4):39:1–39:36, 2023.
6
Karl Bringmann, Anne Driemel, André Nusser, and Ioannis Psarros. Tight bounds for
approximate near neighbor searching for time series under the Fréchet distance. In SODA,
pages 517–550. SIAM, 2022.
7
Boris Aronov, Tsuri Farhana, Matthew J. Katz, and Indu Ramesh. Discrete Fréchet
distance oracles. In SoCG, volume 293 of LIPIcs, pages 10:1–10:14. Schloss Dagstuhl Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
8
Boris Aronov, Omrit Filtser, Michael Horton, Matthew J. Katz, and Khadijeh Sheikhan.
Efficient nearest-neighbor query and clustering of planar curves. In WADS, volume 11646
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 28–42. Springer, 2019.

5.10

Dynamic Subgraph Connectivity

Liam Roditty (Bar-Ilan University – Ramat Gan, IL)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Liam Roditty

Let G = (V, E) be a fixed undirected graph. In the dynamic subgraph connectivity problem
each vertex of G is either marked as on or off. An update either turns off a vertex that is on
or turns on a vertex that is off. The data structure has to support connectivity queries on the
graph induced by the on vertices while vertices are being updated. The dynamic subgraph
connectivity problem was introduced in [1]. In [2] the first data structure for general graphs
with O(m0.94 ) amortized update time (using FMM) and Õ(m1/3 ) query time was presented.
In [3] the update time of [2] was improved to amortized update time of Õ(m2/3 ) (without
FMM) while keeping the query time Õ(m1/3 ).
A data structure with Õ(m4/5 ) worst case update time and Õ(m1/5 ) query time was
presented in [4]. A randomized data structure with Õ(m3/4 ) worst case update time and
Õ(m1/4 ) query time was presented in [5]. Notice that the product of the update time and
the query time is Õ(m) in all these results.
This is not a coincidence since there is CLB presented by [6] which states that there
is no algorithm with polynomial preprocessing time, O(mγ−Ω(1) ) amortized update time,
and O(m1−γ−Ω(1) ) amortized query time, for any constants 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1 as long as m ≤
min(n1/γ , n1/(1−γ) ).
Open problem. Does there exist an algorithm for dynamic subgraph connectivity with
worst-case update time of Õ(m2/3 ) and worst-case query time Õ(m1/3 )?

25212

154

25212 – Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms

References
1
Daniele Frigioni and Giuseppe F. Italiano. Dynamically switching vertices in planar graphs.
Algorithmica, 28(1):76–103, 2000.
2
Timothy M. Chan. Dynamic subgraph connectivity with geometric applications. In STOC,
pages 7–13. ACM, 2002.
3
Timothy M. Chan, Mihai Pătraşcu, and Liam Roditty. Dynamic connectivity: Connecting
to networks and geometry. SIAM J. Comput., 40(2):333–349, 2011.
Ran Duan. New data structures for subgraph connectivity. In ICALP (1), volume 6198 of
4
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 201–212. Springer, 2010.
5
Ran Duan and Le Zhang. Faster randomized worst-case update time for dynamic subgraph
connectivity. In WADS, volume 10389 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 337–348.
Springer, 2017.
6
Monika Henzinger, Sebastian Krinninger, Danupon Nanongkai, and Thatchaphol Saranurak.
Unifying and strengthening hardness for dynamic problems via the online matrix-vector
multiplication conjecture. In STOC, pages 21–30. ACM, 2015.

5.11

Sparse and Light (k-)Banyans

Sándor Kisfaludi-Bak (Aalto University, FI)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Sándor Kisfaludi-Bak

A banyan of a point set P ⊂ Rd is a geometric graph G where for any terminal set K ⊂ P
we have that G contains a subtree covering K whose weight is at most 1 + ϵ times the weight
of the minimum Euclidean Steiner tree of K. (The minimum Euclidean Steiner tree of K is
the connected geometric graph of minimum weight that contains K in its vertex set.)
A k-banyan is as above, but we only require the property for sets K of size at most k.
With this definition, 2-banyans are simply (Steiner) spanners.
What is the best trade-off between the banyan stretch and the number of Steiner vertices
(or the number of edges) of a (k−)banyan for a given dimension d What about 3-banyans?
What metrics allow light (k−)banyans? What is the optimal lightness in Rd ?
There is plenty of work on Steiner spanners, so the case k = 2 is well-studied and we have
good answers for the optimal sparsity and lightness for fixed d in this case. Light banyans
have been constructed in a handful of papers cited below, but with the goal of using them
for Steiner tree/forest algorithms; I suspect that these constructions are far from optimal in
terms of stretch/edge count and stretch/lightness trade-offs.
Starting points are: [1, 2, 3]. The appendix of [4] may also be relevant.
References
1
Yair Bartal and Lee-Ad Gottlieb. Near-linear time approximation schemes for Steiner tree
and forest in low-dimensional spaces. In STOC, pages 1028–1041. ACM, 2021.
2
David Eisenstat, Philip N. Klein, and Claire Mathieu. An efficient polynomial-time approximation scheme for Steiner forest in planar graphs. In SODA, pages 626–638. ACM-SIAM,
2012.
3
Satish Rao and Warren D. Smith. Approximating geometrical graphs via “spanners” and
“banyans”. In STOC, pages 540–550. ACM, 1998.
4
Sándor Kisfaludi-Bak, Jesper Nederlof, and Karol Wegrzycki. A gap-ETH-tight approximation scheme for Euclidean TSP. In FOCS, pages 351–362. IEEE, 2021.

Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković

5.12

155

Online Spanners in Metric Spaces

Sujoy Bhore (Indian Institute of Technology Bombay – Mumbai, IN)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Sujoy Bhore

We are given a sequence of points (s1 , . . . , sn ) in a metric space, where the points are presented
one-by-one, i.e., point si is revealed at step i and Si = {s1 , . . . , si } for i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. The
objective of an online spanner algorithm is to maintain a tspanner Gi for Si for all i. The
algorithm is allowed to add edges to the spanner when a new point arrives, however, it is
not allowed to remove any edge from the spanner. Moreover, the algorithm does not know
the total number of points in advance. The performance of an online tspanner algorithm is
measured by comparing it with the offline optimum using the standard notion of competitive
ALG(σ)
ratio, which is defined as supσ OP
T (σ) , where the supremum is taken over all input sequences
σ, OP T (σ) is the minimum weight of a tspanner for the (unordered) set of points in σ,
and ALG(σ) denotes the weight of the tspanner produced by the algorithm. Note that, to
measure the competitive ratio, it is important that σ is a finite sequence of points.
Problem. Determine the best possible bounds for the competitive ratios for the weight/lightness, sparsity, and stretch of online t-spanners, for t > 1.
References: [1, 2, 3, 4].
References
Sujoy Bhore and Csaba D. Tóth. Online Euclidean spanners. ACM Trans. Algorithms,
1
21(1):5:1–5:22, 2025.
2
Sujoy Bhore, Arnold Filtser, Hadi Khodabandeh, and Csaba D. Tóth. Online spanners in
metric spaces. SIAM J. Discret. Math., 38(1):1030–1056, 2024.
3
Noga Alon and Yossi Azar. On-line Steiner trees in the Euclidean plane. In SCG, pages
337–343. ACM, 1992.
4
Makoto Imase and Bernard M. Waxman. Dynamic Steiner tree problem. SIAM J. Discret.
Math., 4(3):369–384, 1991.

5.13

Steiner (1 + ε)-spanners in Rd

Csaba D. Tóth (California State University Northridge – Los Angeles, US)
License

Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
© Csaba D. Tóth

For any set S of n points in Euclidean plane and ε > 0 one can construct a Steiner (1 + ε)spanner of lightness O(ε−1 ) where the lightness is the ratio between the weight of the spanner
and the weight of an MST for the same point set. This bound is the best possible in the
plane. In dimensions d ≥ 3, however, the current best upper and lower bounds do not match:
Ω(ε−d/2 ) and Õ(ε(1−d)/2 ).
Problem. Close the gap between the upper and lower bounds for d ≥ 3 (or, at least for
d = 3).
References: [1, 2].
References
1 Sujoy Bhore and Csaba D. Tóth. Euclidean Steiner spanners: Light and sparse. SIAM J.
Discret. Math., 36(3):2411–2444, 2022.
2 Hung Le and Shay Solomon. A unified framework for light spanners. In STOC, pages
295–308. ACM, 2023.
25212

156

25212 – Metric Sketching and Dynamic Algorithms

6

Working Groups
Jonathan Conroy, Liam Roditty, and Hsien-Chih Chang: DAG Covers for Directed Graph
Classes
Sujoy Bhore, Sándor Kisfaludi-Bak, Lazar Milenković, Csaba D. Tóth, Karol Wegrzycki,
and Sampson Wong: Plane (1 + ε)-spanners in R2
Sergio Cabello, Jie Gao, Paloma Lima, and Nicole Wein: Vantage Point Selection
Édouard Bonnet, Hung Le, and Michał Pilipczuk: Fat Minors
Prosenjit Bose, Omrit Filtser, and Linda Kleist: Planar Spanners
Arnold Filtser, Eunjin Oh, Marcin Pilipczuk, and Da Wei Zheng: Patterns in Unweighted
Planar Graphs

Sujoy Bhore, Jie Gao, Hung Le, Csaba D. Tóth, and Lazar Milenković

157

Participants
Sujoy Bhore
Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay – Mumbai, IN
Édouard Bonnet
ENS – Lyon, FR
Prosenjit Bose
Carleton University –
Ottawa, CA
Sergio Cabello
University of Ljubljana, SI
Hsien-Chih Chang
Dartmouth College –
Hanover, US
Jonathan Conroy
Dartmouth College –
Hanover, US
Arnold Filtser
Bar-Ilan University –
Ramat Gan, IL
Omrit Filtser
The Open University of Israel –
Ra’anana, IL

Jie Gao
Rutgers University –
Piscataway, US
Sándor Kisfaludi-Bak
Aalto University, FI
Linda Kleist
Universität Potsdam, DE
Hung Le
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, US
Paloma Lima
IT University of
Copenhagen, DK
Lazar Milenković
Tel Aviv University, IL
Wolfgang Mulzer
FU Berlin, DE
Eunjin Oh
POSTECH – Pohang, KR
Marcin Pilipczuk
University of Warsaw, PL

Michał Pilipczuk
University of Warsaw, PL
Liam Roditty
Bar-Ilan University –
Ramat Gan, IL
Csaba D. Tóth
California State University
Northridge – Los Angeles, US
Karol Wegrzycki
MPI für Informatik –
Saarbrücken, DE
Nicole Wein
University of Michigan –
Ann Arbor, US
Sampson Wong
University of Copenhagen, DK
Da Wei Zheng
University of Illinois –
Urbana-Champaign, US

25212

