Bootstrapping Homomorphic Encryption via
Functional Encryption
Nir Bitansky1 !
Tel Aviv University, Israel
Tomer Solomon !
Tel Aviv University, Israel
        Abstract
Homomorphic encryption is a central object in modern cryptography, with far-reaching applications.
Constructions supporting homomorphic evaluation of arbitrary Boolean circuits have been known
for over a decade, based on standard lattice assumptions. However, these constructions are leveled,
meaning that they only support circuits up to some a-priori bounded depth. These leveled con-
structions can be bootstrapped into fully homomorphic ones, but this requires additional circular
security assumptions, which are construction-dependent, and where reductions to standard lattice
assumptions are no longer known. Alternative constructions are known based on indistinguishability
obfuscation, which has been recently constructed under standard assumptions. However, this
alternative requires subexponential hardness of the underlying primitives.
    We prove a new bootstrapping theorem based on functional encryption, which is known based
on standard polynomial hardness assumptions. As a result we obtain the first fully homomorphic
encryption scheme that avoids both circular security assumptions and super-polynomial hardness
assumptions. The construction is secure against uniform adversaries, and can be made non-uniformly
secure assuming a generalization of the time-hierarchy theorem, which follows for example from
non-uniform ETH.
    At the heart of the construction is a new proof technique based on cryptographic puzzles and
decomposable obfuscation. Unlike most cryptographic reductions, our security reduction does not
fully treat the adversary as a black box, but rather makes explicit use of its running time (or circuit
size).

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Cryptographic protocols

Keywords and phrases Fully Homomorphic Encryption, Polynomial Assumptions, Cryptographic
Puzzles

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2023.17

Funding This work was supported in part by the European Research Council (ERC) under the Euro-
pean Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 101042417,
acronym SPP) and by ISF grant 2137/19.


    1    Introduction
Starting from the breakthrough work of Gentry [17], homomorphic encryption has changed
the face of cryptography, bringing about the era of encrypted computation, with an abundance
of new applications and new cryptographic tools. In the context of homomorphic encryption
for general Boolean circuits, an important distinction is between schemes that are fully
homomorphic and schemes that are only leveled homomorphic. Leveled homomorphic schemes
have an a-priori bound d on the depth of circuits for which homomorphic evaluation is
supported. In particular, the size of parameters in these schemes may scale with d. In
contrast, fully homomorphic schemes allow to evaluate circuits of arbitrary polynomial depth
with no a-priori bound.


1
    Member of the Check Point Institute of Information Security.
            © Nir Bitansky and Tomer Solomon;
            licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
14th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2023).
Editor: Yael Tauman Kalai; Article No. 17; pp. 17:1–17:23
                   Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
17:2   Bootstrapping Homomorphic Encryption via Functional Encryption


            By now there are various, relatively simple, constructions of leveled homomorphic encryp-
       tion schemes based on standard lattice assumptions (c.f. [11, 10, 19]). However, constructing
       fully homomorphic encryption from similar assumptions remains a long standing open
       problem. Nonetheless, Gentry [17] showed that by making an additional circular security
       assumption the above schemes (and in fact any leveled scheme that can evaluate its own
       decryption circuit) can be made full homomorphic. However, in this case we no longer
       have a reduction to similar lattice assumptions. Furthermore, the corresponding assumption
       is construction-dependent, in the sense that it assumes circular security of any specific
       encryption scheme considered, rather than based on a clean problem that can be studied in
       isolation.
            An alternative construction of fully homomorphic encryption was shown by Canetti et
       al. [13] based on indistinguishability obfuscation. Combining this with the recent breakthrough
       of Jain, Lin, and Sahai [23, 24] who constructed indistinguishability obfuscation from
       standard assumptions, leads to fully homomorphic encryption from standard assumptions.
       The resulting construction, however, suffers from a caveat – it requires that the underlying
       assumptions are all sub-exponentially secure.
            The work of Agrikola et al. [1] showed that fully homomorphic encryption can be obtained
       from polynomially-secure indistinguishability obfuscation and extremely lossy functions
       (ELFs) [33]. However, the above mentioned constructions of indistinguishability obfuscation
       are based on subexponential hardness assumptions, whereas ELFs are only known based on
       exponential hardness assumptions. Other constructions of fully homomorphic encryption are
       based on non-standard forms of obfuscation or functional encryption, which are not known
       to be reducible to standard assumptions [2].
            Overall, a construction of fully homomorphic encryption based on standard polynomial
       assumptions has yet to be achieved.

       1.1    Our Result
       In this work we prove a new bootstrapping theorem based on functional encryption.
       ▶ Theorem 1 (Informal). Assuming (polynomially-secure) semi-compact public-key functional
       encryption, any leveled homomorphic encryption scheme that can evaluate (slightly more
       than) its own decryption circuit, can be turned into a fully-homomorphic scheme against
       efficient uniform adversaries.
       Such functional encryption schemes were recently constructed by Jain, Lin, and Sahai from
       standard polynomial assumptions (LPN, Bilinear SXDH, and shallow PRGs) [23, 24] and
       thus combining with known leveled homomorphic encryption schemes (e.g. [11] from the
       LWE [30]), we obtain the first fully homomorphic encryption scheme that does not rely on
       circular security nor does it require super-polynomial hardness assumptions.

       Non-uniform Adversaries. Whereas above we state security for uniform adversaries, we can
       further obtain security against non-uniform adversaries, by making an additional complexity-
       theoretic assumption that generalizes the time-hierarchy theorem and follows for example
       from non-uniform ETH. We refer the reader to the technical overview for more details.

       Polynomial Security through Cryptographic Puzzles. Our main conceptual contribut-ion
       is a new proof technique that leverages cryptographic puzzles for the sake of polynomial
       security. An interesting aspect of the technique is that unlike most cryptographic security
       reductions, our security reduction does not fully treat the adversary as a black box, but
       rather makes explicit use of its running time (or circuit size).
N. Bitansky and T. Solomon                                                                               17:3


1.2    Technical Overview
In this section we provide an overview of the main new technical ideas behind our results.
    We first briefly recall the syntax and requirements from leveled and fully homomorphic
encryption schemes. Homomorphic encryption scheme consists of an encryption algorithm Enc,
a decryption algorithm Dec, and a homomorphic evaluation algorithm Eval. These algorithms
have associated public encryption and evaluation keys ek, evk and a secret decryption key dk,
which are sampled jointly from some generation algorithm Gen. In a leveled scheme, this
generation algorithm depends on the maximal depth d of supported circuits, and the size of
keys ek, evk, dk may scale polynomially with d. In contrast, in fully homomorphic schemes
the keys are of fixed size, and yet can support the homomorphic evaluation of circuits of
arbitrary polynomial depth.

Gentry’s Bootstrapping. Our starting point is Gentry’s bootstrapping [17]. Here the basic
idea is that a leveled scheme that supports slightly more than the depth d∗ of its own
decryption circuit can be transformed into a leveled scheme for computations of arbitrary
depth. Specifically, to support circuits of depth d ≫ d∗ , we generate d + 1 sets of keys
(ek0 , evk0 , dk0 ), . . . , (ekd , evkd , dkd ), and produce a new set of keys:

   ek = ek0
                                                                 
            Encek1 (dk0 ) Encek2 (dk1 ) . . .   Encekd (dkd−1 )
   evk =
               evk1          evk2       ...         evkd
   dk = dkd

Then, starting from an encryption of the message Encek0 , a circuit of arbitrary depth d can
be homomorphically evaluated layer by layer according to the following invariant: given
encryptions Enceki (vi ) of the circuit wire values vi in layer i, we can obtain encryptions
Enceki+1 (vi+1 ) of the wire values vi+1 in the next layer. This is done starting from
Enceki+1 (dki ), which is part of the evaluation key evk, and homomorphically evaluating the
circuit that given as input the decryption key dki , decrypts Enceki (vi ), and computes vi+1
from vi . The security of the scheme reduces to that of the underlying encryption by a
standard hybrid argument, where starting from Encekd (dkd−1 ), we switch each encryption
Enceki (dki−1 ) with an encryption Enceki (0) of garbage (say, the all-zero string), which is
possible as we have already eliminated dki from the adversary’s view.
    The above is still a leveled scheme as the size of keys grows with the maximal depth d
that can be evaluated. To make the scheme fully homomorphic, Gentry samples a single
set of keys (ek, evk, dk) and collapses the chain of encryptions Encek1 (dk0 ) . . . Encekd (dkd−1 )
into one encryption Encek (dk) where the decryption key is encrypted under its corresponding
encryption key. While the size of keys is now fixed regardless of the depth of evaluated circuit,
we can no longer invoke the above reduction to the security of the underlying encryption
scheme. Proving security requires that the underlying scheme is circularly secure, namely
that an encryption of the scheme’s own decryption key does not compromise its security.

Compressing the Keys via Obfuscation. Aiming to avoid the circular security assumpti-on,
Canetti et al. [13] consider an alternative approach toward compressing Gentry’s bootstrap-
ping. (To be more precise, the exact details in [13] are somewhat different, but the core is
essentially similar). The basic observation is that, using a pseudo-random function (PRF)
family {fk }k , the process of generating the long evaluation key evk can be described by a
succinct circuit EVK that has a hardwired PRF key k. Specifically, for i ≥ 1, the randomness



                                                                                                       ITCS 2023
17:4   Bootstrapping Homomorphic Encryption via Functional Encryption


       ri for generating the i-th set of keys, and encryption randomness ri′ for the i-th encryption,
       are both derived using PRF fk (i). The succinct circuit EVK given input i, derives the key
       generation randomness (ri−1 , ri ) and encryption randomness ri′ , computes the corresponding
       keys, and outputs (evki , Enceki (dki−1 ; ri′ )). We then replace the previously large evaluation key
       evk with an obfuscated version EVK g of the succinct circuit EVK. To allow for homomorphic
       evaluation of circuits of arbitrary polynomial depth, the space of input indices [d] is taken to
       be of super-polynomial size λω(1) in the security parameter λ.
           Using similar techniques to those in [5, 13] this construction can be proven secure if
       the obfuscation is instantiated using indistinguishability obfuscation (IO) and the PRF is
       puncturable [8, 25, 9] (the concept of puncturing is discussed in more detail later on). However,
       the proof requires that the PRF, IO, and underlying leveled homomorphic encryption are
       all super-polynomially secure. Roughly speaking, the cause for this loss is that the security
       reduction extends the previously described hybrid argument, and in particular suffers a loss
       in the indistinguishability gap through d = λω(1) hybrids.
           Overall, this construction has two sources of super-polynomial loss:
        1. The super-polynomial number of hybrids described above.
        2. Known IO reductions incur a loss proportional to the size of the input space of obfuscated
           circuits, which in this case is again super-polynomial (and this is in fact conjectured to
           be inherent [18]).

         Our solution essentially addresses these two sources of super-polynomial loss separately.
       We next explain the main ideas involved.

       Polynomial Number of Hybrids through Cryptographic Puzzles. The essential problem is
       that the two requirements of full homomorphism on one hand, and a polynomial reduction on
       the other hand, collide. To support computations of arbitrary polynomial depth, we cannot
       restrict the length d of the key chain to any specific polynomial. At the same time if the
       length d of the key chain is super-polynomial, then the number of hybrids and loss in the
       security proof is also super-polynomial. Roughly speaking, to avoid the super-polynomial
       loss, we aim that an adversary of polynomial running time (or circuit size) t = poly(λ) will
       only be able to access a corresponding prefix of the key chain

            Encek1 (dk0 ) Encek2 (dk1 ) . . .   Encekt (dkt−1 ) Encekt+1 (dkt ) . . .   Encekd (dkd−1 )
                                                                                                        .
               evk1          evk2       ...         evkt           evkt+1       ...         evkd

       Had we managed that, then the number of hybrids will become proportional to the adversary’s
       polynomial running time, as required.
           To achieve this guarantee, we use an appropriate notion of cryptographic puzzles. Generally
       speaking, cryptographic puzzles are encryption schemes where decryption does not require a
       decryption key, but rather the investment of some pre-specified amount of computational
       resources. Relevant to our context are relaxed time-lock puzzles (RTLPs) as defined in [6],
       where this resource is simply time. Specifically, a RTLP with gap ε < 1 allows anyone to
       encrypt a message m relative to a difficulty parameter T so that the resulting ciphertext
       (aka puzzle) Z can be decrypted in time ≈ T , whereas adversaries running in time at most
       T ε do not learn anything about the underlying message. Encryption on the other hand, only
       requires time polylog(T ). (Both encryption and decryption also have some fixed polynomial
       dependence on the security parameter λ, which we suppress here for simplicity.)
           Such RTLPs relax the notion of (non-relaxed) TLPs by Rivest, Shamir, and Wagner [31],
       which requires that decryption is hard even for parallel adversaries that have sequential
       time T ε , although possibly a number of processors larger than T . RTLPs against uniform
N. Bitansky and T. Solomon                                                                             17:5


adversaries are constructed in [6] based on succinct randomized encodings [5, 12, 27], which
in turn can be constructed from indistinguishability obfuscation with logarithmic input space
[3, 16, 26] and accordingly also from standard polynomial assumptions [23, 24]. Obtaining
RTLPs against non-uniform adversaries requires an additional rather mild assumption that
generalizes (unconditional) time-hierarchy theorems such as [21] and [4], which is used in [6].
We elaborate on this later on.

Augmenting the Construction with RTLPs. Equipped with RTLPs we augment the
previous construction as follows. Rather than considering the circuit EVK that explicitly
outputs the key chain, we augment the circuit EVK so that it outputs increasingly difficult
puzzles encrypting the key chain. That is, on input i, EVK will not output Enceki (dki−1 ) in
the clear, but rather output a RTLP Zi encrypting Enceki (dki−1 ). The required randomness
for computing the puzzle Zi , will again be derived by applying another PRF fk′ to i. In
terms of functionality, we can still homomorphically evaluate circuits of arbitrary polynomial
depth d, by simply solving the puzzles. This only incurs an additive overhead of ≈ d2 (we
explain later how this overhead can be reduced). At the same time, we are now able to
obtain a polynomial reduction, as we effectively prevent the adversary from accessing the
key chain, except for a polynomially bounded prefix.
    In a bit more detail, given an adversary of polynomial running time t = poly(λ). The
hybrid strategy will start from index T ≈ t1/ε , where ε is the constant difficulty gap of
the RTLP. Intuitively, we can now replace the puzzle ZT encrypting the key chain link
EncekT (dkT −1 ), with a puzzle that encrypts garbage. Indeed, the adversary’s running time t
is at most T ε , and thus by the puzzle security guarantee, it cannot tell the difference. Now,
having eliminated the secret key dkT −1 from the adversary’s view, we can proceed with the
hybrid argument to the next link and so on. Overall, we will have a polynomial number
T = t1/ε of hybrids. The exact details behind this hybrid argument are overall similar to [13],
they are based on IO, used to obfuscate the augmented circuit EVK, and puncturable PRFs.
(Below, when discussing how to avoid general-purpose IO, we discuss some of these details.)
    Unlike typical cryptographic reductions that treat the adversary as a complete black-box,
regardless of its efficiency, our reduction depends on the specific running time of the adversary,
and has a diagonalization flavour. Indeed, in the RTLPs from [6] underlies the time hierarchy
theorem, based on diagonalization.

Avoiding the Super-polynomial Loss of General Purpose IO. Having removed the first
mentioned source of super-polynomial loss (the super-polynomial number of hybrids), we now
turn to deal with the second source, which is the inherent loss in using general-purpose IO.
Indeed, there are several known cases where constructions based on IO were subsequently
improved to obtain constructions directly from (polynomially-secure) functional encryption
[14, 15]. These latter works were later abstracted (and extended) by Liu and Zhandry [28]
into a general framework called decomposable obfuscation (DO).
    Like IO, DO recompiles circuits into new circuits with the same functionality. In terms
of security, DO relaxes IO as follows. While IO guarantees that obfuscations of any two
circuits C0 , C1 of the same size and functionality are computationally indistinguishable, DO
requires that this equivalence has a certificate of a specific form. Specifically, for input space
{0, 1}n , such a certificate is a set of nodes T C ⊆ {0, 1}≤n in the corresponding full binary
tree such that:
    It exactly covers the leafs, in the sense that every x ∈ {0, 1}n has exactly one ancestor in
    T C. Hence, it is called a tree covering.



                                                                                                     ITCS 2023
17:6   Bootstrapping Homomorphic Encryption via Functional Encryption


           For every x ∈ T C, the two simplified restrictions C0 (x, ·) and C1 (x, ·) are identical as
           circuits.
           Here by “simplified”, we mean that the partial input x is propagated through the circuit in
           the natural way to make it simpler (e.g. AND(0, b) is turned to the constant 0, AND(1, b)
           is turned to b, unused wires and gates are removed, and so on).
       In other words, the circuits C0 and C1 can both be decomposed to the same fragments
       {C0 (x, ·) : x ∈ T C}. Such two circuits C0 , C1 are called τ -decomposing-equivalent (or
       τ -equivalent in short) if the size of the tree covering T C is τ . Liu and Zhandry construct
       DO based on functional encryption. The security loss in their reduction, with respect to
       τ -equivalent circuits, is proportional to τ ; in particular, for polynomially-equivalent circuits
       polynomially-secure functional encryption suffices. Importantly, the complexity of their
       obfuscation (in particular the size of obfuscated circuits) does not grow with τ . We show
       that relying on DO, and performing certain adaptations to the construction to make it
       “decomposition friendly”, we can prove security. As a corollary we can base our result on
       polynomially-secure functional encryption. We next provide some more details.


       The High-Level Hybrid Structure. The goal of the proof is to show that we can replace the
       obfuscated key chain circuit EVK
                                     g with an obfuscated circuit that is independent of the initial
       decryption key dk0 , and thus any encryption Encek0 (m) is semantically secure. This is shown
       by a hybrid argument that gradually changes the circuit EVK till we can completely erase
       dk0 from it description. We next explain the high-level structure of the hybrid argument. We
       first describe how the functionality of the circuit changes through the hybrids and afterwards
       turn to discuss how this changes are realized to guarantee indistinguishability.
           The first hybrid changes the behavior at a point T , where instead of computing a puzzle
       that encrypts the key chain link EncekT (dkT −1 ), it encrypts garbage. As already mentioned,
       T is chosen according to the (polynomial) adversary running time t and the difficulty gap ε.
       Naming this first hybrid HT , we then consider hybrids HT −1 , . . . , H1 , where in hybrid Hi ,
       on every index j in the interval [i, T − 1], the circuit outputs a puzzle Zj that encrypts a
       fake key chain link Encekj (0) rather than the real link Encekj (dkj−1 ). In particular, in the
       last hybrid H1 , the secret key dk0 is not used at all.


       Indistinguishability through Decomposability. Intuitively, to claim indistinguishability of
       the real obfuscated circuit EVK and its tweaked version in hybrid HT , we wish to invoke
       the RTLP security, whereas, to claim indistinguishability between every Hi and Hi−1 , we
       wish the invoke the semantic of the encryption Enceki . Indeed, had all the outputs were
       simply hardwired into the circuit EVK, we could have done exactly that. However, recall
       that these values are each inferred through computation using a PRF (which was the whole
       point behind compression).
           Roughly speaking, when using IO this difficulty is overcome by using the concept of
       puncturable PRFs (starting from the work of Sahai and Waters [32] and essentially in all
       subsequent IO-based constructions). Such PRFs allow creating punctured PRF keys that
       enable computation of any point except for one punctured point, whereas the value at the
       punctured point remains pseudorandom. Intuitively, this allows hardwiring into the circuit
       one output at a time, and replacing it with a new desired output that is computationally
       indistinguishable. The transition from this “hardwired output form” to and from the
       “computed from the seed form” is enabled by the guarantee of IO, since these two forms are
       just two ways of computing the same output.
N. Bitansky and T. Solomon                                                                              17:7


    Using DO we aim to follow a similar strategy, but have to make sure that the transitions
between the two “hardwired” and “computed” forms are not only functionally equivalent,
but also decomposing equivalent. For this purpose, we rely on the decomposable equivalent
of puncturable PRFs, which are decomoposable PRFs (DPRFs) [28]. Roughly speaking, such
a PRF has the property that when its evaluation circuit fk is decomposed according to
a tree covering T C, any fragment fk (x, ·) where x ∈ T C is a pseudorandom function (of
the remaining bits), even given all other fragments fk (y, ·) such that y ∈ T C \ x. Liu and
Zhandry observe that the GGM PRF [20] is in fact a decomposable PRF.
    DPRFs together with DO allow for example to transition quite easily from the real
obfuscated circuit EVK to the one obfuscated in HT (which on input T outputs a puzzle
ZT encrypting garbage). This is done by decomposing the circuit EVK according to a tree
covering T C that contains the input T (which is a leaf in the binary input tree). This
effectively induces a similar decomposition of the underlying DPRF fk′ used to derive
randomness for puzzles. Here any fragment EVK(y, ·) such that y ∈ T C \ T contains as
a sub-circuit the corresponding DPRF fragment fk (y, ·), and is otherwise independent of
the seed k. The fragment EVK(T, ·) is in fact a constant, which is just the output of the
circuit; namely, it is the the puzzle ZT generated using randomness fk (T ). Invoking the
DPRF security, we can resample ZT using true independent randomness and now invoke
the puzzle security to replace it with a new puzzle ZT that encrypts garbage. (Formally, we
need to consider a version of EVK that is decomposed according to T C and then efficiently
recomposed in a canonical way into a circuit. We refer to the body for details.)


Technical Challenges in the Next Hybrids. The above is a typical use case for DO, and its
relative simplicity stems from the fact that the pseudorandom coins fk (T ) are not used for
any other input i ̸= T . The next transitions between hybrids Hi and Hi−1 are more subtle.
    Recall that unlike the randomness used to generate puzzles, the randomness used to
generate keys is correlated between subsequent inputs. As at any input i, we derive both ri−1
to produce dki−1 as well as ri to produce eki . Had we used IO rather than DO this wouldn’t
be an issue. Indeed, by the time we deal with input i, we have already changed the output
behavior on input i + 1, so that it does not use dki , accordingly puncturing the corresponding
PRF fk at point j does not change the functionality of the overall circuit at point j + 1.
However, in the case of DO things are more subtle. When considering a decomposition
according to some T C ∋ i as described before, we need to consider the composition of both
the DPRF circuit fk (·), but also the shifted circuit fk ((·) − 1). While we are guaranteed
that for any y ∈ T C \ i, fk (y, ·) does not leak information about fk (i), this is not necessarily
guaranteed for fk ((y, ·) − 1), when considering an arbitrary tree covering containing i.
    Our solution is to consider a tree covering with a specific structure that is decomposition
compatible with respect to the function x 7→ x−1. In this tree covering, for any x ∈ T C \{ i },
either |x| = n or x = p||1, where p is not a prefix of i. In the first case where |x| = n we
fully compute the circuit on x, and in particular we fully compute x − 1. So if x ̸= i + 1
the DPRF circuit is evaluated on x − 1 ̸= i so the output of the circuit on that value does
not leak fk (i). The case x = i + 1 is also not problematic since we have already altered
the functionality of the circuit on that input to encrypt garbage instead of dki , so fk (i)
is not leaked. Alternatively, |x| < n and has the form x = p||1 where p is not a prefix of
i. In this case, assuming a suitable implementation which we formalize, we can partially
evaluate the function x 7→ x − 1 to get the prefix p as a partial output, and then continue
with partial evaluation of the DPRF circuit on p. Since p is not a prefix of i, fk (p, ·) does
not leak information about fk (i).



                                                                                                      ITCS 2023
17:8   Bootstrapping Homomorphic Encryption via Functional Encryption


       On RTLPs Against Non-Uniform Adversaries. As mentioned RTLPs against uniform
       adversaries can be based on (polynomial) functional encryption [6]. We observe that RTLPs
       against non-uniform adversaries, with some gap ε < 1, can be obtained by a similar
       construction and proof to that of [6], but require and additional complexity assumption.
       ▶ Assumption 2. There exists a constant ε < 1 such that for any polynomial t(·) there exists
       a language L ∈ Dtime(t) such that any family C = {Cλ } of size-tε (λ) circuits fails to decide
       Lλ = L ∩ {0, 1}λ for all large enough λ.
           We find this assumption rather mild. It can be seen as a generalization of the (uncondition-
       al) time-hierarchy theorem for uniform computation. It is in the same spirit of Nisan-
       Impagliazzo-Wigderson style assumptions used to derandomize BPP [29, 22]. We also note
       that this assumption follows for instance from the non-uniform ETH assumption. (In
       the body, we slightly relax this assumption to also allow for some fixed polynomial size
       non-uniformity in order to solve L.)

       On the Overhead of Homomorphic Evaluation. As mentioned above, homomorphically
       evaluating a circuit of depth d in our scheme incurs an additive overhead of ≈ d2 . Indeed,
       as the complexity of puzzles grows with time, the overall work needed is proportional to
       P
          i∈[d] i. This overhead can be reduced to ≈ d by embedding cryptographic puzzles only in a
       sparse set of positions rather than in every position as described before. For instance, we
       can embed a puzzle in every position that is a power of two. This way the overall work is
                   i
       P
          i∈log d 2 = O(d). This strategy still enables a polynomial security reduction.
           While the amortized overhead in the above adaptation is linear, most of the computational
       overhead is incurred toward the end of the homomorphic evaluation. However, by another
       simple tweak to the scheme, we can ensure that the worst-case overhead in each individual
       step is fixed and independent of the total depth of the computation. The idea is to equally
       divide the process of solving the puzzle corresponding to position 2i among all 2i−1 steps in
       the interval [2i−1 , 2i ), so that at every step we incur a fixed overhead. This can be easily
       done by obtaining the corresponding puzzle already at step 2i−1 and unrolling the puzzle
       computation through the next 2i−1 steps.

        2     Preliminaries
       Prefixes.
          Let || denote string concatenation, e.g. if x = 0 and y = 1 then x||y = 01. Given a string
          x ∈ zo∗ , let |x| be its length.
          Let xj be the j − th bit of x, for i ≤ j let xi,..,j be xi ||...||xj , and let x[j] be x1,j , i.e. the
          prefix of x of length j.
          Given two strings a, b ∈ {0, 1}≤n , we say a ⪯ b if a is a prefix of b and say they are prefix
          free if a ⪯̸ b and b ⪯̸ a. Given a set T ⊆ {0, 1}≤n and p ∈ {0, 1}≤n , p is prefix free with
          respect to T if for any p′ ∈ T , p and p′ are prefix free. We say a set T ⊆ {0, 1}≤n is prefix
          free, if for any p ∈ T , p is prefix free with respect to T \ p, i.e. any two different p, p′ ∈ T
          are prefix free.

       Efficient Adversaries.
           We denote by PPT probabilistic polynomial-time Turing machines.
           For a PPT algorithm M , we denote by M (x; r) the output of M on input x and random
           coins r, and by M (x) the random variable, given by sampling the coins r uniformly at
           random.
N. Bitansky and T. Solomon                                                                             17:9


   A polynomial-size circuit family C is a sequence of circuits C = { Cλ }λ∈N , such that each
   circuit Cλ is of polynomial size λO(1) and has λO(1) input and output bits. We also
   consider probabilistic circuits that may toss random coins.
   An adversary A is said to be t-efficient if A is either a PPT algorithm with time bound
   t(·), or a circuit family C = { Cλ }λ∈N where the size of each circuit Cλ is bounded by
   t(λ).
   An adversary A is said to be uniform efficient if A is a PPT algorithm. Similarly, A is
   said to be non-uniform efficient if A a polynomial-size circuit family C.
   An adversary A is said to be efficient if it is either uniform efficient or non-uniform
   efficient.
   A function f : N → [0, 1] is negligible if f (λ) = λ−ω(1) and is noticeable if f (λ) = λ−O(1) .
   Two ensembles of random variables X = {Xi }λ∈N,i∈Iλ , Y = {Yi }λ∈N,i∈Iλ over the same
   set of indices I = ∪· λ∈N Iλ are said to be computationally indistinguishable (respectively,
   statistically indistinguishable), denoted by X ≈c Y (respectively, X ≈s Y), if for every
   polynomial-size (respectively, unbounded) distinguisher A = { Aλ }λ∈N there exists a
   negligible function negl such that for all λ ∈ N, i ∈ Iλ ,

       |Pr(A(Xi ) = 1) − Pr(A(Yi ) = 1)| ≤ negl(λ)

2.1    Relaxed Time-Lock Puzzles
We adapt the definitions of [6] for puzzles. A puzzle instance is associated with a pair of
parameters: a security parameter λ determining the cryptographic security of the puzzle,
and a difficulty parameter t determining how computationally difficult is to solve the puzzle.

▶ Definition 3 (Relaxed Time-Lock Puzzles). A relaxed time-lock puzzle scheme Puzzle is a
pair of algorithms (Puzzle.Gen, Puzzle.Solve) satisfying the following requirements:
    Syntax:
       Z ← Puzzle.Gen(t, s) is a probabilistic algorithm that takes as an input a difficulty
       parameter t and a solution s ∈ {0, 1}λ , where λ is a security parameter, and outputs a
       puzzle Z.
       s ← Puzzle.Solve(Z) is a deterministic algorithm that takes as input a puzzle Z and
       outputs a solution s.
    Completeness: For every security parameter λ, difficulty parameter t, solution s ∈ {0, 1}λ
   and a puzzle Z in the support of Puzzle.Gen(t, s), Puzzle.Solve(Z) outputs s.
    Efficiency:
       Z ← Puzzle.Gen(t, s) can be computed in time poly(log t, λ).
       Puzzle.Solve(Z) can be computed in time t · poly(λ).
    Relaxed time-lock ε-security: There exists a polynomial t(·), such that for every polyno-
   mial t(·) ≥ t(·) and t′ -efficient adversary A where t′ (·) ≤ tε (·), there exists a negligible
    function negl, such that

                              s1 , s2 ← A(1λ ), where s1 , s2 ∈ {0, 1}λ
                                                                       

       Pr b ← A(1λ , Z)                     b ← {0, 1}                  ≤ 1 + negl(λ)
                                                                            2
                                      Z ← Puzzle.Gen(t(λ), sb )

   Where the probability is also over the random coins tossed by A.
Such a puzzle is called Uniform Relaxed Time-Lock Puzzle (denoted URTLP) if it is secure
against uniform efficient adversaries, and Non-Uniform Relaxed Time-Lock Puzzle (denoted
NRTLP) if secure against non-uniform efficient adversaries.



                                                                                                     ITCS 2023
17:10   Bootstrapping Homomorphic Encryption via Functional Encryption


           In [6], a Uniform Relaxed Time-Lock Puzzle, for gap ε < 1, is constructed based on
        succinct randomized encodings, which in turn can be based on (semi) compact functional
        encryption [3, 16, 26].
           We observe that Non-Uniform Relaxed Time-Lock Puzzle with some gap ε < 1 can
        be obtained by a similar construction and proof, but require and additional complexity
        assumption.

        ▶ Assumption 4. There exists a constant ε < 1 and a polynomial a(·), such that for any
        polynomial t(·) there exists a language L ∈ Dtime(t)/a such that any family C = {Cλ } of
        size-tε (λ) circuits fails to decide Lλ = L ∩ {0, 1}λ for all large enough λ.

            We find this assumption rather mild. It can be seen as a generalization of the (uncondition-
        al) time-hierarchy theorem for uniform computation. It is in the same spirit of Nisan-
        Impagliazzo-Wigderson style assumptions used to derandomize BPP [29, 22]. We also note
        that this assumption follows for instance from the non-uniform ETH assumption (in fact,
        with advice length a = 0).

        2.2     Decomposable Obfuscation
        The following definitions are adapted from [28] to suit our concrete needs. see [28] for full
        definitions.

        ▶ Definition 5 (Single Bit Partial Evaluation). Consider a circuit C defined on input length
        n > 0. For any bit b ∈ {0, 1}, a partial evaluation of C on bit b denoted as C(b, ·) or Cb (·)
        is a circuit defined on inputs of length n − 1, where we hardcode the input bit x1 to b and
        then simplify. To Simplify, while there is a gate which some of its input is already known,
        replace it with the appropriate gate or wire in the usual way, e.g. AND(1, b) is replaced with
        the wire b, AND(1, 1) is replaced with hard coded 1 and AND(0, b) is replaced with hard
        coded 0. Then remove all unused wires.
            It is easy to see that when C is defined on a single bit, the partial evaluation of C is a
        circuit with no input that just gives the output.

        ▶ Definition 6 (Partial Evaluation). Consider a circuit C defined on input length n > 0. For
        any string x of length at most n, a partial evaluation of C on a string x denoted as C(x, ·)
        or Cx (·) is a circuit defined on input of length n − |x| where we repeatedly apply partial
        evaluations on the bit xi for i = 1, ..., |x| .
            From now on, whenever we use the expression C(x, ·) we refer to the result of simplifying
        C after hardcoding the prefix x.

        ▶ Definition 7 (Binary Tree). A binary tree Tn is a tree of depth n + 1 where the root is
        labeled with ε (an empty string), and for any node that is not a root whose parent is labeled as
        x, it is labeled as x||0 if it is a left-child of its parent; it is labeled as x||1 if it is a right-child
        of its parent. The leaves of the tree Tn are labeled from 0n to 1n . Tn has 2n+1 − 1 nodes and
        depth n + 1 (if the root has depth 1).

        ▶ Definition 8 (Tree Covering). We say a set of binary strings T C = {xi }ℓi = 1 is a tree
        covering for all strings of length n if the following holds: for every string x ∈ {0, 1}n there
        exists exactly one xj in that set such that xj is a prefix of x. T C will be referred to just as
        tree covering if n is clear in the context.
            A tree covering T C can also be viewed as a set of nodes in Tn such that for every leaf in
        the tree, the path from ε to this leaf will pass through exactly one node in the set.
N. Bitansky and T. Solomon                                                                                      17:11


    Yet another equivalent formulation is that a tree covering is either (1) a set consisting
only of the root node of the tree, or (2) the union of two tree coverings for the sub-trees rooted
at the children the root node.

▶ Definition 9 (Partial Order on Tree Coverings). Given two tree coverings T C0 , T C1 , we
say T C0 is above T C1 , denoted T C0 ⪯ T C1 , if for every node u ∈ T C1 there exists a node
v ∈ T C0 such that v ⪯ u. We say T C1 is below T C0 if T C0 is above T C1 .

▶ Definition 10 (Minimal Tree Covering). Given strings x1 , ..., xm ∈ {0, 1}≤n , where A =
{x1 , ..., xm } is prefix-free set, let T Cx1 ,...,xm be the minimal tree covering containing x1 , ..., xm .
Similarly, given a prefix-free set A ⊆ {0, 1}≤n denote as T CA the minimal tree covering
containing A.

▶ Observation 11 (Size of Tree Covering). Let A ⊆ {0, 1}≤n be a prefix-free set. Then,
|T CA | = O(n|A|). In particular, if A has polynomial size then so is |T CA |. Moreover, if
|A| = 1 then |T CA | ≤ n + 1 and if |A| = 2 then |T CA | ≤ 2n + 1.

proof sketch: The above observation is achieved by considering for example the following
                                         0
inductive construction: Start from T CA      = {ε}. In step i we consider ai ∈ A and generate a
                   i
tree covering T CA containing a1 , ..., ai . This is done by removing the ancestor of ai from
    i−1
T CA    , followed by adding ai and at most n other nodes. This results in a tree covering
containing A with size bound O(n|A|), hence this is also a bound on T CA .
    We remark that T CA can be actually obtained by this inductive construction if a minimal
set of nodes is added at each inductive step.

▶ Observation 12 (Partial Order on Tree Coverings). Let A, B ⊆ {0, 1}≤n be a prefix-free
sets. If A ⊆ B Then T CA ⪯ T CB . In particular, if A has polynomial size then so is |T CA |.

proof sketch: Suppose this is not the case. Then there exists u ∈ T CB for which there doesn’t
exist a node v ∈ T CA such that v ⪯ u. Let Su be the set of leafs in the subtree rooted at u.
Since T CA is a tree covering, there exist nodes v1 , .., vk ∈ T CA which every leaf l ∈ Su is
a descendent of some vi . Hence, since for any i, vi ̸⪯ u, we must have that u ⪯ vi . Since
u ∈ T CB , for any i, vi ̸∈ B so vi ̸∈ A. Note it can’t be the case that k = 1 as then v1 = u.
Therefore, by replacing v1 , ..., vk by u we obtain a tree covering T C ′ which contain A and
also |T C ′ | < |T CA | contradiction.

▶ Definition 13 (Circuit assignment). We say L = {(xi , Cxi )}xi ∈T C is a circuit assignment
with size ℓ, where T C = {xi }ℓi = 1 is a tree covering for Tn and {Cxi }xi ∈T C is a set of
circuits where Cxi is assigned to the node xi in the covering. We refer to T C as the covering
in L, and may write LT C to emphasize that.
    We denote each such circuit Cxi in the circuit assignment as fragment.
    We say a circuit assignment L = {(xi , Cxi )}xi ∈T C 1 is valid if each Cxi is defined on input
length n − |xi |. A valid circuit assignment LT C = {(xi , Cxi )}xi ∈T C naturally corresponds to
a function LT C (·): on input y ∈ {0, 1}n find the unique xj ∈ T C such that y[i] = xj , and
output Cxi (y[i+1,...,n] ). From now on all circuit assignments will be valid.
    Given a circuit C defined on inputs of length n and a tree covering T C, let LTCC :=
{(x, Cx )}x∈T C be their corresponding circuit assignment defined in the natural way: every
fragment Cx from LTCC is the partial evaluation of C on x, i.e. C(x, ·). In other words, it is
the set of partial evaluations of the circuit C with respect to the prefixes in T C. We may
simply write LC when T C is clear in the context.
    Next, the following operations on circuits and circuit assignments are defined:
    DecomposeTo(C, T C): Returns LTCC = {(x, C(x, ·))}x∈T C . This operation is also
    referred to as circuit decomposition.


                                                                                                               ITCS 2023
17:12   Bootstrapping Homomorphic Encryption via Functional Encryption


           CanonicalMerge(L, x): Operates on an assignment L where L’s tree covering includes
           both the children of the node x (but not x itself). It takes the circuits fragments Cx||0
           and Cx||0 assigned to the nodes x||0, x||1 respectively, and merge them to get the circuit
                                               W
           fragment Cx (b, y) = (b ∧ Cx||1 (y)) (¬b ∧ Cp||0 (y)). The new circuit assignment is then
           obtained by replacing (x||0, Cx||0 ) and (x||1, Cx||1 ) in L with (x, Cx ). Hence, the tree
           covering of the new circuit assignment L′ contains x but not x||0, x||1.
           CanonicalMerge(L): Repeatedly perform CanonicalMerge(L, x) at different x until the
           tree covering in the circuit assignment becomes {ε} and we are left with a single circuit
           fragment Cε′ , i.e. merge canonically all the way to the root. To make this merge truly
           canonical, we need to specify the order the nodes are merge in. We take the convention
           that the lowest nodes in the tree are merged first, and between nodes in the same level,
           the leftmost nodes are merged first.
           The output of CanonicalMerge(L) can be thought of as a circuit or as a circuit assignment
           (with {ε} as the tree covering and Cε′ as the circuit fragment assigned to ε).
           The following definition concerns a circuit C which uses a some sub circuit D in a specific
        way: It evaluates D only on its own input. This definition is flexible, as if we want to run D
        on some y = f (x), we can look at D′ (x) = D(f (x)).
        ▶ Definition 14 (Sub Circuit Assignment). Given a circuit C(·, ·) defined over two inputs,
        and a circuit D(·), denote by C(·, D(·)) the circuit that on input x computes y = D(x) and
        then computes C(x, y). Then, given a circuit assignment L = {(x, Dx )}x∈T C , let C(·, L(·))
        be the following circuit assignment:
            Let T C be the tree covering in L = {(x, Dx )}x∈T C .
            Let L′ = DecomposeTo(C(·, D(·)) T C) = {(x, Cx′ )}x∈T C .
            The fragment in Cx′ corresponding to x ∈ T C is Cx (·, Dx (·)) simplified, which is defined
            on {0s, 1}n−|x| .
           In other words, we decompose C to the same tree covering, and pair Cx with Dx . In this
        context, we refer to D as sub circuit and to L as a sub circuit assignment.
            This above definition can be extended naturally to a circuit using multiple sub circuits,
        and multiple sub circuit assignments, as long as these sub circuit assignments have the same
        tree covering. In other words, let L1 , ..., Lm be sub circuit assignments with the same tree
        covering T C, i.e. Li = {(x, Dxi )}x∈T C . Then C(·, L1 (·), ..., Lm (·)) is a circuit assignment
        whose fragment corresponding to x ∈ T C is C(x, ·, Dx1 (·), ..., Dxm (·) simplified.
            The following lemma (lemma 5.3 from [28]) concerns the decomposition of a circuit and
        its sub circuits. Informally, the lemma says we can push down decomposition to sub circuits,
        and obtain a sub circuit assignments.
        ▶ Lemma 15 (Push Down Circuit Decomposition, [28]). For any circuits C(·, ·), D(·) where
        D takes a single input x and C takes two inputs x and D(x), for any tree covering T C, we
        have:

           DecomposeTo(C(·, D(·)), T C) = C(·, [DecomposeTo(D, T C)](·))

        Similarly, given m + 1 circuits C, D1 , ..., Dm where D1 , ..., Dm take a single input x, and
        C takes x and D1 (x), ..., Dm (x) as inputs, we have:


                               DecomposeTo(C(·, D1 (·), ..., Dm (·)), T C)
           = C(·, DecomposeTo(D1 , T C), ..., DecomposeTo(Dm , T C))
N. Bitansky and T. Solomon                                                                                       17:13


▶ Definition 16 (Decomposing Equivalence). Given two circuits C0 , C1 defined on inputs of
length n, we say they are τ -decomposing equivalent if the following holds:
   There exists a tree covering X = {xi }i of size at most τ ;
    DecomposeTo(C0 , X ) = DecomposeTo(C1 , X ), i.e. for all xi ∈ X , C0 (xi , ·) = C1 (xi , ·).

    We now define decomposable IO (DO). Informally, decomposable IO is an indistinguisha-
bility obfuscator, but where the indistinguishability security requirement only applies to
pairs of circuits that are decomposing equivalent (as opposed to applying to all equivalent
circuits).

▶ Definition 17 (DO). DO with two PPT algorithms (DO.ParaGen, DO.Eval) is τ (n, s, λ)-
decomposable obfuscator if the following conditions hold:
   Efficiency: DO.ParaGen, DO.Eval are efficient algorithms.
   Functionality preserving: DO.ParaGen takes as input a security parameter λ and a circuit
   C, and outputs the description C b of an obfuscated program. For all λ and circuit C, for
   all input x ∈ {0, 1} , we have that DO.Eval(DO.ParaGen(1λ , C), x) = C(x).
                       n

   Decomposing indistinguishability: Consider a pair of efficient adversaries (Samp, D),
   where Samp outputs a tuple (C0 , C1 , σ), where C0 , C1 are circuits with the same size
   s = s(λ) with input length n = n(λ). We require that, for any such PPT (Samp, D), if

         P r[C0 is τ (n, s, λ) − decomposing equivalent to C1 | (C0 , c1 σ) ← Samp(1λ )] = 1

     Then there exists a negligible function negl(λ) such that:

                       |P r(D(σ, DO.ParaGen(1λ , C0 )) = 1)
         −P r(D(σ, DO.ParaGen(1λ , C1 )) = 1)| ≤ negl(λ)

   DO is said to be decomposable obfuscator if it is τ (n, s, λ)-decomposable obfuscator for
any polynomial τ (n, s, λ).

     The following is theorem 4.5 from [28].

▶ Theorem 18 (DO exists under FE). If semi-compact 2 single-key selective secure functional
encryption schemes and one-way functions exists, then there exists decompose obfuscator
DO.

    All circuits will be padded to some upper bound before obfuscation (see Section 3.3 for a
discussion on padding upper bound).

2.2.1       Decomposing Compatible Algorithms
We follow the definition from [28] to define decomposing compatible pseudo random function
DPRF, where it was also observed that the GGM construction [20] satisfies this definition.

▶ Definition 19 (DPRF). A decomposing compatible pseudo random function DPRF consists
of the following polynomial algorithms DPRF.KeyGen and DPRF.Eval where:
    Syntax:
       S ← DPRF.KeyGen(1λ ) is a probabilistic algorithm that samples a seed S of length
       k(λ).


2
    For simplicity, in [28] the statement is stated with compact FE, however same calculations as in [7] show
    semi-compact FE suffices.




                                                                                                                ITCS 2023
17:14   Bootstrapping Homomorphic Encryption via Functional Encryption


              y ← DPRF.Eval(S, x) is a deterministic algorithm that takes as input a seed S ∈
              {0, 1}k(λ) and query input x ∈ {0, 1}n(λ) and outputs y ∈ {0, 1}p(n) for some fixed
              polynomial p(n).
           PRF security: For any efficient adversary A, there exists negligible function negl such
           that:

               ∀x ∈ {0, 1}n(λ) | Pr(A(1λ , DPRF.Eval(S, x)) = 1) − Pr(A(1λ , r) = 1)| ≤ negl(λ)

           Where r ← {0, 1}p(n) is chosen uniformly at random and S ← DPRF.KeyGen(1λ ).
           DPRF security: Let Gameλ,A,b be the following game:
             The challenger prepares a seed S ← DPRF.KeyGen(1λ );
             The adversary A makes queries about x and gets DPRF.Eval(S, x) back from the
             challenger;
             The adversary gives a tree covering T C and y ∗ ∈ T C where y ∗ is not a prefix of any x
             that has been asked;
             The challenger returns the circuit assignment Lb back to the adversary A:
              ∗ L0 : Let D(·) = DPRF.Eval(S, ·). Then L0 = DecomposeTo(D(·), T C).
              ∗ L1 : Same as L0 , but the fragment corresponding to y ∗ - which is DPRF.Eval(S, y ∗ , ·)
                - is replaced with the partial evaluation of DPRF.Eval(S ′ , y ∗ , ·), where S ′ ←
                DPRF.KeyGen(1λ ) is an independent seed.
             The output of the game is the output of A.
           Then for any efficient adversary A there exists a negligible function negl such that:

               |Pr(Gameλ,A,0 = 1) − Pr(Gameλ,A,1 = 1)| ≤ negl(λ)

        ▶ Observation 20 (Generalization of DPRF Security). The set T C in the DPRF security
        game is a tree covering w.l.o.g., and it suffices just to assume y ∗ is prefix-free with respect to
        T C \ {y ∗ }. I.e. y ∗ isn’t a prefix of any other p ∈ T C, and any other p ∈ T C isn’t a prefix of
        y ∗ . In case T C isn’t a tree covering, the sets L0,1 are defined to contain the circuit fragments
        corresponding to the prefixes in T C (And again in L1 an independent seed S ′ is used for y ∗ ).

        This holds as such T C can be easily transformed into a tree covering containing y ∗ : first
        refine it to a prefix free set T C ′ , where if p is prefix of q keep p. Then look at T C ′′ which is
        the minimal tree covering containing T C ′ . As y ∗ was prefix free with respect to T C \ {y ∗ },
        it wasn’t removed along the way, and therefore y ∗ ∈ T C ′′ .

        ▶ Definition 21 (Binary Encoding). Given x ∈ {0, 1}n , denote x b = Σni=1 2i−1 xi . Note that x
        is a binary encoding of x
                                b using the most significant bit encoding.

        ▶ Definition 22 (Decomposing Compatible In-range Tester). A circuit C is called in-range
        tester if on inputs x, y, z ∈ {0, 1}n s.t. x
                                                   b ≤ zb it outputs TRUE if and only if yb ∈ [b
                                                                                               x, zb]. We
        say C is a decomposing compatible in-range tester if it’s an in-range tester and if for any
        such x, z and a prefix p ∈ {0, 1}≤n , such that p isn’t a prefix of any y such that yb ∈ [b  x, zb],
        the partial evaluation of C(x, z, p, ·) is simplified to FALSE.

        Note that a naïve implementation of an in-range tester is decomposing compatible.
            The following definition captures the notion computing x 7→ x − 1 in a decomposing
        compatible manner. That is, given a prefix p the resulting circuit computes as much bits of
        the result as it could. Note that for a prefix p of the form p = y||1||0k we can already deduce
        the result will begin with y (the rest of the bits depend on the rest of the input which is not
        yet known).
N. Bitansky and T. Solomon                                                                            17:15


▶ Definition 23 (Decomposing Compatible Decreaser). A circuit C defined on inputs of length
n is called decreaser if on input x ∈ {0, 1}n it outputs y ∈ {0, 1}n such that yb = x b − 1. Such
circuit shall be called decomposing compatible decreaser if on prefix p ∈ {0, 1}≤n of the form
p = y||1||0k , the partial evaluation of C on p results in a circuit C ′ defined on inputs of size
n − (|y| + k + 1) which outputs y||x′ .

2.3    Homomorphic Encryption
▶ Definition 24 (ℓ-Leveled Homomorphic Encryption). ℓ-leveled homomorphic encryption
scheme LHE consists of four PPT algorithms (LHE.Gen, LHE.Enc, LHE.Dec, LHE.Eval) sat-
isfying:
 1. Depth-ℓ correctness: For any λ ∈ N, (dk, ek, evk) ← LHE.Gen(1λ ), message m ∈
    {0, 1}∗ , and circuit C with input size |m| and depth at most ℓ,

       LHE.Decdk (LHE.Evalevk (C, LHE.Encek (m))) = C(m)

   LHE is then said to support homomorphic evaluation of circuits with depth ℓ or equivalently
   to support ℓ-level of homomorphism.
2. Semantic Security: Let Gameλ,A,b be the following game:
      The challenger samples ek, dk, evk ← LHE.Gen(1λ ) and sends ek, evk to A;
      The adversary A generates two equal length messages m0 , m1 ∈ {0, 1}poly(λ) and sends
      them to the challenger;
      The challenger returns LHE.Encek (mb );
      The output of the game is the output of A.
   Then for any efficient adversary A there exists a negligible function negl such that:

       |Pr(Gameλ,A,0 = 1) − Pr(Gameλ,A,1 = 1)| ≤ negl(λ)

   We also denote ε = |Pr(Gameλ,A,0 = 1) − Pr(Gameλ,A,1 = 1)| and refer to it as A’s
   advantage.
3. Compactness: There exists a fixed polynomial poly, such that for any λ ∈ N,
   (dk, ek, evk) ← LHE.Gen(1λ ), message m ∈ {0, 1}∗ , and circuit C,

       |LHE.Evalevk (C, LHE.Encek (m))| ≤ poly(|C(m)|, λ)

    Let LHE.Decct be the decryption algorithm where the encrypted message ct is hardwired
into the circuit, and the input is only the decryption key dk.
   The following definition is adapted from [17].
▶ Definition 25 (Bootstrapble Leveled Homomorphic Encryption). A ℓ-leveled homomorphic
encryption scheme LHE is said to be bootstrapble leveled homomorphic scheme if its decryption
circuit has depth d such that d + 1 ≤ ℓ.
▶ Definition 26 (Fully Homomorphic Encryption). A scheme FHE is said to be fully homomorp-
hic ecnryption scheme if it is ℓ-leveled homomorphic scheme for any polynomial ℓ(·).
A fully homomorphic ecnryption scheme FHE is said to support homomorphic evaluation of
circuits with depth any polynomial depth or equivalently to support poly-level of homomorphi-
sm. Note that the size of the keys produced by FHE.Gen are bounded by some polynomial in
λ, and do not depend on the depth of the evaluated circuits.
We use the convention that an encryption of a message m ∈ {0, 1}∗ is an encryption of its
bits separately, i.e. Encek (m) = Encek (m1 ), ..., Encek (m|m| ).
We define the following function, which will be used for bootstrapping using the technique
from [17].


                                                                                                     ITCS 2023
17:16   Bootstrapping Homomorphic Encryption via Functional Encryption


        ▶ Definition 27 (Gentry’s function). Given a leveled homomorphic encryption scheme
        LHE, we define the following function: GLHE.Dec
                                                C,C ′   (s) = LHE.DecC (s) NAND LHE.DecC (s) =
        LHE.Decs (C) NAND LHE.Decs (C).

         3     Constructing Fully Homomorphic Encryption
        3.1    FHE Construction Overview
        In this section we build fully homomorphic encryption scheme secure against efficient ad-
        versaries. A formal description of the scheme can be found in the full version of the paper.
        The construction uses the following cryptographic primitives: DPRF, LHE, DO and RTLP:
        if URTLP are used the construction is secure against uniform efficient adversaries, and if
        NRTLP are used the construction is secure against non-uniform efficient adversaries.
            For simplicity of presentation, we assume the underlying LHE scheme used by the
        construction doesn’t need an evaluation key in order to perform homomorphic evaluations.
        we assume w.l.o.g. LHE.Gen and LHE.Enc use λ bits of randomness and that LHE.Eval is
        deterministic. We also assume w.l.o.g. that an encryption of a decryption key has size λ, i.e.
        ∀dk ∈ Support(LHE.Gen(1λ )), ek′ ∈ Support(LHE.Gen(1λ )) we have that |LHE.Encek′ (dk)| =
        λ.
            Our FHE encryption scheme has in the background an exponentially long chain, i.e.
        2λ − 1 long, of encrypted keys. The i-th node in the chain is the i − 1-th decryption
        key encrypted under the i − th encryption key, i.e. LHE.Enceki (dki−1 ). The randomness
        for generating nodes in the chain is derived from a DPRF using a seed Senc . For every i,
        |DPRF.Eval(Senc , i)| = 2λ. The first λ bits are used for generating eki , dki , and the second
        λ bits are used for the encryption procedure itself, i.e. in order to encrypt dki−1 under pki .

        Making “decomposition friendly”. We use “decomposition friendly” algorithms, namely
        DPRF (Definition 19) for deriving randomness, decomposing compatible in-range tester
        (Definition 22) for testing belonging to a range and decomposing compatible decreaser
        (Definition 23) for computing x 7→ x − 1.

        Ciphertexts. A ciphertext in this scheme is a ciphertext of the underlying leveled homo-
        morphic scheme LHE, paired with a key index, which is the index of the decryption key from
        the chain that should be used for decryption. Formally, an encryption in the scheme is a
        tuple ct = (c, pos), where pos represents the key index in the chain, and the decryption
        of ct = (c, pos) is LHE.Decdkpos (c). So a fresh encryption is encrypted under ek0 , i.e. of
        the form (ct, 0), and the output of a homomorphic evaluation of a circuit of depth d1 is
        decryptable under dkd1 , i.e. of the form (c, d1 ). The scheme supports consecutive homo-
        morphic evaluations a ciphertext, so after performing another homomorphic evaluation of a
        circuit of depth d2 we get an encryption decryptable under dkd1 +d2 . More generally, after
        performing homomorphic evaluations of circuits of depths d1 , ..., dk we get an encryption
        decryptable under dkd1 +d2 +...+dk . The scheme support homomorphic evaluation of any circuit
        of polynomial size since there are super-polynomial number of keys.

        Keys: ek, dk, evk. The encryption key of the scheme is ek0 , and the decryption key is the
        seed Senc from which the randomness for generating the keys is derived using DPRF. The
        evaluation key evk of the scheme is a decomposable obfuscation of the EVK circuit (padded to
        some upper bound, see discussion bellow in section 3.3). On input i ≥ 1 this circuit outputs
        Puzzle.Gen(i, LHE.Enceki (dki−1 )) (on i = 0 it returns ⊥). Consequently, the evaluation key
N. Bitansky and T. Solomon                                                                           17:17


circuit induces a super-polynimally long chain of keys (actually, exponentially long), each key
encrypted under the next one (except the last one). Each such encrypted key is wrapped by
a puzzle, where the index in the chain serves as the difficulty level. The relevant puzzles are
solved by FHE.Eval so it can it use the encrypted keys. EVKa,b is defined the same, except
that on input i in the range [a, b] it outputs Puzzle.Gen(i, LHE.Enceki (0λ )) instead.

Inputs to FHE.Eval.
   a description of the function f as NAND gates.
   A ciphertext ct = (c, pos), where each bit in the ciphertext is encrypted separately, that
   is, c = {cj }. pos is the key index under which the ciphertext can be decrypted, e.g. for a
   fresh encryption pos = 0.
   Evaluation key evk, which is a decomposable obfuscation of the evaluation key circuit.
   The input to that circuit is i, and the output is a puzzle of difficult i wrapping the
   encryption of dki−1 under eki , i.e. Puzzle.Gen(i, LHE.Enceki (dki−1 )).

Function evaluation. FHE.Eval evaluates the function layer by layer. Given a layer, the
NAND gates in that layer are homomorphically evaluated by homomorphically evaluating
Gentry’s function (see definition 27): decrypt the input wires and then compute a NAND over
them. The output is then stored in the set EWi . After computing the NAND gates of a layer,
the algorithm also upgrades every wire from EWi−1 to be encrypted under the next key and
add it to EWi , so it could be used by next layers as well. Finally, the algorithm uses the
Output algorithm for determining the output wires of the entire computation, corresponding
to the function being computed. The output of the FHE.Eval algorithm also contains the
index of the current position in the chain of keys, which is the key under which the output is
decryptable.

3.2    Correctness
We state the propositions for the correctness, the full proofs can be found in the full version
of the paper.

▶ Lemma 28 (FHE scheme consists of polynomial algorithms).

proof sketch: Recall that generating a puzzle takes time poly(log(t), λ) where t is the
difficulty parameter. Since the hardest puzzle has difficulty as the length of the key chain,
which is 2λ , we have a time bound poly(log(2λ ), λ) = poly(λ). Therefore, we can take a
puzzle generation circuit of size poly(λ). The rest of the operations are clearly polynomial.

▶ Theorem 29 (FHE is fully homomorphic). Let LHE be a bootstrapable leveled homomorphic
encryption scheme. Then FHE supports homomorphic evaluation circuits with any polynomial
depth.

The proof is by inspection and follows the same lines as in [17].

3.3    Security
In this section we present the key ideas of security proof of the construction, the full security
proof can be found in the full version of the paper. Given adversary A, the idea is to “cut”
the key chain produced by the EVK algorithm at some position i∗ , and switch to puzzles
containing encryptions of 0λ instead. The exact index i∗ is determined by the efficiency
of the adversary, i.e. the running time bound for a uniform adversary and the size for a



                                                                                                    ITCS 2023
17:18   Bootstrapping Homomorphic Encryption via Functional Encryption


        non-uniform one. Since the difficulty level of the puzzle should be only slightly more than the
        efficiency of the reduction, any efficient adversary A has has a polynomial cutting index i∗ .
        When we cut the chain at position i∗ we change the output of the evaluation key circuit on
        input i∗ to contain an encryption of 0λ instead of an encryption of the previous decryption
        key dki∗ −1 . We then go through a series of hybrids till we get to i = 1. At that point the
        evaluation key circuit doesn’t contain any information about the decryption key dk0 , and we
        can apply to the semantic security of the underlying LHE scheme.
            The indistinguishability of the first cut at position i∗ in the chain is due to puzzle security.
        Once we have the first cut in the chain we can rely on the semantic security of underlying
        encryption scheme LHE for the rest of the swaps. The number of hybrids is polynomial
        in the initial cutting position i∗ . Since for every efficient adversary A the first cut is at a
        polynomial position i∗ we have a polynomial number of hybrids in total. Hence all underlying
        cryptographic primitives are allowed to be only polynomially secure.

        Hybrids structure. After the first cut in the chain, the hybrids go through the following
        hybrid circuit EVKi,i∗ : output a puzzle wrapping LHE.Encekj (0λ ) on input j in the range
        [i, i∗ ], and otherwise output a puzzle wrapping LHE.Enceki (dki−1 ). In other words, EVKi,i∗
        is a (succinct) circuit which behaves the same as the original EVK, except on inputs in the
        range [i, i∗ ]. Moving between the hybrids in the security proof is by the following template
        inspired by the example applications described in [28].
            As in [28], we decompose a circuit with respect to some tree covering, followed by
        a CanonicalMerge operation. We then alter the circuit assignment corresponding to the
        decomposed circuit. We use a special type of tree coverings, defined bellow.

        ▶ Definition 30 (Special Tree Covering). Given a tree covering T C and x ∈ {0, 1}n , let
        T x be the tree covering obtained by the following process. We start with T C0 = T C.
        T Ck+1 is obtained from T Ck by picking some element p ∈ Tk which is not a leaf (i.e.
        |p| ̸= n) and not of the form p = q||1 where q is not a prefix of x. We then define
        T Ck+1 = T Ck {p||1, p||0} \ { p }. T C x is then defined as the final tree covering in the
                       S

        proccess.

        ▶ Observation 31 (Size of Special Tree Covering). Given a tree covering T C and x ∈ {0, 1}n ,
        |T C x | = O(n|T C|).

        Bellow is the template of the sub hybrids, when the behaviour of the EVK is switched on
        some input i.
        1. Same circuit C from previous hybrid, which is either EVK if i = i∗ , or EVKi+1,i∗ if i ̸= i∗ .
        2. Decompose the circuit C with respect to a tree covering T C = T Cii (corresponding to
           the input i0 currently changed) to obtain the circuit assignment LC . Then reconstruct a
           new circuit with a CanonicalMerge operation. Indistinguishability is due DO security as
           the two circuits are |T C|-decomposing equivalent, where T C has a polynomial size. Due
           to Lemma 15, the decomposition is pushed down and creates a sub circuit assignment for
           the DPRF.Eval sub circuit. This lets us to treat the randomness as a separate component
           in the reconstructed circuit in next hybrids.
        3. Replace the seed used by the circuit on input i to an independent one S ′ . The switch is done
           in the DPRF.Eval sub circuit assignment of the decomposed circuit. Indistinguishability
           is due to DPRF security. Note the circuit uses two seeds, one for deriving randomness for
           the puzzles, and one for deriving randomness for the encryptions. When we switch the
           puzzles in the first cut where i = i∗ this step is immediate, as the DPRF is evaluated on
           input i with the puzzle’s seed only when the input to the EVK circuit is i. However, when
N. Bitansky and T. Solomon                                                                                     17:19


   we go along the chain and switch the encryptions this requires more subtle argument, as
   the DPRF is evaluated on input i with the encryption’s seed when the input to the EVK
   circuit is either i or i + 1.
4. Switch a real fresh randomness on input i. Indistinguishability is due to PRF security, as
   the currently used seed on i is independent from the rest of the circuit assignment.
5. Switch the underlying cryptographic instance on input i, from a puzzle wrapping
   LHE.Enceki (dki−1 ) to a puzzle wrapping LHE.Enceki (0λ ) 3 . The switch is done in top level
   circuit assignment (as opposed to sub circuit assignments in previous sub hybrids). In the
   first time we cut the chain, indistinguishability is due to the puzzle security, and when
   we go along the chain indistinguishability is due to the LHE semantic security.
6. Move back to using the original seed when computing input i by going through hybrids
   3, 4 in reverse: switch back to an independent random seed and then to the original one.
7. In this hybrid we switch to EVKi,i∗ . This circuit is decomposing equivalent to the circuit
   from previous hybrid and hence their obfuscation is indistinguishable. The decomposing
                                                                  i                                      ∗
   equivalence is with respect to the tree covering T Ci,...,i       ∗ which has a polynomial size: i
                                     ∗
   is polynomial, so |{i, ..., i }| is polynomial, and then we apply observations 11 and 31.
   Let EVK′ be the circuit obtained in the end of the previous step. Since {i} ⊆ {i, ..., i∗ }, by
   observation 12 we have that T Ci ⪯ T Ci,...,i∗ . It follows that T Cii ⪯ T Ci,...,i  i
                                                                                             ∗ . Therefore,
                                                ′      i
   we observe that DecomposeTo(EVK , T Ci,...,i∗ ) is identical to the circuit assignment we
                                                                                                     i
   would have got if in sub hybrid 1 we had decomposed with respect to T C = T Ci,...,i                  ∗

   instead of T C = T Cii . This holds as the fragment corresponding to i is the same, and
   any other fragment is just partially evaluated further. To show equivalence between
   DecomposeTo(EVK′ , T Ci,...,i     i                                          i                    i
                                         ∗ ) and DecomposeTo(EVKi,i∗ , T Ci,...,i∗ ), let p ∈ T Ci,...,i∗

   and consider the following cases:
       In case p ∈ [i, ..., i∗ ] in both hybrids we have the same fragment as it’s the output of
       the circuits on that input - which is the same.
       If p ̸∈ [i, ..., i∗ ], then by the definition of the tree covering, p isn’t a prefix of anything in
       the range [i, ..., i∗ ]. Recall the circuits check belonging to a range using a decomposing
       compatible in-range tester (see definition 22). Therefore, since it’s a tree covering,
       p isn’t a prefix of anything in the range [i, ..., i∗ ], so the tester will be evaluated to
       FALSE, and the simplification process will eliminate the relevant code, after which we
       just end up with the same fragment (which is actually the same as in the original EVK,
       as anything else is eliminated by simplification).

Tree coverings considerations. The reason taking T Ci (the minimal tree covering containing
i) isn’t enough when the seed of the encryptions is switched is due to the use of randomness
by the circuit. Given a prefix p, let DP RFSp be the DPRF equipped with the seed S after
partially evaluated on the prefix p. In order to apply to DPRF security, we need to argue
that any circuit fragment doesn’t contain DP RFSp for any p which is prefix of i. Recall that
the DPRF is evaluated on input i when the input the EVK circuit is either i or i + 1. In
particular, the circuit has a sub circuit for computing x 7→ x − 1. Consider now a prefix q ̸= i
in the tree covering T C, and let Cq be the corresponding circuit assignment. In order for
Cq not to contain DP RFSp for some p which is prefix of i, we need the mapping x 7→ x − 1
to be partially evaluated far enough, so the partial result would be pushed down and allow
partial evaluation of the DPRF on the seed S. This is achieved by taking T Cii combined
with computing x 7→ x − 1 using a decomposing compatible decreaser (definition 23). For


3
    To make the security proof shorter, we also do that when the first puzzle is switched at position i∗ .




                                                                                                              ITCS 2023
17:20   Bootstrapping Homomorphic Encryption via Functional Encryption


        demonstration, suppose we had used a tree covering with some prefix p ∈ {0, 1}<n , which is
        of the form p = p′ ||0. Since p′ ends with 0, we can not yet deduce the prefix of the result of
        the computation x 7→ x − 1. However, we can deduce these bits if p ends with 1 or if |p| = n
        (as in that case we can fully compute p − 1). This is achieved by using T Cii .
        Next, in the last sub hybrid we switch to EVKi,i∗ . The main difference between this circuit
        and the previous one is how the “control flow” is evaluated. Roughly speaking, in EVKi,i∗ the
        control flow has the following form: if the input j is in [i, i∗ ] then do A, otherwise do B. In
        the previous circuit the flow is essentially of the form: if the input j is in [i + 1, i∗ ] then do A,
        otherwise if j = i do A, and otherwise do B. Observe this control flow mechanism is evaluated
                                                                                    i
        and simplified to TRUE or FALSE when using the tree covering T Ci,...,i         ∗ combined with a

        decomposing compatible in-range tester (see definition 22). This eliminates the diffreneces
        between the circuits.

        Padding. Note that during the hybrids in the security proof intermediate circuits are
        obtained by a CanonicalMerge of circuit assignments with |T Cii | = O(poly(λ)) fragments
        followed by replacing a fragment. Therefore, there exists some polynomial upper bound on
        the size of all these circuits, which all circuits are padded to it before obfuscation.

        ▶ Theorem 32 (FHE scheme is secure). If DO is a poly-DO, DPRF is a secure decomposing
        compatible pseudorandom function, LHE is a semantically secure leveled homomorphic en-
        cryption scheme, and Puzzle is URTLP, then the FHE scheme is semantically secure against
        uniform efficient adversaries. Furthermore, if Puzzle is also NRTLP, then the scheme is
        semantically secure against non-uniform efficient adversaries as well.

             proof sketch: We go through the following hybrids using the above sub hybrids template.

        1. H0 : This hybrid corresponds to the real security game, G0 .
        2. H1 : In this hybrid we switch to use obfuscation of EVKi∗ ,i∗ as the evaluation key. I.e.,
           same evaluation key circuit, except that on some polynomial input i∗ the output is a
           puzzle wrapping LHE.Enceki∗ (0λ ) (instead of wrapping LHE.Enceki∗ (dki∗ −1 )).
        3. H2 , k for k ∈ [i∗ , ..., 1]: In this hybrid we use EVKk,i∗ . In other words, on inputs
           in the range i ∈ [k, ..., i∗ ] the evaluation key circuit encrypts 0λ under eki (instead of
           encrypting dki−1 ). In particular in H2 , 1 the evaluation key circuit encrypts 0λ instead of
           dk0 . Hybrids H2,i∗ and H1 are the same.
        4. Hf inal : Same as H2,1 , except that the encryption key ek0 is sampled independently from
           the evaluation key.

               References
         1    Thomas Agrikola, Geoffroy Couteau, and Dennis Hofheinz. The usefulness of sparsifiable
              inputs: How to avoid subexponential io. In Aggelos Kiayias, Markulf Kohlweiss, Petros
              Wallden, and Vassilis Zikas, editors, Public-Key Cryptography – PKC 2020 – 23rd IACR
              International Conference on Practice and Theory of Public-Key Cryptography, Edinburgh, UK,
              May 4-7, 2020, Proceedings, Part I, volume 12110 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
              187–219. Springer, 2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-45374-9_7.
         2    Joël Alwen, Manuel Barbosa, Pooya Farshim, Rosario Gennaro, S. Dov Gordon, Stefano
              Tessaro, and David A. Wilson. On the relationship between functional encryption, obfuscation,
              and fully homomorphic encryption. In Martijn Stam, editor, Cryptography and Coding
              – 14th IMA International Conference, IMACC 2013, Oxford, UK, December 17-19, 2013.
              Proceedings, volume 8308 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 65–84. Springer, 2013.
              doi:10.1007/978-3-642-45239-0_5.
N. Bitansky and T. Solomon                                                                             17:21


 3   Prabhanjan Ananth and Alex Lombardi. Succinct garbling schemes from functional encryption
     through a local simulation paradigm. In Amos Beimel and Stefan Dziembowski, editors,
     Theory of Cryptography – 16th International Conference, TCC 2018, Panaji, India, November
     11-14, 2018, Proceedings, Part II, volume 11240 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
     455–472. Springer, 2018. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-03810-6_17.
 4   Boaz Barak. A probabilistic-time hierarchy theorem for "slightly non-uniform" algorithms. In
     Randomization and Approximation Techniques, 6th International Workshop, RANDOM 2002,
     Cambridge, MA, USA, September 13-15, 2002, Proceedings, pages 194–208, 2002.
 5   Nir Bitansky, Sanjam Garg, Huijia Lin, Rafael Pass, and Sidharth Telang. Succinct ran-
     domized encodings and their applications. In Rocco A. Servedio and Ronitt Rubinfeld,
     editors, Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh Annual ACM on Symposium on Theory of Com-
     puting, STOC 2015, Portland, OR, USA, June 14-17, 2015, pages 439–448. ACM, 2015.
     doi:10.1145/2746539.2746574.
 6   Nir Bitansky, Shafi Goldwasser, Abhishek Jain, Omer Paneth, Vinod Vaikuntanathan, and
     Brent Waters. Time-lock puzzles from randomized encodings. In Madhu Sudan, editor,
     Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science,
     Cambridge, MA, USA, January 14-16, 2016, pages 345–356. ACM, 2016. doi:10.1145/
     2840728.2840745.
 7   Nir Bitansky and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Indistinguishability obfuscation from functional
     encryption. J. ACM, 65(6):39:1–39:37, 2018. doi:10.1145/3234511.
 8   Dan Boneh and Brent Waters. Constrained pseudorandom functions and their applications. In
     Kazue Sako and Palash Sarkar, editors, Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2013 – 19th
     International Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and Information Security,
     Bengaluru, India, December 1-5, 2013, Proceedings, Part II, volume 8270 of Lecture Notes in
     Computer Science, pages 280–300. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-42045-0_15.
 9   Elette Boyle, Shafi Goldwasser, and Ioana Ivan. Functional signatures and pseudorandom
     functions. In Hugo Krawczyk, editor, Public-Key Cryptography – PKC 2014 – 17th International
     Conference on Practice and Theory in Public-Key Cryptography, Buenos Aires, Argentina,
     March 26-28, 2014. Proceedings, volume 8383 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
     501–519. Springer, 2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-54631-0_29.
10   Zvika Brakerski, Craig Gentry, and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. (leveled) fully homomorphic
     encryption without bootstrapping. In Shafi Goldwasser, editor, Innovations in Theoretical
     Computer Science 2012, Cambridge, MA, USA, January 8-10, 2012, pages 309–325. ACM,
     2012. doi:10.1145/2090236.2090262.
11   Zvika Brakerski and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Efficient fully homomorphic encryption from
     (standard) LWE. In Rafail Ostrovsky, editor, IEEE 52nd Annual Symposium on Foundations
     of Computer Science, FOCS 2011, Palm Springs, CA, USA, October 22-25, 2011, pages 97–106.
     IEEE Computer Society, 2011. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2011.12.
12   Ran Canetti, Justin Holmgren, Abhishek Jain, and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Succinct garbling
     and indistinguishability obfuscation for RAM programs. In Rocco A. Servedio and Ronitt
     Rubinfeld, editors, Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh Annual ACM on Symposium on Theory of
     Computing, STOC 2015, Portland, OR, USA, June 14-17, 2015, pages 429–437. ACM, 2015.
     doi:10.1145/2746539.2746621.
13   Ran Canetti, Huijia Lin, Stefano Tessaro, and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Obfuscation of proba-
     bilistic circuits and applications. In Yevgeniy Dodis and Jesper Buus Nielsen, editors, Theory
     of Cryptography – 12th Theory of Cryptography Conference, TCC 2015, Warsaw, Poland,
     March 23-25, 2015, Proceedings, Part II, volume 9015 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
     pages 468–497. Springer, 2015. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-46497-7_19.
14   Sanjam Garg, Omkant Pandey, and Akshayaram Srinivasan. Revisiting the cryptographic
     hardness of finding a nash equilibrium. In Matthew Robshaw and Jonathan Katz, editors,
     Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2016 – 36th Annual International Cryptology Conference,
     Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 14-18, 2016, Proceedings, Part II, volume 9815 of Lecture
     Notes in Computer Science, pages 579–604. Springer, 2016. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-53008-5_
     20.


                                                                                                      ITCS 2023
17:22   Bootstrapping Homomorphic Encryption via Functional Encryption


        15   Sanjam Garg, Omkant Pandey, Akshayaram Srinivasan, and Mark Zhandry. Breaking the
             sub-exponential barrier in obfustopia. In Jean-Sébastien Coron and Jesper Buus Nielsen,
             editors, Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2017 – 36th Annual International Conference
             on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Paris, France, April 30 – May
             4, 2017, Proceedings, Part III, volume 10212 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
             156–181, 2017. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-56617-7_6.
        16   Sanjam Garg and Akshayaram Srinivasan. A simple construction of io for turing machines. In
             Amos Beimel and Stefan Dziembowski, editors, Theory of Cryptography – 16th International
             Conference, TCC 2018, Panaji, India, November 11-14, 2018, Proceedings, Part II, volume
             11240 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 425–454. Springer, 2018. doi:10.1007/
             978-3-030-03810-6_16.
        17   Craig Gentry. Fully homomorphic encryption using ideal lattices. In Michael Mitzenmacher,
             editor, Proceedings of the 41st Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC
             2009, Bethesda, MD, USA, May 31 – June 2, 2009, pages 169–178. ACM, 2009. doi:
             10.1145/1536414.1536440.
        18   Craig Gentry, Allison Bishop Lewko, Amit Sahai, and Brent Waters. Indistinguishability
             obfuscation from the multilinear subgroup elimination assumption. In Venkatesan Guruswami,
             editor, IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2015,
             Berkeley, CA, USA, 17-20 October, 2015, pages 151–170. IEEE Computer Society, 2015.
             doi:10.1109/FOCS.2015.19.
        19   Craig Gentry, Amit Sahai, and Brent Waters. Homomorphic encryption from learning with
             errors: Conceptually-simpler, asymptotically-faster, attribute-based. In Ran Canetti and
             Juan A. Garay, editors, Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2013 – 33rd Annual Cryptology
             Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 18-22, 2013. Proceedings, Part I, volume
             8042 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 75–92. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/
             978-3-642-40041-4_5.
        20   Oded Goldreich, Shafi Goldwasser, and Silvio Micali. How to construct random functions.
             J. ACM, 33(4):792–807, 1986. URL: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/jacm/jacm33.
             html#GoldreichGM86.
        21   Juris Hartmanis and Richard Stearns. On the computational complexity of algorithms.
             Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 117:285–306, 1965.
        22   Russell Impagliazzo and Avi Wigderson. P = BPP if E requires exponential circuits: De-
             randomizing the XOR lemma. In Frank Thomson Leighton and Peter W. Shor, editors,
             Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, El
             Paso, Texas, USA, May 4-6, 1997, pages 220–229. ACM, 1997. doi:10.1145/258533.258590.
        23   Aayush Jain, Huijia Lin, and Amit Sahai. Indistinguishability obfuscation from well-founded
             assumptions. In Samir Khuller and Virginia Vassilevska Williams, editors, STOC ’21: 53rd
             Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, Virtual Event, Italy, June 21-25,
             2021, pages 60–73. ACM, 2021. doi:10.1145/3406325.3451093.
        24   Aayush Jain, Huijia Lin, and Amit Sahai. Indistinguishability obfuscation from LPN over
             $\mathbb {F}_p$, dlin, and prgs in nc0 . In Orr Dunkelman and Stefan Dziembowski, editors,
             Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2022 – 41st Annual International Conference on the
             Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Trondheim, Norway, May 30 – June 3,
             2022, Proceedings, Part I, volume 13275 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 670–699.
             Springer, 2022. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-06944-4_23.
        25   Aggelos Kiayias, Stavros Papadopoulos, Nikos Triandopoulos, and Thomas Zacharias. Dele-
             gatable pseudorandom functions and applications. In Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, Virgil D. Gligor,
             and Moti Yung, editors, 2013 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communica-
             tions Security, CCS’13, Berlin, Germany, November 4-8, 2013, pages 669–684. ACM, 2013.
             doi:10.1145/2508859.2516668.
N. Bitansky and T. Solomon                                                                             17:23


26   Fuyuki Kitagawa, Ryo Nishimaki, Keisuke Tanaka, and Takashi Yamakawa. Adaptively secure
     and succinct functional encryption: Improving security and efficiency, simultaneously. In
     Alexandra Boldyreva and Daniele Micciancio, editors, Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO
     2019 – 39th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August
     18-22, 2019, Proceedings, Part III, volume 11694 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
     521–551. Springer, 2019. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-26954-8_17.
27   Venkata Koppula, Allison Bishop Lewko, and Brent Waters. Indistinguishability obfuscation for
     turing machines with unbounded memory. In Rocco A. Servedio and Ronitt Rubinfeld, editors,
     Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh Annual ACM on Symposium on Theory of Computing,
     STOC 2015, Portland, OR, USA, June 14-17, 2015, pages 419–428. ACM, 2015. doi:
     10.1145/2746539.2746614.
28   Qipeng Liu and Mark Zhandry. Decomposable obfuscation: A framework for build-
     ing applications of obfuscation from polynomial hardness. J. Cryptol., 34(3):35, 2021.
     doi:10.1007/s00145-021-09400-4.
29   Noam Nisan and Avi Wigderson. Hardness vs randomness. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 49(2):149–167,
     1994. doi:10.1016/S0022-0000(05)80043-1.
30   Oded Regev. On lattices, learning with errors, random linear codes, and cryptography. In
     Harold N. Gabow and Ronald Fagin, editors, Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium
     on Theory of Computing, Baltimore, MD, USA, May 22-24, 2005, pages 84–93. ACM, 2005.
     doi:10.1145/1060590.1060603.
31   Ronald L. Rivest, Adi Shamir, and David A. Wagner. Time-lock puzzles and timed-release
     crypto. Technical report, MIT, 1996.
32   Amit Sahai and Brent Waters. How to use indistinguishability obfuscation: deniable encryption,
     and more. In David B. Shmoys, editor, Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2014,
     New York, NY, USA, May 31 – June 03, 2014, pages 475–484. ACM, 2014. doi:10.1145/
     2591796.2591825.
33   Mark Zhandry. The magic of elfs. In Matthew Robshaw and Jonathan Katz, editors, Advances
     in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2016 – 36th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa
     Barbara, CA, USA, August 14-18, 2016, Proceedings, Part I, volume 9814 of Lecture Notes in
     Computer Science, pages 479–508. Springer, 2016. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-53018-4_18.




                                                                                                      ITCS 2023
