Volume 12, Issue 1, January 2022




Mobility Data Science (Dagstuhl Seminar 22021)
  Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                             1
Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical (Dagstuhl Seminar 22022)
  Bettina Berendt, Stan Matwin, Chiara Renso, Fran Meissner, Francesca Pratesi,
  Alessandra Raffaetà, and Geoffrey Rockwell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  35
Bringing Graph Databases and Network Visualization Together (Dagstuhl Seminar 22031)
   Karsten Klein, Juan F. Sequeda, Hsiang-Yun Wu, and Da Yan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles (Dagstuhl Seminar 22042)
   Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and
   Ian Williams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   83
Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory (Dagstuhl Seminar 22051)
   Albert Atserias, Christoph Berkholz, Kousha Etessami, and Joanna Ochremiak . . . 101
The Human Factors Impact of Programming Error Messages (Dagstuhl Seminar 22052)
  Brett A. Becker, Paul Denny, Janet Siegmund, Andreas Stefik, and
  Eddie Antonio Santos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119




   D a g s t u h l R e p or t s , Vo l . 1 2 , I s s u e 1                                                                     ISSN 2192-5283
ISSN 2192-5283

                                                       Aims and Scope
Published online and open access by
                                                       The periodical Dagstuhl Reports documents the
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik
                                                       program and the results of Dagstuhl Seminars and
GmbH, Dagstuhl Publishing, Saarbrücken/Wadern,
                                                       Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshops.
Germany. Online available at
                                                       In principal, for each Dagstuhl Seminar or Dagstuhl
https://www.dagstuhl.de/dagpub/2192-5283
                                                       Perspectives Workshop a report is published that
                                                       contains the following:
Publication date
                                                           an executive summary of the seminar program
August, 2022
                                                           and the fundamental results,

Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche        an overview of the talks given during the seminar
Nationalbibliothek                                         (summarized    as talk abstracts), and
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publica-        summaries from working groups (if applicable).
tion in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; detailed This basic framework can be extended by suitable
bibliographic data are available in the Internet at contributions that are related to the program of the
https://dnb.d-nb.de.                                    seminar, e. g. summaries from panel discussions or
                                                        open problem sessions.
License
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Editorial Board
Attribution 4.0 International license (CC BY 4.0).         Elisabeth André
                 In brief, this license authorizes each    Franz Baader
                 and everybody to share (to copy,
                                                           Daniel Cremers
distribute and transmit) the work under the follow-
ing conditions, without impairing or restricting the       Goetz Graefe
authors’ moral rights:                                     Reiner Hähnle
    Attribution: The work must be attributed to its        Barbara Hammer
    authors.                                               Lynda Hardman

The copyright is retained by the corresponding au-         Oliver Kohlbacher
thors.                                                     Steve Kremer
                                                           Rupak Majumdar
                                                           Heiko Mantel
                                                           Albrecht Schmidt
                                                           Wolfgang Schröder-Preikschat
                                                           Raimund Seidel (Editor-in-Chief )
                                                           Heike Wehrheim
                                                           Verena Wolf
                                                           Martina Zitterbart

                                                       Editorial Office
                                                       Michael Wagner (Managing Editor)
                                                       Michael Didas (Managing Editor)
                                                       Jutka Gasiorowski (Editorial Assistance)
                                                       Dagmar Glaser (Editorial Assistance)
                                                       Thomas Schillo (Technical Assistance)
                                                       Contact
                                                       Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik
                                                       Dagstuhl Reports, Editorial Office
                                                       Oktavie-Allee, 66687 Wadern, Germany
                                                       reports@dagstuhl.de
Digital Object Identifier: 10.4230/DagRep.12.1.i       https://www.dagstuhl.de/dagrep
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 22021

Mobility Data Science
Mohamed Mokbel∗1 , Mahmoud Sakr∗2 , Li Xiong∗3 , Andreas Züfle∗4 ,
Jussara Almeida5 , Taylor Anderson6 , Walid Aref7 , Gennady
Andrienko8 , Natalia Andrienko9 , Yang Cao10 , Sanjay Chawla11 ,
Reynold Cheng12 , Panos Chrysanthis13 , Xiqi Fei14 , Gabriel
Ghinita15 , Anita Graser16 , Dimitrios Gunopulos17 , Christian
Jensen18 , Joon-Sook Kim19 , Kyoung-Sook Kim20 , Peer Kröger21 ,
John Krumm22 , Johannes Lauer23 , Amr Magdy24 , Mario
Nascimento25 , Siva Ravada26 , Matthias Renz27 , Dimitris
Sacharidis28 , Cyrus Shahabi29 , Flora Salim30 , Mohamed Sarwat31 ,
Maxime Schoemans32 , Bettina Speckmann33 , Egemen Tanin34 ,
Yannis Theodoridis35 , Kristian Torp36 , Goce Trajcevski37 , Marc van
Kreveld38 , Carola Wenk39 , Martin Werner40 , Raymond Wong41 ,
Song Wu42 , Jianqiu Xu43 , Moustafa Youssef44 , Demetris
Zeinalipour45 , Mengxuan Zhang46 , and Esteban Zimányi47
1    University of Minnesota – Minneapolis, USA. mokbel@umn.edu
2    Université Libre de Bruxelles – Brussels, Belgium. mahmoud.sakr@ulb.be
3    Emory University – Atlanta, USA. lxiong@emory.edu
4    George Mason University – Fairfax, USA. azufle@gmu.edu
5    Federal University of Minas Gerais – Brazil. jussara@dcc.ufmg.br
6    George Mason University – Fairfax, USA. tander6@gmu.edu
7    Purdue University – West Lafayette, USA. aref@cs.purdue.edu
8    Fraunhofer IAIS – St. Augustin, Germany.
     gennady.andrienko@iais.fraunhofer.de
9    Fraunhofer IAIS – St. Augustin, Germany.
     natalia.andrienko@iais.fraunhofer.de
10   Kyoto University – Kyoto, Japan. yang@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
11   Qatar Computing Research Institute – Doha, Qatar. schawla@hbku.edu.qa
12   University of Hong Kong – Hong Kong, China. ckcheng@cs.hku.hk
13   University of Pittsburgh – Pennsylvania, USA. panos@cs.pitt.edu
14   George Mason University – Fairfax, USA
15   University of Massachusetts at Boston – Boston, USA. Gabriel.Ghinita@umb.edu
16   Austrian Institute of Technology – Vienna, Austria. Anita.Graser@ait.ac.at
17   University of Athens – Greece. dg@di.uoa.gr
18   Aalborg University – Denmark. csj@cs.aau.dk
19   Pacific Northwest National Laboratory – USA. joonseok.kim@pnnl.gov
20   AIST – Tokyo Waterfront, Japan. ks.kim@aist.go.jp
21   University of Kiel – Germany. pkr@informatik.uni-kiel.de
22   Microsoft – Redmond, USA. jckrumm@microsoft.com
23   HERE Technologies – Germany. johannes.lauer@here.com
24   University of California – Riverside, USA. amr@cs.ucr.edu
25   University of Alberta – Edmonton, Canada. mario.nascimento@ualberta.ca
26   Oracle Corp. – Nashua, USA. siva.ravada@oracle.com
27   University of Kiel – Germany. mr@informatik.uni-kiel.de
28   Université Libre de Bruxelles – Brussels, Belgium. dimitris.sacharidis@ulb.be
29   University of Southern California – Log Angeles, USA. shahabi@usc.edu
30   University of New South Wales – Sydney, Australia. flora.salim@unsw.edu.au
31   Arizona State University – Tempe, USA. msarwat@asu.edu
32     Université Libre de Bruxelles – Brussels, Belgium. maxime.schoemans@ulb.be
33     TU Eindhoven – Netherlands. b.speckmann@tue.nl
34     University of Melbourne – Australia. etanin@unimelb.edu.au
35     University of Piraeus – Greece. ytheod@unipi.gr
36     Aalborg University – Denmark. torp@cs.aau.dk
37     Iowa State University – USA. gocet25@iastate.edu
38     Utrecht University – Netherlands. m.j.vankreveld@uu.nl
39     Tulane University – New Orleans, USA. cwenk@tulane.edu
40     Technical University of Munich – Munich, Germany. martin.werner@tum.de
41     Hong Kong Univ. of Science & Technology – Hong Kong, China.
       raywong@cse.ust.hk
42     Université Libre de Bruxelles – Brussels, Belgium. song.wu@ulb.be
43     Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China.
       jianqiu@nuaa.edu.cn
44     AUC and Alexandria University – Egypt. moustafa.youssef@gmail.com
45     University of Cyprus – Nicosia, Cyprus. dzeina@cs.ucy.ac.cy
46     Iowa State University – USA. mxzhang@iastate.edu
47     Université Libre de Bruxelles – Brussels, Belgium. esteban.zimanyi@ulb.be

        Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 22021 “Mobility Data
Science”. This seminar was held January 9-14, 2022, including 47 participants from industry
and academia. The goal of this Dagstuhl Seminar was to create a new research community of
mobility data science in which the whole is greater than the sum of its parts by bringing together
established leaders as well as promising young researchers from all fields related to mobility data
science.
    Specifically, this report summarizes the main results of the seminar by (1) defining Mobility
Data Science as a research domain, (2) by sketching its agenda in the coming years, and by (3)
building a mobility data science community. (1) Mobility data science is defined as spatiotemporal
data that additionally captures the behavior of moving entities (human, vehicle, animal, etc.).
To understand, explain, and predict behavior, we note that a strong collaboration with research
in behavioral and social sciences is needed. (2) Future research directions for mobility data
science described in this report include a) mobility data acquisition and privacy, b) mobility
data management and analysis, and c) applications of mobility data science. (3) We identify
opportunities towards building a mobility data science community, towards collaborations between
academic and industry, and towards a mobility data science curriculum.
Seminar January 9–14, 2022 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/22021
2012 ACM Subject Classification Information systems → Information systems applications;
   Information systems → Data management systems
Keywords and phrases Spatio-temporal, Tracking, Privacy, Behavior, Data cleaning, Data
   management, Analytics
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.12.1.1




∗
    Editor / Organizer
           Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
           under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Mobility Data Science, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 12, Issue 1, pp. 2–34
Editors: Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, and Andreas Züfle, et al.
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                           3


 1     Executive Summary
Mobility data is typically available in the form of sequences of location points with time
stamps, that are generated by location tracking devices. The use of mobility data has
traditionally been linked to transportation industry. Nowadays, with the availability of GPS-
equipped mobile devices and other inexpensive location tracking technologies, mobility data
is collected and published ubiquitously, leading to large data sets of volunteered geographic
information (VGI).
    In general, mobility data science is the science of transforming mobility data into (action-
able) knowledge. This knowledge is critical towards solutions for traffic management, disease
pandemic mitigation, micro-mobility (e.g., shared bikes and scooters), health monitoring,
logistics (e.g., delivery services), to mention a few.
    Despite the common goal of acquiring, managing, and generating insights from mobility
data, the mobility data science community is largely fragmented, developing solutions in
silos. It stems from a range of disciplines with expertise in moving object data storage
and management, geographic information science, spatiotemporal data mining, ubiquitous
computing, computational geometry and more. Furthermore, there is a disconnect in both
industry and science between mobility data scientists and domain scientists or end users
for which solutions are designed. Therefore, the goal of this Dagstuhl Seminar was to bring
together and recognize the mobility data science community as an interdisciplinary research
field, strengthen the definition of mobility data science, and together explore challenges and
opportunities in the field. The seminar had two objectives: (1) to build a new research
community of mobility data science as amalgamation of the several communities who have
been looking at mobility data, and (2) to draft a research agenda for mobility data science.
This dagstuhl seminar was the first towards these objectives. The consensus of the participants
is that more events will be needed in the future to continue the community building effort.



Seminar Program
The seminar was held in the week of January 9 – 14 , 2022. It had 47 participants specialized
in different topics: data management, mobility analysis, geography, privacy, urban computing,
systems, simulation, indoors, visualization, information integration, and theory. Due to
COVID-19, the seminar took place in hybrid mode, with 8 onsite, and 39 remote participants.
Despite the challenge of different time zones of the participants, all sessions were attended
by at least 37 participants.
    The seminar program is given in Figure 1. In the first day, every participant gave a
five-minutes self introduction, research interests, and position statement on mobility data
science. The rest of the program consisted of panels, and open discussions. To work around
the time zone challenge, the seminar activities were centered in the afternoon of Dagstuhl,
which was still possible for the Eastern and CHN time zones. The open discussions slots were
planned ad-hoc during the seminar. In particular, the slot on Tuesday was used to define
what is mobility data science, or more precisely what is the scope of work of this community.
    All working group and panel discussions were moderated to converge towards the seminar
goals of defining a research agenda and building a community. The results are summarized
in this report.




                                                                                                   22021
4   22021 – Mobility Data Science

                                                            Dagstuhl Seminar on Mobilty Science - Program


                       TIme
                                                Sunday Jan 9      Monday Jan 10        Tuesday Jan 11         Wednesday Jan 12      Thursday Jan 13      Friday Jan 14
     US- Eastern   Germany - CET   China- CHN
       1:30 AM        7:30 AM       2:30 PM
       2:00 AM        8:00 AM       3:00 PM                                                              Breakfast (7:30 AM - 8:45 AM)
       2:30 AM        8:30 AM       3:30 PM
       3:00 AM        9:00 AM       4:00 PM
       3:30 AM        9:30 AM       4:30 PM
       4:00 AM       10:00 AM       5:00 PM                           Coffee                Coffee                 Coffee                  Coffee           Coffee
       4:30 AM       10:30 AM       5:30 PM
                                                                   15 x 5-min:
       5:00 AM       11:00 AM       6:00 PM                       Introductory        Open discussions                 Free        Open discussions     Open discussions
       5:30 AM       11:30 AM       6:30 PM                       Presentations

       6:00 AM       12:00 PM       7:00 PM
       6:30 AM       12:30 PM       7:30 PM                                                                Lunch (12:15 PM - 1:30 PM)
       7:00 AM        1:00 PM       8:00 PM
       7:30 AM        1:30 PM       8:30 PM                          Welcome            Mobility Data
                                                                                                              Parallel Working
                                                                                      Management and                                 Industry Panel
       8:00 AM        2:00 PM       9:00 PM                      10 x 5-min: Intro                           Groups: Discussing
                                                                                       Analysis Panel                                  (Mohamed)
       8:30 AM        2:30 PM       9:30 PM                        Presentations                              Panel Outcomes
                                                                                         (Mahmoud)
       9:00 AM        3:00 PM      10:00 PM                       Coffee & cake        Coffee & cake            Coffee & cake           Coffee & cake
       9:30 AM        3:30 PM      10:30 PM                                             Mobility Data
                                                                   15 x 5-min:                                                       Curriculum
                                                                                           Science           Presenting Working
      10:00 AM        4:00 PM       11:00 PM                      Introductory                                                    Development Panel
                                                                                      Applications Panel       Groups Results
      10:30 AM        4:30 PM       11:30 PM                      Presentations                                                      (Mahmoud)
                                                                                          (Andreas)
      11:00 AM        5:00 PM       12:00 AM
                                                                   Mobility Data                                  Funding          Parallel Working
                                                                                       Systems Panel
      11:30 AM        5:30 PM       12:30 AM                      Acquisition and                               Opportunities     Groups: Planing the
                                                                                         (Mohamed)
      12:00 PM        6:00 PM       1:00 AM                      Privacy Panel (Li)                              (Andreas)              Report
                                                Buffet Dinner:
      12:30 PM        6:30 PM       1:30 AM
                                                  6:00 PM                                            Dinner: 6:30 PM
       1:00 PM        7:00 PM       2:00 AM




        Figure 1 Dagstuhl Seminar on Mobility Science – Program.


    Organization and Panels
    To accommodate for the hybrid mode and the time zone differences, we opted to let the
    participants choose to participate in one of the following three thematic working groups,
    each having 14-17 members and led by one of the seminar co-organizers:
       Seminar co-organizers: Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle
       Working Group 1: Mobility Data Acquisition and Privacy
       The scope includes the full cycle of obtaining and preparing mobility data for further
       processing. Examples include innovative ways of data collection, crowdsourcing, simula-
       tion, data uncertainty, data cleaning, and data visualization. It also includes innovative
       ways of ensuring mobile users privacy as a means of encouraging users to share their data.
       Results of Working Group 1 are found in Section 4
       Working Group 2: Mobility Data Management and Analysis
       This includes the full data pipeline from modelling, indexing, query processing/optimiza-
       tion, and data analysis. Existing solutions for mobility data management were discussed
       and a way forward for a next generation system for mobility data management was
       conceived. Results of Working Group 2 are found in Section 5.
       Working Group 3 Mobility Data Science Applications
       This working group discussed the broader impacts of mobility data science to improve
       understanding of human behavior, urban sustainability, improving traffic conditions,
       health, and situational awareness. Specific applications towards these broader impacts
       including map making, contact tracing, pandemic preparedness, indoor navigation, and
       marine transportation were discussed. Results of Working Group 3 are found in Section 6.
        For each working group a dedicated panel session was organized which was attended
    by all seminar participants. In addition, two parallel working group sessions were held for
    discussions and for planning the writing of this report. The working groups presented and
    further discussed their results with all participants on Wednesday. Four cross-cutting panels
    discussed the topics of systems, funding opportunities, industry involvement, and curriculum
    development. All panels started with presentations of panelists as listed below, seven minutes
    each, where they expressed their positions concerning questions given by the panel moderator.
    The rest of the panel time opened the discussion to all participants.
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                           5


  Mobility Data Acquisition and Privacy Panel. Moderator: Li Xiong
  Panelists: Gennady (& Natalia) Andrienko, Kyoung-Sook Kim, John Krumm, Cyrus
  Shahabi
  Mobility Data Management and Analysis Panel. Moderator: Mahmoud Sakr
  Panelists: Walid Aref, Panos Chrysanthis, Christian Jensen, Yannis Theodoridis
  Mobility Data Science Applications Panel. Moderator: Andreas Züfle
  Panelists: Sanjay Chawla, Flora Salim, Moustafa Youssef, Demetris Zeinalipour
  Systems Panel. Moderator: Mohamed Mokbel
  Panelists: Walid Aref, Dimitrios Gunopulos, Cyrus Shahabi, Esteban Zimányi
  Funding Opportunities Panel. Moderator: Andreas Züfle
  Panelists: Johannes Lauer, Mario Nascimento, Matthias Renz, Carola Wenk
  Industry Panel. Moderator: Mohamed Mokbel
  Panelists: John Krumm, Johannes Lauer, Siva Ravada, Mohamed Sarwat
  Curriculum Development Panel. Moderator: Mahmoud Sakr
  Panelists: Anita Graser, Marc van Kreveld, Martin Werner, Esteban Zimányi




                                                                                   22021
6   22021 – Mobility Data Science


     2      Table of Contents
    Executive Summary            . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3

    What is Mobility Data Science? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                7

    Future Research Agenda: Mobility Data Acquisition and Privacy . . . . . .                             7
         Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      8
         Data Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      9
         Bias in Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     11

    Future Research Agenda: Mobility Data Management and Analysis . . . . .                              14
         The Architectural Challenges of Mobility Data Management . . . . . . . . . . . . .              14
         Next Generation Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
         Learning and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

    Applications of Mobility Data Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                21
         Broader Impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
         Specific Application Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24
         Algorithmic Paradigms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

    Mobility Data Science and Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

    Towards a Mobility Data Science Curriculum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

    Closing Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        31

    Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

    Remote Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                          7


 3     What is Mobility Data Science?
During initial seminar discussions, a controversial statement was made that many problems
that the spatiotemporal data community is working on do not have any real-world applications.
An example was the problem of location prediction, where the number of visitors for point
of interests are predicted over time. This controversial statement led to a vivid discussion.
While there was disagreement about the broader impacts of the problem of location prediction
and other spatiotemporal data science problems, it was widely agreed that a useful and open
research challenge is to understanding the underlying behavior: Why does the number of
visitor changes? How can explain the underlying human behavior? And how can we leverage
this understanding to predict what-if scenarios to maximize future visitor numbers at a point
of interest.
    Thus, highlighting need to go beyond the question of where will users be, but also why
they will be there. Understanding the underlying behavior of users would allow us to explain
trends. For example, reduced popularity of a coffee shop could be explained by a nearby
competitor attracting customers with a special offer. These explanation of trends can then
be used to take actions (such as offering a similar or better offer) to not only predict future
trends, but to change them.
    But to answer “why” users visit places, we have to think beyond spatial and spatiotemporal
data science to understanding the underlying human behavior. Adding a component (human)
behavior allows us to transition from traditional spatiotemporal data to mobility data science.
    Therefore, we formalize Mobility Data Science as follows.

▶ Definition 1 (Mobility Data). Spatiotemporal data capturing behavior of moving entities.

▶ Definition 2 (Mobility Data Science). The science of mobility data.

    The additional consideration of (human) behavior in spatiotemporal data is challenging.
As Physics nobel laureate Murray Gell-Mann once famously said: “Think how hard physics
would be if particles could think”. By adding a dimension of behavior, we’re allowing the
entities in our universe of discourse to think. The seminar agreed that experts in social
sciences will be paramount to explain and model human behavior, to mine knowledge from
mobility data, and to create a mobility data science community. Cross-disciplinary research
is challenging because it requires collaboration between domain experts that may address
research in very different manners. However, cross-disciplinary research ensures that the
solutions provided by the mobility data science community are relevant for society. Another
clear benefit from working with experts from other domains is that this creates new research
ideas. The mobility data science community should encourage cross-disciplinary research by
ensuring prestigious outlets publish industry papers and best-practice papers.



 4     Future Research Agenda: Mobility Data Acquisition and Privacy
Results of the first working group on mobility data acquisition and privacy are presented
in this section. Specifically, Section 4.1 discusses challenges related to data acquisition,
Section 4.2 describes issues on mobility data quality, Section 4.3 discussed bias in mobility
data, and Section 4.4 describes privacy threats for mobility data.




                                                                                                  22021
8   22021 – Mobility Data Science


    4.1    Data Acquisition
    Acquisition in the context of this report refers to acquiring mobility data. This is often
    necessary for the research we want to do – as a way to train models, assess the quality of our
    algorithms, and analyze the data for patterns and relationships with other data.
        Mobility data can take different forms. We normally derive mobility data from humans,
    but it can also come from animals. Inanimate objects can move as well (e.g., planets,
    soccer balls, and leaves), but we tend to think of mobility data as coming from something
    whose motion is intentional or at least guided with intention, such as someone in a bus or
    autonomous vehicle. The exact data included in mobility data can vary. Perhaps the most
    common example is timestamped coordinates, such as latitude/longitude. If the timestamps
    are missing, we would likely call it population data or occupancy data rather than mobility
    data. The coordinates could instead be replaced by higher level abstractions like points of
    interest (POI), activities, or other location-specific properties.
        The main issue with acquisition of mobility data is how we can get mobility data for
    our research. Getting the data takes time and effort, especially if it is annotated with
    human-generated abstractions like activity. There have been efforts to gather and share
    mobility data, such as GeoLife from Microsoft Research Beijing which covers 182 different
    users. But there is not yet a massive, shared mobility dataset for human motion. One trend
    among general research papers over the past several years is to encourage or require authors
    to make their data publicly available. As an example, there is a repository of animal mobility
    data at https://www.movebank.org/cms/movebank-main. Besides encouraging sharing in
    individual papers, we should consider starting a publication venue for mobility datasets (or
    more generally spatial datasets), similar to the journal “Nature Scientific Data”, which is a
    “journal for descriptions of scientifically valuable datasets.”
        Human mobility data is sensitive (considered “personally identifiable information” (PII)
    by some companies), so we cannot necessarily share all human mobility data. We note that
    part of this Dagstuhl Seminar also concentrated on privacy, which is at odds with data
    sharing. One approach to the privacy problem is to create a community-based open source
    project where we enroll people who are willing to log and share their location data, possibly
    with privacy guarantees for the contributors. However, such data would be biased toward
    people who are willing to share their location data. One solution for the privacy problem is
    for the data owner to accept code from outside, run it on their proprietary data, and then
    return the results.
        Another way to get mobility data is to generate it synthetically. While numerous synthetic
    trajectory and movement data generators have been proposed in the past, there is not a
    generally accepted synthetic generator for mobility data, and no consensus on whether or not
    such data would be acceptable as the sole test set for a research project. Some have used a
    synthetic dataset as one of their test datasets for a publication. And sometimes a specialized
    simulation is used for testing an algorithm, e.g., flocking behavior or location-based social
    networks.
        Our community could take a lesson from generative adversarial networks (GANs) in the
    deep learning community where the network inspects its artificially generated results for
    realism. However, we do not yet know how to measure the realism of mobility data. If
    synthetic mobility data is too realistic, it may invade someone’s privacy if it, for instance,
    shows where members of a given household actually visit.
        In the end, the research community will have to agree on the suitability of synthetic
    mobility data for research. This agreement could be an explicit statement or could grow
    naturally from the pool of papers that are successfully published.
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                           9


4.2    Data Quality
There exists different procedures for collecting mobility data:
   Time-based: positions of movers are recorded at regularly spaced time moments.
   Change-based: a record is made when a mover’s position, speed, or movement direction
   differs from the previous one.
   Location-based: a record is made when a mover enters or comes close to a specific
   place, e.g., where a sensor is installed.
   Event-based: positions and times are recorded when certain events occur, in particular,
   when movers perform certain activities such as cellphone calls or taking photos.
   Various combinations of these basic approaches. In particular, GPS tracking devices
   may combine time-based and change-based re-cording: the positions are measured at
   regular time intervals but recorded only when a significant change of position, speed, or
   direction occurs.

   To identify data errors, it is necessary to consider systematically the relevant properties
of mobility data, including:
   Mover set properties:
     number of movers: a single mover, a small number of movers, a large number of movers;
     population coverage: whether there are data about all movers of interest for a given
     territory and time period or only for a sample of the movers;
     representativeness: whether the sample of movers is representative, i.e., has the same
     distribution of properties as in the whole population, or biased towards individuals
     with particular properties.
   Temporal properties:
     temporal resolution: the lengths of the time intervals between the position measure-
     ments;
     temporal regularity: whether the length of time intervals between measurements is
     constant or variable;
     temporal coverage: whether the measurements were made during the whole time span
     of the data or in a sample of time units, or there were intentional or unintentional
     breaks in the measurements;
     time cycles coverage: whether all positions of relevant time cycles (daily, weekly,
     seasonal, etc.) are sufficiently represented in the data, or the data refer only to subsets
     of positions (e.g., only work days or only daytime), or there is a bias towards some
     positions.
   Spatial properties:
     spatial resolution: the minimal change of position of an object that can be reflected in
     the data;
     spatial precision: whether the positions are defined as points (by exact coordinates) or
     as locations having spatial extents (e.g., areas). For example, the position of a mobile
     phone call is typically a cell in a mobile phone network;
     spatial coverage: are positions recorded everywhere or, if not, how are the locations
     where positions are recorded distributed over the studied territory (in terms of the
     spatial extent, uniformity, and density)?

   Further sources of data errors and uncertainty relate to
   data collection procedure:
     position exactness: How exactly could the positions be determined? Thus, a movement
     sensor may detect an object within its range but may not be able to determine the
     exact coordinates of the object within its detection area. In this case, the position of
     the sensor stands in for the object’s true the position;

                                                                                                   22021
10   22021 – Mobility Data Science


           positioning accuracy, or how much error may be in the measurements;
           missing positions: in some circumstances, object positions cannot be determined,
           leading to gaps in the data;
           meanings of the position absence: whether absence of positions corresponds to stops,
           or to conditions when measurements were impossible, or to device failure, or to private
           information that has been removed.

         Irrespective of the collection method and device settings, there is also indispensable
     uncertainty in movement data (and, more generally, any time-related data) caused by their
     discreteness. Since time is continuous, the data cannot refer to every possible instant. For
     any two successive instants t1 and t2 referred to in the data there are moments in between
     for which there are no data. Therefore, one cannot know definitely what happened between
     t1 and t2. Movement data with fine temporal and spatial resolution give a possibility of
     interpolation, i.e., estimation of object positions between the measured positions. In this
     way, the continuous path of the mover can be approximately reconstructed by interpolation.
         Movement data that do not allow valid interpolation may be called episodic. Episodic
     data are usually produced by location-based and event-based collection methods but may
     also be produced by time-based methods when the position measurements cannot be done
     sufficiently frequently, for example, due to the limited battery lives of the devices. Thus, when
     tracking movements of wild animals, ecologists have to reduce the frequency of measurements
     to be able to track the animals over longer time periods.
         According to the structure and properties of mobility data, we can identify the following
     classes of errors in movement data:
         temporal properties, e.g., missing data during some time intervals;
         spatial properties, e.g., errors in positions, absence of data in some parts of territory;
         mover identity properties, e.g., misspelled or duplicate identifiers; or no identifiers at all;
         data collection properties, e.g., results of restricting positions to a given bounding
         rectangle.

         For identifying data quality issues, it is necessary to consider all major components
     of the data structure, namely identities, spatial locations, times, and thematic attributes,
     and their combinations. Any unexpected regularity or irregularity of distributions requires
     attention and explanation, as such patterns may indicate sampling bias or other kinds of
     errors. Calculation of derived attributes (e.g., speed, direction) and aggregates over space,
     time, and categories of objects provides further distributions to be assessed.



     4.3    Bias in Data
     All datasets are biased, examples include:
         App data and mobile phone network data are biased against people who don’t use smart
         phones or use prepaid plans
         Most traffic counting sensors are installed to count cars but do not count pedestrians,
         cyclists, wheelchairs, (e-)scooters, and similar
         Object-detection in video-based systems depends on labels in training data, which often
         don’t include new mobility options such as (e-)scooters
         Surveys are biased towards people who are willing and able to fill surveys, i.e., interested,
         literate, sufficient free time, reachable (e.g., for phone surveying)
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                          11




   Figure 2 Location protection without trusted third party.


   Cells in mobile phone networks vary widely in size. Trips that stay within a single cell
   cannot be detected. This affects rural areas with larger cells more than urban areas.
   Volunteered tracking data is biased towards technically savvy people
   Sports tracking data is biased towards health conscious middle and upper class

   It is important to acknowledge and quantify the bias in mobility data sets to ensure that
actions and policies that are based on mobility data science results are equitable and fair
and include vulnerable populations.



4.4     Privacy
We divide our discussion on privacy into two settings: local settings and central settings.
In the local setting (as shown in Figure 2), the mobile service provider is not trusted.
Hence, mobile users need to protect their location information (e.g., via perturbation) before
uploading them to the service provider in exchange for location based services (LBS). The
services include ride sharing, spatial crowdsourcing, and POI search. The aggregate locations
from all users can be also used to support location based analytics. In the central setting (as
shown in Figure 3), the mobile service provider is trusted and has access to users’ mobility
data. It acts as a trusted data curator and shares some form of the mobility data with a
third party or the public which are untrusted. The shared data can be aggregate statistics,
sanitized or anonymized version of the data, machine learning models trained from the
data, or synthetic data generated based on the original data which can support a variety of
applications using mobility data (as we discussed in the application section). The privacy
goal is to protect against inference risks to the original data from the shared data.

4.4.1   Threat Models and Privacy Definitions
The first challenge for mobility data privacy protection is the need to understand the threat
models and adopt or define proper criteria by which to enforce privacy. We need to define
first what needs to be protected (i.e., the sensitive information). This may vary for different




                                                                                                  22021
12   22021 – Mobility Data Science




        Figure 3 Location Protection with Trusted Third Party.


     mobile users and applications. It may be the exact location coordinates, association of
     coordinate with a sensitive place, co-location of two users, or spatiotemporal activities of
     a user (e.g., stay at a place, or a trajectory). When defining privacy models and designing
     subsequent privacy mechanisms, there will (almost always) be an attack to a privacy model
     which is based on side channel information exploitation. A clear threat model needs to be
     defined. Relation to cybersecurity and cyber-defense could be interesting and provides a
     research direction.
         Syntactic Privacy Approaches. Early work on privacy for location data focused on
     location-based services (LBS). Typical use-case scenarios are those where a user wants to
     retrieve points of interest in her proximity, e.g., nearest gas station. Query types are limited
     to range or nearest-neighbor queries. In this setting, the protection model considered was
     one where a user’s whereabouts are hidden, or cloaked, among a set of k − 1 other individuals,
     according to the concept of spatial k-anonymity. This is a syntactic model, which works
     well if the adversary does not have access to background knowledge, but fails to provide
     the required amount of protection when the adversary can use auxiliary information to
     eliminate some of the locations in a cloaking set. Cryptographic Approaches. Later on, formal
     protection guarantees in the LBS setting were achieved with the help of encryption approaches.
     Specifically, existing work encrypts the data and query domain, and answers queries such as
     nearest neighbors in the transformed space. Other work that provides encryption-strength
     protection employs Private Information Retrieval (PIR) in conjunction with Voronoi diagrams
     to answer privately nearest-neighbor queries. Differential Privacy (DP). The introduction of
     DP and its Geo-Indistinguishability (GeoInd) counterpart specifically designed for location
     data have opened the field for new approaches that provide formal protection with statistical
     guarantees. In the case of GeoInd which is designed for the local setting (as shown in
     Figure 1), one protects against pinpointing the exact location of a targeted user from the
     reported (perturbed) location. The level of protection is controlled with the help of a
     privacy parameter. Each user can perturb their own location before reporting it according
     to well-defined protection mechanisms that provide GeoInd. Later works extended geoInd to
     account for temporal correlations between consecutive locations of mobile users, protection
     of customizable spatiotemporal activities instead of raw locations or trajectories. Challenges
     remain in providing customizable and rigorous privacy notions and mechanisms that provide
     high utility for a variety of applications.
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                          13


    For the global setting, several types of aggregate computation can be performed privately
using DP-compliant mechanisms. One can even train a machine learning model in a private
way. Mobility data introduces unique challenges to applying standard DP techniques due to
its spatiotemporal correlations which often results in increased privacy cost due to privacy
composition and the difficulties in modeling the correlations.

4.4.2   Privacy-Utility Tradeoff and Emerging Applications
When designing privacy mechanisms, it is important to consider the utility of the intended
applications. For LBS (as typical in the local setting), the utility needs to be measured
by the precision or accuracy of the LBS queries such as range queries for POI search. For
aggregate data analytics and machine learning applications using mobility data (in both
local setting and central setting), the utility need to be measured by the accuracy of the
statistics (e.g., frequency or density estimation), the trained model, or the fidelity of the
synthetic data.
    The emergence of novel computing paradigms like spatial crowdsourcing led to interesting
technical approaches and challenges to achieving privacy. For instance, existing work invest-
igates how one can perform assignment between spatial tasks and workers in crowdsourced
systems, without compromising the location privacy of the participants involved. Specifically,
the matching is performed based on a DP-compliant algorithm that ensures that an adversary
cannot determine with significant probability if a particular individual took part in the
crowdsourced system or not.
    Another important paradigm shift in terms of type of supported queries occurred with the
emergence of techniques for digital contact tracing, which are important in controlling the
spread of pandemics, such as COVID-19. In this context, it is less important to capture exact
user locations, and what is required is to establish co-location relationships. Determining
whether two individuals have been in close proximity or not in a privacy preserving way is a
challenging and important problem. For example, while geoInd may be used, the perturbation
may introduce false positives and false negatives, a careful balance is needed if the result
will be used to notify potential users at risk. In addition, privacy compositions may further
increase privacy cost or degrade the utility when considering trajectories of users.

4.4.3   Societal Education
An important challenge of mobility data privacy is to improve explainability of privacy
definitions and mechanisms. DP-compliant algorithms and DP-fashioned location privacy
models (such as Geo-Ind) as described earlier use privacy parameters to control the trade-
off between privacy guarantee and the utility of the private outputs. However, there is a
significant gap between the theory and practice of DP: we lack principles and guidelines for
choosing privacy parameters when collecting or processing mobility data using DP techniques
in the real world.
    The parameter ϵ of DP is mathematically defined but not well-aligned with the stakehold-
ers’ beneficial interests. Theoretically, ϵ of DP represents the bound of marginal adversarial
beliefs conditioned on the private output. It is known that the privacy parameters of DP are
not absolute but rather relative measures of privacy. That is to say, even for the same ϵ, the
privacy guarantees enforced by DP could be different based on the datasets and algorithms
at hand. In addition, the ϵ is not always linked to a specific privacy risk for the users (such
as “the probability that an attacker can correctly infer my data”) or a precise utility level
for data analyzers (such as “the accuracy of the DP-ML model”). It may arouse distrust
towards DP technology without explaining why the specific privacy parameters are chosen
and what the potential privacy risk is for the users.


                                                                                                  22021
14   22021 – Mobility Data Science


         To promote the acceptance of DP technology in practice, we should establish principles,
     design guidelines, and provide tools for explaining DP’s protection and limitation from
     stakeholders’ practical interests. For example, we can help data contributors understand the
     privacy risk (such as membership inference attacks or reconstruction attacks) under different
     privacy parameters given a concrete DP algorithm; we can also design efficient methods to
     visualize how data analyzers’ utility metrics (such as MSE or model accuracy) may change
     along with different privacy parameters.
         Towards a privacy and ethics review board, it was discussed that every research project
     needs to be evaluated in privacy/quality management. This may create a need for an ethics
     commissions in mobility data science.



      5      Future Research Agenda: Mobility Data Management and Analysis
     This section discusses the priority topic of research related to the full mobility data pipeline
     from modelling, indexing, query processing/optimization, and data analysis. It summarizes
     the discussions that took place within the Working Group of data management and analysis,
     and were then elaborated in a general discussion between all seminar participants.



     5.1     The Architectural Challenges of Mobility Data Management
     5.1.1   Hybrid Batch Real-time Data Management and Analytics
     Today’s requirements for mobility data management and analytics must combine both batch
     and real-time data. For example, a common requirement is to visualize the position of a
     fleet of vehicles in real time (which only requires to access the most recent positions of the
     vehicles), but at the same time to perform batch analytics on the full trajectory of these
     vehicles (for example to assess whether the trajectories exhibit ssome unexpected behavior).
         Since the 1990s, the need to have both real-time and historical data has led to the
     development of the data warehouse domain, where operational databases cover the real-
     time Online Transaction processing (OLTP) while data warehouses cover the historical
     Online Analytical Processing (OLAP). However, having two different systems for the two
     kinds of workloads is very costly, and for this reason a new approach referred to as Hybrid
     Transactional and Analytical Processing (HTAP) has been recently proposed. This approach
     aims at removing the need for Extraction Transformation and Loading (ETL) process and
     enables real-time analytical queries on current data. The new generation of NewSQL database
     management systems aims at achieving this approach. However, research work is currently
     being done in order to solve all the challenges posed by the HTAP approach, especially in
     the context of big data.
         The situation is similar for mobility data since the training part of ML requires offline
     processing of large training datasets, while we also need to do real-time prediction for
     numerous simultaneous moving objects (e.g., air traffic control). It is still an open question
     whether the recent developments in HTAP and in NewSQL can be extended for manipulating
     real-time stream and historical mobility data. Another line of research is how edge computing
     could be integrated into this context, since it may enable a continuum between these two
     extremes of historical and real-time data analytics.
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                           15


5.1.2   Distributed Data Management and Processing for Mobility Data
The paradigms of distributed data management for mobility data include distributed RDBs,
NoSQL systems, and data flow processing systems based on e.g., the Spark architecture. It
has turned out that these architectures have their pros and cons. For instance,
   while distributed RDBs provide a rich repertoire of features and algorithms, scaling out
   is hard;
   NoSQL systems are really scalable but they are still immature for handling mobility data
   (limited queries, basic partitioning / indexing);
   systems following the Spark architecture, though scalable and with a rich repertoire of
   queries, they provide ad-hoc solutions for indexing and querying.

    In the near future, the goal for the mobility data management community obviously
includes technologies that will combine the best features of each, in fact, scalability together
with rich (though not ad-hoc) indexing support and querying functionality. How can it
be reached? Among the three above baselines and since high scalability of RDBs seems
questionable, the most promising roadmaps are expected to be those exploiting on NoSQL
and/or Spark-based systems. Towards this goal, a number of challenges arise. To name but
a few:
    Regarding indexing, (a) how does modern architecture (e.g., SIMD instructions and
    MSMC architectures) affect the in-memory vs. disk-based processing balance? (b) will
    the auto-generated index configurations paradigm be the future?
    Regarding query processing and the convergence of DBMS and DSMS in a single architec-
    ture, which is the golden ratio between offline (archive) and online (stream) processing?
    Regarding analytical processes (from aggregations to forecasting), to what degree they
    should be considered as duty of the DBMS?
    Regarding the IoT environment, how smoothly can we deal with the edge/fog/cloud
    settings that appear there?
In either case, the target should be offering high scalability (not only with respect to volume
but also to velocity of data) along with query processing methods – and indexing schemes as
their background supporters – that will be based on strong foundations (could it e.g., be a
multi-model, multi-granularity algebra?).

5.1.3   IoT Challenges as a Driver Use-case for Mobility Data Science
The Internet of Things (IoT) has recently received significant attention. An IoT device may
possess an array of sensors that for example monitors the air temperature, carbon monoxide
level, wifi signals, and sound intensity. IoT data is initially created on the device, then sent
over to a central database system (e.g., the cloud) that organizes and prepares such data for
the ongoing use by myriad applications, which include but are not limited to smart home,
smart city, the industrial internet, connected cars, and connected health. Data generated
by IoT devices is inherently mobile with spatial and temporal attributes. For instance, an
audio signal represents the variation of the sound intensity (retrieved by a sound sensor) over
the time dimension. Furthermore, IoT devices can be attached to moving objects such as a
connected vehicle or a wearable device.
    A promising research direction will incorporate IoT data awareness in state-of-the-art
mobility data systems. That also requires that system developers design a middleware
framework, which understands the IoT devices streaming data to the central data system on
one side and the requirements of applications accessing such IoT data on the other side. The
proposed middleware system will tune the mobility data system to adaptively decide whether




                                                                                                   22021
16   22021 – Mobility Data Science


     or not to eagerly propagate data from the device, to the edge, or to the central system.
     Another important direction is to modify existing relational and spatial query processing
     algorithms to leverage the IoT device capabilities and handle the different rate and types of
     data generated by various IoT devices. To capture the interconnected nature of IoT data, a
     mobility data system must also provide a graph processing API in addition to the spatial /
     spatiotemporal API. Such a combination is already supported by existing graph data systems,
     however such systems treat the geospatial location attribute as a second class citizen, and
     hence cannot achieve real-time or near real-time performance. The community needs to craft
     efficient query operators that accelerate location-aware graph queries and also investigate
     new index structures that take into account network aspect of linked IoT data as well as the
     spatial and spatiotemporal aspects.



     5.2     Next Generation Systems
     5.2.1   Lessons Learned from Existing Systems
     Existing systems are built for a variety of application purposes such as on-line updating
     and querying, and historical data querying and analytics. Next generation systems may be
     towards a general platform or cloud system into which individual systems can be integrated
     as modules. Developers who have already built ad-hoc systems could still further enhance
     their systems and then upload them into the platform.
         Existing systems for mobility data have been already well equipped with a number of
     data models, structures, functions and operators. For example, there are historical data
     representation methods, different updating policies, a list of R-tree based index structures
     and grid index structures, and query algorithms. Those well-established techniques should
     be encapsulated into next generation systems. That is, one should not build the system from
     scratch.
         One aspect receiving moderate attention in existing systems is to evaluate the data
     quality of raw mobility data and perform data cleaning. This is because application queries
     and analytics performed on low-quality data inhibit the system performance and even lead
     to incorrect results. A powerful, general and intelligent tool should be developed in the
     community to (i) effectively evaluate the quality of mobility data and (ii) efficiently perform
     the data cleaning task to provide as high-quality data as possible for the system. The tool
     should be open sourced and sustained and empowered by the community such that a wide
     range of researchers as well as those from other communities (e.g., GIS) can benefit from that.
     The system should be completely or almost completely open source rather than partially
     open source. In particular, the underlying implementation details should be visible to the
     community after paper publication such that the techniques can be utilized or even enhanced
     in a wide domain.
         In relational database systems and data mining systems, a natural language interface has
     been provided such that users can express their queries in natural language. This benefits a
     wide range of users, especially, non-experts who cannot write structured query expressions.
     Mobility data systems should also provide a user-friendly interface for non-specialists from
     other domains. The task is to precisely transform queries in natural language into structure
     and executable languages in the system. An interactive interface is preferred as users may
     check the correctness and accuracy of transformed expressions.
         Data visualization also plays a pivotal role for application users and developers as not
     only mobility data but also structures for storing and manipulating them should be displayed
     in a clear way. For application users, the system fluently displays the data in a clear and
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                            17


interactive way such that they understand the meaning and why such results appear. For
developers, the system reports the structure statistics in an intuitive and customizable way
such that they well understand the internal characteristics of underlying data structures, and
then build the structures in an optimal way for application tasks.

5.2.2   Towards an Eco-system for Mobility Data Science
Location data has almost always been supported in data systems as an afterthought. Many
systems, e.g., Postgres, Storm, Spark, and Hadoop, have not been originally designed with
location data support in mind. What typically happens is that spatial data types get
augmented into tuple-oriented systems to support the location data type. For example,
a restaurant tuple that describes various attributes of a restaurant is augmented with
the latitude and longitude of the location attribute of the restaurant to support location
services. Spatial indexes are provided to speedup the access to these attributes, and some
accompanying spatial operators are provided to operate on the location attributes to provide
location services, e.g., range or k-nearest-neighbor searches. While this approach works,
systems that result are not well-optimized for supporting location data. This is similar
in analogy to trying to repurpose a car to be able to fly. While this is possible, it will
not perform optimally and will never be the same as designing an airplane from scratch in
contrast to starting from a car and modifying the car’s design. Thus, the quest is to realize
a data system where location is treated as a first class citizen from the start, i.e., the system
will be optimized firsthand for location data and its corresponding services.
     It is important to note that over 80% of the data is associated with location data. Thus,
it is important that when we design a system that supports location as a first class data type
that this system also supports the other forms of data that are associated with the location.
A vision, termed Location+X, calls for treating location data as a first-class citizen in a
location data system that at the same time can be extended to support other data types (the
“X” in Location+X). The data types “X” can be keywords (e.g., to support spatial-keywords
and tweets), can be graphs (e.g., to support road-network data), can be relational data
(e.g., to support descriptions of spatial data objects), can be click streams (e.g., to support
check-in data), can be document data (e.g., to support points of interest and documents that
describe them), can be annotated trajectories (e.g., location + time + textual annotations),
etc. Notice that in many location services, more than one data type X may need to be
supported at the same time, e.g., a graph data type combined with a document or keyword
data types, etc., which calls for a multi-model-like data system.
     Following the above vision, this gives rise to an eco-system where location is at the core
with some form of an extensible multi-model data system that supports the multitude of
data types “X”. However, current multi-model data system technology is lacking in several
aspects. First, they do not support data streaming that is a cornerstone in location data
systems due to the online streamed locations of moving objects. Second and as important,
we do not want to fall into the trap of adopting existing multi-model technologies that may
affect location being a first class citizen. However, the need for supporting multi-models in
one seamlessly integrated location+X system remains a necessity.
     In addition to supporting location data via a native location+X engine, an eco-system
for mobility data would include many important utilities to facilitate a broad spectrum of
location service applications. From the input data side, to help navigate the vast amounts
of available location datasets, and discover the right data sets for a given task, a location
dataset lake infrastructure and location dataset discovery, cleaning, and integration facilities
are needed. From the presentation side, a comprehensive visualization suite is envisioned
to support visualizations for combinations of spatial and temporal data analytics on top of
location data.

                                                                                                    22021
18   22021 – Mobility Data Science


     5.2.3   Standards
     It is important to have standard interfaces and data exchange formats for the development of
     an eco-system. The current landscape for mobility data standards has two main players: ISO
     and OGC (The Open Geospatial Consortium). ISO has one published standard ISO19141
     which specifies an abstract data model of a moving geometry consisting of translation and/or
     rotation of a geographic feature. Based on it, OGC has published multiple standards, of a
     technical nature, defining data exchange formats and a data access API. Nevertheless the
     standardization work in mobility data is still in the infancy stage. Compared to spatial data,
     there already exist more than 80 published ISO standards as part of the ISO191xx suite.
     This is complemented by more than 160 OGC implementation standards, that are written for
     a more technical audience, and detail the interface structure between software components.
         On the one hand, standards should address the needs of technology users and vendors.
     Therefore, standardization ideally should involve user communities and vendors. For example,
     this is important to ensuring that user and vendor needs are addressed; and it can provide
     assurances to vendors: if they invest in products that comply with standards, the investments
     are relatively safe. On the other hand, standards should be theoretically sound and should
     build on the most recent scientific advances. This will benefit all involved, and it calls for
     the involvement of scientists. To scientists, a key reward for involvement in standardizations
     is potential real-world impact.
         Next, standardization faces a chicken-and-egg dilemma: The existence of high-quality
     standards can accelerate the exploitation of technology, which is an argument for developing
     standards early. However, developing standards early runs the risk of the standards being
     of low quality and hampering the development of compliant products, which in turn slows
     down exploitation. From this perspective, it may be best to not standardize technology until
     several products are available.
         The “standardize late” route may lead to situations where vendors try to take over
     standardization with the objective of protecting their investments into their own products.
     Then standardization processes run the risk of becoming politicized, and scientific arguments
     (and user needs) are trumped by commercial interests, thus limiting the prospects for achieving
     science-based standards.
         SQL standardization of temporal support provides some insights into potential difficulties.
     In 1994, a sizable committee of temporal database researchers released that TSQL2 language
     specification that they hoped could serve as a foundation for standardization. However,
     the subsequent standardization efforts ran into difficulties. First, it turned out to be very
     expensive to participate in ISO standardization, which involved meetings across the globe.
     Second, standardization was dominated by vendors with successful businesses built around
     SQL-based systems. Third, SQL was, and is, a dinosaur on clay feet: having evolved over
     many years, it is a complex language that is not the best example of clean language design.
     Extending such a language is challenging. It turned out that the TSQL2 design did not
     “scale,” and a redesigned version of TSQL2 based on so-called statement modifiers was
     eventually proposed for standardization. Although the proposal was good science, it did
     not make it. A key lesson is that standardization is far from an academic exercise where
     the best proposal wins. Rather, standardization can involve strong political and commercial
     special interests. Scientists who pursue standardization need to be prepared for such aspects.
     They should try to understand the costs and reward structure clearly before they embark on
     standardization. They may consider forming alliances with vendors or user communities, or
     with other scientists.
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                            19


    Mobility data science, and data science general, has two main setbacks: (1) GDPR and
relevant privacy regulations, and (2) data preprocessing is suspected to generate bias in
the analysis results. Standards (and community best practices) could help overcome these
two setbacks. Data scientists can then base their work on them, and be able to defend it.
This creates requirements for developing standards and community best practices for GDPR
compliant data management, and for mobility data science pipelines.



5.3     Learning and Analysis
5.3.1   ML over Mobility Data
The rise of machine learning (ML) has impacted plenty of applications in different domains.
Mobility data is no exception, as researchers have explored using ML in boosting various
related applications and solving systems issues. For example, improving the accuracy of
map building is a recurring application that is being explored through ML models. A major
hurdle, and a research opportunity as well, is that existing ML and analytics tools, e.g.,
tensor flow, do not support location and mobility as base data types to reason about. So,
even the basic analysis, such as clustering, classification, similarity, etc, need to be explored
when mobility data is involved. These tasks, as well as higher-level analysis, can not be
totally independent. Instead, common basic building blocks could have an impact on all
or some of them. For example, exploring the effectiveness of feature vector components for
mobility data analysis is a basic block that could impact different ML-based analysis tasks.
This raises a fundamental and big question on what are the analysis primitives and common
building blocks for applications that could shape a framework of ML-based mobility data
analysis?
    With all those open research questions and challenges, there are still more directions that
are hardly touched, although being promising and open for ample exploration. One of these
promising directions is exploring the ability of ML technology to help improve mobility data
preparation and cleaning. This is an increasingly important task with increasing noisy signals
in human-generated mobile data and the availability of a wide variety of heterogeneous data
sources. It also includes the fact that mobility data is often very sparse.
    Another major direction that currently hinders ML models on spatial and mobility data
is scalability on big data. Although it is usually assumed that scalability is a step after
supporting primitive blocks and supporting data preparation, practically, this assumption
causes a significant lag in using newly developed mobility data techniques in real environments
for several reasons. First, it leaves making use of non-spatial technologies, such as general-
purpose ML models, as an always-future step, which lags the advancements in mobility data
behind the non-mobile environments. Second, the lack of scalability makes the developed
techniques practically not very useful for evolving applications that operate on big data. This
makes the mobility data community lose its audience early in the ever-running game. Thus,
thinking of scalability on big data and solving system-level issues for end-user friendliness
and usability should be hand-in-hand with exploring all the new techniques, applications,
and directions that have been highlighted above.

5.3.2   In-database Analytics – Analytics Algebra
The wide adoption of a tool or system depends to a large extent on the ease of use. One
question therefore is where the functionality of mobility data analysis should reside. One
option is to make it a stand-alone application with dedicated data types and methods.



                                                                                                    22021
20   22021 – Mobility Data Science


     Another option is to see it as an extension, or rather a specialization, of a more general
     purpose system, which would logically be a spatial database or GIS. Since several data types
     and methods needed for mobility data analysis are already present in GIS, the latter option
     appears natural.
         The most important data types to be supported are movement data in all of its forms:
     trajectory data, video data, check-in data with ids (like cell towers) or without ids (like
     induction loops), and more. Other relevant data are contextual, which help to understand or
     explain mobility or the behavior that underlies it. These data can be (topographic) map
     data, weather data, elevation data, and data on events in the real world, like a big sports
     match taking place at a certain location at a certain time.
         Since data integration is key to nearly all mobility data analysis tasks, a well-designed
     system must include this functionality for heterogeneous data. One option is to provide an
     algebra that can combine different data types, but this is convenient mostly for field data
     in raster form, and less so for object data in vector form. Since GPS tracks (trajectories)
     are typically in vector form, further research is needed to see in what ways algebras can be
     utilized to deal with heterogeneous mobility data.
         Another big issue in data management and analysis is the level of detail that must be
     maintained to support the analysis. Here the situation is the same as for any spatiotemporal
     research domain: a high level of detail in space and time leads to huge data sets and slow
     analysis, but a low level of detail may not suffice to answer the research questions. The
     presence of heterogeneous data implies that a system needs to deal with data with very
     different spatial and/or temporal resolutions.

     5.3.3   Visual Analytics
     Visualization and exploratory analysis of mobility data has long been a hot topic in visual
     analytics. More recently, the trend turned to combining visualization with modeling and
     simulation to support decision making. This kind of research is by necessity application-
     oriented, while much less is done on developing more general ideas and approaches.
         One general research problem that has only been slightly touched in VA but not sys-
     tematically addressed is human involvement in real-time analysis of big mobility data. Is it
     possible to define realistic scenarios for involving human intelligence in big data analytics
     taking into account the cognitive limitations of human analysts with regard to the amount
     of information that can be perceived, speed of processing, and time required for analytical
     reasoning and contributing to the analysis process? It appears possible, in principle, that
     human experts work at their own pace on gradual improvement of a computational model
     operating automatically in real-time, provided that the context and the properties of the
     incoming data do not change too rapidly.
         There is even a more general problem of finding effective approaches to combining
     computational methods of analysis, such as ML, with human expert knowledge and reasoning.
     While it is usual in VA to involve algorithmic methods in analytical workflows, it is mostly
     limited to two scenarios. One is the use of algorithmic methods to support human reasoning
     and generation of new knowledge in the mind of an analyst. The other is human-controlled
     development of ML models according to the standard data science pipeline. The involvement
     of human intelligence is limited to thoughtful data preparation, feature selection, parameter
     setting, and so on. It would be great to find ways to make more direct and effective use of
     human-possessed concepts and, particularly, knowledge of causal relationships. Possibilities
     for that could be explored in two directions: (1) transforming purely data-driven ML methods
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                             21


into hybrid approaches that can use human expert knowledge in the learning process and
(2) enriching ML outcomes with expert knowledge, so that data-level features are lifted to
domain concepts and statistical associations transformed to causal links.
    While these research problems and directions sound quite general, there is a specific topic
for research on mobility data analysis: from low-level movement data, such as trajectories
of moving entities, derive understanding and models of mobility behaviors. This is where
the human capability of abstracting, forming general concepts, and reasoning with the use
of these concepts are especially valuable, as current algorithmic methods are limited to
operating on the data level.
    Hence, a grand research challenge for visual mobility analytics is to develop approaches
to understanding and modeling mobility behaviors, i.e., how purpose-oriented movements
and actions are being adapted to the contexts in which they take place.
    The research should include development of a conceptual framework for describing
individual and collective behaviors of moving entities. It should encompass various kinds of
collective behaviors, from individuals pursuing their own goals while adapting to behaviors
of others to groups of cooperating entities having a common goal and, possibly, competing
with other groups. The framework should define the set of potentially relevant aspects of a
mobility behavior, such as visited places and characteristics of the visits (frequency, duration,
regularity, typical times), dynamic properties of movements (speed, direction, mode), as
well as affecting factors, including characteristics of the moving entities themselves and the
context of their movement.
    The next sub-problem to be solved is to find ways of transforming low level mobility
data, i.e., trajectories of moving entities, into representations of mobility behaviors. It is
the process requiring involvement of human abstractive perception and interpretation of the
data in terms of high-level concepts. The human needs to understand how to transform
the data and to tell this to the computer. Interactive visual interfaces should support the
human both in gaining the understanding and in communicating necessary knowledge and
instructions to the computer. In parallel, it is necessary to develop computer algorithms
capable of incorporating human knowledge and adhering to the instructions.
    The following research problem is how to analyze behaviors after they have been extracted
from elementary movement data and represented by appropriate data structures. The
conceptual framework should enable defining the types of conceivable patterns of movement
behavior. This will provide orientation for developing visualization techniques facilitating
visual discovery of behavioral patterns, as well as algorithmic methods for detection of
specified types of patterns. These techniques and methods should be incorporated in systems
and workflows for analyzing the contexts in which various patterns take place and developing
models for describing and predicting mobility behaviors depending on the context.



 6     Applications of Mobility Data Science
This section describes the broad impacts of mobility data science as well as specific applications
that were identified by participants. Figure 4 provides an overview of this section. We
first give an overview of broader impacts of mobility data science in Section 6.1 followed
by specific applications described in Section 6.2. In addition, the working group also
discussed algorithmic paradigm that may be applied to Mobility Data Science as described
in Section 6.3.




                                                                                                     22021
22   22021 – Mobility Data Science


                  Broader                                                           Health, Well‐
                           Understanding          Urban         Improving Traffic                       Situational
                   Impact Human Behavior       Sustainability     Conditions
                                                                                     being, and
                                                                                                        Awareness
                                                                                    Productivity
       Application
               Map Making
           Public Transportation
              Contact Tracing
           Pandemic Prevention
           Elder Health Monitoring
             Indoor Navigation
             Location Privacy
           Marine Transportation
             Animal Behavior
                 BlockChain          Quantum Computing              Visualization                   Simulation


        Figure 4 Broader impacts (vertical), example applications (horizontal), and underlying algorithmic
     paradigms (bottom) of mobility data science.


     6.1      Broader Impacts
     This section describes broad areas that may benefit from a mobility data science research
     agenda. Specific applications which may fall under one or multiple of these areas are described
     in Section 6.2

     6.1.1      Understanding Human Behavior
     During the seminar, one participant made a controversial statement claiming that “many
     researchers focus on the problem of location prediction, yet no useful application for this
     problem exists”. Indeed, it seems difficult to leverage knowledge such as “User X will
     visit Coffee Shop A next” or “32 users will visit Coffee Shop A today” for marketing or
     other applications. However, if we can begin to understand the underlying behavior, at
     the individual-, group-, or population-scale, that leads to such predictions, we could begin
     to understand why one coffee shop chain is increasing visitor rates (for example due to a
     movement towards organic coffee sold by the former coffee shop). Through inferring from the
     data about such behaviours, only then we can take corresponding actions not only to predict
     locations, but also to prescribe actions (such as offering more organic coffee) to improve
     visitor rates. Such understanding of (human) behavior will broadly affect applications using
     mobility data: While traditional spatiotemporal data science allows predictive analytics to
     predict the future, mobility data science enables prescriptive analytics by understanding
     the underlying human behavior to devise actions and policies that change the future in a
     desirable way.

     6.1.2      Urban Sustainability
     Rising temperatures on Earth, have led to the exploration of new technologies to help
     curb the severe effects of Climate Change. Highly urbanized environments are a focal
     point for the application of these new technologies as they introduce a variety of mobility
     modalities (e.g., EVs, bicycle, scooters with respective sharing programs) and smart spaces
     (e.g., smart IoT living spaces with renewable energy), where human spend 90% of their
     time. According to the European Environmental Agency, urban environmental sustainability
     encourages revitalization and transition of urban areas and cities to improve livability,
     promote innovation and reduce environmental impacts while maximizing economic and social
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                           23


co-benefits. In the epicenter of these challenges lay challenging spatiotemporal data-driven
problems that require new operators, algorithms and infrastructures to schedule energy
prosumer’s (consumers-producers) activity to minimize the CO2 footprint while improving
livability. Given that the computing field is anticipated to increase its CO2 footprint from 4%
to 8% until 2025, compared to only 2% of the whole aviation industry, clearly demonstrate
that not only computing requires to become more energy efficient, but also that the computing
field has to compensate for this increase by reducing CO2 in a variety of other domains (i.e.,
smart-everything: transport, heating, industry, agriculture/land.)
    By understanding how people move in cities, outer suburban, and regional areas, the
demand for infrastructure and energy can be better understood. This, will not only help
to ensure sustainable production and consumption, but also to reduce urban inequalities
in cities. In addition, tools that use accurate models of people mobility to predict future
transportation demands would be very useful to stakeholders to plan future developments,
formulate evaluate alternative policies for improving city infrastructures, end evaluate the
impact of various decisions.

6.1.3   Improving Traffic Conditions
Traffic is a problem of global scale, as recognized by transportation science over a decade
ago. Drivers in the United States spend 6.9 billion of man-hours stuck in traffic and
waste more than 11 billion liters of fuel per year according to INRIX. Measured per-capita,
people in Russia and Thailand spend even more time in traffic, while Brazil, South Africa,
the UK, and Germany are only slightly behind the United States. The SIGSPATIAL
community had great success in exploiting mobility data for predicting traffic and using these
predictions for traffic-aware routing. Leveraging mobility data science and understanding
the underlying behavior of human participants concomitantly with different transportation
modes, can enable more effective solutions to multiple problems at the heart of improving
traffic management. One such example is devising accurate models for dynamic scheduling of
public transportation. Another example is the context-aware optimization of traffic signals
regime – i.e., incorporating the impact of additional flux of pedestrians in bus/train stations,
to minimize the stop-and-go impacts for vehicles.

6.1.4   Health, Well-being, and Productivity
Mobility data has been found increasingly useful in novel applications in the social care
domain. For example, contact-tracing solutions have been using human mobility data during
the COVID-19 pandemic to notify individuals who may have been in close contact with an
infectious individual. As another example, GPS-enabled smart-watch can be used to monitor
the movement of elder users. In addition, given the increasingly blurred boundaries between
work and private lives, especially since the disruptions led by the pandemic, understanding
mobility patterns in conjunction with daily works can provide insights into work-life balance.
Given that humans are creatures of habit, disruptions to the daily habits in work and private
lives can also led to disrupted productivity. Mobility data can provide a deeper insight to
assist users in maintaining health, wellbeing, and productivity, when incorporated to digital
assistance.

6.1.5   Situational Awareness
Situational awareness, initially a term coined in defence applications, involve perception of
the environmental states using the surrounding data, comprehension of the ingested data to
understand the emerging situations, and projection of future states and/or events, which


                                                                                                   22021
24   22021 – Mobility Data Science


     require predictive analytics. Mobility data provides critical components and insights into
     situational awareness in cities. When achieved, this is applicable not only to enabling robust
     critical infrastructures in cities, but also to protecting them from harm, such as forest fires,
     earthquakes, terrorist attacks, etc. Many researchers have used mobility data as an input to
     enable situational awareness in cities.



     6.2     Specific Application Fields
     This section described specific applications of mobility data science identified during the
     Dagstuhl Seminar.

     6.2.1   Map Making
     The spatiotemporal data science community has proposed many successful solutions to
     infer maps from trajectory data. Such data is important to identify changes in a road
     network which is paramount for autonomous driving. In addition to considering trajectories,
     understanding the underlying purpose of human mobility will allow to create maps tailored
     to different purposes. For example, by understanding which trajectories correspond to
     commuters, tourists, and joggers, we can devise better maps for such groups, rather than
     having a single map that is oblivious to the purpose of a trip and the underlying human
     behavior. It is important to note that accurate map making is an important enabler in
     all autonomous car applications, and at the same time data from automonous and semi-
     autonomous car operation (which includes GPS, video and other sensor readings) is a useful
     source for improving automatically generated maps.

     6.2.2   Public Transportation and Traffic Management
     Public transportation and mobility-as-a-service, particularly in urban areas, is a key applica-
     tion area for mobility data science. This also includes the recent ridesharing services. People
     need to move from A to B daily, either for work, leisure, or caring purpose. The means to
     achieve that vary, either a single modal trip with a private vehicle, or a multimodal trip
     involving driving a private car, parking, a subway ride, and a final Uber ride or an e-scooter
     hire. The latter, when computed as an integrated mobility and offered as a service, is called
     mobility-as-a-service. The challenges are broad, from understanding demands and volumes
     of traffic, rides, or shared bikes pick-ups, to allocating resources (vehicles as well as drivers)
     to regions with high demand. In peak travel times, and high holiday seasons, efficient and
     effective transportation and mobility services, and other application of smart cities (such as
     smart parking) are critical to enable sustainable operations in cities.

     6.2.3   Contact Tracing
     Contact Tracing refers to the process of tracking persons who may have come into spatial
     contact with an infected person, and subsequently collecting further information about these
     contacts. The feature-rich interaction, processing and localization/communication modalities
     of smartphone devices, have brought these to battle on the technological forefront and have
     curbed the fast spread of pandemics, like COVID-19. The community has to this date pro-
     posed a wide range of approaches, ranging from: opportunistic to participatory approaches,
     privacy-sensitive to no-privacy approaches, handheld-based (distributed) to cloud-based
     (centralized) approaches, proximity-based (e.g., BLE, sound) to location-based approaches
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                             25


(e.g., Wi-Fi, GPS), for only outdoor settings to indoor settings, using closed-source to
open-source counterparts. However, a wide range of challenges remain unanswered, including
methodologies to improve the penetration and adoption rates, alleviate privacy or expectation
skepticism, ubiquitous availability on low-end terminals as well as technological/psycholo-
gical adoption barriers, achieving cross-country interoperability with standard formations
beyond recommendations, scalability/reliability and accuracy verification of engaged spatial
technologies as well as lessons about effectiveness from real large-scale deployments.

6.2.4   Pandemic Prevention
Leveraging (human or animal) mobility data to understand the underlying behavior will allow
us to gain an understanding of how a new or re-emerging disease spreads across space and
time, provide accurate predictive models and devise actionable interventions and policies to
prevent future epidemics and pandemics. Such understanding will require close collaboration
with sociologists who are able to explain human behavior (such as social distancing behavior or
vaccine uptake), epidemiologists to understand the ecology of infectious diseases, and experts
in policy to help devise policies to mitigate diseases spread and to effectively communicate
such policies to the public.

6.2.5   Elder Health Monitoring
GPS-enabled smart-watch technology can be used to monitor the movement of elder users.
The trajectory data recorded by this smart-watch can reflect the mental health state of the
user. In particular, if the user is showing early signs of dementia, her/his trajectories could
show an abrupt change from her/his movement history. For instance, a user, who normally
walks in a park then going to a restaurant, is found to only stay in the park for a substantial
amount of time. Indoor sensors installed in the room can also be used to track whether an
elder or a patient falls from the bed. Trajectory outlier analysis methods, together with
gerontology knowledge, can be very useful for this kind of applications.

6.2.6   Indoor Localization/Navigation
Indoor localization is still an open research problem due to the non-existence of the indoor
equivalent of GPS: a system that can provide the user location in any building worldwide.
This is particularly important in many applications such as pandemic tracing, E911, indoor
analytics, among others. There are a number of systems developed over the years to address
this problem based on different data sources including WiFi signals strength and time of
arrival, cellular signal, UWB, ultrasonic, magnetic tracking, inertial sensors, among others
but also a new wave of infrastructure-free localization method using deep learning and
computer vision.

6.2.7   Location Privacy
The incorporation of localization technologies creates new challenges with privacy, as localiz-
ation processes might allow the service provider to know the location of a user at all times.
Location tracking is unethical in many respects and can even be illegal if it is carried out
without the explicit consent of a user. It can reveal the stores and products of interest in a
mall we’ve visited, doctors we saw at a hospital, book shelves of interest in a library, artifacts
observed in a museum and generally anything else that might publicize our preferences,
beliefs and habits. Privacy-preserving localization has been an intensive subject of research




                                                                                                     22021
26   22021 – Mobility Data Science


     in the past, yet the advent of new localization, tracking and contact tracing technologies
     brings new challenges to the topic that need to be investigated by the mobility data science
     commununity.

     6.2.8   Marine Transportation
     International shipping is ∼ 1000 million tonnes CO2 one of the main emitters of Greenhouse
     Gases (GHG). This is equivalent to ∼ 3% of the global emissions worldwide, in the order
     of the total emissions of Germany. An optimization of ship routes could effectively lead to
     significant reductions of GHG emissions and contribute to the actions against anthropogenic
     global warming. The influence of ocean currents, waves and wind on the course and speed to
     ships are known for centuries. Mean currents, usually displayed in sea charts, can be used,
     for example to utilize the Gulf Stream on the way from North America to Europe and avoid
     it on the way back. However, ocean currents are highly variable and change their strength
     and directions on timescales of days to weeks. Used optimally, ocean currents lead to more
     efficient paths between two given ports. Though the spatial and spatiotemporal database
     and mobility community well studied how to optimize routes on street traffic networks taking
     many influencing parameters, like traffic jams, route preferences, etc. into consideration,
     problems of open-water routing for ships hasn’t been touched by the community, yet. This
     application field opens up new interesting fields of research in the community, including
     studies on ocean current, wave and wind prediction, free-space routing, routing in highly
     dynamic environments, etc.

     6.2.9   Animal Behavior
     It has been long recognized that the motion trends of different wildlife species have a
     significant impact on ecological processes, spanning from the dynamics of biodiversity,
     through transmission of diseases, to feedback-like changes of the very animals behavior in
     terms of relocating breeding locations. Advances in sensing devices and communication have
     increased the observational capabilities – however, to date, there is no systematic exploitation
     of such data in a manner that would enable derivation of models for predicting the animal
     behavior and movement ecology broadly. In addition to the landscape type of interactions
     with terrestrial animals (e.g., pasture vs. forestation; impact of urbanization) that could
     benefit from mobility data science, there is significant potential of its application in the
     domain of aquatic animals where certain species (e.g., salmon) are well known to travel large
     distances between their adult habitat and the nesting one.



     6.3     Algorithmic Paradigms
     In addition to discussing how spatial computing can be applied to other fields, the Applications
     Working Group also discussed the flipside of which novel algorithmic paradigms may find
     application in spatial computing. This section summarizes these findings.

     6.3.1   Blockchain Computing
     A key component in future Web 3.0 scenarios using edge learning is the requirement to
     utilize a shared database that allows all participants to operate collaboratively with more
     functionality and transparency. The objective is to enable users execute updates and queries
     on the collaborative edge database while preserving a consistent view among all users
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                         27


maintaining the system consistency and transparency. Blockchain database architectures
keep records on an immutable chain of blocks, so later on, nodes agree on the shared state
across a network of untrusted participants. Thus, it forms the blockchain platform that can
be viewed as a distributed (transaction-log or) database system. One basic obstacle in these
are performance issues measured in terms of throughput and latency, because of the lengthy
consensus protocols. As such, the Mobile Data Science community needs to identify new
algorithms, structures and protocols to make blockchain databases for mobility data science
practical and efficient.

6.3.2   Quantum Computing
Quantum computing provides a new way of designing algorithms that provides a number of
advantages over their classical counterparts. For example, quantum parallelism can allow
exponential gains in speedup and storage space compared to classical algorithms. Moreover,
the no-cloning theory, which states that quantum bits (qubits) cannot be copied, gives
an advantage to quantum algorithm in different security applications. This in turn opens
the door for addressing different mobility data science problems in terms of enhancing the
speed of the current algorithms as well as introducing new algorithms that benefit from the
potential of quantum computing concepts. For instance, quantum computing allows to solve
np-hard problems efficiently, which affects many spatial computing problems that can be
reduced from the np-hard traveling salesman problem.

6.3.3   Visualization of Mobility Data
As discussed and defined in Section 3, mobility data science considers the human behavior
that underlies the observed data. It requires expertise from behavioral and social sciences
not only to understand this behavior, but also to leverage this understanding for informed
decision and policy making. To make mobility data science results actionable for policy
makers, such as local health departments, an important paradigm is effective visualization of
mobility data to inform domain experts that may not be computer scientists. New solutions
for mobility data visualization are required to go beyond understanding of spatiotemporal
patterns towards understanding of the underlying behavioral patterns that drive them.

6.3.4   Modeling and Simulation
Understanding the human behavior that causes observed spatiotemporal data allows us
to abstract behavior into models of human behavior that can be captured by simulation
models. For example, the decision process of individuals to visit a certain point of interest
like a coffee shop can be modeled depending on age and gender of individual agents in an
agent-based model. Informed by observed human mobility data, such an (agent-based) model
can than be used to simulate entire cities having millions of individuals. Such simulation
can then be used to predict future “what-if”-scenarios, for example to predict the impact of
opening a new coffee shop or of changing the menu to attract certain population groups, or
to simulate the spread of an infectious disease across a city. Having the ability to run many
such simulation, we can investigate optimal actions and policies achieve a desired future, for
example to maximize the number of customers in a coffee shop, or to minimize the spread of
an infectious disease.




                                                                                                 22021
28   22021 – Mobility Data Science



             A specific Industry
                                         Never makes it to                                  Academia never
             vertical utilizes the                              Academia picks up
                                             Industry                                          picks up
                     idea



                         A few or many                                        A few years
                         years later       Complicated                        later            Lack of
                                            solutions                                         resources

             General idea starts           Idea starts in          Idea starts in            Idea starts in
               in Academia                   Academia                Industry                  Industry
                                               Real (not made up) user need


          Figure 5 Industry/Academia Alignment.


      7      Mobility Data Science and Industry
     There is a consensus that we want to make our work practical, and the connection with
     industry is a good motivator toward this goal. But how to create such connections? Talking to
     engineers and product groups is more effective in establishing links than talking to industrial
     R&D groups. Engineers and product groups own the data and the products, and they
     have the problems. Visiting the company and giving presentations and demonstrations is
     a persuasive way to develop contacts. Industry is generally interested in getting exposed
     to good students for hiring. Thus, inviting industry to sponsor student activities such as
     programming contests and projects is another way to create links. Commercial companies
     also fund research directly, sometimes in the form of collaborations. Industry can also be
     found in 3rd party communities with common interest for research, like OGC, thematic
     meetups, hackathons, and tournaments.
          University researchers can provide teaching and training opportunities for people in
     industry, which helps bridge the gap. Other than industry, research can generate impact
     by involving the future beneficiaries and users. Industry, on the other hand, could launch
     projects with a lab culture, where they prepare a sandbox where researchers can work and
     put their algorithms to have impact on an industry problem.
          The efforts in academia and industry are not always aligned. Figure 5 outlines the different
     cases. The first case is where an idea starts in academia and gets adopted in industry. Good
     examples for this case are navigation, map matching, route planning, and map making. The
     three top problems with Mobile data that Microsoft is trying to solve are: (1) how to spend
     less on road map data, (2) how to identify where people visit, and (3) creating enterprise
     solutions for fleet management.
          Spatial indexes have also proved to be very useful for practical applications, and they came
     from academia. However, after the very first spatial index proposals for R-tree and Quad-tree,
     very many indexing papers appeared proposing incremental changes. Improving a spatial
     index to perform 2% better is not an interesting problem to industry. It comes at a high cost
     of development, testing and deployment, which is not worth the time from the company’s
     point of view. Integrating such solutions depends on the ROI of the proposed improvement.
     If this enables new products and applications or saves costs, it will be integrated – assuming
     it is maintainable.
          Many inventions are getting traction when they are available for a broader community
     via open source. The speed may also result from industry actions like Amazon Scholar,
     where researchers can become affiliated to Amazon and get full employee access to data and
     resources to implement their ideas. Another way is to launch academic startups and take
     the ideas directly to industry.
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                              29


    The second case in Figure 5 is when an idea that starts in academia never makes it to
industry. A main reason is that the problem is made up, and does not map to real user
need. Location prediction has been around for a while, but never got into real use. Another
example is the problem of understanding what people are doing from their mobility. A third
example is COVID contact tracing. It became clear early that there is not enough data to
make COVID tracking applications work. Nevertheless many papers continued to appear
with COVID tracking solutions. Another reason for not reaching the industry is that the
solution might be too complex to implement. If simpler solutions exist, they tend to be more
adopted, being easy to integrate with the whole eco-system that the industry has. Some
complex solutions found their way to commercial tools though, backed by strong customer
need, e.g., RSA encryption.
    Researchers might be in a position to think that the feedback from industry limits
visionary thoughts. The problems of industry are no less interesting than the problems of
open-ended research. Industry operate on constraints for price, for time, for infrastructure,
and so forth. The ability of research to recognize as many of these constraints as possible,
makes it effective.
    The fourth case, and possibly the most recurring, is where a practical mobility problem is
not picked up by academia. This is mostly because of lack of data. Data is a key for research
in mobility, and the lack of data is a major obstacle. To strengthen the data sharing between
industry and academia, both sides need to converge toward the ambitions of each other.
The business ROI is different from research ROI. Researchers want publications, citations,
keynotes, and research funds while industry wants profits, IP, new markets, and new products.
Researchers tend to ignore practical/technical difficulties, such as the deployment of the
solution. Something simple like the availability of a docker image can push forward an
innovation to get used. This can also be addressed by starting further research/innovation
projects in 3rd party founded programs. A connection of interesting and valuable research
topics with market requests and opportunities can trigger a win-win-win situation, where
researchers can publish results, companies can integrate the findings in their products and
users do get improved solutions. Initiatives such as the EU’s FAIR principle can ensure real
data becomes available. However, the EU’s GDPR rights must be fulfilled to ensure the
privacy of individuals.
    Synthetic data is still highly useful, e.g, to test the scalability of solutions. Such datasets
should have similar properties with existing publicly available datasets, and will also foster
the development and testing of new research by academia. To build such benchmarks we
will need to leverage new optimization techniques and mobility models.
    In early 2000s, spatial data used to be addressed as a special kind of data in database
engines. This proved to be counter productive, as users rather prefer to have native support
for their data in the database that they use. Applying this experience to the domain of
mobility data, it has to be thought of from the beginning as a native data type.



 8     Towards a Mobility Data Science Curriculum
When we initiate a curriculum, and consequently a degree, we have implicit commitment to
the students that join this degree about the market opportunities. In the case of mobility
data science, clear employers will be cities, transport authorities, and consultation companies.
The current state in market is that there are CS graduates who approach every problem by
code, and often try to re-invent the wheel. On the other hand there are geographers, planners,




                                                                                                      22021
30   22021 – Mobility Data Science


     and architects who are often not able to code. This gap is currently closing by discrete
     initiatives for programs that link the two. With this argument, it is time to harmonize these
     initiatives and start collaborating on building curricula for mobility data science. Yet we need
     to take steps to evolve interest, and hence to evolve sufficient mass of students. Naturally
     this has to go bottom up, starting with a single course, then a specialization, then a study
     program, depending on the student enrollment.
         A text book on mobility data science is missing. The seminar participants collaborated
     in creating a list of topics to be included in a curriculum.
         Basic principles of mobility data science
         Intro to time-series, ST and trajectory, spatial data handling
         Mobility data modeling, e.g., multi-modal traffic modeling
         Mobility databases and query processing
         Modelling, i.e., transform a real-world problem into a computational problem that is
         meaningful.
         Search and Optimisation, e.g., routing
         Movement data processing, and data warehousing
         Specific errors and problems in mobility data (data quality and data cleaning)
         Mobility data visualization
         ML techniques for mobility data
         Privacy of mobility data, GDPR, and data minimization
         Ethical, responsible / FATE in AI for mobility
         Hands-on mobility data science projects and case studies
         Big data mobility processing

         A practical approach to developing a book is to start by a mobility data science problem,
     then develop the needed theory and techniques towards solving this problem. Imagine a
     company that wants to develop an application for eco-routing starting with CAN bus data.
     The process of developing the curriculum would then develop around the needed steps. The
     company will need to first collect the data, then clean, transform, correlate with weather
     data, etc. The curriculum shall then be developed in a way that teaches students the theory
     and practice of these tasks.
         Building a complete program on mobility data science for CS students might be too specific
     at the moment. A pragmatic approach is to incorporate it as a special track in existing data
     science programs (1-2 semesters). It can also be offered as a specialized diploma/certification
     program. This argument is supported by the big overlap in knowledge, skills, and questions
     between data science and mobility data science. Both share the foundations of statistics,
     graph theory, linear algebra, measures and metrics, etc. They also share the techniques like
     clustering, classification, learning, heterogeneity and modeling. As such mobility data science
     will be more of an appealing flavor of data science, mainly to attract students, while teaching
     the same thing with a twist.
         Yet if we expand the scope, which seems more proper, a mobility data scientist needs to
     acquire other knowledge and skills than CS. Domains like urban and transportation have
     went a long way in building curricula. A curriculum in mobility data science should not
     ignore and redo. Mobility is not entirely a CS topic. It connects to people mobility, and
     students must be trained on the human and policy aspects. A curriculum should cover at
     least the additional topics of: geography, urban/transport planning, and ethics. Students
     also need to learn the pitfalls of real-world data, which is a topic that is often missed in
     CS programs. They need to learn and appreciate the state of art in mobility and transport
     modeling. Finally they need to learn how to produce value with minimal data requirements,
     and how to deal with the human part of the problem. Building such a curriculum cannot be
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                             31


solely covered by CS departments. It has to be conceived in an inter-faculty structure. A
mobility data science curriculum should not adopt on a toolbox view. It should rather train
students for analyzing and explaining the results.
    Promoting a disciplined approach to mobility data science goes through open science and
open software. A basic toolset, developed through proper scientific software development,
that every can use helps aligning the state of practice and the sharing of experience among
practitioners. Successful examples in the spatial domain are the geopandas, and geos libraries.
It also helps to promote this discipline in scientific and in practitioner events, and to possibly
evolve communication platforms and events.



 9     Closing Notes
The vivid discussions during the seminar demonstrated a consensus that it is timely to
identify mobility data science as a multidisciplinary research topic, and to start building
a community. This report presented a clear definition of the scope of work, and the key
research problems for this community. Many of the participants indicated the necessity
to have follow up events, e.g., another Dagstuhl Seminar, and community building tools,
e.g., mailing list. Specially that the majority of participants in this seminar were remote, a
physical gathering should be planned as soon as the pandemic situation allows.
    The majority of participants in this seminar stem from CS domains. In follow-up events,
it will be needed to increase the participation of other domains such as social and behavioral
sciences and epidemiology whose expertise is paramount to understand the human behavior
that causes mobility data.
    In the time of COVID-19, organizing a scientific gathering is challenged by the uncertainty
of physical participation. The organizer would like to thank the Dagstuhl team, which allowed
the switching from purely onsite into hybrid only a few weeks before the seminar due to
the Omicron variant of COVID-19. This flexibility, which is not matched by hotels and
conference centers, allowed the organizers to focus on the program and the participation,
rather than focusing on the venue logistics. This Dagstuhl Seminar allowed the field of
mobility data science to take a great step forward. All participants greatly appreciate the
unique opportunity that Dagstuhl provides for supporting the science.




                                                                                                     22021
32   22021 – Mobility Data Science


     Seminar Hybrid-Photo
Mohamed Mokbel, Mahmoud Sakr, Li Xiong, Andreas Züfle et al.                                           33


        Participants
  Taylor Anderson                Mahmoud Sakr                      Bettina Speckmann
George Mason Univ. –           ULB – Brussels, BE                TU Eindhoven, NL
Fairfax, US                      Flora Salim                       Marc van Kreveld
                               University of New South Wales –   Utrecht University, NL
  Amr Magdy                    Sydney, AU                          Andreas Züfle
University of California –       Maxime Schoemans                George Mason Univ. –
Riverside, US                  ULB – Brussels, BE                Fairfax, US




        Remote Participants
  Jussara Almeida                Xiqi Fei                          Johannes Lauer
Federal University of Minas    George Mason Univ. –              HERE – Schwalbach am Taunus,
Gerais-Belo Horizonte, BR      Fairfax, US                       DE
  Gennady Andrienko              Gabriel Ghinita                   Mohamed Mokbel
Fraunhofer IAIS –              University of Massachusetts –     University of Minnesota –
Sankt Augustin, DE             Boston, US                        Minneapolis, US
  Natalia V. Andrienko           Anita Graser                      Mario A. Nascimento
Fraunhofer IAIS –              AIT – Austrian Institute of       University of Alberta –
Sankt Augustin, DE             Technology – Wien, AT             Edmonton, CA
  Walid Aref                                                       Siva Ravada
Purdue University –              Dimitrios Gunopulos             Oracle Corp. – Nashua, US
West Lafayette, US             University of Athens, GR
                                                                   Matthias Renz
  Eric Auquiere                  Joon-Seok Kim                   Universität Kiel, DE
STIB / MIVB – Brussels, BE     Pacific Northwest National Lab. –
                               Richland, US                        Dimitris Sacharidis
  Yang Cao                                                       ULB – Brussels, BE
Kyoto University, JP             Kyoung-Sook Kim                   Mohamed Sarwat
  Sanjay Chawla                AIST – Tokyo Waterfront, JP       Arizona State University –
QCRI – Doha, QA                  Peer Kröger                     Tempe, US
  Reynold Cheng                Universität Kiel, DE                Cyrus Shahabi
University of Hong Kong, HK      John Krumm                      USC – Los Angeles, US
  Panos Kypros Chrysanthis     Microsoft Corporation –             Egemen Tanin
University of Pittsburgh, US   Redmond, US                       The University of Melbourne, AU




                                                                                                   22021
34   22021 – Mobility Data Science


       Yannis Theodoridis           Song Wu                          Demetris Zeinalipour
     University of Piraeus, GR    ULB – Brussels, BE               University of Cyprus –
       Kristian Torp                Li Xiong                       Nicosia, CY
     Aalborg University, DK       Emory University – Atlanta, US
                                                                    Esteban Zimanyi
       Carola Wenk                  Jianqiu Xu                     ULB – Brussels, BE
     Tulane University –          Nanjing University of Aero-
     New Orleans, US              nautics and Astronautics, CN       Dimitris Zissis
       Martin Werner                Moustafa Youssef               University of the Aegean –
     TU München – Ottobrunn, DE   Alexandria University, EG        Ermoupolis, GR
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 22022

Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical
Bettina Berendt∗1 , Stan Matwin∗2 , Chiara Renso∗3 , Fran Meissner4 ,
Francesca Pratesi5 , Alessandra Raffaetà6 , and Geoffrey Rockwell7
1       TU Berlin, Germany & Weizenbaum Institute – Berlin, Germany & KU Leuven,
        Belgium. berendt@tu-berlin.de
2       Dalhousie University – Halifax, Canada. stan@dal.ca
3       Istituto di Scienza e Tecnologie dell’Informazione, National Research Council of
        Italy – Pisa, Italy. chiara.renso@isti.cnr.it
4       University of Twente, The Netherlands. f.meissner@utwente.nl
5       Istituto di Scienza e Tecnologie dell’Informazione, National Research Council of
        Italy – Pisa, Italy. francesca.pratesi@isti.cnr.it
6       University Cá Foscari of Venice, Italy. raffaeta@unive.it
7       University of Alberta – Edmonton, Canada. grockwel@ualberta.ca

        Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 “Mobility Data
Analysis: from Technical to Ethical” that took place fully remote and hosted by Schloss Dagstuhl
from 10–12 January 2022. An interdisciplinary team of 23 researchers from Europe, the Americas
and Asia in the fields of computer science, ethics and mobility analysis discussed interactions
between their topics and fields to bridge the gap between the more technical aspects to the ethics
with the objective of laying the foundations of a new Mobility Data Ethics research field.
Seminar January 10–12, 2022 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/22022
2012 ACM Subject Classification Computing methodologies → Machine learning; Computing
   methodologies → Artificial intelligence; Security and privacy → Human and societal aspects of
   security and privacy; Human-centered computing → Interaction design; Social and professional
   topics → Computing / technology policy; Security and privacy → Database and storage
   security; Security and privacy → Software and application security
Keywords and phrases Dagstuhl Report, Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.12.1.35



    1     Executive Summary
Bettina Berendt
Stan Matwin
Chiara Renso
Fran Meissner
Francesca Pratesi
Alessandra Raffaetà
Geoffrey Rockwell
        License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Bettina Berendt, Stan Matwin, Chiara Renso, Fran Meissner, Francesca Pratesi, Alessandra
                  Raffaetà, and Geoffrey Rockwell


Mobility data is one of the fastest growing types of data, thanks to the increasing number of
mobile devices approaching the population of the globe. The collection, storage and analysis
of spatio-temporal data representing trajectories of moving objects is one of the topics that


∗
    Editor / Organizer
            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Mobility Data Analysis: from Technical to Ethical, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 12, Issue 1, pp. 35–66
Editors: Bettina Berendt, Stan Matwin, Chiara Renso, Fran Meissner, Francesca Pratesi, Alessandra Raffaetà, and
Geoffrey Rockwell
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
36   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


     received major attention in the field of data analytics. The more semantic information is
     collected from various sources, the richer is movement data. This enriched mobility data is
     typically referred to as semantic trajectories. The analysis of such trajectories can produce
     powerful results in domains such as transportation, security, tourism, health, environment
     and even policy design. The recent COVID-19 outbreak shed a light on the importance of
     collecting mobility data for public health. However, at the same time, the more mobility
     data is enriched with semantics, the larger the risks of violating the privacy of users and
     of possible unethical uses of these data analysis results. Aspects of Computational Ethics
     include privacy, but they go beyond this, towards a more general vision of ethical gathering,
     processing, uses of data and the results of data analyses. How ethics interrelates with mobility
     data analysis is an emerging issue.
         The objective of this Dagstuhl Seminar was therefore to start a deep interacting discussion
     between Mobility Data Analysis researchers and Ethics experts to link these two fields with
     the objective of creating the foundations of a new Mobility Data Ethics research field.
         This Dagstuhl Seminar, organised by Chiara Renso, Bettina Berendt and Stan Matwin as
     an activity from and beyond the MASTER project [1], aimed at bringing together researchers
     from different disciplines from Computer Science, Mobility Analysis and Ethics to trace the
     path from a technical vision of mobility Analysis to an also ethics-based approach to the
     field.
         The three-day seminar was structured into three main modules: (1) round-table presenta-
     tions in which each participant presented him/her self with a question about Mobility and
     Ethics that represents his/her interest and an object to visualise this interest or serve as a
     starting point for further discussion; (2) three tutorial on “technical”, “ethical” and “legal”
     aspects of mobility data; (3) the working groups to discuss the main topics of interest that
     emerged during phases (1) and (2).
         As a result of the group discussions on participants’ interests and the issues raised in the
     tutorials, we formed five main working groups:

        What is/are the trade-off(s) between data privacy and data utility?
        Mobility Data Anonymity (Can location data be really anonymous?)
        Ethics of Mobility Data: What is unique? Which guidelines?
        Mobility Data Analysis Ethics beyond the data
        Mobility Data Analysis Ethics beyond humans only: Tracking animals and moral agency

     The tutorials and each of the working groups are described in a chapter of this report.
     Like other Dagstuhl Seminar reports, these chapters aim at makign the scientific results
     re-usable and extendable by others. In addition, we also want to help others profit from our
     experiences with the videoconferencing and other media technologies that we employed and
     the interaction-design choices that we made. This last chapter is a reflection also on ethical
     aspects of the precluded and the newly added forms of mobility of scientists (and others) in
     meetings during and after COVID-19.
     References
      1 Chiara Renso, Vania Bogorny, Konstantinos Tserpes, Stan Matwin, and José An-
          tônio Fernandes de Macêdo. Multiple Aspect Analysis of semantic trajectories (MASTER).
          Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci., 35(4):763–766, 2021.
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                     37


 2       Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Bettina Berendt, Stan Matwin, Chiara Renso, Fran Meissner, Francesca Pratesi,
  Alessandra Raffaetà, and Geoffrey Rockwell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

Tutorials
     Location privacy: an overview
     Sébastien Gambs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
     Mobility data analysis: ethical issues
     Geoffrey Rockwell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
     Connected vehicles and mobility data – work done by the EDPB
     Peter Kraus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

Topic-based Working Groups
     What is/are the trade-off(s) between data privacy and data utility?
     WG scribe and other members: Francesca Pratesi, Bettina Berendt, Thierry Chevallier,
     Josep Domingo-Ferrer, Ioannis Kontopoulos, Jeanna Matthews, Anna Monreale . . 43
     Mobility data anonymity
     WG scribe and other members: Francesca Pratesi, Jeanna Matthews, Anna Monreale,
     Florence Chee, Ioannis Kontopoulos, Karine Zeitouni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       47
     Ethics on mobility data: what is unique? Which guidelines?
     WG scribe and other members: Geoffrey Rockwell, Christine Ahrend, Florence Chee,
     Thierry Chevallier, Maria Luisa Damiani, Peter Kraus, Fen Lin, Fran Meissner,
     Alessandra Raffaetà, Chiara Renso, Paula Reyero Lobo, Yannis Theodoridis, Karine
     Zeitouni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
     Mobility Data Analysis Ethics beyond the data
     WG scribe and other members: Fran Meissner, Fen Lin, Florence Chee, Peter
     Kraus, Chiara Renso, Paula Reyero Lobo, Yannis Theodoridis . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
     Mobility Data Analysis Ethics beyond humans only: Tracking animals and moral
     agency
     Chiara Renso, Bettina Berendt, Stan Matwin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55

Online Interactions in a COVID-19-era Dagstuhl Seminar: Design, Experiences,
  and Reflections
     What do we consider “success”? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    57
     What did we do, and what did we learn from it? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        57
     A sense of place in a hybrid world – and other parallels between the medium and
     the message . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63

Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    64

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66




                                                                                                       22022
38   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


      3     Tutorials
     3.1    Location privacy: an overview
     Sébastien Gambs (Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM), Canada)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Sébastien Gambs


     In the introduction of his tutorial, Sébastien highlighted the fact that location is personal
     data that is collected and used in many different contexts such as location-based services,
     geolocated advertising, augmented reality, mobile game, collaborative traffic monitoring,
     call details records, physical analytics, smart cities as well as electronic payments, just to
     name a few. Moreover in situation of crisis, such as the COVID pandemic, there was a huge
     pressure in many countries by public health agencies for the access to mobility data (e.g., Call
     Details Records collected by telecom operators) to use it to understand how the movements
     of persons affect the spread of the disease as well as whether the population was respecting
     the confinement rules. While location privacy can be preserved from an external attacker
     through classical security mechanisms (e.g., the use of TLS (Transport Layer Security) to
     secure communications between the client and service provider), one of the inherent risks is
     its possible abuse by this service provider due to rich inference potential of location data.
         In the second part of his talk, Sébastien Gambs reviewed inference attacks against mobility
     data whose main objective is to quantify the risks in terms of privacy related to the collection
     and disclosure of mobility data. After defining the goal of location privacy as preventing an
     undesired entity from learning the past, present and future location of an individual [1], he
     discussed why pseudonymization offers a very low level of privacy protection for mobility
     data due to the possibility of using the pair home-work as quasi-identifiers if the spatial
     granularity is too much fine-grained [2] or the observations that the combination of 4 four
     random locations visited by a user is usually unique in the population as previous works
     have shown.
         Afterwards, Sébastien Gambs presented some of his own work on inference attacks
     against mobility data such as the identification of points of interests based on a clustering
     algorithm [3], the prediction of mobility patterns using a mobility Markov chain [4] or a
     de-anonymization attack against anonymized mobility traces in which the mobility model
     is used as auxiliary knowledge by the adversary to re-identify mobility traces [5]. Other
     inference attacks briefly reviewed include profiling, exploiting the co-location of users to
     predict their location [6], as well as performing membership inference [7] or reconstructing
     trajectories from aggregated data [8].
         The third part of the tutorial was dedicated to privacy-preserving methods for mobility
     data publishing. The objective of these methods is to sanitize the data to preserve location
     privacy, in particular by preventing some of the attacks described in the previous part. When
     sanitizing data, there is an inherent trade-off between the desired level of privacy and the
     utility of the sanitized data. Here, utility can be defined with respect to global properties of
     the data or be dependent on the application considered. First, simple sanitization mechanisms
     were introduced such as the geographical masks, which protect privacy through aggregation
     or perturbation, or approaches based on sampling or removing records that are too atypical.
     Afterwards, the spatio-temporal version of the k-anonymity privacy model, called spatial
     cloaking, was presented [9]. Methods that address privacy by limiting the possibility for
     the adversary to link together the mobility traces belonging to the same identity, such as
     mix-zones and Swapmob [10], were also discussed. Finally, the differential privacy model
     [11] as well as its applications for privacy-preserving mobility analytics [12] as well as
     privacy-preserving trajectory synthesis [13] were also briefly mentioned.
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                 39


    In his conclusion, the speaker mentioned that while there has been a huge scientific
literature in the last 20 years on location privacy, the fundamental question of defining and
quantifying location privacy in a formal yet actionable manner is still partially open. More
precisely, what does it mean to have “good” location privacy?

   To be hidden inside a crowd gathered in a small area?
   To be alone in a desert?
   To have a behavior indistinguishable from those of a non-negligible number of other
   individuals?
   To be unlinkable between different positions?

Sébastien Gambs emphasized that whatever the approach chosen, it should prevent the
inference of sensitive information from the location data revealed, rather than focusing on
hiding only the location itself. Finally, he listed several open challenges for research on
location privacy: (1) the lack of a set of (preferably few) privacy and utility metrics on which
there is consensus in the community, (2) the absence of large-scale reference datasets that
could be used to benchmark algorithms (mainly due to confidentiality and privacy reasons)
and (3) the fact that often the source code of algorithms is not published. All these three
challenges limit the possibility of comparing different sanitization algorithms and hinder
reproducible science.
References
 1 Alastair R. Beresford and Frank Stajano. Location privacy in pervasive computing. IEEE
     Pervasive Comput., 2(1):46–55, 2003.
 2 Philippe Golle and Kurt Partridge. On the anonymity of home/work location pairs. In
     Hideyuki Tokuda, Michael Beigl, Adrian Friday, A. J. Bernheim Brush, and Yoshito Tobe,
     editors, Pervasive Computing, 7th International Conference, Pervasive 2009, Nara, Japan,
     May 11-14, 2009. Proceedings, volume 5538 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
     390–397. Springer, 2009.
 3 Sébastien Gambs, Marc-Olivier Killijian, and Miguel Núñez del Prado Cortez. Show me
     how you move and I will tell you who you are. Trans. Data Priv., 4(2):103–126, 2011.
 4 Sébastien Gambs, Marc-Olivier Killijian, and Miguel Núñez del Prado Cortez. Next place
     prediction using mobility markov chains. In Hamed Haddadi and Eiko Yoneki, editors,
     Proceedings of the First Workshop on Measurement, Privacy, and Mobility, MPM ’12, Bern,
     Switzerland, April 10, 2012, pages 3:1–3:6. ACM, 2012.
 5 Sébastien Gambs, Marc-Olivier Killijian, and Miguel Núñez del Prado Cortez. De-
     anonymization attack on geolocated data. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 80(8):1597–1614, 2014.
 6 Alexandra-Mihaela Olteanu, Kévin Huguenin, Reza Shokri, Mathias Humbert, and Jean-
     Pierre Hubaux. Quantifying interdependent privacy risks with location data. IEEE Trans.
     Mob. Comput., 16(3):829–842, 2017.
 7 Apostolos Pyrgelis, Carmela Troncoso, and Emiliano De Cristofaro. Measuring membership
     privacy on aggregate location time-series. In Edmund Yeh, Athina Markopoulou, and
     Y. C. Tay, editors, Abstracts of the 2020 SIGMETRICS/Performance Joint International
     Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems, Boston, MA, USA, June,
     8-12, 2020, pages 73–74. ACM, 2020.
 8 Fengli Xu, Zhen Tu, Yong Li, Pengyu Zhang, Xiaoming Fu, and Depeng Jin. Trajectory
     recovery from ash: User privacy is NOT preserved in aggregated mobility data. In Rick
     Barrett, Rick Cummings, Eugene Agichtein, and Evgeniy Gabrilovich, editors, Proceedings
     of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW 2017, Perth, Australia,
     April 3-7, 2017, pages 1241–1250. ACM, 2017.




                                                                                                   22022
40   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


      9    Marco Gruteser and Dirk Grunwald. Anonymous usage of location-based services through
           spatial and temporal cloaking. In Daniel P. Siewiorek, Mary Baker, and Robert T. Morris,
           editors, Proceedings of the First International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications,
           and Services, MobiSys 2003, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 5-8, 2003, pages 31–42. USENIX,
           2003.
     10    Julián Salas, David Megías, and Vicenç Torra. Swapmob: Swapping trajectories for
           mobility anonymization. In Josep Domingo-Ferrer and Francisco Montes, editors, Privacy
           in Statistical Databases – UNESCO Chair in Data Privacy, International Conference, PSD
           2018, Valencia, Spain, September 26-28, 2018, Proceedings, volume 11126 of Lecture Notes
           in Computer Science, pages 331–346. Springer, 2018.
     11    Cynthia Dwork. Differential privacy. In Michele Bugliesi, Bart Preneel, Vladimiro Sassone,
           and Ingo Wegener, editors, Automata, Languages and Programming, 33rd International
           Colloquium, ICALP 2006, Venice, Italy, July 10-14, 2006, Proceedings, Part II, volume
           4052 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1–12. Springer, 2006.
     12    Mohammad Alaggan, Mathieu Cunche, and Sébastien Gambs. Privacy-preserving wi-fi
           analytics. Proc. Priv. Enhancing Technol., 2018(2):4–26, 2018.
     13    Takao Murakami, Koki Hamada, Yusuke Kawamoto, and Takuma Hatano. Privacy-
           preserving multiple tensor factorization for synthesizing large-scale location traces with
           cluster-specific features. Proc. Priv. Enhancing Technol., 2021(2):5–26, 2021.




     3.2    Mobility data analysis: ethical issues
     Geoffrey Rockwell (University of Alberta, Canada)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Geoffrey Rockwell


     Geoffrey Rockwell’s presentation started with an example from the early days of the pandemic
     when Tectonix, a geospatial analysis company, tweeted a video of a visualization showing
     where people active during the March 2020 spring break on a beach in Ft. Lauderdale
     returned to after their break. Tectonix was promoting how their analysis and visualization
     technology combined with mobility data from X-Mode could help efforts to control the
     pandemic by tracking the irresponsible youth who come to Florida to party on the beach
     instead of social distancing.
         This technology demonstration on the one had appalled some on Twitter who were
     surprised by how their privacy wasn’t respected, but it also coincided with stories that the
     Trump administration was in conversation with various companies to see if location data
     could be used in anonymized form to track the novel coronavirus. An official quoted in The
     Washington Post article that broke the story said that mobility data could, “help public
     health officials, researchers, and scientists improve their understanding of the spread of
     COVID-19 and transmission of the disease” [1]. The point of this introductory case study
     was that there are significant ethical issues around how mobility data is gathered, used,
     aggregated, and shared. The variety of ways mobility data can be gathered, the inferences
     possible, and the number of players who are commercializing such data raise difficult problems
     around principles, privacy, the application of ethical frameworks and how to develop a culture
     of ethical use. In the rest of the talk, Rockwell surveyed these issues in order to provide a
     common ground for discussion.
         Why bother with ethics? Ethics is often seen as a drag on innovation. Rockwell reviewed
     some reasons why addressing ethics is becoming important in both commercial and academic
     research and development [2].
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                 41


    What ethical principles apply? A common starting point in data ethics is to identify
common principles that should guide researchers, developers and users. Rockwell surveyed
some applicable sets of big data principles like the 2017 Big Data Guidelines from the
Information and Privacy Commissioner of Ontario and principles from the Harvard Business
School [3]. Researchers, however, often come to different conclusions, even if they start from
similar principles. For example, on the issue of using mobility data for public health we
found positions like: Ultimately, if residual risk is acceptable, analysis of mobility data can
be justified if it can yield actionable insights that benefit public health [4].
    From these discussions spurred by the current pandemic, three major location data issues
emerged: (1) anonymized data sometimes are not anonymous, (2) location data are often
not representative and can exacerbate inequality, and (3) location data are a key part of the
extension of the surveillance state.
    Rockwell concluded the case study by asking whether this moment of visibility for location
data collection could provide an opportunity to push for new media literacies [5].
    Privacy. Rockwell reviewed some of the definitions of privacy and how they might apply
to mobility data [6, 7, 8].
    Ethical Approaches. Finally, Rockwell reviewed some of the common ethical approaches
that can be used to think through situations:

     Duty-Based Ethics where rules and guidelines are used to establish the morality of actions
     rather than their consequences;
     Consequentialist Ethics such as Utilitarianism which judge the morality of actions based
     on their consequences;
     Ethics of Care which emphasizes the relationships in actions and care for others.

     Rockwell concluded by asking how we can develop a culture of ethics in data disciplines.
     Some general resources mentioned in the talk include also [9]. 1
References
 1 Tony Romm, Elizabeth Dwoskin, and Craig Timberg. U.S. government, tech industry
     discussing ways to use smartphone location data to combat coronavirus. The Washington
     Post, 2020. https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/03/17/white-house
    -location-data-coronavirus/.
 2 Anne-Laure Thieullent et al. AI and the ethical conundrum: How organizations can build
     ethically robust ai systems and gain trust. Technical report, Capgemini Research Institute,
     2020. https://www.capgemini.com/research/ai-and-the-ethical-conundrum/.
 3 Catherine Cote. 5 Principles of Data Ethics for Business, 2021. Harvard Business School
     online, https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/data-ethics.
 4 Bouke C. de Jong et al. Ethical considerations for movement mapping to identify disease
     transmission hotspots. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 25(7):e181421, 2019. https://www.
     ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6590736/.
 5 Jordan Frith and Michael Saker. It is all about location: Smartphones and tracking the
     spread of COVID-19. Social Media + Society, 6(3), 2020. https://journals.sagepub.c
     om/doi/10.1177/2056305120948257.
 6 James Moor. The ethics of privacy protection. Library Trends, 39, 1990.
 7 Kate Raynes-Goldie. Aliases, creeping, and wall cleaning: Understanding privacy in the age
     of facebook. First Monday, 15(1–4), 2010. https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v15i1.2775.


1
    The slides of this tutorial are available at:
    http://www.master-project-h2020.eu/dagstuhl-materials/.




                                                                                                   22022
42   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


      8    Danah Boyd. Debating privacy in a networked world for the WSJ, 2011. http://www.zeph
           oria.org/thoughts/archives/2011/11/20/debating-privacy-in-a-networked-wor
           ld-for-the-wsj.html.
      9    Josh Lauer. Sarah E. Igo. The Known Citizen: A History of Privacy in Modern America.
           The American Historical Review, 124(3):1019–1021, 2019.



     3.3    Connected vehicles and mobility data – work done by the EDPB
     Peter Kraus (European Data Protection Board, Brussels, Belgium)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Peter Kraus


     Peter Kraus gave a short presentation of how the European Data Protection Board (EDPB)
     works as a European Body, composed of Members from the different Member States of
     the European Economic Area and the European Data Protection Supervisor. The EDPB,
     being tasked with ensuring the consistent application of Europe’s General Data Protection
     Regulation (GDPR), has issued Opinions, Binding Decisions, Guidelines, Best Practices and
     Recommendations. He also gave a short overview of the EDPB Strategy and the transnational
     enforcement done by the Member State authorities.
         Concerning the topic of mobility, Mr Kraus highlighted the work done by the EDPB re-
     garding contact tracing during the COVID-19 pandemic and presented the EDPB’s Guidelines
     on connected vehicles [1]. These Guidelines analyse the different legal instruments that
     are relevant from a data protection perspective and their interaction: the GDPR and the
     e-Privacy Directive. The e-Privacy Directive, as a so called lex specialis, provides additional
     protection to electronic communications, whereas the GDPR sets the general framework.
         Following the presentation by Mr Rockwell and the mentioning of possibly applicable
     ethical principles, Mr Kraus highlighted that the GDPR is known as a principles-based
     legislation, which in its Article 5 contains the legal principles of data protection, which in
     many respects are similar to the ethical principles mentioned for ethical use of mobility data.
     This includes, in particular, the principles of fairness, transparency and data minimisation.
     These principles are highlighted and operationalised by Article 25 of the GDPR – Data
     Protection by Design and by Default.
         One of the possible legal bases under the GDPR to process and to use personal data,
     as well as one of the requirements of the e-Privacy directive to access personal data on an
     end device, is consent. However, consent has a list of properties for it to be considered valid
     consent in the legal context. It needs to be informed, unambiguous, specific and freely given.
     This relates back to the principles of data protection. Further, the GDPR requires that
     consent can be withdrawn and that this withdrawing must be as easy to do as it is to give
     consent. Therefore, when using consent as a legal basis, consideration should be given to
     what happens when the consent is withdrawn.
         One way to avoid being in scope of data protection law altogether is to effectively
     anonymise personal data. However, as already presented by Mr Gambs, anonymisation is hard
     to do in practice. Encryption and hashing are frequently mistaken for anonymisation processes,
     whereas from a legal data-protection perspective, they merely amount to pseudonymisation.
     One has to be aware of re-identification attacks that may turn a dataset previously deemed
     to be anonymised into one that is not anonymised at all. Lastly, it was highlighted, that
     anonymisation is particularly difficult for location data due to the additional context that
     can be derived from a specific location.
         Finally, a few examples that are provided in the Guidelines on connected vehicles were
     given, which showcase how the legal framework can be applied to use cases such as contact
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                       43


tracing or usage based insurance services.
References
1    European Data Protection Board. Guidelines 1/2020 on processing personal data in the
     context of connected vehicles and mobility related applications, 2020. https://edpb.eur
     opa.eu/our-work-tools/documents/public-consultations/2020/guidelines-12020
    -processing-personal-data_en.



 4     Topic-based Working Groups
Inspired by the round-table presentations of attendees and the tutorials and discussions, we
identified the following main topics as of interest of the audience to build the new mobility
data ethics “from the technical to the ethical”: (1) What is/are the trade-off(s) between
data privacy and data utility?, (2) Mobility data anonymity – asking whether such data
can ever be really anonymous, and (3) Ethics on mobility data: what is unique? Which
guidelines? While these three groups retained the focus on data of the seminar title and the
focus on humans often implicit in the term “ethics”, two further groups explored the need to
go beyond this: (4) Mobility Data Analysis Ethics beyond the data and (5) Mobility data
analysis beyond humans only: Tracking animals and moral agency.



4.1    What is/are the trade-off(s) between data privacy and data utility?
WG scribe and other members: Francesca Pratesi, Bettina Berendt, Thierry Chevallier,
Josep Domingo-Ferrer, Ioannis Kontopoulos, Jeanna Matthews, Anna Monreale
      License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © WG scribe and other members: Francesca Pratesi, Bettina Berendt, Thierry Chevallier,
                Josep Domingo-Ferrer, Ioannis Kontopoulos, Jeanna Matthews, Anna Monreale


To understand the bond between data privacy and data utility, in a first step one needs to
consider or develop definitions and measures for both these dimensions. What is utility?
How to measure it? How to do a utility vs. privacy (but also fairness and other ethical
dimensions) analysis? How do we actually and effectively define and measure privacy?
    As starting points, from the background and the past experience of participants regarding
the processing of mobility data, the best way to act is to reduce granularity. Unfortunately,
even if many papers in the literature prove that this approach can really work [1, 3, 2], there
are two main problems: (1) sometimes it is hard to apply data minimization (indeed, it
is hard to define what we need before knowing what you want to do); (2) there is a huge
difference between one-shot collection vs. the continuous anonymization of trajectories (i.e.,
data streams). Regarding the first problem, purpose specification can help to overcome this,
especially for researchers; moreover, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) defines
the “public interest” purpose and allows derogation for research, cf. [4].
    However, connected to this latter point, there is the secondary-use problem. Although it
is generally considered good practice for administration or companies to reuse data (even
for potentially good purposes) without the need to perform potentially expensive and time
consuming new data collection (e.g., establish new surveys), we must be aware that this
practice violates the GDPR principles. An example that was cited are instances of (mis?)use




                                                                                                         22022
44   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


     of a centralized Corona app in Germany2 , an app that was quasi-obligatory for the use of
     several services (such as going to the restaurant), so this implied a huge coverage of the
     system. Therefore, special caution must be taken and ensure that the collected data will
     not used for other purposes during or after the emergency in the context of which they were
     originally collected.
         Unlike the data-protection principle of purpose limitation, principles of open science
     allow and encourage secondary use; the drawback is that stored datasets can often be
     de-anonymized quite easily. This is one reason why access to open datasets is conditioned
     on some constraints, such as the definition of a specific research project. As an example, in
     the Netherlands, it is possible, for researchers working with a university or other institution
     associated with the national statistics office, to access the comprehensive and highly detailed
     Dutch Microdata. To get access, researchers have to submit their project idea. Once approved,
     they can access the data in a secure environment provided by the statistics office. Payment
     is per month plus per export (because each export is checked for meeting common privacy
     standards). 3
         A solution to this problem is to build and use synthetic data.
         During the working group discussion, we focused on concrete use cases, such as local
     buses management (in terms of both real-time position and capacity) and journey planners.
     Such planners strongly depend on the starting point and destination of the user, on the
     means of transport (which can also be suggested by the service), and on the time of the day.
     You can also consider “mobility as a service application”, where you can also have other
     utility integration (e.g., buying tickets) that involve other stakeholders (e.g., bus companies),
     and possible second uses of data. This helped us highlight different contrasting dimensions:
     Tracing people vs. not tracing people. Both tracing and not tracing can be approaches
     to solving a problem, but these problems are different in that they have different needs
     and challenges. Some services can be obtained even without the tracking of people in a
     privacy-preserving way, so not tracing people could still be a good option. In the case of
     buses, for example, sensors can be installed on buses that can give the real-time aggregated
     occupancy, a value that can be exploited to avoid further data gathering. Clearly, when we
     do not track the location of buses or people inside it, we do not know the actual route. For
     this kind of service, avoiding the tracking we are actually applying data minimization: we
     do not need to track people and we will not do it. The difference in terms of privacy in the
     different scenarios is due to the need to know an immediate location characteristic (e.g., a
     bus position or whether a person is on a bus) versus the need to know the actual movements
     and, thus, to actually trace people (of course, only in this case we have to deal with personal
     data).
     Historical data vs. real-time data. Historical data are data collected in the past and
     generally used to build some models; these models can be used at a later time for several uses.
     Here, already existing methodologies can be applied, such as randomization or k-anonymity.
     Once the model has been computed on historical data, the model will likely be used. Indeed,
     one must share his/her position to take advantage of it, resulting in a real-time scenario.
     While hiding persons in the crowd during the building of the model is relatively simple, when


     2
       This was the app “Luca”, not to be confused with the “main” German tracing app CWA, which is
       decentralised. Regarding the adoption rate of such measures in general, and the importance to provide
       incentives, see [5].
     3
       https://www.cbs.nl/en-gb/our-services/customised-services-microdata/microdata-conduct
       ing-your-own-research
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                     45


the system is in use you have more constraints, because the environment is both dynamic and
distributed. There is probably the need to define a new concept of privacy is this case. Indeed,
in the real-time context, it is more difficult to compute the privacy risk since, in general, we
do not have the general overview of the situation. The most promising approaches in this
context seem to be randomization or federated learning in location data. The limitation of
the first solution is that when you are the only person in an area, even when when noise is
consistently being added, you will always be re-identifiable; thus, you could have no privacy
and no utility at all. Federated learning approaches are similarly limited: when the peers
have very different location data, there are no guarantees of protection.
Service quality vs. data quality. To assess the utility, we usually rely on service quality,
measuring whether we are able to perform similar analyses with or without privacy. This
represents what the end user loses with a privacy-preserving service. In the bus scenario,
an example could be to suggest a longer route to reach a destination in order to preserve
privacy: the privacy-preserving route could be more expensive in terms of more time but also
more money for gas or the bus ticket. Therefore, we must be able to measure the difference
in performance (e.g., accuracy
    or cost-sensitive performance metrics) between the model with and without privacy (i.e.,
with private data or raw data).
The “kind of risk”. This dimension is related to the risk you are taking into consideration.
Examples are the re-identification risk or the disclosure of sensitive attributes (e.g., profiling).
We can also consider if the risk is data-centric or real-life-centric. Regarding the risk of
re-identification, there are some practical tools4 , based on the work presented in [6, 7].
Multi-criteria utility function. Utility is often equated with accuracy of the model, but
accuracy is not the only objective. For example, there are the fairness trade-off or the
transparency trade-off. We call these options simple model vs. complex model: one can prefer
an explainable model over one with perfect accuracy. While on the one hand, we need to
protect privacy, on the other hand, transparency is a valuable aspect that could be in conflict
with privacy. How to achieve both and maintain utility? In this sense, we could start from
the work done in [8], where some contrasting dimensions are considered (even if here the
utility is missing), and [9], where it is highlighted that there are values that help each other
and there are values that harm each other; it also depends on the choice you made.
Participation vs. non-participation. This is another trade-off that needs to be considered.
We should be able to measure the trade-off between benefits and opportunity costs, consider
disincentives, and be sure that subjects really understand the risk of participation. Moreover,
it happens very often that a certain service cannot be pursued if the adoption rate does
not reach a certain threshold. Thus, we are led to thinking that there is a strong need to
collect large quantities of data. However, this thinking may be the result of assuming false
trade-offs: usually, a lot of data means a high utility, and this leads to a high risk; on the
contrary, no data means no utility but also no risk. However, this need not be the case, and
with some transformed (e.g., partially or badly anonymized) data one may obtain something
in the middle: no utility and full risk [10].
Stakeholder diversity. During the discussion, we agreed on the existence of three different
stakeholders for both privacy and utility, aiming at different kinds of utility:


4
    https://github.com/scikit-mobility/scikit-mobility




                                                                                                       22022
46   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


        subject, who provides the data or uses the service. Regarding the privacy aspects, subjects
        who provide data have the specific need that their data cannot be re-identified. At the
        same time we want to able to maintain some data utility. In general, we can refer to
        individual utility that is how good is the service or collective utility meaning that a user
        can share his/her data if there are benefits for the society, such as reducing traffic in a
        city. Regarding the final user of the service, we can use other metrics. For example, as
        said before, a user can take more time by using a path different from the shortest with
        the purpose of preserving privacy.
        data owner, who is usually the provider owning the data, and who possibly permits to
        third parties to access its data. This subject has interest in keeping the ownership of the
        data and prevent uses by third parties without their consent; their utility is usually the
        profit. We can consider the utility from the perspective of data collector: you should
        check the difference of performances (e.g., accuracy) of the model with or without privacy
        (i.e., with private preserved data or raw data).
        data analyst, who is in charge of analyzing data and providing the service. This subject
        wants the confidentiality of results. Its utility can be recognized in profits if it is related
        to a private company or in benefits for the society if it corresponds to a public entity.
        More information about these three kinds of privacy can be found in [11]. Moreover, these
        different kinds of perspectives can be easily related: for example, when data is privacy
        protected, this is good not only for the subjects but also for the owner of the service. It
        is important to consider in this analysis also the economic concept of externalities [12].

        To conclude, the last part of the discussion focused on the accountability and the
     responsibility, especially at the societal level, of the actual implementation and on the
     possible implications of the utility computation. In particular, we discussed the use of
     checklists, where the outcome is not a specific value but rather the starting point for the
     evaluation. These checklists come in the form of a list of questions to the user, such as “Did
     you consider this aspect?”.
        Finally, about the application of this data utility mechanism: even supposing that we
     have the perfect formula for utility computation, who is going to implement it?
     References
      1 George Danezis, Josep Domingo-Ferrer, Marit Hansen, Jaap-Henk Hoepman, Daniel Le
          Metayer, Rodica Tirtea, and Stefan Schiffner. Privacy and data protection by design-from
          policy to engineering, 2014. ENISA Report. https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publicatio
          ns/privacy-and-data-protection-by-design.
      2 Anna Monreale, Gennady Andrienko, Natalia Andrienko, Fosca Giannotti, Dino Pedreschi,
          Salvatore Rinzivillo, and Stefan Wrobel. Movement data anonymity through generalization.
          Transactions on Data Privacy, 3, 2010.
      3 Anna Monreale, Salvatore Rinzivillo, Francesca Pratesi, Fosca Giannotti, and Dino Pedreschi.
          Privacy-by-design in big data analytics and social mining. EPJ Data Science, 3(10), 2014.
          https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13688-014-0010-4.
      4 Michael Beauvais. GA4GH GDPR Brief: The public interest and the GDPR, 2021. https:
          //www.ga4gh.org/news/ga4gh-gdpr-brief-the-public-interest-and-the-gdpr-feb
          ruary-2021/.
      5 Mirco Nanni et al. Give more data, awareness and control to individual citizens, and they
          will help COVID-19 containment. Trans. Data Priv., 13(1):61–66, 2020.
      6 Luca Pappalardo, Filippo Simini, Gianni Barlacchi, and Roberto Pellungrini. Scikit-mobility:
          a python library for the analysis, generation and risk assessment of mobility data, 2019.
          https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.07062.
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                             47


    7   Francesca Pratesi, Anna Monreale, Roberto Trasarti, Fosca Giannotti, Dino Pedreschi, and
        Tadashi Yanagihara. Prudence: a system for assessing privacy risk vs utility in data sharing
        ecosystems. Trans. Data Priv., 11(2):139–167, 2018.
    8   Marit Hansen, Meiko Jensen, and Martin Rost. Protection goals for privacy engineering.
        2015 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops, pages 159–166, 2015.
    9   Josep Domingo-Ferrer and Alberto Blanco-Justicia. Ethical value-centric cybersecurity: A
        methodology based on a value graph. Sci. Eng. Ethics, 26(3):1267–1285, 2020.
10      Bettina Berendt. Better data protection by design through multicriteria decision making:
        On false tradeoffs between privacy and utility. In Erich Schweighofer, Herbert Leitold,
        Andreas Mitrakas, and Kai Rannenberg, editors, Privacy Technologies and Policy – 5th
        Annual Privacy Forum, APF 2017, Vienna, Austria, June 7-8, 2017, Revised Selected
        Papers, volume 10518 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 210–230. Springer, 2017.
11      Josep Domingo-Ferrer. A three-dimensional conceptual framework for database privacy. In
        Willem Jonker and Milan Petkovic, editors, Secure Data Management, 4th VLDB Workshop,
        SDM 2007, Vienna, Austria, September 23-24, 2007, Proceedings, volume 4721 of Lecture
        Notes in Computer Science, pages 193–202. Springer, 2007. https://crises-deim.urv.
        cat/web/docs/publications/lncs/457.pdf.
12      Bogdan Kulynych, Rebekah Overdorf, Carmela Troncoso, and Seda F. Gürses. Pots:
        protective optimization technologies. In Mireille Hildebrandt, Carlos Castillo, L. Elisa
        Celis, Salvatore Ruggieri, Linnet Taylor, and Gabriela Zanfir-Fortuna, editors, FAT* ’20:
        Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, Barcelona, Spain, January 27-30,
        2020, pages 177–188. ACM, 2020.



4.2      Mobility data anonymity
WG scribe and other members: Francesca Pratesi, Jeanna Matthews, Anna Monreale, Florence
Chee, Ioannis Kontopoulos, Karine Zeitouni
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © WG scribe and other members: Francesca Pratesi, Jeanna Matthews, Anna Monreale, Florence
                  Chee, Ioannis Kontopoulos, Karine Zeitouni


In this working group, the discussion focused on multiple aspects of data anonymity, which is
extremely hard to reach [3] for mobility data [1], especially considering the fact that mobility
patterns are usually highly predictable. As experts, can we recommend (and develop) ways
to use technology still but with some evasions of location tracking (e.g., download offline
maps and navigate with GPS), and do our best to increase people’s awareness, especially
considering how we are exposed and easily manipulable [2].
    Moreover, there is a need to consider the danger of predatory data collection. Sometimes,
the choices are false choices (you “must” download an app due to peer pressure or to
participate in ordinary social life). Therefore, we should encourage the definition of different
levels of consent. Another possibility is to implement tools to help people to analyze the
permissions required from mobile phone apps5 or from web pages6 .
    However, as said in Section 4.1, it is worth noting that the choice to participate in a
project or to share something affects the final goal: the goodness of the model depends
on the number of individuals that participate. And this has an impact on the individuals


5
    https://privacyflag.eu
6
    https://github.com/chatziko/location-guard




                                                                                                               22022
48   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


     themselves. In the literature a scenario that evaluates this trade-off is missing: what is the
     impact (in terms of privacy loss) if you participate? And what is the impact (in terms of
     service quality) if you do not participate? Another challenge is that this must be computed
     and evaluated in real-time. Moreover, in the mobility context, it is not enough to have a
     certain percentage of the population, but we need to evaluate also the geographical area; it
     seems that the only possibility is to simulate this computation.
         The discussion ended up with a possible trend of personal data management, providing
     decentralized solutions. There are solutions actually existing, such as personal data cloud,
     where you locally store data, but to be usable, they need suitable infrastructures and ad
     hoc protocols. This is not implementable today because there is no pressure neither from
     governments and surely not from companies. We need to ask ourselves if we have the power
     to influence choices, both at individual and at companies levels.
         A follow-up article on the concerns of surveillance and the best practice we can adopt to
     contrast them has already been published [4].
     References
      1 Hui Zang and Jean Bolot. Anonymization of location data does not work: a large-scale
          measurement study. In Parmesh Ramanathan, Thyaga Nandagopal, and Brian Neil Levine,
          editors, Proceedings of the 17th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and
          Networking, MOBICOM 2011, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, September 19-23, 2011, pages
          145–156. ACM, 2011.
      2 Jeanna Matthews. How fake accounts constantly manipulate what you see on social media –
          and what you can do about it. The Conversation, 2020, Jun 24. https://theconversatio
          n.com/how-fake-accounts-constantly-manipulate-what-you-see-on-social-media
         -and-what-you-can-do-about-it-139610.
      3 Alex Hern. “anonymised” data can never be totally anonymous, says study. The Guardin,
          2019, Jul 23. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/jul/23/anonymised-d
          ata-never-be-anonymous-enough-study-finds.
      4 Geoffrey Rockwell, Bettina Berendt, Florence M. Chee, Jeanna Matthews, Sébastien Gambs,
          and Chiara Renso. Ottawa’s use of our location data raises big surveillance and privacy
          concerns. The Conversation, 2022, Jan 27. https://theconversation.com/ottawas-use
         -of-our-location-data-raises-big-surveillance-and-privacy-concerns-175316.



     4.3    Ethics on mobility data: what is unique? Which guidelines?
     WG scribe and other members: Geoffrey Rockwell, Christine Ahrend, Florence Chee, Thierry
     Chevallier, Maria Luisa Damiani, Peter Kraus, Fen Lin, Fran Meissner, Alessandra Raffaetà,
     Chiara Renso, Paula Reyero Lobo, Yannis Theodoridis, Karine Zeitouni
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © WG scribe and other members: Geoffrey Rockwell, Christine Ahrend, Florence Chee, Thierry
                     Chevallier, Maria Luisa Damiani, Peter Kraus, Fen Lin, Fran Meissner, Alessandra Raffaetà, Chiara
                     Renso, Paula Reyero Lobo, Yannis Theodoridis, Karine Zeitouni


     The question of data ethics and technology ethics has been a hot topic for some time. Over
     the past decade following an explosion of the availability of various and voluminous data
     sets often referred to as big data, a common laminate has been that technology is often
     developing faster than the regulations that might keep the implications of those technologies
     and data uses at bay in step with the innovations in the field. The mobility data analysis
     field is not excluded and efforts are underway to engage with and “update” ethics thinking to
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                49


new data and technology realities. Those efforts raise a number of questions. In particular,
we discussed the questions described in the following Sections 4.3.1–4.3.3. As a result of
the discussion, we discussed existing guidelines and drew up a tentative set of guidelines
tailored to the needs of a graduate student doing a mobility data project, provided here in
Section 4.3.4.

4.3.1   What is unique about Mobility Data from an ethics perspective?
In many ways the field of mobility data aligns with many other fields that have moved from
relative data scarcity to a relative data abundance. So is there anything unique about the
type of research? We here argue that while there are many parallels and there is a lot to
learn from the ongoing wider debates, our argument here is that there is indeed something,
if not unique, at least specific about the mobility data if viewed from an ethics perspective.
Much of that uniqueness derives from the type of data needed for the mobility analysis.
    One of the peculiarities of mobility data is that we can deduce/infer knowledge. Mobility
data is first of all characterized by spatial-temporal information and this allows us to relate
this data to the context, by considering the environment where the moving object is traveling.
In this way, we can detect the points of interest that the moving object is crossing, the time
spent in each place, their semantic categories. Based on the time and frequency of the places,
we can infer the workplace and/or home. Moreover, we have the possibility to understand
the interaction among the moving objects, if they are moving in a group, who they are in a
meeting and to have an idea of the social network.
    Some features of mobility data merit highlights.

   Scale: the amount of information from smartphones/sensors is massive. Such data
   expand the notion of temporal and spatial scales that used to be developed from the
   “small-and-static” data. Moreover, the granularity of the spatial and temporal information
   can vary significantly (e.g. days vs. seconds, km vs. cm).
   Associated Metadata: depending on the provider, mobility data can often come with
   associated metadata about the user or about the application.
   Auto-correlation: the data are not independent and they have incredible details correlated
   in time and space. The temporal component, especially, seems to add a new dimension
   to the ethics.
   Relational: the mobility data is beyond categorical information, it also reveals the
   relational behaviour – who were close to, who were you likely talking to, what might you
   have been doing.
   Behavioural prediction: due to the temporal and spatial detail, Mobility Data can be
   used to infer everyday behaviour in ways that many other sources of data don’t. If ethics
   is about guidelines for behaviour, then having such detail about day-to-day behaviour
   raises questions about how behaviour can be surveilled, managed, and manipulated in
   new ways.

    As a result, mobility data is much more than “simple” geographic data, and these data
are incredibly valuable both for fine-grained analysis but also in economic terms. This value
of mobility data brings with it an array of different interests in how and for what purposes
mobility data ought to be used. At the same time it is also hard to anonymize full mobile
datasets, and this creates challenges when it comes to sharing data for open science purposes.
    Such features of mobility data imply that there is an array of normative questions that
mobility researchers are faced with today. These questions go beyond, but also accompany,
more traditional concerns such as how to preserve privacy of individuals in the data, as



                                                                                                  22022
50   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


     elaborated on in Section 4.1. This also means that due to the nature of mobility data
     is engaging with, articulating and addressing those questions is exceptionally important.
     The myriad of ethical considerations that need to enter the mobility data field have gained
     attention that is too fragmented to create clarity, for researchers, about applicable ethics
     guidelines and how to use ethical considerations as a means to engage in responsible research.
     The following takes the uniqueness of mobility data we here postulate as a starting point to
     engage with some important questions that are often not very clearly spelled out.

     4.3.2   What is the role of context and culture in Mobility Data Ethics?
     We recognize that ethical practices vary across contexts and cultures. For example, the
     MIT moral machine experiments that examined moral decisions of self-driving cars across 42
     countries revealed a cultural divide in ethics [1]. The use and regulation of mobility data
     might therefore need to integrate contextual situations and normative ethical principles. At
     the same time it may be necessary to recognize that some technical solutions that work in
     one context might have adverse effects if applied in another context, making awareness for
     the context of analysis and application crucial in assessing ethics concerns.
         Even though big data technology in general, and technology using mobility data specifically,
     enables researchers to efficiently understand the people’s behaviour, which might offer
     insightful suggestions for policy-makers to develop better governance, it inevitably invites the
     conundrum of balancing utility and personal privacy. How to make such a balance might also
     vary by contextual situation (thus adding to the many other factors to take into account that
     are discussed in Section 4.1) and across cultures. The contextualized ethical practices might
     also be manifest in various stages of operationalization of mobility data: data collection,
     data analysis, data publication, data sharing and data storage. Such contexts might also
     bring issues that are related to ethics but go beyond ethics. For example, when a private
     citizen attends a public event, to what extent do they own their behaviour and trajectory
     data in the public event?
         We recognize that there are communities that do not want to be surveilled and, in fact,
     want to remain hidden from the research gaze. Likewise, we recognize that researchers are not
     necessarily neutral or objective observers who have only the good of the community in mind.
     It is the responsibility of the researcher to engage communities that they are going to surveil
     in a dialogue and be willing to not gather data in some cases or to redesign their research
     in others. Further, there are now contexts in which it would be an “appropriation of voice”
     to do research which is not co-designed with the community. Indigenous communities in
     particular have made it clear that no research should be conducted without their involvement
     and approval.
         On these debates much can be learned from ongoing debates about data justice. For
     example, Taylor [2] argues that one useful approach might be to take a capabilities approach
     – meaning to think through how individual and group capability is hindered or facilitated –
     to think through data justice. This requires thinking through at least three conundrums. (1)
     what sort of visibility is being made possible with the data and can access to representation
     as well as access to information privacy be maintained. (2) how is an engagement with
     the technology made possible that allows both to share the benefits of data and allow for
     an autonomy in technology choices; and (3) how can a principle of non-discrimination be
     adhered to in a way that allow for challenging bias and preventing discrimination. Facilitating
     capabilities is also an relevant aspect of debates that link data technologies to the questions
     of ethics.
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                  51


4.3.3   What are the benefits and risks of ethics (and too much ethics)?
There is a balance between research utility and addressing various ethical concerns. In this
sense, ethics should be part of the research process as a dialogue to ensure there is a minimum
risk of harming people and this goes beyond complying with legal regulations.
    Several factors involved with the use of mobility data advocate for the need for an ethics
assessment to be in place before and during the whole lifetime of the project. Privacy
preservation is a fundamental aspect, but not the only one. While there are questions about
data manipulation and control which relate to both ethics and privacy, we discuss other
important aspects of data ethics that differentiate these two concepts. The impact of the
project needs to be understood to be able to make decisions such as which data to use or
how to use it, in order for it to have the best possible outcomes. This is an intricate task,
as the impact may not always be straightforward, for example, if the data being used may
not be directly linked to an individual. However, is it important that researchers have a
legitimate interest and data subjects are aware that their activities are being recorded and
the purpose for which they are used?
    Such question invokes conversation that were circled around the tensions between a) the
value that we, as researchers, put on openness and the sharing of data and b) the privacy
rights of individuals or groups whose data are collected. This is particularly a problem in
mobility data research due to the difficulty involved in anonymizing datasets. In fact, sharing
the data and the methods used in a research project is essential in open science. It allows
the community to check and reproduce the results that support the findings. It is the basis
of evaluating and benchmarking different approaches.
    Some of the approaches discussed that could mitigate this tension include:

   Minimize your data to that which is needed for replication.
   Researching and applying new practices in anonymization. We recognize that this is itself
   a research field where approaches are changing.
   Embargo your data for a number of years until the privacy challenge is lessened.
   Ask people to apply for access to your data and provide it with clear terms of use.
   Provide synthetic data instead of the real data.

4.3.4   A Tentative Guideline
On the second day we discussed guidelines. We were inspired by the Locus Charter [3]. We
agreed that the guidelines could be organized by audience and different sets of guidelines
might be proposed at different stages of processing data, such as data collection, data analysis,
data storage and data sharing. We proposed a tentative guideline for a graduate student
doing a mobility data project.

Guidelines for a Graduate Student doing a Mobility Data project
Policy. Inform yourself about the research ethics and data privacy policies of your university
and research lab. If there is a research ethics board to which you need to apply to proceed
with your project then you should engage that board. Don’t think of the process as an
obstacle, but as a chance for dialogue.
Data. Identify where you are getting your data from. Are you gathering the data yourself,
or are you getting data from a mobility provider, or have you inherited a data set? Make sure
you fully document the provenance and structure of the data even if you have inherited it.




                                                                                                    22022
52   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


     Transparency and Consent. If you are gathering data you should consider how you could
     get consent or at least be transparent about what you are gathering and why. You might,
     for example, have a notice at the location where you gather data or you might publish a
     web site that provides information on the project. As part of your transparency you should
     describe what you are gathering, what you will do with it, and how someone might hold you
     accountable.
     Security. Develop a data security plan. Check it with your supervisor and data security
     colleagues. This is especially important if you are working with data that can identify
     individuals or is sensitive in some fashion.
     Check for Bias. Ask yourself if your dataset is biased. Who is represented? Who is not?
     Does this make a difference to the research? Familiarise yourself with the literature on bias
     so you understand what might be reasons for bias. Test your dataset for bias if you can.
     Research Goal. Ask yourself what you are trying to achieve with this research and whether
     the research project itself is ethical. Are you trying to do good, or could there be unintended
     harms from misuse of your data or research? Is the new knowledge generated helpful, useful,
     or welcome?

     (a) A good starting point is to identify your values, including the often unexpressed values
          embedded in Western modes of research. What do you think is good such that your
          research will make a difference.
     (b) It is a good idea to identify the stakeholders in your research, both those whose data is
          gathered and others (including the research team). Engage the stakeholders in a dialogue
          about the design of the research.
     (c) Consider how they might have different values. They may not value the research you are
          doing or value it differently.
     (d) Make sure you are transparent about the goals of your research so people understand the
          purpose for the data gathering, the analysis, and publication.
     (e) Consider the ethics of the methods and analytics used in the project. Could your methods
          be unethically applied in a different context, or with different data?
      (f) Audit the research. Share your research goals and plans with other people, starting with
          your supervisor and colleagues in order to get input on the ethics of the means and the
          goals. If there is an ethics board, or people with a designated ethics role, you should get
          their feedback early and often.

     Data Management Plan. Develop a long-term DMP that describes how you will process
     your data to minimize it, what you will deposit in the university research data repository for
     future use, whether there should be an expiry date to the data, and whether it should be
     embargoed for a while. Consult with research data librarians about the plan. Ask yourself
     and others how your data could be used for good or misused. Document your wishes for the
     data (and include this with the data deposited) so you are clear how you hope it will or will
     not be used.
     Ask yourself about possible second use cases. Even if your own research may adhere
     to best research standards you should audit your data and project. Could your data, the
     methods you develop or the findings you plan to publish lead to adverse effects? If so, what
     are those effects and can you think of and actively implement mitigation strategies that will
     prevent adverse effects and promote socially responsible reuse of your work?
     Care and Repair. Maintain and repair your data, methods and research publications.
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                          53


References
1    Edmond Awad, Sohan Dsouza, Azim Shariff, Iyad Rahwan, and Jean-François Bonnefon.
     Universals and variations in moral decisions made in 42 countries by 70,000 participants.
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(5):2332–2337, 2020.
2    Linnet Taylor. What is data justice? the case for connecting digital rights and freedoms
     globally. Big Data & Society, 4(2):2053951717736335, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1177/
     2053951717736335.
3    EthicalGEO. Lotus charter, 2021. https://ethicalgeo.org/locus-charter/.



4.4    Mobility Data Analysis Ethics beyond the data
WG scribe and other members: Fran Meissner, Fen Lin, Florence Chee, Chiara Renso, Paula
Reyero Lobo, Yannis Theodoridis
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © WG scribe and other members: Fran Meissner, Fen Lin, Florence Chee, Peter Kraus, Chiara
                Renso, Paula Reyero Lobo, Yannis Theodoridis


Debates about the ethics of mobility analysis tend to focus on the data and what it reveals.
They are often framed in light of privacy and the problems with guaranteeing privacy given
the specificity of spatio-temporal data compared to other categorical data. To take a step back
from this perspective, we explore what kinds of ethics questions surface if we think about the
ethics of mobility data analysis beyond the data. Engaging in such an exercise is helpful to
consider mobility data and its analysis as part ofmobility information infrastructures. These
infrastructures include broader institutional infrastructures that make mobility research
possible (think servers, data specialists, multi-origin data sources) and political and economic
infrastructures that influence research priorities.
    As with many other fields, mobility data analysis used to grapple with relative data
scarcity. New data collection and processing capabilities have transformed how mobility
research is done. More and more actors interested in technological innovation and monetising
data are entering the field. Such changes bring opportunities and concerns. These require a
broader engagement with ethics – with what it means to do good. The lure of innovation
itself can be a concern as it often trumps a real need for innovation. Use cases are frequently
found after the fact. Given economic interests that undergird the field, it is not immune to
a mentality of “move fast and break things” that leaves little room for considering ethics
and long-term implications of new mobility data ecosystems. The concerns raised in our
discussion centred around questions of consent, equitable access, reproduction of power
asymmetries, and fundamental questions about who should benefit from mobility research
how.
    Our discussions involved thinking about issues linked to a digital divide, both in terms of
data produced and the mobility tools that data is used to create. New ideas about mobility
as a service, for example, are frequently thought about in terms of creating sustainability
and efficiency. Still, social aspects require considering a diversity of stakeholders who might
be disadvantaged by hyper-efficient and environmentally sustainable systems. City building
always tends to happen both as a byproduct of natural growth and the engineering of cities –
cities are arenas where there is an interplay between policy and new knowledge. At the level
of ethics, this raises the question of what kind of city we want to live in. It seems complicated
to imagine a truly ethically ’optimised’ mobility data application without concerted efforts
engaging with that question.




                                                                                                            22022
54   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


         The question of third-use scenarios and the pivoting of services that might have been
     conceptualised with good intentions is another concern that looms large in the field. Beyond
     this, there is an increasing growth of hybrid applications that take advantage of mobility
     data information infrastructures. One prominent example is how developers might draw on
     mobility choice data for identifying investment areas – accelerating problems with already
     tight housing markets in many urban areas across the globe.
         Questions of access and equity also matter for how mobility data becomes bound up in
     platforms and projections of how mobility should work in the future. For example, while
     visions for developing so-called EU “mobility data spaces” are framed as openly accessible
     platforms, de facto who registers to those spaces is limited, as technology knowledge and
     resources required to access such platforms are pretty high. This might perpetuate inequities
     as it consolidates the prominent role of large corporations and creates dependencies that may
     not necessarily be just or desirable.
         There are different technological solutions envisaged to bridge these different access
     inequalities. For example digital identity management may offer inclusion opportunities also
     to people without legally recognised identification [1]. At the same time, a drive towards
     digital identity verification is often under scrutiny for their surveillance potential. In terms of
     facilitating access to data, debates hone in on interoperability standards or so-called mobility
     data marketplaces.
         Privacy remains a significant value. Privacy and how its protection is interpreted requires
     critical evaluation. Issues that arise are those linked to reproducing prevailing power
     inequalities. For example, in debates on who ought to access and share what kinds of mobility
     data, customer data is often excluded as too sensitive. In effect, this means that this data
     stays with those who can harvest it. It also means that those with access to more detailed
     customer data have a competitive advantage over others as “innovative” mobility platforms
     grow. While it remains unclear how to counter this type of development, it is important to
     re-emphasise that debates about a multiplicity of principles – with privacy being one – have
     to continue to ensure that mobility research does not consolidate undesirable social patterns.
         At the same time, innovations in the field are also shaking up who the relevant players
     are. Some startups – like, for example, Citymapper – might perform better at facilitating
     mobility for their subscribers than the transport operators themselves. This eventually also
     gave them a stake in the mobility debates, even though their practices might not fall under
     the same regulatory frameworks as public service providers. This is not to say that such
     changes are necessarily ethically suspect – various business models are emerging, some of
     which sincerely have social and ecological sustainability at their heart. Examples here might
     be the establishment of data trusts in some Canadian cities that conceptualise mobility
     data as a public good. Similarly, the ideals of Gaya X at the EU level are pointing us to a
     rethinking of priorities. Still, a prevailing pattern is strong incentives to cut corners to stay
     competitive.
     References
     1    McKinsey Global Institute. Digital identification: A key to inclusive growth, 2019. https:
          //www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/digita
          l-identification-a-key-to-inclusive-growth.
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                   55


4.5     Mobility Data Analysis Ethics beyond humans only: Tracking
        animals and moral agency
WG scribe and other members: Alessandra Raffaetà, Bettina Berendt, Maria Luisa Damiani,
Stan Matwin, Chiara Renso, Geoffrey Rockwell
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Chiara Renso, Bettina Berendt, Stan Matwin


In this group, we considered issues around the dignity and rights of non-humans when it
comes to location data. We track, for example, land animals (individuals and herds) and
fish, for all sorts of reasons. The location data can be used to study them or to hunt/fish
them. This raises a number of ethical questions.
Rights from dignity. Animals with dignity implies the existence of rights for such animals.
For example, pets are considered by many to have dignity, so there are laws that punish their
mistreatment or abandonment. We can say that rights are proportional to dignity: more
dignity, more rights. It is also a matter of relationships. You are tied to your cat or dog so
you recognize that they have some rights.
Rights from suffering. The philosopher Peter Singer [1, 2] states that all beings capable of
suffering have to be worthy of equal consideration and that giving lesser consideration to
beings based on their species is no more justified than discrimination based on skin colour.
He argues that animals’ rights should be based on their capacity to feel pain more than
on their intelligence. Animals can suffer so they should have rights, hence they should be
protected.
What about fish? We do not consider fish as individuals but as species. Our attitude is to
take care of the species’ survival in order to maintain the ecosystem. We have an utilitarian
approach with respect to fish. We want to avoid over-exploitation because this can provoke
loss of work (for the fishers) or loss of food for some populations. In this context, domain
experts like ecologists are useful to establish policies for sustainable ecosystems; such policies
are utilitarian rather than tied to the deontological notion of dignity.
What about insects? We usually kill mosquitoes, and in agricultural ethics it is argued
that individual insects do not have a “right to life.” 7 Animal ethics depend on culture and
religion. Let us think about Buddhists or Jains – they try to do no harm to any animal.

Issues concerning research and animals
We also discussed issues around the ethics of research and animals.
Tracking animals. We track animals to understand their behaviour; is that ethical or not?
We use datasets reporting the movements of animals assuming that they do not have any
privacy/ethical concerns. Is it really true? Lennox et al. [3] highlight the risks associated with
animal tracking. In fact, bad actors, such as poachers or also photographers, could intercept
animals directly using tracking hardware or indirectly from research results, databases and
maps that provide the positions of vulnerable animals, and they could chase or simply disturb
them. Thus, uncontrolled access to such location data may ultimately compromise the
welfare of wild animals and the recovery of species. In [3] some techniques are discussed to
protect animal data from misuse, such as data blurring, data aggregation, and data hiding.


7
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insects_in_ethics




                                                                                                     22022
56   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


     However, it is worth noticing that anonymization approaches used with human data are less
     useful in this context because the identity of an individual animal is rarely important. A
     good trade-off to delivering research data could be providing time-varying density location
     data extracted from trajectories. In this way, the whole trajectories are not shared and they
     are protected.
     Bridging movement ecology and human mobility. Movement ecology is a relatively new
     discipline in the field of ecology that studies the spatio-temporal patterns and processes at
     the basis of animal movement [4] . While data and analytical methods are similar between
     movement ecology and human mobility, there is surprisingly little interdisciplinary awareness
     of these similarities. Developing new methods to integrate human mobility data (e.g. road
     traffic or human recreational activities) in the study of movement ecology would crucially
     improve the ecologists’ understanding of the tight relationship between animal movement
     and human activities, as for example to unveil the effect of COVID-19 human lockdowns on
     animal movement and behavior. The vision of an integrated science of movement bridging
     the two research fields is however hampered by the limited availability of open data on human
     mobility.
     Sustainability of research. As a more general issue, we need to reflect on what research
     looks like, how it is conducted, and also what its impacts on the environment are. To
     what extent should we consider not only humans and animals, but also ecosystems and the
     planet as a whole as moral agents (or patients)? It is important to consider alternative or
     hybrid formats of conferences that are more inclusive and ultimately more sustainable. In
     fact, having virtual conferences can allow researchers who are excluded for geographical and
     financial reasons from participating and at the same time the carbon footprint is reduced [5].
     References
      1 Peter Singer. Animal Liberation. Harper Collins, 1975.
      2 Peter Singer. In Defence of Animals: The Second Wave. Blackwell, 1985.
      3 Robert J Lennox et al. A Novel Framework to Protect Animal Data in a World of
          Ecosurveillance. BioScience, 70(6):468–476, 2020.
      4 Federico Ossi, Fatima Hachem, Francesca Cagnacci, Urska Demsar, and Maria Luisa Dami-
          ani, editors. HANIMOB@SIGSPATIAL 2021: Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGSPATIAL
          International Workshop on Animal Movement Ecology and Human Mobility, Beijing, China,
          2 November 2021. ACM, 2021.
      5 Chelsea Miya, Oliver Rossier, and Geoffrey Rockwell. Right Research: Modelling Sustainable
          Research Practices in the Anthropocene. OpenBook, 2021.



      5     Online Interactions in a COVID-19-era Dagstuhl Seminar: Design,
            Experiences, and Reflections
     Bettina Berendt (TU Berlin, DE)
          License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Chiara Renso, Bettina Berendt, Stan Matwin


     This three-day Dagstuhl Seminar took place in January 2022, which for many participants was
     month 23 of a string of more or less harsh COVID-19 lockdowns and home-office conferences.
     The seminar had originally been planned as an on-site and then as a hybrid workshop. Given
     the skyrocketing COVID-19 infection counts throughout the world and the suddenly quickly
     increasing number of participants who were forced to or chose to participate online, we
     decided, in the week before the seminar, to hold it fully online. We were quite concerned
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                   57


about this decision, given the stark contrast between many participants’ fond memories of
the interactivity of pre-COVID Dagstuhl Seminars and the growing Zoom fatigue that we
had been witnessing in ourselves and in our colleagues. We therefore contemplated what we
could do to make the most of our three days together.
    We (the organisers) were happy about the results of our strategy, and we received very
positive feedback from several participants. Of course, our choices could not fully reproduce
the experience of an on-site Dagstuhl Seminar. However, we believe that online and hybrid
meetings have many advantages and will be an important part of how we all will be working
in the future. Therefore, in this section, we want to share our experiences and observations.
We hope that others can profit from them.



5.1     What do we consider “success”?
There are many possible measures of a Dagstuhl Seminar’s success. Based on our personal
experience, we especially hoped for (a) academic output (especially of the type(s) aspired to by
the participants of the seminar), (b) a pleasant working atmosphere: interactive, inclusive and
with the right balance of focussed academic exchange, loose brainstorming, and everything
in between, (c) meeting new colleagues or interacting with known colleagues in new ways, so
as to enter into meaningful conversations (which often begin as loose brainstormings, often
about personal matters), and (d) retention of participants over the course of the seminar.
    We believe that we have met goal (a) (with, for example, an op-ed in The Conversation
[1] about seminar topics published two weeks after the seminar’s end; other activities are
ongoing). This is related to the self-reported goal of a majority of participants at the
beginning of the seminar (“an extended paper abstract”). All participants who gave us
feedback expressed (b), and this is in line with our (the organisers’) own impressions. We
did not ask participants about (c) but can confirm this to be true for ourselves.
    With regard to (d), most participants attended the seminar all day, which we found
remarkable given our observations that project meetings and workshops tended to become
shorter over the course of the pandemic. Some participants (especially senior ones) had
to leave the seminar repeatedly for other duties, and we observed how hard it was for
participants in substantially different time zones to participate in all sessions. However,
due to the informal organisation this did not present serious problems, and in fact some
participants who were not able to participate throughout still managed to be central for their
working group’s progress and outputs, even if in a partly asynchronous way. We are also
especially impressed by and grateful to those participants from +7 hours to -8 hours time
zones who participated in all sessions. So in sum, we believe we were reasonably successful
along this criterion. Since we do not have statistics about participant retention in other
online formats, it is even possible that comparatively speaking, we were very successful.



5.2     What did we do, and what did we learn from it?
We believe that four elements of interaction design and participation choices were key.

5.2.1   Zoom + Gathertown + jointly edited documents
A specific combination of two different types of videoconferencing software, in our case Zoom
and Gathertown, proved very helpful for engagement. Our hypothesis had been that Zoom
fatigue is not only a physiological effect and the lack of the full breadth of “real” interaction,
but also very much a consequence of the types of interaction favoured by Zoom (or similar

                                                                                                     22022
58   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


     VC systems that are essentially generalisations of bilateral video telephony): a meeting at
     a specific time in which there is one speaker at a time. Zoom breakout rooms allow for
     a restructuring of a meeting into smaller meetings, but again they create public fora for
     well-defined groups with set start and end times. Parallel conversation threads are possible
     (in private chats), but usually only with one other participant at a time, and they always
     carry a certain feeling of clandestine conversation. So in sum, Zoom appeared to us to be
     an excellent tool for presentations, for goal-oriented discussions in “work mode” (i.e. under
     strict time settings), and suitable for the informal interactions needed to get to know people
     (or get to know them better) at most in small groups in which trust is established through
     a common goal or between people who already know each other well. Importantly, group
     membership and partaking in a conversation are binary choices, marked by entries and exits
     that are rendered very visible by the software.
         Some of us had attended work meetings in Gathertown before. Gathertown allows for
     a categorically different type of being in a group and partaking in a conversation. First,
     Gathertown employs a spatial metaphor: groups congregate in locations, and one can see
     a group (as a set of avatars, rather than a list of names as in Zoom) and move there (and
     be watched moving by those in the group and others) rather than be “teleported” as in
     Zoom. Membership is gradual: the closer one gets to another person, the better one sees
     them (and is seen by them), and the better one hears them (and is heard). By positioning
     one’s avatar at the “outskirts” of a group, one can signal a certain looseness of belonging,
     and if one does this, does not take part actively in the conversation, and then moves on, it
     feels a lot less abrupt and impolite than dropping out of a Zoom breakout room. In addition,
     Gathtertown’s Minecraft-like environment may particularly appeal to people who enjoy video
     games, but also for others it offers gratuitous (but still potentially effective) signals of shared
     environment luxury: the cute watercooler, the plants, the sofa, rather than only the often
     bleak and distorted camera view of somebody else’s home, office, or virtual background. We
     considered these elements key enablers of the pleasant and informal and fluid conversations
     that are so generative of creative exchanges with (hitherto) strangers in physical Dagstuhl
     meetings. We also considered the spatial and motion-based interaction of Gathertown to be
     particularly suited to our topic of mobility data mining.
         We were privileged to have a colleague who is an expert of Gathertown designs and was
     enthusiastic to help us: we are incredibly grateful to Adem Kikaj of KU Leuven – his work
     has been a major factor in making this Dagstuhl Seminar a success! We are also grateful
     to people from whom we learned interaction techniques (in former Dagstuhl Seminars as
     well as in the planning of the current one). We designed an action model for the seminar
     and a spatial manifestation of this action model (with combinations of frontal presentations,
     fishbowl interaction, posters that people would be able to come back to to remember other
     participants’ introductions of themselves and have bilateral or small-group discussions, etc.).
     In line with the real Dagstuhl experience, we also designed a lobby (with small seating
     groups, implemented as Gathertown private spaces, to mimick the availability of various
     meeting rooms in Dagstuhl castle) and a dining hall. We also planned a sports room for
     joint gymnastics exercises, a feature one of us had seen and appreciated as an activity during
     breaks in a different conference, and a nod to Dagstuhl’s sports equipments/rooms. Adem
     built this world for us and enabled us to apply the finishing touches (which would only be
     possible during the seminar and/or live) ourselves.
         Another core element in the media mix were jointly editable documents and folders. We
     used Google docs/folders for the landing page, the participant-to-working-group assignment,
     shared resources such as participant self-descriptions and tutorial slides, and working group
     results (each working group had one folder that they were free to fill).
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                59




   Figure 1 Gathertown: entrance area (map view).


    The services themselves of course come with their advantages and disadvantages. We
chose two services that are widely known and easy to use (Zoom and Googledocs) and one
that, as far as we know, is the only one to provide a certain type of interaction (Gathertown).
Familiarity is, in our experience, important, but it does raise questions with regard to
providers and their (e.g. data protection) policies. Future designs could prioritise other
features more (such as open source or provider characteristics).

5.2.2   Less is more
As explained above, the Gathertown world was quite elaborate and beautifully supportive of
different types of planned interactions. In order not to overwhelm participants, we however
decided to do the first day fully in Zoom and with Googledocs (for familiarity) and gave
participants a first tour of the Gathertown world only during the “reception”, an extra one-
hour slot after the close of the official “work” programme. Many (but not all) participants
accepted this “invitation”, and we did our best to make this a tour, picking people up at the
entrance (and returning to meet individual latecomers), showing them around, explaining
the functionalities, etc. Observing their interactions, we (the organisers) quickly decided
to use Gathertown for the breaks only and keep the “work” programme in Zoom, and we
enforced neither the use of all rooms in the Gathertown world (for example, we supplanted
the originally planned poster-room by a simple folder on Googledocs) nor of all functionalities
(such as shared whiteboards, private spaces, and the fishbowl). We also dropped the idea of
our gymnastics offer, instead only making it known that we’d be in the Gathertown for the
“morning coffee” (half an hour before the official start every day), the two coffee breaks and
the lunch break, and the “reception”. The “morning coffee” break was taken over by one of




                                                                                                  22022
60   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical




          Figure 2 Gathertown: room designed for supporting fishbowl discussions (partial view).


     us who likes getting up early, and the “reception” by one who tends to work later during the
     day. In sum, an even simpler Gathertown world would have sufficed (and may have required
     less bandwith).8




          Figure 3 “Work” and “break”.

         We believe that this adaptivity to the actual interactions was important and prevented a
     sense of over-structuring that we had observed in earlier online events we had taken part in,
     a structuring which may contribute to work productivity but can feel stifling at times.
         There was one element that we added (while all other adaptations were removals): one
     participant reminded us of the Dagstuhl tradition of randomising (but then enforcing) seating
     at meals. We implemented this with a simple hack that illustrates that complex Gathertown


     8
         We learned after the seminar that a previous Dagstuhl collaborator created a virtual replica of Dagstuhl
         itself. While we were intrigued by this and probably would have used it had we known about it, based on
         our experiences, we believe it is not functionally necessary and may even prove somewhat overwhelming.
         This question should be explored in future work.
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                              61


spaces can also be pragmatically adapted under time pressure: we put different ready-made
objects (a plant, a guitar, . . . ) next to the different tables, created a random assignment of
participants to tables, wrote this on the landing page, and showed it just before he lunch
break, asking people to go to their assigned table. These arrangements proved to not work as
deterministically as in the physical Dagstuhl, but they did create the same effect: unexpected
gatherings and chitchat over lunch with participants one had not known before.
    These little tricks encouraged also timid people to interact more with other participants
they did not know before. It was not as effective as in physical Dagstuhl, since some people
preferred to take a real break from the online event and also had to prepare their food, but a
start.
    To future organisers who consider using meeting software that is not widely known, we
recommend trying out an interaction space such as Gathertown intensively. We did this in a
“dress rehearsal” with two organisers and two participants in the week before the seminar, but
at the time, we did not anticipate the dining seating arrangements. It was only during the
breaks that we realised we had positioned the “tables” too close to each other relative to the
visibility/audibility radius in Gathertown, such that conversations at different tables mixed
in a confusing manner, and we had to artificially “move into the corner behind the table” to
avoid disturbing the neighbouring table. This was amusing rather than really annoying, but
we would certainly improve this design element next time.
    As a consequence, there was one great simplification: Conceptually, there was one space
for “work” (Zoom and shared documents) and one space for “breaks” (Gathertown). Within
the “breaks” space, only the two rooms near the entrance (dining hall and lobby) were
actually used, but this may have been a consequence of the number of users and the space
being sufficient for them. The two organisers who were responsible for “hosting the breaks”
complemented this conceptual separation by a technical one, running the “work” space on
one computer and the “breaks” space on a different one. This improved audio and video
quality considerably and made it easier to mentally control and survey the spaces. One
participant remarked on this clean separation by relating their experiences from another
online event, which employed a very elaborate Gathertown world with dedicated spaces for
every activity. They had found that too complicated and overwhelming and welcomed our
simplicity.

5.2.3      Structure + flexibility
We combined a simple outer structure with guidance on the one hand with freedom in
the details of how working groups were to function. The outer structure consisted of (i) a
consistent timetable for all three days, (ii) a rough specification of the functions and expected
outcomes of each half-day slot, (iii) a self-presentation round in which each participant was
asked to fill in the same Powerpoint slide consisting of three questions to present themselves,
with slides sent to the organisers ahead of the seminar,9 (iv) a tutorial round in which three
relevant angles on the seminar topic were introduced by experts in the respective fields
(see Section 3), (v) working-group formation and reporting rounds in the plenum, and (vi)
working-group sessions (see Section 4).


9
    The slide asked for: name, affiliation, “my question” (that I would like to see answered at the seminar),
    “expected seminar output” (4 choices + free-form), and “an image of an object that symbolizes your
    interest, motivation, curiosity, doubts, ... regarding this seminar”. All templates that we believe could
    be helpful for future seminars can be downloaded at http://www.master-project-h2020.eu/dagstu
    hl-materials/.




                                                                                                                22022
62   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


         Media use was kept simple: one landing page (a Googledoc that was adapted during the
     course of the seminar) which pointed to all other resources, one Zoom main room which was
     always open and either in use by at least one person or equipped with a slide that indicated
     the current status (such as “lunch break”), and the Gathertown world which was also always
     open. A first version of working-group topics was created by the organisers clustering
     participants’ answers to a question about the personal goal for the seminar (included in the
     self-presentation slide), but then modified in an open group discussion. This as well as the
     assignment of people to working groups used a jointly edited spreadsheet.10 Sessions for
     five working groups were planned adaptively to also take into account when participants in
     American time zones would be able to attend (better). The working groups were numbered
     and met in Zoom breakout rooms of the same number, which were only opened during
     the times previewed in the time plan. Participants were encouraged to also meet with
     their working groups or with others outside these slots, and the use of Gathertown for such
     meetings was explained. This last option was however, as far as we know, not used much,
     since the “break” times were needed for relaxation, and remaining online for socialising after
     a full day of online work was not really an option for most participants.
         One organiser monitored the Zoom main room throughout and another one did so in the
     Gathertown world. During working-group sessions, this presence was a secondary activity
     from a different computer. This ensured that participants who arrived at an unusual time
     (e.g. due to other commitments or time zones) were never “alone” and could always be briefly
     informed of current activities and locations.
         Working groups were free to choose any type of media they wanted and any type of
     reporting, and other structures (such as the dining seating arrangements) were not enforced.
     This flexibility was used and appreciated by participants.
         Visual consistency was ensured by a graphics expert’s providing slide templates for
     self-presentation and organiser-provided slides: we are very grateful to Beatrice Rapisarda
     of ISTI/CNR, who also created the “group photograph” included at the beginning of this
     report from a collection of screenshots we had taken throughout the seminar.

     5.2.4       “I am not here”
     Many of us had experienced, over the course of the pandemic, a “densification” of work:
     an increasing number of work meetings from the home office, with meetings often taking
     longer than previously and positioned back-to-back. Attendance at conferences, which now
     involved no physical travel, was regularly disturbed by the assumption of colleagues that all
     the usual work could be done in parallel. Many senior colleagues we spoke to concluded that
     at some point, they just stopped going to conferences because it was “too much” or “not
     worth it”. We believe that this overload contributed at least as much to Zoom fatigue as the
     physiological factors and the restricted interaction mentioned above.
         Without having coordinated this in advance, we found that (at least) two of the organisers
     and one other participant had independently decided to break this pattern for this seminar.
     They had told their colleagues and superiors that they would be “at” Dagstuhl and not


     10
          Interestingly, the spreadsheet was chosen by participants over an initially planned process involving
          spatial movement that one of us had observed as an efficient group formation process in earlier Dagstuhl
          Seminars. We had envisaged a replication of this technique in the Gathertown spaces, but after one
          participant proposed the spreadsheet, everybody immediately agreed that this would be the best
          method. It supported the same functionalities: simultaneous and mutually influencing self-assignemnt
          and observation of other participants’ choices.
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                                    63


available during the three days of the seminar, and severely restricted their email monitoring
and processing. One participant from the Americas had even put themselves into the Dagstuhl
time zone, ensuring support from their family for this “absence”. While the three days were
still physiologically very taxing, all three of us agreed that this had been very sensible choices,
needed for sustainable participation in future seminars, conferences, etc.



5.3    A sense of place in a hybrid world – and other parallels between the
       medium and the message
One element stands out from these observations, and it echoes the seminar’s themes. Media
use and interactions provided a “sense of place” that helped structure both (a) a prima
facie non-spatial online world and (b) the hybrid nature of contemporary work. The unique
and permanent “entrance points” (the Web-based landing page, the main Zoom room, the
Gathertown world) provided stability and simplicity. The clear association of Zoom with
“work” and Gathertown with “breaks” (or, in some cases, also corridor talk in parallel to the
official working group meetings) helped participants to focus respectively relax. Gathertown’s
fluid interaction supported informal chats. Once inside a space (in particular in the breakout
rooms), individuals and groups had all the freedom of acting there. The additional choice
made by some participants to effectively “remove” themselves from their main place of work,
in order to be fully at the seminar place, proved beneficial.
    The sense of place echoes the mobility part of the seminar’s themes, Mobility data analysis:
from technical to ethical. We believe that the other key elements were also reflected: the
technical obviously in the explorations of online-media design and uses, and the ethical through
our general approach to research design, which we base on an ethics of care. This involves
the recognition of relationships between people as at least as fundamental as autonomy and a
desire to create, sustain and honour such relationships in research design. This meta-notion
of care and ethics, first explored by the author of this section – together with two participants
of this Dagstuhl Seminar – in [2], informed the choices described in the present section.
In this sense, the present section is not only an exploration of different videoconferencing
systems, but also a complement to the section author’s work as the MASTER project’s
Independent Ethics Advisor.
References
 1 Geoffrey Rockwell, Bettina Berendt, Florence M. Chee, Jeanna Matthews, Sébastien Gambs,
     and Chiara Renso. Ottawa’s use of our location data raises big surveillance and privacy
     concerns. The Conversation, 2022, Jan 27. https://theconversation.com/ottawas-use
    -of-our-location-data-raises-big-surveillance-and-privacy-concerns-175316.
 2 Todd Suomela, Florence Chee, Bettina Berendt, and Geoffrey Rockwell. Applying an ethics
     of care to internet research: Gamergate and digital humanities. Digital Studies/le Champ
     Numérique, 9(1), 2019. http://doi.org/10.16995/dscn.302.




                                                                                                      22022
64   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


      6     Conclusions
     Chiara Renso, Bettina Berendt and Stan Matwin
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Chiara Renso, Bettina Berendt, Stan Matwin


     We believe that this seminar represents a successful first step in building a community
     of scientists around the mobility data ethics theme. The five topics that we identified
     and discussed in the Working groups are stepping stones from which the community can
     extrapolate new research topics. Indeed, at many points of our three-day journey, we realized
     that more research and reflections are needed to properly address these issues. For example,
     many discussions in the working groups revolved around drilling down into and challenging
     points that had been topics of the tutorials.
         We also saw, in the tutorials as well as the discussions and through the interest in our work
     that greeted us at The Conversation Canada and in reaction to the article we published there
     directly after the seminar [1], the extent to which the general public perceives the urgency
     and importance of the issues we discussed, and the extent to which they expect explanations,
     answers, and better technology from the research community. It is our responsibility and
     aim to continue to provide these.
         We would like to close with conclusions for future work on interaction design. After the
     second COVID-19 winter and with political choices worldwide geared towards making us
     “live with COVID”, all of us find ourselves in a transition to working routines that will likely
     involve more online interactions than in the past. Some of us believe that online meetings are
     the future, some of us believe that we should also invest more time and energy into creating
     successful hybrid meetings, which present additional challenges. Others are more cautious
     and long for a return to “normality”. Most believe in the need to find a new balance, such as
     obviating extensive travel for one-day meetings but travelling for longer meetings. (These
     discussions were also had at our Dagstuhl Seminar.)
         We believe in the virtues of online meetings, at the minimum because they promise
     more inclusiveness (e.g. of mobility-restricted or otherwise vulnerable people, individuals
     without access to travel funding, persons with care duties, etc.) and are environmentally
     more sustainable. We also agree that hybrid meetings are particularly challenging, in
     particular when it comes to forming working groups that involve both on-site and online
     participants. But through the experience of this seminar, we also understood better that
     even so-called “fully online” meetings are in fact hybrid – in the sense that every participant
     remains engulfed in their home-office and/or regular-place-of-work spatial spheres. Creating
     a “sense of place” that is psychologically, physiologically and socially sustainable, will be a
     necessary element of future meetings, whether they are “fully online”, “hybrid”, or “on-site”
     in standard terminology. The sometimes-used term “offline” may actually be a key element
     for disconnecting from an overload of simultaneous duties. The simple and often ad-hoc
     uses of existing technology towards these ends that we have described in this text may have
     worked well in this particular setting, and others will be needed for different settings. But
     we hope that our lessons learned can serve as an inspiration to others on this trajectory.



     Acknowledgements
     This work is supported by the MASTER project that has received funding from the European
     Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie-Slodowska Curie
     grant agreement N. 777695. Bettina Berendt thanks the German Federal Ministry of
     Education and Research (BMBF) – Nr. 16DII113f for funding for this seminar.
Bettina Berendt et al.                                                                             65


References
 1 Geoffrey Rockwell, Bettina Berendt, Florence M. Chee, Jeanna Matthews, Sébastien Gambs,
     and Chiara Renso. Ottawa’s use of our location data raises big surveillance and privacy
     concerns. The Conversation, 2022, Jan 27. https://theconversation.com/ottawas-use
    -of-our-location-data-raises-big-surveillance-and-privacy-concerns-175316.




                                                                                               22022
66   Dagstuhl Seminar 22022 – Mobility Data Mining: from Technical to Ethical


             Participants
       Darren Abramson                    Sébastien Gambs                 Francesca Pratesi
     Dalhousie University, CA          University of Montreal, CA       ISTI-CNR – Pisa, IT
      Christine Ahrend                    Ioannis Kontopoulos            Alessandra Raffaetà
     TU Berlin, DE                     Harokopio University –           University of Venice, IT
                                       Athens, GR
      Bettina Berendt                     Peter Kraus                     Chiara Renso
     TU Berlin, DE                     European Data Protection Board   ISTI-CNR – Pisa, IT
       Florence Chee                   – Brussels, BE                     Paula Reyero-Lobo
     Loyola University Chicago, US        Fen Lin                       The Open University –
                                       City University –                Milton Keynes, GB
       Thiery Chevallier
     Akka Technologies, FR             Hong Kong, HK                      Geoffrey Rockwell
                                          Jeanna Matthews               University of Alberta –
      Maria Luisa Damiani              Clarkson University – Potsdam,   Edmonton, CA
     University of Milan, IT           US
                                                                         Yannis Theodoridis
       Josep Domingo-Ferrer               Stan Matwin                   University of Piraeus, GR
     Universitat Rovira i Virgili –    Dalhousie University –
     Tarragona, ES                     Halifax, CA                        Konstantinos Tserpes
                                          Fran Meissner                 Harokopio University –
       José Antônio Fernandes de
                                       University of Twente, NL         Athens, GR
     Macedo
     Universidade Federal do Ceara –      Anna Monreale                  Karine Zeitouni
     Brazil, BR                        University of Pisa, IT           University of Versailles, FR
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 22031

Bringing Graph Databases and Network Visualization
Together
Karsten Klein∗1 , Juan F. Sequeda∗2 , Hsiang-Yun Wu∗3 , and
Da Yan∗4
1       Universität Konstanz, DE. karsten.klein@uni-konstanz.de
2       data.world – Austin, US. juan@data.world
3       FH – St. Pölten, AT. hsiang-yun.wu@fhstp.ac.at
4       The University of Alabama – Birmingham, US. yanda@uab.edu

        Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 22031 “Bringing
Graph Databases and Network Visualization Together”. Due to the ongoing restrictions caused
by the COVID-19 pandemic, this purely on-site seminar had a reduced number of participants.
Twenty-two researchers and practitioners from the Network Visualization and Graph Database
communities met to initiate collaborative work and exchange between the two communities. The
seminar served to establish a common understanding of the state of the art and the terminology in
both communities, and to connect participants to tackle joint research challenges. Survey talks on
the first days laid the foundations for subsequent plenary discussions and working groups. Further
lightining talks during the next days gave more detailed insight into specific research questions
and practical challenges. The contributions of the seminar include bringing the communities
together, the identification of the top areas of research interest, and the characterization of
research challenges and research questions. As an outcome, a position paper is planned, and
further collaborations and joint publications are on the way.
Seminar January 16–21, 2022 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/22031
2012 ACM Subject Classification Information systems → Data management systems; Human-
   centered computing; Human-centered computing → Visualization
Keywords and phrases graph databases, network visualization, visual analytics
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.12.1.67



    1    Executive Summary
Karsten Klein (Universität Konstanz, DE)
Juan F. Sequeda (data.world – Austin, US)
Hsiang-Yun Wu (FH – St. Pölten, AT)
Da Yan (The University of Alabama – Birmingham, US)
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Karsten Klein, Juan F. Sequeda, Hsiang-Yun Wu, and Da Yan


Network analytics through interactive network visualization has been essential in many re-
search and application areas, such as bioinformatics, biomedicine, cyber security, e-commerce,
social science, and software engineering. A network is often supported by graph databases
with advanced query engines and indexing techniques. Graph databases have substantial
contributions by academia and gained strong momentum in the industry, where the focus
is on scalable systems using graph query languages that require to be learned by users.


∗
    Editor / Organizer

            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Bringing Graph Databases and Network Visualization Together, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 12, Issue 1, pp. 67–82
Editors: Karsten Klein, Juan F. Sequeda, Hsiang-Yun Wu, and Da Yan
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
68   22031 – Bringing Graph Databases and Network Visualization Together


     Even though the Graph Database and Network Visualization communities study the same
     object, a graph/network, albeit from different perspectives, they do not communicate with
     each other. By bringing both communities together, we aimed to initiate and foster mutual
     communication and joint work. The goal of this seminar was to initiate collaborative efforts,
     to increase the mutual awareness of each others’ existing concepts and technologies, and to
     identify new and complementary research challenges that lead to novel scientific outcomes.
     We have developed the schedule for the seminar based on our experience from previous
     successful Dagstuhl Seminars with a balance between prepared talks, plenary discussions,
     and breakout groups for less structured discussions focused on a selection of highly relevant
     topics.
         The organizers envisioned several core topics for discussion at the Dagstuhl Seminar, as
     outlined in the proposal:
         Integration of fundamental concepts used in the two communities
         Visual scalability and computational performance
         Visual graph query paradigm
         Responsive visualization of graph query results
         (Qualitative) Evaluation
         Domain-oriented applications

        During the plenary discussions on the first day, the participants identified several more
     specific topics for the work in separate working groups, which lead to the following working
     group titles:
        Evaluation and Usefulness
        Understanding gaps and opportunities between Graph Databases and Network Visualiza-
        tion
        Visual querying and result visualization

         Our aim was to have focused discussions on these topics in which we would be able to
     make significant progress during the seminar, in order to shape a position paper and to lay
     the foundations for subsequent collaborations. The discussions showed that there indeed
     is the need for a closer exchange between the communities in order to improve the mutual
     understanding and practical solutions, but also to identify research questions that can be
     tackled jointly. They however also showed the great potential in this exchange and the large
     interest in both communities for joint work.
         We have organized the seminar during the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to various regulations
     and travel restrictions, only roughly half of the usual number of participants attended in
     person. The meeting was held purely on-site, with the exception of one participant connecting
     in via video conferencing. We thank Dagstuhl for equipping the seminar rooms with suitable
     infrastructure and for putting suitable health and safety regulations in place to create a
     smooth experience and safe environment for all participants.

     Acknowledgments
     We would like to thank all participants of the seminar for their contributions and lively
     discussions, and the scientific directorate of Dagstuhl for providing us with the opportunity
     to organize this seminar. Finally, the seminar would not have been possible without the
     amazing support by the staff of Dagstuhl.
Karsten Klein, Juan F. Sequeda, Hsiang-Yun Wu, and Da Yan                                                   69


 2      Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Karsten Klein, Juan F. Sequeda, Hsiang-Yun Wu, and Da Yan . . . . . . . . . . .                  67

Overview of Talks
     Lightning Talk on GraphPolaris Visual Graph Analytics System and Research
     Challenges
     Michael Behrisch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
     Visual Graph Query and Analysis for Tax Evasion Discovery
     Walter Didimo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
     Overview of Graph Query Language Part 1 – Foundations
     George Fletcher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   71
     Lightning Talk on Visualization and Query Optimization
     Pavel Klinov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    71
     Visualizing large graphs: a brief overview and some research experience
     Fabrizio Montecchiani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     71
     Lightning Talk: Case Study: yFiles layout improvements for Graph Database
     Visualizations
     Sebastian Müller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
     What do Knowledge Graphs, Data Catalogs and Network Visualization have to do
     with each other?
     Juan F. Sequeda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
     Lightning Talk on Neo4j Bloom
     Hannes Voigt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
     Overview of Graph Query Language Part 2 — Practice
     Hannes Voigt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
     Qualitative Evaluation: Opportunities and Pitfalls
     Tatiana von Landesberger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
     An Overview of Graph Analytics
     Da Yan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    74

Working groups
     Working Group 1: Evaluation and Usefulness
     Juan F. Sequeda, Walter Didimo, Nadezhda T. Doncheva, George Fletcher, Stephen
     G. Kobourov, Giuseppe Liotta, Catia Pesquita, and Tatiana von Landesberger . . .              74
     Working Group 2: Understanding Gaps and Opportunities Between Graph Data-
     bases and Network Visualisation
     Karsten Klein, Henry Ehlers, Oliver Kohlbacher, Sebastian Müller, Falk Schreiber,
     Hannes Voigt, and Markus Wallinger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
     Working Group 3: Visual Querying and Result Visualization
     Hsiang-Yun Wu, Da Yan, Michael Behrisch, Carsten Goerg, Katja Hose, Pavel
     Klinov, and Fabrizio Montecchiani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82



                                                                                                        22031
70   22031 – Bringing Graph Databases and Network Visualization Together


      3     Overview of Talks
     3.1    Lightning Talk on GraphPolaris Visual Graph Analytics System and
            Research Challenges
     Michael Behrisch (Utrecht University, NL & GraphPolaris.com Analytics Platform)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Michael Behrisch


     GraphPolaris is a no-code analytics platform for graph analysis. It enables non-data scientists
     to analyze large and complex datasets without the typically required query scripting and
     allows exposing the gathered analytical insights directly through effective visualizations. Our
     inductive exploration workflow engages the user into a visual data analysis dialog, in which
     an intuitive drag and drop user interface guides the construction of complex analytical queries
     visually and expressive visualizations give access to on-the-fly result interpretations, thus
     making graph databases and graph analytics accessible for a wide commercial and research
     audience.
         In this talk, I demonstrated, on the one hand, the current approach towards developing a
     visual graph analytics platform in GraphPolaris and, on the other hand, contrasted it with
     the current research challenges.



     3.2    Visual Graph Query and Analysis for Tax Evasion Discovery
     Walter Didimo (University of Perugia, IT)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Walter Didimo


     We briefly report on a 3-years collaboration with the Italian Revenue Agency, about the
     design of a decision support system for tax evasion discovery. The system combines network
     visualization techniques with graph databases and exploits some key ingredients: 1) An
     intuitive and powerful visual language that allows analysts to define suspicious patterns
     related to fraudulent schemes; the language also handles temporal information and does not
     require the knowledge of native GDBMS query languages. 2) A graph pattern matching
     engine, built on top of the Neo4J graph database, which efficiently retrieves and ranks
     subgraphs from a large network of taxpayers, based on the previously defined schemes. 3) An
     interactive environment which makes it possible to visualize the results returned by the graph
     pattern matching engine and to incrementally explore the network of taxpayers starting
     from them. Additionally, the system adopts artificial intelligence and information diffusion
     techniques to automatically assign each taxpayer a risk level based on both classical network
     centrality indices and on new centrality indices that estimate the level of involvement of a
     taxpayer in suspicious activities.
Karsten Klein, Juan F. Sequeda, Hsiang-Yun Wu, and Da Yan                                             71


3.3    Overview of Graph Query Language Part 1 – Foundations
George Fletcher (TU Eindhoven, NL)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © George Fletcher


We gave an overview of graph data models with particular attention to RDF and Property
Graphs. We then highlighted two basic ingredients used in the design of graph query
languages: subgraph pattern matching and path querying. In the first class the languages of
conjunctive queries and unions of conjunctive queries were formally defined and illustrated
with examples. In the second class reachability, label constrained reachability, and regular
path queries were defined and illustrated. We then defined and illustrated languages which
combine both ingredients: unions of conjunctions of regular path queries and the regular
queries. We concluded with an overview of the complexity of query evaluation and the
complexity of query containment for each language.



3.4    Lightning Talk on Visualization and Query Optimization
Pavel Klinov (Stardog – Arlington, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Pavel Klinov


The idea of the talk is that there might be an overlap between the graph visualization area and
the graph query optimization area. Both graph visualization tools and query optimizers often
require graph pre-processing, such as summarization, algorithms to figure out the structural
properties of the graph. Visual rendering algorithms require it to highlight the most salient
nodes and patterns in the graph while the optimizers use it to enable cardinality estimations
for generating efficient query plans. It remains to be seen whether similar summarization or
sampling algorithms can turn out useful for both kinds of tools.



3.5    Visualizing large graphs: a brief overview and some research
       experience
Fabrizio Montecchiani (University of Perugia, IT)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Fabrizio Montecchiani


Visualization is a very popular and central task in graph processing pipelines. When the
input is a large and complex network, computing an effective visualization is very challenging.
The main steps involved in the creation of large-scale graph visualizations are usually
simplification, layout, rendering, and interaction. We gave a brief overview of the methods
and techniques used to address each of these steps. Particular attention has been paid
to node-link layouts and to force-directed methods for computing such layouts. We also
presented a vertex-centric multilevel force-directed algorithm to compute node-link layouts
on a cloud computing platform.




                                                                                                  22031
72   22031 – Bringing Graph Databases and Network Visualization Together


     3.6    Lightning Talk: Case Study: yFiles layout improvements for Graph
            Database Visualizations
     Sebastian Müller (yWorks GmbH – Tübingen, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Sebastian Müller


     The presentation was about what improvements were made in the graph drawing library
     “yFiles” in response to requirements by real world users working with graph database
     visualizations. With the help of conceptually simple layout techniques, the usefulness of
     visualizations for graph database exploration purposes was improved dramatically. By
     incorporating information about different semantic types of nodes and edges in the diagram
     as stored in the graph database, the algorithms were able to improve the arrangement in the
     diagram. Also, as an additional improvement, certain patterns that frequently appear in
     query results were specifically highlighted in the diagram, matching the users’ expectation of
     the query results. For this, paths, stars, chains, and parallel structures were detected and
     treated especially by the layout algorithm. These improvements are available for various
     common layout algorithm implementations in yFiles.



     3.7    What do Knowledge Graphs, Data Catalogs and Network
            Visualization have to do with each other?
     Juan F. Sequeda (data.world – Austin, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Juan F. Sequeda


     Data catalogs are metadata and data management systems that inventory and organize data
     within an organization. Knowledge Graphs are a means of integrating data and knowledge
     at scale where concepts and relationships of a domain are manifested in the form of a graph.
     Thus a data catalog can be powered by a knowledge graph.
         A question is how can Network Visualizations help accomplish common tasks in a data
     catalog such as business glossary definition, ontology engineering, impact analysis, root cause
     analysis, sensitive data impact. In this presentation, I highlight challenges and opportunities
     when attempting to integrate Network Visualization with a data catalog powered by a
     knowledge graph.



     3.8    Lightning Talk on Neo4j Bloom
     Hannes Voigt (Neo4j – Leipzig, DE)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Hannes Voigt


     We gave a brief ad-hoc presentation/demo of Neo4j Bloom, a domain-agnostic, low-code,
     ad-hoc graph visualization and exploration tool for data experts, data scientists, and data
     analysts.
Karsten Klein, Juan F. Sequeda, Hsiang-Yun Wu, and Da Yan                                               73


3.9     Overview of Graph Query Language Part 2 — Practice
Hannes Voigt (Neo4j – Leipzig, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Hannes Voigt


We gave an overview of three graph query languages used in practice: SPARQL, Cypher,
and GQL. The talk illustrated how the basic ingredients for graph query language discussed
in Part 1 manifest in these graph query languages. This demonstrated that these languages –
even if designed for different data models – are very similar in their capabilities. Still, we
pointed out corners in which the languages differ slightly in their capabilities or put different
emphases. Specifically for property graph query languages, we highlighted how they make
use of the visual benefits of the ascii-art approach used in the graph pattern sublanguage
and how it contributes to the adoption of these languages.



3.10      Qualitative Evaluation: Opportunities and Pitfalls
Tatiana von Landesberger (Universität Köln, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Tatiana von Landesberger


This talk introduces evaluation studies in graph visualization. It focuses on qualitative
evaluation with users. Evaluation studies with users are important when evaluating real value
of application-motivated visualizations such as medicine, biology, finance. The visualizations
need to be of high quality both from perceptual side and need to fit to the user’s task and
experience. Based on author’s experience, and related literature in conducting evaluations of
visualizations for real applications, the talk presents main steps, guidelines and pitfalls in
conducting the studies. The talk discusses how the choice of tasks influence the evaluation,
the pros/cons of methodological choices such as think-aloud protocols, which measures should
be used for the evaluation, what is the value of free feedback for the evaluation. Finally, the
talk presents how pitfalls from ill-posed evaluation questions can be turned into interesting
research questions.
References
 1 Archambault, Daniel, Helen Purchase, and Tobias Hoßfeld. “Evaluation in the Crowd.”
     Crowdsourcing and Human-Centered Experiments: Dagstuhl Seminar 15481. Vol. 10264.
     Springer, 2015.
 2 Purchase, Helen C. Experimental human-computer interaction: a practical guide with visual
     examples. Cambridge University Press, 2012.
 3 Isenberg, Tobias, et al. “A systematic review on the practice of evaluating visualization.”
     IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 19.12 (2013): 2818-2827.
 4 Sedlmair, Michael, Miriah Meyer, and Tamara Munzner. “Design study methodology:
     Reflections from the trenches and the stacks.” IEEE transactions on visualization and
     computer graphics 18.12 (2012): 2431-2440.
 5 Ballweg, Kathrin, et al. “Visual Similarity Perception of Directed Acyclic Graphs: A Study
     on Influencing Factors and Similarity Judgment Strategies.” J. Graph Algorithms Appl. 22.3
     (2018): 519-553.
 6 Kochtchi, Artjom, T. von Landesberger, and Chris Biemann. “Networks of Names: Visual
     Exploration and Semi-Automatic Tagging of Social Networks from Newspaper Articles.”
     Computer Graphics Forum. Vol. 33. No. 3. 2014.



                                                                                                    22031
74   22031 – Bringing Graph Databases and Network Visualization Together


     3.11      An Overview of Graph Analytics
     Da Yan (The University of Alabama – Birmingham, US)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Da Yan
     Main reference Da Yan, Guimu Guo, Md Mashiur Rahman Chowdhury, M. Tamer Özsu, Wei-Shinn Ku, John C. S.
                    Lui: “G-thinker: A Distributed Framework for Mining Subgraphs in a Big Graph”, in Proc. of the
                    36th IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering, ICDE 2020, Dallas, TX, USA, April 20-24,
                    2020, pp. 1369–1380, IEEE, 2020.
               URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE48307.2020.00122


     A typical data analytics workflow includes (1) data retrieval, which falls in the domain of
     Data Engineering for data maintenance and querying; and (2) data analytics, which falls
     in the domain of Data Analytics. This is of no exception when we consider graph data,
     where the relevant graph data can be first retrieved from a graph database using query
     languages such as SPARQL, Neo4j Cypher, and GQL; the obtained graph can then be
     analyzed using methods in data mining and knowledge discovery, machine learning, and data
     visualization. Oftentimes, such retrieval and analytics algorithms can be programmed using
     a graph-parallel programming framework where users only need to specify some important
     user-defined functions based on application needs, rather than learning and using existing
     query languages and analytics libraries.
         This talk introduces two such programming framework paradigms: (1) think like a vertex
     (TLAV) which aims to output a value for each vertex, as presented by Google’s Pregel;
     and (2) think like a task (TLAT) for mining subgraphs, as presented by G-thinker, which
     allows compute-intensive analytics to scale performance with the number of CPU cores in
     contrast to existing data-intensive analytics tools. This talk also reviews a list of graph
     analytics tasks: (T1) Graph Traversal for Node Labeling, (T2) Random Walks for Node
     Scoring/Embedding, (T3) Graph Neural Networks, (T4) Frequent Subgraph Mining, (T5)
     Dense Subgraph Mining, and (T6) Subgraph Matching. Among them, (T1)-(T3) can be
     addressed by TLAV systems, while (T4)-(T6) can be efficiently addressed by TLAT systems
     such as G-thinker and PrefixFPM both published in ICDE 2020.



      4      Working groups
     4.1     Working Group 1: Evaluation and Usefulness
     Juan F. Sequeda (data.world – Austin, US), Walter Didimo (University of Perugia, IT),
     Nadezhda T. Doncheva (University of Copenhagen, DK), George Fletcher (TU Eindhoven,
     NL), Stephen G. Kobourov (University of Arizona – Tucson, US), Giuseppe Liotta (University
     of Perugia, IT), Catia Pesquita (University of Lisbon, PT), and Tatiana von Landesberger
     (Universität Köln, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Juan F. Sequeda, Walter Didimo, Nadezhda T. Doncheva, George Fletcher, Stephen G.
                      Kobourov, Giuseppe Liotta, Catia Pesquita, and Tatiana von Landesberger


     This group discussed evaluation and the notion of usefulness of network visualizations. We
     observe a socio-technical phenomenon when it comes to the wow factor vs usefulness of
     network visualizations. Our discussions led us to the following realizations:
        We need to understand the diversity of roles around the work of network data management
        and network visualization.
Karsten Klein, Juan F. Sequeda, Hsiang-Yun Wu, and Da Yan                                               75


   Bridging the gap between network visualization and graph database communities should
   be a win-win for both communities. Network visualization should support graph databases.
   Graph databases should support network visualization
   It is important to study how much network visualization can help in each role.
   There are specific interactions between the roles, which are not fully understood. How
   can network visualization help for those interactions?
   The network visualization space needs to be more fully studied, in the light of evaluation
   and usefulness.

   The main topics we discussed were the following:
What is special about graphs/networks? Graphs are “natural” as they often capture the
underlying model/problem well: If you need to model objects and relationships between
them. A graph captures this with vertices and edges. Furthermore, a node-link diagram is a
“natural” representation of a graph because the objects are the nodes, the relationships are the
edges/links. There are many variations (edges can be directed/undirected, nodes can have
attributes). The takeaway is that the data model, the visualization, and the interaction and
meta-modeling paradigms are all the same: a graph. This is what makes graphs/networks
special.
On the varieties of “Usefulness”. What does it mean for a network visualization to be
useful? Let’s start with an example for the use case of ontology matching in life science. In
the absence of context, we might infer that two references to the term “Gum” might match
with high confidence. However, given the context of a dental ontology (network) visualization,
we might note that one reference is in the context of the human mouth while the other is in
the context of a type of candy, arising during different tasks by different researchers. This
greatly lowers the subject matter expert’s confidence in the match. This simple example
illustrates that the usefulness of visualizations is very multifaceted.
    We discussed and itemized several of these facets: the phases of usefulness and the lifecycle
of network visualization (from engagement to final outcome); each of access for experts
versus non-experts; aesthetics and enjoyability of network visualizations; trustworthiness
and interpretability; small versus big data; loose versus highly structured data; data versus
metadata; human context and human factors (e.g., profession); cost of interaction.
Roles in graph data and visualization. The final major topic discussed was that of roles
around network data work. We identified some major roles, as a starting point to studying
their interaction and how these interactions can be better supported by network visualization
solutions.

   Domain Practitioner: Has expertise in a specific domain and has a question that needs
   to be answered. This role is the ultimate motivator (has the $), e.g., Doctor, CEO,
   Journalist.
   Analyst: Translates the question from the domain to the other roles. Probably the
   role responsible to provide the answer (or some means to get the answer such as data,
   visualization, etc) to the Domain Practitioner, e.g., Business Analyst, Data Scientist.
   Knowledge Scientist: Gather knowledge from the domain in order to understand what
   data should be used in order to answer the question.
   Visualization Scientist: Knows the space of visualization paradigms/metaphors and is
   able to suggest the best way of visualizing a certain type of data.
   Visualization Engineer: Is in charge of integrating or implementing visualization solutions
   and algorithms.



                                                                                                    22031
76   22031 – Bringing Graph Databases and Network Visualization Together


        Graph Database (GDB) Admin: Is responsible for the graph database, making sure the
        infrastructure is up and running, and provides access to the data.
        GDB Engineer: Is responsible to develop the graph database system itself; this role is
        typically filled in the context of a graph database vendor.
        Data Engineer: Is responsible for bringing in the data, integrating the data following
        requirements and loading them into a graph database.
        Data Steward: Is responsible for input data sources.
        Data Governance: Is responsible for understanding what data exists, how it is used and
        that it satisfies organizational requirements (regulations, policies, security, legal)

         Some remarks. First, this list is not exhaustive. Second, one person can assume multiple
     roles, and multiple people can assume one role. Finally, we do not use the word “user” as it
     is ambiguous/confusing and also has negative connotations in some domains.
         The following two additional roles are considered, but they are separated from the others,
     because they are studying the phenomena that occurs with the previous roles (their are not
     part of the evaluation process):
         Visualization Researcher: Provides innovation in the visualization field, by studying
         and experimenting new visualization metaphors/paradigms, layout algorithms, proof-of-
         concepts, prototype systems, quantitative and qualitative evaluations
         GDB Researcher: Provides innovation in the graph database field, by studying and
         experimenting new languages, data structures, efficient algorithms for graph queries.
     These roles are fulfilled by professors, PhD students, industry researchers, etc.
     Challenges and Opportunities. A major topic for further study is to deeply understand the
     interactions between roles and how we can better support these interactions with network
     visualization and graph data management solutions. A further general challenge is to study
     the different roles of visualization in the context of graph databases:
         Use visualization as a communication media between the different actors of the data
         production chain.
         Use visualization to design user-centric applications for the domain practitioners who
         need to explore the data and elaborate new information.
         Graph Layout Recommendation based on role, task, data, etc.
     Within each of these challenges lies the deeper study of the definition(s) of usefulness, how we
     might quantify these definitions, and use these metrics for better evaluation of more effective
     network visualization and graph data management methods.



     4.2    Working Group 2: Understanding Gaps and Opportunities Between
            Graph Databases and Network Visualisation
     Karsten Klein (Universität Konstanz, DE), Henry Ehlers (TU Wien, AT), Oliver Kohl-
     bacher (Universität Tübingen, DE), Sebastian Müller (yWorks GmbH – Tübingen, DE), Falk
     Schreiber (Universität Konstanz, DE), Hannes Voigt (Neo4j – Leipzig, DE), and Markus
     Wallinger (TU Wien, AT)
           License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Karsten Klein, Henry Ehlers, Oliver Kohlbacher, Sebastian Müller, Falk Schreiber, Hannes Voigt,
                     and Markus Wallinger


     Originally constituted as a group to work on use cases and applications, our initial discussions
     quickly showed that before we could talk about concrete use cases, we needed to lay
     foundations for our common understanding of the potential interplay between graph databases
Karsten Klein, Juan F. Sequeda, Hsiang-Yun Wu, and Da Yan                                               77




    Figure 1 A conceptual diagram of the interplay between data assets, processing entities, and
users in interactive graph database visualisation. It shows which sources of information could be
used for query and visualisation processor, and how the user would interact with the system. Red
arrows indicate currently unused but available information.


and network visualisation. While large potential for synergy and cross-pollination between
the two areas is quite evident, we began by structuring the involved aspects and expectations
in order to derive a conceptual framework based on which we could better identify gaps and
opportunities of this interplay.
    Our discussions quickly converged to a network visualisation in which we tried to cover the
interplay between data assets and involved stakeholders and entities when graph visualisation
is used in interactive interfaces for graph databases. Figure 1 shows the intermediate result
that we came up with and which we used for the further discussions. While probably omitting
some relevant aspects, it helped us to structure the discussion and to create a common
mental map of the interactive graph database visualisation process.
    With this conceptual model, we could now analyze the role as well as the aims of the user.
The conceptual model then reveals requirements as well as the potential impact of graph
visualisations, which in turn led us to a first characterisation of challenges and opportunities.
As main gaps and challenges we identified
    A lack of appropriate graph visualisation and navigation methods that are tailored towards
    users of graph databases
    A lack of methods for projection in graph database systems (i.e., mapping from data
    assets to graph visualisation), incl. aggregation / abstraction of the graph structure
    Missing integration of concepts from graph database and visualisation communities into
    one coherent concept
    A definition of “usefulness” for graph visualisation in the graph database context and
    measures to evaluate it, and in general evaluation of metaphors for specific data/use
    cases/tasks
    Accessibility of meta-data available in the database system for the visualisation tool, and
    a systematic understanding of visualisation patterns for meta-data integration
    A lack of annotations for useful domain knowledge about graph topology in database
    schemas




                                                                                                    22031
78   22031 – Bringing Graph Databases and Network Visualization Together


         As opportunities we see both significant potential improvements in practice, in particular
     regarding data handling, user experience, and more direct interfaces, as well as space for
     methodological work and new applications for research. These opportunities might concern
     different stakeholders differently depending on their role – user, developer, product owner,
     vendor – and area – visualisation, graph databases:
         Development of new graph visualisation and interaction techniques tailored towards graph
         databases. These can target the layout, encoding, and navigation, but also abstractions,
         e.g. for overview visualisation and subgraph comparison.
         Availability of currently untapped data sources and use cases for research, as there are
         huge and diverse graph databases with context available.
         Users can start with an improved out-of-the-box visualisation and apply ready-made
         templates to common use-cases with subsequent incremental improvement.
         New queries can be automatically derived by interacting with the visualisation as a more
         intuitive interface than current solutions.
         Query result visualisation has a large potential for improvement (leveraging meta-data
         and additional data stored with and in the database).
         An efficiency dividend can be achieved through simplified analysis processes.
         Visualisation system developers or vendors can increase the degree of automation and
         abstraction of their visualisation tool box and simplify its usage.
         Visualisation domain developers can produce domain-specific visualisations in shorter
         time due to an improved visualisation tool box.
         DB system developer/vendor can improve functional support of visualisation applications
         (by offering e.g. more powerful graph projection or additional graph schema annotation),
         and improve performance of query processing for visualisation applications (by leveraging
         extra knowledge about the application).

         In order to structure our discussion on use cases, we made high-level distinctions of these
     with respect to the following questions: 1) Who tells the story – user or system? 2) What is
     the user’s level of knowledge on the database content? 3) What is the goal – exploration,
     answering specific questions, or creating visualisations to tell a story?
         Building on these discussions, we identified connections to the discussion topics in other
     groups, for example for the definition and evaluation of usefulness, the roles and types
     of audience involved, possible exploration patterns, as well as visual query support and
     corresponding visualisation metaphors. We plan to put our model to the test by creating
     instantiations of it for specific application use cases that we are familiar with, and to refine
     it according to the experience we gain in that process.
Karsten Klein, Juan F. Sequeda, Hsiang-Yun Wu, and Da Yan                                                     79


4.3    Working Group 3: Visual Querying and Result Visualization
Hsiang-Yun Wu (St. Pölten University of Applied Sciences, Austria, hsiang-yun.wu@fhstp.ac.at),
Da Yan (The University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA, yanda@uab.edu), Michael
Behrisch (Utrecht University, The Netherlands & GraphPolaris.com Analytics Platform,
m.behrisch@uu.nl), Carsten Goerg (University of Colorado, USA, carsten.goerg@ucdenver.edu),
Katja Hose (Aalborg University, Denmark, khose@cs.aau.dk), Pavel Klinov (Stardog, USA,
pavel@stardog.com), and Fabrizio Montecchiani (University of Perugia, Italy,
fabrizio.montecchiani@unipg.it)
      License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Hsiang-Yun Wu, Da Yan, Michael Behrisch, Carsten Goerg, Katja Hose, Pavel Klinov, and
                Fabrizio Montecchiani


Working group 3 studied (1) the problem of visual graph querying which aims to assist
user to formulate effective and efficient graph queries, and (2) the problem of visualizing
graph query results for effective summarization, aggregation and human comprehension.
Visual Graph Querying (VGQ). VGQ is in contrast to the traditional graph database query
languages such as SPARQL, Neo4j’s Cypher, and GQL. Dagstuhl Seminar 22031 was fortunate
to involve industrial attendees from Neo4j, Stardog, GraphPolaris, yWorks and data.world,
which are startups and companies with graph database products already integrated with some
simple frontend visualization tools. These participants have given in-depth demonstration
of their products and use cases on Day 1 presentations. Working group 3 in particular has
industrial members from Stardog and GraphPolaris, so in subsequent days we got a lot
of chances reviewing concrete real-world use cases to see how graph database queries are
applied, such as searching from enterprise knowledge graphs and biological networks.
    During the discussion, members with less familiarity in the specific graph querying
languages found it not easy to compose and even understand the traditional graph queries.
The working group agreed upon the conclusion that learning the grammar of a graph
querying language leads to a steep learning curve for end users, such as attendees with graph
visualization background rather than graph database background. We expect that tools for
formulating a graph query with drag-and-drop visual widgets would provide end users more
intuition on what they are searching for, and it is also beneficial to support interactive and
explorative query reformulation where users can learn from (at least partial) query results to
incrementally revise their queries based on their search intents.
    In fact, even our members from the industry admitted that their colleagues can formulate
bad queries that accidentally create a large amount of unnecessary information. Figure 2
illustrates such an example to find the editors of all journals and conference proceedings
from a backend graph database, where the SPARQL query on the left would unnecessarily
lead to an expensive Cartesian product operation that can easily overwhelm computing and
memory resources; the correct form of such a query is shown on the right which uses the
UNION keyword to allow efficient execution. We expect that some visual widgets can better
guide users to avoid formulating bad queries, such as giving a warning sign on excessive
intermediate result size in the above SPARQL query example, or even to recommend an
equivalent but more efficient query formulation. The implementation, however, would require
techniques such as query cardinality estimation and seq2seq deep learning from curated (bad
query, correct query) pairs captured in real enterprise operations.
    The working group members identified several open challenges to address for effective
VGQ. One challenge lies in how to define a set of visual querying paradigms that are effective
in real applications. Several possible paradigms were discussed, including (i) pattern matching




                                                                                                          22031
80   22031 – Bringing Graph Databases and Network Visualization Together




                   (a) Expensive query                         (b) Fast and correct query

        Figure 2 An examples of a bad and a better queries.


     as adopted by existing languages such as SPARQL, (ii) query-by-examples where end users
     list some desired results for the query engine to learn and recommend the possible queries
     and query semantics/intentions, (iii) query-by-sketch where end users sketch an incomplete
     graph query and rely on the learned data schema to auto-complete the actual query or to
     guide the formulation of the complete query. The group members agreed that effective data
     schema discovery techniques would be critical for implementing those VGQ paradigms. It is
     also an open problem to explore whether those query forms are sufficient for real user tasks,
     and how users can select among these VGQ paradigms. Novel query forms such as Cypher
     path matching could need to be invented to meet newly discovered querying demands as the
     field of VGQ progresses forward.
     Graph Query Result Visualization. The output of a graph query can be of various forms
     such as many subgraph instances, or many path instances. Moreover, intermediate results
     before aggregation/reduction could be huge, requiring effective summative visualizations to
     make sense of the results that would be otherwise overwhelming to enumerate one by one.
         A particularly interesting type of query is the path query as supported by Cypher, where
     end users specify a path pattern which is then matched against the backend graph database
     to find all matching path instances. The results are often numerous as indicated by our
     industrial members, and current systems usually enumerate individual path instances one
     after another leading to overwhelmingly many results to examine by end users. We envision
     that more optimized solutions can be easily developed, such as organizing the path instances
     (including partially matched ones) by tries so that common prefix paths can be shared to
     avoid redundancy. This method would not only speed up query evaluation, but also reduce
     the storage space requirement and the number of visual elements to display. Advanced
     visualization techniques can be integrated, such as making the nodes shared by more paths
     larger, and making the edges shared by more paths thicker. Of course, path queries are
     themselves relatively new, so the effectiveness of their result visualization approaches is yet
     to be verified in real applications.
         Some other graph data are geospatial and/or topological in nature (e.g., nodes are
     associated with coordinates), which enable more effective visualization to bring intuition.
     Some effective visual representations already exist including radial layout, edge bundling and
     metro map metaphor, and they have been used in applications such as visualizing metro
     maps and metabolic pathways, but how to scale them to larger graphs effectively is still
     an open problem. Possible solutions include multi-scale result representation and hybrid
     visualization models such as NodeTrix (resp. ChordLink) which collapses dense fragments of
     a graph into matrices (resp. chord diagrams). See Figure 3 for an illustration.
Karsten Klein, Juan F. Sequeda, Hsiang-Yun Wu, and Da Yan                                                   81




                               NodeTrix                     ChordLink




   Figure 3 NodeTrix and ChordLink.



      Graph Database



                                                                        Interactive query exploration
                 Schema discovery
                                                       Graph Query


   Data Schema




                             Query recommendation




   Figure 4 Integrating graph visualization and graph database.


   Another interesting topic is to provide provenance explanations for graph query results,
and some pioneering work has been conducted in the context of SPARQL, e.g., SPARQLprov
published in PVLDB’21.
Summary: Integrating Graph Visualization and Graph Database. Figure 4 summarizes
what we have discussed so far, where network visualization can be applied in the various stages
of the graph querying pipeline, including data schema discovery, query result visualization
and query reformulation recommendation. While a lot of those features have already been
integrated into existing graph databases such as Neo4j, more diversified and advanced
visualization techniques are yet to be implemented and integrated.




                                                                                                        22031
82   22031 – Bringing Graph Databases and Network Visualization Together


            Participants
       Michael Behrisch               Karsten Klein               Falk Schreiber
     Utrecht University, NL &       Universität Konstanz, DE     Universität Konstanz, DE
     GraphPolaris.com Analytics       Pavel Klinov
     Platform                                                      Juan F. Sequeda
                                    Stardog – Arlington, US      data.world – Austin, US
       Walter Didimo                  Stephen G. Kobourov
     University of Perugia, IT      University of Arizona –        Hannes Voigt
       Nadezhda T. Doncheva         Tucson, US                   Neo4j – Leipzig, DE
     University of Copenhagen, DK     Oliver Kohlbacher           Tatiana von Landesberger
       Henry Ehlers                 Universität Tübingen, DE     Universität Köln, DE
     TU Wien, AT                      Giuseppe Liotta
                                                                  Markus Wallinger
       George Fletcher              University of Perugia, IT
                                                                 TU Wien, AT
     TU Eindhoven, NL                 Fabrizio Montecchiani
       Carsten Görg                 University of Perugia, IT     Hsiang-Yun Wu
     University of Colorado –         Sebastian Müller           FH – St. Pölten, AT
     Aurora, US                     yWorks GmbH – Tübingen, DE     Da Yan
       Katja Hose                     Catia Pesquita             The University of Alabama –
     Aalborg University, DK         University of Lisbon, PT     Birmingham, US
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 22042

Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles
Frank Kargl∗1 , Ioannis Krontiris∗2 , André Weimerskirch∗3 ,
Ian Williams∗4 , and Nataša Trkulja†5
1       Universität Ulm – Ulm, DE. frank.kargl@uni-ulm.de
2       Huawei Technologies – München, DE. ioannis.krontiris@huawei.com
3       Lear Corporation and University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute
        – Ann Arbor, US. aweimerskirch@lear.com
4       University of Michigan – Ann Arbor, US. ianwill@umich.edu
5       Universität Ulm – Ulm, DE. natasa.trkulja@uni-ulm.de

         Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 22042 “Privacy
Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles”. The Seminar reviewed existing privacy-
enhancing technologies, standards, tools, and frameworks for protecting personal information in
the context of automated and self-driving vehicles (AVs). We specifically focused on where such
existing techniques clash with requirements of an AV and its data processing and identified the
major road blockers on the way to deployment of privacy protection in AVs from a legal, technical,
business and ethical perspective. Therefore, the seminar took an interdisciplinary approach
involving autonomous and connected driving, privacy protection, and legal data protection
experts. This report summarizes the discussions and findings during the seminar, includes the
abstracts of talks, and includes a report from the working groups.
Seminar January 23–28, 2022 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/22042
2012 ACM Subject Classification Security and privacy → Human and societal aspects of
   security and privacy; Security and privacy → Privacy protections; Security and privacy →
   Privacy-preserving protocols
Keywords and phrases automotive security and privacy, privacy and data protection
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.12.1.83



    1     Executive Summary
Frank Kargl (Universität Ulm – Ulm, DE)
Ioannis Krontiris (Huawei Technologies – München, DE)
Nataša Trkulja (Universität Ulm – Ulm, DE)
André Weimerskirch (Lear Corporation – Ann Arbor, US)
Ian Williams (University of Michigan – Ann Arbor, US)
         License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                   © Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian Williams


Cooperative, connected and automated mobility (CCAM) has the potential to drastically
reduce accidents, travel time, and the environmental impact of road travel. To achieve
their goals, connected and automated vehicles (AVs) require extensive data and machine
learning algorithms for processing data received from local sensors, other cars, and road-side
infrastructure. This immediately raises the question of privacy and data protection. While
privacy for connected vehicles has been considered for many years, AV technology is still


∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector

            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 12, Issue 1, pp. 83–100
Editors: Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian Williams
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
84   22042 – Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles


     in its infancy and the privacy and data protection aspects for AVs are not well addressed.
     The capabilities of AVs pose new challenges to privacy protection, given that AVs have large
     sensor arrays that collect data in public spaces. Additionally, AVs capture data not only
     from other vehicles, but also from many other parties (i.e. pedestrians walking along a
     street) with very limited possibilities to offer notice and choice about data processing policies.
     Additionally, the driver will not necessarily be the owner of the vehicle and it may be the
     case that the majority of AVs are owned by fleets.
         Our seminar reviewed existing technologies, standards, tools, and frameworks for protect-
     ing personal information in CCAM, investigated where such existing techniques clash with
     the requirements of an AV and its data processing, and identified gaps and road-blockers
     that need to be addressed on the way to deployment of privacy protection in AVs from a
     legal, technical, and ethical perspective. While we ran only a shortened online version of
     the originally planned seminar due to COVID pandemic limitations, we made very good
     progress, in particular towards identifying and structuring the challenges. Future meetings
     will build on the results and will discuss the different challenges in more depth, prioritize the
     corresponding road blockers, and push for research to overcome them.
         Discussions during the seminar were organized in seven sessions with presentations from
     renowned experts from industry and academia, and a final discussion that collected and
     structured outcomes. In the concluding session, we identified four main challenges that we
     present in this report alongside the talk abstracts.
        The first challenge is ethics and responsible behavior of companies and other actors that
        collect and process personal data in such systems. This goes beyond mere regulatory
        compliance but was seen as a promising path to complement this minimal baseline.
        Further discussions are required to identify ways to encourage such practices.
        Second, we discussed how regulation needs to evolve for future CCAM systems in
        order to establish a stable baseline. A challenge here will be to identify to what extent
        sector-specific regulation will be needed to address specifics of CCAM and if regulation
        of future systems is reasonable and possible.
        A third challenge is the commercial environment. Industry has to meet regulations
        and financial expectations and sometimes even conflicting goals like privacy and safety.
        Understanding and narrowing these trade-offs while acknowledging that industry has
        many such constraints that limit its flexibility requires further investigation.
        Last but not least, we see a strong progress in the privacy-enhancing technology (PET)
        as a promising path towards resolving many of the above mentioned problems. At the
        same time, many PETs have not been designed for the CCAM domain and might not
        meet its demands in data quality or latency. For this reason, we see the need to further
        investigate how existing PETs meet CCAM requirements or how they can be developed
        further to do so.
        Generally speaking, there is a lack of incentives for enterprises like original equipment
     manufacturers (OEMs) to go beyond the legal minimum requirements to manage personal
     data in a privacy-respecting manner, to design privacy-preserving products, or to make the
     use of personal data transparent to the data subject. During our discussions one question
     became prominent: What could be the motivation for OEMs to do more in the field of data
     protection that goes beyond the bare minimum of legal compliance? Ethical and trustworthy
     aspects, as well as reputation and brand image could be worth investigating in answering this
     question. However, the field is massively interdisciplinary making it necessary to convince
     other involved disciplines of the value of data protection for the automotive sector.
Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian Williams                   85


    There are several technical solutions available for protecting privacy and facilitating the
privacy-by-design approach. However, the up-scaling of these solutions to larger systems and
their integration with existing systems often fails because systems aspects and the related
interdisciplinary issues are not taken into account. So, further progress is needed in promoting
privacy-friendly system engineering, as well as integrating PETs into complete systems, taking
into consideration the special requirements of safety and trust in the automotive domain.
Overall, there should be a push for joint efforts to define and deploy technologies that are
superior to today’s solutions and that are commercially feasible since cost and effort are split
amongst many participants.
    Further progress is also required for the development of best practices, methodologies,
and a requirements standard similar to ISO 21434 that supports the engineering of practical
privacy solutions in complex systems. This will give OEMs a proper threshold target and
allow for efficient solution finding and re-use. That guidance or standard could be a layer
on top of regulation, similar to how the UN ECE R155 regulation requires a Cybersecurity
Management System (CSMS) for which the ISO 21434 standard defines process requirements.




                                                                                                   22042
86   22042 – Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles


      2       Table of Contents
     Executive Summary
       Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian Williams 83

     Overview of Talks
          Introduction to Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles
          Frank Kargl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87
          The Role of Information in Autonomy and Community
          Bryant Walker Smith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
          Ethics, Privacy, and Autonomous Vehicles
          Adam Henschke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     91
          CCAM Research: Experiences in Handling Data Protection Regulations @UULM-
          MRM
          Michael Buchholz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
          Privacy Challenges of Connected and Autonomous Vehicles
          Benedikt Brecht . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
          Technologies for Establishing and Managing Trust in CCAM
          Thanassis Giannetsos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
          On Exploring the Use of Local Differential Privacy in ITS
          Ines Ben Jemaa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    94
          Automotive Privacy – The Good, The Bad, The Ugly
          Mario Hoffmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95

     Working groups
          Results of Concluding Discussions
          Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian
          Williams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96

     Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian Williams                         87


 3     Overview of Talks
3.1    Introduction to Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving
       Vehicles
Frank Kargl (Universität Ulm, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Frank Kargl


This talk opened the seminar with an overview over the field of automotive privacy and
how it developed over the years. We started from early works on Car-to-Everything (C2X)
and discussed how privacy was considered an important requirement from day one. From
this perspective, C2X is an excellent example of privacy-by-design and privacy-by-default.
We introduced how changing pseudonyms were designed as a mechanism to protect privacy
and prevent location tracking, also highlighting its limitations and the need to balance and
trade-off technical privacy against effort and efficiency of applications. As an example, we
looked into tracking attacks that can easily reconstruct a vehicle’s path from anonymous
position samples (if they are available with sufficiently high resolution).
    We then continued with the observation that just providing technical solutions is not
enough. We also need to consider the field of privacy engineering and the challenges
that integrating privacy engineering with the overall engineering process implies. This
includes a number of observations. First, system engineering for automotive E/E systems is
already a highly complex process that needs to consider many aspects, like safety, real-time
requirements, security, and now also privacy. Simplifying and streamlining these processes is
important. Second, we need to educate experts for privacy engineering and privacy-enhancing
technologies (PETs), while at the same time providing the tools and skills to ordinary
developers to enable privacy-by-design in their projects. And third, as automotive industry
builds products for world-wide markets, considering all the different privacy regulations is a
special challenge.
    We then looked into a case study that Prof. Kargl’s research group conducted on privacy
of electric vehicle charging in 2010 [1]. In the POPCORN protocol [2], they re-engineered
the ISO/SAE 15118 protocol towards better technical privacy protection. This research
highlighted that with proper privacy engineering, we can build systems that are highly
privacy-preserving that at the same time provide rich and personalized functionality. In its
conclusion, the talk discussed challenges and questions specific to autonomous vehicles and
future cooperative intelligent transportation system (cITS) architectures including:
    Privacy of automotive AI and machine learning mechanisms
    Increased complexity and data flows in cooperative ITS and CCAM
    The conflict between privacy and functional and safety requirements, and whether PETs
    could help to resolve it
    Challenges to policy-making and law-making

   Many of these challenges were in the focus of the talks and discussions throughout the
remainder of the seminar week.
References
1    Fazouane, Marouane, Henning Kopp, Rens W. Heijden, Daniel Le Métayer, and Frank
     Kargl. “Formal verification of privacy properties in electric vehicle charging.” In International
     Symposium on Engineering Secure Software and Systems, pp. 17-33. Springer, Cham, 2015.




                                                                                                         22042
88   22042 – Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles


     2     Christina Höfer, Jonathan Petit, Robert Schmidt, and Frank Kargl. “POPCORN: privacy-
           preserving charging for eMobility.” In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM workshop on Security,
           privacy & dependability for cyber vehicles, pp. 37-48. 2013.



     3.2    The Role of Information in Autonomy and Community
     Bryant Walker Smith (University of South Carolina, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Bryant Walker Smith


     Issues of privacy and data protection implicate the role of information in the larger goals of
     autonomy and community. These issues are exacerbated by the combination of increasingly
     powerful perception, processing, and transmission by advanced motor vehicles. In an analysis
     of these issues, some common distinctions among advanced vehicles matter, while others
     probably do not. This is evident in three threshold questions. First, (how) are mobile phones
     and other connected devices different than vehicles? Second, (how) are V2V-capable vehicles
     different than conventional vehicles? Third, (how) are automated vehicles different than
     conventional vehicles?
         Connectivity and automation are orthogonal concepts. Connectivity in a narrow sense
     typically refers to the vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) or vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communica-
     tion that involves low latency, high reliability, direct(ish) transmission between road users.
     Connectivity in a broad sense refers to all manner of digital and wireless communication
     technologies and applications, including telematics, infotainment, over-the-air updates, re-
     mote assistance, mobile vehicle apps, and others. Automation typically involves distinctions
     between assisted driving and automated driving and among trips, vehicles, and features, but
     for the purposes here the distinction between safety and convenience features may be more
     significant.
         Current and future technologies can monitor inside the vehicle, the vehicle itself, and
     outside the vehicle. This monitoring is accomplished with a large number and variety of
     internal-facing and external-facing sensors. Indeed, Congress recently directed NHTSA to
     soon mandate impaired driver detection systems in new vehicles. Data can be collected by
     these sensors for multiple overlapping purposes: To operate the system (implicit collection), to
     develop the system (implicit or intended), to document performance of the system (intended),
     or merely during operation of the system (incidental). It is also helpful to distinguish among
     data that are generated, processed, used, stored, and transmitted–on-board or off-board the
     vehicle.
         This leads to three key questions: What can vehicle sensors perceive that humans cannot?
     What can computers do with that information that humans cannot? And what might
     companies, governments, and individuals do with these capabilities? This suggests immense
     possibilities both good and bad, for which canals, railroads, highways, and the Internet offer
     useful analogies from technologies of the past. Imagine a real-time version of Google’s Street
     View or automated enforcement by private networks in which pedestrians who impede the
     movement of a company’s vehicle are identified through facial recognition and then barred
     from that company’s services as punishment.
         This brings us to an antagonistic view of “privacy” as against a variety of actors, including
     domestic governments acting in their law enforcement or national security or administrative
     capacity or on behalf of companies, foreign governments acting in equivalent capacities,
     companies acting in a market, as employers, or on behalf of governments, individuals who
     are nosy, malicious, or controlling, and so forth.
Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian Williams                    89


    The domain of safety offers lessons for privacy–since, indeed, both implicate autonomy
and community. My argument is that automated vehicles are driven not by hardware or
software or humans or nobody but by the companies that develop and deploy them. This is
the position taken by the Uniform Law Commission’s Automated Operation of Vehicles Act.
    In other words, we should focus less on technologies and more on the companies behind
those technologies. This means asking not “does the public trust this technology” but, rather,
“is the company behind this technology worthy of our trust?” The former question is not
useful because the public is fickle, words are not actions, marketing is still coming, and a lot
can still change before we reach 100% adoption or acceptance (if ever). Similarly, asking
“should the public trust this technology?” is not helpful because future technologies don’t
yet exist, these technologies will be diverse, and most won’t be super dangerous. Indeed, the
story of technology, society, law, and progress is about replacing one set of problems with a
new set of problems and just hoping that the new set in aggregate is less than the old set–as
illustrated by replacing the pollution of the horse with the pollution of the car.
    “Is the company behind this technology worthy of our trust?” is an important question
because companies act through their human and their machine agents, because technologies
are only as safe (or privacy protecting) as the companies behind them, because safety (like
privacy) is a marriage rather than a wedding, and because companies can do right even after
their technologies fail. Similarly, regulation (whether of safety or privacy) needs the concept
of trustworthiness because emerging technologies are complex, stochastic-ky, and dynamic;
because developers have the expertise, information, and access to make lifecycle safety (or
privacy) cases; because developers need space for technical innovation and regulators need
space for regulatory innovation; and because even though regulators won’t have all the
answers, they can still ask better questions.
    The question of how safe is safe enough has two answers: the retrospective (after a failure)
and the prospective (before a deployment). Retrospective is more straightforward: a system
must be at least as safe as a human in the maneuver and at least as safe as a comparative
system, and (more controversially) safer than the last system to fail. Prospective safety is
trickier, and my answer is that it means having reasonable confidence that the developer is
worthy of our trust.
    A trustworthy company, in turn, shares its safety philosophy (by saying what the company
is doing, why it believes that to be reasonably safe, and why the public can believe the
company), makes a promise to the public (by committing to market only what it believes to
be safe, to being candid about its limits and failures, and by mitigating its failures), and then
keeps that promise (by appropriately managing public expectations, supervising the entire
product lifecycle, and mitigating harms promptly, fully, and publicly). The same approach
might be applied to issues of privacy.
    Looking for early breaches of trust is key to identifying untrustworthy actors. These
breaches include making hyperbolic claims, misrepresenting evidence, failing to update
technologies, exploiting the litigation process, and forcing confidential settlements. For
example, if we cannot trust a company when it calls it system “full self driving,” why should
we trust that company when it calls its system safe or private? By analogy: Calling my
umbrella a parachute doesn’t make it true, but does make my umbrella more dangerous.
    This approach also has implications for administrative regulation: Regulate the company
rather than the technology; expect a company to vouch for its technologies through a public
safety (or privacy) case; focus on processes and systems; identify assumptions and logical
progressions; ask questions and challenge answers; and target breaches of public trust. In
short (and to quote Voltaire or Spiderman): With great power comes great responsibility.




                                                                                                    22042
90   22042 – Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles


         This detour into safety can also apply to privacy. In some ways, modern privacy law is
     something of a late 19th century invention. The foundational article, at least in the United
     States, may have been inspired by the fact that the paparazzi of the day used one technology–
     the camera–to take photos of a high-society wedding attended by one of the authors and
     then used another–the modern printing press–to distribute them widely in newspapers. But
     most people of the day did not enjoy privacy: They shared beds in tenements or other small
     homes, and they lived in communities of hundreds or thousands in full view of what Jane
     Jacobs approvingly called “eyes on the street.” At the same time, they did have a form of
     escape that is largely unavailable today: They could physically run, or be chased, away from
     gossip and rumors and reputations. They could physically move to a new place without the
     kind of digital trail that would likely follow each of us today.
         Privacy has since become a key aspect of the modern human rights doctrine. It can be
     embraced (or rejected) in ways that are revolutionary or evolutionary. It can be an end
     in itself or a means to an end. In particular, is may serve as a tool toward the goal of
     autonomy, where autonomy means the freedom to discover oneself, to be true to oneself,
     and to live one’s own life. At the same time, society necessitates community, and every unit
     of governance other than the individual is a collective: governments, companies, religious
     institutions, families. And so both autonomy and community are part of happiness in the
     classic sense of leading a good life–that is, eudaimonia.
         One of the key policy choices, to be determined by society much more than it is dictated
     by any existing law, is who or what will be empowered: individuals, governments, companies,
     or other collectives. Consider, very roughly, data protection. The approach in the EU has
     been to empower individuals through legal rights created by the General Data Protection
     Regulation (GDPR). The approach in the United States, at least prior to some recent state
     laws, has been to empower companies by generally enforcing the contracts of adhesion that
     we have all accepted in order to use many of the products and services essential to our
     modern lives. And the approach in the People’s Republic of China has been to empower
     government in the storage and access expectations for companies operating in that country.
         This is a crude model, and like everything else it is full of contradictions and unexpected
     consequences. For example, in the early 1900s, the US entered the “Lochner era” that
     empowered big business in the name of individual rights: Because the freedom to contract
     was paramount (indeed, the courts said, constitutionally protected), states could not enact
     rules for minimum wages or maximum hours worked. There are still echoes of this in so-called
     “right to work” states that restrict the power of unions. And in the European Union, there is
     concern that the GDPR could ultimately empower large companies vis-à-vis their smaller
     counterparts and ultimately vis-à-vis consumers.
         One of my research interests is on using technologies and other tools to appropriately
     empower collectives. A key: Who inside the community, who is outside, and who decides?
         These issues can be considered on the strategic, tactical, and operational levels. And
     here too there is much tension! It may be that governments should not necessarily adopt the
     policies that people think they want. For example, a world full of single-occupant vehicle trips
     on big, wide, fast roads is also a world of obesity and isolation and massive sea-level rise. In
     fact, there are benefits to “frictions” in life – what some incorrectly call inefficiencies. Sharing
     space with strangers, for example, can produce empathy and maybe even friendship–although
     it could also lead to harassment and assault. But it may be that policy should seek to
     accomplish what people say they want at a strategic level if not necessarily at an operational
     level. People say they want communities with fresh air and active mobility, for example.
     One answer is to set, regularly review, and as necessary revisit public policy goals so that
     changes are happen through deliberation rather than by default.
Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian Williams                                 91


    This presents a challenging strategic and even ethical question: Should innovation be
understood primarily as a technical solution (to accomplish that which otherwise is technically
impossible) or primarily as a policy solution (to accomplish that which is already technically
feasible but not politically feasible)? For example, the public may be far more accepting
of privacy and other risks inherent in the status quo than of equivalent risks inherent in
new technologies. Similarly, economic interests may be far more entrenched for established
technologies than for those that are merely emergent. This is one of the ethical issues explored
in the “Ethics of AI in Transport” book chapter in the 2020 Oxford Handbook of Ethics in
AI.



3.3     Ethics, Privacy, and Autonomous Vehicles
Adam Henschke (University of Twente, NL)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Adam Henschke
Main reference Adam Henschke: “Ethics in an Age of Surveillance: Personal Information and Virtual Identities”,
               Cambridge University Press, 2017.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/9781316417249
Main reference Adam Henschke: “Privacy, the Internet of Things and State Surveillance: Handling Personal
               Information within an Inhuman System”, Moral Philosophy and Politics, Vol. 7(1), pp. 123–149,
               2020.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1515/mopp-2019-0056


In this talk, I covered a range of conceptual and ethical issues to do with privacy and
autonomous vehicles. The talk started with a motivating problem, showing how potentially
innocuous vehicle data can have social and political implications. The talk then gave an
overview of the “swamp” of different ways that privacy can be conceptualised. When thinking
of privacy in an interpersonal sense, it can be descriptive or normative. The talk then
shows that we also need to think of privacy in a political sense, as the relationship between
citizens and the state. The talk then suggested that technologies like autonomous vehicles
may need us to add an international geopolitical sense of privacy, where what matters
are the relationships between states. The talk next looked at how autonomous vehicles
are different from traditional cars in terms of the capacity to aggregate, share, and use
personal information. Finally, the talk offered a way out of the swamp of privacy concepts
by suggesting that we ought to be concerned for privacy if and when autonomous vehicles
gather, access, use, and/or communicate information that is revealing, powerful, or has a
special meaning given a particular context.




                                                                                                                 22042
92   22042 – Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles


     3.4     CCAM Research: Experiences in Handling Data Protection
             Regulations @UULM-MRM
     Michael Buchholz (Universität Ulm, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Michael Buchholz
     Main reference Michael Buchholz, Johannes Muller, Martin Herrmann, Jan Strohbeck, Benjamin Volz, Matthias
                    Maier, Jonas Paczia, Oliver Stein, Hubert Rehborn, Rudiger-Walter Henn: “Handling Occlusions in
                    Automated Driving Using a Multiaccess Edge Computing Server-Based Environment Model From
                    Infrastructure Sensors”, IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine, Vol. PP, pp. 2–16, 2021.
               URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MITS.2021.3089743


     This talk starts with a short introduction of our cooperative, connected and automated
     mobility (CCAM) research at the Institute of Measurement, Control, and Microtechnology
     (MRM) at Ulm University (UULM). Besides several automated test vehicles with approval
     for public traffic, UULM-MRM operates a smart infrastructure installation at an intersection
     in Ulm-Lehr, a suburb of Ulm. Details can be found in this video: https://www.youtube.
     com/watch?v=RFdIpi3buAg.
         For both, test vehicles and smart infrastructure, sensors such as cameras are used, which
     potentially capture personal data of (other) road users. The second part of this talk focuses
     on the experiences made with implementing data security concepts as required by GDPR
     and national laws, as well as the experiences that the research team had with the persons
     concerned, all from an engineering perspective. For UULM, the Data Protection Act of the
     State of Baden-Württemberg holds, whereas for companies, the federal law is applicable.
         The talk highlights some specific experiences and solutions, such as storing video data
     in read-only mode to avoid logging of potential changes, or the use of pictograms and QR
     codes to inform the persons concerned. Additionally, it is reported that sharing the data
     with others, like companies, is also possible, e.g., by using subcontracting or joint controller
     contracts. One experience discussed in the talk is the fact that most people seem not
     to care about the cameras on the vehicles or in the infrastructure, since there have been
     almost no questions and objections from persons concerned. Finally, personal conclusions are
     drawn, which address also the requirement of a good communication between the responsible
     lawyers/data security officers and the engineers.



     3.5     Privacy Challenges of Connected and Autonomous Vehicles
     Benedikt Brecht (Volkswagen AG – Berlin, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Benedikt Brecht


     This talk is an opinion contributing to the discussion of the seminar rather than a scientific
     presentation. It focuses on vehicle data and the potential privacy issues that may arise
     when accessible via different means. It begins with showing and listing all known and
     specific privacy-relevant data that is available in modern cars [1]. The listing gives a first
     understanding as to why getting access to this data could be a privacy issue. Especially as
     it is relatively simple to access this data, given physical access to such a vehicle, the tools
     and the know-how that is available on the internet. The section ends with a discussion
     of potential reasons why this data is not better protected yet, and why this becomes a
     potential privacy problem when selling a car or parts of it. The next section is a digression
     to Car-to-Everything (C2X) communication. It lists which data is sent out when enabling
Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian Williams                                    93


C2X in modern, European cars of a specific make. It also highlights the fact that this data
is unencrypted as this is the only solution to solving the requirements of availability (even if
not connected to the internet), as well as latency that is required by the safety functions;
the overhead created by any key exchange for an effective encryption would not meet these
requirements. This section ends with a discussion about whether legitimate interest following
GDPR is a sufficient legal basis. The following section discusses why especially autonomous
vehicles add massively to the privacy issue due to their extended sensors and the way data
is collected in order to make machine learning work. The last section gives a glimpse to a
developing effort of ETSI’s Technical Committee (TC) Lawful Interception (LI) summarized
in their Technical Report (TR) 103 854. They appear to be working on standardizing the
access to in-vehicle data (e.g., live camera feeds, planning of routes, customer details etc.)
for law enforcement agencies while linking their effort to the ongoing regulation effort of the
European Union on Electronic Evidence (E-Evidence).
References
1    c’t – magazin für computertechnik 2022, Heft 1, pages 20/21. Heise Medien GmbH & Co.
     KG, Hannover, GER, 2022




3.6     Technologies for Establishing and Managing Trust in CCAM
Thanassis Giannetsos (UBITECH Ltd. – Athens, GR)
      License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Thanassis Giannetsos
 Joint work of Thanassis Giannetsos, Ioannis Krontiris
Main reference Benjamin Larsen, Thanassis Giannetsos, Ioannis Krontiris, Kenneth A. Goldman: “Direct
               anonymous attestation on the road: efficient and privacy-preserving revocation in C-ITS”, in Proc.
               of the WiSec ’21: 14th ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks,
               Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 28 June – 2 July, 2021, pp. 48–59, ACM, 2021.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3448300.3467832


This talk focused on the security, privacy, and trustworthiness, which are key properties
that need to be considered as we are moving towards the realization of the 5G C-V2X
technology. In this context, converging all of these properties by assessing dynamic trust
relationships and defining a trust model and a trust-reasoning framework is of paramount
importance; based on which involved entities can establish trust for cooperatively executing
safety-critical functions. This will enable both a) cybersecure data sharing between data
sources in the cooperative, connected and automated mobility (CCAM) ecosystem that
had no or insufficient pre-existing trust relationship, and b) outsource tasks to the MEC
and the cloud in a trustworthy way. Beyond the needs of functional safety, trustworthiness
management should be included in CCAM’s security functionality solution for verifying
trustworthiness of transmitting stations and infrastructure. Compounding this issue, new
schemes need to be designed that build upon and expand the Zero Trust concept: how to
bootstrap vertical trust from the application, the execution environment, and the device
hardware from the vehicle up to MEC and cloud environments.
    For the latter, a promising solution integrates the use of trusted computing technologies
and attestation mechanisms to enable the establishment of such “strong” trust relationships.
This includes the integration of TEE technologies that enable highly secure, trusted, and
verifiable remote computing capabilities, which can offer guarantees and assurances for
the establishment of trust through the required proofs/claims. Such proofs can provide
verifiable evidence on their correctness and functional safety, from their trusted launch and
configuration to the runtime attestation of both behavioral and low-level concrete execution
properties.

                                                                                                                    22042
94   22042 – Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles


         On the privacy front, Direct Anonymous Attestation (DAA) offers a promising solution –
     to overcome the challenges of traditional Public Key Infrastructures (PKIs) – by shifting
     trust from the backend infrastructure to the edge vehicles. DAA is a cryptographic protocol
     designed primarily to enhance user privacy within the remote attestation process of computing
     platforms, which has been adopted by the Trusted Computing Group (TCG). Applying the
     DAA protocols for securing V2X communication results in the redundancy (and removal)
     of most of the PKI infrastructure entities, including the pseudonym certificate authority:
     vehicles can now create their own pseudonym certificates using an in-vehicle trusted computing
     component (TC), and DAA signatures are used to self-certify each such credential that is
     verifiable by all recipients. Furthermore, a DAA-based model supports a more efficient
     revocation of misbehaving vehicles that don’t require the use of CRLs, therefore removing
     all of the computational and communication overhead that comes with it.
         Based on the above, some final conclusions were reached as it pertains to the future of
     CCAM technologies: this new security paradigm is the key element for having certifiable,
     more agile levels of trustworthiness to automotive services and translates to long-term
     consumer confidence, which is a requirement for end-user adoption.



     3.7    On Exploring the Use of Local Differential Privacy in ITS
     Ines Ben Jemaa (IRT SystemX – Palaiseau, FR)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Ines Ben Jemaa
      Joint work of Ines Ben Jemaa, Anis Bkakria, Cedric Adjih, Ala’a Almomani, Michael Wolf


     In this talk, we focus on the vehicular kinematic data sharing with the edge servers scenarios.
     One of the main privacy threats of this data sharing is the ability of an attacker to reconstruct
     the vehicular trajectory and thus learn information about the user profile. Differential Privacy
     (DP) [1] seems to be a promising solution to protect such data. Compared to other privacy
     approaches based on anonymization, cryptography or obfuscation, DP offers strong theoretical
     guarantees of privacy by adding some noise on the data following a specific probabilistic
     distribution while keeping some desired utility. Thus, it is compatible with the low overhead
     and computation complexity requirements of embedded systems. While the centralized
     scheme of DP is based on the data noise addition by a trusted curator, the local scheme,
     which assumes an untrusted curator, seems more realistic and convenient for our data sharing
     model. In the local scheme, the noise addition operation is attributed to the end users (i.e. the
     data originators) before transmitting their data to the server. The Geo-indistinguishability [2]
     paradigm implements the local scheme of DP and provides interesting properties for location
     privacy protection. We focused on studying its feasibility in the context of continuous data
     sharing in the connected and automated driving context and realize that there are some
     remaining challenges that have to be addressed. One of these challenges is the periodic nature
     of data sharing which decreases the privacy level and raises the problem of privacy budget
     allocation. The privacy budget allocation strategy could also directly impact the trade-off
     between the privacy and the utility of the service. The second challenge is the location
     correlation risk created by continuous sharing, which is not solved by geo-indistinguishability
     designed originally for sporadic use.
Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian Williams                    95


References
1    C. Dwork. Differential privacy. Proceedings Of ICALP, volume 4052 of LNCS, pages 1–12.
     Springer, 2006
2    Andrés, M. E., Bordenabe, N. E., Chatzikokolakis, K., Palamidessi. Geo-indistinguishability:
     Differentialprivacyfor location-basedsystems. Proceedings of the ACM Conferenceon Com-
     puter and Communications Security, 901–914.



3.8    Automotive Privacy – The Good, The Bad, The Ugly
Mario Hoffmann (Continental Teves – Frankfurt-Sossenheim, DE)
      License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Mario Hoffmann
 Joint work of Mario Hoffmann, Sarah Syed-Winkler


The future of automotive products and mobility services is digital, autonomous, and person-
alized. Specifically, modern vehicles with dozens of assist systems, sensors and actuators,
and autonomous driving capabilities will become a huge data source for a plethora of new
individually tailored mobility services by the end of this decade. In this data industry, modern
vehicles will become an important cornerstone for complex cross-domain scenarios with other
road users, infrastructures, as well as mobile and back-end systems. One promising example
are Smart Cities.
    According to the “Guidelines 1/2020 on processing personal data in the context of
connected vehicles and mobility related applications” by the European Data Protection
Board [1] these scenarios rely on the so-called Personally Identifiable Information (PII) and,
therefore, are subject to special regulations and laws. One of the most prominent regulations
is the European General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR, enforced May 2018). Here,
a set of binding rules has been defined giving clear obligations for realizing – for instance –
user consent, transparency, purpose binding, data minimization, data portability, and the
right to be forgotten. Meanwhile, several regions around the globe took the EU GDPR as a
blueprint for their own regulations.
    The technical interpretation and implementation of these regulations in complex mobility
scenarios, however, is a huge challenge. While Privacy Enhancing Technologies – such as
Sticky Policies, Zero Knowledge Proofs, and Attribute Based Encryption, are well understood
in the IT and Internet domain [2], there is still a technological gap in applying these
techniques into the automotive domain. On the one hand, specifically, the PII life cycle
in modern cars with its more than 100 Electronic Control Units (ECUs) lacks a consistent
and interoperable data protection architecture which includes vehicles of different brands,
mobile devices, infrastructures and back-end service environments. On the other hand,
drivers and passengers, however, would like to be sure that the privacy settings defined in
a car are enforced according to the regulation for each participant and stakeholder in any
corresponding mobility scenario. Enjoying a particular personalized mobility service does
not necessarily mean that the users’ PII is free for any further usage.
    In the publicly funded project “AUTOPSY – Automotive Data-Tainting for Privacy
Assurance Systems”, Continental investigates together with Fraunhofer AISEC and an
equally small French consortium technical readiness and applicability of Privacy Enhancing
Technologies for future automotive products and mobility services. From June 2021 to May
2024 the project will constantly update guidelines and learning material for the automotive
domain regarding the impact of data protection regulations, applicable PETs for both




                                                                                                    22042
96   22042 – Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles


     embedded as well as end2end automotive architectures, and will demonstrate selected data
     tainting techniques. Future innovation projects need to investigate step by step more PETs
     in order to ensure cross-stakeholder inter-operability and policy enforcement as well as tackle
     all regulatory goals appropriately in order to fill the automotive privacy engineering toolbox.
     References
     1    European Data Protection Board, Guidelines 1/2020 on processing personal data
          in the context of connected vehicles and mobility related applications. Jan 2020,
          https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/default/files/consultation/edpb_guidelines_
          202001_connectedvehicles.pdf
     2    ENISA, Data Protection Engineering. Jan 2022, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/
          publications/data-protection-engineering/@@download/fullReport



      4       Working groups
     4.1      Results of Concluding Discussions
     Frank Kargl (Universität Ulm – Ulm, DE)
     Ioannis Krontiris (Huawei Technologies – München, DE)
     Nataša Trkulja (Universität Ulm – Ulm, DE)
     André Weimerskirch (Lear Corporation – Ann Arbor, US)
     Ian Williams (University of Michigan – Ann Arbor, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian Williams


     The seminar was organized in five 3-hour sessions with remote attendance due to the COVID
     pandemic. There was an introductory session and a concluding session, and the other time
     was spent on presentations and discussions around ethical, regulatory, legal, commercial, and
     technology aspects. The seminar sessions were loosely linked to those four topics with many
     cross-area considerations and discussions. The following summarizes the main results of the
     discussions.

     4.1.1      Ethics
     The ethical aspect considers the trustworthy and responsible use of personal data which is a
     matter of respect to other people including a company’s customers. During discussions in
     the online seminar, we concluded that data protection regulation will not necessarily create
     ethical behavior but rather compliance. Compliance requires validation, which also creates
     cost and overhead. Furthermore, compliance does not rule out unethical behavior, e.g., today
     many terms of use and license agreements lure users to give their consent against their best
     interest. This observation led to a number of questions being raised and debated.
         The working group discussed that stakeholders, in particular companies, might have an
     incentive to provide privacy protection that goes beyond minimal compliance and to establish
     a reputation of trustworthiness. There are examples available from the consumer electronics
     domain, even though only a few. For instance, the public opinion is that Apple is trustworthy
     in terms of privacy protection, but it is unclear if and how automotive stakeholders can
     follow Apple’s role model.
         It is also unclear what a company’s incentive to act in a trustworthy way is and which
     regulatory steps can foster trustworthiness. Ideas include a regulatory requirement for
     transparency and demonstration of data protection practices. It is uncertain if a push
Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian Williams                    97


for more trustworthiness as a concept replaces or extends data protection regulation. A
concern raised is that perceived trustworthy behavior of a company might be created by
clever marketing without the company providing actual trustworthiness. It is unclear how
such practices can be stopped though. It appears this leads to a regulatory requirement for
more transparency and for demonstrable privacy practices. At the same time, perceived
trust and how technical safeguards to protect privacy are communicated to end-consumers is
an important aspect that is built on trustworthiness and ethical behavior instead of strict
compliance. We also discussed how this would evolve in a larger international setting. There
is a strong overlap with the legal domain discussions presented in the next section.
    The next discussion block was around the ethical goals of handling and processing personal
data. It is unclear how to provide companies guidance on behaving ethically. We discussed
that a reasonable expectation of privacy of a reasonable / average person could be a guiding
principle where we would, e.g., ask whether such a person might expect to be unobserved by
cameras when driving in an AV taxi.
    We also identified that there is a lack of understanding of privacy expectations of people
in traffic and mobility and this would require further research. For instance, it is necessary
to understand under what circumstances end-consumers are willing to share information
voluntarily for the greater or personal good, and what data they are willing to share.
Experiences from some research projects show that people are usually willing to share data
to contribute to research.
    Overall, we think that this is an interesting concept to follow-up on and it would definitely
help to explore the alternatives to the apparent trade-off between ever stricter regulation
and abundant (ab-)use of personal data in cooperative, connected and automated mobility
(CCAM) systems.

4.1.2   Regulation
The regulatory and the legal aspect of privacy are often termed data protection. Automated
vehicles (AVs) face a number of legal and regulatory challenges that come from the complex
intersection of data privacy law (often new and still developing) with a long-standing system
of motor vehicle law and regulation. We discussed how we can ensure compliance and how
we can encourage anything more than legally required compliance minimums. One train of
thought is that heavy fines or significant potential legal liability are the only way to ensure
even minimal compliance. An alternative argument is that potential reputational damage
or the potential to use privacy protection as a marketing tool could be used to encourage
compliance and even encourage privacy protection beyond minimum legal compliance. It
is a challenge then for companies to prove compliance and for other stakeholders including
end-consumers to check for compliance. Much of this discussion overlapped with a wider
discussion on corporate trustworthiness, and what it means to be a “trustworthy” company.
    A main question to answer is whether privacy issues around AVs (and connected vehicles)
rise to a level that requires automotive-specific privacy laws and regulations, or whether
privacy of AVs should be addressed through existing (or proposed) laws, regulation, and
policy intended to govern privacy issues across a number of technologies.
    The team discussed the effects of regulation on future technology and raised the concern
that overly stringent privacy rules may lead manufacturers and developers to avoid new
technologies or region-limit their deployments. Another challenge is how we communicate legal
and regulatory requirements. In particular, how do we ensure that regulatory requirements
are understood by engineers and developers in a way that assists the overall policy goal of
a law/regulation, and how can we define threshold values around privacy for the average /




                                                                                                    22042
98   22042 – Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles


     reasonable person, as this would also guide the courts in future disputes? The same holds
     for the communication with the end-consumers, e.g., how can we communicate a vehicle’s
     level of privacy-friendliness or regulatory compliance to end-consumers similar to the idea of
     the NCAP 5-star safety rating.
         A main challenge for industry are different regional data privacy regulations. For instance,
     the demands of the GDPR differ from those found in state privacy laws in the US, and from
     other countries’ privacy regimes. Safety regulations also differ between countries and regions,
     so manufacturers may be more willing to deal with regional differences rather than try and
     apply standards more broadly. It is unclear if and how this will affect the deployment of AVs.
         Finally, AVs could be used as a source of data for law enforcement – even as incidental
     surveillance (recording street activity as part of their regular activities). This might raise
     concerns both for industry stakeholders and end-consumers, and it is unclear how the
     stakeholders can balance privacy protection with cooperating with lawful data requests from
     law enforcement.

     4.1.3   Commercial
     The working group pointed out a few automotive specific challenges around privacy and
     self-driving vehicles that are described in the following. There seems to be a trade-off between
     privacy and safety and efficiency in that more detailed widely available data will enable
     more and better safety systems. In many applications and scenarios, it is unclear what this
     trade-off is though. It is also unclear who is supposed to decide about the trade-off. In fact,
     it is unclear if the automotive industry stakeholders should take the lead here or leave it to
     lawmakers to define regulation, and then the industry stakeholders only comply with said
     regulation. There are further trade-offs between privacy and traffic efficiency, pollution, and
     profits. There are also further trade-offs between physical safety such as emotional protection,
     pollution protection, etc. The same questions arise for these additional trade-off areas.
          There are commercial limitations that limit the ability to go beyond the minimum legal
     requirements. OEMs and suppliers move in a highly regulated and competitive space, which
     limits flexibility of industry stakeholders. There might be other regulations that need to
     be considered for conflicts or contradiction in the context of privacy protection, such as
     right-to-repair law. Finally, it might be unclear who owns the data and hence how access to
     the data should be organized and controlled.
          There are also challenges around the technical solutions. It is cumbersome to analyze each
     use-case/application and then design and implement a custom privacy solution. Maintenance
     and extensions are also rather cumbersome since each use-case that touches on the existing
     applications might alter the picture and require additional privacy solutions, and so do
     advances in privacy research and new attacks. Therefore, it appears there is a need for a
     framework, comprehensive technical guidance, and/or a standard to design, implement and
     audit privacy.
          Companies might be able to utilize privacy for a competitive advantage. There are
     companies that implement privacy protection beyond legal compliance and that utilize
     their effort for a competitive advantage. It is unclear whether such an approach would be
     successful in the automotive sector, especially since the margins in the automotive industry
     are rather small compared to consumer electronics. Therefore, it is rather unclear whether
     any automotive stakeholder is willing to take the lead on privacy protection, especially since
     many tech companies don’t appear to approach the topic beyond legal compliance.
Frank Kargl, Ioannis Krontiris, Nataša Trkulja, André Weimerskirch, and Ian Williams                   99


4.1.4   Technology
The privacy-enhancing technologies (PETs) can be used to provide fundamental data pro-
tection principles to an AV system, e.g., minimizing personal data use, maximizing data
security, and empowering individuals. Examples of such PETs include differential privacy,
homomorphic encryption, secure multiparty computation, etc. The group particularly dis-
cussed the case of differential privacy that guarantees privacy protection in the presence
of arbitrary auxiliary information. Differential privacy has been adapted to the context of
location-based services to personalize the information provided to a user. In the context
of the AV system, we can apply differential privacy to vehicle location data (often termed
geo-indistinguishability). Notably, the system can add noise to vehicle location data to
obfuscate the actual position of the driver or passengers. We identified two trade-offs:
    AVs count on an unprecedented amount of data to make decisions and usually it is a
    strict requirement that this data is accurate in order to allow the implementation of
    safety-critical services. This creates a tension with the fact that data needs to be handled
    in a secure and privacy preserving manner.
    The cryptography behind PETs can be computationally expensive like, for example, in
    privacy preserving machine learning. On the other hand, safety critical applications have
    such strict time constraints that makes it impossible to execute several cryptographic
    operations within these constraints.

    A challenge is how to converge privacy protection with safety, based on the strict
requirements of computational efficiency and time constraints. Emerging technologies that
we can consider as solutions to overcoming this problem include Multi-access Edge Computing
(MEC), which brings processing power near the vehicle to meet ultra-low latency requirements.
With the help of MEC, massive computation and storage tasks need not be handled in the
vehicle with its limited power and resources. Instead, these functionalities can be offloaded
to the MEC which can handle it in a more cost-effective way in real-time. At the same
time, 5G as the underlying communication paradigm can guarantee the strict service level
agreements (bandwidth, zero latency, etc.).
    Facilitating the secure and private collaboration between entities is a complex task,
especially in the domain of CCAM that relies on cooperation and communication between
vehicles and nodes. In this context, several entities that belong to different trust domains
must interact with each other to exchange privacy sensitive data in order to enable safety-
critical collaborative services. However, if these interactions are not properly managed, it
can be the cause of privacy leaks. Therefore, there is a need to establish a high level of trust
into received data and the functions that rely on this data. This in turn requires new trust
assessment methods, in order to enable vehicles and nodes to assess the trust level of its
neighbouring stations and received data and to take critical driving decisions.
    A second challenge is how we can assess dynamic trust relationships and define appropriate
trust models for involved entities. In this context the group investigated potential mechanisms.
A promising approach is the employment of Trusted Computing and the enactment of remote
attestation for producing verifiable claims on system properties and integrity.




                                                                                                   22042
100   22042 – Privacy Protection of Automated and Self-Driving Vehicles


             Participants
        Ala’a Al-Momani                 Ioannis Krontiris           Lauren Smith
      Universität Ulm – Ulm, DE       Huawei Technologies –       Cruise – Washington, US
        Ines Ben Jemaa                München, DE
                                                                   Nataša Trkulja
      IRT SystemX – Palaiseau, FR       Jason Millar              Universität Ulm – Ulm, DE
        Benedikt Brecht               University of Ottawa – .
      Volkswagen AG – Berlin, DE      Ottawa, CA                    Jessica Uguccioni
        Michael Buchholz                Kyriaki Noussia           Law Commission of England and
      Universität Ulm – Ulm, DE       University of Reading –     Wales – London, GB
        Thanassis Giannetsos          Reading, GB                   Bryant Walker Smith
      UBITECH Ltd. – Athens, GR         Christos Papadopoulos     University of South Carolina –
        Adam Henschke                 University of Memphis –     Columbia, US
      University of Twente –          Memphis, US
                                                                    André Weimerskirch
      Enschede, NL                      Jonathan Petit            Lear Corporation –
        Mario Hoffmann                Qualcomm – Boxborough, US   Ann Arbor, US
      Continental Teves –               Chrysi Sakellari
      Frankfurt-Sossenheim, DE        Toyota Motor Europe –         Ian Williams
        Frank Kargl                   Brussels, BE                University of Michigan – Ann
      Universität Ulm – Ulm, DE                                   Arbor, US
                                        Yu Shang
        Alexander Kiening             Huawei Technologies –        Harald Zwingelberg
      Denso Automotive – Eching, DE   Shanghai, CN                ULD SH – Kiel, DE
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 22051

Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory
Albert Atserias∗1 , Christoph Berkholz∗2 , Kousha Etessami∗3 , and
Joanna Ochremiak∗4
1       UPC Barcelona Tech, ES. atserias@cs.upc.edu
2       HU Berlin, DE. berkholz@informatik.hu-berlin.de
3       University of Edinburgh, GB. kousha@ed.ac.uk
4       University of Bordeaux, FR. joanna.ochremiak@gmail.com

        Abstract
Finite and algorithmic model theory (FAMT) studies the expressive power of logical languages
on finite structures or, more generally, structures that can be finitely presented. These are the
structures that serve as input to computation, and for this reason the study of FAMT is intimately
connected with computer science. Over the last four decades, the subject has developed through a
close interaction between theoretical computer science and related areas of mathematics, including
logic and combinatorics. This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl
Seminar 22051 “Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory”.
Seminar January 30–February 4, 2022 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/22051
2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Finite Model Theory
Keywords and phrases automata and game theory, database theory, descriptive complexity, finite
   model theory, homomorphism counts, Query enumeration
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.12.1.101



    1    Executive Summary
Albert Atserias (UPC Barcelona Tech, ES)
Christoph Berkholz (HU Berlin, DE)
Kousha Etessami (University of Edinburgh, GB)
Joanna Ochremiak (University of Bordeaux, FR)
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Albert Atserias, Christoph Berkholz, Kousha Etessami, and Joanna Ochremiak


Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory research revolves around the study of the expressive
power of various logics on finite and finitely presented structures, and the connections between
this and different computational models and mathematical formalisms.
    The methods and tools of finite and algorithmic model theory (FAMT) have played
an active role in the development of several areas of computer science. Finite or finitely
representable structures are those that serve as inputs to computation, and the study of the
expressive power of logical languages on such structures has led to fundamental insights in
diverse areas, including database theory, computational complexity, random structures and
combinatorics, verification, automata theory, proof complexity, and algorithmic game theory.
    Over the past four decades FAMT has established itself as a rich research field with a
strong and evolving community of researchers with a shared agenda. Much of the progress
can be traced to the regular meetings of the community: the last such meeting was at
Dagstuhl in 2017, and before that at Les Houches in 2012.


∗
    Editor / Organizer


            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 12, Issue 1, pp. 101–118
Editors: Albert Atserias, Christoph Berkholz, Kousha Etessami, and Joanna Ochremiak
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
102   22051 – Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory


         The principal goals of this seminar included:
      1. To identify fresh challenges in FAMT arising from some of the main application areas as
         well as newly emerging ones.
      2. To make connections between core research in FAMT and other subfields of theoretical
         computer science, such as the theory of combinatorial and continuous optimization
         algorithms, and the theory of homomorphism counts and limit structures.
      3. To transfer knowledge from emerging techniques in core FAMT back to the connected
         subfields and application areas.
      4. To strengthen the research community in FAMT, especially by integrating younger
         members into it.
      5. To provide continuity for what has been a successful model of regular seminars for building
         and consolidating the productive research community in FAMT.

          One of the main goals of this Dagstuhl Seminar was to capitalize on the progress and
      the potential impact of some of the latest developments in FAMT and related areas. Such
      developments include:
          a) The recently established connections between symmetric models of classical computation
      and bounded-variable counting logics. The symmetric counterparts of classical models of
      computations include threshold circuits, linear and semidefinite programs, and algebraic
      circuits. These new results have already been used to establish new upper and lower bounds
      for large families of algorithms by FAMT tools.
          b) The theories of homomorphism counts and limit structures in combinatorics. A recent
      trend of work establishes that distinguishing the structures by the number homomorphisms
      they admit from certain classes of patterns, or to certain classes of patterns, is a fruitful
      alternative to distinguishing them by the logic formulas they satisfy.
          c) Enumeration and counting methods including their use in database query processing,
      among others. One of the goals of this line of research is to understand and classify the
      logical queries for which it is possible to compute a compact representation of the output
      from which the query results can be obtained, efficiently, and on demand.



      Organization and Activities
      The organizers developed a schedule consisting of a number of invited survey talks, a number
      of talks focused on regular contributions proposed by participants, and an open problem
      session.
          The seminar took place in person at Dagstuhl, with essentially all talks (except one)
      delivered by speakers attending Dagstuhl in person. The timing of the seminar coincided
      with the height of the Covid Omicron wave in Germany and Europe. This resulted in a
      number of late covid-related cancellations. Some talks, including invited talks, had to be
      cancelled, and the total number of participants (24) was fewer than originally planned.



      Outcomes
      Despite the many organizational challenges presented by the covid surge around the time of
      the workshop, the seminar was highly stimulating and surprisingly successful for those who
      were able to attend, and achieved many of our goals. (And thankfully there were no cases of
      covid during the seminar among those who did attend in person.)
Albert Atserias, Christoph Berkholz, Kousha Etessami, and Joanna Ochremiak                                             103


               Monday             Tuesday              Wednesday          Thursday             Friday

09:00--09:15   Welcome
09:15--09:30   Intros                                  Group photo
09:30--10:00   Martin Grohe       Albert Atserias      Anuj Dawar         Mikolaj Bojanczyk    Christoph Berkholz
10:00--10:30   Martin Grohe       Albert Atserias      Anuj Dawar         Mikolaj Bojanczyk    Wrap-up
10:30--11:00   Coffee break       Coffee break         Coffee break       Coffee break         Coffee break
11:00--12:00   David Roberson I   David Roberson II    Erich Graedel      Thomas Colcombet
12:00--14:00   Lunch Break        Lunch Break          Lunch Break        Lunch Break          Lunch
14:00--14:30   Andrei Bulatov     Szymon Torunczyk     EXCURSION/OUTING   Marius Tritschler
14:30--15:00   Andrei Bulatov     Szymon Torunczyk                        Jerzy Marcinkowski
15:00--15:30   Thomas Zeume                                               Sandra Kiefer
15:30--16:00   Coffee/Cake        Coffee/Cake          Coffee/Cake        Coffee/Cake
16:00--16:30                      Isolde Adler                            Wei-Lin Wu
16:30--17:00                      Sebastian Siebertz                      Open problems
17:00--17:30                      Sebastian Siebertz                      Open problems
               Dinner             Dinner               Dinner             Dinner



    The final program included invited tutorial talks by Martin Grohe on homomorphism
counts (delivered online, to an in person audience at the workshop, due to a last minute
cancellation for Grohe caused by COVID), David Roberson I and II on quantum isomorphism
and its connection to homomorphism counting. These and other related talks at the seminar
highlighted the exciting ongoing work aimed at delineating the power of homorphism counting
on various classes of graphs and structures, with surprising connections to other areas of
mathematics.
    Another invited talk was by Albert Atserias on symmetric computation and descriptive
complexity (replacing a last minute cancellation), highlighted the exciting recent developments
at the intersection of FAMT and combinatorial optimization. Another invited talk on query
enumeration also had to be cancelled due to COVID. The full schedule including all the
other talks of the Seminar can be found in the adjoined table.
    One of the traditions of the series of workshops on Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory
is to have a session in which some of the attendants present open problems and directions for
further research. In this occasion, an hour of the afternoon of Thursday was devoted to such
a session. A couple of days earlier we made a public call for presentations of open problems.
Volunteers would write down their name on an easel pad. By Thursday, three volunteers
came forward who gave 10 minute presentations (aprox.) of their proposals.
    First, Erich Graedel presented an open problem on the topic of his earlier talk on
Wednesday. Shortly put, the open problem asks to develop a proof theory for the emerging
field of semiring semantics for logic formulas. The motivation comes from its potential
applications in database theory and game analysis. Second, Isolde Adler presented an open
problem on a topic covered in an earlier talk by Torunczyk. In brief, the open problem
asks to study the relationships between the various notions of model-theoretic stability for
classes of hypergraphs and more general relational structures. Third, Kousha Etessami gave
a short talk on his recent work on applications of Tarski’s Fixed-Point Theorem to economic
game theory. In a nutshell, the question asks how much faster can one compute an arbitrary
fixed-point of a monotone operator on a grid lattice than it takes to compute the least or
greatest fixed-point by the standard iteration method. A detailed exposition of this open
problem and its motivations can be found in a later section of this report. Finally, during his
talk on Tuesday, Albert Atserias announced an open problem related to the optimal hardness




                                                                                                                    22051
104   22051 – Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory


      of approximating the minimum vertex cover on graphs. Since it was presented earlier during
      a talk, this open problem was not presented during the session. A detailed description of
      this open problem appears also in a later section of this report.
          Overall, the organizers regard the seminar as a resounding success despite the difficult
      circumstances, and judging by the very positive feedback from participants, they agreed. We
      look forward to the next meeting of the FAMT community, hopefully within a few years,
      whether at Dagstuhl or elsewhere.
          The organizers are grateful to the Scientific Directorate of the Center for its support of
      this workshop and the staff of Schloss Dagstuhl for their organisation of our stay (including
      regular covid testing) and their hospitality, despite the many challenges posed by covid.
Albert Atserias, Christoph Berkholz, Kousha Etessami, and Joanna Ochremiak                                 105


 2       Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Albert Atserias, Christoph Berkholz, Kousha Etessami, and Joanna Ochremiak                 . . 101

Overview of Talks
     First-order property testing
     Isolde Adler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
     Symmetric computation, symmetric LP-lifts, and more...
     Albert Atserias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
     Number of variables vs. formula size in existential-positive FO
     Christoph Berkholz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
     Polyregular Functions
     Mikolaj Bojanczyk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
     Complexity classification of counting graph homomorphisms modulo a prime number
     Andrei A. Bulatov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
     On Uniformisation
     Thomas Colcombet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
     Cohomology and Finite Model Theory
     Anuj Dawar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
     Homomorphism Tensors and Linear Equations
     Martin Grohe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
     Semiring Semantics and Strategy Analysis
     Erich Grädel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
     Logarithmic Weisfeiler-Leman Identifies All Planar Graphs
     Sandra Kiefer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
     Determinacy of Real Conjunctive Queries. The Boolean Case
     Jerzy Marcinkowski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
     Quantum isomorphism is equivalent to equality of homomorphism counts from
     planar graphs I & II
     David Earl Roberson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
     First-Order Logic with Connectivity Operators: expressiveness and model-checking
     Sebastian Siebertz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
     Model Checking on Interpretations of Classes of Bounded Local Cliquewidth
     Szymon Torunczyk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
     On guarded team logics
     Marius Tritschler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
     On capturing some equivalence relations by homomorphism counts
     Wei-Lin Wu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
     Iltis: Learning logic in the web
     Thomas Zeume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115




                                                                                                        22051
106   22051 – Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory


      Open problems
         Find C3-equivalent graphs with a factor-2 gap in the size of their minimum vertex
         covers
         Albert Atserias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
         Can the current bounds for computing a Tarski fixed point on a finite (grid) lattice
         be improved?
         Kousha Etessami . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116

      Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
Albert Atserias, Christoph Berkholz, Kousha Etessami, and Joanna Ochremiak                                             107


 3      Overview of Talks
3.1     First-order property testing
Isolde Adler (University of Leeds, GB)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Isolde Adler
 Joint work of Isolde Adler, Polly Fahey, Frederik Harwath, Noleen Köhler, Pan Peng
Main reference Isolde Adler, Noleen Köhler, Pan Peng: “On Testability of First-Order Properties in Bounded-Degree
               Graphs”, in Proc. of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2021, Virtual
               Conference, January 10 – 13, 2021, pp. 1578–1597, SIAM, 2021.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611976465.96


Property testing (for a property P) asks for a given graph, whether it has property P, or
is “structurally far” from having that property. A “testing algorithm” is a probabilistic
algorithm that answers this question with high probability correctly, by only looking at small
parts of the input. Testing algorithms are thought of as “extremely efficient”, making them
relevant in the context of large data sets.
    In this talk I will present recent positive and negative results about testability of properties
definable in first-order logic and monadic second-order logic on classes of bounded-degree
graphs.



3.2     Symmetric computation, symmetric LP-lifts, and more...
Albert Atserias (UPC Barcelona Tech, ES)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Albert Atserias
 Joint work of Albert Atserias, Anuj Dawar, Joanna Ochremiak
Main reference Albert Atserias, Anuj Dawar, Joanna Ochremiak: “On the Power of Symmetric Linear Programs”, J.
               ACM, Vol. 68(4), pp. 26:1–26:35, 2021.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3456297
Main reference Albert Atserias, Joanna Ochremiak: “Definable Ellipsoid Method, Sums-of-Squares Proofs, and the
               Isomorphism Problem”, in Proc. of the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer
               Science, LICS 2018, Oxford, UK, July 09-12, 2018, pp. 66–75, ACM, 2018.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3209108.3209186


Descriptive complexity can be thought of as addressing the same fundamental questions as
computational complexity theory but in a different model of computation. Unlike Turing
machines or Boolean circuits, that get their inputs as strings, the machines and circuits of
this model get their inputs as unordered sets of tuples of atomic objects; e.g., graphs. The
computation is then supposed to develop in a symmetry-preserving way. In the talk, we
discuss the power of fixed-point logic with counting, FPC, and of linear programming lifts,
LP-lifts, as models of symmetric polynomial-time computation. We also report on the status
of the program that asks to settle some of the most relevant questions of complexity theory
in this restricted model, and do so unconditionally.




                                                                                                                    22051
108   22051 – Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory


      3.3     Number of variables vs. formula size in existential-positive FO
      Christoph Berkholz (HU Berlin, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Christoph Berkholz
       Joint work of Christoph Berkholz, Hubie Chen
      Main reference Christoph Berkholz, Hubie Chen: “Compiling Existential Positive Queries to Bounded-Variable
                     Fragments”, in Proc. of the 38th ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI Symposium on Principles of
                     Database Systems, PODS 2019, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, June 30 – July 5, 2019, pp. 353–364,
                     ACM, 2019.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3294052.3319693


      A crucial property of bounded-variable fragments of first-order logic is that they can be
      evaluated in polynomial time. It is therefore a useful preprocessing step to rewrite, if possible,
      a first-order query to a logically equivalent one with a minimum number of variables. However,
      it may occur that reducing the number of variables causes an increase in formula size. We
      investigate this trade-off for the existential-positive fragment of first-order queries, where
      variable minimisation is decidable in general. In particular, we study the blow-up in the
      formula size when compiling existential-positive queries to the bounded variable fragment of
      positive first-order logic. While the increase of the formula size is always at most exponential,
      we identify situations (based on the signature and the number of variables) where only a
      polynomial blow-up is needed. In all other cases, we show that an exponential lower bound
      on the formula size of the compiled formula that matches the general upper bound. This
      exponential lower bound is unconditional, and is the first unconditional lower bound for
      formula size with respect to the studied compilation; it is proved via establishing a novel
      interface with circuit complexity which may be of future interest.



      3.4     Polyregular Functions
      Mikolaj Bojanczyk (University of Warsaw, PL)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Mikolaj Bojanczyk


      Transducers are like automata, but instead of accepting/rejecting they produce an output,
      such as a string or a tree. In my talk, I will discuss some recent results transducers, mainly
      about the class of polyregular transducers, which can be seen as a candidate for the notion
      of “regular” string-to-string transducers of polynomial growth. I will discuss how this class
      can be characterised in many different ways, including logic, automata, and λ-calculus. From
      a finite model theory point of view, the most interesting fact is that it makes sense to
      consider mso interpretations where positions in the output string are represented by k-tuples
      of positions in the input string. It turns out that, somewhat surprisingly, such functions are
      closed under composition if the inputs and outputs are strings.
      References
      1    M. Bojanczyk. “Polyregular functions”. CoRR abs/1810.08760 , 2018.
Albert Atserias, Christoph Berkholz, Kousha Etessami, and Joanna Ochremiak                                        109


3.5     Complexity classification of counting graph homomorphisms modulo
        a prime number
Andrei A. Bulatov (Simon Fraser University – Burnaby, CA)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Andrei A. Bulatov
 Joint work of Amirhossein Kazeminia, Andrei A. Bulatov
Main reference Amirhossein Kazeminia, Andrei A. Bulatov: “Counting Homomorphisms Modulo a Prime Number”,
               in Proc. of the 44th International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science,
               MFCS 2019, August 26-30, 2019, Aachen, Germany, LIPIcs, Vol. 138, pp. 59:1–59:13, Schloss
               Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.MFCS.2019.59


Counting graph homomorphisms and its generalizations such as the Counting Constraint
Satisfaction Problem (CSP), its variations, and counting problems in general have been
intensively studied since the pioneering work of Valiant. While the complexity of exact
counting of graph homomorphisms (Dyer and Greenhill, 2000) and the counting CSP (Bulatov,
2013, and Dyer and Richerby, 2013) is well understood, counting modulo some natural number
has attracted considerable interest as well. In their 2015 paper Faben and Jerrum suggested
a conjecture stating that counting homomorphisms to a fixed graph H modulo a prime
number is hard whenever it is hard to count exactly, unless H has automorphisms of certain
kind. In this paper we confirm this conjecture. As a part of this investigation we develop
techniques that widen the spectrum of reductions available for modular counting and apply
to the general CSP rather than being limited to graph homomorphisms.



3.6     On Uniformisation
Thomas Colcombet (CNRS – Paris, FR)
      License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Thomas Colcombet
 Joint work of Thomas Colcombet, Alex Rabinovich


In this talk, I will present several questions and results related to uniformisation questions
for first-order and monadic second-order theory (MSO). Uniformisation consists in, given a
formula ϕ(X, p̄), where p̄ is a tuple of parameters, to find a formula ψ(X, p̄) such that: (1) If
ψ(X, p̄) holds, then ϕ(X, p̄) holds, and (2) is ϕ(X, p̄) holds for some X, then there exists a
unique X such that psi(X, p̄) holds. in other words, if a formula has a solution, it is possible
to define a unique solution. Of course these questions are parametrised by the logic and the
family of models under consideration.
    Question pertaining to uniformisation are various. Some logics may admit uniformisation
on some models. Some logics may require a more expressive logic for uniformisation. And
uniformisability can be seen as a decision procedure.
    In this talk, I will survey some results of these forms on finite and infinite structure, for
first-order or monadic second-order logic. In particular, I will explain how the algebraic
approach can be used to answer some uniformisability questions for MSO logic over countable
ordinals. More precisely, it was is known since 1998 by Shelah and Lifshes that MSO is
uniformisable in itself over all ordinals shorter than ω ω (non-uniformly), and that it is
not true beyond. I will present recent unpublished new results in collaboration with Alex
Rabinovich: (a) there is a single construct that can be added to MSO in order to uniformise
MSO over all countable ordinals (the ability to choose a unique cofinal set of order-type
omega); and (2) that it is possible to decide, given an MSO formula, whether it can be
uniformised in MSO itself over all countable ordinals.


                                                                                                               22051
110   22051 – Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory


      3.7    Cohomology and Finite Model Theory
      Anuj Dawar (University of Cambridge, GB)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Anuj Dawar
       Joint work of Samson Abramsky, Adam Ó Conghaile, Anuj Dawar


      In this talk I gave a brief introduction to algebraic topology intended for the finite model
      theory audience, leading up to a definition of cohomology. With this in hand, I discussed
      some potential applications of the ideas in finite model theory. In particular, we look at a
      collection of partial solutions to a constraint satisfaction problem as a presheaf and identify
      cohomological obstructions to satisfiability. This allows us to draw conclusions about the
      expressive power of fixed-point logic extended with operators for solving systems of linear
      Diophantine equations.



      3.8    Homomorphism Tensors and Linear Equations
      Martin Grohe (RWTH Aachen University, DE)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Martin Grohe
       Joint work of Martin Grohe, Gaurav Rattan, Tim Seppelt
      Main reference Martin Grohe, Gaurav Rattan, Tim Seppelt: “Homomorphism Tensors and Linear Equations”,
                     CoRR, Vol. abs/2111.11313, 2021.
                URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2111.11313


      Lovász (1967) showed that two graphs G and H are isomorphic if and only if they are
      homomorphism indistinguishable over the class of all graphs, i.e. for every graph F, the
      number of homomorphisms from F to G equals the number of homomorphisms from F to
      H. Recently, homomorphism indistinguishability over restricted classes of graphs such as
      bounded treewidth, bounded treedepth and planar graphs, has emerged as a surprisingly
      powerful framework for capturing diverse equivalence relations on graphs arising from logical
      equivalence and algebraic equation systems. In this paper, we provide a unified algebraic
      framework for such results by examining the linear-algebraic and representation-theoretic
      structure of tensors counting homomorphisms from labelled graphs. The existence of certain
      linear transformations between such homomorphism tensor subspaces can be interpreted
      both as homomorphism indistinguishability over a graph class and as feasibility of an
      equational system. Following this framework, we obtain characterisations of homomorphism
      indistinguishability over two natural graph classes, namely trees of bounded degree and
      graphs of bounded pathwidth, answering a question of Dell et al. (2018).
Albert Atserias, Christoph Berkholz, Kousha Etessami, and Joanna Ochremiak                                                111


3.9     Semiring Semantics and Strategy Analysis
Erich Grädel (RWTH Aachen, DE)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Erich Grädel
 Joint work of Erich Grädel, Niels Lücking, Matthias Naaf
Main reference Erich Grädel, Niels Lücking, Matthias Naaf: “Semiring Provenance for Büchi Games: Strategy
               Analysis with Absorptive Polynomials”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2106.12892, 2021.
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.12892


This paper presents a case study for the application of semiring semantics for fixed-point
formulae to the analysis of strategies in Büchi games. Semiring semantics generalizes the
classical Boolean semantics by permitting multiple truth values from certain semirings.
Evaluating the fixed-point formula that defines the winning region in a given game in an
appropriate semiring of polynomials provides not only the Boolean information on who wins,
but also tells us how they win and which strategies they might use. This is well-understood
for reachability games, where the winning region is definable as a least fixed point. The case of
Büchi games is of special interest, not only due to their practical importance, but also because
it is the simplest case where the fixed-point definition involves a genuine alternation of a
greatest and a least fixed point. We show that, in a precise sense, semiring semantics provide
information about all absorption-dominant strategies – strategies that win with minimal
effort, and we discuss how these relate to positional and the more general persistent strategies.
This information enables further applications such as game synthesis or determining minimal
modifications to the game needed to change its outcome. Lastly, we discuss limitations of our
approach and present questions that cannot be immediately answered by semiring semantics.



3.10      Logarithmic Weisfeiler-Leman Identifies All Planar Graphs
Sandra Kiefer (RWTH Aachen, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Sandra Kiefer
 Joint work of Martin Grohe, Sandra Kiefer
Main reference Martin Grohe, Sandra Kiefer: “Logarithmic Weisfeiler-Leman Identifies All Planar Graphs”, in Proc.
               of the 48th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2021,
               July 12-16, 2021, Glasgow, Scotland (Virtual Conference), LIPIcs, Vol. 198, pp. 134:1–134:20, Schloss
               Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2021.134


The Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) algorithm is a well-known combinatorial procedure for detecting
symmetries in graphs and it is widely used in graph-isomorphism tests. It proceeds by
iteratively refining a colouring of vertex tuples. The number of iterations needed to obtain
the final output is crucial for the parallelisability of the algorithm.
    In my talk, I presented recent work concerning the number of iterations of the WL
algorithm on planar graphs. To be more precise, we found that there is a constant k such
that every planar graph can be identified (that is, distinguished from every non-isomorphic
graph) by the k-dimensional WL algorithm within a logarithmic number of iterations. This
generalises a result due to Verbitsky (STACS 2007), who proved the same for 3-connected
planar graphs.
    The number of iterations needed by the k-dimensional WL algorithm to identify a graph
corresponds to the quantifier depth of a sentence that defines the graph in the (k + 1)-variable
fragment Ck+1 of first-order logic with counting quantifiers. Thus, our result implies that
every planar graph is definable with a Ck+1 -sentence of logarithmic quantifier depth.



                                                                                                                       22051
112   22051 – Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory


      3.11      Determinacy of Real Conjunctive Queries. The Boolean Case
      Jerzy Marcinkowski (University of Wroclaw, PL)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Jerzy Marcinkowski
       Joint work of Jarosław Kwiecień, Jerzy Marcinkowski, Piotr Ostropolski-Nalewaja
      Main reference Jarosław Kwiecień, Jerzy Marcinkowski, Piotr Ostropolski-Nalewaja: “Determinacy of Real
                     Conjunctive Queries. The Boolean Case”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2112.12742, 2021.
                URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.12742


      In their classical 1993 paper [CV93] Chaudhuri and Vardi notice that some fundamental
      database theory results and techniques fail to survive when we try to see query answers as bags
      (multisets) of tuples rather than as sets of tuples. But disappointingly, almost 30 years after
      [CV93], the bag-semantics based database theory is still in its infancy. We do not even know
      whether conjunctive query containment is decidable. And this is not due to lack of interest,
      but because, in the multiset world, everything suddenly gets discouragingly complicated.
      In this paper, we try to re-examine, in the bag semantics scenario, the query determinacy
      problem, which has recently been intensively studied in the set semantics scenario. We show
      that query determinacy (under bag semantics) is decidable for boolean conjunctive queries
      and undecidable for unions of such queries (in contrast to the set semantics scenario, where
      the UCQ case remains decidable even for unary queries). We also show that – surprisingly
      – for path queries determinacy under bag semantics coincides with determinacy under set
      semantics (and thus it is decidable).



      3.12      Quantum isomorphism is equivalent to equality of homomorphism
                counts from planar graphs I & II
      David Earl Roberson (Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © David Earl Roberson
       Joint work of Laura Mancinska, David E. Roberson
      Main reference Laura Mancinska, David E. Roberson: “Quantum isomorphism is equivalent to equality of
                     homomorphism counts from planar graphs”, in Proc. of the 61st IEEE Annual Symposium on
                     Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2020, Durham, NC, USA, November 16-19, 2020,
                     pp. 661–672, IEEE, 2020.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00067


      Over 50 years ago, Lovász proved that two graphs are isomorphic if and only if they admit the
      same number of homomorphisms from any graph. Other equivalence relations on graphs, such
      as cospectrality or fractional isomorphism, can be characterized by equality of homomorphism
      counts from an appropriately chosen class of graphs. Dvořák [J. Graph Theory 2010] showed
      that taking this class to be the graphs of treewidth at most k yields a tractable relaxation of
      graph isomorphism known as k-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman equivalence. Together with a
      famous result of Cai, Fürer, and Immerman [FOCS 1989], this shows that homomorphism
      counts from graphs of bounded treewidth do not determine a graph up to isomorphism. Dell,
      Grohe, and Rattan [ICALP 2018] raised the questions of whether homomorphism counts
      from planar graphs determine a graph up to isomorphism, and what is the complexity of
      the resulting relation. We answer the former in the negative by showing that the resulting
      relation is equivalent to the so-called quantum isomorphism [Mančinska et al, ICALP 2017].
      Using this equivalence, we further resolve the latter question, showing that testing whether
      two graphs have the same number of homomorphisms from any planar graph is, surprisingly,
      an undecidable problem, and moreover is complete for the class coRE (the complement
Albert Atserias, Christoph Berkholz, Kousha Etessami, and Joanna Ochremiak                                                113


of recursively enumerable problems). Quantum isomorphism is defined in terms of a one-
round, two-prover interactive proof system in which quantum provers, who are allowed to
share entanglement, attempt to convince the verifier that the graphs are isomorphic. Our
combinatorial proof leverages the quantum automorphism group of a graph, a notion from
noncommutative mathematics.



3.13      First-Order Logic with Connectivity Operators: expressiveness and
          model-checking
Sebastian Siebertz
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Sebastian Siebertz
 Joint work of Michał Pilipczuk, Nicole Schirrmacher, Sebastian Siebertz, Szymon Toruńczyk, Alexandre Vigny
Main reference Nicole Schirrmacher, Sebastian Siebertz, Alexandre Vigny: “First-Order Logic with Connectivity
               Operators”, in Proc. of the 30th EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic, CSL 2022,
               February 14-19, 2022, Göttingen, Germany (Virtual Conference), LIPIcs, Vol. 216, pp. 34:1–34:17,
               Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.CSL.2022.34
Main reference Michal Pilipczuk, Nicole Schirrmacher, Sebastian Siebertz, Szymon Torunczyk, Alexandre Vigny:
               “Algorithms and data structures for first-order logic with connectivity under vertex failures”, CoRR,
               Vol. abs/2111.03725, 2021.
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.03725


First-order logic (FO) can express many algorithmic problems on graphs, such as the
independent set and dominating set problem parameterized by solution size. On the other
hand, FO cannot express the very simple algorithmic question whether two vertices are
connected. We enrich FO with connectivity predicates that are tailored to express algorithmic
graph properties that are commonly studied in parameterized algorithmics. By adding the
atomic predicates connk (x, y, z1 , . . . , zk ) that hold true in a graph if there exists a path
between (the valuations of) x and y after (the valuations of) z1 , . . . , zk have been deleted, we
obtain separator logic F O+conn. We thereby obtain a logic that can express many interesting
problems such as the feedback vertex set problem and elimination distance problems to
first-order definable classes.
    We first study the expressive power of the new logic. We then study the model-checking
problem and prove that from the point of view of parameterized complexity, under standard
complexity theoretical assumptions, the frontier of tractability of separator logic is almost
exactly delimited by classes excluding a fixed topological minor. From the atomic case
of connectivity predicates we obtain the first deterministic data structure for connectivity
under batched vertex failures where for every fixed number of failures, all operations can be
performed in constant time.
    This talk is based on the results presented in [2] and [1].
References
1    Michał Pilipczuk, Nicole Schirrmacher, Sebastian Siebertz, Szymon Toruńczyk, and Alex-
     andre Vigny. Algorithms and data structures for first-order logic with connectivity under
     vertex failures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.03725, 2021.
2    Nicole Schirrmacher, Sebastian Siebertz, and Alexandre Vigny. First-order logic with
     connectivity operators. In 30th EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic
     (CSL 2022). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.




                                                                                                                       22051
114   22051 – Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory


      3.14      Model Checking on Interpretations of Classes of Bounded Local
                Cliquewidth
      Szymon Torunczyk (University of Warsaw, PL)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Szymon Torunczyk
       Joint work of Édouard Bonnet, Jan Dreier, Jakub Gajarský, Stephan Kreutzer, Nikolas Mählmann, Pierre Simon,
                     Szymon Toruńczyk
      Main reference Michal Pilipczuk, Nicole Schirrmacher, Sebastian Siebertz, Szymon Torunczyk, Alexandre Vigny:
                     “Algorithms and data structures for first-order logic with connectivity under vertex failures”, CoRR,
                     Vol. abs/2111.03725, 2021.
                URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.03725


      We present a fixed-parameter tractable algorithm for first-order model checking on interpret-
      ations of graph classes with bounded local cliquewidth. Notably, this includes interpretations
      of planar graphs, and more generally, of classes of bounded genus. To obtain this result we
      develop a new tool which works in a very general setting of dependent classes and which we
      believe can be an important ingredient in achieving similar results in the future.



      3.15      On guarded team logics
      Marius Tritschler (TU Darmstadt, DE)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Marius Tritschler


      Guarded logics and team logics are logics of imperfect information, in different ways. When
      combined, some fragments have nice model theoretic properties while still being reasonably
      expressive. In particular, a technique called “strategy tree transfer” can be applied to show
      a finite model property for these fragments.



      3.16      On capturing some equivalence relations by homomorphism counts
      Wei-Lin Wu (University of California – Santa Cruz, US)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Wei-Lin Wu
       Joint work of Albert Atserias, Phokion G. Kolaitis, Wei-Lin Wu
      Main reference Albert Atserias, Phokion G. Kolaitis, Wei-Lin Wu: “On the Expressive Power of Homomorphism
                     Counts”, in Proc. of the 36th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS
                     2021, Rome, Italy, June 29 – July 2, 2021, pp. 1–13, IEEE, 2021.
                URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LICS52264.2021.9470543


      A classical result by Lovasz states that two graphs are isomorphic if and only if they have the
      same left profile, i.e., they have the same homomorphism counts “from” all graphs. A similar
      result by Chaudhuri and Vardi states that two graphs are isomorphic if and only if they have
      the same right profile, in other words, they have the same homomorphism counts “to” all
      graphs. By restricting the left or right profile to a class of graphs, we have a relaxation of
      isomorphism. In this talk, I will share some results about what relaxations of isomorphism
      do/don’t coincide with a restriced left or right profile.
Albert Atserias, Christoph Berkholz, Kousha Etessami, and Joanna Ochremiak                                       115


3.17      Iltis: Learning logic in the web
Thomas Zeume (Ruhr-Universität Bochum, DE)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Thomas Zeume
 Joint work of Thomas Zeume, Gaetano Geck, Christine Quenkert, Marko Schmellenkamp, Jonas Schmidt, Felix
               Tschirbs, Fabian Vehlken
Main reference Gaetano Geck, Christine Quenkert, Marko Schmellenkamp, Jonas Schmidt, Felix Tschirbs, Fabian
               Vehlken, Thomas Zeume: “Iltis: Teaching Logic in the Web”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2105.05763, 2021.
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.05763


The Iltis project provides an interactive, web-based system for teaching the foundations
of formal methods. It is designed with the objective to allow for simple inclusion of new
educational tasks; to pipeline such tasks into more complex exercises; and to allow simple
inclusion and cascading of feedback mechanisms. Currently, exercises for many typical
automated reasoning workflows for propositional logic, modal logic, and some parts of
first-order logic are covered.
    In this talk I will address (algorithmic) challenges and solution approaches for building
such systems, but also show how the system can be used in logic instruction.



 4      Open problems
4.1     Find C3-equivalent graphs with a factor-2 gap in the size of their
        minimum vertex covers
Albert Atserias (UPC Barcelona Tech, ES)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Albert Atserias


The minimum vertex cover of a graph G, denoted by k(G), is the least cardinality of a set
of vertices that touches every edge. By rounding the straightforward linear programming
relaxation of the problem, k(G) can be approximated within a factor of two in polynomial
time. It is conjectured that, for every positive real ϵ ∈ (0, 1], the problem of approximating
k(G) by a factor better than (2 − ϵ) is NP-hard. Is it also hard for k-variable counting logic
Ck for every fixed k? A precise statement of the problem is the following:
   Question: Is it true that for every natural number k and every real number ϵ ∈ (0, 1]
there exist Ck -equivalent graphs G and H with k(G) > (2 − ϵ)k(H)? One way to ensure
k(G) > (2 − ϵ)k(H) is by having G have independence number at most o(n) and H have
independence number at least (1/2 − −o(1))n, where n = |V (G)| = |V (H)| and n → ∞.
    For k = 2 and arbitrary ϵ ∈ (0, 1], graphs as required in the question can be easily found
(see [1]). For k = 3 and ϵ = 0 it follows from the results in [2] that such graphs do not exist.
For arbitrary positive integer k and ϵ ∈ [0.73, 1], graphs as required are shown to exist in [1].
For k ≥ 3 and ϵ ∈ (0, 0.74], the problem is open.
References
1    Albert Atserias, Anuj Dawar: Definable Inapproximability: New Challenges for Duplicator.
     J. Log. Comput. 29(8): 1185-1210 (2019)
2    Albert Atserias, Elitza N. Maneva: Sherali-Adams Relaxations and Indistinguishability in
     Counting Logics. SIAM J. Comput. 42(1): 112-137 (2013)




                                                                                                              22051
116   22051 – Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory


      4.2     Can the current bounds for computing a Tarski fixed point on a
              finite (grid) lattice be improved?
      Kousha Etessami (University of Edinburgh, GB)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Kousha Etessami


      Let [N ] = {1, . . . , N }.
         Consider a function
          f : [N ]d → [N ]d
      mapping the finite d-dimensional euclidean grid lattice with sides of length N to itself.
           Suppose the function f is monotone with respect to the standard coordinate-wise partial
      order on vectors in [N ]d , meaning that for all x, y ∈ [N ]d , if x ≤ y then f (x) ≤ f (y). By
      Tarski’s (1953) fixed point theorem, such a monotone function f must have a fixed point,
      i.e., there must exist a point
          x′ ∈ [N ]d
      such that f (x′ ) = x′ .
           How hard is it to compute such a fixed point when (a) the function f is given to us as
      a black box and we wish to find a fixed point with a minimum number of queries? or, (b)
      the function f is given to us explicitly but succinctly using a boolean circuit, with d · log(N )
      input gates and d · log(N ) output gates.
           For (a), it is easy to see that standard (Kleene) value iteration, starting from the bottom
      1̄ (or, respectively, top N̄ ) of the lattice [N ]d requires at most d · N queries to find the least
      (respectively, greatest) fixed point of f . On the other hand, suppose we don’t care which
      fixed point we compute. Suppose any fixed point will do. Can we do better?
           This problem has a number of important applications. In particular, efficient algorithms
      for this problem (polynomial in both d and log(N )) would imply polynomial time algorithms
      for supermodular games (a very well studied class of games in economic theory), as well as
      for both Condon’s simple stochastic games and Shapley’s stochastic games, which are long
      standing open questions (see [1].)
           There is a black-box algorithm due to Dang, Qi, and Ye [2], which requires at most
      logd (N ) queries to find a fixed point, and uses a combination of recursion and binary search.
      This algorithm has recently been improved by Fearnley, Palvolgyi, and Savani [3], who give
                                  2d
      an upper bound of log⌈ 3 ⌉ (N ) queries for finding a fixed point. There has also been some
      even more recent (unpublished) results which improve the exponent further, but it remains
      exponential in d.
           What is the best upper bound we can obtain for computing a Tarski fixed point? This
      is very much an open question. Etessami, Papadimitriou, Rubinstein, and Yannakakis [1]
      provide a lower bound of Ω(log2 (N )) queries in the black-box model for (a), already for
      2-dimensional monotone functions f : [N ]2 → [N ]2 . They also show that a total search
      version of the white-box Tarski problem (b) is in both the complexity classes PPAD and
      PLS. (It thus follows from recent results that the Tarski problem is also in the total search
      complexity classes CLS and EOPL.)
      References
      1    K. Etessami, C. Papadimitriou, A. Rubinstein, M. Yannakakis, “Tarski’s Theorem, Super-
           modular Games, and the Complexity of Equilibria”, Proceedings of 11th Innovations in
           Theoretical Computer Science conference (ITCS’20), 2020.
Albert Atserias, Christoph Berkholz, Kousha Etessami, and Joanna Ochremiak                            117


2   C. Dang, Q. Qi, and Y. Ye. “Computational models and complexities of Tarski’s fixed
    points”. Technical Report, Stanford University, 2012.
3   J. Fearnley, D. Palvolgyi, and R Savani: A Faster Algorithm for Finding Tarski Fixed Points.
    arXiv:2010.02618 (2021). (Earlier version in STACS 2021).




                                                                                                   22051
118   22051 – Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory


             Participants
        Isolde Adler                 Erich Grädel                      Sebastian Siebertz
      University of Leeds, GB       RWTH Aachen, DE                   Universität Bremen, DE
        Albert Atserias              Martin Grohe
      UPC Barcelona Tech, ES        RWTH Aachen University, DE         Szymon Torunczyk
        Christoph Berkholz                                            University of Warsaw, PL
                                     Sandra Kiefer
      HU Berlin, DE                 RWTH Aachen, DE
        Mikolaj Bojanczyk                                              Marius Tritschler
                                     Aliaume Lopez                    TU Darmstadt, DE
      University of Warsaw, PL      ENS – Gif-sur-Yvette, FR
        Andrei A. Bulatov
                                     Jerzy Marcinkowski                Alexandre Vigny
      Simon Fraser University –
                                    University of Wroclaw, PL         Universität Bremen, DE
      Burnaby, CA
        Thomas Colcombet               Rémi Morvan
                                    University of Bordeaux, FR         Igor Walukiewicz
      CNRS – Paris, FR                                                University of Bordeaux, FR
        Anuj Dawar                     Martin Otto
      University of Cambridge, GB   TU Darmstadt, DE
                                                                        Wei-Lin Wu
        Kousha Etessami                David Earl Roberson            University of California – Santa
      University of Edinburgh, GB   Technical University of Denmark   Cruz, US
        Diego Figueira              – Lyngby, DK
      CNRS &                         Tim Seppelt                        Thomas Zeume
      Université de Bordeaux , FR   RWTH Aachen, DE                   Ruhr-Universität Bochum, DE
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 22052

The Human Factors Impact of Programming Error
Messages
Brett A. Becker∗1 , Paul Denny∗2 , Janet Siegmund∗3 ,
Andreas Stefik∗4 , and Eddie Antonio Santos†5
1      University College Dublin, IE. brett.becker@ucd.ie
2      University of Auckland, NZ. p.denny@auckland.ac.nz
3      TU Chemnitz, DE. siegj@hrz.tu-chemnitz.de
4      University of Nevada - Las Vegas, US. stefika@gmail.com
5      University College Dublin, IE. eddie.santos@ucdconnect.ie

        Abstract
The impacts of many human factors on how people program are poorly understood and present
significant challenges for work on improving programmer productivity and effective techniques
for teaching and learning programming. Programming error messages are one factor that is
particularly problematic, with a documented history of evidence dating back over 50 years. Such
messages, commonly called compiler error messages, present difficulties for programmers with
diverse demographic backgrounds. It is generally agreed that these messages could be more
effective for all users, making this an obvious and high-impact area to target for improving
programming outcomes. This report documents the program and the outputs of Dagstuhl
Seminar 22052, “The Human Factors Impact of Programming Error Messages”, which explores
this problem. In total, 11 on-site participants and 17 remote participants engaged in intensive
collaboration during the seminar, including discussing past and current research, identifying gaps,
and developing ways to move forward collaboratively to address these challenges.
Seminar January 30–February 02, 2022 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/22052
2012 ACM Subject Classification General and reference → Surveys and overviews; Human-
   centered computing → Human computer interaction (HCI); Social and professional topics
   → Computing education; Applied computing → Education; Software and its engineering →
   General programming languages
Keywords and phrases Accessibility; Compilers; Compiler Error Messages; Computer Science
   Education; Computer-Human Interaction; Computing Education; CS1; Error Messages; HCI;
   Human Factors; Human Computer Interaction; Novice Programmers; Programming Errors;
   Programming Error Messages; Programming Languages; Software Engineering; Syntax Errors
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.12.1.119




∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector
            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
The Human Factors Impact of Programming Error Messages, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 12, Issue 1, pp. 119–130
Editors: Brett A. Becker, Paul Denny, Janet Siegmund, Andreas Stefik, and Eddie Antonio Santos
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
120   22052 – The Human Factors Impact of Programming Error Messages


       1     Executive Summary
      Brett A. Becker (University College Dublin, IE, brett.becker@ucd.ie)
      Paul Denny (University of Auckland, NZ, p.denny@auckland.ac.nz)
      Janet Siegmund (TU Chemnitz, DE, siegj@hrz.tu-chemnitz.de)
      Andreas Stefik (University of Nevada - Las Vegas, US, stefika@gmail.com)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Brett A. Becker and Paul Denny and Janet Siegmund and Andreas Stefik


      Programming error messages (commonly called compiler error messages) pose challenges
      to programmers – from novices to professionals – with evidence dating from the 1960s to
      present day. In this seminar, we explored the nature of these challenges and particularly
      why they remain largely unaddressed. We further investigated the specific challenges that
      different users including children, non-native English speakers, and those of varying ability
      experience when faced with programming error messages. Finally, we sought to identify
      the most promising avenues to assess the effectiveness of error messages, how to improve
      them with large, demonstrated effect, and how to produce appropriate messages for different
      users with different needs. To this end, we assembled experts from many sub-disciplines of
      Computer Science, including Programming Languages, HCI, Computer Science Education,
      and Software Engineering as well as Learning Sciences. Due to travel restrictions imposed by
      the COVID-19 pandemic, we ran the seminar in a hybrid format, with 11 on-site participants
      collaborating with 17 remote participants. We formulated a schedule for the seminar that
      sought to maximise outcomes for all participants.
          By combining the expertise of these different disciplines, we could identify gaps in
      knowledge and high-priority areas to build a basis for future work. This is the starting
      point for a long-lasting contribution to the field. By uniting communities that have to date
      been working largely in isolation, we sought to gather appropriate and useful data, broaden
      perspectives, build consensus among diverse stakeholders, and begin cross-community efforts
      working in unison going forward.
          During the seminar, we had sessions focusing on existing literature and practice, including
      experience reports from language maintainers, expert users, researchers, and educators,
      to develop a shared understanding of the evidence that exists with regard to effective
      programming error messages. This included the group working together to synthesise existing
      data sets, which we view as an important exercise given that large corpora of errors and error
      message data are generally not openly available. This can make it difficult for researchers
      to answer seemingly simple questions such as: “What are the most frequent error messages
      encountered by [students, professionals, blind, non-native English speakers] in language x?”
      or, “What are evidence-based examples of effective and/or ineffective error messages?”. As a
      result, we identified several fruitful avenues in the form of cross-discipline collaboration, data
      sharing opportunities, and improved focus on what steps are needed to improve efforts to
      answer these questions.
          One of the key objectives of the seminar was to identify areas for immediate research.
      Several problems have been identified, including but not limited to:
      1. linking error messages with the context of the problems and programs being worked on
          when error messages are generated;
      2. understanding the metacognitive aspects involved in the process of interpreting and
          reacting to error messages;
      3. identifying what error messages arise from inconsistent conceptions of how a program
          runs or how it is structured;
Brett A. Becker et al.                                                                             121


4. the effects of error message presentation on error message interpretation (e.g. visual
   queues, structured error messages, etc.);
5. error message classification schemes;
6. metrics to measure and assess error messages;
7. identifying when error messages are “wrong”, what occurs when they steer the programmer
   in the wrong direction, and how this can be avoided;
8. determining the design factors of programming error messages that differ across demo-
   graphic groups (e.g., expertise level, disabilities, native/natural language, etc.).

    Another key objective was to establish new cross-community efforts to improve program-
ming error messages in practice, leveraging the strengths of each community. Participants
discussed open research problems and identified those of high priority and interest including
those listed above. Several interdisciplinary research objectives have been established, and
seeds were sewn to form teams to collaboratively address these research questions.




                                                                                                22052
122   22052 – The Human Factors Impact of Programming Error Messages


       2       Table of Contents
      Executive Summary
        Brett A. Becker and Paul Denny and Janet Siegmund and Andreas Stefik . . . . . 120

      Overview of Talks
           After ++5 Decades of Error Messages, Where Do We Go (right) Now?
           Brett A. Becker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
           Teaching Novices to Read (gcc) Programming Error Messages?
           Dennis Bouvier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
           Blackbox
           Neil Brown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
           Improving Programming Error Messages: Why Should We Bother?
           Paul Denny . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
           Error Messages: Six Seconds of Progress from 25 Years of Research
           Kathi Fisler and Shriram Krishnamurthi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
           Observing Programmers with EEG and Eye Tracking
           Janet Siegmund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
           On the Location of Errors in Source Code
           Tobias Kohn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
           Novices vs Expert Errors: One Size Fits None?
           Linda McIver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
           Error Message Topic Potpourri
           Prajish Prasad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
           Terminology Used When Discussing Programming Error Messages
           Eddie Antonio Santos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126

      Panel discussions
           inHUMANe Programming Error Messages – Position Panel
           Dennis Bouvier, Kerstin Haring, Felienne Hermans, Amy Ko, Michael Kölling, and
           James Prather . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
           Directions for Error Message Research
           Jan Pearce, Neil Brown, Linda McIver, Jens Mönig, and Raymond Pettit . . . . . 128

      Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129

      Remote Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
Brett A. Becker et al.                                                                                              123


 3      Overview of Talks
3.1     After ++5 Decades of Error Messages, Where Do We Go (right)
        Now?
Brett A. Becker (University College Dublin, IE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Brett A. Becker
 Joint work of Brett A. Becker, Paul Denny, Raymond Pettit, Durell Bouchard, Dennis J. Bouvier, Brian
               Harrington, Amir Kamil, Amey Karkare, Chris McDonald, Peter-Michael Osera, Janice L. Pearce,
               James Prather
Main reference Brett A. Becker, Paul Denny, Raymond Pettit, Durell Bouchard, Dennis J. Bouvier, Brian
               Harrington, Amir Kamil, Amey Karkare, Chris McDonald, Peter-Michael Osera, Janice L. Pearce,
               James Prather: “Compiler Error Messages Considered Unhelpful: The Landscape of Text-Based
               Programming Error Message Research”, in Proc. of the Working Group Reports on Innovation and
               Technology in Computer Science Education, ITiCSE 2019, Aberdeen, Scotland Uk, July 15-17, 2019,
               pp. 177–210, ACM, 2019.
          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3344429.3372508


Text-based error messages are the primary mechanism provided to programmers by a
programming language to fix errors in code. Error messages have been studied for over 50
years in the context of education, software engineering, human-computer interaction, and
programming languages. They are often described as confusing and misleading, and are
known to cause frustration, particularly for students and novices, but also for professionals.
They are situated in the complex boundary between the human user and the system and
involve constructed computer languages, human language, cognition, and complex concepts
such as the notional machine. They have impacts on humans and society, including the
economy, the workplace, and human and societal productivity. They also likely impact
diversity, equality, and inclusion as they affect various people and groups differently. The
historical literature has called for several avenues to be explored in order to improve their
effectiveness. Although progress has been made on this front in recent years many areas
remain largely under-explored. New advancements in cognitive science and neuroscience, as
well as approaches based on artificial intelligence show promise in improving error messages.
However much fundamental work remains. This presentation provides an overview of this
landscape, presents a corpus of 330 scientific papers on programming error messages spanning
1965–2019 [1], and provides several avenues for future work – from fundamental human
factors research to those based on emerging technologies.
References
1    Becker, Brett A., & Denny, Paul, & Pettit, & Bouchard, Durell & Bouvier, Dennis J. & Har-
     rington, Brian & Kamil, Amir & Karkare, Amey & McDonald, Chris & Osera, Peter-Michael
     & Pearce, Janice L. & Prather, James, Compiler Error Messages Considered Unhelpful:
     The Landscape of Text-Based Programming Error Message Research. In Proceedings of the
     Working Group Reports on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education
     (ITiCSE-WGR ’19), Association for Computing Machinery, New York, New York USA,
     2019, https://doi.org/10.1145/3344429.3372508




                                                                                                                 22052
124   22052 – The Human Factors Impact of Programming Error Messages


      3.2    Teaching Novices to Read (gcc) Programming Error Messages?
      Dennis Bouvier (Southern Illinois Univ. Edwardsville, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Dennis Bouvier


      Until better tools are commonly used, students could benefit from being better prepared
      to make use of error messages in current systems. Presented are: (1) Ideas for essential
      topics on for novice programmers learning to use error messages effectively. The topics
      include (1a) terminology, (1b) compiler technology for producing error messages, and (1c)
      strategies for using error messages effectively. (2) Ideas for evaluating the efficacy of the
      lesson, including (2a) debugging activity, and (2b) a questionnaire of personal debugging
      practice. In the debugging activity, students are presented with a sequence of programs that
      each have one error message. The student then (i) compiles the program. (ii) reports the
      error message found, (iii) explains the error message in their own words, and (iv) proposes
      a fix for the code without actually editing the code nor recompiling. The questionnaire of
      personal debugging practice asks the student to report on activities they employ in response
      to error messages. These activities were experienced by students as the third lesson of an
      introduction to programming course using the C programming language. The debugging
      activity and questionnaire were repeated two-thirds through the course. Data and analysis
      to be reported at a later date.



      3.3    Blackbox
      Neil Brown (King’s College London, GB)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Neil Brown


      Blackbox is a large dataset of programming activity, collected worldwide from users of the
      BlueJ IDE that helps novices learn to program Java. In this session I will describe the
      dataset and then guide attendees through an activity to explore some of the data and see
      how novices respond to error messages “in the wild”. Finally, I will describe Blackbox Mini,
      a new small subset of the data with a simple schema.



      3.4    Improving Programming Error Messages: Why Should We Bother?
      Paul Denny (University of Auckland, NZ)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Paul Denny


      It is well known that programming error messages can be notoriously difficult for novices
      to understand. This is a long standing problem and one that, if solved, would have clear
      positive impacts on student learning. At this seminar, all participants bring with them a
      wonderful diversity of motivations, interests and expertise for tackling this problem. I will
      articulate my own motivations, which include that students have suffered long enough, and
      will support these with empirical data illustrating the large positive effects that better error
      message have on the programming performance of novices.
Brett A. Becker et al.                                                                                125


3.5    Error Messages: Six Seconds of Progress from 25 Years of Research
Kathi Fisler (Brown University, Providence, US) and Shriram Krishnamurthi (Brown Uni-
versity, Providence, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Kathi Fisler and Shriram Krishnamurthi


We have made significant progress in our theoretical and practical understanding of error
messages. Some of this work is in languages and environments outside the mainstream; in
other cases, these are general results that can be applied widely.
   The talk presents eight vignettes describing results, challenges, and cautions for inter-
pretation.



3.6    Observing Programmers with EEG and Eye Tracking
Janet Siegmund
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Janet Siegmund


To gain deeper insights into how programming error messages are perceived by programmers,
we can use established methods from neuroscience and cognitive psychology, especially
electroencephalography and eye tracking. We demonstrate a possible experiment with EEG
and eye tracking and show what we could do with the data.



3.7    On the Location of Errors in Source Code
Tobias Kohn (University of Cambridge, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Tobias Kohn


Compilers tend to present errors at specific locations in the source code, indicating where
exactly the parsing process or name resolution ground to a halt. We might assume that
this should also be the region to make corrections and amend the source code. Closer
inspection, however, reveals that a substantial part of the errors are not that easily pinned
to a specific location. In fact, it might be more fruitful to think of compiler errors primarily
as inconsistencies in the source code. Consider a variable name, for instance, that is spelled
differently – who is to say that the variable’s declaration must be the correct spelling with
all other deviating occurrences being wrong?
    On the basis of several examples of student code we make a case that indeed most
programming errors may be better viewed as matters of inconsistencies in source code rather
than clear-cut mistakes. Presenting programming errors as such inconsistencies might also
work towards the learners understanding as to why the computer has trouble “understanding”
the program code, with less emphasis on arbitrary syntactic rules that must be followed.




                                                                                                   22052
126   22052 – The Human Factors Impact of Programming Error Messages


      3.8     Novices vs Expert Errors: One Size Fits None?
      Linda McIver (ADSEI, Glen Waverley, AU)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Linda McIver


      A lively discussion of what we need from error messages, and whether novice and expert
      programmers’ needs are irreconcilably different. The consensus, if there was one, seemed to
      be that novices and experts require different things, but there were a few assumptions that
      require further testing.



      3.9     Error Message Topic Potpourri
      Prajish Prasad (IIT Bombay, IN)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Prajish Prasad


      In this session, I facilitated a discussion where we discussed three topics related to error
      messages. For each topic, I provided some background and focus questions. Discussions were
      centred around these focus questions.
          The first topic was related to “The Effect of Error Messages in Learners’ Metacognition
      and Self-Regulation”. Metacognition, in simple words is “thinking about one’s own thinking”.
      When learners encounter a programming task, applying metacognition and self-regulation
      strategies involve identifying strategies that have been successful or unsuccessful in the past
      and evaluating these strategies based on feedback. We discussed how error messages can
      hinder learners’ metacognitive processes and whether we could provide general metacognitive
      scaffolds to help learners recover from these errors.
          The second topic was related to “Error Messages and Live Coding”. Live coding is the
      process of writing code live on a computer. In recent times, several developers as well as
      instructors have been doing live coding. We discussed whether general patterns or guidelines
      can be extracted from live coding videos that show expert developers encountering and fixing
      error messages.
          Finally, we discussed about “Error Messages in Web Programming Languages”, and
      the challenges in designing and improving error messages for such languages. The web has
      so many languages and implementations, that deciphering errors often requires a strong
      understanding of the architecture of the web, of browsers, and of languages.



      3.10      Terminology Used When Discussing Programming Error Messages
      Eddie Antonio Santos (University College Dublin, IE)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Eddie Antonio Santos


      I was interested in the seminar participants’ views and attitudes about the words we use when
      talking about programming error messages (PEMs). I divided this talk into two sections:
      1. I had participants post their favourite error message. “Favourite” was defined however
          the submitter chose.
Brett A. Becker et al.                                                                                              127


2. I had participants collectively edit a Google Document adding to a list of salient words
   found within programming error messages: and a list of words that us – educators,
   language implementers, and researchers – use when talking about PEMs.

    Our discussion revealed that our attitudes towards the wording found within contemporary
PEMs is largely negative, and can be improved in terms of tone. We note that for experts,
words like “illegal”, “offending”, “fatal”, are okay, however novices may be negatively affected
by these “scary” words. We suggest that compiler developers may wish to add another stage
to the compiler explicitly dedicated to providing feedback to the programmer. This module
should be maintained by a professional in human-computer interaction. We also float the
idea that “error” is the wrong word to use when discussion feedback whatsoever.



 4     Panel discussions
4.1    inHUMANe Programming Error Messages – Position Panel
Dennis Bouvier (Southern Illinois Univ. Edwardsville, US), Kerstin Haring (University of
Denver, US), Felienne Hermans (Leiden University, NL), Amy Ko (University of Washington,
Seattle, US), Michael Kölling (King’s College London, GB), and James Prather (Abilene
Christian University, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Dennis Bouvier, Kerstin Haring, Felienne Hermans, Amy Ko, Michael Kölling, and James Prather


The organisers of the workshop posed position statements to the panel. Panellists discussed
both sides of several positions, including (1) Error messages for novice programmers should
be avoided at all costs, (2) Kids should learn programming before learning to read and write
natural languages, and (3) Internationalised programming error messages are harmful.
     With respect to position 1, the position was supported and opposed by most panellists.
For example, the argument can be made that error message understanding is crucial for
forming professional skills and/or for building knowledge of how programming systems work;
likewise the argument can be made when the goal is building confidence with computing, or
using computing as a means to study another discipline, learning should not be hampered by
dealing with avoidable error messages.
     With respect to position 2, the position is supported by some panellists considering that
programming is (or will be) a fundamental skill, and that learning programming early in
life could be beneficial. Most panellists pushed back on the use of the word “before” in the
position, stating that learning to code could, and perhaps should, coincide with learning
natural language(s).
     With respect to position 3, multiple panellists posed the possibility of using programming
error messages expressed in a natural language being learned as a way to expand the
programmer’s experience in the language while programming; though, it was not entirely
clear that such suggestions were entirely genuine. Also suggested was that American
programmers would not be able to adapt to messages in a foreign language, and so all
error messages should be in English. As this round progressed, it became clearer that, at
least, half of the panellists’ positions were somewhat facetious. Taking a tangent in the
discussion, panellists suggested that no written language be used – errors could be conveyed
by “screaming” and/or “electric shock” or memes.




                                                                                                                 22052
128   22052 – The Human Factors Impact of Programming Error Messages


          The final point of discussion was “how is, or how can, change of programming technology
      be influenced for the better?” Michael Kölling suggested that “creating new better things” is
      the way to influence the way forward, and gave Snap! as an example. Amy Ko suggested
      that organised community effort can be a way forward, and that influencing “error messages”
      is a unique opportunity for influencing. Ultimately, the panel suggested this was an Hegelian
      dialectic; and that making error messages more understandable might fit some goals, but not
      others.



      4.2    Directions for Error Message Research
      Jan Pearce (Berea College, US), Neil Brown (King’s College London, GB), Linda McIver
      (ADSEI, Glen Waverley, AU), Jens Mönig (SAP SE, Walldorf, DE), and Raymond Pettit
      (University of Virginia, Charlottesville, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Jan Pearce, Neil Brown, Linda McIver, Jens Mönig, and Raymond Pettit


      Neil Brown, Linda McIver, Jens Mönig, Jan Pearce, and Raymond Pettit served as discussants,
      presenting their views on the impact of error messages on identity and self-efficacy, the needs
      of novice programmers versus expert programmers, what research is needed in these key
      areas, as well as what concerns panellists have as reviewers of conference papers on error
      messages. Panellists also discussed how one might make the delivery of error messages more
      nuanced as well as more accessible to those with disabilities. Neil Brown talked about activity
      traces from the Blackbox data, and how error messages can often send students down the
      wrong route to fix their code, thus increasing their frustration and damaging their confidence.
      Linda McIver talked about how many students come to programming convinced that it’s too
      hard, and that unintelligible error messages are seen as proof. These students are looking
      for evidence that they can’t program, and bad error messages provide that proof. Jens
      Mönig discussed his concern that expectations regarding the positive and negative impacts
      of error messages may be too large given that these impacts are so heavily dependent upon
      many other contextual variables that are difficult to disambiguate. Jan Pearce shared and
      led a discussion on student-produced artefacts that self-describe the negative impacts error
      messages have personally had on them. Participants discussed whether these self-described
      negative impacts were due to the error message content or the error itself. Raymond Pettit
      discussed the differences in the ways novices and experts relate to error messages. Experts are
      accustomed to receiving these messages and use them as a tool in helping to fix a program,
      whereas novices often see the error message as the problem. Attendees commented on the
      ideas shared.
Brett A. Becker et al.                                                                              129


        Participants
  Annabelle Bergum                Felienne Hermans              Ma. Mercedes T. Rodrigo
Universität des Saarlandes –    Leiden University, NL         Ateneo de Manila University –
Saarbrücken, DE                   Tobias Kohn                 Quezon City, PH
  Joe Dillane                   University of Cambridge, GB
University College Dublin, IE     Jens Mönig                   Eddie Antonio Santos
  Kerstin Haring                SAP SE – Walldorf, DE         University College Dublin, IE
University of Denver, US          Raymond Pettit
  Elisa Madeleine Hartmann      University of Virginia –       Janet Siegmund
TU Chemnitz, DE                 Charlottesville, US           TU Chemnitz, DE




        Remote Participants
  Brett A. Becker                 Amy Ko                        James Prather
University College Dublin, IE   University of Washington –    Abilene Christian University, US
  Dennis Bouvier                Seattle, US
Southern Illinois Univ.           Michael Kölling              Seán Russell
Edwardsville, US                King’s College London, GB     University College Dublin, IE
  Neil Brown                      Shriram Krishnamurthi
King’s College London, GB       Brown University –              Andreas Stefik
                                Providence, US                University of Nevada –
  Paul Denny                                                  Las Vegas, US
University of Auckland, NZ        Linda McIver
  Kathi Fisler                  ADSEI – Glen Waverley, AU      Toni Taipalus
Brown University –                Jan Pearce                  University of Jyväskylä, FI
Providence, US                  Berea College, US
  Ioannis Karvelas                Prajish Prasad               Jan Vahrenhold
University College Dublin, IE   IIT Bombay, IN                Universität Münster, DE




                                                                                                 22052
130   22052 – The Human Factors Impact of Programming Error Messages
