                                              Superpolynomial Length Lower Bounds for Tree-Like
                                                Semantic Proof Systems with Bounded Line Size

                                                          Susanna F. de Rezende                           David Engström
                                                             Lund University                              Lund University
                                                            Yassine Ghannane                                Kilian Risse
                                                          University of Copenhagen                         Lund University
arXiv:2604.28172v1 [cs.CC] 30 Apr 2026




                                                                                       May 1, 2026


                                                                                          Abstract

                                            We prove superpolynomial length lower bounds for the semantic tree-like Frege refutation system
                                                                                                                   1−𝜀
                                         with bounded line size. Concretely, for any function 𝑛 2−𝜀 ≤ 𝑠(𝑛) ≤ 2𝑛 we exhibit an explicit family 𝒜
                                         of 𝑛-variate CNF formulas 𝐴, each of size |𝐴| ≤ 𝑠(𝑛)1+𝜀 , such that if 𝐴 is chosen uniformly from 𝒜,
                                         then asymptotically almost surely any tree-like Frege refutation of 𝐴 in line-size 𝑠(𝑛) is of length super-
                                         polynomial in |𝐴|. Our lower bounds apply also to tree-like degree-𝑑 threshold systems, for 𝑑 ≈ log 𝑠(𝑛) ,
                                                                                                                                                     

                                         that is, for 𝑑 up to 𝑛 1−𝜀 . More generally, our lower bounds apply to the semantic version of these systems
                                         and to any semantic tree-like proof system where the number of distinct lines is bounded by exp 𝑠(𝑛) .
                                                                                                                                                   
1   Introduction
Proof complexity studies certificates of unsatisfiability, refutations, of unsatisfiable propositional
formulas. The original motivation for the conception of the field [Rec75, CR79] was to establish
that there are propositional formulas that require refutations of size superpolynomial in the
formula size or, equivalently, to separate NP from coNP. Since such a separation would
imply P ≠ NP we do not expect a resolution in the near future.
    The general approach towards such a separation is to study constrained refutations and
show length lower bounds on ever stronger classes of refutations, proof systems, to ultimately
establish that there is no polynomially bounded proof system: the goal is to establish that there
is no proof system that has polynomially-size refutations for all unsatisfiable propositional
formulas. Establishing that there is no polynomially bounded proof system readily separates NP
from coNP.
    As an intermediary goal proof complexity studies different proof systems and compares
their relative deductive abilities. Lower bounds on limited proof systems are interesting in
their own right yielding lower bounds for limited models of computation and applications to
coding theory [KM24a, KM24b], the theory of total search problems [GHJ+ 24], and many other
adjacent areas. These lower bounds are well-motivated but do not seem to directly contribute
towards the original objective of establishing NP ≠ coNP.
    Progress on extending lower bounds from weak proof systems such as resolution, cutting
planes, or bounded-depth Frege to more powerful systems is slow. If the ultimate aim is to establish
lower bounds for strong proof systems that can efficiently refute simple benchmark formulas
such as the pigeonhole principle, Tseitin contradictions, or the clique-coloring formulas, then we need to
develop lower bound strategies that do not depend on these formulas requiring long refutations
in a proof system. Since worst-case refutation size lower bounds on constraint satisfaction
problems (CSPs) follow from the hardness of simple combinatorial principles [AO18], it is
common to study average-case CSP instances, such as the clique or coloring formulas on an
Erdős-Rényi random graph, and prove refutation size lower bounds on these formulas in weak
proof systems. The hope is that since we cannot obtain average-case lower bounds from the
hardness of simple formulas, these lower bounds hold regardless of whether simple formulas
are hard for a given proof system. While the average-case lower bound arguments for weak
proof systems are getting more and more involved, we cannot rule out that these lower bounds
hinge on the fact that it is hard to refute simple combinatorial principles.
    Our main result is an average-case refutation length lower bound for semantic tree-like proof
systems with a bounded number of distinct lines. More concretely we show that there exists
an explicit family 𝒜 of 𝑛-variate CNF formulas 𝐴 such that if 𝐴 is chosen uniformly from 𝒜,
then any tree-like semantic proof system over a bounded number of lines asymptotically almost
surely requires super-polynomial length to refute 𝐴. These proof systems are very strong,
and can efficiently refute simple combinatorial principles such as the pigeonhole principle,
the Tseitin contradictions, and the clique-colouring formula, thus establishing that our lower
bound technique does not hinge on these principles being hard. As corollaries, we obtain
average-case super-polynomial length lower bounds for tree-like Frege refutation systems with
lines of bounded size, and for tree-like degree-𝑑 threshold proof systems, for 𝑑 up to 𝑛 1−𝜀 . Our
lower bounds apply for the semantic version of these systems and the parameters are close to
optimal: allowing slightly larger line-size, or slightly larger degree, would allow these proof
systems to represent the CNF formula 𝐴 on a single line, thus allowing these semantic systems
to immediately derive contradiction.


                                                    1
1.1   Semantic Proof Systems
For concreteness, let us informally define these semantic proof systems; we refer to Section 3 for
a formal treatment. Consider a set ℱ of 𝑛-variate Boolean functions. In the following, we view
each function 𝑓 ∈ ℱ as an indicator of a set of assignments 𝛼 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 that are ruled out, i.e.,
we think of 𝛼 being ruled out by 𝑓 if 𝑓 (𝛼) = 1. The semantic ℱ proof system, denoted by sem(ℱ ),
is an inferential proof system that operates over proof lines in ℱ : a sem(ℱ ) refutation 𝜋 of a
CNF formula 𝐴 ≔ 𝐶1 ∧ · · · ∧ 𝐶 𝑚 is a sequence 𝜋 ≔ ( 𝑓1 , . . . , 𝑓𝑡 ) such that 𝑓𝑡 = 1 is the constant
1 function and each 𝑓𝑖 is either an axiom, that is, there is a clause 𝐶 ∈ 𝐴 such that 𝑓 is the
indicator of falsifying assignments of 𝐶; or 𝑓𝑖 ∈ ℱ and there are 𝑓 𝑗 , 𝑓 𝑘 with 𝑗, 𝑘 < 𝑖 such that 𝑓𝑖
is (semantically) implied by 𝑓 𝑗 and 𝑓 𝑘 , that is, for all 𝛼 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 if 𝑓𝑖 (𝛼) = 1 then either 𝑓 𝑗 (𝛼) = 1
or 𝑓 𝑘 (𝛼) = 1. The length of the derivation 𝜋 is 𝑡, and 𝜋 is tree-like if each function 𝑓 𝑗 ∈ 𝜋 is used
at most once to derive some other function 𝑓𝑖 . We denote the tree-like sem(ℱ ) proof system
by sem★(ℱ ).
     Semantic tree-like proof systems are very powerful: for any fixed CNF formula 𝐴 ≔
𝐶1 ∧ · · · ∧ 𝐶 𝑚 there is a set ℱ of Boolean functions such     thatÓthere      are semantic refutations
                                                                         𝑖
of 𝐴 over ℱ of size 𝑂(𝑚): if ℱ contains the functions 𝑓𝑖 ≔ 𝑗=1 𝐶 𝑗 𝑖 ∈ [𝑚] , then there is a
sem★(ℱ ) refutation of 𝐴 by iteratively deriving the functions 𝑓𝑖 for 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑚. More generally,
even some large formula families 𝒜 may be refuted by sem★(ℱ ) for small sets |ℱ | ≪ |𝒜|. For
example, the family of Tseitin contradictions on at most 𝑛 variables may be refuted by adding
all linear equations mod 2 to ℱ , and the graph pigeonhole formulas over at most 𝑛 variables
may be refuted by adding linear inequalities to ℱ .
     Furthermore, if |ℱ | = exp Ω(𝑛 log 𝑛) we can assume—without increasing the size of ℱ by
                                             

more than a polynomial factor—that sem★(ℱ ) is well-behaved in the sense that it is complete
and closed under permutations of variables. More formally, for any ℱ , we can construct a
ℱ ′ ⊇ ℱ of size at most |ℱ | · exp 𝑂(𝑛 log 𝑛) that is well-behaved. Indeed, it suffices to include
                                                 

the 3𝑛 functions representing all clauses, to ensure that sem★(ℱ ′ ) is complete. In order to make
it closed under permutations, for every 𝑓 ∈ ℱ , we further include 𝑓 under all permutations of
variables. This increases the size by at most a multiplicative factor exp 𝑂(𝑛 log 𝑛) .
                                                                                              

     We can therefore conclude that there are sets ℱ of size exp 𝑂(𝑛 log 𝑛) such that sem★(ℱ )
                                                                                      

is a well-behaved proof system, and it refutes any fixed formula and even simple families of
formulas. In general, these proof systems can be somewhat unnatural. For instance, we cannot
guarantee that they are closed under restrictions nor that proofs are efficiently verifiable. In
this paper, we consider concrete, natural proof systems that are captured by this definition
of semantic proof systems. We highlight two of these, for which, prior to this paper, no
superpolynomial refutation size lower bounds were known.
     The first of these are tree-like Frege refutation systems operating over Boolean formulas of
size at most 𝑠. We consider the refutation version, where the system is given a CNF formula,
viewed as a set of axioms, and every line of the refutation is either one of these axioms or can be
derived by some sound inference rule from two previous lines. This system can be simulated by
sem★(ℱ𝑠 ), where ℱ𝑠 is the family of formulas of size at most 𝑠, and thus |ℱ𝑠 | ≤ exp 𝑂(𝑠 log 𝑠) .
                                                                                                            

We note that while tree-like Frege simulates general, dag-like Frege, it is unclear whether this
also holds for Frege systems with bounded line-size. This is because, given a length-ℓ dag-like
Frege refutation of a CNF formula 𝐴 with lines containing formulas of size at most 𝑠, the known
simulation produces a tree-like Frege proof of length 𝑂(ℓ ) but increases the maximum size of
the formulas in a line to ℓ 𝑠. This might seem like a mild increase in formula size but, in the
semantic setting, allowing for formulas of size |𝐴| yields trivial upper bounds—the system can


                                                     2
represent the formula 𝐴 in one line and thus immediately derive contradiction.
    The second proof system we highlight are tree-like degree-𝑑 threshold systems which operate
over polynomial inequalities of degree at most 𝑑. Since there are exp 𝑂(𝑛 𝑑+1 ) many distinct
                                                                                  

such inequalities, there is a family ℱ of functions, with |ℱ | ≤ exp 𝑂(𝑛 𝑑+1 ) such that sem★(ℱ )
                                                                              

simulates tree-like degree-𝑑 threshold systems. We note that there are known superpolynomial
lower bounds for this system when 𝑑 is at most logarithmic in 𝑛 [BPS07, GP18, IR21]. Similarly
to the case of Frege, once the semantic version of these systems can encode a contradictory CNF
formula 𝐴 in one line, it can immediately derive contradiction. This implies in particular that
semantic tree-like degree-𝑑 threshold systems can refute any 𝑑-CNF formula in length linear in
the formula size.

1.2   Lower Bounds for Tree-Like Semantic Proof Systems
In order to prove refutation length lower bounds on sem★(ℱ ) refutations that hold for any
set ℱ of bounded size, we need to consider a family of formulas 𝒜 of size |𝒜| ≫ |ℱ | and argue
that if 𝐴 is sampled uniformly from 𝒜, then asymptotically almost surely there are no short
tree-like sem(ℱ ) refutations of 𝐴. We present our lower bounds in three different parameter
settings. The first lower bound minimizes the width of the family of CNF formulas 𝒜.

Theorem 1.1 (informal). There is a family 𝒜 of 𝑛-variate 3-CNF formulas such that for any set ℱ
of 𝑛-variate Boolean functions of size |ℱ | ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝜀 ) the following holds. If 𝐴 is sampled uniformly
from 𝒜, then asymptotically almost surely all sem★(ℱ ) refutations of 𝐴 are of super-polynomial length.

    As corollaries we obtain optimal average-case lower bounds for the tree-like versions
of cutting planes and resolution over linear equations proof systems. We discuss these
consequences in Section 1.3.
    Note that the 3-CNF formulas 𝐴 ∈ 𝒜 for which Theorem 1.1 holds have to be rather dense
since the set 𝒜 needs to be of size |𝒜| ≫ |ℱ |, for any ℱ of size exp 𝑂(𝑛 2−𝜀 ) . If we want to allow
                                                                               

the proof system to operate over significantly more lines, say, |ℱ | ≫ exp(𝑛 3 ), then our family 𝒜
of hard formulas needs to be over formulas of larger width as there are only 𝑂 exp(𝑛 3 ) CNF
                                                                                               

formulas of width 3. The following statement is the intermediate parameter setting for CNF
formulas of constant width.

Theorem 1.2 (informal). For any constant even integer ℓ ≥ 4, there is a family 𝒜 of 𝑛-variate ℓ -CNF
formulas such that for any set ℱ of 𝑛-variate Boolean functions of size |ℱ | ≤ exp 𝑛ℓ −𝜀 the following
                                                                                        

holds. If 𝐴 is sampled uniformly from 𝒜, then asymptotically almost surely all tree-like sem(ℱ )
refutations of 𝐴 are of super-polynomial length.

    Note that the size upper bound on ℱ is essentially optimal as there are exp 𝑂(𝑛ℓ ) many
                                                                                               

ℓ -CNF formulas. Recall that for the theorem to hold it must be the case that |𝒜| ≫ |ℱ | and
hence most formulas in 𝒜 must be dense. For the family 𝒜 we consider, most formulas 𝐴 ∈ 𝒜
            e ℓ ).
are of size Θ(𝑛
    Theorem 1.2, moreover, establishes a strict hierarchy of tree-like semantic proof systems

                              sem★(ℱ4 ) ⊊ sem★(ℱ6 ) ⊊ sem★(ℱ8 ) ⊊ · · ·                              (1)

where sem★(ℱℓ ) refutes any 𝑘-CNF formula 𝐹 with 𝑘 < ℓ in length linear in |𝐹| but, at the same
time, cannot refute all ℓ -CNF formulas 𝐹 in length polynomial in |𝐹|. This implies that this
hierarchy is strict with respect to refutations of polynomial length.


                                                   3
    Finally, we observe that both theorems above imply that most minimially unsatifiable
constant width CNF formulas are dense. In particular, Theorem 1.1 shows that most minimally
unsatisfiable 3-CNF formulas have at least 𝑛 2−𝜀 clauses, and Theorem 1.2 shows that for even
ℓ ≥ 4 most minimally unsatisfiable ℓ -CNF formulas are of almost maximum density. This finding
was somewhat surprising to us, although it is possible that it has already been established
previously by other methods.
    The final parameter regime we consider optimizes the number of lines ℱ while maintaining
that the lower bound is super-polynomial in the formula size.
                                                                                1−𝜀
Theorem 1.3 (informal). For every function 𝑠(𝑛), satisfying 𝑛 2−𝜀 ≤ 𝑠(𝑛) ≤ 2𝑛 we exhibit an explicit
family 𝒜 of 𝑛-variate CNF formulas 𝐴, each of size |𝐴| ≤ 𝑠(𝑛)1+𝜀 , such that for any set ℱ of 𝑛-variate
Boolean functions of size |ℱ | ≤ exp 𝑠(𝑛) the following holds. If 𝐴 is sampled uniformly from 𝒜, then
                                            

asymptotically almost surely all tree-like sem(ℱ ) refutations of 𝐴 are of length superpolynomial in |𝐴|.
    As before, in order to prove lower bounds for tree-like semantic ℱ proof systems for larger
families ℱ , we need to consider CNF formulas 𝐴 of larger width and over more clauses. In this
sense, we can allow for larger families ℱ in terms of the number of variables of 𝐴, but not in
terms of its size. Nevertheless, the lower bound we obtain is a length lower bound, that is, a
lower bound in the number of steps in the refutation, and it is superpolynomial in the number of
clauses of 𝐴. We note, moreover, that it is even possible to push the size of ℱ to exp exp 𝑂(𝑛)
                                                                                                  

albeit at the expense of the lower bound: it becomes polynomial in the formula size instead of
super-polynomial.
    We establish Theorems 1.1 to 1.3 by extending the lower bound approach of constructing a
pseudo-measure [dRPR23]. This approach has been successfully employed to show essentially
optimal average-case clique refutation size lower bounds for the Sherali–Adams proof system
with bounded coefficients [dRPR23]. It has also proven useful to analyse TFNP intersection
classes [HKT24] and similar ideas were used to obtain total coefficient size lower bounds on
Nullstellensatz refutations [PZ24].
    The very high-level proof idea of [dRPR23] adapted to our setting is to construct a linear
pseudo-measure 𝜇 that assigns contradiction to 1 but any weakening of an axiom to a value of
small magnitude. Since the measure is linear, the measure of all the leaves of a tree-like proof,
that is, weakenings of axioms, need to sum to the measure of contradiction, which is equal to 1.
Since the measure assigns each leaf small value, there must be many leaves.
    In the setting of [dRPR23], all the weakenings of axioms are very structured. This is certainly
not the case in our setting as we allow arbitrary proof lines without any syntactic restriction. One
of our contributions is to extend their proof strategy to any fixed set of weakenings of axioms
regardless of their structure. At the heart of the argument is a union bound over all possible
weakenings of axioms of any refutation. Since we have a bound on the number of distinct
proof lines we also have a bound on the number of such weakenings of axioms which allows us
to appeal to the union bound. This argument is in some sense a delicate counting argument.
Finally, let us mention that we do not rely on the non-negativity argument of [dRPR23], which
does seem to rely on the precise structure of proof lines.
    As mentioned in Section 1.1, the set ℱ of proof lines may be chosen such that sem★(ℱ )
refutes all standard benchmark formulas based on simple combinatorial principles. Hence the
approach of constructing a pseudo-measure may have the potential to yield lower bounds for
even stronger proof systems.
Corollary 1.4. Lower bounds obtained by the pseudo-measure approach do not rely on the fact that
simple combinatorial principles are hard for a given proof system.

                                                   4
    While Theorem 1.1 highlights a major strength of the pseudo-measure approach it at the
same time points to its main weakness: in its current form the approach does not depend on
the precise syntactic rules of a proof system. Whether this approach can be adapted so that it
depends on the precise syntactic derivation rules is an interesting direction, which we leave as
an open problem.
    The family of formulas for which we exhibit the superpolynomial lower bound of The-
                                                                                         𝑛
orems 1.1 to 1.3 is the family of 𝑘-clique formulas. For each graph 𝐺 ∈ {0, 1}( 2 ) this family
contains a formula claiming that 𝐺 contains a 𝑘-clique. It is well-known that the maximum
clique size of a graph sampled by including each edge independently with probability 1/2 is
bounded by 2(1 + 𝑜(1)) log 𝑛. Hence formulas sampled uniformly from this family are with high
                                                                                    𝑛
probability unsatisfiable for 𝑘 ≥ 3 log 𝑛. Note that since this family is of size 2( 2 ) = exp 𝑂(𝑛 2 )
                                                                                                       

the restriction on the size of 𝐹 in Theorem 1.1 is essentially tight. To obtain Theorem 1.2 we
consider non-standard encodings of the clique formula that interpolate between the standard
unary encoding used for Theorem 1.1 and the harder to refute binary encoding used to obtain
Theorem 1.3. To get the full range of parameters in Theorem 1.3, apart from the different
encodings, we also need to consider smaller edge probability so that there are no 𝑘-cliques of
size log𝜀 𝑛.

1.3   Lower Bounds for Tree-Like Cook–Reckhow Proof Systems
From Theorem 1.3, we obtain the first superpolynomial refutation length lower bounds on
tree-like Th(𝑑) refutations, i.e., refutations with lines consisting of degree-𝑑 polynomial inequal-
ities, for 𝑑 polynomial in the number of variables. The previously strongest lower bounds held
for 𝑑 logarithmic in the number of variables [GP18, IR21], both building on connections to
𝑑-party communication complexity [BPS07].

Corollary 1.5 (informal). There is a family 𝒜 of 𝑛-variate formulas such that if 𝐴 is sampled
uniformly from 𝒜, then asymptotically almost surely any tree-like Th 𝑛 1−𝜀 refutation of 𝐴 is of length
                                                                          

superpolynomial in |𝐴|.

    Similarly, we obtain length lower bounds for tree-like Frege refutations with lines of bounded
size.
                                                                        1−𝜀
Corollary 1.6 (informal). For every function 𝑛 2−𝜀 ≤ 𝑠(𝑛) ≤ 2𝑛 , there is a family 𝒜 of 𝑛-variate
CNF formulas 𝐴, each of size |𝐴| ≤ 𝑠(𝑛)1+𝜀 , such that the following holds. If 𝐴 is sampled uniformly
from 𝒜, then asymptotically almost surely any tree-like Frege refutation of 𝐴 in line-size 𝑠(𝑛) is of length
super-polynomial in |𝐴|.

    As discussed earlier, the result holds for semantic tree-like Frege with line-size at most
𝑠(𝑛) and, in terms of allowed line-size, our parameters are close to optimal: allowing line-size
𝑠(𝑛)1+𝜀 ≥ |𝐴| would give trivial refutations of 𝐴 in semantic tree-like Frege.
    Corollaries 1.5 and 1.6 hold for 𝑘-clique formulas in the binary encoding. Regarding the
unary encoding, as consequences of Theorem 1.1, we obtain essentially optimal average-case
clique size lower bounds for tree-like versions of the well-studied proof systems cutting planes
and resolution over parities.

Corollary 1.7 (informal). If 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 1/2) is an Erdős-Rényi random graph, then it holds asymptotically
almost surely that tree-like cutting planes and tree-like resolution over parities require length 𝑛 Ω(log 𝑛) to
refute that 𝐺 contains a clique of size 𝑛 Ω(1) .

                                                      5
Organization.    In Section 2 we recall some preliminaries followed by Section 3 in which we
formally introduce semantic proof systems. This is followed by Section 4 in which we state our
main theorem and prove the consequences mentioned in the introduction. Section 5 is devoted
to the proof of our main theorem. We provide some concluding remarks in Section 6.


2     Preliminaries
All logarithms are base 2, for integer 𝑛 ∈ N+ we introduce the shorthand [𝑛] = {1, . . . , 𝑛}, and
sometimes identify singletons {𝑢} with the element 𝑢. For a set 𝑆 denote by 𝑆ℓ the family of
                                                                                

subsets of 𝑆 of size ℓ and, for a random variable 𝑋 and an event 𝑃, let 1𝑃 (𝑋) be the indicator
random variable that is 1 if 𝑃 holds and 0 otherwise.

2.1   Graph Theory
For 𝑛 ∈ N and 𝑝 ∈ [0, 1] let 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑝) denote the Erdős-Rényi random graph distribution over
𝑛-vertex graphs where each of the 𝑛2 edges is included independently with probability 𝑝. It is
                                     

well-known that for 𝑝 ≤ 𝑛 −2/𝑘 graphs 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑝) asymptotically almost surely do not contain a
𝑘-clique.
    Unless stated otherwise, for the remainder of this paper 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸) always denotes a
                                    Ã𝑘
𝑘-partite graph with partition 𝑉 = 𝑖=1   𝑉𝑖 , where each block 𝑉𝑖 is of size |𝑉𝑖 | = 𝑛. A 𝑘-partite
graph 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑝) is sampled by first sampling 𝐺′ ∼ 𝒢(𝑛 𝑘, 𝑝) and intersecting 𝐺 ′ with the
complete 𝑘-partite graph over blocks of size 𝑛.

2.2   Extremal Set Theory
Denote by ℱ a family of sets, and say that a set 𝑋 is shattered by ℱ if 𝑋 ∩ ℱ = 2𝑋 , for
𝑋 ∩ ℱ B {𝐹 ∩ 𝑋 | 𝐹 ∈ ℱ }. The VC-dimension of ℱ , denoted by VC(ℱ ), is the largest integer 𝑑
such that there is a set 𝑋 ⊆ 𝐹∈ℱ 𝐹 of size 𝑑 = |𝑋| shattered by ℱ . We rely on the following
                            Ð
theorem relating the VC-dimension of a family to its size.

Theorem 2.1 (Sauer-Shelah [Sau72, She72]). For a family of sets ℱ with VC(ℱ ) = 𝑑 and 𝑛 ≔
                             Í𝑑 𝑛     𝑑
  𝐹∈ℱ 𝐹 it holds that |ℱ | ≤  𝑖=0 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛 .
Ð


2.3   Proof Complexity
All variables considered are Boolean over the standard {0, 1} basis. A literal ℓ is either a variable
𝑥 or its negation 𝑥,
                   ¯ a clause 𝐶 is a disjunction of literals over distinct variables 𝐶 ≔ ℓ1 ∨ · · · ∨ ℓ 𝑘 ,
and a CNF formula 𝐹 ≔ 𝐶1 ∧ · · · ∧ 𝐶 𝑚 is a conjunction of clauses. We sometimes refer to
the clauses of a formula 𝐹 by axioms, write Vars(𝐹) for the variables of 𝐹, and for a Boolean
function 𝑓 : {0, 1}𝑛 → {0, 1} let CNF( 𝑓 ) denote the canonical CNF encoding of 𝑓 .
    A semantic inferential refutation system 𝑃 is defined over a set of proof lines ℒ, and a
𝑃-derivation 𝜋 of 𝐿 ∈ ℒ from a set of axioms 𝐴 ⊆ ℒ is a sequence 𝜋 ≔ (𝐿1 , . . . , 𝐿 𝑠 ) such that 𝐿 𝑠 = 𝐿
and every line 𝐿 𝑖 ∈ ℒ is either an axiom, that is, 𝐿 𝑖 ∈ 𝐴, or it is a semantic consequence over
Boolean assignments {0, 1}𝑛 of at most two previous lines of 𝜋. A 𝑃-refutation 𝜋 from a set of
axioms 𝐴 ⊆ ℒ is a 𝑃-derivation of contradiction, the length of a derivation is the number of lines
in it, and a derivation is tree-like if every line is used at most once as the premise of an inference
and otherwise called dag-like.


                                                    6
    The semantic cutting planes (CP) proof system is an inferential refutation system that operates
over linear inequalities with integer coefficients; contradiction is represented by 0 ≥ 1 and a
CNF formula is expressed as a system of linear inequalities by translating each of its clauses
𝐶 ≔ 𝑖∈𝐼 𝑥 𝑖 ∨ 𝑗∈𝐽 𝑥¯ 𝑗 to an inequality 𝑖∈𝐼 𝑥 𝑖 + 𝑗∈𝐽 (1 − 𝑥 𝑗 ) ≥ 1. Semantic degree-𝑑 threshold
      Ô          Ô                          Í          Í
proof systems [BPS07] are a natural generalization of cutting planes: for 𝑑 ∈ N, the semantic
threshold proof system Th(𝑑) is the semantic inferential refutation system whose proof lines
are polynomial inequalities 𝑝 ≥ 0 for 𝑝 ∈ Z[𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑛 ] of degree at most 𝑑.
    The semantic Frege refutation system is a semantic inferential refutation system operating
over Boolean formulas, and semantic Frege with bounded line size 𝑠 operates over Boolean formulas
of size at most 𝑠. For a family of Boolean functions ℱ closed under negation, that is, if 𝑓 ∈ ℱ ,
then ¬ 𝑓 ∈ ℱ , let an ℱ -clause 𝑓1 ∨ · · · ∨ 𝑓𝑤 denote a disjunction of formulas 𝑓𝑖 ∈ ℱ . Semantic
resolution over ℱ is the semantic inferential refutation system over ℱ -clauses. Ordinary resolution
is recovered by considering the set of Boolean functions that depend on single variables and
resolution over parities [IS20], denoted Res(⊕), is resolution over F2 affine linear forms.

2.4   Clique Formulas
Before discussing 𝑘-partite graphs, let us consider an ordinary graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸) over 𝑛
vertices.  The unary 𝑘-clique formula over 𝐺, denoted by Clique(𝐺, 𝑘), is defined over variables
  𝑥 𝑣,𝑖 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 and 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘] where a variable 𝑥 𝑣,𝑖 indicates whether 𝑣 is the 𝑖th clique member. The


axioms of Clique(𝐺, 𝑘) are

             𝑥¯ 𝑢,𝑖 ∨ 𝑥¯ 𝑣,𝑗            ∀ 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 ∈ [𝑘], ∀ {𝑢, 𝑣} ∉ 𝐸                      (edge axiom)
             Ü
                   𝑥 𝑣,𝑖                ∀ 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘] ,                                     (block axiom)
             𝑣∈𝑉

where the edge axioms ensure that two non-adjacent vertices are not simultaneously clique
members and the block axioms ensure that at least one vertex is the 𝑖th clique member. It should
be evident that the formula is satisfiable if and only if 𝐺 contains a 𝑘-clique.

Block Encodings       Consider a 𝑘-partite graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸) with blocks 𝑉1 , . . . , 𝑉𝑘 of size 𝑛 each.
We want to encode the claim that 𝐺 contains a 𝑘-clique. Note that if there is a 𝑘-clique in 𝐺, then
it contains exactly one vertex 𝑣 𝑖 from each block 𝑉𝑖 . In other words, the only vertex sets 𝑡 ⊆ 𝑉
that might be a 𝑘-clique satisfy 𝑡 ∩ 𝑉𝑖 = {𝑣 𝑖 } for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘]. Denote the family of these sets
by 𝒯 ≔ 𝑖∈[𝑘] 𝑉𝑖 and call a set 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 a tuple.
         Î

    Let 𝑌 be a set of Boolean variables of size |𝑌| = 2𝑘 𝑛 2 and think of these variables as encoding
                                                        

a 𝑘-partite graph with blocks of size 𝑛 each. For a set 𝑋 of Boolean variables consider any CNF
formula BlockClique : {0, 1}𝑋 × {0, 1}𝑌 → {0, 1} mapping 𝑘-partite graphs 𝐺 and assignments
to 𝑋 such that (1) each clause 𝐶 ∈ BlockClique contains at most one literal over 𝑌, (2) if 𝐺 does
not contain a 𝑘-clique, then for all assignments 𝜌 ∈ {0, 1}𝑋 it holds that BlockClique(𝐺, 𝜌) = 0,
and (3) for each tuple 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 there is a “witnessing” assignment 𝜌𝑡 ∈ {0, 1}𝑋 such that for all
graphs 𝐺 ∈ {0, 1}𝑌 it holds that

                               𝑡 is a 𝑘-clique in 𝐺 ⇔ BlockClique(𝐺, 𝜌𝑡 ) = 1 .                     (2)

In other words, there is a one-to-one correspondence between witnessing assignments 𝜌𝑡 and
tuples 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 . Our results hold for any encoding satisfying the above provided 𝑋 is not too
large |𝑋| ≤ 𝑛 2−𝜀 . As parameters crucially depend on the size of 𝑋 let us discuss three concrete
encodings.

                                                      7
Unary Block Encoding      For a 𝑘-partite graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸) over blocks 𝑉1 , . . . , 𝑉𝑘 of size 𝑛
each let BlockCliqueU (𝐺, 𝑘) : {0, 1}𝑋 → {0, 1} be the CNF formula defined over variables
𝑋 ≔ {𝑥 𝑣 | 𝑣 ∈ 𝑖 𝑉𝑖 } and consisting of clauses
              Ð

                   𝑥¯ 𝑢 ∨ 𝑥¯ 𝑣                     ∀ {𝑢, 𝑣} ∉ 𝐸                                   (edge axiom)
                    Ü
                           𝑥𝑣                      ∀ 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘] .                                   (block axiom)
                   𝑣∈𝑉𝑖

The formula BlockCliqueU (𝐺, 𝑘) is satisfiable if and only if there is a tuple 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 such that the
vertex induced subgraph 𝐺[𝑡] is a 𝑘-clique. Refuting the unary block encoding is at least as
hard as refuting the natural (non-block) encoding as summarized by the next statement.
Proposition 2.2 ([BIS07]). Let 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N+ be integer and let 𝐺 be an ordinary graph on 𝑘𝑛 vertices. If a
proof system is closed under restrictions, then the minimum refutation length to refute the Clique(𝐺, 𝑘)
formula is bounded from below by the minimum length required to refute BlockCliqueU (𝐺, 𝑘) with
respect to any 𝑘-partition of 𝐺.
   In light of Proposition 2.2 we only consider the block encoding of the 𝑘-clique formula. For
Theorems 1.2 and 1.3 we need to consider formulas using fewer variables than the unary clique
formula.

Binary Block Encoding            The
                                    binary encoding of    the 𝑘-clique     formula BlockCliqueB (𝐺, 𝑘) is
defined over variables 𝑋 ≔ 𝑥 𝑖,𝑏 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘] and 𝑏 ∈ ⌈log 𝑛⌉ . For 𝑎 ∈ [𝑛] with binary expansion
                                                                      

𝑎 1 . . . 𝑎⌈log 𝑛⌉ denote by 𝐶 𝑖,𝑎 B 𝑏:𝑎𝑏 =0 𝑥 𝑖,𝑏 ∨ 𝑏:𝑎𝑏 =1 𝑥¯ 𝑖,𝑏 the clause that is falsified if and only if
                                     Ô              Ô
the variables of block 𝑖 encode 𝑎. The formula BlockCliqueB (𝐺, 𝑘) consists of axioms
         𝐶 𝑖,𝑎 ∨ 𝐶 𝑗,𝑏              ∀ 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 ∈ [𝑘], ∀𝑎, 𝑏 such that {𝑣 𝑖,𝑎 , 𝑣 𝑗,𝑏 } ∉ 𝐸(𝐺) .      (edge axiom)
It should be clear that BlockCliqueB (𝐺, 𝑘) is satisfiable if and only if BlockCliqueU (𝐺, 𝑘) is. The
main reason to consider BlockCliqueB (𝐺, 𝑘) is that for 𝑘 = 𝑂(log 𝑛) the number of variables is
exponentially smaller than the size of the formula.

Interpolated Block Encodings            We can interpolate between the unary and the binary block
formulas as follows. Let 𝑚 < 𝑛 be a positive integer and suppose for the sake of exposition
that 𝑛 = 𝑚 𝑐 for integer 𝑐 (otherwise take 𝑐 = ⌈log(𝑛)/log(𝑚)⌉ and pad). For each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘], write
𝑉𝑖 = 𝑣 𝑖,𝛼 𝛼 = (𝛼 1 , . . . , 𝛼 𝑐 ) ∈ {0, . . . , 𝑚 − 1}𝑐 . The 𝑐-ary blocked 𝑘-clique formula, denoted
BlockClique𝑐 (𝐺, 𝑘), is defined over variables
                                 𝑋 ≔ 𝑥 𝑖,𝑗,𝑎 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘], 𝑗 ∈ [𝑐], 𝑎 ∈ {0, . . . , 𝑚 − 1}   ,                      (3)
                                       

where 𝑥 𝑖,𝑗,𝑎 indicates that the 𝑗th coordinate of the vertex chosen from 𝑉𝑖 is 𝑎. For a vertex
𝑣 𝑖,𝛼 ∈ 𝑉𝑖 , define the clause 𝐶𝑣 𝑖,𝛼 ≔ 𝑐𝑗=1 𝑥¯ 𝑖,𝑗,𝛼 𝑗 , so that 𝐶𝑣 𝑖,𝛼 is falsified if and only if the mentioned
                                       Ô
variables encode vertex 𝑣 𝑖,𝛼 . The formula BlockClique𝑐 (𝐺, 𝑘) consists of clauses
                𝐶𝑢 ∨ 𝐶𝑣                        ∀{𝑢, 𝑣} ∉ 𝐸(𝐺)                                     (edge axiom)
                𝑚−1
                Ü
                       𝑥 𝑖,𝑗,𝑎                 ∀𝑖 ∈ [𝑘], ∀𝑗 ∈ [𝑐] .                              (range axiom)
                 𝑎=0

Note that the formula BlockClique1 (𝐺, 𝑘) corresponds to the unary clique encoding whereas the
formula BlockClique⌈log 𝑛⌉ (𝐺, 𝑘) almost corresponds to the binary encoding: the only (minor)
difference is that the interpolated encoding has two variables per coordinate of a vertex (of
which precisely one is set to 1), whereas the binary encoding has a single variable per coordinate.

                                                            8
2.5     𝓕 -Decision Trees
A decision tree is a directed tree where each node has in-degree 1 except the designated root node
which has in-degree 0. The out-degree of each node is either 2 (an internal node) or 0 (a leaf node),
internal nodes are labelled with a variable, and one out-edge of each internal node is labelled 0
whereas the other is labelled 1. Given a Boolean assignment 𝜌 we evaluate a decision tree 𝑇
by starting at the root node 𝑣, and repeatedly considering the label 𝑥 of the current node and
following the edge labelled 𝜌(𝑥) until we reach a leaf.
    For a fixed unsatisfiable CNF formula 𝐴 B 𝐶1 ∧ · · · ∧ 𝐶 𝑚 the falsified clause search prob-
lem Search(𝐴) asks for a clause 𝐶 ∈ 𝐴 falsified by the provided assignment 𝜌 ∈ {0, 1}Vars(𝐴) . A
decision tree for Search(𝐴) is a decision tree with leaves labelled by clauses of 𝐴 such that any
Boolean assignment 𝜌 ending in a leaf labelled 𝐶 ∈ 𝐴 falsifies the clause 𝐶, that is, 𝐶↾𝜌 = 0.
    More generally, we may consider an ℱ -decision tree, for ℱ a set of Boolean functions, defined
as a decision tree with internal nodes labelled by functions 𝑓 ∈ ℱ . Given an assignment 𝜌 the
evaluation proceeds similarly by repeatedly considering the label 𝑓 of the current node and
following the edge labelled 𝑓 (𝜌) until a leaf is reached. An ℱ -decision tree solves Search(𝐴) if
every leaf ℓ is labelled by a clause 𝐶 ∈ 𝐴 such that every assignment 𝜌 reaching ℓ falsifies 𝐶.


3     Semantic Proof Systems Over a Bounded Set of Lines
This section is devoted to a rigorous treatment of the semantic proof systems mentioned in
Section 1.1. The main difference to the informal discussion in the introduction is that we
consider proof lines as sequences for a parameter 𝑛 ∈ N.

Definition 3.1 (Semantic Proof System). Let ℱ ≔ (𝐹𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) be a sequence of families 𝐹𝑛 of
𝑛-variate Boolean functions. The semantic ℱ proof system, denoted by sem(ℱ ), is an inferential
proof system operating over lines ℱ ; a sem(ℱ ) refutation 𝜋 of an 𝑛-variate CNF formula 𝐴 is a
sequence 𝜋 ≔ ( 𝑓1 , . . . , 𝑓𝑡 ) such that 𝑓𝑡 = 1 is the constant 1 function and each 𝑓𝑖 is either
    • an axiom, that is, there is a clause 𝐶 ∈ 𝐴 such that for all assignments 𝛼 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 it holds
      that 𝐶 is not satisfied by 𝛼 if and only if 𝑓𝑖 (𝛼) = 1, or
    • 𝑓𝑖 ∈ 𝐹𝑛 and there are 𝑓 𝑗 , 𝑓 𝑘 with 𝑗, 𝑘 < 𝑖 such that 𝑓𝑖 ⊆ 𝑓 𝑗 ∪ 𝑓 𝑘 when viewed as indicators.
The length of the derivation 𝜋 is 𝑡, and 𝜋 is tree-like if each function 𝑓 𝑗 ∈ 𝜋 is used at most once to
derive some other function 𝑓𝑖 . We denote the tree-like semantic ℱ proof system by sem★(ℱ ).

    Not every sequence ℱ gives rise to a proof system that is well-behaved. In particular, the
proof system sem(ℱ ) is generally not even complete and is not closed under restrictions. In the
following we show that for each ℱ there is a slightly larger ℱ ′ that is complete, closed under
permutations of variables, and monotone.

Definition 3.2 (Reasonable Sequence). A sequence ℱ ≔ (𝐹𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) is reasonable if the proof
system sem(ℱ ) is complete and for every 𝑛 ∈ N and every function 𝑓𝑛 ∈ 𝐹𝑛 it holds that
    1. the function 𝑓𝑛𝜎 (𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑛 ) B 𝑓𝑛 (𝑥 𝜎(1) , . . . , 𝑥 𝜎(𝑛) ) is in 𝐹𝑛 , for any permutation 𝜎 : [𝑛] → [𝑛],
       and                                                                                   (closed under permutation)
    2. the function 𝑓𝑛+1 (𝑥 1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑛 , 𝑥 𝑛+1 ) B 𝑓𝑛 (𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑛 ) belongs to 𝐹𝑛+1 .     (monotonicity)

    It is not too hard to see that any sequence ℱ gives rise to a reasonable sequence ℱ ′ of similar
size as stated next.


                                                              9
Lemma 3.3. For any sequence (𝐹𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) there is a reasonable sequence (𝐹𝑛′ : 𝑛 ∈ N) such that for
all 𝑛 ∈ N it holds that 𝐹𝑛 ⊆ 𝐹𝑛′ and that |𝐹𝑛′ | ≤ 1 + 𝑖≤𝑛 |𝐹𝑖 | · exp 𝑂(𝑛 log 𝑛) .
                                                      Í                         

Proof. By adding all 3𝑛 clauses over 𝑛 variables to each 𝐹𝑛′ we ensure that sem(𝐹𝑛′ : 𝑛 ∈ N)
is complete. By further adding for each 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹𝑖 and all 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛 the formula 𝑓 ′ (𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑛 ) ≔
 𝑓 (𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑖 ) to 𝐹𝑛′ we ensure monotonicity. Finally, we can close the sets of functions under
permutations by increasing the size by at most a multiplicative factor exp 𝑂(𝑛 log 𝑛) .
                                                                                               
                                                                                                     □

   In the following we study tree-like sem(ℱ ) proof systems where the sequence ℱ B (𝐹𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈
N) is only restricted by the size of the families of Boolean functions 𝐹𝑛 . To ensure that
these systems can be chosen to be somewhat natural we want the families 𝐹𝑛 to be of size at
least |𝐹𝑛 | = exp Ω(𝑛 log 𝑛) . We say that a family of formulas is “simple” or “based on a simple
                            

combinatorial principle” if the entire family can be refuted by a semantic proof system over a
small number of lines.

Definition 3.4 (Simple). A sequence (𝒜𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) of families 𝒜𝑛 of 𝑛-variate CNF formulas
is simple if there is a sequence ℱ B (𝐹𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) of families 𝐹𝑛 of 𝑛-ary Boolean functions of
size |𝐹𝑛 | ≤ exp 𝑂(𝑛 log 𝑛) such that for all 𝑛 ∈ N tree-like sem(ℱ ) refutes any formula 𝐴 ∈ 𝒜𝑛
                            

in size polynomial in |𝐴|.

    Before we can discuss concrete examples of simple families we need to discuss when we can
translate between different encodings of these formulas.

Definition 3.5 (Encoding Robust). A sequence (𝐺 𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) of families 𝐺 𝑛 of 𝑛-ary Boolean
functions is encoding robust if there is a sequence ℱ B (𝐹𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) of families 𝐹𝑛 of 𝑛-ary
Boolean functions of size |𝐹𝑛 | ≤ exp 𝑂(𝑛 log 𝑛) such that for any 𝑛 ∈ N and any 𝑔 ∈ 𝐺 𝑛 it holds
                                                 

that there is a tree-like sem(ℱ ) derivation of 𝑔 from CNF(𝑔) in size polynomial in |CNF(𝑔)|.

Lemma 3.6. Any sequence (𝐺 𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) of families 𝐺 𝑛 of 𝑛-ary Boolean functions of size |𝐺 𝑛 | ≤
exp 𝑂(𝑛 log 𝑛) is encoding robust.
              

Proof. Consider a Boolean function 𝑔 ∈ 𝐺 𝑛 and note that the CNF-encoding of 𝑔 is of size
                                                          (𝑖) Ó
|CNF(𝑔)| ≤ 2𝑛 . Let CNF(𝑔) ≔ 𝐶1 ∧ · · · ∧ 𝐶 𝑚 and 𝐹 𝑔 ≔ 𝑓 𝑔 ≔ 𝑗≤𝑖 𝐶 𝑗 𝑖 ∈ [𝑚] . Define 𝐹𝑛 ≔
  𝑔∈𝐺 𝑛 𝐹 𝑔 and observe that the tree-like proof system sem (𝐹𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) can derive any 𝑔 ∈ 𝐺 𝑛
                                                           ★
Ð
                                                                            (𝑖)
from CNF(𝑔) in size 𝑂 |CNF(𝑔)| by iteratively deriving the functions 𝑓 𝑔 for 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑚. Since
                                    

|𝐺 𝑛 | ≤ exp(𝑂(𝑛 log 𝑛)) the family 𝐹𝑛 is of size |𝐹𝑛 | ≤ exp(𝑂(𝑛 log 𝑛)) and the sequence (𝐺 𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈
N) thus encoding robust.                                                                            □

   Let 𝐺 = (𝑃, 𝐻, 𝐸) denote a bipartite graph with partitions of size |𝑃| = 𝑚 + 1 and |𝐻| = 𝑚.
The graph pigeonhole principle over 𝐺 claims that the set of pigeons 𝑃 fits into holes 𝐻 such that
each pigeon 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃 flies to an adjacent hole ℎ ∈ 𝐻 while each hole contains at most
                                                                                 a single pigeon.
Denote by PHP(𝐺) the CNF encoding of the above principle over variables 𝑥 {𝑝,ℎ} {𝑝, ℎ} ∈ 𝐸 ,
each variable 𝑥{𝑝,ℎ} indicating that pigeon 𝑝 flies to hole ℎ, consisting of clauses
             Ü
                     𝑥 {𝑝,ℎ}            ∀𝑝 ∈ 𝑃                                        (pigeon axiom)
            ℎ∈𝑁(𝑝)

           𝑥¯ {𝑝,ℎ} ∨ 𝑥¯ {𝑝 ′ ,ℎ}       ∀ℎ ∈ 𝐻, ∀𝑝 ≠ 𝑝 ′ ∈ 𝑁(ℎ) .                        (hole axiom)

Consider the family of graph pigeonhole principles over 𝑛 variables. We would like to argue that
this family is simple. Since sem(ℱ ) is generally not closed under restrictions this is not immediate.

                                                  10
                                              2
Additionally, for 𝑛 ∈ N there are exp 𝑂( 𝑛𝑛 ) many graph pigeonhole principle formulas over
                                                   

𝑛 variables that do not contain an isolated pigeon and are therefore not immediately refuted. To
argue that this family of formulas is simple we can thus not add a refutation for each instance
to 𝐹𝑛 . However, by introducing linear integer inequalities as proof lines this entire family can
be refuted efficiently.

Proposition 3.7. The family of graph pigeonhole principle formulas is simple.

Proof. Consider the sequence (𝐹𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) where each 𝐹𝑛 is the set of threshold functions that can
be either written as 𝑖∈𝐼 𝑥 𝑖 ≥ 𝑗 or 𝑖∈𝐼 𝑥 𝑖 ≤ 𝑗 for 𝐼 ⊆ [𝑛] and 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]. Since |𝐹𝑛 | ≤ exp 𝑂(𝑛 log 𝑛) ,
                    Í              Í                                                                 

by Lemma 3.6 these functions are encoding robust. Thus by an irrelevant increase in the size
of each 𝐹𝑛 we may derive the graph pigeonhole principle expressed with inequalities to then
refute the formula.                                                                                  □

  For an (ordinary) graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸) and a charge vector 𝛼 ∈ {0, 1}𝑉 denote by Tseitin(𝐺, 𝛼) the
CNF formula over variables {𝑥 𝑒 | 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸} consisting of constraints
                        Õ
                              𝑥 𝑒 = 𝛼𝑣   mod 2                        ∀𝑣 ∈ 𝑉                        (4)
                        𝑒∋𝑣

each encoded as a CNF formula with 2deg(𝑣)−1 clauses. Consider the family of Tseitin formulas
                                                  2 
over 𝑛 variables. This family is of size exp 𝑂( 𝑛𝑛 ) if we ignore formulas that contain empty
clauses and are thus trivial to refute. While this family is large it is easily seen that it can be
efficiently refuted by proof systems with access to affine linear forms over F2 .

Proposition 3.8. The family of Tseitin contradictions is simple.

Proof. Note that the sequence ℱ B (𝐹𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) of F2 -affine linear forms is small and thus
encoding robust according to Lemma 3.6. Add the necessary proof lines to each 𝐹𝑛 so that from
the CNF encoding of the Tseitin contradiction sem★(ℱ ) can derive the corresponding system of
F2 -affine linear forms which may then be readily refuted.                                  □

    Finally, we consider lifted families of formulas. For a function 𝑔 : {0, 1}𝑚 → {0, 1} and a
𝑛-variate CNF formula 𝐴, let 𝐴 ◦ 𝑔 𝑛 denote the lifted CNF formula where we replace every
variable 𝑥 ∈ Vars(𝐴) by a formula computing 𝑔 over a fresh set of variables, and writing it out
as a CNF formula.

Proposition 3.9. For any simple sequence (𝒜𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) of families 𝒜𝑛 of 𝑛-variate CNF formulas and
any gadget 𝑔 : {0, 1}𝑚 → {0, 1} it holds that the lifted sequence {𝐴 ◦ 𝑔 𝑛 | 𝐴 ∈ 𝒜𝑛 } : 𝑛 ∈ N is also
                                                                                             

simple.

Proof. Denote by 𝐺 𝑚𝑛 the family of 𝑚𝑛-variate Boolean functions obtained by viewing 𝑔 as an 𝑚𝑛-
variate function depending on the first 𝑚 variables and applying any permutation 𝜎 : [𝑚𝑛] →
[𝑚𝑛] to 𝑔. Note that this family is not too large |𝐺 𝑚𝑛 | ≤ exp 𝑂(𝑚𝑛 log 𝑚𝑛) and thus encoding
                                                                            

robust by Lemma 3.6. Denote by (𝐻𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) the sequence certifying that (𝐺 𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) is
encoding robust and let (𝐹𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) be the sequence certifying that (𝒜𝑛 : 𝑛 ∈ N) is simple. By
composing each 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹𝑛 with 𝑔 we obtain the sequence 𝐻𝑚𝑛 ∪ { 𝑓 ◦ 𝑔 𝑛 | 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹𝑛 } : 𝑛 ∈ N with
                                                                                          

which the lifted formulas can be efficiently refuted.                                         □



                                                        11
4   Lower Bounds for Tree-Like Cook–Reckhow Proof Systems
In this section we state our main result on tree-like semantic refutations. We then proceed to
prove the corollaries mentioned in the introduction assuming our main theorem. The proof of
the main theorem is deferred to Section 5.
    To obtain the desired consequences mentioned in Section 1.3 we cannot simply measure a
set of proof lines 𝐹𝑛 by its size |𝐹𝑛 |. Instead, we have to resort to a more refined notion taking
the structure of the clique formula into consideration. Recall that if a 𝑘-partite graph 𝐺 with
partition 𝑉1 , . . . , 𝑉𝑘 contains a 𝑘-clique, then this 𝑘-clique is a tuple 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 ≔ 𝑖∈[𝑘] 𝑉𝑖 . For any
                                                                                    Î
CNF formula BlockClique : {0, 1}𝑋 × {0, 1}𝑌 → {0, 1}, as introduced in Section 2.4, there is by
definition a one-to-one correspondence between tuples 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 and assignments 𝜌𝑡 ∈ {0, 1}𝑋
such that for any graph 𝐺 ∈ {0, 1}𝑌 it holds that BlockClique(𝜌𝑡 , 𝐺) = 1 if and only if 𝑡 is a
𝑘-clique in 𝐺. In what follows, instead of considering all assignments {0, 1}𝑋 , we only consider
assignments {𝜌𝑡 | 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 } ⊆ {0, 1}𝑋 corresponding to tuples. Since these assignments are in
one-to-one correspondence with tuples we simply discuss tuples and it is understood that we
really mean to discuss the corresponding assignments.
    Associate each proof line 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹|𝑋| with the tuples it rules out: let 𝑄 : 𝐹|𝑋| → {0, 1}𝒯 denote
the map defined by 𝑄( 𝑓 ) B {𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 | 𝑓 (𝜌𝑡 ) = 1} and extend this notation to sets 𝐹 ⊆ 𝐹|𝑋|
by 𝑄(𝐹) B {𝑄( 𝑓 ) | 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹}. With this notation at hand we can state our main theorem.
Theorem 4.1. For any CNF formula BlockClique(𝑋 , 𝑌) as introduced in Section 2.4, any 𝜀 ∈ R+ , and
integer 𝐷, 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N such that 𝑘 < 𝑛 𝜀/61 and 𝐷 ≤ 2 log 𝑛 the following holds. If ℱ ≔ (𝐹𝑡 | 𝑡 ∈ N) is
a sequence of proof lines satisfying |𝑄(𝐹|𝑋| )| ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝜀 ), then for 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑛 −2/𝐷 ) asymptotically
                                                                                          2
almost surely any tree-like sem(ℱ ) refutation of BlockClique(𝑋 , 𝐺) is of length 𝑛 Ω(𝜀 𝐷) .
    Theorems 1.1 to 1.3 follow from Theorem 4.1 as explained next. Note that since 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛
the number of clauses in the different encodings of clique considered, i.e., BlockCliqueU (𝐺, 𝑘),
BlockClique𝑐 (𝐺, 𝑘), and BlockCliqueB (𝐺, 𝑘), is bounded by 𝑂(𝑛 4 ). This is independent of the
number of variables of the formulas and thus implies that for any of these encodings Theorem 4.1
yields a superpolynomial lower bound in the formula size, provided 𝐷 = 𝜔(1). For Theorem 1.1
let 𝑘 = 4 log 𝑛, 𝐷 = 2 log 𝑛, and consider the unary encoding BlockCliqueU (𝐺, 𝑘) with the range
axioms expressed as a conjunction of width 3 clauses by introducing 𝑂(𝑘𝑛) extension variables.
Similarly, Theorem 1.2 follows for the identical parameter setting with ℓ ≔ 2𝑐 but by considering
BlockClique𝑐 (𝐺, 𝑘) with range axioms expressed as 3-CNF formulas by introducing extension
variables. Finally, Theorem 1.3 follows from Theorem 4.1 for 𝐷 = log𝜀0 𝑛 and 𝑘 = 2 log𝜀0 𝑛 and
noting that the number of variables BlockClique𝑐 (𝐺, 𝑘) is defined over ranges from 𝑛 log𝜀0 𝑛 to
2 log1+𝜀0 𝑛 as 𝑐 ranges from 1 to ⌈log 𝑛⌉.
    We defer the proof of Theorem 4.1 to Section 5, and first show how our results for concrete
proof systems mentioned in Section 1.3 follow.
    Let us first consider tree-like cutting planes (CP) refutations of BlockCliqueU (𝐺, 𝑘). Each
line of a CP refutation is a linear integer inequality, which may be viewed as an affine halfspace
in R 𝑘𝑛 . Intuitively, since a halfspace is determined by 𝑘𝑛 points and we are only interested
                                                                                 𝑛𝑘       2
in the points 𝜌𝑡 ∈ R 𝑘𝑛 for tuples 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 we see that there are approximately 𝑘𝑛       ≤ 𝑛 𝑘 𝑛 many
                                  √
distinct proof lines. Since 𝑘 ≪ 𝑛 we should be able to appeal to Theorem 4.1.
    Instead of formalizing the above intuition into a rigorous argument it is more convenient
to appeal to bounds on the VC-dimension of the family of affine halfspaces to then invoke
Theorem 4.1 by appealing to Theorem 2.1.
Theorem 4.2 ([SSBD14]). The VC-dimension of the family of affine halfspaces in R𝑑 is 𝑑 + 1.

                                                    12
    Our main result on tree-like cutting planes refutations follows.

Corollary 4.3. For integer 𝐷, 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N such that 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛 1/64 and 𝐷 ≤ 2 log(𝑛) it holds that tree-like
cutting planes requires for 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑛 −2/𝐷 ) asymptotically almost surely refutations of length 𝑛 Ω(𝐷)
to refute BlockCliqueU (𝐺, 𝑘).

Proof. Denote by (𝐹ℓ | ℓ ∈ N) the sequence of families of linear threshold functions in ℓ di-
mensions. To bound the cardinality of 𝑄(𝐹 𝑘𝑛 ) view any linear threshold function as an affine
halfspace partitioning the vertices of the 𝑘𝑛-dimensional hypercube.
    Note that if a subset of tuples 𝑋 ⊆ 𝒯 is shattered by the family 𝑄(𝐹 𝑘𝑛 ), then the corresponding
set of assignments {𝜌𝑡 | 𝑡 ∈ 𝑋} is shattered by the family of affine halfspaces. By appealing
to Theorem 4.2 we thus get that VC 𝑄(𝐹 𝑘𝑛 ) ≤ 𝑛 𝑘 + 1. The result follows by appealing
                                                   

to Theorem 4.1 with the unary 𝑘-clique formula BlockCliqueU (𝐺, 𝑘), 𝜀 B 61/64, and the
bound |𝑄(𝐹 𝑘𝑛 )| ≤ (𝑛 𝑘 )𝑛 𝑘+1 obtained from Theorem 2.1.                                           □

    Note that Corollary 4.3 above can be slightly generalized to hold for inferential proof
systems operating over low-width disjunctions of linear thresholds, i.e., bounded-width tree-
like resolution over cutting planes, or equivalently bounded-depth stabbing planes. This follows
                             (𝑠)
from the fact that the set 𝐹𝑛 𝑘 of disjunctions of 𝑠 linear threshold functions over 𝑛 𝑘 Boolean
                          (𝑠)          (1)  𝑠
variables satisfies 𝑄 𝐹𝑛 𝑘 ≤ 𝑄 𝐹𝑛 𝑘    ≤ exp 𝑂(𝑠𝑛 𝑘 2 log 𝑛) . Hence as long as 𝑠 is a small
                                                                      

power of 𝑛 we obtain optimal average-case clique refutation length lower bounds.
   The second instantiation of Theorem 4.1 is for tree-like Res(⊕).

Corollary 4.4. For integer 𝐷, 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N such that 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛 1/64 and 𝐷 ≤ 2 log(𝑛) it holds that tree-like
Res(⊕) requires for 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑛 −2/𝐷 ) asymptotically almost surely refutations of length 𝑛 Ω(𝐷) to refute
BlockCliqueU (𝐺, 𝑘).

   The proof of this result follows along the same lines as the proof of Corollary 4.3. Let us
recall the bound on the VC-dimension of linear systems of equations over F2 .

Theorem 4.5 ([CEYZ20]). The VC-dimension of solutions of linear systems of equations over F2 in 𝑑
variables is 𝑑.

   With this bound at hand the proof of Corollary 4.3 can be essentially repeated to obtain
Corollary 4.4. For completeness we provide the proof next.

Proof of Corollary 4.4. Let 𝐹𝑛 𝑘 denote the set of F2 -affine linear forms over the
                                                                                  Ô𝑘𝑛 variables of
               U
BlockClique (𝐺, 𝑘), and denote by 𝐹 𝑘𝑛 the set of 𝐹 𝑘𝑛 -clauses, that is, 𝐹 𝑘𝑛 B      𝑓 ∈𝐼 𝑓 𝐼 ⊆ 𝐹 𝑘𝑛 .
                                        ∨                                     ∨

It remains to bound the VC-dimension of 𝑄(𝐹 𝑘𝑛   ∨
                                                   ). Since every set of tuples shattered by 𝑄(𝐹 𝑘𝑛 ∨
                                                                                                      )
is equivalently shattered by the set of solutions of linear systems of equations over F2 we
may appeal to Theorem 4.5 to obtain that VC 𝑄(𝐹 𝑘𝑛       ∨
                                                            ) ≤ 𝑘𝑛. Theorem 4.1 thus yields the
                                                             

claimed bound if instantiated with the formula BlockCliqueU (𝐺, 𝑘), 𝜀 B 61/64, and the bound
                2
     ∨
        )| ≤ 𝑛 𝑘 𝑛 obtained by appealing to Theorem 2.1 with VC 𝑄(𝐹 𝑘𝑛   ∨
                                                                           ) ≤ 𝑘𝑛.
                                                                            
|𝑄(𝐹 𝑘𝑛                                                                                               □

   The penultimate application of Theorem 4.1 is for tree-like threshold Th(𝑑) proof systems,
formally establishing Corollary 1.5.

Corollary 4.6. For integer 𝐷, 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N such that 𝑘 = Θ(𝐷) and 𝐷 ≤ 2 log 𝑛, it holds that
tree-like Th log 𝑛/2 log log 𝑛 requires for 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑛 −2/𝐷 ) asymptotically almost surely refutations
                               

of length 𝑛 Ω(𝐷) to refute BlockCliqueB (𝐺, 𝑘).

                                                    13
    Corollary 1.5 readily follows from Corollary 4.6 for 𝐷 = log𝜀 𝑛, 𝑘 = 2 log𝜀 𝑛, and a
re-parametrization by the number of variables 𝑂(log1+𝜀 𝑛) the formula BlockCliqueB (𝐺, 2 log𝜀 𝑛)
is defined over.
    The proof of Corollary 4.6 follows the same template as the proofs of Corollaries 4.3 and 4.4.
The following bound on the VC-dimension of polynomial threshold functions (PTFs) over
Boolean variables can be deduced from [AB09] and appears explicitly in, e.g., [BFPJH21].

Theorem 4.7 ([AB09, BFPJH21]). The VC-dimension of PTFs over 𝑡 Boolean variables and degree at
         Ímin(𝑡,𝑑) 𝑡 
most 𝑑 is 𝑖=0      𝑖 .

     With this bound at hand the proof of Corollary 4.6 is easily established as follows.

Proof of Corollary 4.6. Let 𝑘 ≔ 𝛼𝐷 and 𝑑 ≔ log 𝑛/2 log log 𝑛. Since Th(𝑑) operates over PTFs
of degree at most 𝑑 by Theorem 4.7 it holds that the set 𝐹 𝑘 log 𝑛 of PTFs over 𝑘 log 𝑛 variables
satisfies

                      VC 𝑄(𝐹 𝑘 log 𝑛 ) ≤ (1 + 𝑘 log 𝑛)𝑑 ≤ (4𝛼 log 𝑛)2𝑑 ≤ 𝑛 1+o(1) .                      (5)
                                      

                                                                                                       1+o(1)
We may thus appeal to Theorem 4.1 with BlockCliqueB (𝐺, 𝑘) and the bound |𝑄(𝐹 𝑘 log 𝑛 )| ≤ 𝑛 𝑘𝑛
obtained from Theorem 2.1.                                                                                □

     Last but not least we get our corollary for tree-like Frege over formulas of bounded size.

Corollary 4.8. For any 𝜀 ∈ R+ and integer 𝑐, 𝐷, 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N such that 𝐷 ≤ 2 log 𝑛, 0 < 𝑐 ≤ ⌈log 𝑛⌉
and 𝑘 = 𝑂(𝐷), it holds that tree-like Frege with line size 𝑛 2−𝜀 requires for 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑛 −2/𝐷 )
asymptotically almost surely refutations of length 𝑛 Ω(𝐷) to refute BlockClique𝑐 (𝐺, 𝑘).

    Corollary 1.6 follows from Corollary 4.8 for 𝐷 = log𝜀0 𝑛, 𝑘 = 2 log𝜀0 𝑛, and observing that the
number of variables BlockClique𝑐 (𝐺, 𝑘) is defined over ranges between 2 log1+𝜀0 𝑛 and 𝑛 log𝜀0 𝑛
for 𝑐 ∈ [1, ⌈log 𝑛⌉].

Proof. The number of formulas of size 𝑠 is bounded by exp 𝑂(𝑠 log 𝑠) . Hence the number of
                                                                                

proof lines 𝐹⌈𝑘𝑐𝑛 1/𝑐 ⌉ is bounded by |𝐹⌈𝑘𝑐𝑛 1/𝑐 ⌉ | ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝜀 (2 − 𝜀) log 𝑛) ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝜀/2 ). We may thus
appeal to Theorem 4.1 with the BlockClique𝑐 (𝐺, 𝑘) encoding and 𝜀/2.                                       □


5     Length Lower Bounds on Tree-Like Semantic Refutations
This section is devoted to arguing that for 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑛 −2/𝐷 ) with 𝐷 ≤ 2 log 𝑛 and any
family 𝒬 ⊆ 2𝒯 of size |𝒬| ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝛿 ) asymptotically almost surely there exists a pseudo-measure
𝜇 : 2𝒯 → R, linear over the set of tuples 𝒯 , such that
    1. 𝜇(𝒯 ) ≥ 1/2, and
    2. if 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬 is ruled out by a missing edge, that is, there is an edge 𝑒 ∉ 𝐸(𝐺) such that 𝑒 ⊆ 𝑡 for
       all 𝑡 ∈ 𝑄, then 𝜇(𝑄) ≤ 𝑛 −Ω(𝐷) .
Let us sketch the proof of Theorem 4.1 assuming there exists a pseudo-measure 𝜇 with the
above properties.
    Consider a tree-like sem(ℱ ) refutation 𝜋 ≔ ( 𝑓1 , . . . , 𝑓𝑠 ) of a formula 𝐴. Towards contradiction
let us assume that 𝑠 ≤ 𝑛 𝜆𝐷 for some small enough 𝜆 ∈ R+ . By standard arguments we can
extract from 𝜋 a balanced 𝐹|𝑋| -decision tree 𝑇 solving Search(𝐴) of size |𝑇| = 𝑂(𝑠). Consider

                                                    14
a node 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉(𝑇), denote the unique root-to-𝑣 path by 𝑝 𝑣 ≔ (𝑢1 , 𝑢2 , . . . , 𝑢𝜏 = 𝑣), and let
𝐶𝑣 ≔ 𝑢∈𝑝𝑣 ( 𝑓𝑢 = 𝑏 𝑢 ) be the conjunction of the answers to the queried functions 𝑓𝑢 on 𝑝 𝑣 .
       Ó
Since 𝑇 is balanced each 𝐶𝑣 is a small conjunction of size 𝑂(log 𝑠). Hence the family
                                      nÙ                  Ù                                              o
            𝑄(𝐶𝑣 ) 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉(𝑇) ⊆ 𝒬 B              𝑄( 𝑓 ) ∩         𝑄(¬𝑔) 𝐼, 𝐽 ⊆ 𝐹|𝑋| , |𝐼 ⊔ 𝐽| ≤ 𝑂(log 𝑠)       (6)
        
                                        𝑓 ∈𝐼              𝑔∈𝐽


is of size at most |𝑄(𝐹|𝑋| )|𝑂(log 𝑠) . Since by assumption |𝑄(𝐹|𝑋| )| ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝛿 ) we obtain that |𝒬| ≤
exp(𝑛 2−𝛿/2 ) for small enough 𝜆 > 0.
    We may thus consider the pseudo-measure 𝜇 for the family 𝒬. Associate each node 𝑢 ∈ 𝑉(𝑇)
with 𝜇 𝑄(𝐶𝑢 ) . Note that by linearity of the measure it holds that the values associated
                  

with the two out-neighbours 𝑣 0 , 𝑣1 of 𝑢 sum to the value associated with 𝑢, that is, it holds
that 𝜇 𝑄(𝐶𝑢 ) = 𝜇 𝑄(𝐶𝑣0 ) + 𝜇 𝑄(𝐶𝑣1 ) . By Property 1 of the measure the root node 𝑟 of 𝑇
                                             

is associated with 𝜇 𝑄(𝐶 𝑟 ) = 𝜇(𝒯 ) ≥ 1/2. If we can further argue that each leaf of the
                                 

refutation is associated with a set 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬 ruled out by a missing edge, then we may conclude
by Property 2 of 𝜇 that 𝑇 has 𝑛 Ω(𝐷) leaves and we thus obtain the claimed length lower bound
on tree-like sem(ℱ ) refutations. This completes the proof sketch of Theorem 4.1 assuming the
existence of a pseudo-measure 𝜇 with the above properties.
    We rely on the same construction for the pseudo-measure 𝜇 as in [dRPR23]. The main
difference lies in its analysis: whereas [dRPR23] could guarantee Property 2 for structured 𝑄
only, in our setting there is no restriction on the nature of 𝑄—each 𝑄 is an arbitrary set of tuples
that are all ruled out by the same missing edge. The only guarantee we have is that there are not
too many such sets; that is, that 𝒬 is somewhat small. We show that the analysis of [dRPR23] is
flexible enough to be adapted to our setting.

Organization.  In Section 5.1 we formalize the above proof outline. We define the notion of
cores from [dRPR23] in Section 5.2 and define the property of random graphs we need for the
lower bound to hold. In Section 5.3 we establish the required properties of the pseudo-measure
and end with Section 5.4 arguing that random graphs are pseudorandom.

5.1   The Pseudo-Measure and Proof of the Main Theorem
Denote by vc(𝐸) the minimum vertex cover of a set of edges 𝐸, let 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑝) be a 𝑘-partite
graph, and denote by 𝑒 a potential edge, that is, an edge that has non-zero probability of being
sampled by 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑝). Consider the biased characters
                                                   ( 1−𝑝
                                                      𝑝         if 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝐺)
                                     𝜒𝑒 (𝐺) B                                                                (7)
                                                    −1          otherwise,

and for a set of potential edges 𝐸 define
                                                          Ö
                                         𝜒𝐸 (𝐺) B               𝜒𝑒 (𝐺) .                                     (8)
                                                          𝑒∈𝐸

For 𝑑 ∈ N the pseudo-measure 𝜇𝐺,𝑑 : 2𝒯 → R is defined on tuples 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 by
                                                            Õ
                                    𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝑡) B 𝑛 −𝑘                 𝜒𝐸 (𝐺) ,                                 (9)
                                                           𝐸⊆ 2𝑡
                                                             ( ):
                                                          vc(𝐸)≤𝑑


                                                      15
and extended linearly to sets of tuples 𝑄 ⊆ 𝒯
                                                             Õ
                                            𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝑄) B             𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝑄) .                         (10)
                                                             𝑡∈𝑄

    Next we state the properties required of the pseudo-measure to deduce Theorem 4.1.

Theorem 5.1. There is a constant 𝑐 ∈ R+ such that for small enough 𝜀 ∈ R+ and for all 𝑑, 𝐷, 𝛿 ∈ R+
and integer 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N satisfying 𝛿 > 𝑐𝜀, 𝑘 < 𝑛 𝛿/60 , 𝐷 ≤ 2 log 𝑛, and 𝑑 = 𝜀𝐷 the following holds for
any family 𝒬 ⊆ 2𝒯 of size |𝒬| ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝛿 ). If 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑛 −2/𝐷 ), then asymptotically almost surely
  1. 𝜇𝐺,𝑑 is linear over 𝒯 ,
  2. 𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝒯 ) = 1 − 𝑜(1), and
  3. for all 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬 ruled out by a missing edge it holds that 𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝑄) ≤ 𝑛 −Ω(𝜀𝑑) .

    Note that the first property of Theorem 5.1 is immediate by the definition of the pseu-
do-measure. The second property follows from the analysis of [dRPR23]. All that remains is
to argue the third property. Before proving Theorem 5.1 let us show that Theorem 4.1 follows
from Theorem 5.1. For convenience we restate Theorem 4.1.

Theorem 4.1. For any CNF formula BlockClique(𝑋 , 𝑌) as introduced in Section 2.4, any 𝜀 ∈ R+ , and
integer 𝐷, 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N such that 𝑘 < 𝑛 𝜀/61 and 𝐷 ≤ 2 log 𝑛 the following holds. If ℱ ≔ (𝐹𝑡 | 𝑡 ∈ N) is
a sequence of proof lines satisfying |𝑄(𝐹|𝑋| )| ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝜀 ), then for 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑛 −2/𝐷 ) asymptotically
                                                                                          2
almost surely any tree-like sem(ℱ ) refutation of BlockClique(𝑋 , 𝐺) is of length 𝑛 Ω(𝜀 𝐷) .

Proof. Let 𝜋 be a sem★(ℱ ) refutation of BlockClique𝑐 (𝐺, 𝑘) and suppose that |𝜋| ≤ 𝑛 𝜆𝐷 for a
small enough 𝜆 B 𝜆(𝜀) ∈ R+ . The first step in the proof is to construct an 𝑂 log|𝜋| -depth
                                                                                                 

𝐹|𝑋| -decision tree 𝑇 that solves the falsified clause search problem Search BlockClique(𝑋 , 𝐺) . In
                                                                                                     

a second step we then argue that the tree 𝑇 must have at least 𝑛 Ω(𝜀𝑑) leaves, thereby establishing
the claimed length lower bound on the refutation 𝜋.
     Since the proof 𝜋 is tree-like, we can construct 𝑇 inductively via a Brent-Spira balancing
argument: find a line 𝑓 ∈ 𝜋 such that the subtree 𝜋 𝑓 of 𝜋 rooted at 𝑓 is of size |𝜋|/3 < |𝜋 𝑓 | < 2|𝜋|/3.
Query 𝑓 and consider two cases. If 𝑓 = 0, then one of the leaves of 𝜋 𝑓 is a solution to the
falsified clause search problem, since the leaves of 𝜋 𝑓 imply 𝑓 . Otherwise, if 𝑓 = 1, then
the pruned proof tree 𝜋 \ 𝜋 𝑓 will contain an axiom falsified by any assignment agreeing
with the query. In both cases, we can recurse on a tree-like proof of size at most 2|𝜋|/3.
By induction we thus obtain a tree 𝑇 solving the falsified clause search problem in depth
depth(𝑇) = 𝑂 log|𝜋| ≤ Δ ≔ 𝑐𝜆𝐷 log 𝑛 for a large enough constant 𝑐 ∈ R+ . This establishes the
                       

first step of the argument. It remains to argue that 𝑇 has many leaves.
     Associate with each leaf ℓ ∈ 𝑇 the set of tuples 𝑄ℓ containing 𝑡 ∈ 𝑄ℓ whose corresponding
assignment 𝜌𝑡 is consistent with the set of queries on the root-to-ℓ path. Every such set 𝑄ℓ is
the intersection of at most depth(𝑇) ≤ Δ sets of the form 𝑄( 𝑓 ) or 𝑄(¬ 𝑓 ) for 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹|𝑋| . Consider
the set
                               nÙ                  Ù                                       o
                       𝒬B               𝑄( 𝑓 ) ∩         𝑄(¬𝑔) 𝐼, 𝐽 ⊆ 𝐹|𝑋| , |𝐼 ⊔ 𝐽| ≤ Δ       .      (11)
                                 𝑓 ∈𝐼              𝑔∈𝐽

                                                                           Δ      2−𝜀
It holds that {𝑄ℓ | ℓ ∈ leaves(𝑇)} ⊆ 𝒬 and |𝒬| ≤ 2|𝑄(𝐹|𝑋| )| < 2Δ(𝑛 +1) by the assumption on
the size of 𝑄 𝐹|𝑋| . Since Δ = 𝑐𝜆𝐷 log 𝑛 and 𝐷 ≤ 2 log 𝑛, for large enough 𝑛 and 𝛿 ≔ 60𝜀/61
                  


                                                             16
it thus holds that |𝒬| ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝛿 ) and 𝑘 < 𝑛 𝛿/60 . This allows us to consider the pseudo-
measure 𝜇 ≔ 𝜇𝐺,𝜀0 𝐷 as in Theorem 5.1 for the set 𝒬 and 𝜀0 B 𝛿/𝑐0 = 𝜀 · 60/61𝑐 0 for a large
enough constant 𝑐0 ∈ R+ .
    Because 𝑇 solves the falsified clause search problem there is a clause 𝐶 ∈ BlockClique(𝑋 , 𝐺)
falsified by all tuples 𝑡 ∈ 𝑄ℓ . In other words, for all 𝑡 ∈ 𝑄ℓ it holds that the assignment 𝜌𝑡
falsifies 𝐶. Fix a leaf ℓ ∈ leaves(𝑇), a tuple 𝑡 ∈ 𝑄ℓ , and denote by 𝐶 the associated falsified clause.
Recall that the formula BlockClique(𝑋 , 𝐺) is obtained by restricting the BlockClique(𝑋 , 𝑌)
formula by 𝐺 ∈ {0, 1}𝑌 , where each variable 𝑦 𝑒 ∈ 𝑌 is the indicator variable of a potential edge 𝑒.
    Consider the formula 𝐹𝐶 ⊆ BlockClique(𝑋 , 𝑌) consisting of all clauses 𝐶 ′ ⊇ 𝐶. We claim
that every clause 𝐶 ′ ∈ 𝐹𝐶 contains a positive literal 𝑦 𝑒 with 𝑒 ⊆ 𝑡: recall that every clause
contains at most one literal over 𝑌 and consider the graph 𝐺𝑡 : 𝑌 ↦→ {0, 1} with edges 𝑦 𝑒 ↦→ 1 if
and only if 𝑒 ⊆ 𝑡. Since BlockClique(𝜌𝑡 , 𝐺𝑡 ) = 1 but 𝐶↾𝜌𝑡 = 0, it holds that every clause 𝐶 ′ ∈ 𝐹𝐶
either contains a positive literal 𝑦 𝑒 for 𝑒 ⊆ 𝑡, or a negative literal 𝑦¯ 𝑒 for an edge 𝑒 ⊈ 𝑡.
Suppose some clause 𝐶 ′ contains a negative literal 𝑦¯ 𝑒 for 𝑒 ⊈ 𝑡. Since 𝐶 ′↾ 𝑦𝑒 ↦→1 = 𝐶 which
maps to false under 𝜌𝑡 we see that BlockClique(𝜌𝑡 , 𝐺𝑡 ∨ {𝑦 𝑒 ↦→ 1}) = 0. But this cannot be
since 𝑡 is a clique in 𝐺𝑡 ∨ {𝑦 𝑒 ↦→ 1} and by definition 𝜌𝑡 is thus a satisfying assignment of
BlockClique(𝑋 , 𝐺𝑡 ∨ {𝑦 𝑒 ↦→ 1}).
    We conclude that 𝐹𝐶 =         𝑒∈𝐸 𝑦 𝑒 ∨ 𝐶  for some non-empty edge set 𝐸 ⊆ 2𝑡 . Since the above
                                Ó                                                  

holds for every 𝑡 ∈ 𝑄ℓ it holds that 𝐸 ⊆ 𝑡∈𝑄ℓ 2𝑡 . At least one edge 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 is not present in 𝐺 as
                                             Ñ        

otherwise 𝐶 ∉ BlockClique(𝑋 , 𝐺). Thus by the third property of the pseudo-measure
                                                            2           2
                                 𝜇𝐺,𝜀0 𝐷 (𝑄ℓ ) = 𝑛 −Ω(𝜀0 𝐷) = 𝑛 −Ω(𝜀 𝐷)                            (12)

for all leaves ℓ ∈ leaves(𝑇). Since the sets {𝑄ℓ | ℓ ∈ leaves(𝑇)} partition the set of tuples 𝒯 and
the measure is linear over 𝒯 it holds that
                                         Õ
                                                     𝜇(𝑄ℓ ) = 𝜇(𝒯 ) .                              (13)
                                      ℓ ∈leaves(𝑇)

                                                                                2
By the first property we have that 𝜇(𝒯 ) = 1 − 𝑜(1) and 𝑇 thus has 𝑛 Ω(𝜀 𝐷) many leaves; it is
of depth depth(𝑇) = Ω 𝜀2 𝐷 log(𝑛) . Since depth(𝑇) = 𝑂 log|𝜋| this contradicts the original
                                                                

assumption |𝜋| ≤ 𝑛 𝜆𝐷 . This completes the proof of Theorem 4.1.                            □

5.2   On Cores and Pseudorandom Graphs
This section recalls the notion of a core crucial to the analysis as originally defined in [dRPR23]
to then define our notion of pseudorandom graphs.
    Consider a graph 𝐻 with vertex set [𝑘]. In what follows we often identify 𝐻 as a graph over
the vertex set [𝑘] and at the same time treat it as a set of edges 𝐻 ⊆ [𝑘]    . Slightly non-standard,
                                                                            
                                                                          2
let us say that a graph 𝐹 is a vertex-induced subgraph of 𝐻 if 𝑉(𝐹) = 𝑉(𝐻) = [𝑘] and there is
a set 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘] such that 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝐹) if and only if 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝐻) and 𝑒 ⊆ 𝑆. A core of a graph 𝐻 is a
vertex-induced subgraph 𝐹 of 𝐻 such that any minimum vertex cover of 𝐹 is also a vertex cover
of 𝐻.

Lemma 5.2 ([dRPR24, Theorem 4.4]). There is a map core that maps graphs to one of its cores with
the following property. For every graph 𝐹 in the image of core it holds that |𝑉(𝐸(𝐹))| ≤ 3 vc(𝐹) and
that there exists an edge set 𝐸★𝐹 ⊆ 𝑉 𝐸(𝐹) × [𝑘] \ 𝑉 𝐸(𝐹) such that core(𝐻) = 𝐹 if and only if
                                                           

𝐸(𝐻) = 𝐸(𝐹) ⊔ 𝐸 for 𝐸 ⊆ 𝐸★𝐹 .


                                                       17
    Going forward we fix the mapping core as exhibited in Lemma 5.2 and refer to core(𝐻) as
the core of 𝐻. Let us say that a graph 𝐻 is in the 𝑒-boundary for an edge 𝑒 ∈ 𝑉(𝐻)   if and only if
                                                                                   
                                                                               2
vc(𝐻 ∪ 𝑒) > vc(𝐻). The notions of an 𝑒-boundary and a core interact nicely as stated next.

Proposition 5.3 ([dRPR24, Proposition 4.3]). A core of a graph 𝐻 is in the 𝑒-boundary if and only
if 𝐻 is.

     In other words Proposition 5.3 guarantees that either the entire family ℋ𝐹 ≔ {𝐹 ⊔ 𝐸 | 𝐸 ⊆ 𝐸★𝐹 }
is in the 𝑒-boundary or no graph 𝐻 ∈ ℋ𝐹 is in
                                             the 𝑒-boundary.     The next statement gives a simple
                                                              [𝑘]
bound on the number of core graphs ℱ𝑑 B core(𝐻) 𝐻 ⊆ 2 with vc(𝐻) ≤ 𝑑 for graphs over
𝑘 vertices and minimum vertex cover bounded by 𝑑.

Lemma 5.4 ([dRPR24, Lemma 2.4]). There are at most 2𝑏(𝑎+log 𝑘) graphs 𝐻 over 𝑘 vertices with a
vertex cover of size 𝑎 and |𝑉(𝐸(𝐻))| ≤ 𝑏.

   For a tuple 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 write 𝑡 𝑖 ≔ 𝑡 ∩𝑉𝑖 for the vertex in the 𝑖th block 𝑉𝑖 , consider a graph 𝐻 ⊆ [𝑘]        ,
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                          2
and denote by 𝐻(𝑡) the graph obtained by replacing each vertex 𝑖 ∈           [𝑘] of 𝐻 by 𝑡 𝑖 . In other
words, the graph 𝐻(𝑡) is defined over vertices {𝑡1 , . . . , 𝑡 𝑘 } and edges {𝑡 𝑖 , 𝑡 𝑗 } {𝑖, 𝑗} ∈ 𝐸(𝐻) .

Definition 5.5 ((𝒬, 𝐷, 𝛿)-good). Let 𝑠 ∈ N+ , denote by 𝑄 ⊆ 𝒯 a set of tuples, and consider a
core 𝐹. A 𝑘-partite graph 𝐺 with partition 𝑉1 , . . . , 𝑉𝑘 of size |𝑉𝑖 | = 𝑛 each is 𝑠-bounded over 𝑄
and 𝐹 if it holds that                Õ Õ
                                 𝑛 −𝑘          𝜒𝐻(𝑡) (𝐺) ≤ 𝑠 .
                                            𝑡∈𝑄 𝐻∈ℋ𝐹

For 𝐷 ∈ R+ and for a family 𝒬 ⊆ 2𝒯 of sets of tuples the graph 𝐺 is (𝒬, 𝐷, 𝛿)-good if 𝐺 is
𝑠-bounded over 𝑄 and 𝐹 for all 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬, all non-empty 𝐹 ∈ ℱ𝐷/4 , and 𝑠 B 𝑛 2|𝐸(𝐹)|/𝐷−𝛿 vc(𝐹)/10 .

Theorem 5.6. The following holds for 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N and 𝐷, 𝛿 ∈ R+ satisfying 𝐷 ≤ 2 log 𝑛 and 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛 1/5 .
For a family 𝒬 ⊆ 2𝒯 of size |𝒬| ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝛿 ) it holds that 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑛 −2/𝐷 ) is asymptotically almost
surely (𝒬, 𝐷, 𝛿)-good.

    We defer the proof of Theorem 5.6 to Section 5.4. In the following we verify that Theorem 5.6
suffices to prove Theorem 5.1.

5.3   The Pseudo-Measure Is Well-Behaved on Good Graphs
As mentioned earlier it was already shown in [dRPR23] that the measure is large on the entire
set of tuples 𝒯 . Since we are using a different notion of pseudorandomness we reprove it for
completeness.

Lemma 5.7. There is a constant 𝑐 ∈ R+ such that for small enough 𝜀 ∈ R+ and for all 𝑑, 𝐷, 𝛿 ∈ R+
and integer 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N satisfying 𝛿 > 𝑐𝜀, 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛 𝛿/60 , 𝐷 ≤ 2 log 𝑛, and 𝑑 = 𝜀𝐷 the following holds for any
family 𝒬 ⊆ 2𝒯 of size |𝒬| ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝛿 ). If 𝒯 ∈ 𝒬 and 𝐺 is (𝒬, 𝐷, 𝛿)-good, then 𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝒯 ) ≥ 1 − 𝑛 −Ω(1) .




                                                     18
Proof. By the triangle inequality and Lemma 5.2 we may write
                                        Õ Õ
                     𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝒯 ) = 𝑛 −𝑘                       𝜒𝐻(𝑡) (𝐺)                                    (14)
                                        𝑡∈𝒯 𝐻⊆([𝑘]) :
                                                    2
                                               vc(𝐻)≤𝑑
                                        Õ                             Õ Õ Õ
                              = 𝑛 −𝑘          𝜒∅(𝑡) (𝐺) + 𝑛 −𝑘                           𝜒𝐻(𝑡) (𝐺)       (15)
                                        𝑡∈𝒯                          𝐹∈ℱ𝑑 : 𝑡∈𝒯 𝐻∈ℋ𝐹
                                                                      𝐹≠∅
                                         Õ              Õ Õ
                              ≥1−                𝑛 −𝑘                𝜒𝐻(𝑡) (𝐺)                           (16)
                                        𝐹∈ℱ𝑑 :          𝑡∈𝒯 𝐻∈ℋ𝐹
                                         𝐹≠∅
                                         Õ
                              ≥1−                𝑛 2|𝐸(𝐹)|/𝐷−𝛿 vc(𝐹)/10 ,                                (17)
                                        𝐹∈ℱ𝑑 :
                                         𝐹≠∅

where for the final inequality we relied on 𝐺 being (𝒬, 𝐷, 𝛿)-good and the fact that 𝒯 ∈ 𝒬. Since
according to Lemma 5.2 cores 𝐹 ∈ ℱ𝑑 have few non-isolated vertices |𝑉(𝐸(𝐹))| ≤ 3 vc(𝐹) it holds
that |𝐸(𝐹)| ≤ 3𝑑 vc(𝐹), where we used that vc(𝐹) ≤ 𝑑. Summing over 𝑖 = vc(𝐹) and combining
(17) with the above bound and the bound on the number of cores from Lemma 5.4 we obtain
                                                   Õ
                            𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝒯 ) ≥ 1 −                23𝑖(𝑑+log 𝑘) 𝑛 −𝑖(𝛿/10−6𝑑/𝐷)                  (18)
                                                   𝑖∈[𝑑]
                                                   Õ
                                        ≥1−                𝑛 −𝑖(𝛿/10−12𝜀−3 log 𝑘/log 𝑛) ,                (19)
                                                   𝑖∈[𝑑]

using that 𝑖 ≤ 𝑑 = 𝜀𝐷 ≤ 2𝜀 log 𝑛. Since 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛 𝛿/60 and we may assume that 𝛿 > 240𝜀 we conclude
that 𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝒯 ) ≥ 1 − 𝑛 −Ω(1) .                                                               □
    To prove Theorem 5.1 it thus remains to establish that the pseudo-measure is small on sets
of tuples 𝑄 ⊆ 𝒯 ruled out by a missing edge as summarized in the following statement.
Lemma 5.8. There is a constant 𝑐 ∈ R+ such that for small enough 𝜀 ∈ R+ and for all 𝑑, 𝐷, 𝛿 ∈ R+
and integer 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N satisfying 𝛿 > 𝑐𝜀, 𝑘 < 𝑛 𝛿/60 , 𝐷 ≤ 2 log 𝑛, and 𝑑 = 𝜀𝐷 the following holds for
any family 𝒬 ⊆ 2𝒯 of size |𝒬| ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝛿 ). If a graph 𝐺 is (𝒬, 𝐷, 𝛿)-good, then any 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬 ruled out
by a missing edge satisfies 𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝑄) ≤ 𝑛 −Ω(𝜀𝑑) .
   Note that Theorem 5.1 follows from Lemmas 5.7 and 5.8 in combination with Theorem 5.6.
Proof. Fix 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬 ruled out by a missing edge, let 𝑒 denote the corresponding edge, and denote
by 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 the indices of the blocks of the endpoints of 𝑒. Observe that for a tuple 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 and a
graph 𝐻 ⊆ [𝑘]     the identity 𝜒𝐻(𝑡)∪𝑒 + 𝜒𝐻(𝑡) = 0 holds whenever 𝑒 ∉ 𝐸(𝐺) and 𝑒 ∉ 𝐻(𝑡). This
                
              2
identity allows us to pair a graph 𝐻 that does not contain the edge {𝑖, 𝑗} with the graph 𝐻 ∪ {𝑖, 𝑗}
to obtain that
                                       Õ Õ
                    𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝑄) = 𝑛 −𝑘                     𝜒𝐻(𝑡) (𝐺)                                        (20)
                                        𝑡∈𝑄     𝐻:
                                              vc(𝐻)≤𝑑
                                       Õ          Õ                           Õ                     
                                  −𝑘
                             =𝑛                               𝜒𝐻(𝑡) (𝐺) +                𝜒𝐻(𝑡) (𝐺)       (21)
                                        𝑡∈𝑄      𝐻 : 𝑒∈𝐻(𝑡)                 𝐻 : 𝑒∉𝐻(𝑡)
                                                  vc(𝐻)≤𝑑                    vc(𝐻)≤𝑑
                                       Õ           Õ
                             = 𝑛 −𝑘                              𝜒𝐻(𝑡) (𝐺) .                             (22)
                                        𝑡∈𝑄 𝐻 : vc(𝐻)=𝑑
                                           vc(𝐻∪{𝑖,𝑗})>𝑑



                                                            19
Note that the set of graphs we sum over are precisely the graphs in the {𝑖, 𝑗}-boundary with
vertex cover 𝑑. By Proposition 5.3 the families ℋ𝐹 for 𝐹 ∈ ℱ𝑑 in the {𝑖, 𝑗}-boundary and vertex
cover vc(𝐹) = 𝑑 partition this set of graphs We thus obtain that
                                                        Õ         Õ Õ
                                𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝑄) = 𝑛 −𝑘                                  𝜒𝐻(𝑡) (𝐺)                        (23)
                                                      𝐹∈ℱ𝑑 :          𝑡∈𝑄 𝐻∈ℋ𝐹
                                                     vc(𝐹)=𝑑
                                                  vc(𝐹∪{𝑖,𝑗})>𝑑
                                                  Õ
                                         ≤                    𝑛 2|𝐸(𝐹)|/𝐷−𝛿𝑑/10 ,                                 (24)
                                             𝐹∈ℱ𝑑 : vc(𝐹)=𝑑
                                             vc(𝐹∪{𝑖,𝑗})>𝑑

where we relied on the assumption that 𝐺 is bounded over 𝑄 and 𝐹. Since according to
Lemma 5.2 it holds that cores 𝐹 ∈ ℱ𝑑 have few non-isolated vertices |𝑉(𝐸(𝐹))| ≤ 3 vc(𝐹) it also
holds that |𝐸(𝐹)| ≤ 3𝑑2 , further using that vc(𝐹) = 𝑑. Appealing to Lemma 5.4 to bound the sum
in (24), and using the above bound and the fact that 𝑑 = 𝜀𝐷 ≤ 2𝜀 log 𝑛 we get that

                                     𝜇𝐺,𝑑 (𝑄) ≤ 23𝑑(𝑑+log 𝑘) · 𝑛 −𝑑(𝛿/10−6𝜀)                                      (25)
                                                ≤ 𝑛 −𝑑(𝛿/10−12𝜀−3 log 𝑘/log 𝑛)                                    (26)
                                                       −Ω(𝜀2 𝐷)
                                                =𝑛                ,                                               (27)

assuming that 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛 𝛿/60 , and that 𝛿 > 240𝜀. This concludes the proof of Lemma 5.8.                                □

5.4   Random Graphs are Good
This section is devoted to the proof of Theorem 5.6. To this end we need to recall two further
statements from [dRPR23]. If we call a vertex set 𝑡 an 𝑎-tuple if |𝑡| = 𝑎 and there is a tuple 𝑡 ′ ∈ 𝒯
such that 𝑡 ⊆ 𝑡 ′ , then the first statement claims that for any block 𝑉𝑖 the size of the common
neighbourhood 𝑁 ∩ (𝑡, 𝑉𝑖 ) ≔ 𝑉𝑖 ∩ 𝑢∈𝑡 𝑁(𝑢) in 𝑉𝑖 for graphs 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑝) is tightly concentrated
                                    Ñ
around its expected value E[|𝑁 ∩ (𝑡, 𝑉𝑖 )|] = 𝑝 |𝑡| 𝑛.

Lemma 5.9 ([dRPR24, Lemma 8.1]). For any integer 𝐷, 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N satisfying 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛 1/5 and 𝐷 ≤ 2 log 𝑛
the following holds for 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑛 −2/𝐷 ) asymptotically almost surely. For any 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘], any 𝑎 ≤ 𝐷/4,
and any 𝑎-tuple 𝑡 ⊆ 𝑉(𝐺) \ 𝑉𝑖 it holds that |𝑁 ∩ (𝑡, 𝑉𝑖 )| ∈ (1 ± 1/𝑘) E[|𝑁 ∩ (𝑡, 𝑉𝑖 )|].

    The proof of Lemma 5.9 follows by the usual Chernoff bound plus union bound argument.
To argue Theorem 5.6 we need bounds on linear combinations of Fourier characters associated
with the same core 𝐹 as stated next. For a set 𝐴 ⊆ [𝑘] and a tuple 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 let 𝑡 𝐴 ≔ {𝑡 𝑖 | 𝑖 ∈ 𝐴}, and
extend this notation to 𝒯 in the natural way 𝒯𝐴 B {𝑡 𝐴 | 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 }.

Lemma 5.10 ([dRPR24, Lemma 8.5]). Consider a non-empty graph 𝐹 over the vertex set [𝑘], let
𝐴 ≔ 𝑉 𝐸(𝐹) , and denote by 𝑀 ⊆ 𝐸(𝐹) a matching in 𝐹. For any even 𝑚 ≤ 𝑛 2 , any 𝑟 ∈ R+ , and any
              

function 𝜉 : 𝒯𝐴 → [−𝑟, 𝑟] it holds that
                                                                                      |𝑀|/2             !𝑚
                         hÕ                        i𝑟 · 𝑝 −|𝐸(𝐹)| · 𝑚/𝑛 2                      · 𝑛 |𝐴|
                 Pr             𝜒𝐹(𝑡) (𝐺)𝜉(𝑡) > 𝑠 ≤                                                           ,
                𝐺[𝑉𝐴 ]                                               𝑠
                         𝑡∈𝒯𝐴

                         𝑉𝐴 
where each edge 𝑒 ∈       2 is sampled independently with probability 𝑝, provided 𝑒 has endpoints in
distinct blocks.


                                                          20
   Lemma 5.10 is in fact a weaker statement than Lemma 8.5 from [dRPR24] since it fixes 𝑄 ≔ 𝒯𝐴 .
From Lemmas 5.9 and 5.10 we may derive Theorem 5.6 restated here for convenience.
Theorem 5.6. The following holds for 𝑘, 𝑛 ∈ N and 𝐷, 𝛿 ∈ R+ satisfying 𝐷 ≤ 2 log 𝑛 and 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛 1/5 .
For a family 𝒬 ⊆ 2𝒯 of size |𝒬| ≤ exp(𝑛 2−𝛿 ) it holds that 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑛 −2/𝐷 ) is asymptotically almost
surely (𝒬, 𝐷, 𝛿)-good.
    The remainder of this section is devoted to the proof of Theorem 5.6. Let 𝑝 B 𝑛 −2/𝐷 , fix
a core 𝐹, let 𝐴 B 𝑉 𝐸(𝐹) , and let 𝐵 B [𝑘] \ 𝐴. For the following it is convenient to write
                            

a tuple 𝑡 ∈ 𝒯 as 𝑡 = (𝑡 𝐴 , 𝑡 𝐵 ). For a graph 𝐺 denote by 𝐺 𝐴 B 𝐺[𝑉𝐴 ] the graph induced by
vertices 𝑉𝐴 B 𝑖∈𝐴 𝑉𝑖 and let 𝐺 𝐴¯ B 𝑉[𝑘] , 𝐸(𝐺) \ 𝑉2𝐴 denote the remainder. For a fixed set of
               Ð                                     

tuples 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬 and 𝐺 𝐴¯ fixed define
                                                    ★
                                                                  1{(𝑡𝐴 ,𝑡𝐵 )∈𝑄} 1{𝐸★𝐹 (𝑡𝐴 ,𝑡𝐵 ) present} (𝐺𝐴¯ ) .
                                                        Õ
                     𝜉𝐹,𝑄,𝐺𝐴¯ (𝑡 𝐴 ) ≔ 𝑝 −|𝐸𝐹 |                                                                                             (28)
                                                        𝑡 𝐵 ∈𝒯𝐵

Recall further that ℋ𝐹 = {𝐹 ⊔ 𝐸 | 𝐸 ⊇ 𝐸★𝐹 }. This allows us to write the considered sum as
          Õ Õ                        Õ                      Õ
                     𝜒𝐻(𝑡) (𝐺) =           𝜒𝐹(𝑡) (𝐺)                𝜒𝐸(𝑡) (𝐺)                                                               (29)
          𝑡∈𝑄 𝐻∈ℋ𝐹                   𝑡∈𝑄                   𝐸⊆𝐸★
                                                              𝐹
                                                                     ★
                                           𝜒𝐹(𝑡) (𝐺 𝐴 ) 𝑝 −|𝐸𝐹 | 1{𝐸★(𝑡) present} (𝐺 𝐴¯ )
                                     Õ
                                 =                                                                                                          (30)
                                                                              𝐹
                                     𝑡∈𝑄
                                                                         ★
                                                                                       1{(𝑡𝐴 ,𝑡𝐵 )∈𝑄} 1{𝐸★𝐹 (𝑡𝐴 ,𝑡𝐵 ) present} (𝐺𝐴¯ )
                                      Õ                                      Õ
                                 =             𝜒𝐹(𝑡𝐴 ) (𝐺 𝐴 ) 𝑝 −|𝐸𝐹 |                                                                      (31)
                                     𝑡 𝐴 ∈𝒯𝐴                                 𝑡 𝐵 ∈𝒯𝐵
                                      Õ
                                 =             𝜒𝐹(𝑡𝐴 ) (𝐺 𝐴 ) 𝜉𝐹,𝑄,𝐺𝐴¯ (𝑡 𝐴 ) ,                                                             (32)
                                     𝑡 𝐴 ∈𝒯𝐴

where we observe that since every edge in 𝐸★𝐹 has an endpoint outside 𝐴, the function 𝜉𝐹,𝑄,𝐺𝐴¯
only depends on the edges of 𝐺 𝐴¯ and not on those of 𝐺 𝐴 .
   For 𝑟 ∈ R+ denote by X𝑟 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) the indicator random variable of the event |𝜉𝐹,𝑄,𝐺𝐴¯ | ≤ 𝑟,
and for 𝑠 ∈ R+ let Y𝑠 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) be the indicator random variable for the event
                                                    Õ Õ
                                                                    𝜒𝐻(𝑡) (𝐺) ≤ 𝑠 .                                                         (33)
                                                    𝑡∈𝑄 𝐻∈ℋ𝐹

Note that it holds that
 Pr ∃𝐹 ∈ ℱ𝐷/4 , 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬 such that ¬Y𝑠 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺)
                                                                    
  𝐺

                          = Pr ∃𝐹 ∈ ℱ𝐷/4 , 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬 such that ¬Y𝑠 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) and ¬X𝑟 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) + (34)
                                                                                                                                       
                             𝐺

                                 Pr ∃𝐹 ∈ ℱ𝐷/4 , 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬 such that ¬Y𝑠 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) and X𝑟 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺)
                                                                                                                                       
                                 𝐺

                          ≤ Pr ∃𝐹 ∈ ℱ𝐷/4 , 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬 such that ¬X𝑟 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) +
                                                                                                           
                             𝐺

                                                                                                                                            (35)
                                     Õ
                                           Pr ¬Y𝑠 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) X𝑟 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) .
                                                                                                 
                                           𝐺
                                 𝐹∈ℱ𝐷/4
                                  𝑄∈𝒬

   To argue that 𝐺 ∼ 𝒢(𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑝) is asymptotically almost surely (𝒬, 𝐷, 𝛿)-good, we need to show
that the initial probability in (34) is bounded by o(1) for 𝑠 ≔ 𝑛 𝑘 𝑝 −|𝐸(𝐹)| 𝑛 −𝛿 vc(𝐹)/10 . Theorem 5.6
thus follows from the following two claims.

                                                                      21
Claim 5.11. For 𝑟 ≔ 3𝑛 𝑘−|𝐴| it holds that

                                  Pr ∃𝐹 ∈ ℱ𝐷/4 , 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬 such that ¬X𝑟 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) = o(1) .
                                                                                                                       
                                  𝐺

Claim 5.12. For 𝑟 B 3𝑛 𝑘−|𝐴| and 𝑠 B 6𝑛 𝑘 𝑝 −|𝐸(𝐹)| (4𝑛 𝛿/2 )− vc(𝐹)/4 it holds that
                                            Õ
                                                      Pr ¬Y𝑠 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) X𝑟 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) = o(1) .
                                                                                                               
                                                      𝐺
                                           𝐹∈ℱ𝐷/4
                                            𝑄∈𝒬

Proof of Claim 5.11. The probability that any such event fails can be bounded by Lemma 5.9 as
follows. Lemma 5.9 implies that asymptotically almost surely for any core 𝐹 ∈ ℱ𝐷/4 , any set of
tuples 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬, any set 𝐴 ⊆ [𝑘] of size |𝐴| ≤ 𝐷/4, and any 𝑡 𝐴 ∈ 𝑄 𝐴 it holds that
                                                                    ★
                                                                                   1{(𝑡𝐴 ,𝑡𝐵 )∈𝑄} 1{𝐸★𝐹 (𝑡𝐴 ,𝑡𝐵 ) present} (𝐺𝐴¯ )
                                                                            Õ
                                 𝜉𝐹,𝑄,𝐺𝐴¯ (𝑡 𝐴 ) = 𝑝 −|𝐸𝐹 |                                                                                                    (36)
                                                                         𝑡 𝐵 ∈𝒯𝐵
                                                                    ★
                                                                                   1{𝐸★𝐹 (𝑡𝐴 ,𝑡𝐵 ) present} (𝐺𝐴¯ )
                                                                            Õ
                                                       ≤ 𝑝 −|𝐸𝐹 |                                                                                              (37)
                                                                         𝑡 𝐵 ∈𝒯𝐵
                                                                    ★                                            ★
                                                       ≤ 𝑝 −|𝐸𝐹 | 𝑛 𝑘−|𝐴| (1 + 1/𝑘) 𝑘−|𝐴| 𝑝 |𝐸𝐹 |                                                              (38)
                                                       ≤ 3𝑛 𝑘−|𝐴| = 𝑟 .                                                                                          □

Proof of Claim 5.12. Fix a core 𝐹 ∈ ℱ𝐷/4 and a set 𝑄 ∈ 𝒬. We claim that Lemma 5.10 implies that
                                                                                 Õ                                                                
       Pr ¬Y𝑠 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) X𝑟 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) = Pr                                                  𝜒𝐹(𝑡𝐴 ) (𝐺) 𝜉𝐹,𝑄,𝐺𝐴¯ (𝑡 𝐴 ) > 𝑠 X𝑟 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺)                        (39)
                                                             
       𝐺                                                                𝐺
                                                                                 𝑡 𝐴 ∈𝒯𝐴
                                                                                                                             𝑚
                                                                    𝑟 · 𝑝 −|𝐸(𝐹)| · (𝑚/𝑛 2 )vc(𝐹)/4 · 𝑛 |𝐴|
                                                                     
                                                                  ≤                                                                                            (40)
                                                                                      𝑠

for any 𝑠 ∈ R+ and any even integer 𝑚 ∈ N. Indeed, since any graph 𝐹 has a matching of size
vc(𝐹)/2 and 𝜉𝐹,𝑄,𝐺𝐴¯ only depends on 𝐺 𝐴¯ , we may condition on 𝐺 𝐴¯ and average over it to obtain
that
        Õ                                                                                     
  Pr                 𝜒𝐹(𝑡𝐴 ) (𝐺) 𝜉𝐹,𝑄,𝐺𝐴¯ (𝑡 𝐴 ) > 𝑠 X𝑟 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺)
  𝐺
           𝑡 𝐴 ∈𝒯𝐴

                             Õ                                                                            Õ                                                  (41)
                                           Pr         𝐺 𝐴¯ X𝑟 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) · Pr                                         𝜒𝐹(𝑡𝐴 ) (𝐺) 𝜉𝐹,𝑄,𝐺𝐴¯ (𝑡 𝐴 ) > 𝑠       .
                                                                                          
                     =
                                       𝐺\𝐺[𝑉𝐴 ]                                                𝐺[𝑉𝐴 ]
                             𝐺 𝐴¯ :                                                                        𝑡 𝐴 ∈𝒯𝐴
                          X𝑟 (𝐹,𝑄,𝐺)

For 𝑟 B 3𝑛 𝑘−|𝐴| , 𝑚 B 𝑛 2−𝛿/2 /4, and 𝑠 B 6𝑛 𝑘 𝑝 −|𝐸(𝐹)| (𝑚/𝑛 2 )vc(𝐹)/4 we find that
                            Õ Õ                                                                    𝑚  vc(𝐹)/4                       
                                                                            𝑘      −|𝐸(𝐹)|
                     Pr                     𝜒𝐻(𝑡) (𝐺) > 6𝑛 · 𝑝                                 ·                      X𝑟 (𝐹, 𝑄, 𝐺) < 2−𝑚 .                     (42)
                𝐺[𝑉𝐴 ]
                             𝑡∈𝑄 𝐻∈ℋ𝐹
                                                                                                    𝑛2

                                                                                Í𝐷/4
Since by Lemma 5.4 there are at most 𝑖=1 23𝑖(𝑖+log 𝑘) ≤ 2𝐷(𝐷+log 𝑘) many cores with vertex
                                                          2−𝛿
cover at most 𝐷/4 and by assumption it holds that |𝒬| ≤ 2𝑛 , it follows that the sum under
consideration is bounded by
                                                          2−𝛿                                         2−𝛿/2 (1/4−𝑛 −𝛿/2 )
                                 2𝐷(𝐷+log 𝑘) 2𝑛                 2−𝑚 = 2𝐷(𝐷+log 𝑘)−𝑛                                         = 𝑜(1) .                             □

                                                                                       22
6   Concluding Remarks
We prove lower bounds on tree-like semantic proof systems operating over a limited number
of distinct proof lines. These lower bounds are essentially optimal in a sense that the number
of proof lines cannot be increased by much as otherwise there are semantic proof systems that
can refute the entire family of formulas under consideration. As corollaries we obtain the first
superpolynomial refutation length lower bounds on tree-like Frege refutation systems with
bounded line size and the tree-like threshold proof system of polynomial degree. These lower
bounds are established for different encodings of the clique formula. For the standard unary
encoding, our main theorem yields essentially optimal average-case 𝑛 Ω(𝐷) size lower bounds on
tree-like cutting planes and tree-like resolution over parities refutations of the 𝑘-clique formula
over Erdős-Rényi random graphs with maximum cliques of size 𝐷.
    Given that we obtain lower bounds for proof systems that can refute all simple benchmark
formulas we thereby establish that the proof method of constructing a pseudo-measure is
independent of the hardness of these simple combinatorial principles. This shows that this
proof paradigm may be able to yield lower bounds for even stronger proof systems. As a first
step in this direction it would be interesting to see whether the lower bound methodology
of constructing a pseudo-measure can be adapted to only hold for a certain class of syntactic
derivation rules instead of the very generic semantic derivation rule considered in this paper.
There are many further loose ends—let us mention two other directions we consider most
interesting.
    First off, is it possible to prove refutation length lower bounds on dag-like semantic ℱ proof
systems? This might be an avenue towards dag-like Lovász–Schrĳver refutation length lower
bounds. Could it even be that for every dag-like semantic ℱ proof system there is a tree-like
semantic ℱ ′ proof system that efficiently simulates the former with |ℱ ′ | = poly |ℱ | ?
                                                                                         

    To prove cutting planes lower bounds for random 𝑂(1)-CNF formulas, we need to consider
proof methods that separate deterministic from randomized communication models; the falsified
clause search problem for random 𝑂(1)-CNF formulas has low-depth randomized communication
protocols. As already pointed out in [dRPR23], the pseudo-measure 𝜇 can be used to prove a
lower bound on the deterministic 𝑘-player number-in-hand communication complexity: consider
the problem of finding a missing edge in the induced subgraph by a tuple (𝑣1 , . . . , 𝑣 𝑘 ), where
player 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘] is provided vertex 𝑣 𝑖 . The pseudo-measure 𝜇 shows that any deterministic
communication protocol for this problem is of depth Ω(𝐷 log 𝑛). As this problem can be solved
in constant cost in the randomized model for small values of 𝑘, this provides a modest separation
of these two models. Can the method of constructing a pseudo-measure be used to prove
random 𝑂(1)-CNF cutting planes refutation size lower bounds?


Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Mika Göös, Dmitry Itsykson, Duri Andrea Janett, and Artur Riazanov for
insightful discussions.
    S.R. and D.E. received funding from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation grant
KAW 2023.0116, ELLIIT, and the Swedish Research Council grant 2021-05104. Y.G. received
funding from the Independent Research Fund Denmark grant 9040-00389B. K.R. is supported
by the Swiss National Science Foundation Postdoc.Mobility fellowship P500-2_235298; part of
this work was done while affiliated with EPFL. We also gratefully acknowledge that we have


                                                23
benefited greatly from being part of the Basic Algorithms Research Centre (BARC) environment
financed by the Villum Investigator grant 54451.


References
[AB09]     Martin Anthony and Peter L Bartlett. Neural network learning: Theoretical foundations.
           cambridge university press, 2009. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511624216. 14
[AO18]     Albert Atserias and Joanna Ochremiak. Proof complexity meets algebra. 20(1),
           December 2018. doi:10.1145/3265985. 1
[BFPJH21] Eric Blais, Renato Ferreira Pinto Jr., and Nathaniel Harms. VC dimension and
          distribution-free sample-based testing. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM
          SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, page 504–517. Association for Computing
          Machinery, 2021. doi:10.1145/3406325.3451104. 14
[BIS07]    Paul Beame, Russell Impagliazzo, and Ashish Sabharwal. The resolution complexity
           of independent sets and vertex covers in random graphs. Computational Complexity,
           16(3):245–297, October 2007. doi:10.1007/s00037-007-0230-0. 8
[BPS07]    Paul Beame, Toniann Pitassi, and Nathan Segerlind.           Lower bounds for
           Lovász–Schrĳver systems and beyond follow from multiparty communication com-
           plexity. SIAM Journal on Computing, 37(3):845–869, 2007. doi:10.1137/060654645.
           3, 5, 7
[CEYZ20] Justin Chen, Christopher Eur, Greg Yang, and Mengyuan Zhang. Free resolutions of
         function classes via order complexes. Advances in Applied Mathematics, 120:102074,
         2020. doi:10.1016/j.aam.2020.102074. 13
[CR79]     Stephen A. Cook and Robert A. Reckhow. The relative efficiency of propositional
           proof systems. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 44(1):36–50, March 1979. Preliminary version
           in STOC ’74. doi:10.2307/2273702. 1
[dRPR23] Susanna F. de Rezende, Aaron Potechin, and Kilian Risse. Clique is hard on average
         for unary Sherali–Adams. In 2023 IEEE 64th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
         Computer Science (FOCS), pages 12–25, 2023. doi:10.1109/FOCS57990.2023.00008.
         4, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 23
[dRPR24] Susanna F. de Rezende, Aaron Potechin, and Kilian Risse. Clique is hard on
         average for Sherali–Adams with bounded coefficients. CoRR, abs/2404.16722, 2024.
         doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2404.16722. 17, 18, 20, 21
[GHJ+ 24] Mika Göös, Alexandros Hollender, Siddhartha Jain, Gilbert Maystre, William Pires,
          Robert Robere, and Ran Tao. Separations in proof complexity and TFNP. J. ACM,
          71(4), August 2024. doi:10.1145/3663758. 1
[GP18]     Mika Göös and Toniann Pitassi. Communication lower bounds via critical block sensi-
           tivity. SIAM Journal on Computing, 47(5):1778–1806, 2018. doi:10.1137/16M1082007.
           3, 5
[HKT24]    Pavel Hubáček, Erfan Khaniki, and Neil Thapen. TFNP Intersections Through the
           Lens of Feasible Disjunction. In Venkatesan Guruswami, editor, 15th Innovations in
           Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2024), volume 287 of Leibniz International
           Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 63:1–63:24, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2024. Schloss
           Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2024.63.
           4

                                               24
[IR21]    Dmitry Itsykson and Artur Riazanov. Proof Complexity of Natural Formulas via
          Communication Arguments. In Valentine Kabanets, editor, 36th Computational
          Complexity Conference (CCC 2021), volume 200 of Leibniz International Proceedings in
          Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 3:1–3:34, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2021. Schloss Dagstuhl –
          Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2021.3. 3, 5
[IS20]    Dmitry Itsykson and Dmitry Sokolov. Resolution over linear equations modulo two.
          Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 171(1):102722, 2020. doi:10.1016/j.apal.2019.
          102722. 7
[KM24a]   Pravesh K. Kothari and Peter Manohar. An exponential lower bound for linear 3-
          query locally correctable codes. In Bojan Mohar, Igor Shinkar, and Ryan O’Donnell,
          editors, Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
          STOC 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, June 24-28, 2024, pages 776–787. ACM, 2024.
          doi:10.1145/3618260.3649640. 1
[KM24b]   Pravesh K. Kothari and Peter Manohar. Exponential lower bounds for smooth 3-LCCs
          and sharp bounds for designs. In 65th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of
          Computer Science, FOCS 2024, Chicago, IL, USA, October 27-30, 2024, pages 1802–1845.
          IEEE, 2024. doi:10.1109/FOCS61266.2024.00110. 1
[PZ24]    Aaron Potechin and Aaron Zhang. Bounds on the Total Coefficient Size of Nullstellen-
          satz Proofs of the Pigeonhole Principle. In Karl Bringmann, Martin Grohe, Gabriele
          Puppis, and Ola Svensson, editors, 51st International Colloquium on Automata, Lan-
          guages, and Programming (ICALP 2024), volume 297 of Leibniz International Proceedings
          in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 117:1–117:20, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2024. Schloss Dagstuhl
          – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2024.117. 4
[Rec75]   Robert A. Reckhow. On the Lengths of Proofs in the Propositional Calculus. PhD thesis,
          University of Toronto, 1975. doi:1807/100390. 1
[Sau72]   N Sauer. On the density of families of sets. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A,
          13(1):145–147, 1972. doi:10.1016/0097-3165(72)90019-2. 6
[She72]   Saharon Shelah. A combinatorial problem; stability and order for models and
          theories in infinitary languages. Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 41(1):247 – 261, 1972.
          doi:10.2140/pjm.1972.41.247. 6
[SSBD14] Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding Machine Learning:
         From Theory to Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2014. doi:10.1017/
         CBO9781107298019. 12




                                              25
