                       Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity, Report No. 166 (2026)




          Quasi-polynomial Frege Simulation of IPS beyond
                                       Noncommutativity
   Abhranil Chatterjee* Prerona Chatterjee† Utsab Ghosal‡ Partha Mukhopadhyay§

                                              September 4, 2026



                                                      Abstract

          Grochow and Pitassi (2018) introduced the algebraic proof system, the Ideal Proof System
      (IPS), which connects algebraic circuit complexity to propositional proof complexity. They
      showed that propositional proof systems such as Extended Frege (Frege) are equivalent to
      circuit IPS (formula IPS) if the correctness of PIT for circuits (formulas) can be proved in Ex-
      tended Frege (Frege). Along the same lines, the work of Li, Tzameret, and Wang (2018) gives
      a quasi-polynomial (unconditional) equivalence between noncommutative formula IPS and
      Frege (over GF(2)) by proving the correctness of the noncommutative formula (ABP) PIT al-
      gorithm of Raz and Shpilka (2005) in Frege.
          We extend this line of work beyond the fully noncommutative setting. We consider a par-
      tially commutative model in which the variables are partitioned into two sets: variables within
      each set are noncommuting while they commute across the sets. We show that the same quasi-
      polynomial equivalence with Frege continues to hold in this setting, even when both sets have
      unbounded size.
          Enroute to the main result, we give a new deterministic polynomial time PIT algorithm for
      partially commutative formulas (ABPs) over such mixed variables and show that the correct-
      ness of the algorithm can be efficiently verified in Frege. To the best of our knowledge, this
      is the strongest known class of algebraic formulas for which Frege efficiently proves identity
      testing. Our approach uses tools from skew field theory (Cohn 1995), which may be of inde-
      pendent interest in algebraic proof complexity.




  * Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kharagpur. Email: abhranilc@cse.iitkgp.ac.in
  † School of Computer Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhubaneswar, India; Homi

Bhabha National Institute, Anushakti Nagar, Mumbai, India. Email: prerona.ch@gmail.com
   ‡ Imperial College, London. This work was done as a PhD student at Chennai Mathematical Institute, India. Email:

utsab.ghosal@gmail.com.
   § Chennai Mathematical Institute, Chennai, India. Email: partham@cmi.ac.in.



                                                          1


                                                                                                           ISSN 1433-8092
1     Introduction
The theory of propositional proof complexity studies the computational resources required to
prove propositional tautologies in concrete proof systems. Cook and Reckhow [CR79] formalized
the notion of a propositional proof system and showed that there exists a polynomially bounded
proof system if and only if NP = coNP. Among the standard propositional proof systems, the
Frege proof system plays a central role. A Frege proof1 starts from a fixed finite collection of axiom
schemes and derives new Boolean formulas using a fixed collection of sound inference rules. By
the work of Reckhow [Rec76], the complexity of proving propositional tautologies in this system
is independent of the particular choice of axioms and rules. Thus, Frege gives a robust model for
measuring the complexity of ordinary propositional reasoning.
    Despite being one of the main strong propositional proof systems, the power of Frege is still
poorly understood. In particular, no super-polynomial lower bound is known for unrestricted
Frege proofs; see, for example [Jeř25]. However, strong lower bounds are known for restricted
versions such as bounded-depth Frege [Ajt88, PBI93, KPW95, PRST16, HR25]. Moreover, several
families of tautologies that are hard for weaker proof systems admit polynomial-size Frege proofs.
One such classical example is the pigeonhole principle [Bus87]. Thus, understanding the power
and limitations of unrestricted Frege remains a basic problem in proof complexity.
    This gap makes it useful to look for other ways to understand the power of Frege. One such
direction is through algebraic proof systems. In an algebraic proof system, propositional formulas
are translated into polynomial equations and proofs are represented by algebraic computations.
This brings tools from algebraic complexity into proof complexity and gives a direct way to com-
pare the complexity of proofs with the complexity of algebraic circuits; see, for example, [PT16]
for a survey.
    A central system in this direction is the Ideal Proof System (IPS), introduced by Grochow and
Pitassi [GP18]. An IPS refutation is a single algebraic circuit (formula, ABP, etc.), that witnesses
a given system of polynomial equations is unsatisfiable. The circuit version of IPS polynomially
simulates Extended Frege, while the formula version polynomially simulates Frege [GP18]. At
the same time, lower bounds for unrestricted IPS are closely connected to lower bounds in alge-
braic circuit complexity. Therefore, understanding the relation between Frege and algebraic proof
systems such as IPS gives another approach to understanding the power of Frege.


Commutative IPS. We first recall the commutative Ideal Proof System introduced by Grochow
and Pitassi [GP18].

        Let F be a field and let f 1 , . . . , f m ∈ F[ X ] be a set of unsatisfiable polynomials, where
        the Boolean axioms xi2 − xi are included among the f i s. A commutative IPS certificate
    1 The formal definition is given in Subsection 2.3.




                                                          2
      is a polynomial P( X, Z ) ∈ F[ X, Z ] such that

                            P( X, 0) = 0         and         P( X, f 1 ( X ), . . . , f m ( X )) = 1.

      The size of a refutation is the size of an algebraic circuit2 computing P( X, Z ). We
      call the proof system C -IPS, if the proof polynomial P( X, Z ) is computed in C . The
      proof system is sound by definition, and completeness follows from Hilbert’s weak
      Nullstellensatz. Note that if the proof polynomial P( X, Z ) is computed by an algebraic
      class C , then the verification of C -IPS is exactly polynomial identity testing in C .

A natural question is whether strong propositional proof systems can efficiently prove the sound-
ness of IPS3 . This question is fundamental because, as is standard in proof complexity, if a proof
system P2 admits polynomial-size proofs of the soundness of another proof system P1 , then P2
polynomially simulates P1 . Therefore polynomial-size proofs of the soundness of IPS in Frege (or
Extended Frege) immediately yield polynomial simulations of IPS by these propositional proof
systems.
    Grochow and Pitassi [GP18] approached this question in two steps. They first introduced a
propositional formula SoundnessIPS expressing the soundness of commutative IPS, and showed
that polynomial-size proofs of a natural collection of PIT principles imply polynomial-size proofs
of SoundnessIPS . They then proved that polynomial-size proofs of SoundnessIPS imply polynomial
simulations of commutative IPS by the ambient propositional proof system. Consequently, prov-
ing the soundness of commutative IPS reduces to proving the correctness of Polynomial Identity
Testing (PIT) within propositional proof systems. Subsequent work further clarified this connec-
tion. Grochow [Gro26] showed that commutative IPS can be p-simulated by a Cook–Reckhow
proof system [CR79] if and only if PIT ∈ NP. Hence, understanding how propositional proof
systems reason about polynomial identities becomes a central question in relating algebraic and
propositional proof systems. The simulation theorem of Grochow and Pitassi reduces the simula-
tion of commutative IPS by propositional proof systems to proving the correctness of Polynomial
Identity Testing within those proof systems. At present, no strong propositional proof system is
known to admit polynomial-size proofs of these PIT principles in the commutative setting.
    Our question is more specific. Rather than asking whether unrestricted IPS can be simulated
by some Cook–Reckhow proof system, we ask for which natural algebraic restrictions of IPS the
simulation can be carried out by Frege itself. Equivalently, we want to understand the classes of
algebraic identities that Frege can efficiently prove to establish the soundness of the corresponding
IPS system. In this sense, we seek to understand the boundary of algebraic reasoning that Frege
can efficiently simulate.
  2 or sometimes an algebraic formula. See Definition 2.1 for the definitions of algebraic circuits and formulas.
  3 Given { f , . . . , f }, if there is a proof polynomial P ( X, Z ) satisfying these two properties from the definition, then
             1           m
indeed the set has no common root.


                                                              3
Noncommutative IPS. Li, Tzameret, and Wang [LTW18] identified an important point on this
boundary by considering the fully noncommutative setting. Instead of reasoning about the com-
mutative PIT principles, they directly proved the soundness of a noncommutative variant of IPS
(over GF(2)) within Frege. This yields a quasi-polynomial simulation of noncommutative IPS by
Frege.
   They introduced the noncommutative Ideal Proof System (NC-IPS) as follows.

      Let F be a field and let f 1 , . . . , f m ∈ F⟨ x1 , . . . , xn ⟩4 be noncommutative unsatisfiable
      polynomials containing the Boolean axioms { xi (1 − xi ) : i ∈ [n]} and the commutator
      axioms { xi x j − x j xi : i < j}.
      A noncommutative IPS certificate is a noncommutative polynomial P( X, Z ) ∈ F⟨ X, Z ⟩
      satisfying
                        P( X, 0) = 0       and    P( X, f 1 , . . . , f m ) = 1.

      The size of an NC-IPS refutation is the size of a noncommutative formula computing
      P( X, Z ).

The proof of Li, Tzameret, and Wang relies on a reflection principle for noncommutative IPS. In-
formally, such a principle states that Frege can prove the soundness of noncommutative IPS. As
discussed above, proving the soundness of one proof system within another immediately yields
a simulation. Thus it suffices to establish polynomial-size Frege proofs of the soundness of non-
commutative IPS.
    To prove this reflection principle, Li, Tzameret, and Wang reduce the problem to proving
Boolean tautologies arising from noncommutative polynomial identities. Over the field GF(2),
every noncommutative arithmetic formula F naturally defines a Boolean formula Fe by replacing
addition with XOR and multiplication with AND. Thus every noncommutative polynomial iden-
tity F gives rise to a Boolean tautology ¬ F.
                                           e
    Using the deterministic Polynomial Identity Testing algorithm of Raz and Shpilka [RS05], they
proved that every homogeneous noncommutative polynomial identity of size s has a correspond-
ing Boolean tautology with a Frege proof of size poly(s). This theorem allows Frege to verify
the polynomial identities appearing in a noncommutative IPS certificate. Consequently, Frege
proves the soundness of noncommutative IPS, and therefore quasi-polynomially5 simulates non-
commutative IPS. The result of Li, Tzameret, and Wang illustrates a broader phenomenon. The
existence of an efficient algorithm for Polynomial Identity Testing does not, by itself, imply an
efficient Frege proof of the corresponding polynomial identities. In general, it is unclear whether
the correctness of an efficient algorithm can be proved within Frege with only polynomial over-
head. Thus, obtaining Frege simulations requires more than efficient algorithms. One also needs
    4 F⟨ x , . . . , x ⟩ is the ring of noncommutative polynomials. Here the variables do not commute. That is, ∀ i ̸ =
           1          n
j xi x j − x j xi ̸= 0.
    5 The source of quasi-polynomial blow up is homogenization of the noncommutative formulas.



                                                          4
algorithms whose correctness admits efficient Frege proofs. The deterministic PIT algorithm of
Raz and Shpilka [RS05] has precisely this property for noncommutative formulas.
    The result of Li, Tzameret, and Wang therefore leaves a natural gap. At one endpoint, fully
noncommutative formula IPS is already quasi-polynomially equivalent to Frege. At the other end-
point, in the fully commutative setting, an efficient simulation of formula IPS by Frege remains
tied to proving suitable commutative PIT statements inside Frege. This suggests studying inter-
mediate algebraic models in which some commutativity is introduced while asking whether the
Frege simulation continues to hold.
    Our motivation here is not that introducing commutativity should make Frege lower bounds
easier. In fact, allowing more commutativity makes the underlying algebraic model stronger and
can make algebraic lower bounds more difficult. Rather, we use these intermediate models to
study how far the ability of Frege to efficiently reason about algebraic identities extends beyond
the fully noncommutative setting. In particular, we ask:
       How much commutativity can be introduced into the noncommutative IPS model while re-
       taining an efficient simulation by Frege? More generally, what is the largest class of algebraic
       identities whose corresponding Boolean tautologies admit efficient Frege proofs?
Answering this question would identify new algebraic proof systems whose soundness can be
proved within Frege and hence admit efficient Frege simulations.

1.1    Our Contribution

Partially Commutative IPS. Motivated by the gap between commutative and noncommutative
IPS, we define a family of proof systems called Partially Commutative IPS, {PCm,n - IPS}1≤m≤n . It
bridges noncommutative IPS and Commutative IPS in the following sense: PC1,n - IPS ≡ NC-IPS
and PCn,n - IPS ≡ IPS where n is the total number of variables.
    We begin by looking at the notion of a partially commutative polynomial. A partially commu-
tative polynomial is defined over variables partitioned into buckets. Variables inside the same
bucket do not commute, whereas variables belonging to different buckets commute. We explain it
with a 2-partition of the variable set below.
       Let X1 , X2 be two sets of variables such that X1 = { x1,1 , . . . , x1,n1 } and X2 =
       { x2,1 , . . . , x2,n2 }, and let F be a field. A partially commutative monomial m ∈
       F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ is uniquely determined by its restrictions to X1 and to X2 : m| X1 = m X1 ∈
       F⟨ X1 ⟩ and m| X2 = m X2 ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩, where m X1 and m X2 are noncommutative monomials.
       All variables in X1 commute with all variables in X2 . Hence, for m, m′ ∈ F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩,
       we have m = m′ if and only if m| X1 = m′ | X1 and m| X2 = m′ | X2 . This induces an
       equivalence relation ∼ on the set of monomials.6
   6 For example, consider two monomials m
                                                 1 = x1,1 x2,1 x1,2 x2,2 and m2 = x2,1 x1,1 x2,2 x1,2 . These two monomials are
the same with m1 | X1 = m2 | X1 = x1,1 x1,2 and m1 | X2 = m2 | X2 = x2,1 x2,2 .


                                                              5
      A partially commutative polynomial f ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ is an F-linear combination of the
      partially commutative monomials over X1 and X2 . A partially commutative polyno-
      mial over p buckets, say f ∈ F X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ X p , can be defined analogously.

    This is a very well-studied model with connections to the problem of multiplicity equivalence
testing of multi-tape automata [HK91, Wor13]. The study of one-way multi-tape finite automata
was initiated in the seminal paper by Rabin and Scott [RS59]. The multiplicity equivalence testing
problem for multi-tape automata is reduced to the identity testing problem over the partially com-
mutative ring, and a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm was designed only very recently
(over Q) when the number of tapes is O(1) [ACM24].
    In particular, the bucketing structure of the variables defines a noncommuting graph, a struc-
ture (motivated by the classical work of Cartier and Foata [CF69]) which measures the amount of
noncommutativity present in the model.

      The noncommuting graph has one vertex for each variable in the polynomial, and
      an edge exists between two vertices if and only if the corresponding variables do not
      commute.

   Note that a commutative polynomial f ∈ F[ X ] can be thought of as a partially commutative
polynomial in F ⟨ X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xn ⟩ where | Xi | = 1. Thus, a natural generalization of both IPS and
NC-IPS is the proof system PCm,n - IPS, which we define in such a way that PC1,n - IPS ≡ NC-IPS
and PCn,n - IPS ≡ IPS where n is the total number of variables.
   In particular, the input equations of a PCm,n - IPS proof are partially commutative polynomials
in F ⟨ X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm ⟩. Using this partially commutative ring, we define the corresponding Ideal
Proof System. The definition is analogous to NC-IPS, except that computations are carried out
over the partially commutative ring. A formal definition of PCm,n - IPS is given below.
Definition 1.1. (Partially commutative IPS (PCm,n - IPS)) Let F be a field and X = X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm be a
set of partially commutative variables7 with | X | = n and for every i ∈ [m], | Xi | = ni .
    Assume that f 1 = f 2 = · · · = f ℓ = 0 is a set of partially commutative polynomial equations from
F ⟨ X ⟩ and suppose that the following equations (axioms) are included among the f i ’s.

   • Boolean axioms: x2 − x for every x ∈ X
   • Commutator axioms: xi,j xi,j′ − xi,j′ xi,j for every i ∈ [m], j ̸= j′ ∈ [ni ].

    A partially commutative IPS proof (PCm,n - IPS) of unsatisfiability of the system { f i } is a polynomial
P( X, z1 , . . . , zℓ ) represented by a partially commutative formula over the quotient of F⟨ X, Z ⟩ by the pre-
scribed commuting relations among the X-variables only; in particular, no additional commuting relations
involving the placeholder variables Z = {z1 , . . . , zℓ } are imposed. We require

   1. P( X, 0) = 0;
  7 For every i, the variables within X are noncommuting, but for every i ̸ = j, variables from X and X commute.
                                       i                                                         i     j



                                                        6
   2. P( X, f 1 , . . . , f ℓ ) = 1,

where substitution is the algebra homomorphism that fixes the X-variables and sends zi 7→ f i . The size of
a PCm,n - IPS proof is the minimum size of a partially commutative formula computing P( X, Z ).          ♢

Our Result Both commutative and noncommutative IPS are known to be sound and complete
proof systems [GP18, LTW18]. Partially commutative IPS is an intermediate model; we give a for-
mal proof of its soundness and completeness in Subsection A.1. Verification of noncommutative
IPS proofs can be done in deterministic polynomial-time using the Raz–Shpilka noncommutative
ABP identity-testing algorithm [RS05, LTW18]. On the other hand, commutative IPS has random-
ized polynomial-time verification via polynomial identity testing [Zip79]. For two buckets over
GF(2), deterministic polynomial-time verification follows from Theorem 1.3; more generally, for a
constant number of buckets over Q, deterministic polynomial-time identity testing is known from
[ACM24]. We refer the reader to Subsection A.2 for a more detailed discussion. We also show in
Subsection A.3 that partially commutative IPS can efficiently simulate the Frege proof system, in
particular the Łukasiewicz calculus described in Definition 2.3.
     Our main result is a quasi-polynomial simulation of a natural subclass of partially commuta-
tive IPS by Frege. In particular, let X = X1 ⊔ X2 be a set of partially commutative variables with
| X1 | = n1 , | X2 | = n2 , and n1 + n2 = n. Then, we show that any PC2,n - IPS proof of unsatisfiability
for a CNF, can be converted into a Frege proof with at most a quasi-polynomial increase in size.
This extends the simulation theorem of Li, Tzameret, and Wang from the fully noncommutative
setting to a substantially more general, partially commutative model.
     We fix F to be GF(2) throughout. For notational simplicity, we assume that | X1 | = | X2 | = n′ .
The arguments do not depend on the two buckets having the same size, and the same proofs apply
to an arbitrary partition X = X1 ⊔ X2 .

Theorem 1.2. Any size-s PC2,n - IPS refutation over F of an unsatisfiable CNF can be simulated by a Frege
                      O (1)
proof of size s(log s) .

    Note that the noncommuting graph in this setting is the disjoint union of two cliques of size
n′ . As discussed earlier, proving Theorem 1.2 reduces to establishing the soundness of PC2,n - IPS
within Frege. Equivalently, we need efficient Frege proofs of the Boolean tautologies arising from
partially commutative polynomial identities.
    At first sight, one might hope to use an existing deterministic Polynomial Identity Testing al-
gorithm for partially commutative polynomials. However, this is not sufficient for our purposes.
To obtain short Frege proofs, one needs an identity testing algorithm whose correctness can it-
self be efficiently formalized within Frege. Existing algorithms rely on sophisticated algebraic
constructions, and it is currently unclear how to efficiently formalize their correctness in Frege.
    We therefore develop a new deterministic white-box identity testing algorithm for partially
commutative ABPs. The algorithm is designed together with its proof of correctness, so that every

                                                    7
step admits an efficient Frege formalization. This forms the main technical ingredient in our proof
of Theorem 1.2.
Theorem 1.3. (White-box algorithm for 2-bucket) Let A be a partially commutative ABP in F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩
of size s and depth d. Then we can decide deterministically in time poly(s, d, n) whether A computes the
zero polynomial. Moreover the correctness of the algorithm can be efficiently proved in Frege.

Informal Description of the Algorithm: Our white-box algorithm is inspired by the noncommu-
tative identity testing algorithm of Raz and Shpilka [RS05]. Recall that the variables are partitioned
into two buckets X1 and X2 , where variables within the same bucket do not commute, while vari-
ables from different buckets commute. Using Lemma B.17, we first transform the given partially
commutative ABP into one that is homogeneous with respect to the variables in X1 . Consequently,
                                   ′
every edge label has the form ∑nj=1 x1,j f j , where each f j ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩ is computed by a polynomial-size
noncommutative ABP.
    Let A be such a homogeneous partially commutative ABP of width w, depth d, source s, and
sink t. For every layer i ∈ [d], let Pi ∈ F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩w denote the vector of partial ABPs, where the
j-th coordinate is the sub-ABP from the source s to the j-th node in layer i. Thus every coordinate
of Pi computes a polynomial of X1 -degree exactly i, and the vector Pi captures the computation
performed by the ABP up to the i-th layer.
    For every monomial m ∈ F⟨ X1 ⟩, define the coefficient vector coeff m (Pi ) ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩w , whose j-th
coordinate is the coefficient of m in the polynomial computed by the j-th partial ABP. Equivalently,
coeff m (Pi ) records how the monomial m propagates simultaneously through every node of the i-th
layer while preserving the remaining computation over the variables in X2 .
    Let
                              Vi = {coeff m (Pi ) : m ∈ F⟨ X1 ⟩} ⊆ F⟨ X2 ⟩w

denote the collection of all coefficient vectors at layer i. Since there are exponentially many mono-
mials in X1 , the set Vi is exponentially large. Therefore, the algorithm never stores Vi explicitly.
Instead, it maintains a basis Bi ⊆ F⟨ X2 ⟩w such that every coefficient vector in Vi can be written as
a left F⟨ X2 ⟩-linear combination of vectors from Bi . In addition, the vectors in Bi and Vi have the
same left span over the free skew field F⦓X2 ⦔. Thus, Bi provides a succinct representation of all
coefficient vectors at layer i.
    The crucial observation is that these basis sets can be propagated recursively from one layer to
the next. Indeed, if
                                                    n′
                                                                !
                                                    ∑ x1,j Mj
                                                            (i )
                                      Pi + 1 = Pi                  ,
                                                    j =1

                       (i )
where the matrices M j describe the transitions from layer i to layer i + 1, then for every monomial
m ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⟩ ,
                                                                     (i )
                               coeff mx1,j (Pi+1 ) = coeff m (Pi ) M j .

                                                    8
Hence, every coefficient vector at layer i + 1 is obtained by multiplying a coefficient vector at layer
i with one of the transition matrices. Consequently, starting from a basis Bi , we obtain a spanning
set for Vi+1 simply by multiplying every basis vector with each transition matrix. The remaining
task is to compress this spanning set back into a basis. This is precisely where our main technical
ingredient enters.

Lemma 1.4. (Factorization Lemma (Informal)) Let M ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×m be a matrix of noncommutative
polynomials of noncommutative rank r. Assume every entry of M is computed by a polynomial-size non-
commutative ABP. Then one can efficiently compute a factorization M = GH, where G ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×r ,
H ∈ F⟨ X ⟩r×m , and every entry of both G and H is computed by a polynomial-size noncommutative ABP.
Moreover, H has full noncommutative row rank. Consequently, every row of M is a left F⟨ X ⟩-linear com-
bination of the rows of H, and the rows of M and H have the same left span over the free skew field F⦓X⦔.

Remark 1.5. The proofs of Theorem 1.3 as well as the factorization lemma (Lemma 1.4) continue to hold
when F is a finite field or Q.                                                                     ♢
    The Factorization Lemma provides exactly the compression step required by the recursive
algorithm. At every layer, we arrange the spanning set generated from Bi as the rows of a matrix
over F⟨ X2 ⟩. The Factorization Lemma computes a rank factorization of this matrix, from which
we obtain a full-row-rank spanning set while preserving succinct ABP representations and the
same skew-field span. This basis becomes Bi+1 and is propagated to the next layer. Repeating this
procedure throughout the ABP yields a deterministic polynomial-time white-box identity testing
algorithm for partially commutative ABPs over two buckets.
    The algorithm is designed not only to test polynomial identities efficiently but also to allow
for an efficient formalization within Frege. Both the layer-by-layer propagation and the factoriza-
tion procedure can be verified by polynomial-size Frege proofs. This forms the first step towards
proving the soundness of PC2,n - IPS within Frege.
    More precisely, let P( X, Z ) be a PC2,n - IPS proof of an unsatisfiable CNF, where Z = (z1 , . . . , zℓ )
are the placeholder variables. By definition, P satisfies the identities

                                  P( X, 0) = 0,      P( X, f 1 , . . . , f ℓ ) = 1,

where f 1 , . . . , f ℓ are the polynomial encodings of the clauses, boolean axioms and commutator
axioms. After Booleanization, these become the tautologies

                                      ¬ Pe( X, 0),    Pe( X, fe1 , . . . , feℓ ).

The reflection principle states that polynomial-size Frege proofs of these two tautologies yield a
Frege refutation of the original CNF.
   Thus the remaining task is to prove the Booleanizations of partially commutative polynomial
identities efficiently in Frege. For this, one needs suitable identity witnesses certifying that a partially

                                                      9
commutative ABP computes the zero polynomial, together with polynomial-size Frege proofs of
their correctness. Our white-box identity testing algorithm and the Factorization Lemma provide
exactly the machinery needed to construct such witnesses. The following theorem is the key tech-
nical result of this paper.

Lemma 1.6. (Witness Theorem for Partially Commutative ABP Identities) Let F be a field and A be a
partially commutative homogeneous (over X1 ) ABP in F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ of size s computing the identically zero
polynomial. Let d be the depth of A, and let wi denote the width of the i-th layer. Then there exist 2d − 1
matrices λ0′ , . . . , λ′d−1 and T1′ , . . . , Td′ −1 such that
                               


                             λi′ ∈ Fwi ×wi ⟨ X2 ⟩ ,      Ti′ ∈ Fwi−1 ×wi ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ ,

and the following hold:
                                       λ′d−i · Ai = 0     ∀ i = 1, 2, . . . , d,                          (1.7)

                           λ′d−i · Ai = Td′ −i+1 · λ′d−i+1 · Ai−1      ∀ i = 2, 3, . . . , d,             (1.8)

                                       λ0′ := 1,        λ0′ · Ad = Ad = 0.                                (1.9)

Moreover, every entry of the matrices λi′ and Tj′ is computable by a polynomial-size noncommutative ABP.


1.2     Proof Overview

The proof of Theorem 1.2 consists of two conceptual steps. The first, and technically most substan-
tial, step is to construct identity witnesses for partially commutative ABPs over two buckets. These
witnesses certify that a partially commutative ABP computes the zero polynomial and, moreover,
admit efficient formalization within Frege. The second step is to use these witnesses to prove the
soundness of PC2,n - IPS inside Frege, which yields the desired quasi-polynomial simulation via
the reflection principle. Our white-box identity testing algorithm is designed to admit efficient
Frege formalization. The witness theorem can be viewed as the proof-complexity counterpart of
this algorithm: it converts the recursive computation performed by the algorithm into algebraic
certificates that can be verified efficiently inside Frege.


1.2.1   Proof Overview for the Construction of Witness Identities

The main technical contribution of the paper is the construction of witness identities for partially
commutative ABPs over two buckets. We begin by recalling the witness construction of Li, Tza-
meret, and Wang for the noncommutative setting, since our proof can be viewed as a generaliza-
tion of their argument.
     Let A be a noncommutative ABP of depth d computing the identically zero polynomial, and
let the width of layer i be wi , with nodes {ui,1 , . . . , ui,wi }. Also, let s, t be the source and sink nodes


                                                         10
                                                                     ⊤
in A. For i ∈ [d], define Ai = A[ud−i,1 , t], . . . , A[ud−i,wd−i , t] . Assuming A is homogeneous,
each entry of Ai computes a homogeneous polynomial of degree i. We use A[ℓ1 , ℓ2 ] to denote the
polynomials computed between the nodes ℓ1 , ℓ2 .
     In this setting, [LTW18] constructs matrices {λ1 , . . . , λd | λi ∈ Fwi ×wi } and { T1 , . . . , Td | Ti ∈
F ⟨ X ⟩wi ×wi+1 } witnessing the zeroness of the polynomial computed by A. They do so using an
inductive argument based on Gaussian elimination over F.
     Formally, let M be the transition matrix from layer i to i + 1. Note that it can be uniquely
expressed as M = ∑nj=1 x j M j . From the inductive hypothesis, λi · Ad−i = 0 and Ad−i =
M · Ad−i−1 . So, ∑nj=1 x j (λi M j ) · Ad−i−1 = 0, and hence, by homogeneity and noncommutativity,
(λi M j ) · Ad−i−1 = 0 for j ∈ [n].
     Let V = SpanF {Rows(λi M j ) | j ∈ [n]} ⊆ Fwi+1 . Every vector in V is orthogonal to
Ad−i−1 . Choosing a basis matrix of V, say B, by Gaussian elimination on the stacked matrix
                       
  λi M1 ; . . . ; λi Mn , we obtain matrices Tj such that λi M j = Tj B for all j ∈ [n]. Now if we de-
fine Ti+1 := ∑nj=1 x j Tj , the required properties are satisfied. Since all matrices λi+1 and T1 , . . . , Tn
have entries in F, this is sufficient for [LTW18] regarding expressiveness in Frege.


   We now explain why this argument does not extend directly to partially commutative ABPs. If
we attempt to apply the same idea directly, the first important point is that the matrices λi and the
coefficient matrices M j are no longer scalar matrices over F, but rather matrices whose entries are
noncommutative polynomials over F ⟨ X2 ⟩.
    Thus, the rows of λi M j span a left module over the free skew field F⦓X2 ⦔. If one were to per-
form Gaussian elimination in this setting, the resulting matrices Tj would have entries in F⦓X2 ⦔,
potentially involving nested inverses. Such expressions do not admit canonical representations as
noncommutative polynomials8 , and therefore cannot be handled explicitly inside Frege. A stan-
                                                                         f
dard example is (z + xy−1 x )−1 − z−1 whcih cannot be written as g where both f , g ∈ F⟨ x, y, z⟩.
    To overcome this obstacle, we construct the witness matrices directly within F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ us-
ing a factorization-based inductive procedure. Conceptually, this factorization replaces Gaussian
elimination over the free skew field by an explicit decomposition within F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩. Instead of
computing a basis via division, which would introduce inverses, we obtain a structured factoriza-
tion that preserves polynomial representations and allows the construction to be simulated within
Frege.
    The proof proceeds by induction on r = 0, 1, . . . , d − 1, constructing matrices λr′ and Tr′+1 such
that
                                   λ′d−i · Ai = 0 ∀ i = 1, 2, . . . , d,

and
                           λ′d−i · Ai = Td′ −i+1 · λ′d−i+1 · Ai−1   ∀ i = 2, 3, . . . , d,
  8 The entries from F⦓X⦔ do not even admit a canonical representation like commutative rational functions.




                                                       11
where λi′ ∈ F ⟨ X2 ⟩wi ×wi and Ti′ ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩wi−1 ×wi .
    The matrices λr′ can be viewed as encoding linear dependencies among the coefficient vectors
at layer d − r. In particular, the invariant λr′ · Ad−r = 0 expresses that the rows of λr′ lie in the space
of relations among the polynomials computed at that layer. The base case r = 0 follows from
Ad = 0. The matrices λr′ are chosen by the factorization procedure so that the transition identities
can be propagated across layers; they need not be nonzero in every degenerate rank case.
    For the inductive step, assume λr′ · Ad−r = 0. Using homogeneity over X1 , we obtain

                                      (λr′ M j ) · Ad−r−1 = 0 ∀ j ∈ [n].

   Define the stacked matrix                            
                                                  λr′ M1
                                                 . 
                                              T=     . 
                                                 . .
                                                  λr′ Mn

Then Ad−r−1 lies in the right kernel of T.
   Instead of performing Gaussian elimination over the free skew field, we compute a constructive
matrix factorization
                                           T = C·B

using the factorization procedure of Lemma 3.5.
    This factorization is obtained by first linearizing T via a variant of Higman’s construction (see
Lemma 3.15), and then applying a structured decomposition of the resulting linear matrix. The
procedure yields matrices C and B with polynomial-sized ABP entries.
    Moreover, the factorization satisfies that for each j ∈ [n], the corresponding block Cj of C
satisfies
                                              λr′ M j = Cj B.

We now define
                                                                n
                                   λr′ +1 := B,      Tr′+1 := ∑ x1,j Cj .
                                                               j =1

This yields the transition identity

                                    λr′ · Ad−r = Tr′+1 · λr′ +1 · Ad−r−1 .

    To obtain the next vanishing condition, we use the rank properties of the factorization. If C has
full column rank, then
                             C · B · Ad−r−1 = 0 ⇒ λr′ +1 · Ad−r−1 = 0.

Otherwise, the structure of the decomposition forces Ad−r−1 = 0, implying that λr′ +1 · Ad−r−1 = 0.
   This completes the inductive construction. Finally, since all matrices involved are computed by

                                                     12
polynomial-size ABP, and the factorization preserves this complexity, every entry of the witness
matrices λi′ and Tj′ admits a polynomial-size ABP. The witness identities certify the correctness of
identity testing for partially commutative ABPs in a form that can be efficiently verified inside
Frege. We now explain how these witnesses are used to prove the soundness of PC2,n - IPS.


1.2.2   Proof Overview for the Frege Simulation

As mentioned earlier, the field F is fixed to be GF(2) and we assume the witness identities of
Lemma 1.6. Our goal is to prove Theorem 1.2, namely that every size-s PC2,n - IPS refutation of an
unsatisfiable CNF
                                      Φ = κ1 ∧ κ2 ∧ · · · ∧ κ ℓ

can be simulated by a quasi-polynomial-size Frege refutation.
    Using the standard arithmetization, we obtain an unsatisfiable system of partially commuta-
tive polynomials
                                     PΦ = { PΦ,1 , . . . , PΦ,ℓ }.

Let F ( X, Z ) be a PC2,n - IPS refutation of this system, where X = X1 ⊔ X2 and Z denotes the place-
holder variables. Let PΦ be the set of polynomials obtained by adding the boolean axioms and
commutator axioms to PΦ . As mentioned earlier, we assume | X1 | = | X2 | = n′ , By definition,

                                  F ( X, 0) = 0,          F ( X, PΦ ) = 1.

Applying the Booleanization map (Definition 3.1) yields Boolean tautologies.

                                      ¬ Fe( X, 0),        Fe( X, P
                                                                 fΦ ).


By the reflection principle (Lemma B.1), it is sufficient to provide quasi-polynomial-size Frege
proofs of these two tautologies.
    Consequently, it is enough to prove that whenever a partially commutative formula computes
the zero polynomial, its Booleanization has a quasi-polynomial size Frege proof. This is precisely
the content of Theorem B.2.
    The proof begins by applying homogenization using Lemma B.3 to the given partially com-
mutative formula, followed by Nisan’s construction to obtain a layered homogeneous partially
commutative ABP A F . We then partially homogenize A F with respect to the bucket X1 using
Lemma B.17. For every r ≥ 1, this gives a compressed layered ABP A′F,r whose source-to-sink
polynomial is the X1 -homogeneous component of degree r; the degree-zero component is a non-
commutative polynomial over X2 . Every edge label of A′F,r is a homogeneous linear form in X1
whose coefficients are polynomial-size noncommutative ABPs over X2 .
    The main technical step is to associate every node of each A′F,r with an induced formula derived


                                                     13
from the original homogeneous formula. Starting from the induced formulas of Li, Tzameret and
Wang [LTW18] for the homogeneous ABP A F , we refine the construction so that every duplicated
node of A′F,r is tracked by an induced formula computing the same polynomial. Furthermore,
these induced formulas satisfy local ABP identities corresponding to the recursive computation of
A′F,r , and these identities admit polynomial-size Frege proofs.
     For every r ≥ 1, the compressed ABP A′F,r [s, t(r) ] computes the X1 -homogeneous component
of degree r. Since the original formula computes the zero polynomial, each of these ABPs also
computes the zero polynomial, and we apply the witness theorem (Lemma 1.6) to obtain wit-
ness matrices satisfying the vanishing and transition identities. The degree-zero component is a
noncommutative identity over X2 and is handled directly using [LTW18].
     The witness identities are Booleanized and proved inside Frege. The proof reduces these iden-
tities to polynomially many noncommutative ABP identities over X2 . These noncommutative
identities are then proved using the Frege simulation of noncommutative identity testing due to
Li, Tzameret and Wang [LTW18].
     Finally, the Booleanized witness identities are propagated layer by layer through the partially
homogeneous ABP. The vanishing identities provide the base case, while the transition identities
propagate the argument from one layer to the next, yielding a Frege proof of ¬ Ff  ∗
                                                                                  s,r for every homo-
geneous component. Using the homogeneous decomposition of F, these derivations are combined
to obtain a Frege proof of ¬ F,e and the reflection principle completes the simulation of the original
PC2,n - IPS refutation.
     The resulting Frege proof has quasi-polynomial-size. This follows because the partially homo-
                                                                              2
geneous ABP has polynomial size, every induced formula has size sO(log s) , every witness entry
is computable by a polynomial-size noncommutative ABP, and the layer-by-layer propagation
introduces only a polynomial overhead.


1.3   Further Remarks

The main contribution of this paper is a quasi-polynomial simulation of PC2,n - IPS by the Frege
proof system. In this sense, we make some progress towards understanding how much commu-
tativity Frege can handle while simulating IPS.
    A natural question is whether the simulation extends to PCk,n - IPS for constant k. Arvind,
Chatterjee, and Mukhopadhyay [ACM24] give a deterministic polynomial-time identity-testing
algorithm for partially commutative ABPs over X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xk , for constant k and over Q. Their
algorithm proceeds through the more general singularity-testing problem for linear matrices over
the corresponding partially commutative algebra. It is not clear how to obtain from this algo-
rithm identity witnesses of the form required for an efficient Frege formalization over GF(2). A
further obstacle is the construction of skew fields containing partially commutative rings. The al-
gorithm of [ACM24] relies on a skew-field construction over Q⟨ X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xk ⟩, which is presently


                                                 14
known only over fields of characteristic zero when k ≥ 3 [KVV20]. Moreover, the factorization
based technique to formulate the efficient witness from this work seems not extendable to three
or more buckets. Formally speaking, for two buckets, after homogenizing with respect to X1 , the
coefficients lie in the free algebra GF(2)⟨ X2 ⟩. Our witness construction uses rank factorizations of
matrices over this free algebra given by Cohn. Such efficiently representable factorization holds
since the noncommutative ring is a free ideal ring [Coh06, Chapter 2].
    For three buckets, the same approach would instead require working over the coefficient ring
GF(2)⟨ X1 , X2 ⟩ and, more generally, over a partially commutative algebra when the number of
buckets is larger. Universal skew fields of fractions for these algebras are known to exist [KVV20].
However, partially commutative algebras with at least two unbounded sized partitions are not
free ideal rings [KVV20]. Therefore, the rank-factorization argument used in Subsection 3.4 does
not directly extend to these coefficient rings.
    In particular, extending our proof to more buckets would require either an analogue of the
matrix-factorization witnesses used here for multipartite coefficient rings, or a different form of
identity witness that can be efficiently verified in Frege. We leave the following question open.

      For every constant k, can PCk,n - IPS be quasi-polynomially simulated by Frege over GF(2)?


Organization.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the computational mod-
els and proof systems used in the paper. Section 3 develops the new white-box identity-testing
algorithm, proves the Factorization Lemma, and constructs the witness matrices. Appendix A
defines the partially commutative Ideal Proof System, establishes soundness and completeness,
and explains how it simulates Frege. Finally, Appendix B gives the detailed Frege simulation and
completes the proof of the main theorem.


2     Preliminaries
Notation. For any i, j ∈ N with i ≤ j, we denote the set {i, . . . , j} by [i, j]. In addition, for any
n ∈ N, we denote the set {1, . . . , n} by [n].


2.1   Computational Models

Definition 2.1 (Algebraic Circuits and Formulas). An algebraic circuit C is a directed acyclic graph
with a unique output gate (root) of out-degree 0, and input gates of in-degree 0 (leaves) labeled by variables
x1 , . . . , xn or constants from F. The internal gates are labeled by + or ×.
      Each gate v computes a polynomial f v defined recursively: if v is an input, then f v = label(v) ∈
{ x1 , . . . , xn } ∪ F; if v = u op w for op ∈ {+, ×}, then f v = f u op f w . The polynomial computed at the


                                                     15
output gate is the polynomial computed by the circuit.
    If the underlying graph is restricted to be a tree, then the model is that of an algebraic formula. The size
of an algebraic circuit or formula is the number of wires in it.                                              ♢
Definition 2.2 (Algebraic Branching Program). An algebraic branching program (ABP) is a layered
directed acyclic graph. The vertex set is partitioned into layers 0, 1, . . . , L, with directed edges only between
adjacent layers (i to i + 1). There is a source vertex of in-degree 0 in layer 0, and one out-degree-0 sink
vertex in layer L. Each edge is labeled by an affine F-linear form where F is the underlying field. The
polynomial computed by the ABP is the sum over all source-to-sink directed paths of the ordered product of
affine linear forms labeling the path edges.
     The size of an ABP is the number of vertices in it.                                                          ♢

Partially Commutative Models. Given a partition X = X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm of the variables, an ABP
is said to be Partially Commutative with respect to this partition if the multiplication respects
the partial commutativity defined by the partition during its computation. Partially Commuta-
tive Formulas with respect to a given partition is defined analogously. Clearly, any polynomial
computed by such an ABP or formula lies in F ⟨ X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm ⟩.
    Let A be a partially commutative ABP with respect to the partition X1 ⊔ X2 computing a poly-
nomial Â ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩. We will consider the edge labels in compressed form obtained after
homogenizing with respect to the bucket X1 : each edge label is written as ∑nj=1 x1,j · f j , where each
coefficient f j ∈ F ⟨ X2 ⟩ is represented by a polynomial-size noncommutative ABP.
    Further, we will denote the number of layers in A by d and the width of A by w. Thus
degX1 ( Â) = d. Finally, we will denote the nodes in layer i by {ui,1 , ui,2 , . . . , ui,wi } and the source,
sink nodes respectively by s, t. We can then define the following vector of ABPs:

                               Ai := [ A[ud−i,1 , t], A[ud−i,2 , t], · · · , A[ud−i,wd−i , t]]⊤

where A[ud−i,j , t] is the partial ABP between ud−i,j and t for every j ∈ [wd−i ].
   Observe that each ABP in Ai computes a partially commutative polynomial which is homoge-
neous over X1 and has X1 -degree i.


2.2   The Ideal Proof Systems

We start with the definition of the Ideal proof system (IPS) as defined in [GP18].
Definition 2.3 (Ideal Proof Systems [FSTW21, GP18, LTW18]). Let f 1 , . . . , f ℓ ∈ F[ X ] be a set of
polynomials such that f 1 , . . . , f ℓ , x12 − x1 , . . . , xn2 − xn has no common solution9 . A proof of the un-
                                   

satisfiability of this set of polynomial equations, in the Ideal Proof System (IPS), is a polynomial
P( X, y1 , . . . , yℓ , z1 , . . . , zn ) ∈ F[ X, Y, Z ] such that the following holds:
  9 That is, there does not exist x̄ ∈ {0, 1}n such that for every i ∈ [ℓ], f ( x̄ ) = 0.
                                                                             i




                                                                16
      • P( X, 0, 0) = 0;
      • P( X, f 1 , . . . , f ℓ , x12 − x1 , . . . , xn2 − xn ) = 1.

The size of an IPS proof is the minimal size of a circuit (formula or ABP) computing P( X, Y, Z ).
    If f 1 , . . . , f ℓ ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩ are, instead, a set of noncommutative polynomials such that { f 1 , . . . , f ℓ } ∪
 2                           
  xi − xi : i ∈ [n] ∪ xi x j − x j xi : i, j ∈ [n] has no common solutions, then a proof of the unsatis-
fiability of this set of polynomial equations, in the noncommutative Ideal Proof System (NC-IPS), is a
polynomial P( X, y1 , . . . , yℓ , z1 , . . . , zn , w1 , . . . wn2 ) ∈ F ⟨ X, Y, Z, W ⟩ such that the following holds:

      • P( X, 0, 0) = 0;
      • P( X, f 1 , . . . , f ℓ , x12 − x1 , . . . , xn2 − xn , x1 x2 − x2 x1 , . . . , xn−1 xn − xn xn−1 ) = 1.

The size of an NC-IPS proof is the minimal size of a noncommutative formula computing P( X, Y, Z, W ).
                                                                                                    ♢
Remark 2.4. Suppose we are given a system of equations, say { f 1 = 0, . . . , f ℓ = 0 : f i ∈ F[ x1 , . . . , xn ]},
in the commutative setting. We say that the system is unsatisfiable if there is no a ∈ Fn such that f i ( a) = 0
for every i ∈ [ℓ]. However, when we consider the variable set X to be noncommuting, we need to look for a
common solution in the matrix algebra over F, denoted by Fd×d for some d > 1.
     In particular, elements from F are thought of as 1 × 1 dimensional matrices. Hence, given a set of
noncommutative equations { f 1 = 0, . . . , f m = 0 : f i ∈ F ⟨ x1 , . . . , xn ⟩}, we say that they are unsatisfiable
if there does not exist any d, A = ( A1 , . . . , An ) : Ai ∈ Fd×d such that f i ( A) = 0 for every i ∈ [m]. ♢
                              


Example 2.5 (Evaluation in Matrix algebra). xy − yx + 2 evaluates to
                                             !               !                     !               !
                                    a1 a2            b1 b2                 b1 b2           a1 a2
                                                 ·               −                     ·               + 2I2×2
                                    a3 a4            b3 b4                 b3 b4           a3 a4
                                              !                        !
                                     a1 a2                 b1 b2
when we substitute x =                            ,y =                     ∈ F2×2 .                                  ♢
                                     a3 a4                 b3 b4

2.3      The Frege Proof System

Definition 2.6 (Boolean Formula). A Boolean formula Φ over variables x1 , . . . , xn is a finite rooted tree
with a fan-in of at most 2 in which:

      • Each leaf is labeled by either a variable xi or a Boolean constant {0, 1}.
      • Each internal node is labeled by one of the Boolean connectives {∨, ∧, ¬}.
      • A node labeled by ¬ has exactly one child (unary connective).
      • Nodes labeled by ∨ or ∧ have exactly two children (binary connectives).



                                                                       17
The formula computes the Boolean function obtained by evaluating the tree in the natural way: each gate
applies its connective to the values computed by its child/ children. The size of the formula is the number of
nodes in it, denoted as |Φ|.                                                                                ♢
      We now define the Frege proof system.
Definition 2.7. (Frege derivation rule, [LTW18, Definition 2.2], [CR79]) Let x be a set of boolean vari-
ables. A Frege rule is a sequence of propositional formulas A0 ( x ), . . . , Ak ( x ), for k ≥ 0, written as
 A1 ( x ),...,Ak ( x )
       A0 ( x )
                       . When k = 0, the Frege rule is called axiom scheme.
       A formula F0 is said to be derived by the rules from F1 , . . . , Fk if there are formulas B1 , . . . , Bn such that
for every i ∈ {0, 1, , . . . , k }, Ai ( B1 /x1 , . . . , Bn /xn ) = Fi 10 . The rule is said to be sound if any assignment
satisfying A1 ( x ), . . . , Ak ( x ) also satisfies A0 ( x ).                                                           ♢
    A proof system is sound if it admits proofs only of tautologies. It is said to be implicationally
complete if, for all sets of formulas T, if T semantically imply F, then there is a derivation of F in
the proof system from the axioms T.
Definition 2.8. (Frege Proof, [LTW18, Definition 2.3], [CR79]) Given a set of Frege rules, a Frege proof
of a boolean formula A is a sequence of boolean formulas such that every formula is either an axiom or
derived by one of the rules from previous formulas and terminates at A. The size of the proof is the sum of
the sizes of all formulas in the proof. Given a set of sound Frege rules P, we say P is a Frege proof system if
it is implicationally complete.                                                                             ♢
   It is known from the work of Reckhow [Rec76], that all Frege proof systems are polynomially
equivalent to each other. We now describe the instantiation of the Frege proof system that we will
work with in this paper, known as the Łukasiewicz calculus. For propositional formulas A, B, C,
we abbreviate ¬ A ∨ B as A → B.
   The system has only three axiom schemes, and they are as follows.

     1. A → ( B → A).
     2. (¬ A → ¬ B) → ((¬ A → B) → A).
     3. ( A → ( B → C )) → (( A → B) → ( A → C )).

The single inference rule (known as modus ponens) used here is A,AB→ B . That is, from A and A → B
we infer B.


3      Quasi-Polynomial Simulation of PC2,N - IPS via Frege using a new PIT
       Algorithm for Partially Commutative ABPs Over Two Buckets
In this section, we discuss our main technical contribution.
    10 we define A ( B /x , . . . , B /x ) by the formula A where x is substituted by B .
                  i 1    1           n  n                  i       i                   i




                                                             18
    We begin by giving a more formal version of our main theorem (Theorem 1.2). As discussed
in the proof overview Subsection 1.2, the proof of the Frege simulation closely resembles that
of [LTW18], with each of the steps having to be carefully modified in order to get equivalent
statements for the partially commutative setting. The most non-trivial modification required is
that of the Witness Lemma (Lemma 1.6). Even though the statement looks very similar to the
one in [LTW18], an entirely new identity testing algorithm for partially commutative ABPs with
two buckets had to be developed in order for us to prove the existence of these witness identities.
Therefore, we focus on describing this new algorithm here along with its proof of correctness.
    A complete description of the quasi-polynomially large Frege simulation of PC2,N - IPS (that is,
the proof of Theorem 1.2) using these witness identities can be found in Appendix B.


3.1   Formal Statement of our Main Theorem

Given a boolean formula Ψ over boolean variables X with | X | = N with internal gates ∧, ∨, ¬, we
define the corresponding partially commutative formula Tr(Ψ) in the following inductive way:

   1. Partition the variables into X = X1 ⊔ X2 where | X1 | = n1 , | X2 | = n2 and n1 + n2 = N.
      We treat X as a partially commutative algebraic variables now where variables from X1
      commute with variables from X2 and vice versa, but variables within X1 (similarly, X2 ) are
      noncommuting.
   2. Tr( xi ) := 1 − xi and Tr(¬ xi ) := xi for every xi ∈ X.
   3. Tr(False) := 0, Tr(True) := 1, Tr(ψ1 ∨ ψ2 ∨ . . . ∨ ψt ) := ∏i Tr(ψi ). The product maintains the
      partial commutativity of the variables across the sets X1 , X2 .
   4. Given a CNF Φ = κ1 ∧ κ2 ∧ . . . ∧ κm , we denote the set of partially commutative polynomials
      {Tr(κ1 ), . . . , Tr(κm )} by PΦ with Tr(κ j ) := PΦ,j .

   Let F be a PC2,N - IPS proof over F that witnesses the unsatisfiability of PΦ = { PΦ,1 , . . . , PΦ,m },
and let PΦ be the set obtained by adjoining the boolean and commutator axioms to PΦ . Then, by
Definition 1.1, F satisfies the conditions: F ( X, 0) = 0 and F ( X, PΦ ) = 1.
Definition 3.1. Let X = X1 ⊔ X2 be partially commutative variables. Let F be a partially commutative
formula computing a polynomial in F ⟨ X ⟩. We define the boolean formula Fe from F by changing the + gate
to ⊕, the × gate to ∧, and treating the algebraic variables X as boolean variables.                    ♢
    Observe that over the boolean
                          n          cube {0, 1} No, both formulas F and Fe evaluate to the same value.
Now define the set PeΦ := PeΦ,1 , . . . , PeΦ,m , B,
                                                  e Ce , where B
                                                               e and C
                                                                     e is the set of boolean formulas we
obtain from boolean axioms and commutator axioms over F = GF(2). From the PC2,N - IPS proof
F, we obtain the following two tautologies using Definition 3.1:

                                         ¬ Fe( X, 0)        Fe( X, PeΦ )                              (3.2)


                                                       19
The formal statement of Theorem 1.2 is then the following.

Theorem 3.3. Let Φ = κ1 ∧ · · · ∧ κm be an unsatisfiable CNF and PΦ = {Tr(κ1 ), . . . , Tr(κm )} be the
corresponding partially commutative system that has no common boolean root. If there is a PC2,N - IPS
                                                                                          O (1)
refutation for PΦ of size s over GF(2) then there is a Frege proof for ¬Φ of size s(log s) .

    As mentioned earlier, the proof is given in Appendix B. We now move on to the description
our new identity testing algorithm for partially commutative ABPs with two buckets along with
its proof of correctness. This would complete the proof of our second main theorem.

Theorem 1.3. (White-box algorithm for 2-bucket) Let A be a partially commutative ABP in F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩
of size s and depth d. Then we can decide deterministically in time poly(s, d, n) whether A computes the
zero polynomial. Moreover the correctness of the algorithm can be efficiently proved in Frege.

    The rest of this section is devoted to describing the algorithm and proving its correctness. The
efficient Frege provability is given in Subsection B.6.


3.2   The White-Box Identity Testing Algorithm

We first describe the new deterministic white-box algorithm for testing whether a partially com-
mutative ABP over two buckets computes the identically zero polynomial. Although F is fixed to
be GF(2), we remark that similar statements continue to hold when F is a finite field or Q.


Notational convention. For the remainder of this section, and only for notational simplicity, we
assume that | X1 | = | X2 | = n. None of the arguments below use the fact that the two buckets have
the same cardinality. For arbitrary | X1 | = n1 and | X2 | = n2 , the same proofs go through verbatim
by indexing the variables in X1 by [n1 ] and those in X2 by [n2 ]. Thus the equal-size assumption
has no effect on the statement or complexity of our results.


Setup. Let A be a layered partially commutative ABP over F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ of size s and depth d,
with source s and sink t. Carefully modifying the proof of a similar statement from the work of
Li, Tzameret, Wang [LTW18], we can convert the ABP to another partially commutative ABP that
is homogeneous over X1 with a polynomial blow up in size (see Lemma B.17). Hence, we assume
that A is homogeneous with respect to the X1 -variables and that every edge label is of the form

                                               n
                                              ∑ x1,j · f j ,
                                              j =1


where each f j is computed by a noncommutative ABP over X2 of size poly(s). The source s and
sink t are in layer 0 and d, respectively. Let wi be the number of nodes at layer i and assume



                                                     20
w = maxi {wi }. For the sake of simplicity, we assume each layer has w nodes (by adding dummy
vertices wherever required).
   For each layer i ∈ {0, . . . , d}, define the vector of partial ABPs as

                             Pi = A[s, ui,1 ], . . . , A[s, ui,w ] ∈ F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩w ,
                                                                  


so that each entry of Pi is homogeneous of X1 -degree i.


Coefficient vectors. For a monomial m ∈ F⟨ X1 ⟩, define

                       coeff m (Pi ) := (coeff m ( A[s, ui,1 ]), . . . , coeff m ( A[s, ui,w ])) ,

where each entry is a noncommutative polynomial over X2 . Let Vi denote the set of all such
coefficient vectors, and F′ = F⦓X2 ⦔ be the free skew field containing the ring F⟨ X2 ⟩. The idea is
to maintain a basis set Bi ⊆ F⟨ X2 ⟩w for every layer i such that

                      every u ∈ Vi satisfies         u = ∑ pj · vj          with p j ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩.         (3.4)
                                                           v j ∈Bi


In addition to Equation 3.4, we maintain the following linear-algebraic invariant over the free skew
field F′ : the left F′ -linear span of Bi is exactly the left F′ -linear span of Vi . That is, spanF′ (Bi ) =
spanF′ (Vi ). The stronger polynomial spanning property in Equation 3.4 will be used to propagate
coefficient vectors from one layer to the next, whereas equality of the F′ -linear spans will be used
in the final zero test.
    We also need the following lemma to efficiently construct the factors of a polynomial matrix.

Lemma 3.5. (Factorization Lemma) Let M ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩ℓ×m be a matrix of noncommutative polynomials
with ncrank( M) = r < min {ℓ, m}. Assume each entry of M is computed by a size s noncommutative
ABP. Then we can compute a nontrivial factorization of M, namely M = G · H, such that the entries of
G ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩ℓ×r and H ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩r×m have poly(s, ℓ, m)-size noncommutative ABPs.

   We prove Lemma 3.5 in Subsection 3.3, but for now, we will use it to design the algorithm and
prove its correctness.


Rank factorization convention. In the algorithm below, whenever we factor a polynomial ma-
trix C ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩ a×b of noncommutative rank r, we use Lemma 3.5 when r < min{ a, b}. If r = a ≤ b,
we use the trivial factorization C = Ia · C, and if r = b ≤ a, we use C = C · Ib . If r = 0, then C = 0
and the corresponding basis set is empty. Thus, in every case, we obtain a factorization C = U · V
with inner dimension r, where U has full noncommutative column rank and V has full noncom-
mutative row rank.



                                                          21
Algorithm (White-box PIT for Partially Commutative ABPs over Two Buckets).

Input: A layered, partially commutative ABP A as described above.
Output: Z ERO if A[s, t] ≡ 0; otherwise, N ONZERO.

  1. Initialization.
     n                   Considero the first layer. The set of vectors corresponding to layer 1, V1 :=
       coeff x1,j (P1 ) : j ∈ [n] ⊆ F⟨ X2 ⟩w . Each entry of these vectors is computable by a noncom-
     mutative ABP of size poly(s). Consider the matrix M1 of dimension n × w whose rows are
     the vectors from V1 . Using the rank-factorization convention above, we obtain a factoriza-
     tion of the matrix M1 = C1 · B1 where C1 and B1 are noncommutative polynomial matrices
     of dimension n × r1 and r1 × w with r1 = ncrank( M1 ). Moreover, the rows of B1 are linearly
     independent over the field F′ . So we obtain B1 := Rows( B1 ).

  2. For each layer i = 1, . . . , d − 1:
                                        (i )
      (a) Consider the matrices M j such that
                                                                                    !
                                                                n
                                                               ∑
                                                                             (i )
                                               Pi + 1 = Pi ·          x1,j M j          .
                                                               j =1


      (b) For each v ∈ Bi and each j ∈ [n], compute

                                                                        (i )
                                                      v( j) : = v · M j .

       (c) Form the matrix Ci+1 whose rows are all vectors v( j) .
      (d) Compute a factorization
                                                       Ci+1 = U · V

           such that U has full column rank and V has full row rank over the free skew field. Every
           row of Ci+1 is a left F⟨ X2 ⟩-linear combination of the rows of V, and the two row sets
           have the same left span over F′ . Define Bi+1 := Rows(V ).

  3. Final check. If every vector in Bd has a zero entry in the coordinate corresponding to the
     sink node t, output Z ERO; otherwise, output N ONZERO.

Correctness. We show by induction on the layer i that the two invariants stated above hold:
  (i) every vector in Vi is a left F⟨ X2 ⟩-linear combination of vectors in Bi ,
 (ii) spanF′ (Bi ) = spanF′ (Vi ).
   For i = 1, the factorization M1 = C1 B1 gives the polynomial spanning property. Since B1 has
r1 = ncrank( M1 ) rows and full noncommutative row rank, its rows and the rows of M1 have the
same r1 -dimensional left span over F′ .

                                                       22
                                                                                                (i )
    Suppose the invariants hold at layer i. Every coefficient vector in Vi+1 has the form uM j for
some u ∈ Vi and j ∈ [n]. By the polynomial spanning invariant for Vi , it is therefore a left F⟨ X2 ⟩-
linear combination of the rows used to form Ci+1 . The factorization Ci+1 = UV then expresses
every such row as a left polynomial combination of rows of V, proving (i) for Bi+1 . Over the free
skew field, V has r = ncrank(Ci+1 ) independent rows, while the row space of Ci+1 has dimension
r and is contained in the row span of V; hence these spans are equal. Together with the inductive
hypothesis, this proves (ii).

Final step. The polynomial A[s, t] is zero if and only if every coefficient of every monomial is zero.
This holds if and only if all coefficient vectors in Vd have a zero entry at coordinate t. By the
invariant, this is equivalent to all vectors in Bd having a zero entry at coordinate t.


Complexity. At each layer, |Bi | ≤ wi ≤ s. Each iteration performs a polynomially many
matrix-vector multiplications and one noncommutative rank computation. Over F, determin-
istic noncommutative-rank algorithms and the factorization procedure below give overall run-
ning time polynomial in s. It is important to note that identity testing for partially commuta-
tive ABP with two buckets is equivalent to testing the equivalence of two tape deterministic au-
tomata. A polynomial-time algorithm was already given for this problem Arvind, Chatterjee and
Mukhopadhyay [ACM24] over Q when the number of buckets is constant.


3.3     Proof of the Factorization Lemma

In this section, we prove Lemma 3.5. For that, we need to use some algebraic tools that we
will develop in the following subsections. Throughout this section, unless stated otherwise,
X = { x1 , . . . , xn } denotes a set of noncommutative variables.


3.3.1    Linear Matrix Factorization

For a matrix of noncommutative polynomials, invertibility is defined over the universal skew field
of fractions of the noncommutative polynomial ring. The noncommutative rank is the size of a
largest invertible sub-matrix. We use the following characterization of the noncommutative rank
due to Cohn [Coh95].

Theorem 3.6. (Noncommutative rank). Let M ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×m be a matrix of noncommutative polynomials
of noncommutative rank r < min{ℓ, m}. Then there exist matrices P ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×r and Q ∈ F⟨ X ⟩r×m such
that M = P · Q.

      In our proof, we need the following lemmas.

Lemma 3.7. (Linear Matrix Factorization). Let F be a field. and X = { x1 , x2 , . . . , xn }. Let
L ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×m be a noncommutative linear matrix of rank r < min{ℓ, m}, where “linear” allows a


                                                 23
constant term (equivalently, the entries are affine linear forms). Then we can construct linear matrices
L1 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×r and L2 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩r×m in deterministic poly(ℓ, m, n) time such that L = L1 · L2 .

    The proof of this lemma is implicit from the work of [Coh95, FR04, IQS17, IQS18]. For the sake
of completeness, we add a detailed proof in Appendix C.

Lemma 3.8 (Matrix Product Trivialization [AJ22b], [Coh00], PP. 198). Let A ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩m×n , B ∈
F ⟨ X ⟩n×k be two matrix polynomial with A being linear matrix, such that A · B = 0. Then there exists an
unit 11 P ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩n×n such that for every i ∈ [n], either the i-th column of AP is all 0 or the i-th row of
P−1 B is all 0.

Lemma 3.9 (Lemma 2.4, [AJ22a]). Let C ∈ F⟨ X ⟩k×ℓ be a linear matrix and D ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×m be noncom-
mutative polynomial matrix whose entries are computable by size s ABPs, such that CD = 0. Then in
deterministic poly(s, k, ℓ, m) time we can compute a unit N ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×ℓ such that,

   1. For every i ∈ [ℓ], either the i-th column of CN is all 0, or the i-th row of N −1 D is all 0.
   2. Each entry of N is a polynomial of degree at most ℓ2 and computable by a poly size ABP, and also
      each entry of N −1 is computable by a poly size ABP.


3.3.2   Higman’s Linearization for a Matrix of Noncommutative ABPs

In this section, we bound the ABP complexity of Higman linearization for a rectangular matrix
whose entries are computed by noncommutative ABPs. It then suffices to prove the factorization
lemma for linear matrices only.


ABPs as Products of Linear Matrices. A standard way to view a noncommutative ABP of size
S is as an iterated product of linear matrices. Concretely, if a polynomial f ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ is computed
by an ABP of size S, then there exist integers d ≤ S, widths w1 , . . . , wd+1 ≤ S, linear matrices
Aℓ ∈ F⟨ X ⟩wℓ ×wℓ+1 , and vectors u ∈ Fw1 , v ∈ Fwd+1 such that

                                              f = u⊤ A1 A2 · · · Ad v.                                           (3.10)

(Here “linear” means each entry is an affine linear form in X.)
    Absorbing u⊤ into the first factor and v into the last factor, we may take w1 = wd+1 = 1. Thus,
                           ′
for a matrix M ∈ F⟨ X ⟩s×s whose scalar entries have ABP size at most S, after possibly padding
the internal widths (by inserting identity blocks), we may assume that

                                                         (i,j)    (i,j)        (i,j)
                                          M [i, j] = A1          A2       · · · Ad ,                             (3.11)
  11 A noncommutative polynomial Matrix C ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×ℓ is called unit, if C is invertible and the inverse of C is again a

polynomial matrix.



                                                          24
         (i,j)                  (i,j)                                                       (i,j)
where A1 has one row, Ad has one column, and for each ℓ ∈ [d] the factor Aℓ is a linear ma-
trix of dimension wℓ × wℓ+1 with w1 = wd+1 = 1 and wℓ ≤ S, and the width profile (w1 , . . . , wd+1 )
is independent of (i, j). This is the model we linearize.
     Such a result was previously known only when each entry of the matrix is computed by a
noncommutative formula [GGdOW20, Proposition A.2].


Higman Linearization for Each Entry

We first isolate the basic gadget that linearizes a single product entry while introducing only up-
per/lower triangular multipliers with diagonal entries that are 1.

Lemma 3.12 ( Higman linearization for one product block [AJ25]). Let B ∈ F⟨ X ⟩w1 ×wd+1 be a block
polynomial of the form
                                      B = A1 A2 · · · A d ,

where Aℓ ∈ F⟨ X ⟩wℓ ×wℓ+1 is a linear matrix. Let w := ∑dℓ=2 wℓ . Then there exist matrices PB , Q B , L B
such that                                    !
                                       B 0
                                                = PB · L B · Q B ,                                (3.13)
                                       0 Iw
where:

   1. PB is upper triangular and Q B is lower triangular,
   2. all diagonal entries of PB , Q B are equal to 1,
   3. L B is a linear matrix (every entry is either 0, 1, or an affine linear form in X),
   4. every nonzero entry of PB , Q B is either ±1 or an entry of one of the factors Aℓ . Hence, if each Aℓ is
      computable by poly(S)-size ABPs, then so are the entries of PB , Q B .

Moreover, L B can be taken in the companion form
                                                                                   
                                    0      0                  0   ···     0     A1
                                  − Ad   Iwd                 0   ···     0      0 
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
                                   0   − A d −1         Iwd−1    ···     0      0 
                             LB =  .                                                 .                (3.14)
                                                                                   
                                   ..     ..              ..     ..      ..     .. 
                                           .               .        .     .      . 
                                                                                    
                                   0      0                  0   ···     Iw3    0 
                                                                                   

                                    0      0                  0   ···    − A2   Iw2

Proof. This is the standard Higman linearization (sometimes called “Higman’s trick”). One can
prove (3.13) by repeatedly applying the d = 2 elimination step: for any compatible linear matrices




                                                         25
U ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ a×b and V ∈ F⟨ X ⟩b×c , set
                                       !               !         !        !
                           UV     0            Ia −U        0 U      Ic 0
                                           =             ·         ·        .
                            0     Ib           0    Ib     −V Ib     V Ib
                                             |   {z    } |   {z  } | {z }
                                             upper triangular           linear           lower triangular


after a suitable block permutation to match dimensions (equivalently, embed into the bottom-right
corner). Iterating this construction for the product A1 · · · Ad yields the companion matrix (3.14),
and the accumulated left and right multipliers remain upper/lower triangular with diagonal 1.
Every nonzero off-diagonal entry introduced is a copy of some Aℓ or a constant; hence, it is ABP-
computable whenever the Aℓ are.


Higman Linearization for a Rectangular Matrix of ABP Entries

We now lift the local gadget to a full s × s′ matrix M, linearizing each entry in place while preserv-
ing the global triangular structure.
                                                                                                            ′
Lemma 3.15 (Higman linearization for a matrix of ABP-entries). Let M ∈ F⟨ X ⟩s×s be a rectangular
matrix such that for every (i, j) ∈ [s] × [s′ ]

                                                           (i,j)    (i,j)        (i,j)
                                           M [i, j] = A1           A2       · · · Ad ,                          (3.16)

                                            (i,j)
where for each ℓ ∈ [d], the factor Aℓ is a linear matrix of dimension wℓ × wℓ+1 (the width profile
(w1 , . . . , wd+1 ) is independent of (i, j)). Let

                                                      d
                                           w : = ∑ wℓ ,             t := w · ss′ .
                                                     ℓ=2

Then there exist matrices P, L, Q over F⟨ X ⟩ such that

                                                    M ⊕ It = P · L · Q,                                         (3.17)

with the following properties:

   1. P is (block) upper triangular and Q is (block) lower triangular,
   2. all diagonal entries of P, Q are equal to 1,
   3. L is a linear matrix (all its entries are affine linear forms in X),
   4. every nonzero entry of P, Q is computable by an ABP of size poly(s, s′ , d, w1 , . . . , wd+1 ).

Proof. We linearize the entries of M one-by-one using Lemma 3.12 as a block gadget, and we do
so in an order that preserves the triangularity of the accumulated multipliers.


                                                            26
   Order of Linearization. Fix the lexicographic order scanning columns from right to left, and
within each column from bottom to top:

                          (s, s′ ), (s − 1, s′ ), . . . , (1, s′ ), (s, s′ − 1), . . . , (1, 1).

   Invariant. After processing τ entries, we maintain a matrix M
                                                               e of size

                                  ( s · w1 + w · τ ) × ( s ′ · w d +1 + w · τ )

such that:

   • all processed positions have been replaced by linear companion blocks,
   • all unprocessed positions still contain their original product blocks,
   • Me is obtained from M by adjoining τ slack identity blocks Iw and multiplying on the left and
     right by block upper/lower triangular matrices with diagonal 1.

One Step: Local Linearization. Let (i, j) be the next unprocessed position. We adjoin one additional
slack block Iw , increasing τ to τ + 1.
    We perform the Higman linearization locally on the coordinates corresponding to:

   • the block M [i, j], and
   • the newly added slack block Iw .

   Within these coordinates, the matrix contains a sub-block of the form
                                                      !
                                          M[i, j] 0
                                                        .
                                             0     Iw

Applying Lemma 3.12 to this sub-block yields matrices Pi,j , Qi,j and a linear block Li,j satisfying
                                                        !
                                         M [i, j] 0
                                                            = Pi,j · Li,j · Qi,j .
                                           0      Iw

We extend Pi,j and Qi,j to the full matrix by acting as identity outside these coordinates. Denote
the resulting matrices by Pbi,j and Q b i,j .
    Since Pi,j is upper triangular and Qi,j is lower triangular with diagonal entries equal to 1, their
extensions Pbi,j and Q
                     b i,j are block upper and lower triangular with diagonal 1. Thus we obtain

                                         M                e new · Q
                                         e ⊕ Iw = Pbi,j · M       b i,j ,                          (3.18)

where M e new agrees with M
                          e away from the selected block and the fresh slack coordinates. This
follows from the triangular form of the local multipliers: the newly added slack row and column

                                                           27
are zero outside the fresh identity block, so the row and column operations do not alter the other
original entries.
    Completion. Repeating this process for all ss′ entries, we obtain a matrix L in which every entry
has been linearized. Let P and Q be the products of all accumulated multipliers.
    Since each step multiplies by block upper (resp. lower) triangular matrices with diagonal 1,
and this property is preserved under multiplication, the final matrices P, Q satisfy the required
triangularity conditions. The total number of slack blocks used is t = w · ss′ .

                                                                                                      (i,j)
ABP Size Bound. Each step introduces only constants and entries from the matrices Aℓ
into P and Q. Hence every entry of P, Q is computable by an ABP of size polynomial in
(s, s′ , d, w1 , . . . , wd+1 ).

Remark 3.19. The above construction avoids any row or column permutations. All steps are implemented
via local Higman linearizations embedded into the matrix using slack identity blocks. Consequently, all
left multipliers are upper triangular with diagonal 1, and all right multipliers are lower triangular with
diagonal 1.                                                                                             ♢

  If the entries of M are given directly by ABPs of size ≤ S, then by the standard conversion (3.10)
we can rewrite each entry as a product of d ≤ S linear matrices with widths at most S. After
padding to equalize width profiles across entries, Lemma 3.15 applies and yields t = poly(s, s′ , S).
                                                                               ′
Corollary 3.20 (Higman linearization for ABP entries). Let M ∈ F⟨ X ⟩s×s be such that each entry is
computed by a noncommutative ABP of size at most S. Then there exists t = poly(s, s′ , S) and matrices
P, L, Q such that
                                       M ⊕ It = P · L · Q,

where P is upper triangular with diagonal 1, Q is lower triangular with diagonal 1, L is linear, and every
entry of P, Q is computable by poly(s, s′ , S)-size ABPs.

3.3.3   Proof of Factorization Lemma

Finally, we prove the existence of small factors witnessing the low rank.

Lemma 3.5. (Factorization Lemma) Let M ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩ℓ×m be a matrix of noncommutative polynomials
with ncrank( M) = r < min {ℓ, m}. Assume each entry of M is computed by a size s noncommutative
ABP. Then we can compute a nontrivial factorization of M, namely M = G · H, such that the entries of
G ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩ℓ×r and H ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩r×m have poly(s, ℓ, m)-size noncommutative ABPs.

Proof. Let M ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩ℓ×m with ncrank( M ) = r < min{m, ℓ}. We first apply Corollary 3.20 to M
and obtain                          "          #
                                       M 0
                                                 = P · L · D,                            (3.21)
                                        0 Ik′

                                                   28
                       ′                 ′                                                                     ′            ′                       ′       ′
where L ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩(ℓ+k )×(m+k ) is a linear matrix, and P ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩(ℓ+k )×(ℓ+k ) , D ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩(m+k )×(m+k )
are upper triangular and lower triangular full rank matrices, respectively, with all diagonal entries
equal to 1. Moreover, every entry of P, L, D is computable by a size poly(s) noncommutative ABP.
    Our goal is to compute a nontrivial rank factorization M = G · H with inner rank r, such that
the entries of G and H have poly(s)-size ABPs.
                                            "            #             "              #
                                              P1,1 P1,2                   D1,1     0
    Write the block decompositions P =                     ,    D =                     . Since P and D
                                                0 P2,2                    D2,1 D2,2
are invertible units (they are triangular matrices with 1’s on the diagonal), multiplication by P
or D preserves noncommutative rank. Moreover, noncommutative rank is additive under direct
sums. Hence,
         "         #! noncommutative rank on both sides of Equation 3.21 gives ncrank( L) =
                taking
            M 0
ncrank                 = ncrank( M) + k′ = r + k′ = r ′ (say).
            0 Ik′
    Using Lemma 3.7, we first factorize L,

                                                          L
                                                         |{z}             =      L1 · L2 .                                                              (3.22)
                                                                                |{z}  |{z}
                                                    (ℓ+k′ )×(m+k′ )           (ℓ+k′ )×r ′      r ′ ×(m+k′ )


Since the inner dimension of the factorization is exactly ncrank( L) = r ′ , both L1 and L2 have
full noncommutative column rank and row rank, respectively. In particular, ncrank( L1 ) =
ncrank( L2 ) = r ′ .
    Moreover, we assume the following block decomposition of L1 and L2 .
                                                    "            #
                                                         L1,1                                     ′                             ′   ′
                                         L1 =                            L1,1 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×r , L1,2 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩k ×r
                                                         L1,2                                                                                           (3.23)
                                     h                          i                     ′                   ′   ′
                                                                         ′
                           L2 =               ′
                                             L1,1        ′
                                                        L1,2            L1,1 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩r ×m , L1,2
                                                                                             ′
                                                                                                 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩r × k .

   Combining Equation 3.22 and Equation 3.23, we have the following equality.
               "                 #           "                       #"            #                                   "                    #
                   M       0                     P1,1 P1,2                 L1,1            h
                                                                                                ′        ′
                                                                                                                   i       D1,1         0
                                     =                                                 ×       L1,1     L1,2
                   0       Ik′                      0     P2,2             L1,2                                            D2,1 D2,2
                                     "                                     #                                                                            (3.24)
                                             P1,1 L1,1 + P1,2 L1,2                 h
                                                                                        ′ D        ′                             ′ D
                                                                                                                                            i
                                 =                                             ×       L1,1 1,1 + L1,2 D2,1                     L1,2 2,2        .
                                                     P2,2 L1,2

   Consider the (1, 1)-th block of both matrices in Equation 3.24.

                                                                     ′           ′
                                  M = ( P1,1 L1,1 + P1,2 L1,2 ) × ( L1,1
                                 |{z}                                    D1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 ) .                                                           (3.25)
                                      |           {z         } |              {z         }
                                 ℓ×m                            ℓ×r ′                                 r ′ ×m




                                                                              29
Similarly, equating the (2, 1)-th block and (2, 2)-th block from Equation 3.24 we have

                                                         ′           ′
                                     0 = P2,2 ( L1,2 )( L1,1 D1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 )                            (3.26)

and
                                                                    ′
                                              Ik′ = P2,2 ( L1,2 )( L1,2 D2,2 ).                            (3.27)

     Consider Equation 3.27. Since P2,2 and D2,2 are invertible units, we have k′ ≤ ncrank( L1,2 ). But
L1,2 has only k′ rows. Hence, L1,2 has full noncommutative row rank, i.e., ncrank( L1,2 ) = k′ .
     Consider now Equation 3.26. Since P2,2 is invertible, L1,2 ( L1,1  ′ D         ′
                                                                            1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 ) = 0. Let E : =
                                ′
      1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩
  ′ D
L1,1         ′                 r ×m . Since ncrank( L ) = k ′ , the matrix L
                                                     1,2                     1,2 has full row rank over the
                                                                   ′   ′
free skew field. Therefore its right kernel has dimension r − k = r. Moreover, from L1,2 E = 0,
every column of E belongs to the right kernel of L1,2 . Consequently, ncrank( E) ≤ r. On the other
hand, from Equation 3.25, we have ncrank( M) = r ≤ ncrank( E). Hence, ncrank( E) = r.
                                ′          ′
     We now have ( L1,2 ) ( L1,1  D1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 ) = 0 with ncrank( L1,2 ) = k′ and ncrank( L1,1 ′ D
                                                                                                       1,1 +
                      | {z } |          {z        }
                      k ′ ×r ′        r′ ×m
 ′ D ) = r.
L1,2 2,1
    Since L1,2 is a linear matrix, we can apply the matrix product trivialization, Lemma 3.9. Hence,
there exists a unit matrix N whose entries, as well as the entries of N −1 , are computable by
polynomial-size noncommutative ABPs, such that for every a ∈ [r ′ ], either the a-th column of
L1,2 N is zero or the a-th row of N −1 ( L1,1
                                           ′ D         ′
                                               1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 ) is zero.
    We next show that the product trivialization separates exactly k′ coordinates corresponding
                                                     ′ D          ′                         ′
to L1,2 and r coordinates corresponding to L1,1          1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 . Let S ⊆ [r ] denote the indices
of the nonzero columns of L1,2 N, and let T ⊆ [r ′ ] denote the indices of the nonzero rows of
N −1 ( L1,1
        ′ D         ′
            1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 ). By the product trivialization property, S ∩ T = ∅.
    Since N is a unit, ncrank( L1,2 N ) = ncrank( L1,2 ) = k′ . Thus, L1,2 N must                       ′
                                                                                      have at least k nonzero
columns, and hence |S| ≥ k′ . Similarly, ncrank N −1 ( L1,1   ′ D          ′
                                                                    1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 ) = r, so this matrix must
have at least r nonzero rows, and hence | T | ≥ r.
    Since S and T are disjoint subsets of [r ′ ] and r ′ = r + k′ , we have r ′ = r + k′ ≤ |S| + | T | ≤ r ′ .
Therefore, |S| = k′ , | T | = r, and S ⊔ T = [r ′ ].
    Hence, there exists a permutation matrix Π such that the last k′ columns of L1,2 NΠ are nonzero
while the first r columns are zero, and the first r rows of Π−1 N −1 ( L1,1     ′ D           ′
                                                                                     1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 ) are nonzero
                                                                                                        "    #
                                                                                                           H
while the remaining k′ rows are zero. In particular, Π−1 N −1 ( L1,1         ′ D          ′
                                                                                  1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 ) =          for
                                                                                                           0
some H ∈ F⟨ X ⟩r×m . Since the matrix on the left has noncommutative rank r, it follows that
ncrank( H ) = r.




                                                            30
   From Equation 3.25 we have the following factorization,
                                                                                        
                   M = (( P1,1 L1,1 + P1,2 L1,2 ) NΠ) Π−1 N −1 ( L1,1
                                                                  ′           ′
                                                                      D1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 )
                                                             "        #
                                                                                                 (3.28)
                                                           ′
                                                 
                                                    G    G         H
                                             = |{z} |{z}                     G · |{z}
                                                                         = |{z}      H .
                                                   ℓ×r  ℓ×k′        0              r ×m
                                                                              ℓ×r

Since ncrank( M ) = r and the inner dimension of this factorization is r, both factors have full rank
in the corresponding direction. In particular, ncrank( G ) = ncrank( H ) = r.

ABP-size bound. It remains to show that every entry of G and H is computable by a polynomial-
size noncommutative ABP.
     By Corollary 3.20, every entry of P and D is computable by a poly(s)-size noncommutative
ABP. The matrices L1 and L2 obtained from Lemma 3.7 are linear matrices. Hence, all entries of
               ′ and L′ have constant-size ABPs.
L1,1 , L1,2 , L1,1    1,2
     It follows that every entry of P1,1 L1,1 + P1,2 L1,2 is computable by a polynomial-size noncom-
mutative ABP. Indeed, each entry is a sum of at most polynomially many products of entries of P
with linear forms.
                                ′ D         ′
     Similarly, every entry of L1,1 1,1 + L1,2 D2,1 is computable by a polynomial-size noncommuta-
tive ABP. Here again, each entry is a sum of polynomially many products of a linear form with an
entry of D.
     By Lemma 3.9, the entries of the unit matrix N and its inverse N −1 are computable by
polynomial-size noncommutative ABPs. Multiplication by the permutation matrix Π or Π−1 only
permutes rows or columns and therefore introduces no additional algebraic complexity.
     Consequently, every entry of ( P1,1 L1,1 + P1,2 L1,2 ) NΠ and every entry of Π−1 N −1 ( L1,1
                                                                                              ′ D
                                                                                                  1,1 +
  ′
L1,2 D2,1 ) is computable by a polynomial-size noncommutative ABP. The dimensions of all matrices
involved are polynomially bounded in the input size by the Higman linearization construction, so
the polynomially many additions and multiplications required for these matrix products preserve
polynomial ABP size.
     Finally, G and H are sub-matrices of the above two matrices. Hence every entry of G and H is
computable by a poly(s)-size noncommutative ABP. This completes the proof.

   We have the following corollary, which is required to prove Lemma 1.6.

Corollary 3.29. Let A1 , . . . , An ∈ F⟨ X ⟩k×m , with every entry computed by a size-s noncommutative
ABP. Let                            
                                     A1
                                    . 
                                         ∈ F⟨ X ⟩
                                                   (nk)×m
                            A =  .. 
                                                         ,   r = ncrank( A).
                                     An

Then there exist a matrix B ∈ F⟨ X ⟩r×m and matrices Ci ∈ F⟨ X ⟩k×r such that Ai = Ci B for every


                                                     31
i ∈ [n]. The matrix B has full noncommutative row rank, the stacked matrix C = (C1⊤ , . . . , Cn⊤ )⊤ has
full noncommutative column rank, and all entries of B and the Ci are computable by poly(s, n, k, m)-size
noncommutative ABPs.

Proof. If r < min{nk, m}, apply Lemma 3.5 to obtain a rank factorization A = CB with inner
dimension r, and partition C into n consecutive blocks C1 , . . . , Cn of k rows each. If r = nk ≤ m,
take C = Ink and B = A. If r = m ≤ nk, take C = A and B = Im . These choices also cover the
square full-rank case.
    In every case, A = CB and the inner dimension is r = ncrank( A). Hence B has full non-
commutative row rank and C has full noncommutative column rank: otherwise the rank of the
product would be smaller than r. In particular, C admits a left inverse over the free skew field.
The stated ABP-size bounds follow from Lemma 3.5 in the non-full-rank case and are immediate
in the boundary cases.


3.4   Construction of witness matrices

We end with a proof of Lemma 1.6 using the machinery we have developed so far.

Lemma 1.6. (Witness Theorem for Partially Commutative ABP Identities) Let F be a field and A be a
partially commutative homogeneous (over X1 ) ABP in F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ of size s computing the identically zero
polynomial. Let d be the depth of A, and let wi denote the width of the i-th layer. Then there exist 2d − 1
matrices λ0′ , . . . , λ′d−1 and T1′ , . . . , Td′ −1 such that
                               


                              λi′ ∈ Fwi ×wi ⟨ X2 ⟩ ,        Ti′ ∈ Fwi−1 ×wi ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ ,

and the following hold:
                                         λ′d−i · Ai = 0      ∀ i = 1, 2, . . . , d,                                 (1.6)

                            λ′d−i · Ai = Td′ −i+1 · λ′d−i+1 · Ai−1        ∀ i = 2, 3, . . . , d,                    (1.7)

                                         λ0′ := 1,        λ0′ · Ad = Ad = 0.                                        (1.8)

Moreover, every entry of the matrices λi′ and Tj′ is computable by a polynomial-size noncommutative ABP.

Proof. Let A be a partially commutative ABP over X = X1 ⊔ X2 of depth d and layer widths
w0 , . . . , wd , which is homogeneous over X1 and computes the identically zero polynomial in F⟨ X1 ⊔
X2 ⟩. For i ∈ [d], recall the column vector
                                                                                   ⊤
               Ai =       A[ud−i,1 , t], A[ud−i,2 , t], . . . , A[ud−i,wd−i , t]        ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ w d − i .

In particular, Ad is the polynomial computed by A, and hence Ad = 0.



                                                            32
Homogeneity Convention. Since A is homogeneous over X1 from our assumption, we view
each edge label of A as a homogeneous linear form in the X1 -variables whose coefficients lie in
F⟨ X2 ⟩. Equivalently, for every layer transition i → i + 1 there exist coefficient matrices

                                      M1 , . . . , Mn ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩wi ×wi+1

such that the one-layer ABP recurrence from layer i to layer i + 1 can be written as

                                           n
                                    Ad−i = ∑ x1,j · M j · Ad−i−1 ,
                                                                
                                                                                                (3.30)
                                              j =1


where the product is matrix-vector multiplication over F⟨ X2 ⟩, and the x1,j appears as left multipli-
ers.


Step 0: initialize λ0′ . Set
                                        λ0′ := 1 ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩w0 ×w0 .

Then λ0′ · Ad = Ad = 0, which is Item (3) in the statement.


Inductive construction. We construct, for i = 0, 1, . . . , d − 2, matrices

                    Ti′+1 ∈ F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩wi ×wi+1      and       λi′+1 ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩wi+1 ×wi+1

such that for every i we have both:

                                    λi′ · Ad−i = 0,                                             (3.31)
                                    λi′ · Ad−i = Ti′+1 · λi′+1 · Ad−i−1 .                       (3.32)

Note that Equation 3.32 is exactly the desired transition identity, and together with Equation 3.31
it will imply the next vanishing statement λi′+1 · Ad−i−1 = 0.
    Fix i ∈ {0, . . . , d − 2} and assume the inductive hypothesis

                                              λi′ · Ad−i = 0.                                   (3.33)


Step 1: form the rectangular coefficient matrix over F⟨ X2 ⟩. Using Equation 3.30 and left-
multiplying by λi′ , we get

                                            n
                               λi′ · Ad−i = ∑ x1,j · (λi′ M j ) · Ad−i−1 .
                                                                        
                                                                                                (3.34)
                                              j =1




                                                      33
By Equation 3.33, the left-hand side is 0. Since the variables in X1 are noncommuting and appear
as leftmost multipliers in Equation 3.34, homogeneity over X1 implies that each coefficient must
vanish:
                                 (λi′ M j ) · Ad−i−1 = 0  ∀ j ∈ [ n ].                     (3.35)

   Define the stacked rectangular matrix
                                        ′       
                                         λi · M1
                                        ′
                                        λi · M2 
                                                 
                                                  ∈ F ⟨ X2 ⟩
                                                              (nwi )×wi+1
                                  T :=  . 
                                                                         .                                   (3.36)
                                        .  .
                                                  λi′ · Mn

Then Equation 3.35 is equivalent to
                                                     T · Ad−i−1 = 0.                                          (3.37)


Step 2: apply Corollary 3.29 to extract a common left factor. Apply Corollary 3.29 over the ring
F⟨ X2 ⟩ to the matrices λi′ M1 , . . . , λi′ Mn ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩wi ×wi+1 . We obtain:
                                       ′
   • a basis matrix B ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩wi+1 ×wi+1 ,
                                                                     ′
   • and coefficient matrices C1 , . . . , Cn ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩wi ×wi+1 ,

such that for every j ∈ [n],
                                            λi′ · M j = Cj · B           ∀ j ∈ [ n ].                         (3.38)


Step 3: define λi′+1 and Ti′+1 . Note that it may happen that wi′+1 < wi+1 . In that case, add 0 rows
to make the number of rows of B equal to wi+1 . Let this new matrix be B′ . Similarly, add 0 columns
to each Cj to obtain the number of columns equal to wi+1 . Let these new matrices be Cj′ .

                                                                          n
            λi′+1 := B′ ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩wi+1 ×wi+1 ,                Ti′+1 := ∑ x1,j · Cj′ ∈ F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩wi ×wi+1 .
                                                                         j =1


Then, combining Equation 3.30 with Equation 3.38, we obtain the propagation identity:

                               n                              n
                  λi′ · Ad−i = ∑ x1,j · (λi′ M j ) · Ad−i−1 = ∑ x1,j · (Cj B) · Ad−i−1
                                                                                      
                                j =1                                          j =1
                                                         !
                                            n
                                           ∑ x1,j · Cj       · B · Ad−i−1 = Ti′+1 · λi′+1 · Ad−i−1 .
                                                                         
                                =
                                           j =1


Padding by zero rows and columns does not change the product Cj B, so the last equality is valid
with Cj′ and B′ . This proves Equation 3.32 for the current i.


                                                               34
Step 4: derive the next vanishing statement λi′+1 · Ad−i−1 = 0. We now derive the next van-
ishing statement, namely λi′+1 · Ad−i−1 = 0. We have two cases to consider here. The first case is
when the stacked matrix T, defined in Equation 3.36 has noncommutative rank r < wi+1 . For this
case, recall from Equation 3.35; for every j ∈ [n],

                                             (λi′ M j ) · Ad−i−1 = 0.

In Step 2, we applied Corollary 3.29 to the family {λi′ M j } j∈[n] (each of dimension wi × wi+1 ) and
obtained a factorization of the form

        λi′ · M j = Cj · B    ∀ j ∈ [ n ],    where B ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩r×wi+1 , and Cj ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩wi ×r .   (3.39)

Substituting Equation 3.39 into the coefficient vanishing gives, for all j ∈ [n],

               0 = (λi′ M j ) · Ad−i−1 = (Cj B) · Ad−i−1 = Cj · B · Ad−i−1 ∀ j ∈ [n].
                                                                          


Hence
                                                                  
                                                                C1
                                                               C2 
                                                               
                                                               ..  ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩
                                                                               (nwi )×r
                                      
                    C · B · A d − i −1 = 0     where     C :=                         .         (3.40)
                                                               . 
                                                                     Cn

    The Corollary 3.29 shows that the stacked coefficient matrix C has full noncommutative col-
umn rank, r. Equivalently, C admits a left inverse over F⦓X2 ⦔; i.e., there exists a matrix C † (over
the free skew field) such that
                                           C † · C = Ir .

Left-multiplying Equation 3.40 by C † therefore gives

                    B · Ad−i−1 = 0 =⇒ B′ · Ad−i−1 = 0 =⇒ λi′+1 · Ad−i−1 = 0.                      (3.41)

On the other hand, suppose that the stacked matrix T defined in Equation 3.36 has full noncom-
mutative column rank, i.e., ncrank( T ) = wi+1 over F⦓X2 ⦔. Then, by Equation 3.35, we have
T · Ad−i−1 = 0. Each entry of Ad−i−1 is a partially commutative ABP that is homogeneous over X1
with coefficients in F⟨ X2 ⟩. Accordingly, we may write Ad−i−1 = ∑m m · vm , where the sum ranges
over homogeneous noncommutative monomials m in X1 and vm ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩wi+1 ×1 is the coefficient
vector of m. Substituting this expansion yields

                                   0 = T · A d − i −1 = ∑ m · ( T · v m ).                        (3.42)
                                                            m



                                                       35
Since the variables in X1 are noncommuting and all monomials m appearing above have the same
X1 -degree, the representation ∑m m · ( T · vm ) = 0 is unique; hence T · vm = 0 for every m. Since T
has full noncommutative column rank, its right kernel over the free skew field is zero. Thus every
vm = 0, and therefore Ad−i−1 = 0, so trivially λi′+1 · Ad−i−1 = 0.


Re-indexing to match Equation 1.7–Equation 1.8. Setting j = d − i in Equation 3.39 gives

                       λ′d− j · A j = Td′ − j+1 · λ′d− j+1 · A j−1        ∀ j = 2, 3, . . . , d,

which is Equation 1.8. Moreover, Equation 3.41 yields Equation 1.7, namely

                                    λ′d− j · A j = 0         ∀ j = 1, 2, . . . , d.

ABP-size of entries. Each entry of λi′ M j is computed by a size poly(s) ABPs over F⟨ X2 ⟩, and so
are the entries of the stacked matrix T in Equation 3.36. Applying Corollary 3.29 preserves the size
poly(s) of the computability of these entries, and therefore, the padded matrix λi′+1 = B′ and each
Cj′ have polynomial size ABPs. Finally,

                                                         n
                                              Ti′+1 = ∑ x1,j · Cj′
                                                        j =1


is a homogeneous linear form in X1 with ABP-computable coefficients in F⟨ X2 ⟩, again of size
poly(s). This completes the proof of Lemma 1.6.


Acknowledgement
We acknowledge the use of LLM (GPT-5.6) to improve the language, grammar and formatting the
manuscripts.


References
[ACM24]       Vikraman Arvind, Abhranil Chatterjee, and Partha Mukhopadhyay. Trading Deter-
              minism for Noncommutativity in Edmonds’ Problem. In 65th IEEE Annual Sympo-
              sium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2024, Chicago, IL, USA, October 27-30,
              2024, pages 539–559. IEEE, 2024.

[AJ22a]       V. Arvind and Pushkar S. Joglekar. Matrix Polynomial Factorization via Higman
              Linearization, 2022. Pre-print available at arXiv:2203.16978.



                                                        36
[AJ22b]     Vikraman Arvind and Pushkar S. Joglekar. On Efficient Noncommutative Polyno-
            mial Factorization via Higman Linearization. In 37th Computational Complexity Con-
            ference, CCC 2022, July 20-23, 2022, Philadelphia, PA, USA, volume 234 of LIPIcs, pages
            12:1–12:22. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.

[AJ25]      V. Arvind and Pushkar S. Joglekar. On Efficient Noncommutative Polynomial Fac-
            torization via Higman Linearization, 2025. Pre-print available at arXiv:2202.09883.

[Ajt88]     Miklós Ajtai. The Complexity of the Pigeonhole Principle. In Proceedings of the 29th
            Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 346–355. IEEE Com-
            puter Society, 1988.

[Bus87]     Samuel R. Buss. Polynomial Size Proofs of the Propositional Pigeonhole Principle.
            The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 52(4):916–927, 1987.

[CF69]      P. Cartier and D. Foata. Problémes combinatoires de commutation et réarrange-
            ments. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 1969.

[Coh95]     P. M. Cohn. Skew Fields: Theory of General Division Rings. Encyclopedia of Mathemat-
            ics and its Applications. Cambridge University Press, 1995.

[Coh00]     Paul M. Cohn. Introduction to Ring Theory. Springer Undergraduate Mathematics
            Series. Springer, 2000.

[Coh06]     P. M. Cohn. Free Ideal Rings and Localization in General Rings. Cambridge University
            Press, 2006.

[CR79]      Stephen A. Cook and Robert A. Reckhow. The Relative Efficiency of Propositional
            Proof Systems. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 44(1):36–50, 1979.

[FR04]      Marc Fortin and Christophe Reutenauer. COMMUTATIVE/NONCOMMUTATIVE
            RANK OF LINEAR MATRICES AND SUBSPACES OF MATRICES OF LOW RANK.
            Séminaire Lotharingien de Combinatoire [electronic only], 52, 01 2004.

[FSTW21]    Michael A. Forbes, Amir Shpilka, Iddo Tzameret, and Avi Wigderson. Proof Com-
            plexity Lower Bounds from Algebraic Circuit Complexity. Theory Comput., 17:1–88,
            2021.

[GGdOW20] Ankit Garg, Leonid Gurvits, Rafael Mendes de Oliveira, and Avi Wigderson. Oper-
          ator Scaling: Theory and Applications. Found. Comput. Math., 20(2):223–290, 2020.

[GP18]      Joshua A. Grochow and Toniann Pitassi. Circuit Complexity, Proof Complexity, and
            Polynomial Identity Testing: The Ideal Proof System. J. ACM, 65(6):37:1–37:59, 2018.


                                               37
[Gro26]    Joshua A. Grochow. Polynomial Identity Testing and the Ideal Proof System: PIT Is
           in NP If and Only If IPS Can Be p-Simulated by a Cook-Reckhow Proof System. In
           Proceedings of the 58th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2026,
           Salt Lake City, UT, USA, June 22-26, 2026, pages 1569–1580. ACM, 2026.

[HK91]     Tero Harju and Juhani Karhumäki. The Equivalence Problem of Multitape Finite
           Automata. Theor. Comput. Sci., 78(2):347–355, 1991.

[HR25]     Johan Håstad and Kilian Risse. On Bounded Depth Proofs for Tseitin Formulas on
           the Grid; Revisited. SIAM Journal on Computing, 54(5):FOCS22–288–FOCS22–339,
           2025.

[IQS17]    Gábor Ivanyos, Youming Qiao, and K. V. Subrahmanyam. Non-commutative Ed-
           monds’ problem and matrix semi-invariants. Comput. Complex., 26(3):717–763, 2017.

[IQS18]    Gábor Ivanyos, Youming Qiao, and K. V. Subrahmanyam. Constructive non-
           commutative rank computation is in deterministic polynomial time. Comput. Com-
           plex., 27(4):561–593, 2018.

[Jeř25]   Emil Jeřábek. A Simplified Lower Bound for Implicational Logic. Bulletin of Symbolic
           Logic, 31(1):53–87, 2025.

[KPW95]    Jan Krajíček, Pavel Pudlák, and Alan R. Woods. An Exponential Lower Bound to the
           Size of Bounded Depth Frege Proofs of the Pigeonhole Principle. Random Structures
           & Algorithms, 7(1):15–39, 1995.

[KVV20]    Igor Klep, Victor Vinnikov, and Jurij Volčič. Multipartite Rational Functions. Docu-
           menta Math., 25:1285–1313, 2020.

[LTW18]    Fu Li, Iddo Tzameret, and Zhengyu Wang. Characterizing Propositional Proofs as
           Noncommutative Formulas. SIAM J. Comput., 47(4):1424–1462, 2018.

[Nis91]    Noam Nisan. Lower Bounds for Non-Commutative Computation (Extended Ab-
           stract). In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
           May 5-8, 1991, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, pages 410–418, 1991.

[PBI93]    Toniann Pitassi, Paul Beame, and Russell Impagliazzo. Exponential Lower Bounds
           for the Pigeonhole Principle. Computational Complexity, 3(2):97–140, 1993.

[PRST16]   Toniann Pitassi, Benjamin Rossman, Rocco A. Servedio, and Li-Yang Tan. Poly-
           logarithmic Frege Depth Lower Bounds via an Expander Switching Lemma. In Pro-
           ceedings of the 48th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’16, pages
           644–657. ACM, 2016.


                                             38
[PT16]            Toniann Pitassi and Iddo Tzameret. Algebraic proof complexity: progress, frontiers
                  and challenges. ACM SIGLOG News, 3(3):21–43, 2016.

[Raz13]           Ran Raz. Tensor-Rank and Lower Bounds for Arithmetic Formulas.                                    J. ACM,
                  60(6):40:1–40:15, 2013.

[Rec76]           Robert A. Reckhow. On the lengths of proofs in the propositional calculus. Ph.d. thesis,
                  University of Toronto, 1976. Technical Report #87.

[RS59]            Michael O. Rabin and Dana S. Scott. Finite Automata and Their Decision Problems.
                  IBM J. Res. Dev., 3(2):114–125, 1959.

[RS05]            Ran Raz and Amir Shpilka. Deterministic polynomial identity testing in non-
                  commutative models. Computational Complexity, 14(1):1–19, 2005.

[Wor13]           James Worrell. Revisiting the Equivalence Problem for Finite Multitape Automata.
                  In Automata, Languages, and Programming - 40th International Colloquium, ICALP 2013,
                  Riga, Latvia, July 8-12, 2013, Proceedings, Part II, pages 422–433, 2013.

[Zip79]           R. Zippel. Probabilistic algorithms for sparse polynomials. In Proc. of the Int. Sym.
                  on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation, pages 216–226, 1979.


A     Partially Commutative Proof Systems
In this section we first define partially commutative polynomials and the partially commutative
proof system (PCm,n - IPS for m ≤ n). We then prove that it is sound and complete, discuss its
verifiability and show that it simulates the Frege proof system.
Definition A.1 (Partially Commutative Polynomial). Let X = X1 ⊔ X2 be such that | X | = n and
let F be a field. A partially commutative monomial mon ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ is uniquely determined by its
restrictions to X1 and to X2 : mon| X1 = monX1 ∈ F⟨ X1 ⟩ and mon| X2 = monX2 ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩, where monX1
and monX2 are noncommutative monomials. All variables in X1 commute with all variables in X2 . Hence,
for mon, mon′ ∈ F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩, we have mon = mon′ if and only if mon| X1 = mon′ | X1 and mon| X2 =
mon′ | X2 . This induces an equivalence relation ∼ on the set of monomials.12
    A partially commutative polynomial f ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ is an F-linear combination of the partially
commutative monomials over X1 and X2 .13 A partially commutative polynomial over p buckets, say
 f ∈ F X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ X p , can be defined analogously for any.                                      ♢
   12 For example, consider two monomials mon = x x x x
                                                   1       1,1 2,1 1,2 2,2 and mon2 = x2,1 x1,1 x2,2 x1,2 . These two monomials
are the same with mon1 | X1 = mon2 | X1 = x1,1 x1,2 and mon1 | X2 = mon2 | X2 = x2,1 x2,2 .
   13 It is sometimes useful to think of polynomials in F ⟨ X ⊔ X ⟩ as a noncommutative polynomial in F ⟨ X ⟩ ⟨ X ⟩. That
                                                               1     2                                              2   1
is, f can be uniquely written as f = ∑mi ∈F⟨ X1 ⟩ mi · f i where f i ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩.




                                                              39
   Note that a commutative polynomial f ∈ F[ X ] can be thought of as a partially commutative
polynomial in F ⟨ X1 , . . . , Xn ⟩ where | Xi | = 1. As mentioned in the introduction, inspired by this,
we define a generalization of both IPS and NC-IPS. In particular, we define PCm,n - IPS where
PC1,n - IPS ≡ NC-IPS and PCn,n - IPS ≡ IPS if the total number of variables is n.
   We recall the definition here.
Definition 1.1. (Partially commutative IPS (PCm,n - IPS)) Let F be a field and X = X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm be a
set of partially commutative variables14 with | X | = n and for every i ∈ [m], | Xi | = ni .
    Assume that f 1 = f 2 = · · · = f ℓ = 0 is a set of partially commutative polynomial equations from
F ⟨ X ⟩ and suppose that the following equations (axioms) are included among the f i ’s.

   • Boolean axioms: x2 − x for every x ∈ X
   • Commutator axioms: xi,j xi,j′ − xi,j′ xi,j for every i ∈ [m], j ̸= j′ ∈ [ni ].

    A partially commutative IPS proof (PCm,n - IPS) of unsatisfiability of the system { f i } is a polynomial
P( X, z1 , . . . , zℓ ) represented by a partially commutative formula over the quotient of F⟨ X, Z ⟩ by the pre-
scribed commuting relations among the X-variables only; in particular, no additional commuting relations
involving the placeholder variables Z = {z1 , . . . , zℓ } are imposed. We require

   1. P( X, 0) = 0;
   2. P( X, f 1 , . . . , f ℓ ) = 1,

where substitution is the algebra homomorphism that fixes the X-variables and sends zi 7→ f i . The size of
a PCm,n - IPS proof is the minimum size of a partially commutative formula computing P( X, Z ).          ♢
Remark A.2. In Definition 1.1, if P ⟨ X, Z ⟩ is computed by a model C (can be a circuit, ABP or formula), we
denote the proof system by C - PCm,n - IPS. If C is circuits or formulas, then each product gate has designated
left and right children; the leaves are labeled either by X variables or the set of placeholder variables Z with
the convention specified in Definition 1.1. In the case of ABPs, the order of multiplication is maintained
layer-wise. The size of a C - PCm,n - IPS proof is the minimal size of a C (circuit or ABP or formula) that
computes the proof polynomial P( X, Z ).                                                                      ♢
Remark A.3. Analogous to the noncommutative setting, if we consider the partially commutative ring
F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ with | X1 | = | X2 | = n and the set of equations { f 1 = 0, . . . , f m = 0 : f i ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩},
a common solution is a set of d × d matrices (say A = { A1 , . . . , An } and B = { B1 , . . . , Bn }) for some
d > 1, such that the matrices from A and B commute with each other and that f i ( A, B) = 0.
    For the partially commutative ring F ⟨ X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm ⟩ where | Xi | = ni for every i ∈ [m], a set of
equations { f 1 = 0, . . . , f ℓ = 0} have a common solution if there exists a set of d × d matrices (say A1 =
{ A1,1 , . . . , A1,n1 } , . . . , Am = { Am,1 , . . . , Am,nm }) for some d > 1, such that the matrices from Ai and A j
commute with each other for every i, j and that f i ( A1 , . . . , Am ) = 0.                                         ♢
  14 For every i, the variables within X are noncommuting, but for every i ̸ = j, variables from X and X commute.
                                        i                                                         i     j




                                                          40
A.1    Soundness and Completeness

Lemma A.4. For every m, n with m ≤ n, the proof system PCm,n - IPS is sound and complete for CNFs.
Proof. Soundness follows from the definition of the system. Assume we have a polynomial P( X, Z )
that satisfies the properties (1) : P( X, 0) = 0 and (2) : P( X, f 1 , . . . , f ℓ ) = 1. If the set of equations
{ f i } has a common solution A = ( A1,1 , . . . , Am,nm ), where each Ai,j ∈ Fd×d for some d ≥ 1, then
we obtain a contradiction by substituting the variables with A since

                          (1) =⇒ P( A, 0) = 0d×d ̸= Id×d = P( A, 0) ⇐= (2)

    To prove completeness, we first claim the following.

Claim A.5. Let { f 1 = 0, . . . , f ℓ = 0 : f i ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm ⟩} (with | Xi | = ni for each i ∈ [m] and
∑i∈[m] | Xi | = n) be a system of equations that includes the boolean axioms and the commutator axioms.
Then the given system has a common solution in Fn if and only if there exist d ≥ 1, set of matrices
{ A1,1 , . . . , Am,nm } ⊆ Fd×d which satisfy the given system.

Proof. Suppose the given system has a common solution in Fn , say a = ( a1,1 , . . . , am,nm ). Taking
d = 1 and Aij = aij for every i ∈ [m], j ∈ [ni ], we trivially get the required statement.
    For the converse direction, we give the full proof for m = 1 and observe that the proof follows
analogously for larger m. Let d × d matrices A = ( A1 , . . . , An ) ∈ (Fd×d )n be a common solution to
the given system of equations.
    Since the set of equations includes boolean axioms, A2i = Ai for every i ∈ [n], the minimal
polynomial of Ai must divide xi ( xi − 1). Thus the minimal polynomial has roots 0, 1 with multi-
plicity 1, implying that each Ai is diagonalizable, with diagonal entries 0, 1.
    Moreover, the matrices satisfy the commutator axioms. That is, for every i ̸= j, Ai A j = A j Ai .
This implies that the matrices are simultaneously diagonalizable. That is, there exists an invertible
                                                                     (i ) (i )   (i )
matrix R ∈ Fd×d such that for every i, RAi R−1 = Di = Diag( a1 , a2 , . . . , ad ) is a diagonal matrix
                        (i )
with diagonal entries a j ∈ {0, 1}. Observe that, for every i ∈ [ℓ],

         f i ( A1 , . . . , An ) = 0 =⇒ R · f i ( A) · R−1 = 0 =⇒ f i ( RA1 R−1 , . . . , RAn R−1 , a) = 0.

    Now for every monomial over X1 in f i , say mon = ∏ j∈T x j ∈ f i for some T ⊆ [n],

                          R · mon( A) · R−1 = R(∏ A j ) R−1 = ∏( R · A j · R−1 ).
                                                     j∈ T            j∈ T

                                                                                   ( j)   ( j)    ( j)        ( j)
Thus, for every i ∈ [ℓ], f i ( D1 , . . . , Dn ) = 0 where each D j = Diag( a1 , a2 , . . . , ad ) with a j ∈
{0, 1}. Here, the left hand side is a d × d dimensional 0 matrix, with the (t, t)-th entry being
       (t) (t)           (t)
                               n this is true for everyof i , we obtain a set of solutions over F to the system
f i ( a1 , a2 , . . . , an ). Since
                                   (t)    (t)
of equations, namely ( a1 , . . . , an ) : t ∈ [d] .

                                                            41
     For m > 1, the proof follows analogously since the matrices corresponding to different buckets
commute (by definition) and we have commutator axioms for variables within each bucket. Hence
all the matrices from the solution set mutually commute, and this gives an invertible matrix R that
simultaneously diagonalizes every matrix. This proves the claim.

    Now we use Claim A.5 to prove the completeness. Consider the system of unsatisfiable equa-
tions { f 1 = 0, . . . , f ℓ = 0 | f i ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm ⟩} that includes the boolean and commutator axioms.
Here | Xi | = ni for every i ∈ [m] and ∑i∈[m] ni = n. We want to demonstrate the existence of the
proof polynomial P( X, Z ) ∈ F ⟨ X, Z ⟩.
    Moreover, assume that the axioms of the system other than the boolean and commutator ax-
ioms are obtained by a suitable arithmetization of an unsatisfiable CNF (as described below).

                    T ( xij ) = (1 − xi,j )         T (¬ xij ) = xi,j             T ( A ∨ B ) = T ( A ) · T ( B ).

For the partially commutative setting, we fix an order of variables in each bucket and multiply
them accordingly.
     Now, for every t ∈ [m], let It be the two sided ideal generated by the commutators
  xt,j xt,j′ − xt,j′ xt,j | j′ ̸= j ∈ [nt ] and let π : F ⟨ X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm ⟩ → F[ X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm ] be the surjec-


tive homomorphism obtained by quotienting by the two-sided ideal I1 + · · · + Im . Equivalently,
π imposes all within-bucket commutator relations. We denote π ( f i ) by f i′ for every i ∈ [ell ].
     By Claim A.5, we know that partially commutative unsatisfiability in matrix algebra over F
implies commutative unsatisfiability over F. Since the boolean axioms are included in { f i }, every
common zero over the algebraic closure F must in fact be Boolean: each coordinate satisfies z2 −
z = 0, hence lies in {0, 1} ⊆ F. Therefore a common zero over F would already give a common
zero over F, contradicting unsatisfiability in matrix algebra (in particular, in dimension 1). Thus
the commutative system has no common zero over F. So, by Hilbert’s Nullstellensatz, there are
polynomials g1′ , . . . , gℓ′ ∈ F[ X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm ] such that ∑iℓ=1 gi′ · f i′ = 1. Let gi ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm ⟩ be
a polynomial such that π ( gi ) = gi′ 15 . Then,
                                              !
                     π    1 − ∑ gi · f i          = 1 − ∑ π ( gi ) · π ( f i ) = 1 − ∑ gi′ · f i′ = 0.
                               i ∈[ℓ]                     i ∈[ℓ]                                  i ∈[ℓ]


But (1 − ∑i∈[ℓ] gi · f i ) ∈ I1 + · · · + Im , and hence

                                                     m
                             1 − ∑ gi · f i = ∑              ∑           ht,i,j ( xt,i xt,j − xt,j xt,i )ĥt,i,j
                                  i ∈[ℓ]            t=1 i ∈[ℓ],j∈[nt ]


for suitable polynomials ht,i,j , ĥt,i,j .
  15 Note that there can be multiple g such that π ( g ) = g′ . We take one such g
                                      i               i     i                      i




                                                                   42
   For each commutator xt,i xt,j − xt,j xt,i , let zt,i,j denote the corresponding placeholder already
present among Z (since the commutator axioms are among the f i ’s). We can then define

                                                               m
                               P( X, Z ) := ∑ gi · zi + ∑              ∑           ht,i,j · zt,i,j · ĥt,i,j ,
                                              i ∈[ℓ]          t=1 i ∈[ℓ],j∈[nt ]


to be the proof polynomial since it clearly satisfies conditions (1) and (2) from Definition 1.1.


A.2     Verifiability

From the definition of IPS, verifying a C -IPS refutation amounts to solving the C -PIT problem.
For PCm,n - IPS, refutations can be verified in randomized polynomial time when m = O(1), and
in randomized quasi-polynomial time when m = (log s)O(1) , where s is the refutation size. This
follows from the randomized identity testing algorithm for formulas (and more generally, ABPs)
over Q⟨ X1 , . . . , Xm ⟩ due to Worrell [Wor13].
    Arvind, Chatterjee, and Mukhopadhyay [ACM24] recently gave a deterministic identity test-
ing algorithm for formulas (and ABPs) over Q⟨ X1 , . . . , Xk ⟩ for any constant k. This implies the
following: for any constant k, PCk,n - IPS is a sound and complete refutation system for unsatisfi-
able propositional formulas (represented as partially commutative formulas), and refutations can
be verified in deterministic polynomial time over F = Q.
    Note that, the algorithm given in [ACM24] does not work over finite field in general as dis-
cussed in Subsection 1.3. Nevertheless, when k = 2, the algorithm of [ACM24] can be applied
over an arbitrary field F16 . In fact the white-box deterministic polynomial time algorithm given in
Theorem 1.3 can also be used for the verification of PC2,n - IPS proofs. Hence PC2,n - IPS refutations
admit deterministic polynomial-time verification in this case.


A.3     PCm,n - IPS simulates the Frege proof system

The commutative IPS and the noncommutative IPS simulate the Frege proof system [GP18,
LTW18] and since PCm,n - IPS (for m ≤ n) is a generalization of both, it should simulate Frege.
We prove that this is indeed the case, for the sake of completeness.
   We start with the standard translation between propositional formulas and algebraic formulas.
Definition A.6. Given a propositional formula T defined over ∧, ∨, ¬, and variables X = { x1 , . . . , xn },
we define
                        Tr′ ( xi ) := xi , Tr′ (false) := 1,  Tr′ (true) := 0

and by induction on the size of the formula,

Tr′ (¬ Ti ) := 1 − Tr′ ( Ti ); Tr′ ( T1 ∨ T2 ) := Tr′ ( T1 ) Tr′ ( T2 ); Tr′ ( T1 ∧ T2 ) := 1 − (1 − Tr′ ( T1 ))(1 − Tr′ ( T2 )).
  16 Personal communication with the authors of [ACM24].



                                                               43
If T is a propositional tautology then the polynomial computed by Tr′ ( T ) is 0 over every boolean evaluation,
     \
i.e. Tr ′
          ( T )( a) = 0 for every a ∈ {0, 1}n .                                                              ♢
    We now prove the following theorem.

Theorem A.7. If a propositional tautology T has a size s Frege proof, then for every m ≥ 1 with m ≤ n,
Tr′ ( T ) has a PCm,n - IPS-proof of size poly(s).

  In particular, we show how PCm,n - IPS simulates Łukasiewicz calculus (Definition 2.3) in poly-
nomial size for any 1 ≤ m ≤ n.

Lemma A.8. (PCm,n - IPS simulates Łukasiewicz calculus-Frege: analogue of [LTW18, Lemma 3.3])
Let F be a field. Further, let X = X1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xm be partially commutative variables where | Xi | = ni for
every i ∈ m and ∑i∈[m] ni = n. Here the variables inside each Xi are noncommuting and variables from
different buckets commute.
     Let π be a tree-like Frege (Łukasiewicz calculus) proof of a propositional formula T, defined over X,
from assumptions { F1 , . . . , Fℓ }, and let the proof-lines be line1 , line2 , . . . , lines . Let Tr′ (·) be the algebraic
translation from Boolean formulas to F ⟨ X ⟩ as in Definition A.6. For each i ∈ [ N ] define the partially
commutative algebraic translation Li := Tr′ (linei ) ∈ F ⟨ X ⟩ and let F := Tr′ ( F1 ), . . . , Tr′ ( Fℓ ) .
                                                                                                                    

     Finally, let B be the set of all Boolean axioms: x ( x − 1) for every x ∈ X and let C be the set of all
partial commutator axioms: xy − yx for every x, y ∈ Xi , i ∈ [m]. Then for every i ∈ [s], there exists
a partially commutative algebraic formula Φi ( X, Y, Z, W ) ∈ F ⟨ X, Y, Z, W ⟩, where Y = (y1 , . . . , yℓ ) and
Z, W are placeholder vectors for the Boolean and commutator axioms, such that:

   1. Φi ( X, 0, 0, 0) = 0.
   2. Φi ( X, F, B, C ) = Li .
                            4
   3. |Φi | ≤ ∑ j∈ Ai | L j | , where Ai ⊆ [s] is the set of Frege proof-lines involved in deriving linei in the
      tree-like proof π (i.e., the indices of the sub-tree rooted at linei ).

In particular, Φs is a PCm,n - IPS proof of Tr′ ( T ) from assumptions {Tr′ ( F1 ), . . . , Tr′ ( Fℓ )}, and its size is
poly(|π |). Here by |.| we denote the size of the formula computing the polynomial.

Proof. We follow the inductive construction of Lemma 3.3 in [LTW18]. The only modification is
that whenever [LTW18] uses commutator axioms to swap adjacent variables, in the partially com-
mutative setting it suffices to use commutators within the same bucket, since variables from different
buckets commute by definition. Fix the (tree-like) proof π and its sequence of lines line1 , . . . , lines .
As in [LTW18], we build Φi by induction on the derivation of linei .

Placeholders. The formula Φi ( X, Y, Z, W ) is a partially commutative formula in the variables X
and in placeholder variables Y, Z, W, where:

    • Y will be substituted by the translated assumptions Tr′ ( Fj );

                                                             44
   • Z will be substituted by the Boolean axioms x ( x − 1);
   • W will be substituted by the commutator axioms xy − yx for x, y in the same bucket.

Condition (1) says Φi vanishes when all placeholders are set to 0, and (2) says that after substitu-
tion we obtain exactly Li .


Base cases.     (B1) linei is an assumption. Suppose linei = Fj for some j ∈ [ℓ]. Then Li = Tr′ ( Fj ).
Define
                                               Φi ( X, Y, Z, W ) := y j .

Clearly, Φi ( X, 0, 0, 0) = 0 and Φi ( X, F, B, C ) = Tr′ ( Fj ) = Li .

(B2) linei is a Łukasiewicz calculus axiom instance. We treat explicitly the axiom scheme A →
( B → A). Note that A → ( B → A) ≡ ¬ A ∨ (¬ B ∨ A), and hence by the definition of Tr′ (·),

              Li = Tr′ ¬ A ∨ (¬ B ∨ A) = Tr′ (¬ A) · Tr′ (¬ B ∨ A) = (1 − a) · (1 − b) · a ,
                                                                                         


where a := Tr′ ( A) and b := Tr′ ( B). Thus,

                                              Li = (1 − a) · (1 − b) · a.

By [LTW18, Lemma 3.6], there exists a partially commutative formula Ψ a ( X, Z ) such that

                        Ψ a ( X, 0) = 0,        Ψ a ( X, B) = (1 − a) · a,        | Ψ a | ≤ | a |2 .

Multiplying on the left by (1 − b) yields a certificate for

                                                 (1 − b) · (1 − a) · a.

Define
                                           Θ( X, Z ) := (1 − b) · Ψ a ( X, Z ).

Then Θ( X, 0) = 0 and Θ( X, B) = (1 − b) · (1 − a) · a.
   Now swap the first two factors to obtain (1 − a) · (1 − b) · a. Using the analogue of Lemma 3.4
from [LTW18] with only intra-bucket commutator axioms, there exists a partially commutative
formula φ M,N ( X, W ) such that

                  φ M,N ( X, 0) = 0,         φ M,N ( X, C ) = M − N,          | φ M,N | ≤ | M|2 | N |2 ,

where
                       M := (1 − b) · (1 − a) · a,           N : = (1 − a ) · (1 − b ) · a = L i .



                                                           45
Finally define
                              Φi ( X, Y, Z, W ) := Θ( X, Z ) − φ M,N ( X, W ).

Then Φi ( X, 0, 0, 0) = 0 and after substitution we obtain

                               Φi ( X, F, B, C ) = M − ( M − N ) = N = Li .

The other Łukasiewicz calculus axioms are handled analogously, as in [LTW18].


Induction step: modus ponens. Assume linei is derived by modus ponens from line j = A and
lineh = A → B, with j, h < i. By the definition of Tr′ (·), since A → B ≡ ¬ A ∨ B, we have

      L j = Tr′ ( A) = a,     Lh = Tr′ ( A → B) = Tr′ (¬ A ∨ B) = (1 − a) · Tr′ ( B) = (1 − a) · c,

where c := Tr′ ( B). The conclusion is linei = B, hence Li = c.
  By induction, we have Φ j , Φh satisfying (2)-(3) in Definition 1.1 . Define

                   Φi ( X, Y, Z, W ) := Φ j ( X, Y, Z, W ) · Tr′ ( B) + Φh ( X, Y, Z, W ).

Then Φi ( X, 0, 0, 0) = 0 and after substituting (Y, Z, W ) = ( F, B, C ) we obtain

                       Φi ( X, F, B, C ) = Tr′ ( A) · Tr′ ( B) + (1 − Tr′ ( A)) · Tr′ ( B)
                                         = Tr′ ( A) + (1 − Tr′ ( A)) · Tr′ ( B)
                                                                     

                                        = 1 · Tr′ ( B) = Tr′ ( B) = Li .

The size bound follows exactly as in the proof pf [LTW18, Lemma 3.3]. Since the present construc-
tion changes only which commutator axioms are available, the size analysis is unchanged.


Conclusion. Applying the construction to i = s gives a partially commutative IPS proof of Ls =
Tr′ ( T ) from assumptions Tr′ ( F1 ), . . . , Tr′ ( Fℓ ) and the Boolean/partial-commutator axioms, with
size poly(|π |).


B    Proof of Theorem 3.3
Throughout this section, let X = X1 ⊔ X2 ,     | X1 | = n 1 , | X2 | = n 2 ,  N = n1 + n2 . Thus,
when we refer to the corresponding partially commutative proof system, it is PC2,N - IPS. Variables
within each Xi are noncommuting, while variables from X1 commute with variables from X2 .
Throughout the Frege simulation the underlying field is F = GF(2).




                                                       46
B.1   The Reflection Principle

In order to prove Theorem 3.3, we use the reflection principle.

Lemma B.1. ([LTW18, Lemma 4.3]) There is a polynomial-size Frege proof of ¬Φ assuming that
¬ Fe( X, 0) and Fe( X, P
                       fΦ ) have polynomial-size Frege proofs.

     Even though Li, Tzameret, and Wang [LTW18] prove this statement for noncommutative IPS,
the same proof applies in the partially commutative setting. Once Frege proofs of ¬ Fe( X, 0) and
Fe( X, P
       fΦ ) are available, the remainder of the reflection argument is purely propositional.
     Therefore, our goal is to obtain Frege proofs of the two tautologies in Equation 3.2. In particu-
lar, using Lemma B.1, Theorem 3.3 follows directly from the following theorem.

Theorem B.2. Let X = X1 ⊔ X2 be partially commutative variables, where | X1 | = n1 , | X2 | = n2 , and
N = n1 + n2 . Let F be a partially commutative formula of size s over F, with variable set X, that computes
the zero polynomial. Then there exists a constant c > 0 such that the Boolean formula ¬ Fe( X ) has a Frege
                      c
proof of size s(log s) .

    The remainder of the section is dedicated to the proof of Theorem B.2. The remainder of the
section is dedicated to the proof of Theorem B.2.
    Following the notation of [LTW18], for Boolean formulas Fe and G,   e we write Fe ⊢ G e to de-
note that there exists a Frege proof of Ge from the axiom Fe of size polynomial in | G
                                                                                     e|. That is, G
                                                                                                  e
can be derived from Fe by purely syntactic manipulations using standard Frege inference rules
and Boolean equivalences, including associativity and distributivity, as well as identities such as
False ⊕ Fe ≡ F,e True ∨ Fe ≡ True, True ⊕ Fe ≡ ¬ F,
                                                 e False ∧ Fe ≡ False, True ∧ Fe ≡ F,
                                                                                    e and similar
Boolean equivalences.
    Similarly, for two vectors of formulas F and G, we write F ⊢ G to denote that, for each index,
the corresponding entry of G can be derived from the corresponding entry of F by a Frege proof
of size polynomial in the size of that entry.


B.2   Homogenization of Partially Commutative Formulas

Note that the results given in this section are true for any partially commutative formula with a
k-partition of variables for any constant k. Let F be a partially commutative formula over F with
the variable set X = X1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Xk .
    Given a partially commutative monomial m = ∏i∈[k] mi with mi being noncommutative in Xi
for every i ∈ [k ], define the degree signature of m to be d(m) := (d1 , . . . , dk ) if the degree of mi
is di for every i ∈ [k ]. A partially commutative polynomial f is homogeneous if every monomial
of f has the same degree signature. Thus any partially commutative polynomial computed by a




                                                    47
formula F, say F̂, can be uniquely written as

                                                 F̂ =              ∑         F̂(d1 ,...,dk )
                                                            d1 ,...,dk ≤d
                                                              ∑ di ≤ d


where the degree of F̂ is d and F̂(d1 ,...,dk ) is the homogeneous component of F̂ with degree signature
( d1 , . . . , d k ).

Lemma B.3. Let F be a partially commutative formula of size s and depth O(log s) computing a polynomial
in F⟨ X1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Xk ⟩. Moreover, let F(d1 ,...,dk ) be the homogeneous component of the polynomial computed
by F with degree signature (d1 , . . . , dk ). Then there exists a sO(k log s) size Frege proof of
                                                                       M
                                            Fe( X ) ←→                              Fe(d1 ,...,dk ) .           (B.4)
                                                                    (d1 ,...,dk )


    This is analogous to [LTW18, Lemma 4.6] and the proof follows along the same lines.

Proof. We first show the homogenization of [Raz13] in the partially commutative setting; then, we
show how Frege can prove it.

Raz’s Homogenization in the Partially Commutative Setting Let X = X1 ⊔ X2 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xk be
the variable set. Since the size of the formula F is s, the degree of the polynomial computed by
F is at most s + 1. Furthermore, the individual degree from each bucket can be at most s + 1.
Given any node u ∈ F, denote the product depth of u by δu . We assume the depth of F is O(log s)
and hence, δu ≤ O(log s) for any u ∈ F. The idea is to track the increment of any monomial’s
degree signature along the path from u → n  r with r being the root. This is done by oconsidering all
monotone non increasing functions Nu := D u : {0, 1, . . . , δu } → {0, 1, . . . , s + 1}k . The number
                                            k
of such functions is | Nu | ≤ (s+δuδ+    u +2
                                           1 ) ≤ s
                                                      O(k log s) . So, first we construct the homogeneous formula

F ′ with | Nu | many nodes for every node u ∈ F. We identify 0 with the root r in the function
D u ∈ Nu . For (i1 , . . . , ik ) ∈ [0, 1, . . . , s + 1]k , Diu1 ,...,ik denotes all the functions D u ∈ Nu such that
D u (δu ) = (i1 , . . . , ik ). We want to prove for every node u ∈ F,
                                                                                   
                                                M
                                                            Fe′   (u,Ddu ,...,d )        ←→ Feu .               (B.5)
                                                                         1     k
                                            (d1 ,...,dk )


If we prove Equation B.5 for the root r, we prove Equation B.4 within Frege.
Construction of F ′ and Frege proof If u ∈ F is a leaf, then for every D u ∈ Nu , the node (u, D u )
is a leaf. If u is labeled by a field element and D u (δu ) = (0, . . . , 0), then (u, D u ) is labeled by the
                                                              | {z }
                                                                                                    k
same field element, and if D u (δu ) ̸= (0, . . . , 0) then (u, D u ) is labeled by 0. If u is labeled from
X1 (respectively Xi for i ∈ [k ]), then (u, D u ) is labeled by the same variable only if D u (δu ) =

                                                                      48
(1, 0, . . . , 0) (respectively D u (δu ) = (0, . . . , 1, . . . , 0)). Otherwise, we label it by 0. In this case, we
can clearly prove Equation B.5 within Frege.


Inductive Case : Let u, v, w ∈ F such that u = v + w. For every D u ∈ Nu , let D v ∈ Nv be
the function that agrees with D u on {0, 1, . . . , δu } and D v (δv ) = D u (δu ). Similarly, consider such
D w ∈ Nw . Then we have the following connection (u, D u ) = (v, D v ) + (w, D w ) in F ′ . This implies

                                                                                 Fb′ (u,Du ) := Fb′ (v,Dv ) + Fb′ (w,Dw )
                                 If D u (δu ) = (i1 , . . . , ik ) then we have the following,                                                                                        (B.6)
                                                             Fb′ (u,Diu ,...,i ) := Fb′ (v,Div ,...,i ) + Fb′ (w,Diw ,...,i ) .
                                                                          1       k                              1      k                       1        k


Hence, we have the following tautology,
                                                                                                                M
                                          Fe′ (u,Diu ,...,i ) ←→ Fe′ (v,Div ,...,i )                                  Fe′ (w,Diw ,...,i ) .                                           (B.7)
                                                     1       k                                  1       k                          1       k


By the inductive hypothesis,
                                                                    M                                                                     M
                                                Fev ↔                            Fe′ (v,Div ,...,i )                    Few ↔                           Fe′ (w,Diw ,...,i )
                                                                                                1       k                                                          1    k
                                                                 (i1 ,...,ik )                                                         (i1 ,...,ik )
                                                     M
                      =⇒ Fev ⊕ Few ↔                              ( Fe′ (v,Div ,...,i ) ⊕ Fe′ (w,Diw ,...,i ) )                                 we can prove                          (B.8)
                                                                                      1    k                          1       k
                                                 (i1 ,...,ik )
                                                M
                        =⇒ Feu ←→                            Fe(u,Diu ,...,i )                      this follows from Equation B.7.
                                                                         1        k
                                             (i1 ,...,ik )


   Let u = v × w and D u ∈ Nu be such that D u (u) = (d1 , . . . , dk ).
Then, (u, D u ) = ∑id11=0 ∑id22=0 · · · ∑idkk=0 (v, Div1 ,...,ik )(w, Ddw1 −i1 ,...,dk −ik ). That is,

                                                                                      i1       i2                ik
                                             Fb′ (u,Diu ,...,i ) := ∑ ∑ · · · ∑ Fb′ (v,Dvj ,...,j ) Fb′ (w,Diw − j ,...,i − j )
                                                         1         k                                                                1       k                  1   1    k     k
                                                                                 j1 =0 j2 =0                    jk =0                                                                 (B.9)
                   =⇒      Fe′ (u,Diu ,...,i ) ↔ ⊕ij11 =0 (· · · (⊕ijkk =0 ( Fe′ (v,Dvj ,...,j ) ∧ Fe′ (w,Diw − j ,...,i − j ) ) · · · ).
                                    1       k                                          1      k             1 1         k k

                                                                 M                                                                      M
                 Feu ←→ Fev ∧ Few ↔ (                                                 Fe′ (v,Div ,...,i ) ) ∧ (                                              Fe′ (w,Dwj ,...,j ) )
                                                                                                    1       k                                                           1     k
                                                       (i1 ,...,ik )                                                               ( j1 ,...,jk )
                                                    0≤i1 ,...,ik ≤sv +1                                                       0≤ j1 ,...,jk ≤sw +1

                                                    (⊕ij11 =0 · · · (⊕ijkk =0 ( Fe′ (v,Dvj ,...,j ) ∧ Fe′ (w,Diw − j ,...,i − j ) )) · · · )
                                     M
                         ↔
                                 ( j1 ,...,jk )
                                                                                                                 1        k                         1    1     k   k                 (B.10)
                             0≤ j1 ,...,jk ≤su +1
                                                                 M
                                             ↔                                        Fe′ (u,Diu ,...,i )             follows from Equation B.9.
                                                                                                    1       k
                                                     (i1 ,...,ik )
                                                  0≤i1 ,...,ik ≤su +1




                                                                                           49
    To show within Frege that the homogeneous partially commutative formula F is identically
0, we first convert F into a layered homogeneous ABP A F that computes the same polynomial.
Following [LTW18], we establish equations that witness A F computes the zero polynomial.
    Since Frege operates on formulas rather than ABPs, we translate this argument back to for-
mulas by associating each partial ABP in A F with a unique induced formula in F that computes
the same polynomial. Let Fe be the Boolean formula obtained from the homogeneous partially
commutative formula F over GF(2) via Definition 3.1.


B.3    Translation Between Formulas and ABPs

We first eliminate Boolean constants from Fe using the following lemma from [LTW18]. That is, we
transform Fe into a constant-free formula by applying standard Boolean equivalences. A Formula
is called constant-free if there is no leaf labelled by constants. Although the lemma is stated for
noncommutative formulas in [LTW18], it applies verbatim to partially commutative formulas.

Lemma B.11. ([LTW18, Lemma 4.10]) Let F be a non-constant partially commutative homogeneous
formula over GF(2) that computes the zero polynomial. Then there exists a constant-free partially commu-
tative formula F ′ of size poly(| F |) that computes the zero polynomial, such that Fe ⊢ Fe′ .

   Next, given a partially commutative homogeneous constant-free formula F, we construct
the corresponding homogeneous partially commutative ABP A F following the construction of
[Nis91]. The construction proceeds inductively as follows.

    • If u = v + w is a node of F and the ABPs Av and Aw have already been constructed, then
      Au is obtained by taking the parallel composition of Av and Aw , merging their source nodes
      into a single source and their sink nodes into a single sink. The resulting ABP computes the
      sum of the polynomials computed by Av and Aw .
    • If u = v × w, then Au is obtained by sequentially composing Av and Aw : the sink of Av is
      identified with the source of Aw , and the source of Av and the sink of Aw serve as the source
      and sink of Au , respectively.


Tracking computation in F corresponding to computation done A F

The arguments are the same as those of [LTW18], but we recall them here as well for completeness.
Firstly, we need the following two notions defined in their work.
Definition B.12 (Induced formula [LTW18]). Given a formula F, let F ′ be a sub-formula of F. Assume
{u1 , . . . , us } are nodes in F ′ and {α1 , . . . , αs } are elements of F. Then F ′ (u1 = α1 , . . . , us = αs ) is called
the induced formula from F.                                                                                                 ♢
Definition B.13 (v-part [LTW18]). Let F be a formula and A F be the corresponding ABP for F with source
and sink nodes s, t, respectively. For any node v ∈ A F , the v-part of F is an induced formula computing the

                                                             50
polynomial A F [v, t]. Although a formula may admit multiple v-parts in general, for homogeneous formulas
and their corresponding homogeneous ABPs, we define a canonical v-part for every node v ∈ A F , denoted
by Fv∗ .                                                                                               ♢
   We now consider a map g : {nodes of A F } → {nodes of F } ∪ {∅} where g(u) = v if the
polynomial computed by F at v is the polynomial computed between u and t in A F .
   The definition is given by induction and can be found in [LTW18]. We recall it here.


Base case. Let F be the formula u = x. The corresponding ABP A F consists of a single edge
  x
 → t. We define g(s) := u and g(t) := ∅.
s−


Inductive case (addition). Let F = G + H, where u, v, w are the roots of F, G, H, respectively,
with u = v + w. Let AG , A H be the corresponding ABPs, and let g1 , g2 be the associated maps with
g1 (s) = v and g2 (s) = w. We abuse notation by denoting the source and sink nodes of both ABPs
by s and t.
    The ABP A F is obtained using the parallel composition of AG and A H . The map g is defined
by                                     
                                       
                                       
                                        u,        if ui is the source node,
                                       
                                       
                                        g (u ), if u ∈ A ,
                                       
                                          1 i          i      G
                            g ( ui ) =                                                       (B.14)
                                       
                                       
                                        g2 (ui ), if ui ∈ A H ,
                                       
                                       
                                       ∅,
                                       
                                                   if ui is the sink node.

Inductive case (multiplication). If F = G · H, then A F is obtained by sequentially composing
AG and A H . The source of A F is the source of AG , and the sink of AG is identified with the source
of A H . The map g is defined as the union of g1 and g2 , except at the merged node ut , where we set

                                             g(ut ) := g2 (s),

with s denoting the source of A H .
   Now, to derive the induced formulas explicitly corresponding to the nodes of the ABP, we
need the following function.


Definition of the function D. We then define a function D that takes as input a homogeneous
sub-formula Fu and a node v ∈ F, and outputs an induced sub-formula of F. Although D is defined
for all nodes of F, we only apply it to nodes in the image of g. Note that constants introduced in
D do not appear in the original constant-free formula F.
    For every node u ∈ F, define D ( Fu , u) := Fu . If u is not a node of F, then D ( F, u) is undefined.
The function D is defined inductively from the leaves upwards.


                                                    51
   Let G, H be homogeneous sub-formulas of F. For a +-node,
                                                    
                                                     D ( G, u) + 0,         u ∈ G,
                                 D ( G + H, u) =                                                 (B.15)
                                                    0 + D ( H, u),          u ∈ H.

For a ×-node,                                       
                                                     D ( G, u) × H,         u ∈ G,
                                 D ( G × H, u) =                                                 (B.16)
                                                    1 × D ( H, u),          u ∈ H.

Definition of the v-part. Finally, for a node v ∈ A F , define Fv∗ := D ( F, g(v)). Let r be the root of
F. Since g(s) = r, where s is the source node of A F , we have Fs∗ = D ( F, r ) = F, which computes
the same polynomial F̂ as the original homogeneous formula F.
    Following the notation that has been defined, [LTW18] shows,

                             Fv∗ ⊢                 ∑                    A F [v, u] · Fu∗ .
                                     u: u has an incoming edge from v

That is, we can prove the following tautology within Frege:

                           Fv∗     ↔                 ∑                    A F [v, u] · Fu∗ .
                                       u: u has an incoming edge from v


Thus, it is enough to argue about the partially commutative ABP A F , which is what we do now.


B.4   Refined Translation Between Formulas and ABPs

To handle partial commutativity, we represent polynomials as sums of monomials over a fixed
bucket, with coefficients given by polynomials over the remaining buckets. We need this view-
point to be incorporated directly into the underlying computational model (ABPs or formulas).
Note that even though the following construction works for any constant k, we present it for
k = 2.
    In particular, starting from the homogeneous partially commutative ABP A F over the variable
set X = X1 ⊔ X2 , we first partially homogenize it with respect to the first bucket X1 . The goal is to
transform A F into an equivalent ABP A′F computing the same polynomial such that:

   • each edge label of A′F is a homogeneous linear form over X1 , and
   • the coefficients of these linear forms are noncommutative ABPs over F⟨ X2 ⟩.

   We achieve this by applying the homogenization procedure of Lemma B.17.

Lemma B.17. [ACM24, Lemma 12] Let f ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Xk ⟩ be a partially commutative polynomial
of degree d computed by an ABP of size s. Then for any 1 ≤ i ≤ k, we can efficiently homogenize the ABP

                                                        52
over the variable set Xi , and the coefficients ∈ F ⟨ X1 ⊔ . . . Xi−1 ⊔ Xi+1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Xk ⟩ can also be computed
by partially commutative ABPs of size O(sd).


B.4.1        Refined ABP Construction

Recall that F is a partially commutative homogeneous constant-free formula over the variable set
X = X1 ⊔ X2 , and A F is the corresponding homogeneous partially commutative ABP of size s and
depth d computing the same polynomial.
                                                                             (1)            (2)
   Thus, every edge label in A F from ui,j to ui+1,ℓ is of the form L j,ℓ = L j,ℓ ( X1 ) + L j,ℓ ( X2 ), where
            (i )
each L j,ℓ is a homogeneous noncommutative linear form over the variable set Xi .


First stage: degree tracking. We first construct an intermediate ABP A                 eF that explicitly tracks
the accumulated X1 -degree. This is the first step in the homogenization procedure of [ACM24,
Lemma 12].
                                                 (0) (1)               (d)
    For each node ui,j of A F , introduce nodes ui,j , ui,j , . . . , ui,j in A
                                                                              eF , where the superscript records
the accumulated X1 -degree.
                                                                                                      (1)
                 Li                           (1)         (2)                           i   (1)   L
Base Case: Let s −
                 →                                                       eF contains s −−
                    u1,i in A F , where Li = Li ( X1 ) + Li ( X2 ). Then A               → u1,i and
      (2)
  Li          (0)
s −−→ u1,i .
                                                                                                                   (1)
                        L j,ℓ                                                                               ( p) L j,ℓ
Inductive Step: If ui,j −→ ui+1,ℓ is an edge of A F , then for every p ∈ {0, . . . , d}, A
                                                                                         eF contains u −−→
                                                                                                      i,j
                                  (2)
 ( p +1)                ( p) L j,ℓ ( p)
ui+1,ℓ when p < d, and ui,j −−→ ui+1,ℓ .
   Thus, an edge labeled by a linear form in X1 increases the tracked degree by one, whereas an
edge labeled by a linear form in X2 preserves it.
   For a node ui,j of A F , we write ( A F [s, ui,j ])( p) to denote the X1 -degree-p homogeneous com-
ponent of the polynomial computed by A F [s, ui,j ]. The following claim follows directly from the
construction.

                                                                     eF [s, u( p) ] = A F [s, ui,j ] ( p) , where
                                                                                                    
Claim B.18. For every node ui,j of A F and every p ∈ {0, . . . , d}, A       i,j
(·)( p) denotes the X1 -degree-p homogeneous component.
                                                 eF [s, t( p) ] computes the X1 -degree-p homogeneous
   In particular, if t is the sink of A F , then A
component of A F [s, t]. The size of A
                                     eF is O(sd).


Second stage: compression of the X2 -edges. The ABP A    eF is not yet in the form required by the
Witness Theorem: it contains edges that preserve the X1 -degree. Following the second step of the
homogenization procedure in [ACM24, Lemma 12], we eliminate these degree-preserving edges.
                                                                     (q)
    For nodes v(q) and u(q) of A
                               eF having the same X1 -degree q, let Cv,u ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩ denote the sum
                                  ( q ) ( q )
of the weights of all paths from v to u that use only degree-preserving edges. Equivalently,


                                                       53
these are precisely the paths whose edge labels involve only variables from X2 . Since the degree-q
                                                      (q)
subgraph is an acyclic subgraph of A      eF , every Cv,u is computed by a noncommutative ABP over
X2 of size O(sd).
    Fix an X1 -degree r ∈ {1, . . . , d}. We construct an ABP A′F,r computing AeF [s, t(r) ]. Its layers are
indexed by the accumulated X1 -degree q = 0, 1, . . . , r.
    The source is s, which lies in degree layer 0. For 1 ≤ q < r, the nodes in degree layer q are
the nodes v(q) which can occur immediately after the q-th X1 -edge of a path in A    eF . The final layer
consists only of the sink t(r) .
                                                                                 (q)
    Consider 0 ≤ q < r − 1. For nodes v(q) and w(q+1) , define the edge label Gv,w by summing over
                      (1)
                    Lu,w                (q)          ( q ) (1)
all X1 -edges u(q) −−→ w(q+1) of A
                                 eF : Gv,w  := ∑u Cv,u Lu,w .
    Since variables from X1 commute with variables from X2 in the partially commutative algebra,
                                                               (q)             (q)                 (q)
every such label can be written uniquely in the form Gv,w = ∑nj=1 1 x1,j f v,w,j , where every f v,w,j ∈
F⟨ X2 ⟩ is computable by a noncommutative ABP of size poly(s, d).
    For the final transition, we must also absorb all degree-preserving X2 -paths occurring after
                                                (r −1)             (r −1) (1) (r )
the last X1 -edge. For a node v(r−1) , define Gv,t        := ∑u,w Cv,u Lu,w Cw,t . Again, using the com-
                                              (r −1)               (r −1)                                  (r −1)
mutation between the two buckets, Gv,t                = ∑nj=1 1 x1,j f v,t,j , where all the coefficients f v,t,j are
computed by poly(s, d)-size noncommutative ABPs over X2 .
    Thus every edge of A′F,r goes from degree layer q to degree layer q + 1, and every edge label has
the form ∑nj=1 1 x1,j f j ,     f j ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩, with each f j computed by a polynomial-size noncommutative
ABP.
    Every path in A       eF from s to t(r) has a unique decomposition into r occurrences of X1 -edges,
separated by possibly empty paths consisting only of X2 -edges. The construction above contracts
precisely these intervening X2 -paths. Therefore, A′F,r [s, t(r) ] = A         eF [s, t(r) ] = ( A F [s, t])(r) .
    Hence A′F,r computes exactly the X1 -degree-r homogeneous component of the polynomial
computed by A F . Moreover, A′F,r has polynomial size in s and d, and every coefficient occurring
on an edge is computed by a poly(s, d)-size noncommutative ABP over X2 .
    For r = 0, the homogeneous component contains only variables from X2 . In this case no com-
pression or witness construction is required: the resulting identity is a noncommutative identity
over X2 and can be handled directly using [LTW18].


B.4.2   Tracking the Partially Homogenized ABP by Induced Formulas

Let F be a fully homogeneous, constant-free, partially commutative formula over F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ ob-
tained after Raz’s homogenisation. Let A F be the corresponding homogeneous layered ABP ob-
tained from F using Nisan’s construction.
    By the construction of Li, Tzameret and Wang [LTW18], there exists a map g : Nodes( A F ) →
Nodes( F ) and a recursively defined operator D such that, for every node v ∈ A F , Fv∗ := D ( F, g(v))
is an induced formula satisfying cFv∗ = A F [v, t]. Moreover, every formula Fv∗ has size sO(log s) .


                                                         54
      Fix an X1 -degree r ∈ {1, . . . , d} and consider the compressed ABP A′F,r constructed in the
previous subsection. For simplicity, throughout this subsection we write A′F for A′F,r .
      Recall that a node v(q) in the q-th layer of A′F records that exactly q variables from X1 have
already been encountered along a path from the source. Therefore, from such a node to the sink
t(r) , the remaining X1 -degree is r − q.
      The following lemma identifies the polynomial computed from every node of the compressed
ABP to the sink.

Lemma B.19. For every node v(q) of A′F , where 0 ≤ q ≤ r, A′F [v(q) , t(r) ] = ( A F [v, t])(r−q) , where (·)(r−q)
denotes the homogeneous component of X1 -degree r − q.

Proof. Consider first the intermediate degree-tracking ABP A              eF . A path from v(q) to t(r) increases
the tracked X1 -degree from q to r. Consequently, it contains exactly r − q edges labeled by linear
forms in X1 . Hence, A eF [v(q) , t(r) ] = ( A F [v, t])(r−q) .
    The second compression does not change this path polynomial. Indeed, every path from v(q)
to t(r) admits a unique decomposition into r − q X1 -edges separated by paths involving only X2 -
                              (q)
edges. The edge labels Gv,w of A′F are defined precisely by summing over these intervening X2 -
paths. Therefore, A′F [v(q) , t(r) ] = A eF [v(q) , t(r) ]. Combining the two equalities proves the lemma.

   We now associate a formula with every node of A′F . For every node v ∈ A F , apply Raz’s
homogenization procedure to the induced formula Fv∗ with respect to X1 . For a node v(q) of the
compressed ABP A′F , define Fv∗(q) to be the formula computing the X1 -degree-(r − q) homogeneous
component of Fv∗ .
                     (r − q )
          ∗
   Thus, Fd
          v(q)
               =    Fv∗
                    c           . Using the definition of Fv∗ and Lemma B.19, we obtain Fd  ∗
                                                                                            v(q)
                                                                                                 =
( A F [v, t])(r−q) = A′F [v(q) , t(r) ].
     Hence every node of the compressed ABP A′F is represented by a formula obtained by homog-
enizing an induced formula of F. In particular, these formulas are derivable from the original
formula inside Frege by the same homogenization reasoning used earlier.
                                                                                                 2
Lemma B.20. For every node v(q) of A′F , the induced formula Fv∗(q) has size at most sO(log s) .

Proof. By [LTW18], | Fv∗ | ≤ sO(log s) . Furthermore, depth( Fv∗ ) = O(log s), since Fv∗ is an induced
formula of the balanced formula F.
       Applying Raz’s homogenization to Fv∗ produces every homogeneous component with size
                  ∗
                                                          O(log s)         2
| Fv∗ | O(depth( Fv )) . Therefore, | Fv∗(q) | ≤ sO(log s)           = sO(log s) . Thus every node of the compressed
partially homogeneous ABP can be represented by a quasi-polynomial-size formula derivable in-
side Frege.




                                                        55
B.4.3    Local identities for the partially homogenized ABP

Fix r and continue to write A′F for the compressed ABP A′F,r . By construction, every edge from
                                             (q)                       (q)                            (q)
layer q to layer q + 1 has a label Gv,u = ∑nj=1 1 x1,j f v,u,j , where each f v,u,j ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩ is computed by a
polynomial-size noncommutative ABP.
   Since Fd ∗ = A′ [ v(q) , t(r ) ], the recursive computation in the compressed ABP gives the follow-
            v(q)    F
ing local identity.

Lemma B.21 (Local identity for A′F ). Let v(q) be a node of A′F with 0 ≤ q < r. Then

                                                               ∑
                                                                                    (q)
                                         Fv∗(q) =                                 Gv,u · Fu∗(q+1) ,
                                                    u:(v(q) ,u(q+1) )∈ E( A′F )


where at the final layer we regard Ft∗(r) = 1.

Proof. Semantically, the identity follows immediately from the recursive computation of the ABP
                                                       (q)
A′F : A′F [v(q) , t(r) ] = ∑u:(v(q) ,u(q+1) )∈E( A′ ) Gv,u · A′F [u(q+1) , t(r) ]. Substituting A′F [u(q+1) , t(r) ] = \ Fu∗(q+1)
                                                  F
gives the required algebraic identity.
     We additionally note that this identity is obtained syntactically from the local identities of
the intermediate ABP A       eF . Indeed, starting from the local recursion at v(q) , repeatedly substitute
through degree-preserving X2 -edges until the next X1 -edge is reached. Since A                         eF is acyclic, this
procedure terminates after polynomially many such substitutions. The resulting coefficients are
                                          (q)                                                                        (q)
exactly the path polynomials Cv,u used in the definition of the compressed edge labels Gv,u . Thus
the compression preserves not only the computed polynomial but also gives an explicit derivation
of the above local identity.

    Writing the identity layer by layer, suppose v = uq,j is a node in the q-th X1 -degree layer
                                                                                                            (q)
of the compressed ABP and its outgoing edges go to uq+1,ℓ . Then Fu∗q,j = ∑ℓ Gj,ℓ Fu∗q+1,ℓ , where
  (q)                 (q)                 (q)
Gj,ℓ = ∑na=
          1
            1 x1,a f j,ℓ,a and every f j,ℓ,a is computed by a polynomial-size noncommutative ABP over
X2 .

Corollary B.22. For every node v(q) of A′F , Frege derives the Booleanization of the local identity from
Lemma B.21 with quasi-polynomial-size overhead.

Proof. The compression from A    eF to A′ is obtained by polynomially many applications of associa-
                                          F
tivity, distributivity, and substitution through degree-preserving X2 -edges. After Booleanization
over GF(2), these operations correspond to standard Frege reasoning involving XOR and conjunc-
tion.
                                      (q)      (q)
    Every coefficient polynomial Cv,u and f v,u,j is represented by a polynomial-size noncommu-
tative ABP over X2 . Using the standard divide-and-conquer conversion, each such ABP is rep-
resented by a quasi-polynomial-size noncommutative formula. Whenever two such representa-


                                                                   56
tions compute the same polynomial, their equality is a noncommutative identity over X2 , and its
Booleanization has a quasi-polynomial-size Frege proof by [LTW18].
     Therefore Frege can formalize each step of the compression and derive the Booleanization of
             (q)
Fv(q) = ∑u Gv,u Fu∗(q+1) with quasi-polynomial-size overhead. Since the number of nodes, edges, and
  ∗

compression steps is polynomial in the size of A   eF , the total proof size remains quasi-polynomial
in the size of the original formula F.

B.5   Identity Witnesses

Note that after the partial homogenization procedure and refined tracking (Subsection B.3, Sub-
section B.4) on the partially commutative formula F ∈ F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩, we obtain an ABP A′F that
is homogeneous over X1 and every coefficient has polynomial size non commutative ABP over
X2 . For each nonzero X1 -degree r ∈ {1, . . . , d}, the construction gives such an ABP A′F,r ; the X1 -
degree-zero component is a noncommutative identity over X2 and is handled directly by [LTW18].
Fix one nonzero-degree partially homogeneous ABP. For simplicity, we drop the X1 -degree index
and denote it by A′F .
    Using the refined operator D, for every node at every layer v = u(r) of A′F , the induced formula
Fv∗ computes A′F [v, t]. This formula computes a polynomial in F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ that is homogeneous
over X1 .
    We now apply the identity witness lemma, which is restated below. The proof of this identity
follows from our white-box identity testing algorithm and a Factorization Lemma (Lemma 3.5)
and is given in Subsection 3.4.
Lemma 1.6. (Witness Theorem for Partially Commutative ABP Identities) Let F be a field and A be a
partially commutative homogeneous (over X1 ) ABP in F ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ of size s computing the identically zero
polynomial. Let d be the depth of A, and let wi denote the width of the i-th layer. Then there exist 2d − 1
matrices λ0′ , . . . , λ′d−1 and T1′ , . . . , Td′ −1 such that
                               


                            λi′ ∈ Fwi ×wi ⟨ X2 ⟩ ,      Ti′ ∈ Fwi−1 ×wi ⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩ ,

and the following hold:
                                      λ′d−i · Ai = 0     ∀ i = 1, 2, . . . , d,                       (1.6)

                          λ′d−i · Ai = Td′ −i+1 · λ′d−i+1 · Ai−1      ∀ i = 2, 3, . . . , d,          (1.7)

                                      λ0′ := 1,        λ0′ · Ad = Ad = 0.                             (1.8)

Moreover, every entry of the matrices λi′ and Tj′ is computable by a polynomial-size noncommutative ABP.

B.6   The Frege Simulation

Throughout this section, the field is F = GF(2).

                                                        57
    Let F be a fully homogeneous, partially commutative formula over F⟨ X1 ⊔ X2 ⟩, and let A F
be the corresponding homogeneous ABP obtained by Nisan’s construction. For every r ∈ [d],
let A′F,r be the compressed partially homogeneous ABP obtained from A F by the construction of
Lemma B.17; its sink is denoted by t(r) . For a fixed r, we write v( p) for a node in the X1 degree-p
layer of A′F,r .
    By the previous subsection, every node v( p) of A′F is associated with a formula Fv∗( p) satisfying

                                            ∗ = A ′ [ v ( p ) , t (r ) ].
                                           Fd
                                            v( p) F,r
                                                                      2
    Moreover, every formula Fv∗( p) has size at most sO(log s) and admits a quasi-polynomial size
Frege derivation from the original formula F. The X1 -degree-zero component is treated separately
as a noncommutative formula over X2 .
    We are finally ready to prove Theorem B.2, which we recall first.

Theorem B.2. Let X = X1 ⊔ X2 be partially commutative variables, where | X1 | = n1 , | X2 | = n2 , and
N = n1 + n2 . Let F be a partially commutative formula of size s over F, with variable set X, that computes
the zero polynomial. Then there exists a constant c > 0 such that the Boolean formula ¬ Fe( X ) has a Frege
                      c
proof of size s(log s) .


Booleanization

Following Definition 3.1, for every algebraic formula P over F we denote by Pe its Booleanization,
obtained by replacing + with ⊕ and · with ∧.


Booleanization of the homogeneous decomposition

Let s and t denote the source and sink of the homogeneous ABP A F . After partial homogenization
with respect to X1 , the polynomial A F [s, t] decomposes into its X1 -homogeneous components of
degrees 0, 1, . . . , d. For every p ∈ {1, . . . , d}, let A′F,p be the compressed ABP from Subsection B.4,
                             ∗ be the induced formula associated with its source. By Lemma B.19,
with sink t( p) , and let Fs,p

                                            ′          ( p)
                                                                           ( p)
                                    ∗
                                    s,p = A F,p [ s, t
                                   Fc                       ] = A F [s, t]       .

                ∗ denote the X -degree-zero component formula; it is a noncommutative formula
For p = 0, let Fs,0             1
over X2 . By the correctness of the partial homogenization,

                                   d                                                  d
                      A F [s, t] = ∑ A′F,p [s, t( p) ]. Consequently,            F = ∑ Fs,p
                                                                                        ∗
                                                                                            .
                                  p =0                                               p =0




                                                        58
   Applying Booleanization yields
                                                                      d
                                                                      M
                                                             Fe ≡             ∗
                                                                             Ff
                                                                              s,p .                                   (B.23)
                                                                      p =0



Claim B.24. Frege admits a polynomial-size proof of Equation B.23. Moreover,

                                                          d
                                                          ^
                                                                   ∗
                                                                ¬ Ff
                                                                   s,p ⊢ ¬ F.
                                                                           e
                                                         p =0


Proof. By the correctness of the partial homogenization and the construction of the formulas Fs,p∗ ,

we have F = ∑dp=0 Fs,p
                     ∗ . Booleanizing this identity yields Equation B.23. Since Booleanization over

GF(2) replaces addition with XOR, Frege derives this equivalence with a polynomial overhead
from the local homogenization identities.
    Assume that dp=0 ¬ Ff ∗
                 V
                          s,p holds. Then every summand on the right-hand side of Equation B.23
is equivalent to ⊥. Using the associativity of XOR together with the propositional equivalence
A ⊕ B ≡ ( A ∧ ¬ B) ∨ (¬ A ∧ B), Frege derives that

                                                            d
                                                            M
                                                                    ∗
                                                                    s,p ≡ ⊥.
                                                                   Ff
                                                            p =0


Finally, by Equation B.23, Frege concludes ¬ F.
                                             e The proof size is polynomial in the size of Equa-
tion B.23.


Booleanization of the witness identities

Fix r ∈ [d] and consider the compressed ABP A′F,r of depth r, with source s and sink t(r) . Since

                                                         ∗       ′         (r )
                                                         s,r = A F,r [ s, t ],
                                                        Fc

we may apply the witness theorem (Lemma 1.6) to this ABP.. Hence, there exist witness matrices

                                            ′              ′                   ′              ′
                                           λr,0 , . . . , λr,r −1 ,           Tr,1 , . . . , Tr,r −1 ,


whose entries are computed by polynomial-size noncommutative ABPs and which satisfy

                      ′         (r )
                     λr,r −i · Ai      = 0,                                                              1 ≤ i ≤ r,   (B.25)
                      ′         (r )      ′            ′                     (r )
                     λr,r −i · Ai      = Tr,r −i +1 · λr,r −i +1 · Ai −1 ,                               2 ≤ i ≤ r.   (B.26)

       (r )
Here Ai       is the vector of partial ABPs from the nodes in layer r − i to the sink t(r) .


                                                                      59
                                                             (r )
   By Lemma B.19, each entry of Ai                                  is computed by the corresponding induced formula F ∗(r) .
                                                                                                                                                ur−i,j
Booleanizing the witness identities therefore gives the following propositional identities.


Vanishing identities. For every layer i and every row index a,
                                                                                                 
                                                       M
                                                                     ′^                 ∗
                                                                         −i [ a, j ] ∧ Fu(r)          ≡ ⊥.                                     (B.27)
                                                                    λr,r               ]
                                                         j                              r −i,j




Transition identities. For every 2 ≤ i ≤ r and every row index a,
                                                                                                                                   !
        M                                              M                                    M
                  ′^                 ∗                               ′ ^                               ′ ^                  ∗
                      −i [ a, j ] ∧ F (r)       ≡                   Tr,r −i +1 [ a, j ] ∧                  −i +1 [ j, ℓ] ∧ F (r)           .   (B.28)
                 λr,r               ]                                                                 λr,r                 ^
                                   ur−i,j                                                                                  ur−i+1,ℓ
         j                                               j                                    ℓ


Key Frege reflection step.

Claim B.29. Each Booleanized identity in Equation B.27 and Equation B.28 has a quasi-polynomial size
Frege proof.

Proof. We prove that each Booleanized identity in Equation B.27 and Equation B.28 admits a Frege
proof of size quasi-polynomial in | A′F |.
    Fix r ∈ [d] and write A′F,r for the compressed ABP of depth r. Now consider each ABP
A′F,r [s, t(r) ] where t was the sink node in A F , and A′F,r [s, t(r) ] computes the X1 -degree r homoge-
                                                                                                 n           o
neous component of A F . For each such r, we have a set of witness identities, denoted as λr,i      ′ , T′ .
                                                                                                         r,i
Moreover, we have the length of A′F,r is r, which is the total degree and assume the width at layer
i, wr,i .

                                                            ′                                                    (r )
Vanishing identities Fix r ∈ [d]. We consider the identity λr,r −i · Ai                                                 = 0. We first treat the base
layer i = 1.
                                                  (r )
Base case (i = 1). Each entry of A1 is a homogeneous linear form in the X1 -variables with coeffi-
cients in F⟨ X2 ⟩. Thus, for every t ∈ [wr,r−1 ],

                                                                    n1
                                                (r )
                                            A1 [t] = ∑ x1,j · f t,j ,                         f t,j ∈ F⟨ X2 ⟩.
                                                                    j =1


   Therefore, the identity for every p ∈ wr,r−1

                                                                                       (r )
                                                             ∑ λr,r
                                                                ′
                                                                    −1 [ p, t ] · A1 [ t ] = 0
                                                              t




                                                                                60
is equivalent to the collection of identities

                                            ∀ j ∈ [ n1 ],              ∑ λr,r
                                                                          ′
                                                                              −1 [ p, t ] · f t,j = 0.
                                                                           t

   Each polynomial ∑t λr,r  ′
                              −1 [ p, t ] · f t,j is computed by a noncommutative ABP over X2 of size
         ′
poly(| A F |). Hence, by [LTW18], each Boolean tautology
                                                            M                                    
                                                        ¬              ′
                                                                           −1 [ p, t ] ∧ f t,j
                                                                      ^
                                                                      λr,r               e
                                                              t

has a quasi-polynomial size Frege proof. Combining these for all j and substituting the local
induced-formula identities, Frege derives the Booleanized identity Equation B.27 for i = 1.

   General i. Assume that the Booleanized transition identities (Equation B.28) have already been
proved for every layer. We show that the Booleanized vanishing identities follow.
   The witness identities satisfy

                                  ′          (r )      ′            ′                      (r )
                                 λr,r −i · Ai       = Tr,r −i +1 · λr,r −i +1 · Ai −1                    ∀ 2 ≤ i ≤ r.

By the base case proved above,
                                                                ′               (r )
                                                               λr,r −1 · A1 = 0.

Suppose inductively that
                                                              ′                     (r )
                                                             λr,r −i +1 · Ai −1 = 0.

Substituting this identity into the transition identity yields

                                                     ′              (r )      ′
                                                    λr,r −i · Ai           = Tr,r −i +1 · 0 = 0.


Applying Booleanization, Frege derives the corresponding vanishing identity at layer i. There-
fore, once the transition identities are proved, the Booleanized vanishing identities for every layer
follow by induction on i.


Transition identities Fix i ∈ {2, . . . , r }. We consider the identity

                                             ′              (r )      ′            ′                     (r )
                                            λr,r −i · Ai           = Tr,r −i +1 · λr,r −i +1 · Ai −1 .


   Since this is a vector identity, it suffices to prove it entry-wise. Fix a row index p. Then the
above identity is equivalent to
                                                                                                                                               
                                        (r )                                                                                             (r )
         ∑           ′
                    λr,r −i [ p, t ] · Ai [ t ] =       ∑             ′
                                                                     Tr,r −i +1 [ p, t ] ·
                                                                                                     ∑            ′
                                                                                                                  λr,r −i +1 [ t, q ] · Ai −1 [ q ] .
                                                                                                                                                   
      t∈[wr,r−i ]                                   t∈[wr,r−i+1 ]                                 q∈[wr,r−i+1 ]


                                                                               61
We now reduce this identity to noncommutative ABP identities over X2 . Since the ABP is homo-
geneous over X1 , the layer transition satisfies
                                                                                         !
                                                               n1
                                            (r )                                                       (r )
                                                              ∑
                                                                            (r,i −1)
                                           Ai =                      x1,j M j                · A i −1 ,
                                                              j =1

               (r,i −1)
where each M j       is a matrix with entries in F⟨ X2 ⟩ computed by polynomial-size ABPs.
    Similarly, by construction of the witness matrices (see Lemma 1.6), the transition matrix admits
a linear expansion
                                                                          n1
                                                         −i +1 = ∑ x1,j Cj
                                                     ′                                   ( i −1)
                                                    Tr,r                                           ,
                                                                          j =1

              ( i −1)
where each Cj    has entries in F⟨ X2 ⟩ and is computable by polynomial-size ABPs.
  Substituting these expressions, the identity becomes
                                                       !                                                      !
                             n1                                                  n1
                                                                 (r )                                                               (r )
                             ∑                                                   ∑
                  ′                        (r,i −1)                                           ( i −1)                ′
                 λr,r −i ·          x1,j M j                 · A i −1 =                 x1,j Cj                   · λr,r − i +1 · A i −1 .
                             j =1                                                j =1


Since the variables x1,1 , . . . , x1,n1 appear as the leftmost noncommuting variables, it therefore suf-
fices to establish the following coefficient-wise identities for each x1,j ∀ j ∈ [n1 ]. That is,

                                   ′            (r,i −1)        (r )             ( i −1) ′         (r )
                                  λr,r −i M j                · A i −1 = C j              λr,r−i+1 · Ai−1 .

                                      ( i −1)
By Lemma 1.6, the matrices Cj      are constructed so that the following matrix identities hold over
F ⟨ X2 ⟩ :
                            ′       (r,i −1)    ( i −1) ′
                          λr,r −i M j        = Cj      λr,r−i+1 ∀ j ∈ [ n1 ].

Expanding these identities entry-wise, for each j ∈ [n1 ] and each pair ( a, b), we obtain noncom-
mutative polynomial identities

                                     ′            (r,i −1)                       ( i −1) ′      
                                    λr,r −i M j                [ a, b] = Cj              λr,r−i+1 [ a, b].

ach side is computed by a polynomial-size noncommutative ABP over X2 . Hence, by [LTW18],
the Booleanization of each such identity admits a quasi-polynomial size Frege proof. Since the
total number of such identities is at most n1 · w2 ≤ Nw2 (where w = maxi wr,i ), Frege can derive
all these Booleanized identities with a quasi-polynomial overhead. Using standard propositional
reasoning expressing matrix multiplication entry-wise over F, Frege combines these identities to
derive the Booleanization of the matrix identities

                                      ′           (r,i −1)              ( i −1) ′
                                     λr,r −i M j              = Cj             λr,r−i+1            ∀ j ∈ [ n1 ].


                                                                          62
Substituting these identities back into the coefficient-wise equalities, Frege derives the Booleaniza-
tion of
                             ′        (r,i −1)      (r )     ( i −1) ′         (r )
                            λr,r −i M j          · A i −1 = C j      λr,r−i+1 · Ai−1 .

Finally, recombining over all j ∈ [n1 ] using the linear expansion in X1 , Frege derives the
Booleanized transition identity Equation B.28..

Corollary B.30 (Frege proofs for partially homogeneous ABP identities). For every r ∈ {0, . . . , d},
if the X1 -homogeneous component of degree r computes the zero polynomial, then the Booleanized formula
¬ Ff∗
    s,r admits a quasi-polynomial-size Frege proof.

Proof. If r = 0, then Fs,0  ∗ is a noncommutative formula over X , so the claim follows directly
                                                                         2
from [LTW18]. Assume r ≥ 1. By the Witness Theorem (Lemma 1.6), the compressed ABP
                                           ′ }r −1 and { T ′ }r −1 that satisfy the vanishing and transi-
A′F,r [s, t(r) ] admits witness matrices {λr,i i =0       r,i i =1
tion identities. By Claim B.29, the Booleanizations of these identities have quasi-polynomial-size
Frege proofs. Applying the layer-by-layer propagation argument below, Frege derives ¬ Ff         ∗
                                                                                                 s,r .

   We are finally ready to combine the above ideas to write a Frege derivation as required in
Theorem B.2.

Theorem B.2. Let X = X1 ⊔ X2 be partially commutative variables, where | X1 | = n1 , | X2 | = n2 , and
N = n1 + n2 . Let F be a partially commutative formula of size s over F, with variable set X, that computes
the zero polynomial. Then there exists a constant c > 0 such that the Boolean formula ¬ Fe( X ) has a Frege
                      c
proof of size s(log s) .

Proof. As in [LTW18], we first balance the original size-s formula to logarithmic depth and ap-
ply Lemma B.3. Since F computes the zero polynomial, each fully homogeneous component also
computes zero, and Equation B.4 shows that it suffices to prove the desired Frege statement for
each such component. Thus, we may assume, as throughout this subsection, that F is fully homo-
geneous.
                                             ∗
     By Claim B.24, it suffices to derive ¬ Ff
                                             s,r for every X1 -homogeneous component. The degree-
zero component r = 0 is a noncommutative identity over X2 and is handled directly by [LTW18].
Fix r ∈ {1, . . . , d}. Throughout the remainder of the layer-by-layer argument, we consider the
compressed partially homogeneous ABP A′F,r [s, t(r) ]. For simplicity, we suppress the superscript
(r ) from the witness matrices.
                                                                  ′
     For every layer-distance i ∈ [r ] and every row index a of λr,r −i , define
                                                                                    
                                   Φi ( a ) =
                                                M
                                                         ′^                 ∗
                                                             −i [ a, t ] ∧ Fu(r)         .
                                                        λr,r               ]
                                                t                           r −i,t



                                                                               ′             (r )
By Lemma B.19, this is precisely the Booleanization of the a-th coordinate of λr,r −i Ai .



                                                          63
Base case. By Equation B.27, Frege derives ¬Φ1 ( a) for every row index a.


Induction step. Assume Frege has derived ¬Φi−1 (t) for every relevant row index t. By Equa-
tion B.28, Frege derives
                                     M                        
                          Φi ( a ) ↔    T′ ^ [ a, t] ∧ Φi−1 (t) .
                                                        r,r −i +1
                                                  t

Every conjunction on the right is false, so Frege derives ¬Φi ( a). Thus, the assertion propagates
through all r layers. At i = r, the backward vector is the single source-to-sink polynomial and
  ′ = 1. Hence,
λr,0
                                           Φr (1) = Ff
                                                     ∗
                                                     s,r ,

                     ∗
and Frege derives ¬ Ff
                     s,r .
   Together with the degree-zero case handled directly by [LTW18], Frege therefore derives

                                                ∗
                                             ¬ Ff        ∀r ∈ {0, . . . , d}.
                                                s,r


Finally, Claim B.24 yields ¬ F.
                             e


Proof size. Let s denote the size of the original partially commutative formula F. The construc-
tion first homogenizes F, then converts the resulting formula into a partially commutative ABP,
and finally partially homogenizes the ABP with respect to X1 . Let

                                                  N ′ := max | A′F,r |
                                                          1≤r ≤ d


denote the maximum size of a compressed partially homogeneous ABP (and enlarge N ′ if neces-
sary to dominate the size of the degree-zero component formula). By the previous size bounds,
we have N ′ ≤ sO(log s) . In particular, log N ′ = O(log2 s). The depth and width of every A′F,r are at
most N ′ .
    We first bound the size of the formulas occurring in the Frege proof. By the construction of the
                                                                      2
induced formulas, every formula Fv∗ has size at most sO(log ns) . Equivalently, in terms of N ′ , this is                o
                          ′
bounded by N ′O(log N ) . The entries of the witness matrices λr,i       ′ : r ∈ [1, . . . , d ], i ∈ [0, . . . , r − 1]
     n                                                  o
and Tr,i ′ : r ∈ [1, . . . , d ], i ∈ [1, . . . , r − 1] are computed by polynomial-sized noncommutative

ABPs. Using the standard ABP-to-formula conversion, each such entry can be represented by a
                                                        ′
noncommutative formula of size N ′O(log N ) . After Booleanization, these become Boolean formulas
of the same quasi-polynomial size.
    We next consider the Booleanized witness identities. For every fixed r, the proof of Claim B.29
reduces these identities to a polynomial number of noncommutative ABP identities over X2 . The
number of such identities is polynomial in N ′ . Each of these identities is computed by noncommu-
tative formulas of quasi-polynomial size in N ′ . Hence, by the Frege simulation of noncommutative

                                                           64
                                                                              O (1)   ′
identity testing in [LTW18], each identity has a Frege proof of size N ′O(log N ) . Therefore, since
only polynomially many such identities are used, the total size contributed by the NC identity
                        O (1) ′
proofs is still N ′O(log N ) .
    It remains to account for the layer-by-layer propagation. For each fixed X1 -degree r, there
are at most d layers and at most N rows in each layer. Thus, the propagation uses at most
O(dN ′ ) ≤ O( N ′2 ) steps. Each step uses one Booleanized witness identity and a polynomial num-
ber of propositional substitution and simplification steps. Hence, the additional number of Frege
lines needed for the propagation is polynomial in N ′ .
    There are at most d + 1 ≤ N ′ + 1 values of r. Thus, combining the proofs for all X1 -
homogeneous components introduces only another polynomial factor in N ′ . Consequently, the
                                         O (1) ′                                                  ′
complete Frege derivation has N ′O(log N ) lines, and every line has a size of at most N ′O(log N ) .
                                                  O (1) ′
Therefore, the total Frege proof size is N ′O(log N ) . Since N ≤ sO(log s) , we have log N ′ =
                                                           O (1)
O(log2 s). Hence, the Frege proof of ¬ Fe has size s(log s) . Thus, the Booleanization of the par-
tially commutative identity F = 0 admits a quasi-polynomial-size Frege proof in the size s of the
original formula.


C    Proof of Lemma 3.7
We first state some definitions that we need for the proof.
Definition C.1 (Free-Skew Field). [Coh95] For a field F and a set of noncommuting variables X, the free
skew field F⦓X⦔ is the smallest field containing the polynomial ring F ⟨ X ⟩.                        ♢
   We now recall the definition of shrunk subspaces used in the context of the noncommutative
rank computation [FR04, IQS18].
Definition C.2. [Shrunk Subspace] Let L = ∑in=1 xi · Ai ∈ Fk×m ⟨ X ⟩ be a noncommutative linear matrix,
where Ai ∈ Fk×m , and suppose that ncrank( L) = r < min{k, m}. A shrunk subspace for L is a
subspace T ⊆ Fm for which there exists a subspace W ⊆ Fk such that Ai · T ⊆ W for every i ∈ [n]
and dim( T ) > dim(W ). More generally, T is called a c-shrunk subspace if one can choose W with
dim( T ) − dim(W ) ≥ c.                                                                              ♢
    Next, we recall the notion of r-decomposability of linear matrices from [FR04].
Definition C.3. [r-Decomposable] A linear matrix L = ∑in=1 xi Ai ∈ Fk×m ⟨ X ⟩ is called r-decomposable
if there exist invertible matrices U ∈ Fk×k and V ∈ Fm×m such that
                                                "                    #
                                                    M[ X ]    0
                                   UL[ X ]V =                            ,                       (C.4)
                                                    B[ X ]   C[X ]

where the block B[ X ] has dimension p × q with p + q = r, ncrank( L) = r, and M, B, C being noncommu-
tative linear matrices.                                                                             ♢


                                                    65
    Given a linear matrix M, the following equivalent characterizations are known from the work
of [Coh95, FR04, IQS17, GGdOW20].

Theorem C.5. (Noncommutative rank of a linear matrix). Let L = ∑in=1 Ai xi ∈ Fℓ×m ⟨ X ⟩ be a linear
matrix and ℓ ≥ m. Then the following are equivalent:

   • The noncommutative rank of L is r.
   • There exist linear matrices L1 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×r and L2 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩r×m such that L = L1 · L2 .
   • L has an (m − r )-shrunk subspace, i.e. there exist a subspace T ⊆ Fm and a subspace W ⊆ Fℓ
     such that Ai T ⊆ W for every i ∈ [n] and dim( T ) − dim(W ) ≥ m − r.
   • L is r-decomposable, i.e. there exist invertible matrices U ∈ Fℓ×ℓ and V ∈ Fm×m such that
                                                         "            #
                                                             L′   0
                                             ULV =                        ,                      (C.6)
                                                             B    C

     where the zero block is of size i × j with i + j = ℓ + m − r.

    The existence of a shrunk subspace is equivalent to the fact the noncommutative rank is not
full.
    The classic result of Fortin and Reutenauer [FR04] gives a necessary and sufficient condition
for the decomposability of linear matrices. We state their result formally. Then we use their result
to obtain an explicit matrix factorization of linear matrices.

Theorem C.7 (Fortin- Reutenauer [FR04]). Let L = ∑in=1 xi · Ai ∈ Fℓ×m ⟨ X ⟩ be a noncommutative
linear matrix. Then L is r-decomposable if and only if ncrank( L) = r

    A linear matrix L is r-decomposable if and only if it has a shrunk subspace using Theorem C.5.
    We divide the proof of Lemma 3.7 into two parts. Given a linear matrix L, we first use [IQS18]
to construct a nontrivial shrunk subspace. We then exploit this subspace to obtain a zero block
following [FR04], which in turn yields a factorization of the input matrix.
    In the following lemma, we first show the construction of a nontrivial subspace.

Lemma C.8. Let L = ∑in=1 Ai xi ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×m be a noncommutative linear matrix with ncrank( L) = r <
min{ℓ, m}. Then we can find a basis of an (m − r )-shrunk subspace T ⊆ Fm .

Proof. We reduce the rectangular case to the square case. If ℓ < m, pad L with m − ℓ zero rows: for
every i ∈ [n], let              "          #
                                                                  n
                                     A
                                                            L=∑A
                                       i
                           bi =
                           A                  ∈ Fm × m ,    b        bi xi .
                                  0(m−ℓ)×m                      i =1

Then ncrank(bL) = r. Applying the square noncommutative-rank algorithm of [IQS18] gives an
(m − r )-shrunk subspace T ⊆ Fm . Since every image A
                                                    bi T lies in the first ℓ coordinates, the same

                                                    66
subspace T is an (m − r )-shrunk subspace for the original matrix L, after identifying the corre-
sponding image space with a subspace of Fℓ . This settles the case ℓ h< m.         i
    Assume henceforth that ℓ ≥ m. For every i ∈ [n], define A  ei = Ai 0
                                                                           ℓ×(ℓ−m)   ∈ Fℓ×ℓ , and
                     h     i
    L = ∑in=1 A
let e         ei xi = L 0 . Clearly, adding zero columns does not change the noncommutative
rank, and hence ncrank(e
                       L) = ncrank( L) = r.
    We now apply the noncommutative rank algorithm of [IQS18] to the square linear matrix e     L.
For sufficiently large fields this follows from [IQS18, Theorem 1.5], while for small finite fields,
and in particular for F = GF(2), we use [IQS18, Corollary 1.7]. Thus, in deterministic polynomial
time we obtain an (ℓ − r )-shrunk subspace T         e ⊆ Fℓ , together with a basis of T     e over the ground
field F.
    Since Te is an (ℓ − r )-shrunk subspace, by definition there exists a subspace W               e 0 ⊆ Fℓ such
that A   e ⊆W
      ei T    e 0 for every i ∈ [n] and dim( T      e) − dim(W  e 0 ) ≥ ℓ − r. We now replace this arbitrary
                                                               e := ∑n A
witnessing subspace by the canonical image space W                      i =1 i T. Clearly, W ⊆ W0 , and hence
                                                                             ee            e       e
dim( Te) − dim(W  e ) ≥ dim( T   e) − dim(W   e 0 ) ≥ ℓ − r. On the other hand, since ncrank(e        L) = r, the
maximum possible shrinkage is ℓ − r. Therefore, dim( T ) − dim(W ) = ℓ − r. Let Z := {0}m ⊕
                                                                   e            e
Fℓ−m = spanF {em+1 , . . . , eℓ } ⊆ Fℓ . The subspace Z corresponds exactly to the ℓ − m zero columns
introduced in the padding. Hence, A       ei Z = 0 for every i ∈ [n].
    We claim that Z ⊆ T. e Suppose otherwise. Then T           e′ := Te + Z satisfies dim( T  e′ ) > dim( T
                                                                                                          e). On
                                 ei annihilates Z, ∑n A    e e′       n                                     e′
the other hand, since every A                          i =1 i T = ∑i =1 Ai T = W. Consequently, dim( T ) −
                                                                            ee     e
dim(W e ) > ℓ − r, which contradicts the fact that the maximum shrinkage of e              L is ℓ − r. Therefore,
Z ⊆ T.e
      Consider now the canonical projection π : Fℓ → Fm onto the first m coordinates. Since
 ker(π ) = Z, define T := π ( T    e) ⊆ Fm . As Z ⊆ T,    e we have T ∼     = T/Z,
                                                                                e      and therefore dim( T ) =
 dim( T e) − dim( Z ) = dim( T e) − (ℓ − m).
      Let W := ∑i=1 Ai T ⊆ Fℓ . We claim that W = W.
                    n                                          e In fact, we show the stronger statement
 Ai T = A    e for every i ∈ [n].
          ei T
      Recall that every vector  et ∈ Fℓ can be written as et = (t, z) with t ∈ Fm and z ∈ Fℓ−m , and that
                         h          i
 π (et) = t. Since Aei = Ai 0 , we have A         eiet = Ai π (et) for every et ∈ Fℓ .
      Therefore, if y ∈ A   e then y = A
                         ei T,            eiet for some et ∈ T.e Setting t = π (et), we have t ∈ T and hence
 y = Ai t ∈ Ai T. This proves A      e ⊆ Ai T.
                                  ei T
      Conversely, if y ∈ Ai T, then y = Ai t for some t ∈ T. Since T = π ( T              e), there exists a lift
et ∈ T e such that π (et) = t. Hence y = Ai t = Ai π (et) = A         eiet ∈ A   e Thus Ai T = A
                                                                              ei T.               ei T
                                                                                                     e for every
                                        n               n
 i ∈ [n], and consequently W = ∑i=1 Ai T = ∑i=1 A              e = W.
                                                            ei T      e It follows that dim( T ) − dim(W ) =
 dim( T e) − (ℓ − m) − dim(W   e ) = (ℓ − r ) − (ℓ − m) = m − r. Thus, T ⊆ Fm is an (m − r )-shrunk
subspace for L.
   It remains to show that a basis of T can be computed efficiently over the ground field. An
explicit basis of Z is {em+1 , . . . , eℓ }. Since Z ⊆ T                e over F is already available,
                                                       e and a basis of T



                                                       67
Gaussian elimination over F allows us to extend this basis of Z to a basis {em+1 , . . . , eℓ , v1 , . . . , vh }
   e Then {π (v1 ), . . . , π (vh )} is a basis of T.
of T.
    Indeed, these vectors span π ( T    e) = T. Moreover, if ∑hj=1 α j π (v j ) = 0, then ∑hj=1 α j v j ∈ ker(π ) =
Z. Since the vectors v1 , . . . , vh form a complement of Z inside T,     e this implies α1 = · · · = αh = 0.
Thus, the projected vectors are linearly independent.
    All the above operations, after obtaining T,      e consist only of ordinary linear algebra over the
ground field F and can be performed in deterministic polynomial time. In particular, the con-
struction works over F = GF(2).

    The second part of the proof uses the shrunk subspace obtained to compute the factors. We do
this in two parts. First, we compute a nontrivial decomposition, which then implies the factors.

Lemma C.9. Let L = ∑in=1 Ai xi ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×m be a noncommutative linear matrix with ncrank( L) = r <
min {ℓ, m}. Let T ⊆ Fm be a (m − r )-shrunk subspace corresponding to L. Then, given a basis of T, one
can construct invertible matrices U ∈ Fℓ×ℓ and V ∈ Fm×m such that
                                                 "       #
                                                   M 0
                                         ULV =             ,                                    (C.10)
                                                   B C

where the zero block is of size a × b such that a + b = ℓ + m − r.

Proof. We show the existence of invertible matrices U ∈ Fℓ×ℓ and V ∈ Fm×m such that for every
i ∈ [ n ],                                    "         #
                                                 Mi 0
                                     U Ai V =             .                            (C.11)
                                                 Bi Ci

    Let dim( T ) = r ′ and let BT := {u1 , . . . , ur′ } ⊂ Fm be a spanning set of T. We extend BT to a
basis of Fm by adding {ur′ +1 , . . . , um } to BT and let T ′ := spanF {ur′ +1 , . . . , um }. Thus T ⊕ T ′ = Fm .
We define the matrix V := [u1 , . . . , ur′ , ur′ +1 , . . . , um ] to be the matrix whose columns are the vectors
{u1 , . . . , um }. Clearly, V is invertible over F.
    Let W := ∑in=1 Ai T = spanF { in=1 Ai · T }, and write s = dim(W ).
                                         S

    Let BW := {w1 , . . . , ws } ⊂ Fℓ be a basis of W. We extend this basis to a basis of Fℓ by adding
{ws+1 , . . . , wℓ } to BW . Let U be the invertible matrix in Fℓ×ℓ such that U := [w1 , . . . , wℓ ]−1 . Con-
sider the matrix Ai · V. For every j ≤ r ′ , the j-th column of this matrix is Ai · u j ∈ W by the
definition of the shrunk subspace. Hence, for every j ≤ r ′ , there exist α1 , . . . , αs ∈ F such that




                                                        68
Ai u j = ∑is=1 αi · wi . Formally,
                                                                  
          α1                        α1                                 α1
        .                       .                                .
         ..                      ..                               .. 
                                                                  
          h                                                       
     −1  α s                      αs 
                             i                                    αs 
    U ·   = w1 w2 w3 . . . wℓ ·   = Ai u j =⇒ U · ( Ai · u j ) = 
                                  
                                                                      0 .
                                                                                                (C.12)
        0                       0                                 
        .                       .                                .
         ..                      ..                               .. 
                                                                  
          0                         0                                  0

Thus, the last ℓ − s positions in U · ( Ai u j ) are 0 for every j ≤ r ′ .
   Therefore, for every i ∈ [n] we obtain
                                                         "           #
                                                              ∗ ∗
                                             U Ai V =                    ,                       (C.13)
                                                              0 ∗

where the zero block is of size (ℓ − s) × r ′ . Since T is an (m − r )-shrunk subspace, r ′ − s ≥ m − r.
On the other hand, because ncrank( L) = r, no shrunk subspace can have deficiency greater than
m − r. Hence r ′ − s = m − r, and therefore ℓ − s + r ′ = ℓ + m − r.
   By permuting the row blocks so that the last ℓ − s rows come first, and permuting the column
blocks so that the first r ′ columns come last, we move this zero block to the upper-right corner.
Composing these permutations with U and V, we obtain invertible matrices U ′ ∈ Fℓ×ℓ and V ′ ∈
Fm×m such that                          "             #
                                 ′   ′     Mi 0
                               U Ai V =                   for every i ∈ [n].
                                            Bi Ci
Consequently,                                                !          "            #
                                                                             M   0
                                 U ′ LV ′ = U ′    ∑ xi Ai       V′ =
                                                                             B   C
                                                                                         .
                                                    i

    We now show that given the r-decomposability form Equation C.10, the linear factors are easy
to compute.

Corollary C.14. Let L = ∑in=1 xi · Ai ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×m be a noncommutative linear matrix with ncrank( L) =
r. Then L admits a nontrivial factorization

                             L = L1 · L2 ,        L1 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×r ,       L2 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩r × m ,

where the factorization follows from the r-decomposability of L.




                                                         69
Proof. Since L is r-decomposable, we have invertible matrices U ∈ Fℓ×ℓ and V ∈ Fm×m such that
                                                              "                   #
                                                                   M          0
                                           U·L·V =                                    ,
                                                                       B      C

where the zero block is of size i × j such that i + j = ℓ + m − r. Therefore, we can write:
                                     "                   # "                          #
                                −1         M      0                Im− j          0
                         L=U                              ·                               · V −1
                                           B     Iℓ−i                  0      C
                                       "                 #                                 "                  #
                                  −1       M       0                                           Im− j     0
                where    L1 = U                                    and            L2 =                            · V −1 .
                                           B      Iℓ−i                                             0     C

Proof of Lemma 3.7. Write the affine-linear matrix as

                                                                   n
                                                L = A0 + ∑ A i x i .
                                                               i =1

Introduce one additional noncommuting variable x0 and consider the homogeneous linear matrix

                                                                        n
                                               Lh = A0 x0 + ∑ A i x i .
                                                                       i =1

Its noncommutative rank is the same as that of L. Indeed, in the free skew field, right multiplica-
tion by x0−1 gives
                                                                   n
                                       Lh x0−1 = A0 + ∑ Ai ( xi x0−1 ),
                                                               i =1

and the rational change of variables yi = xi x0−1 is invertible (with inverse xi = yi x0 ). Thus
ncrank( Lh ) = ncrank( L) = r.
    If r = 0, then L = 0 and the asserted factorization is trivial. Assume r > 0. By Lemma C.8, ap-
plied to Lh , we can compute a basis of an (m − r )-shrunk subspace T ⊆ Fm . Applying Lemma C.9
to this basis gives an r-decomposition of Lh . Finally, Corollary C.14 gives linear matrices

                              L1 ∈ F⟨ x0 , X ⟩ℓ×r ,
                              e                                        L2 ∈ F⟨ x0 , X ⟩r × m
                                                                       e

with Lh = e  L2 . Setting x0 = 1 yields
          L1 e

                           L = L1 L2 ,                   L 1 | x0 =1 ,
                                                  L1 : = e                               L 2 | x0 =1 ,
                                                                                  L2 : = e

where L1 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩ℓ×r and L2 ∈ F⟨ X ⟩r×m are affine-linear matrices. All steps use deterministic
polynomial-time linear algebra together with the shrunk-subspace computation, so the construc-
tion runs in deterministic poly(ℓ, m, n) time in the arithmetic model over the ground field.


                                                              70
                                                                                                         ECCC                          ISSN 1433-8092

                                                                                                         https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il
