                                              New Statistical and Computational Results for Learning
                                                                Junta Distributions
                                                                                       Lorenzo Beretta1
                                                   1
                                                       University of California, Santa Cruz, lorenzo2beretta@gmail.com
arXiv:2505.05819v3 [cs.LG] 12 Jul 2025




                                                                                             Abstract
                                                   We study the problem of learning junta distributions on t˘1un , where a distribution is a
                                               k-junta if its probability mass function depends on a subset of at most k variables. We make
                                               two main contributions:
                                                   • We show that learning k-junta distributions is computationally equivalent to learning k-
                                                     parity functions with noise (LPN), a landmark problem in computational learning theory.
                                                   • We design an algorithm for learning junta distributions whose statistical complexity is
                                                     optimal, up to polylogarithmic factors. Computationally, our algorithm matches the
                                                     complexity of previous (non-sample-optimal) algorithms.
                                               Combined, our two contributions imply that our algorithm cannot be significantly improved,
                                               statistically or computationally, barring a breakthrough for LPN.


                                         1     Introduction
                                         We study the problem of learning k-junta distributions, as first introduced by Aliakbarpour, Blais,
                                         and Rubinfeld [1]. Given n P N and k ď n, a distribution P supported on t˘1un is a k-junta
                                         distribution if its probability mass function Ppxq “ Py„P ry “ xs is a k-junta function, where
                                         a k-junta function on t˘1un is a function that only depends on k out of n input variables1 . The
                                         objective of the learning problem is to design algorithms that, given i.i.d. samples from an unknown
                                         k-junta distribution P over t˘1un , output the p.m.f. of a hypothesis distribution D that satisfies
                                         ||D ´ P||T V ď ε.
                                             In this work, we show that learning junta distributions is computationally as hard as learning
                                         parity functions with noise, a landmark problem in learning theory (Figure 1). We complement
                                         this result by designing a computationally-efficient algorithm for learning junta distributions that
                                         achieves almost optimal statistical complexity, improving over previous work (Table 1).
                                            1 More generally, [1] defines a k-junta distribution with respect to a fixed distribution D. For k ď n and a fixed

                                         distribution D supported on t˘1un , a distribution P over t˘1un is a k-junta distribution with respect to D if there
                                         exists a size-k set of coordinates J Ď rns such that, for every x P t˘1uk , the distributions P and D conditioned on
                                         coordinates in J being set according to x are equal. When D is the uniform distribution, the above definition is
                                         equivalent to the requirement that the probability mass function of P is a k-junta function.




                                                                                                  1
1.1    Related Work
Feature selection and learning juntas A key challenge in machine learning is learning target
concepts despite the presence of irrelevant features [13]. As observed in [11], the task of PAC learning
in the presence of irrelevant features can be formalized as the problem of learning the concept class
of k-junta functions for k ! n. Likewise, feature selection in the context of distribution learning
is formalized by the task of learning junta distributions. Statistical and computational aspects of
learning (and testing) juntas have been the subject of extensive work [3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12, 14, 21, 26,
32, 34, 35, 36].

Learning junta functions Computationally, learning junta functions is hard. In the distribution-
free setting, learning k-juntas takes nΩpkq time, assuming randomized ETH [30]. Interestingly, char-
acterizing the complexity of learning juntas with respect to the uniform distribution proved to be
an elusive problem that resisted decades of attempts [8, 9, 21, 32, 36]. The fastest algorithm to
date runs in time « n0.6k , which is only moderately faster than brute-force [2, 36].

Learning parity functions with noise Learning a function f : t˘1un Ñ t˘1u under distribu-
tion D with noise rate η ă 1{2 means recovering f while observing pairs px, f pxq ¨ bq, where x „ D
and b P t˘1u is a Rademacher random   ś variable with parameter η. A function f is a parity with
relevant variables J Ď rns if f pxq “ iPJ xi . Learning parities with noise under the uniform distri-
bution (LPN) is a cornerstone problem in computational learning theory, serving as a foundation
for several hardness results (see Figure 1).
    Feldman, Gopalan, Khot, and Ponnuswami first demonstrated the central role of LPN by compu-
tationally reducing several fundamental problems in learning theory to it [21, 22]. They showed that,
under the uniform distribution, agnostically learning k-parity functions, learning k-junta functions
(both with and without noise), and learning Boolean functions that admit a DNF representation of
size 2k all reduce to learning k-parities with noise. Furthermore, LPN can be reduced to numerous
other learning problems: learning halfspaces [29] and ReLU functions [23] under the Gaussian distri-
bution, learning submodular functions [20] and agnostically learning halfspaces under the uniform
distribution [25].
    LPN is widely believed to be computationally hard. Kearns established that LPN requires Ωpnk q
constant-noise queries in the statistical query (SQ) model [6, 26]. The learning with errors (LWE)
problem, a generalization of LPN over Fq , is widely conjectured to be hard and underpins modern
lattice-based cryptography [33]. Moreover, LPN itself has been leveraged as a hardness assumption
in cryptographic constructions [28].
    The best known algorithm for sparse LPN (k ! n) runs in time « n0.8k [2, 36], and neural
networks trained with SGD encounter the same nk computational barrier [6]. Finally, for k « n
                                                        n                             k
the fastest known algorithm for LPN runs in time 2 log n , and extending this to n log k for arbitrary
k remains a major open problem [10].

Learning junta distributions The problem of learning junta distributions (LJD) was introduced
by Aliakbarpour, Blais, and Rubinfeld [1]. In their work, they observed that the cover method 2
gives an algorithm for LJD with (essentially) optimal sample complexity (see Table 1 for exact
statistical and computational bounds). Computationally, the cover-method algorithm suffers from
  2 See [17] for a general introduction to the method.




                                                         2
a doubly-exponential dependence on k. The main algorithmic contribution of [1] is to design an
algorithm that achieves low sample complexity (« 22k log n) while being computationally efficient
(« nk ). While a computational cost of nk does not look efficient at first sight, [1] proved that the
problem of learning junta functions without noise (LJ) reduces to LJD, which rules out algorithms
substantially faster than nk , barring a breakthrough for LJ.
    Chen, Jayaram, Levi and Waingarten studied the problem of learning junta distributions in
a stronger model featuring subcube conditioning [15]. Subcube conditioning allows to sample x
conditioned on xi “ qi for all i P I, given I Ď rns and q P t˘1uI . The power of this stronger model
makes the problem computationally easier; in fact, they show an algorithm running exponentially
faster than previous work. Surprisingly, this stronger model does not make the problem any easier
statistically, as the lower bounds of [15] match the statistical complexity achieved by the cover
method.
    Finally, Escudero Gutiérrez improved the algorithmic result of [1] statistically, shaving a factor
2k while keeping the computational cost at « nk [19].

Truncated distributions Learning junta distributions connects with an emerging line of work
on testing distributions truncated by low-degree polynomials. A distribution is truncated by a
function f if it is obtained by conditioning a ground distribution x „ D on the value of f pxq.
Recently, testing junta truncation [24], as well as low-degree polynomial truncation [16], have been
considered. Apparently, a uniform distribution truncated by a junta function is a junta distribution,
so junta truncation testing reduces to LJD. Moreover, juntas are low-degree polynomials, so low-
degree polynomial truncation is a generalization of junta truncation.

1.2    Our Results
As stated above, [1] reduced the problem of learning k-junta functions without noise (LJ) to that
of learning k-junta distributions (LJD). Since improving the computational complexity for LJ is a
long-standing open problem, their reduction serves as a proof of conditional hardness for LJD. In
this work, we strengthen this message and prove that LJD is computationally equivalent to learning
k-parity functions with noise (LPN). See Figure 1 for a summary of these reductions.

Theorem 1. The computational complexity of these two problems is equal, up to polyp2k , nq factors.
   • Learning k-parity functions over t˘1un with respect to the uniform distribution with noise
     rate η “ 21 ´ 2´Opkq
   • Learning k-junta distributions over t˘1un with sample access.
    Since LPN is a central problem in computational learning theory, we believe that Theorem 1
essentially closes the question about the computational complexity of LJD.
    On the algorithmic side, we design a new algorithm for LJD which improves over [1] and [19].
In particular, [19] achieves a sample complexity of « 2k ¨ log n and we improve it to « 2k ` log n,
which is a quadratic speedup for k “ log log n. Moreover, our algorithm runs in time « nk which
we expect to be hard to improve significantly, given Theorem 1. Finally, the sample complexity
achieved by our algorithm matches the lower bound of [15] up to polylogarithmic factors. See
Table 1 for an exhaustive history of the computational and statistical complexity of learning junta
distributions.



                                                  3
                   Learning Junta
                                                             Learning Juntas (LJ)
                 Distributions (LJD)


      Learning:
   DNFs, Halfspaces,                     Learning Parities                       Learning Jun-
     Submodular,                         with Noise (LPN)                        tas with Noise
     ReLU, etc...

Figure 1: An arrow from A to B means that problem B reduces to problem A (i.e., A is harder
than B). The blue arrows were proven in previous work, the red arrow was proven in [1] and the
black arrows are proven in this work.


Theorem 2. There exists an algorithm that properly learns k-junta distributions up to TV distance
ε using Op εk2 p2k ` log nqq samples and Opminp2n , nk q ¨ εk2 p2k ` log nqq running time.


          Algorithms                        Samples                          Time
                                                                          ´` ˘       k
                                                                                        ¯
                                                                         O nk ¨ ε´Ωp2 q
                                `1     k    1
                                                             ˘
          Cover Method      O   ε2 ¨ p2 log ε ` k log nq
                                         `k            ˘               `                          ˘
          [1]                        O   ε4 ¨ 2
                                               2k
                                                  log n              Õ minp2n , nk q ¨ εk4 ¨ 22k
                                        `k             ˘             `                              ˘
          [19]                                  k
                                     O ε2 ¨ 2 log n               O minp2n , nk q ¨ εk2 ¨ 2k log n
                                      `                  ˘         `                                  ˘
          This Work                 O εk2 p2k ` log nq           O minp2n , nk q ¨ εk2 p2k ` log nq

          Lower Bounds
                                             2 ` log nk
                                    `1      ` k     ` ˘˘˘
          [15]                  Ω    ε2 ¨


        Table 1: Statistical and computational complexity of learning junta distributions.


1.3     Technical Overview: Computational Complexity
In order to prove Theorem 1, we need to reduce learning parities with noise (LPN) to learning junta
distributions (LJD) and vice versa.

1.3.1   Reducing LPN to LJD
                                                                               ś
Let px, yq be a sample-label input for LPN with ground truth χJ pxq “             jPJ xj . The sample
x P t˘1un is distributed uniformly, whereas y P t˘1u is distributed as χJ pxq flipped with probability
η ă 1{2.
    We implement a filtering strategy that, given LPN samples px, yq, returns samples z „ D, where
D is a junta distribution. Then, we show that learning D suffices to recover χJ . We define z Ð x
if y “ 1 and re-sample px, yq otherwise. This ensures that D is a mixture of two distributions: (i)
The uniform distribution supported on tw P t˘1un | χJ pwq “ 1u; (ii) The uniform distribution Un


                                                        4
over t˘1un . In this mixture (i) is weighted « 1 ´ 2η and (ii) is weighted « 2η. Moreover, D is a
k-junta distribution with relevant variables J.
    By running an exponential search, we can assume that we know 1´2η up to a constant factor. We
run our LJD learner on D with precision ε¨p1´2ηq, and it returns F such that ||F ´ D||1 ď ε¨p1´2ηq.
Now, define a boolean function f : t˘1un Ñ t˘1u as f pxq “ 1 iff Fpxq ą 1{2. Our estimate F
is precise enough so that f satisfies Ex r|f ´ χJ |s ď ε. Notice that since we have query access to
the probability mass function of F, we also have query access to f . In order to retrieve J from f ,
consider f pwq ¨ f pw ‘ ej q where w P t˘1un is uniformly distributed and w ‘ ej flips the j-th bit
of w. By virtue of Ex r|f ´ χJ |s ď ε, we must have that f pwq ¨ f pw ‘ ej q has a majority of ´1 for
j P J and a majority of 1 for j R J. To conclude, we just test if j P J for all j P rns.

1.3.2   Reducing LJD to LPN
In order to reduce LJD to LPN we need to introduce an auxiliary problem: learning noisy parity dis-
tributions (LNPD). We say that a junta distribution is a parity distribution with relevant variables
J if it coincides with the uniform distribution over tw P t˘1un | χJ pwq “ su for a fixed s P t˘1u.
We generalize this definition and say that a junta distribution is a noisy parity distribution if it
is a mixture of a uniform distribution and a parity distribution. By symmetry, the only non-zero
coefficients in the Fourier spectrum of (the p.m.f. of) a noisy parity distribution D with relevant
variables J are DpHq
                  p     and DpJq.
                             p     The reduction of LJD to LPN develops in two steps: First, we
reduce LJD to LNPD; Second, we reduce LNPD to LPN.

Reducing LJD to LNPD The Fourier spectrum of a junta distribution can have as many as
2k non-zero coefficients, whereas a noisy parity distribution has at most two. The idea is to distill
our input junta distribution D to P so that P is a noisy parity with relevant variables J such that
PpJq
 p    “ DpJq,
         p     for some fixed J. Then, use the LNPD algorithm to learn P.
   To perform such distillation, we use an idea first introduced in [21]: By carefully adding noise
to the distribution D it is possible to zero all Fourier coefficients of D besides DpJq
                                                                                   p    and DpHq.
                                                                                              p
Moreover, each J Ď rns with DpJq ‰ 0 has a large enough chance of being left intact. Thus,
                                p
a coupon-collector style argument ensures that we learn all non-zero Fourier coefficients of D in
« k ¨ 2k rounds.

Reducing LNPD to LPN For ease of presentation, we show how to reduce learning (non-noisy)
parity distributions to learning parity functions (without noise). The reduction carries over to the
noisy case. Let D be a parity distribution over relevant variables J and such that χJ pwq “ 1 for
all w P supp pDq (the case χJ pwq “ ´1 is symmetric). Let z „ D. Fix j P rns and define px, yq as
follows: Flip the j-th bit of z with probability 1{2 and define that to be x; define y “ ´1 if the
j-th bit was flipped and y “ 1 otherwise. If j P J, then x is distributed uniformly over t˘1un and
y “ χJ pxq. Else, if j R J then y is distributed uniformly on t˘1u and independently of x.
    Then, we solve LPN on samples px, yq. If it turns out that y is a k-parity function of x then we
apply the same technique used in the reduction from LPN to LJD above to retrieve S from f , and
we find J. If j R J then y is not going to be a parity function of x and we need to redefine D using
some other j P rns. By scanning all j P rns, we are guaranteed that at some point j P J holds.




                                                 5
1.4    Technical Overview: Sample-Optimal Algorithm
Our algorithm learns JDN with fewer samples than previous work; in particular, it replaces the
term 2k log n in the sample complexity of [19] with 2k `log n (see Table 1). The goal of this overview
is to show how to make the term log n additive, rather than multiplicative.

Low-degree algorithms Most previous literature on junta distributions, as well as our own
algorithm, make use of the low-degree algorithm of Linial, Mansour, and Nisan [31]. In a nutshell,
the low-degree algorithm estimates individual Fourier coefficients and outputs a hypothesis function
consistent with the estimated Fourier coefficients. In [1], the authors pointed out that applying the
low-degree algorithm to the junta distribution problem requires too many samples. Indeed, an
accuracy of ε ¨ 2´n{2 on individual Fourier coefficients is necessary to deliver an ε error in L2 -norm.
To bypass this, Escudero introduced a thresholding of Fourier coefficients, thus ensuring that at
most 2k coefficients are estimated to be nonzero [19]. In this work, we simply apply the low-degree
algorithm to distributions over a small domain t˘1uk , thus the standard analysis from [31] suffices.

Our template algorithm Consider the following template. We maintain a junta distribution Q
as our “best guess” for D, along with its set of relevant variables N Ď rns of size at most k. We
maintain the invariant that N Ď J, where J is the true set of relevant variables. Given S Ě N , we
can check if the marginals of Q and D with respect to the variables in S (resp. Q|S and D|S ) are
close in total variation distance. In order to check the above condition, we draw samples from D,
project them onto the coordinates in S` and ˘ feed these samples to a closeness tester.
    If ||Q|S ´ D|S ||T V ď ε for all S P rns
                                          k   with N Ď S, then we can correctly output Q. Else, if
             `rns˘
we find S P k with N Ď S such that ||Q|S ´ D|S ||T V ą ε, then we learn the Fourier coefficients
of D|S using the low-degree algorithm. Then, we update the distribution Q so that it includes the
newly recovered Fourier coefficients, and augment N accordingly. Each iteration of this scheme
increases the size of N , so we are done after k iterations.

Sample complexity analysis First, observe that while making multiple calls to an algorithm
we can certainly re-use the same samples, and the price we pay is that we need to union bound over
the error probability. The low-degree algorithm operates on distributions over t˘1uk , so the cost
of an individual call is negligible. Moreover, we make at most k calls to it, so a standard boosting
of the success probability increases its sample complexity by at most log k. On the other hand, we
make up to k ¨ nk calls to the closeness tester. Each individual call costs at least Ω̃p2k q by known
lower bounds [37]. So, we cannot afford a standard boosting of the success probability, as it would
introduce a multiplicative term logpnk q “ k log n.
    To counter this, we develop a closeness tester that succeeds with probability 1 ´ δ and uses only
s`log 1{δ samples, where s is the support size. The design of our tester uses the TV distance between
the empirical probability mass function and the tested distribution as an estimator, borrowing ideas
from [18].

1.5    Organization
In Section 2 we introduce notation. In Section 3 we prove the computational equivalence of learning
junta distributions and learning parities with noise (Theorem 1). In Section 4 we show our new
algorithm for the problem of learning junta distributions (Theorem 2).


                                                   6
2    Preliminaries
We denote by ∆pAq the set of probability distributions over the set A. Given a probability dis-
tribution P P ∆pt˘1un q and a set S Ď rns we denote by P|S the marginal of P with respect to
variables in S. We overload the notation and denote by Pp¨q its probability mass function (PMF).
We denote the uniform distribution over t˘1un by Un . Whenever not specified, expectations are
taken with respect to the uniform distribution.

Fourier transform In this paper we use the Fourier transform over the boolean hypercube. For
a subset A Ď rns we define the function χA : t˘1un Ñ t˘1u such that χA pxq “ iPA xi . Such
                                                                                      ś
functions form the Fourier basis of the vector space of functions t˘1un Ñ R. Notice that the
Fourier basis is orthonormal with respect to the dot product xf, gy “ Ex rf pxq ¨ gpxqs.
   Given a function f : t˘1un Ñ R we define its Fourier transform fp : 2rns Ñ R as fppAq “
                              ř
Ex rf pxq ¨ χA pxqs. Thus, f “ AĎrns fppAq ¨ χA . Finally, we have
                                     “ 2 ‰                2
                                                              ÿ
                                E     f pxq “ 2´n ¨ ||f ||2 “   fppAq2 .
                              x„Un
                                                            AĎrns


Learning functions and distributions Fix a class of boolean functions F Ď tf : t˘1un Ñ
t˘1uu. Consider an algorithm A that takes as input parameters ε, δ ą 0 and tpxi , f pxi qquiPrms
where x1 . . . xm P t˘1un are i.i.d. samples from a distribution D and f P F is fixed. Moreover,
A outputs a function fA that satisfies Px„D rf pxq ‰ fA pxqs ď ε with probability at least 1 ´ δ.
Then, we say that A learns F using Spnq samples and T pnq time under the distribution D if A
takes Spnq ¨ polypε´1 , δ ´1 q samples and runs in time T pnq ¨ polypε´1 , δ ´1 q. Moreover, we say that
A learns F with noise of rate η ă 1{2 if the label f pxi q in the samples pxi , f pxi qq is flipped with
probability η.
    Likewise, fix a class of distributions P Ď ∆pt˘1un q. Consider an algorithm A that takes as
input parameters ε, δ ą 0 and x1 . . . xm , where x1 . . . xm P t˘1un are i.i.d. samples from a fixed
distribution P P P . Furthermore, A outputs a distribution PA that satisfies ||P ´ PA pxq||T V ď ε
with probability at least 1 ´ δ. Then, we say that A learns P using Spnq samples and T pnq time if
A takes Spnq ¨ polypε´1 , δ ´1 q samples and runs in time T pnq ¨ polypε´1 , δ ´1 q.
    In general, we can require an algorithm that learns a distribution to output either a generator
or an evaluator for the learned distribution [27]. A generator is an algorithm that generate samples
from the (approximate) target distribution, whereas an evaluator returns the value of the probability
mass function on a given query point. In this work, we assume that a distribution learner returns
evaluators.
    Before delving into the proofs of Theorem 1 and Theorem 2, we prove two folklore lemmas that
are going to be useful throughout the paper.
Lemma 2.1. Let P, Q P ∆pt˘1un q be junta distributions with set of relevant variables J Ď rns,
then
                             ||P ´ Q||1 “ ||P|J ´ Q|J ||1 .

Proof. For each x P t˘1uJ , define Sx “ ty P t˘1un | yj “ xj for all j P Ju and notice that P and Q




                                                   7
are both constant on Sx .

                                                           ||P ´ Q||1 “
                                       ÿ       ÿ
                                                   |Ppyq ´ Qpyq| “
                                    xPt˘1uJ yPSx
                                             ˇ               ˇ
                                       ÿ     ˇÿ              ˇ
                                                  Ppyq ´ Qpyqˇ “
                                             ˇ               ˇ
                                             ˇ
                                             ˇ
                                            J yPS
                                                             ˇ
                                    xPt˘1u         x
                                       ÿ
                                               |P|J pxq ´ Q|J pxq| “
                                     xPt˘1uJ

                                                   ||P|J ´ Q|J ||1 .



Lemma 2.2. Given a distribution P over t˘1un and a size-k set S Ď rns we have that for each
J ĎS
                                  yS pJq “ 2n´k ¨ PpJq.
                                 P|               p

Proof. For any distribution D over t˘1un we have
                                  ´                                  ¯
                      DpJq
                      p    “ 2´n ¨ P rΠiPJ xi “ 1s ´ P rΠiPJ xi “ ´1s .
                                      x„D                       x„D

Applying this identity to both sides proves the desired result.


3     The Complexity of Learning Junta Distributions
In this section we prove the following theorem.
Theorem 1. The computational complexity of these two problems is equal, up to polyp2k , nq factors.
    • Learning k-parity functions over t˘1un with respect to the uniform distribution with noise
      rate η “ 21 ´ 2´Opkq

    • Learning k-junta distributions over t˘1un with sample access.
    In order to prove Theorem 1, we show mutual reductions between learning junta distributions
(LJD) to learning parity functions with noise (LPN). In order to reduce LJD to LPN we need to
introduce an auxiliary problem: learning parity distributions with noise (LPDN). In Section 3.1 we
reduce LPDN to LPN (see Lemma 3.2). In Section 3.2 we reduce LJD to LPDN (see Lemma 3.5).
Finally, in Section 3.3 we reduce LPN to LJD (see Lemma 3.12).

3.1    Reducing Noisy Parity Distributions to Parity Functions with Noise
First, we define noisy parity distributions.




                                                       8
               LPN                                LPDN                                  LJD


         Figure 2: An arrow from A to B means that we reduce problem B to problem A.


Definition 3.1 (Noisy parity distribution). We say that a distribution D over t˘1un is a noisy
parity distribution with relevant variables J Ď rns with noise rate η ă 1{2 if
                                             $
                                             ’1            if S “ H
                                          1 &
                                DpSq
                                p     “ n ¨ ˘p1 ´ 2ηq if S “ J                             (1)
                                         2 ’
                                               0           otherwise.
                                             %

Observation 1. A noisy parity distribution with noise rate η “ 0 corresponds to the uniform
distribution truncated by a parity function (i.e., x „ Un conditioned on either χJ pxq “ ˘1). We
call such distribution a parity distribution and highlight that the PMF of a parity distribution is,
indeed, a parity function (up to multiplying it by ´1). Moreover, a noisy parity distribution over
set J with noise rate η ą 0 coincides with the mixture p1 ´ 2ηq ¨ P ` 2η ¨ Un , where P is a parity
distribution.
    The bulk of this section is spent proving the next lemma, which reduces learning noisy parity
distributions to learning parity functions with noise.
Lemma 3.2. Let A be an algorithm that learns k-parity  `     functions over
                                                                       ˘    t˘1un under the uniform
distribution with noise of rate η ă 1{2 and uses T n, k, p1 ´ 2ηq´1 time. Then, there exists an
algorithm A1 that learns noisy k-parity
                                `        distributions
                                                  ˘    over t˘1un with noise rate η ă 1{2. Moreover,
A1 uses at most polyp2k , nq ¨ T n, k, p1 ´ 2ηq´1 time.
   Before delving into the proof of Lemma 3.2, we prove the following lemma.
Lemma 3.3. Fix ε ą 0. Let D be a noisy parity distribution over t˘1un with relevant variables
J Ď rns and noise rate η ă 1{2. Then, there exists an algorithm that takes as input s candidates
sets J1 . . . Js promised to satisfy J P tJ1 . . . Js u and, without knowledge of η, estimates each DpJ
                                                                                                    p iq
up additive error ˘ε ¨ DpJq with probability 1 ´ δ. Moreover, such algorithm finds J, and uses at
                          p
most Ops ¨ ε´2 p1 ´ 2ηq´2 log δ ´1 q samples from D and time.

Proof. By Definition 3.1, we have DpJq   p     P t˘2´n ¨p1´2ηqu. Assume DpJq  p    ą 0 without loss of gener-
                                                                                          “              ‰
                          ´n
ality. We have Ex„D r2 ¨ χJi pxqs “ DpJ      p i q “ 2 ¨ p1 ´ 2ηq ¨ rJi “ Js and Ex„D p2´n ¨ χJ pxqq2 “
                                                       ´n
                                                                                                   i
2´2n . Let η ď η̄ ă 1{2, m “ Ops ¨ ε´2 p1 ´ 2η̄q´2 log δ ´1 q and given i.i.d. samples x1 . . . xm „ D
              1
define ypi “ m  ¨ pχJi px1 q ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` χJi pxm qq and ỹi “ 2´n ¨ ypi . Standard concentration bounds imply
that ỹi approximates DpJ p i q up to an additive error ˘ε ¨ p1 ´ 2ηq ¨ 2´n with probability at least
         ´s
1´δ¨2 .
     Since η is not known, we perform an exponential search over η̄ by shrinking 1{2 ´ η̄ by half at
each iteration. Define Y “ ti P rss | Ji “ Ju and N “ rsszY (recall that Y and N are unknown
to the algorithm). At each step, we have that, for i P Y , ypi “ 1 ´ 2η ˘ εp1 ´ 2η̄q, and, for i P N ,
ypi “ ˘εp1 ´ 2η̄q with high probability. Condition on this event. Then, we can halt whenever there


                                                     9
                              yi |´ε¨p1´2η̄q| ě p1´2η̄q as this guarantees η̄ ě η with high probability.
exists an i P rss such that ||p
Notice that we halt as soon as 1 ´ 2η̄ ă 21 ¨ p1 ´ 2ηq, which gives the desired complexity.
    Once we have successfully approximated DpJ   p i q for all i P rss up to an additive term ˘ε ¨ p1 ´
2ηq ¨ 2 “ ˘ε ¨ DpJq, we must have J “ Ji for all Ji satisfying ỹi ą εp1 ´ 2η̄q ¨ 2´n .
       ´n          p

   Finally, we prove Lemma 3.2.
Proof of Lemma 3.2. Let D be the noisy parity distribution over the set J Ď rns with noise rate
η ă 1{2 that we would like to learn. By definition, D has only two non-zero Fourier coefficients:
DpHq
 p      and DpJq.
             p      We can assume DpJqp     ą 0, as the case DpJq
                                                              p   ă 0 is symmetric. Since D is a
                                                    ´n
probability distribution, we know that DpHq “ 2 . We are left to learn DpJq.
                                          p                                 p     Once we find the
set of relevant variables J, estimating DpJq
                                        p     is straightforward.
    In order to find J, we proceed as follows. Suppose that we correctly guessed one element j P J.
Sample x1 „ D, define x Ð x1 and flip the j-th bit of x with probability 1{2. Then, define the label
y as y “ ´1 if we flipped xj and y “ 1 otherwise. Let Q be the distribution of px, yq generated as
above and let Qx and Qy be its marginals. We will prove that

 (i) Qx is the uniform distribution over t˘1un
 (ii) Conditioned on x, y is distributed as χJ pxq with noise η.
                                                        px pAq. denote by ej P t˘1un the j-th
   To prove point (i), we compute a generic coefficient Q
vector of the standard basis.
                            ÿ                     ÿ          1
            2n ¨ Q
                 px pAq “       Qx pzq ¨ χA pzq “      Dpzq ¨ pχA pzq ` χA pz ‘ ej qq
                              n                      n
                                                             2
                           zPt˘1u                   zPt˘1u


then, for j P A we have Q px pAq “ 0, whereas for j R A we have Q  px pAq “ DpAq.
                                                                            p     Therefore, assuming
j P J, Qx pAq “ 0 for all A ‰ H.
        p
    To prove (ii) we note that, by Observation 1, D can be written as the mixture p1´2ηq¨P `2η ¨Un
where P is the parity distribution obtained as the uniform distribution over t˘1un conditioned on
χJ p¨q “ 1. Equivalently, there exists an event E of probability 2η such that D conditioned on E
equals Un and D conditioned on ␣E equals P. If we condition on E, y is independent of x and
uniform over t˘1u. If we condition on ␣E, we have y “ χJ pxq. Therefore, y is distributed as χJ pxq
with noise η.
    Now, we feed our samples px, yq „ Q to the algorithm A, which learns the k-parity χJ in the
presence of noise of rate η. By paying a polypε´1 , nq overhead, we can ensure that A learns χJ
up to ℓ1 -accuracy ε ¨ 2n ą 0 with probability 1 ´ polypn´1 q. Recall that Q depends on our guess
j P rns. We repeat the procedure described above for all j P rns and let pg j qjPrns be the functions
returned by A. Let E be the event that, for all j P J, A is correct. E happens with probability at
least 1 ´ polypn´1 q. Condition on E. Then, for each j P J we have ||g j ´ χJ ||1 ď ε ¨ 2n .
    Now we show how to define a set of candidates tJi uiPrns for J. We need a procedure FindCandidatepgq
that returns a size-k subset of rns and such that FindCandidatepgq returns J whenever ||g ´ χJ ||1 ď
ε¨2n . Then, we generate our set of candidates tJi uiPrns as Ji “ FindCandidatepg i q. Lemma 3.4 de-
scribes how to implement FindCandidate. Finally, pJi qiPrns is a collection of at most n candidate
sets and we are promised that J P pJi qiPrns , so we run the algorithm from Lemma 3.3.



                                                  10
Lemma 3.4 (Find Parity with Queries). Assume that we have query access to a function g :
t˘1un Ñ t˘1u such that ||g ´ χS ||1 ď ε ¨ 2n for some S Ď rns. Then, we can find S using polypnq
queries and time.
Proof. We construct our candidate I for S one element at a time. Initialize I Ð H. We iterate
over ℓ P rns, and for each ℓ we sample polypnq elements w „ Un and observe the distribution of
gpwq ¨ gpw ‘ eℓ q. If the majority of those is ´1, then add ℓ to I; otherwise continue with the next
ℓ P rns.
    Assuming ||g ´ χS ||1 ď ε ¨ 2n , we have Pw„Un rgpwq ‰ χS pwq or gpw ‘ eℓ q ‰ χS pw ‘ eℓ qs ď 2ε.
Thus, by standard concentration bounds we have that the majority of gpwq ¨ gpw ‘ eℓ q is ´1 if and
only if ℓ P J with high probability. Conditioned on this event holding for each ℓ P rns, we have
I Ď S and after ℓ rounds we have S X rℓs Ď I. The described algorithm uses polypnq and queries
and, with high probability, returns I “ S.



3.2    Reducing Junta Distributions to Noisy Parity Distributions
In this section, we reduce the problem of learning junta distributions to that of learning noisy parity
distributions. The main result of this section is the next lemma.
                                                                                        n
Lemma 3.5. Let A be an algorithm`that learns a noisy  ˘ k-parity distribution over t˘1u with noise
                                                   ´1
rate η ă 1{2. Suppose that A uses T n, k, p1 ´ 2ηq     time. Then, there exists an algorithm A1 that
                                                                                      `             ˘
learns a k-junta distribution over t˘1un . Moreover, A1 uses at most polyp2k , nq ¨ T n, k, Op2k{2 q
time.

    To prove Lemma 3.5, we mimic the techniques used in [21] to reduce learning junta functions
with noise to learning parity functions with noise. Here is a summary of this technique. Let D be
the junta distribution with relevant variables J ‹ that we would like to learn. We introduce some
noise that, with large enough probability, zeros all Fourier coefficient of D besides DpHq
                                                                                      p     and DpJq
                                                                                                 p
for some J Ď J ‹ . Once all coefficients besides these two are zero, we are left exactly with a noisy
parity distribution. As long as we manage to isolate all J Ď J ‹ such that DpJq
                                                                              p    is high enough, we
can learn D.
    In order to implement this scheme we need the following lemmas that implement noise injection.
Throughout the section we identify t0, 1un „ 2rns so that Fourier coefficients are (also) indexed by
boolean vectors. For J Ď rns, denote by 1J P t0, 1un the vector such that 1J ris “ 1 iff i P J.
We denote by ‘ the sum modulo 2. We overload the notation Un so that it represent the uniform
distribution both on t˘1un and t0, 1un .
Lemma 3.6 (Essentially Lemma 1 in the full version of [21]). Let A P t0, 1umˆn and let f :
t0, 1un Ñ R be any function over the boolean hypercube. Then, for each x P t0, 1un we have the
identity                             “           ‰     ÿ
                       fA pxq :“ E f px ‘ AJ pq “          fppaqχa pxq.
                                   p„Un
                                                           aPt0,1un
                                                           Aa“0m

Proof. First, notice that for each a P t0, 1un
                                                       J
                                χa pAJ pq “ p´1qxa,A py “ p´1qxAa,py ,


                                                  11
          “         ‰                       “         ‰
thus Ep„Um χa pAJ pq “ 1 if Aa “ 0 and Ep„Um χa pAJ pq “ 0 otherwise.
                                                            “       ‰
                                                       Ef px ‘ AJ pq “
                                                     p„Un
                                     ÿ                “ `          ˘‰
                                            fppaq ¨ E χa x ‘ AJ p “
                                                    p„Um
                                 aPt0,1un
                                 ÿ                              “ ` J ˘‰
                                         fppaq ¨ χa pxq ¨ E      χa A p “
                                                       p„Um
                              aPt0,1un
                                                           ÿ
                                                                    fppaqχa pxq.
                                                                n
                                                      aPt0,1u
                                                      Aa“0m




Lemma 3.7. Let D be a k-junta distribution with relevant variables J ‹ Ď rns and m ą k. Sample
A P t0, 1umˆn uniformly at random. Define DA pxq :“ Ep„Un rDpx ‘ AJ pqs as in Lemma 3.6. Fix
J Ă J ‹ . Then, with probability at least 2´pm`1q we have
                                              $
                                              &DpJq, if I “ J
                                              ’ p
                                    DpA pIq “ 2´n ,    if I “ H                            (2)
                                              ’
                                                0,     otherwise.
                                              %

Namely, DA is a noisy parity distribution with relevant variables J.
Proof. By Lemma 3.6, we have
                                           “              ‰           ÿ
                         DA pxq :“ E           Dpx ‘ AJ pq “                   Dpaqχ
                                                                               p     a pxq.
                                   p„Un                                    n
                                                                    aPt0,1u
                                                                    Aa“0m

To realize Equation (2), we must have A1J “ 0m and A1I ‰ 0m for all I Ď J ‹ with I ‰ J. Let
E be such event. It is straightforward to verify that, for any u, v P t0, 1um and any M, N Ď rns
distinct, we have
                                P rA ¨ 1M “ u | A ¨ 1N “ vs “ 2´m .
Thus, the probability of event E can be bounded as

                                                                             P rEs “
       P rA ¨ 1I ‰ 0m
                        for all I Ď J with I ‰ J | A ¨ 1J “ 0 s ¨ P rA ¨ 1J “ 0m s ě
                                     ‹                                 m


                                                                       p1 ´ 2k ¨ 2´m q ¨ 2´m ě 2´pm`1q .



Lemma 3.8. Given a probability mass function D over t0, 1un , and a matrix A P t0, 1umˆn2    the
function DA pxq :“ Ep„Um rDpx ‘ AJ pqs is a probability mass function. Moreover, we can simulate
a sample from DA by y ` AJ q „ DA where y „ D and q „ Um .




                                                     12
Proof. For any fixed p P t0, 1um we have that x ÞÑ Dpx ‘ AJ pq is a probability mass function
(PMF), moreover the set of PMFs is convex so DA is also PMF. We have
                 “            ‰     “           ‰        “           ‰
              P y ‘ AJ q “ z “ P y “ z ‘ AJ q “ E Dpz ‘ AJ qq “ DA pzq.
               y,z                   y,z                          q„Um




Lemma 3.9. Given two distributions D, P over t˘1un we have
                                         g
                                         f ÿ ´                ¯2
                       ||D ´ P||1 ď 2n ¨ e        Dpaq ´ Ppaq
                                         f         p      p      .
                                                      aPt0,1un


Moreover, if D and P are k-junta distributions over the same set of relevant variables, we have
                                         g
                                         f ÿ ´                       ¯2
                                       k f
                        ||P ´ D||1 ď 2 ¨ e           D|
                                                     yJ paq ´ P|
                                                              yJ paq .
                                                    aPt0,1uk


Proof. First, we have
                                               ÿ
                             ||D ´ P||1 “               |Dpxq ´ Ppxq|
                                             xPt˘1un
                                                      d ÿ
                                           ď 2n{2 ¨               pDpxq ´ Ppxqq2
                                                        xPt˘1un
                                                    b
                                           “ 2n ¨       E rpDpxq ´ Ppxqq2 s
                                                      x„Un
                                                    d ÿ
                                           “ 2n ¨                pDpaq
                                                                  p    ´ Ppaqq
                                                                         p     2

                                                      aPt0,1un


where the first inequality holds by Cauchy-Schwarz. Then, using Lemma 2.1 and Lemma 2.2 we
obtain the second claim.
Lemma 3.10 (Estimating a single Fourier coefficient). There exists an algorithm that takes as
input m “ Opε´2 log δ ´1 q i.i.d. samples from a distribution D over t˘1un , J Ď rns and outputs z
such that z “ DpJq
                 p    ˘ ε ¨ 2´n with probability at least 1 ´ δ.
                                                             “          ‰
Proof. We have DpJqp      “ Ex„D r2´n ¨ χJ pxqs and Ex„D p2´n ¨ χJ pxqq2 “ 2´2n . The desiderata
                                                                     1
follows by standard concentration bounds applied to the average z “ m  ¨2´n ¨pχJ px1 q`¨ ¨ ¨`χJ pxm qq
where x1 . . . xm are i.i.d. samples from D.

   Finally, we prove Lemma 3.5.
Proof of Lemma 3.5. Here we design the algorithm A1 that learns an arbitrary k-junta distribution
D with set of relevant variables J ‹ . denote by J the set of all J Ď rns such that |DpJq|
                                                                                     p     ě ε¨2´pn`k{2q .
                   J‹                            k
We have J Ď 2 , which implies |J | ď 2 . We will show a procedure FindHeavyFourier
(Algorithm 1) such that the following holds.


                                                        13
Lemma 3.11. For each J P J , FindHeavyFourier (Algorithm 1) returns J with probability
Ωp2´k q. Moreover, whenever FindHeavyFourier returns pJ, zq then both (i) DpJq         p  ‰ 0, and (ii)
                 ´pn`k{2q                                            ´k
z “ DpJq
     p   ˘ε¨2           ` hold  with probability
                                       ˘         at least 1 ´ polyp2    q. Finally, FindHeavyFourier
uses polyp2k , ε´1 q ` T n, k, Op2k{2 q time.
    We defer the proof of Lemma 3.11 and complete our reduction assuming Lemma 3.11. Let I
be the set (not a multi-set) of sets J returned by FindHeavyFourier after re-running it Opk22k q
                                             ‹
times. By coupon collector, J Ď I Ď 2J with high probability. Additionally, for all     ř J P I, zJ
satisfies zJ “ DpJq
               p    ˘ ε ¨ 2´pn`k{2q with high probability (by
                                                            Ť union bound). Define Z :“  JPI zJ ¨ χJ
and notice that Z is a junta with relevant variables L :“ I Ď J ‹ . By Lemma 3.9 and Lemma 2.2
we have

                                                                 ||Z ´ D||1 “
                                                           ||Z|J ‹ ´ D|J ‹ ||1 ď
                                            d ÿ
                                     2k ¨            pD|
                                                      z                      2
                                                         J ‹ pJq ´ Z|J ‹ pJqq ď
                                                                   p
                                             JĎJ ‹
                                     d ÿ
                              2k ¨              22pn´kq ¨ pDpJq
                                                           p    ´ ZpJqq
                                                                  p     2 ď

                                        JĎJ ‹
                                        a
                                 2k ¨    2k ¨ 22pn´kq ¨ ε2 ¨ 2´2pn`k{2q ď ε.

Finally, Z might not be a probability distribution. We would like to “round” Z to a probability
distribution within ℓ1 -distance Opεq from D. Since there exists a probability distribution D satis-
fying ||D ´ Z||1 ď ε, then such rounding exists. Here we show how to implement such rounding
efficiently.
     Since Z is a junta with relevant variables L Ď J ‹ , then we can simply round Z|L and extend
it to a rounding of Z by taking the product distribution with Un´ℓ , where ℓ “ |L|. First, for all
          ℓ
řP t˘1u such that Z|L pxq ă 0 we set Z|L pxq Ð 0. Then, we normalize all entries of Z|L so that
x
   xPt˘1uℓ Z|L pxq “ 1. It is straightforward to verify that both operations at most double the ℓ1
distance between Z and D. Hence, after rounding Z still satisfies ||Z ´ D||1 “ Opεq.

Complexity. We are left to bound the computational complexity of our   ` reduction.˘ We make
polyp2k q calls to FindHeavyFourier. Each call uses polyp2k , ε´1 q ` T n, k, Op2k{2 q time. All
other operations combined use at most polyp2k , nq time.
   In the end, we show that FindHeavyFourier satisfies the properties stated in Lemma 3.11.

Proof of Lemma 3.11. Fix J P J . Define the event EJ that Equation (2) holds, which happens with
probability at least 2´m´1 ě 2´pk`2q by Lemma 3.7. Conditioned on EJ , DA “ χH ` DpJq     p    ¨ χJ is a
noisy junta distribution with relevant variables J. Moreover, the samples x1 ‘ AJ q1 . . . xS ‘ AJ qS
are distributed according to DA (Lemma 3.8).
    Let EA be the event that A is correct. Conditioned on EJ , the noise rate of DA is ηJ “
1
2 ¨ p1 ´ 2n ¨ DpJqq,
              p      thus J P J implies 1 ´ 2ηJ ě ε ¨ 2´k{2 . Since, conditioned on EJ , the noise rate
of DA is appropriate we have P rEA | EJ s “ Ωp1q.
    From now on, condition on EA X EJ . Suppose that A returns the noisy parity χH ` z ¨ χJ .
Since J P J , |DpJq|
                p     ě ε ¨ 2´pn`k{2q so z “ DpJq
                                             p    ˘ 3ε ¨ 2´pn`k{2q implies |z| ě 2ε
                                                                                  3 ¨2
                                                                                       ´pn`k{2q
                                                                                                . Thus,


                                                          14
   Input: Samples from D P ∆pt˘1un q
   Output: J P J and yJ “ DpJq
                           p   ˘ ε ¨ 2´pn`k{2q

   Let m “ k ` 1
   Sample a uniformly random matrix A P t0, 1umˆn      2
   Sample x1 . . . xS „ D i.i.d.
   Sample q1 . . . qS „ Um i.i.d.
   Let χH ` yJ ¨ χJ be the noisy parity distribution returned by
    Apx1 ‘ AJ q1 , . . . , xS ‘ AJ qS q, where A is PAC if its input has noise of rate 1 ´ Op2´k{2 q.
   Run the algorithm from Lemma 3.10 on D, J and let z be the returned estimate. Set
    parameters so that z “ DpJq p     ˘ 3ε ¨ 2´pn`k{2q with probability ě 1 ´ polyp2´k q.
            2ε
   If |z| ě 3 ¨ 2´pn`k{2q return J and yJ
                                Algorithm 1: FindHeavyFourier


FindHeavyFourier returns pJ, zq correctly with probabability P rEA X EJ s “ Ωp2´k q. Finally,
points (i) and (ii) hold because of correctness of Lemma 3.3.            `           ˘
   Now we analyze the running time of FindHeavyFourier. A uses T n, k, Op2k{2 q time. The
algorithm from Lemma 3.3 uses polyp2k , ε´1 q time. All other operations combined use polypn, 2k q
time.



3.3    Reducing Parity Functions with Noise to Junta Distributions
In this section we prove the next lemma.
Lemma 3.12. Let A be an algorithm that learns k-junta distributions over t˘1un . Suppose that
A uses T pn, kq time. Then, there exists an algorithm A1 that learns k-parity functions on t˘1un
with noise rate η ă 1{2 under the uniform distribution. Moreover, A1 uses at most polyp2k , p1 ´
2ηq´1 q ¨ T pn, kq time.
Proof. Let χS be the parity function that we would like to learn. We observe samples of the form
px, yq where x „ Un and y „ χS pxq ‘ Berpηq, where Berpηq is a Bernoulli random variable of
parameter η. Namely, y equals χS pxq flipped with probability η. Equivalently, we can write
                                #
                                  Berp1{2q, with probability 2η
                            y“
                                  χS pxq,    with probability 1 ´ 2η.

    We construct a sample z from a junta distribution D as follows. Given px, yq sampled as above,
if y “ 1 set z Ð x, otherwise sample a new independent copy of px, yq. We have z „ D where D is
defined as the convex combination
                                           1 ´ 2η        4η
                                    D :“          ¨P `        ¨ Un
                                           1 ` 2η      1 ` 2η

and P is the uniform distribution over tx P t˘1un | χS pxq “ 1u. In fact, if y “ Berp1{2q we have
z „ Un and if y “ χS pxq then with probability 1{2 y “ χS pxq “ 1 and we have z „ P and with


                                                  15
probability 1{2 we reject. The probability of not rejecting is 1´ 12 ¨p1´2ηq, matching the coefficients
above. Notice that the Fourier representation of D  p depends on whether: (i) S ‰ H or (ii)S “ H.
In case (i) we have                            $
                                               ’1 ´ 2η, if A “ S
                                               &
                                DpAq
                                p    “ 2´n ¨ 2η,           if A “ H
                                               ’
                                                 0,        otherwise.
                                               %

In case (ii) we have                                #
                                                1, if A “ S “ H
                                   DpAq
                                   p    “ 2´n ¨
                                                0, otherwise.

The algorithm Here we describe our algorithm A1 . Assume that we have a procedure FindSetpη̄q
that takes as input a guess for the noise rate and returns a candidate S̃ for S. First, we design a
procedure to certify S̃ “ S. Draw m “ polyp2k , p1 ´ 2η̄q´1 q samples pxi , yi q where xi „ Un and yi
equals χS pxi q corrupted with noise of rate η. Define
                                                 1 ÿ
                                        IS̃ :“     ¨ χS̃ pxi q ¨ yi
                                                 m
                                                    iPrms

        “                 ‰
Since E pχS̃ pxi q ¨ yi q2 “ 1, applying standard concentration inequalities we obtain, with high
probability, IS̃ “ E rχS̃ pxi q ¨ yi s ˘ op1 ´ 2η̄q. Moreover,
                                                       $
                                                       &1 ´ 2η if S̃ “ S ‰ H
                                                       ’
                                  E rχS̃ pxi q ¨ yi s “ 1      if S̃ “ S “ H
                                                       ’
                                                         0     if S̃ ‰ S.
                                                       %

Therefore whenever we observe IS̃ ą 2 ¨ p1 ´ 2η̄q, then we can certify that S̃ “ S. Moreover, if we
have 1 ´ 2η̄ ď 14 ¨ p1 ´ 2ηq and S̃ “ S then IS̃ ą 2 ¨ p1 ´ 2η̄q and we can certify S̃ “ S. Now, we
describe a procedure FindSetpη̄q such that whenever 1 ´ 2η̄ ď 1 ´ 2η returns a correct candidate
S̃ “ S. These two ingredients together make it possible to perform an exponential search over the
parameter 1 ´ 2η̄ by shrinking it in half at each round. As soon as 1 ´ 2η̄ ď 41 ¨ p1 ´ 2ηq, FindSetpη̄q
returns a correct S̃ “ S and IS̃ ą 2p1 ´ 2η̄q. Whenever it happens, we return S̃. Notice that the
exponential search ensures that we obtain the right complexity in terms of 1 ´ 2η.
    Here we describe FindSetpη̄q. Recall that we only need FindSet to be correct if 1´2η̄ ď 1´2η.
First, we run A with error parameter ε ¨ p1 ´ 2η̄q on the samples z „ D generated as described
above. A returns F such that ||D ´ F||1 ď ε ¨ p1 ´ 2η̄q. Recall that A returns an evaluator, so we
have query access to F.
    Assume S ‰ H. For each x P t˘1un we have Dpxq “ 2η ¨ 2´n ` p1 ´ 2ηq ¨ 2´n`1 :“ α if χS pxq “ 1
and Dpxq “ 2η ¨ 2´n :“ β if χS pxq “ ´1. Notice that β ´ α “ p1 ´ 2ηq ¨ 2´n`1 . If we have S “ H,
then Dpxq “ 2´n for all x P t˘1u. We define a function f : t˘1un Ñ t˘1u by rounding F. If Fpxq
is closer to β than α then we set f pxq “ ´1, otherwise we set f pxq “ 1.
    A simple charging argument shows that whenever f pxq ‰ χS pxq we can charge at least pβ ´ αq{2
to ||F ´ D||1 . Therefore, ||F ´ D||1 ď ε ¨ p1 ´ 2η̄q ď ε ¨ p1 ´ 2ηq implies ||f ´ χS ||1 ď ε ¨ 2n . Finally,
we use the algorithm from Lemma 3.4 to find S̃.


                                                        16
   Unfortunately, this rounding scheme does not work when S “ H because Dp¨q is constant. To
obviate this issue, we modify FindSet so that it returns two set at each round: S̃ and H. In this
way, the run our certifying procedure both on S̃ and H. If either S “ S̃ or S “ H, the certifying
procedures detects that IS̃ (respectively IH ) is larger than 2 ¨ p1 ´ 2η̄q.
   The complexity of each step of our reduction is polypn, p1 ´ 2η̄q´1 q ¨ T pn, kq. Indeed, boosting
the accuracy of A to ε ¨ p1 ´ 2η̄q (in ℓ1 ) costs polypε´1 , p1 ´ 2η̄q´1 q, the algorithm in Lemma 3.4
runs in time polypnq and all other operations combined cost at most polypnq. Finally, our reduction
uses time polypn, p1 ´ 2ηq´1 q ¨ T pn, kq thanks to our exponential search.



4     Algorithm
A key ingredient of our algorithm is a tolerant tester for distribution identity that is efficient in
the high-confidence regime. First, we develop the tester and then we apply it to learning junta
distributions.

4.1    High-Confidence Tolerant Identity Tester
The goal of this section is to develop a sample-efficient tolerant identity tester for the high-
probability regime. In particular, boosting off-the-shelf identity testers to failure probability δ
incurs a multiplicative overhead of log δ ´1 on the number of samples. We improve over standard
failure-probability boosting and obtain an algorithm that only pays an additive overhead of log δ ´1 .
To this end, we mimic the techniques used in [18].
Definition 4.1 (Tolerant Identity Tester). We say that an algorithm T is an ℓ1 pε1 , ε2 q-tolerant
identity tester for the distribution P with sample complexity m and failure probability δ if the
following holds.
    For any distribution D, let x1 . . . xm be i.i.d. samples from D.

    • If ||D ´ P||1 ď ε1 then T px1 . . . xm q returns “close” with probability at least 1 ´ δ;
    • If ||D ´ P||1 ě ε2 then T px1 . . . xm q returns “far” with probability at least 1 ´ δ.
    Recall the “Bernstein” version of the standard bounded differences (McDiarmid) inequality.
Lemma 4.2 (Bernstein version of McDiarmid’s inequality [38]). Let Y1 , . . . , Ym be independent
random variables taking values in the set Y. Let f : Y m Ñ R be a function of y1 , . . . , ym so that
for every j P rms and y1 , . . . , ym , yj1 P Y, we have that:

                         |f py1 , . . . , yj , . . . , ym q ´ f py1 , . . . , yj1 , . . . , ym q| ď B .

Then, we have:

                                                                                      ´2z 2
                                                                                  ˆ           ˙
                            P rf pY1 , . . . , Ym q ´ Erf s ě zs ď exp                            .
                                                                                      mB 2

    Now we can prove the main result of this section.



                                                              17
Lemma 4.3 (High-confidence tolerant identity tester). For any α, ε, δ ą 0 and any distribution D
with support rss, there exists an ℓ1 pα, α ` εq-tolerant identity tester for D with sample complexity
Opε´2 ps ` log δ ´1 qq.
Proof. We define the same estimator used in [18] and we analyze its mean and concentration
similarly to [18]. Let m “ Opε´2 ps ` log δ ´1 qq and Y1 . . . Ym be i.i.d. samples from D. Let X1 . . . Xs
be the histograms induced by Y1 . . . Ym , namely Xi is the number of j P rms such that Yj “ i.
Given a distribution P supported on rss, define
                                         ˇˇ         ˇˇ    ÿ ˇˇ Xi           ˇ
                                         ˇˇ X       ˇˇ                      ˇ
                             SP pXq :“ ˇˇˇˇ ´ P ˇˇˇˇ “          ˇ   ´  Ppiq ˇ.
                                            m         1
                                                                ˇ m         ˇ
                                                         iPrss

   Let P be a probability distribution supported on rss. In the following we prove that with
probability 1 ´ δ we have
                                                            ε
                                     SP pXq “ ||P ´ D||1 ˘ .
                                                            2
Then, to obtain the desired tolerant tester, we return “close” if SP ď α ` ε{2 and return “far”
otherwise. By triangle inequality, we have
                              ˇˇ       ˇˇ               ˇˇ       ˇˇ
                              ˇˇ X
                              ˇˇ ´ P ˇˇ “ ||D ´ P|| ˘ ˇˇ X ´ Dˇˇ .
                                       ˇˇ               ˇˇ       ˇˇ
                              ˇˇ m     ˇˇ           1   ˇˇ m     ˇˇ
                                         1                          1

So, we are left proving that P rSD pXq ą ε{2s ď δ. First, we bound the expectation of SD pXq.
                                               ÿ „ˇˇ Xi             ˇȷ
                                                                    ˇ
                                 E rSD pXqs “       E ˇˇ     ´ Dpiqˇˇ
                                                         m
                                              iPrss
                                                    d      „            ȷ
                                               ÿ             Xi
                                            ď         Var        ´ Dpiq
                                                              m
                                              iPrss
                                                    c
                                               ÿ      m ¨ Dpiq
                                            ď
                                                          m2
                                              iPrss
                                                    d
                                               ÿ      m ¨ 1s
                                            ď                                                     (3)
                                                        m2
                                              iPrss
                                              c
                                                  s      ε
                                            “        ď .
                                                 m       4
                                     ř    a
Equation (3) holds because D ÞÑ iPrss Dpiq is a concave function of D and so it is minimized
when Dpiq “ 1{s for all i P rss.
    Then, we show that SD pXq concentrates around its expectation. Notice that the map pY1 . . . Ym q ÞÑ
SD pXq has Lipschitz constant B “ 1{m, thus applying Lemma 4.2 we obtain
                                                     ˜       ` ˘2 ¸
               ”                         εı            ´2 ¨ 4ε            ` `      ˘˘
             P |SD pXq ´ E rSD pXqs| ą       ď exp             2
                                                                     “ exp Ω ε2 ¨ m ď δ.
                                         4               m¨B

Therefore, P rSD pXq ą ε{2s ď δ.



                                                    18
4.2    An Algorithm for Learning Junta Distributions
In this section we prove Theorem 2, restated below.
Theorem 2. There exists an algorithm that properly learns k-junta distributions up to TV distance
ε using Op εk2 p2k ` log nqq samples and Opminp2n , nk q ¨ εk2 p2k ` log nqq running time.
   First, we prove a few technical lemmas.
Lemma 4.4 (Learning Fourier coefficients). There exists an algorithm that takes as input Opε´2 pk`
log δ ´1 qq i.i.d. samples from a distribution D over t˘1uk and outputs a distribution Q over t˘1uk
such that, for each J Ď rks
                                                           ε
                                           QpJq
                                            p   “ DpJq
                                                   p    ˘ k.
                                                          2
Such an algorithm succeeds with probability at least 1 ´ δ and runs in time polyp2k , ε, log δ ´1 q.
Proof. Let m “ Opε´2 2k pk ` log δ ´1 qq and x1 . . . xm be i.i.d. samples from D. For each J Ď t˘1uk ,
define PpJq
       p    as the J Fourier coefficient of the empirical distribution of the samples, namely
                                                    ÿ 1
                                   PpJq
                                   p    :“ 2´k ¨        ¨ χJ pxi q.
                                                      m
                                                   iPrms
                           ”    ı
For each J Ď rks, we have E PpJq
                             p    “ DpJq
                                    p    and
                ”    ı   1 ÿ    “              ‰ 2´2k                    2´2k
             Var PpJq
                  p    “ 2   Var 2´k ¨ χJ pxi q “     ¨ Var rχS px1 qs ď      .
                        m                         m                       m
                                iPrms

Thus, by standard concentration bounds we have that, for each J Ă rks,
                               ”ˇ           ˇ         ı
                             P ˇPpJq
                                ˇp     p ˇˇ ą ε ¨ 2´k ď 2´k ¨ δ.
                                     ´ DpJq

By taking a union bound over all J Ď rks we obtain:
                              „      ˇ            ˇ       ȷ
                                                       ´k
                            P max ˇPpJq ´ DpJqˇ ą ε ¨ 2     ď δ.                                   (4)
                                     ˇp       p   ˇ
                                  JĎrks

   The values Pp satisfy the desiderata, however we might have that P, the inverse Fourier transform
of P,
   p is not a probability distribution. On the other hand, conditioning on the previous step
                                                                               ˇˇ      ˇˇ
succeeding, we know that there exists a probability distribution Q such that ˇˇP   ´ Dˇˇ ď ε ¨ 2´k .
                                                                               ˇˇ p p ˇˇ
                                                                                         8
We write a linear program that searches for a distribution Q such that
                                     ˇˇ     ˇˇ
                                     ˇˇP ´ Qˇˇ ď ε ¨ 2´k
                                     ˇˇ p p ˇˇ
                                              8
                                        ÿ
                                            Q“1
                                     xPt˘1uk

                                    Qpxq ě 0 for all x P t˘1uk .
                          p is a linear function of Q we can solve the above LP in time polyp2k q.
Since each coefficient of Q
Triangle inequality and Equation (4) imply our desiderata.

                                                   19
Lemma 4.5. Let Q and D be distributions over t˘1uk with maxaPt˘1uk |Qpaq
                                                                    p    ´ Dpaq|
                                                                           p     ď ε ¨ 2´3k{2 ,
then ||Q ´ D||1 ď ε.
Proof.
                             ||Q ´ D||21 ď 2k ¨ ||Q ´ D||22
                                                   ÿ
                                         “ 22k ¨       pQpaq
                                                          p  ´ Dpaqq
                                                               p     2

                                                  aPt0,1uk
                                                    ÿ     ε2
                                        ď 22k ¨
                                                        k
                                                          23k
                                                  aPt0,1u

                                        ď ε2 .


Observation 2. Combining Lemma 4.5 and Lemma 4.4 we obtain the following. The algorithm
from Lemma 4.4 run with parameter ε1 “ ε ¨ 2´k{2 learns D in ℓ1 norm up to additive error ε.

                  `              ˘
   Input: m “ O εk2 p2k ` log nq i.i.d. samples from a distribution P over t˘1un . Moreover,
    P is promised to be a junta distribution over an unknown size-k set J ‹ Ď rns.;
   Output: The explicit description of a distribution Q over t˘1un such that
    ||Q ´ P||1 “ Opεq ;

   Let Tester be the p2ε, 3εq-tolerant identity tester of Lemma 4.3 with failure probability
    n´2k
   Let LearnFourier be the algorithm described in Lemma 4.4 with error parameter
    ε1 “ ε ¨ 2´k{2 and failure probability k ´2
   Initialize N Ð H
   Initialize Q Ð Un
   for i P rks do
       if For all S Ď rns with S Ě N and |S| “ k, TesterpP|S , Q|S q returns “close” then
           return Q
       end
       Let S be such that TesterpP|S , Q|S q returns “far”;
       R Ð LearnFourierpP|S q;
       For each A Ď S with |RpAq|
                               p    ą ε ¨ 2´3k{2 do N Ð N Y A ;
       Let Q be the junta distr. on variables N s.t. Q|N Ð LearnFourierpP|N q ;
   end
   return Q
                           Algorithm 2: Junta Distribution Learner


Analysis of Algorithm 2 Here we prove Theorem 2. Namely, that Algorithm    `     2 correctly
                                                                                          ˘ returns
an approximation of P with high probability, and that it uses at most O εk2 p2k ` log nq samples
and Opminp2n , nk q ¨ εk2 p2k ` log nqq time.
   Denote with J ‹ the set of relevant variables of P. Let E be the event that LearnFourier and
Tester never fail throughout the execution of Algorithm 2.

                                                   20
Lemma 4.6. P rEs “ op1q.
Proof. The failure probability of Tester is set to n´2k and we make at most k ¨ nk calls to it. The
failure probability of LearnFourier is set to k ´2 and we make at most 2k calls to it.
Lemma 4.7. Conditioned on E, we have N Ď J ‹ throughout the execution of Algorithm 2.

Proof. We initialize N Ð H and the only step where we add elements to N is line 2. Conditioned
on E we have |RpAq
               p       p S | ď ε ¨ 2´3k{2 , thus |RpAq| ą ε ¨ 2´3k{2 implies P|
                     ´ P|                                                    p S pAq ‰ 0 and, in turn,
                        ‹
PpAq ‰ 0. Hence, A Ď J .
p

Lemma 4.8. Conditioned on E, let Q and N be defined as in line 2. Then,
                                                           ´p|N |`k{2q
                                |P|
                                 y N pAq ´ Q|N pAq| ď ε ¨ 2
                                           y                           .

Proof. Notice that P|N is supported on t˘1u|N | and apply Lemma 4.4 with error parameter ε1 “
ε ¨ 2´k{2 .
Lemma 4.9. Conditioned on E, the size of N increases by at least one at line 2.

Proof. Since TesterpP|S , Q|S q returned “far”, we have that ||P|S ´ Q|S ||1 ą 2ε. Thus, by
Lemma 4.5, there exists A Ď S such that |P|          yS pAq| ą 2ε ¨ 2´3k{2 . Moreover, for all
                                            yS pAq ´ Q|
A Ď N we have

                   |P|       yS pAq| “ 2|N |´k ¨ |P|
                    yS pAq ´ Q|                   y  N pAq ´ Q|N pAq| ď ε ¨ 2
                                                             y               ´3k{2


where the first equality holds by Lemma 2.2 and the second inequality holds by Lemma 4.8. Thus,
there must exist have A Ę N such that

                            |P|
                             yS pAq| “ |P|       yS pAq| ą 2ε ¨ 2´3k{2
                                        yS pAq ´ Q|

where the first equality holds because Q is a junta with relevant variables N and S Ę N . Finally,
since LearnFourierpP|S q returns R such that maxBĎS |P|      yS pBq ´ RpBq|
                                                                      p     ď ε ¨ 2´3k{2 then we have
             ´3k{2
RpAq ą ε ¨ 2
 p                 . So we increase the size of N at line 2.
Lemma 4.10. Conditioned on E, Algorithm 2 returns Q such that ||Q ´ P||1 ď 2ε.
Proof. If Q is returned on line 2, then for S “ J ‹ Ě N we obtain

                                   |P ´ Q| “ |P|J ‹ ´ Q|J ‹ | ď 2ε

where the first inequality holds because P is a junta wrt J ‹ and Q is a junta wrt N Ď J ‹ .
   Suppose that Q is returned on line 2. Then, when executing line 2 we have N Ď J ‹ and |N | “ k,
thus N “ J ‹ . Finally, Lemma 4.8 applied on the last iteration (i.e., when N “ J ‹ ), together with
Lemma 4.5 and Lemma 2.1 imply

                                    |P ´ Q| “ |P|N ´ Q|N | ď ε.




                                                  21
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Caleb Koch for the many insightful conversations about juntas that we had
and for introducing me to learning theory in the first place.


References
 [1]   Maryam Aliakbarpour, Eric Blais, and Ronitt Rubinfeld. “Learning and testing junta distri-
       butions”. In: Conference on Learning Theory. PMLR. 2016, pp. 19–46.
 [2]   Josh Alman. “An illuminating algorithm for the light bulb problem”. In: arXiv preprint
       arXiv:1810.06740 (2018).
 [3]   Jan Arpe and Rüdiger Reischuk. “Learning juntas in the presence of noise”. In: Theoretical
       computer science 384.1 (2007), pp. 2–21.
 [4]   Vikraman Arvind, Johannes Köbler, and Wolfgang Lindner. “Parameterized learnability of
       juntas”. In: Theoretical computer science 410.47-49 (2009), pp. 4928–4936.
 [5]   Zongbo Bao and Penghui Yao. “On Testing and Learning Quantum Junta Channels”. In: The
       Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory. PMLR. 2023, pp. 1064–1094.
 [6]   Boaz Barak et al. “Hidden progress in deep learning: Sgd learns parities near the computa-
       tional limit”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), pp. 21750–
       21764.
 [7]   Eric Blais. “Improved bounds for testing juntas”. In: International Workshop on Approxima-
       tion Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization. Springer. 2008, pp. 317–330.
 [8]   Avrim Blum. “Open problems-learning a function of r relevant variables”. In: Lecture Notes
       in Computer Science 2777 (2003), pp. 731–733.
 [9]   Avrim Blum. “Relevant examples and relevant features: Thoughts from computational learn-
       ing theory”. In: AAAI Fall Symposium on ‘Relevance. Vol. 5. 1994, p. 1.
[10]   Avrim Blum, Adam Kalai, and Hal Wasserman. “Noise-tolerant learning, the parity problem,
       and the statistical query model”. In: Journal of the ACM (JACM) 50.4 (2003), pp. 506–519.
[11]   Avrim L Blum and Pat Langley. “Selection of relevant features and examples in machine
       learning”. In: Artificial intelligence 97.1-2 (1997), pp. 245–271.
[12]   Nader H Bshouty and Areej Costa. “Exact learning of juntas from membership queries”. In:
       Theoretical Computer Science 742 (2018), pp. 82–97.
[13]   Girish Chandrashekar and Ferat Sahin. “A survey on feature selection methods”. In: Com-
       puters & electrical engineering 40.1 (2014), pp. 16–28.
[14]   Thomas Chen, Shivam Nadimpalli, and Henry Yuen. “Testing and learning quantum juntas
       nearly optimally”. In: Proceedings of the 2023 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
       Algorithms (SODA). SIAM. 2023, pp. 1163–1185.
[15]   Xi Chen et al. “Learning and testing junta distributions with sub cube conditioning”. In:
       Conference on Learning Theory. PMLR. 2021, pp. 1060–1113.
[16]   Anindya De et al. “Detecting Low-Degree Truncation”. In: Proceedings of the 56th Annual
       ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. 2024, pp. 1027–1038.


                                                22
[17]   Ilias Diakonikolas. “Learning Structured Distributions.” In: Handbook of Big Data 267 (2016),
       pp. 10–1201.
[18]   Ilias Diakonikolas et al. “Sample-optimal identity testing with high probability”. In: 45th In-
       ternational Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2018). Schloss-
       Dagstuhl-Leibniz Zentrum für Informatik. 2018.
[19]   Francisco Escudero-Gutiérrez. “Learning junta distributions and quantum junta states, and
       QAC 0 circuits”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.15822 (2024).
[20]   Vitaly Feldman, Pravesh Kothari, and Jan Vondrák. “Representation, approximation and
       learning of submodular functions using low-rank decision trees”. In: Conference on Learning
       Theory. PMLR. 2013, pp. 711–740.
[21]   Vitaly Feldman et al. “New results for learning noisy parities and halfspaces”. In: 2006 47th
       Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS’06). IEEE. 2006,
       pp. 563–574.
[22]   Vitaly Feldman et al. “On agnostic learning of parities, monomials, and halfspaces”. In: SIAM
       Journal on Computing 39.2 (2009), pp. 606–645.
[23]   Surbhi Goel, Sushrut Karmalkar, and Adam Klivans. “Time/accuracy tradeoffs for learning
       a relu with respect to gaussian marginals”. In: Advances in neural information processing
       systems 32 (2019).
[24]   William He and Shivam Nadimpalli. “Testing junta truncation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13992
       (2023).
[25]   Adam Tauman Kalai et al. “Agnostically learning halfspaces”. In: SIAM Journal on Com-
       puting 37.6 (2008), pp. 1777–1805.
[26]   Michael Kearns. “Efficient noise-tolerant learning from statistical queries”. In: Journal of the
       ACM (JACM) 45.6 (1998), pp. 983–1006.
[27]   Michael Kearns et al. “On the learnability of discrete distributions”. In: Proceedings of the
       twenty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing. 1994, pp. 273–282.
[28]   Eike Kiltz et al. “Efficient authentication from hard learning problems”. In: Journal of Cryp-
       tology 30.4 (2017), pp. 1238–1275.
[29]   Adam Klivans and Pravesh Kothari. “Embedding hard learning problems into gaussian space”.
       In: Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Tech-
       niques (APPROX/RANDOM 2014). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik. 2014.
[30]   Caleb Koch, Carmen Strassle, and Li-Yang Tan. “Superpolynomial lower bounds for decision
       tree learning and testing”. In: Proceedings of the 2023 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
       Discrete Algorithms (SODA). SIAM. 2023, pp. 1962–1994.
[31]   Nathan Linial, Yishay Mansour, and Noam Nisan. “Constant depth circuits, Fourier trans-
       form, and learnability”. In: Journal of the ACM (JACM) 40.3 (1993), pp. 607–620.
[32]   Elchanan Mossel, Ryan O’Donnell, and Rocco A Servedio. “Learning functions of k relevant
       variables”. In: Journal of Computer and System Sciences 69.3 (2004), pp. 421–434.
[33]   Oded Regev. “On lattices, learning with errors, random linear codes, and cryptography”. In:
       Journal of the ACM (JACM) 56.6 (2009), pp. 1–40.



                                                  23
[34]   Mert Sağlam. “Near log-convexity of measured heat in (discrete) time and consequences”. In:
       2018 IEEE 59th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). IEEE.
       2018, pp. 967–978.
[35]   Rocco A Servedio, Li-Yang Tan, and John Wright. “Adaptivity helps for testing juntas”.
       In: 30th Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC 2015). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-
       Zentrum fuer Informatik. 2015.
[36]   Gregory Valiant. “Finding correlations in subquadratic time, with applications to learning
       parities and the closest pair problem”. In: Journal of the ACM (JACM) 62.2 (2015), pp. 1–
       45.
[37]   Gregory Valiant and Paul Valiant. “Estimating the unseen: improved estimators for entropy
       and other properties”. In: Journal of the ACM (JACM) 64.6 (2017), pp. 1–41.
[38]   Yiming Ying. “McDiarmid’s inequalities of Bernstein and Bennett forms”. In: City University
       of Hong Kong (2004), p. 318.




                                                24
