                                                   The Probably Approximately Correct Learning Model in
                                                             Computational Learning Theory
                                                                                   Rocco A. Servedio
                                                                                  Columbia University
arXiv:2511.08791v1 [stat.ML] 11 Nov 2025




                                           1    Introduction
                                           Leslie Valiant’s 1984 paper “A Theory of the Learnable” [Val84], reproduced in this volume, has the
                                           unusual distinction of having changed the course of several scientific disciplines. Within theoretical
                                           computer science it was one of the key works giving rise to the field now known as computational
                                           learning theory, which may loosely be defined as the rigorous study of learning processes and
                                           phenomena from the computer science perspective of efficient algorithms and computational com-
                                           plexity. In the decades since the publication of [Val84], computational learning theory has grown
                                           into a rich field with strong connections to many other theoretical disciplines such as mathematical
                                           probability and statistics, information theory, decision theory and more. Beyond the realm of the-
                                           ory, Valiant’s paper and the Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) model which he introduced in
                                           it have also had a great impact on the subsequent development of machine learning, a field which
                                           has already transformed many aspects of science and human society and seems certain to have an
                                           even greater influence in the future.
                                               This chapter gives an overview of the Probably Approximately Correct learning model that
                                           Valiant introduced in [Val84], explaining some of the major results and directions that the field
                                           has taken in the years since that work. As we shall see, a foundational research program naturally
                                           emerges from the (remarkably elegant) basic framework of PAC learning given in [Val84], which is
                                           to delineate the boundary between what is and what is not learnable by computationally efficient
                                           agents. Indeed, as described below, this is one of the chief scientific goals which is expressly
                                           advocated in Valiant’s original paper. A particular focus of this chapter is to summarize and
                                           explain some of the (considerable) progress that has been made towards this goal.
                                               As we shall see, the research community’s understanding of efficient PAC learnability has come
                                           a long way since the publication of [Val84]. However, a recurring theme which emerges throughout
                                           this survey is that Valiant’s work on PAC learning in the 1980s — including [Val84] and [KV94a],
                                           both of which are included in this volume, and other works — was remarkably prescient in antic-
                                           ipating major themes and directions which subsequently grew into substantial strands of research
                                           for the computational learning theory community. Another theme is the interplay of ideas and
                                           techniques across multiple domains within (and beyond) theoretical computer science, spanning
                                           domains such as statistics, information theory, algorithms, complexity, cryptography, and more,
                                           which recur throughout the study of efficient learnability and lend the field of computational learn-
                                           ing theory much of its intellectual richness.
                                               Organization. The structure of this article is as follows. In Section 2 we define the basic
                                           “distribution-free” PAC learning framework which was introduced by Valiant in [Val84] and high-


                                                                                             1
light the central question which this framework gives rise to (and which is the main topic of this
article):

      Which functions are learnable by computationally efficient algorithms, and which are
      not?

    Section 3 gives an overview of positive results, namely efficient PAC learning algorithms for
various important classes of functions in Valiant’s original distribution-free framework as well as in
a number of variants of the basic framework. The models we consider include ones with and without
black-box queries, with and without noise corrupting the labels of examples, and distribution-
specific variants of the original distribution-independent framework. As we shall see, a wide range of
algorithmic ideas, involving combinatorial and probabilistic reasoning as well as tools from analysis,
geometry, algebra, probability, and other areas, have been employed in developing efficient learning
algorithms in these models.
    Complementing these positive results, Section 4 surveys computational hardness results for PAC
learning. These are rigorous theoretical statements establishing formal limitations on what can be
PAC learned by efficient algorithms, based on the presumed intractability of various computa-
tional problems. That section briefly describes some representation-dependent hardness results,
which establish computational hardness for PAC learning algorithms that use a particular form
of hypothesis representation and rely on worst-case hardness assumptions of the P ̸= NP flavor.
However, most of the emphasis is on representation-independent results, which show that certain
types of functions are inherently unpredictable; these kinds of results rely on stronger average-case
(sometimes called “cryptographic”) hardness assumptions. Hardness results of the latter sort are
of particular interest, as they very directly capture a strong sense in which computational hardness
limits learning. These types of results were first developed in the paper “Cryptographic Limitations
on Learning Boolean Formulae and Finite Automata” by Kearns and Valiant [KV94a], which is
included in this volume.


2     The PAC Learning Framework
We begin this section by giving some intuition and background for the general PAC learning
framework in Section 2.1. Building on this intuition, Section 2.2 gives a more detailed description
of the key ingredients of the PAC learning model. As an illustrative example, a simple PAC learning
algorithm is presented there for learning a basic concept class (the class of all Boolean conjunctions),
along with a sketch of its analysis. With this foundation in place, Section 2.3 explains the research
program of determining which classes of Boolean functions are efficiently learnable, which is the
main subject of this survey.

2.1   Motivation and intuition.
This subsection concisely introduces the basic ideas of the PAC learning framework. A more
leisurely treatment, which situates PAC learning theory in a broader context of connections to
theories of computation and evolution, can be found in [Val13], in particular Chapter 5.
    To motivate the general setup of the PAC learning model, it is useful to consider a simple
object recognition scenario. Imagine that a learning agent (such as a small child) finds itself in
a world with various kinds of objects (such as illustrations of animals in a picture book), with

                                                   2
the goal of learning to recognize a certain type of object given access to objects which have been
labeled identifying each one as either a positive or negative example of the target object type. (For
example, for each picture that is encountered an adult may tell the child whether or not it is a
picture of a dog.) This is a natural scenario, occurring in some form countless times every day in
the real world, and it is clear from common experience that effective and efficient learning is indeed
possible. The PAC learning model offers an abstraction that allows quantitative analysis of the
abilities and limitations of computationally bounded learning agents in situations of this sort.
    Let us recast the above scenario using some mathematical terminology. The domain or uni-
verse of all possible objects (commonly called instances) is a set which we denote by X, and the
classification rule to be learned (often referred to as the target function or target concept) is a
function f : X → {0, 1} (we may equivalently consider the subset f −1 (1) ⊆ X of all instances
which are labeled positively by f ). We assume that there is an unknown and arbitrary probability
distribution, denoted D, over the set X of unlabeled instances. A learning algorithm is given access
to independent random (instance, label) pairs (x, f (x)) ∈ X × {0, 1}, where in each pair the in-
stance x is distributed according to D.1 The goal of a learning algorithm is to output a hypothesis
function h : X → {0, 1} — intuitively, representing the learner’s “best guess” at the classification
rule f — which is Probably (i.e. with probability 1 − δ for some small confidence parameter δ)
Approximately Correct. Here “Approximately Correct” means that for some small error parameter
ε > 0, the hypothesis h satisfies
                                        Pr [h(x) ̸= f (x)] ≤ ε.
                                             x∼D

Note that a learning algorithm which can output an approximately correct hypothesis h can use that
hypothesis h to make high-accuracy predictions on “future” examples drawn from D; indeed, the
ability to make high-accuracy predictions implicitly defines a hypothesis function that the learning
agent is using to make its predictions.
    To motivate the above (ε, δ)-criterion for successful learnability, we note that in general it may
be impossible for a learning algorithm to efficiently output an exactly correct hypothesis, since
doing so may require exhaustive exposure to all possible instances to rule out very rare “corner
cases”. Moreover, in a probabilistic model such as the one described above, even outputting an ap-
proximately correct hypothesis cannot be guaranteed with absolute certainty since it is conceivable
that an unfortunate learning algorithm may only be exposed to a very unrepresentative sample
of labeled examples because of suffering from poor “luck of the draw”. Thus both the ε and δ
parameters are necessary given the probabilistic scenario that we consider; fortunately, we shall see
that both these sources of error ε and δ can be made arbitrarily small.
    The PAC learning framework has as a central concern both the running time and sample
complexity (number of labeled examples) required for a learning algorithm to output its hypothesis
(as well as the running time necessary to evaluate the hypothesis function h; we discuss this further
in Section 2.2). Finally, a standard learning problem in the PAC setting does not deal with simply
learning a single unknown concept f ; rather, there is an a priori known-to-the-learner concept class
C of possible target functions (typically characterized by some type of simple syntactic Boolean
circuit structure that is shared by all the functions in C), with the promise that the actual unknown
target function f belongs to C.
    We briefly discuss some of the intuition behind the basic model sketched above. The unrestricted
distribution D over the instance space X captures the notion that in general little may be known
  1
      Throughout this survey we use bold font such as x to indicate random variables.



                                                         3
about the settings in which nature could require a learning algorithm to perform; by requiring our
learning algorithms to work for arbitrary distributions D, the PAC model minimizes assumptions
about the environment. Having examples for the learner be independently generated according to
the fixed distribution D, and assessing the accuracy of the learned hypothesis h with respect to
the same distribution D, corresponds to the now-standard “train-and-test” paradigm in machine
learning. More fundamentally, this aligns with the natural intuition that learned experience may
only be useful in an environment similar or identical to the one in which the learning took place
(if an animal has learned which plants are good to eat in the savannah but finds itself in a rain
forest, its learning may not be of use). Finally, there are several reasons for the assumption that
instances are labeled according to a target function f which belongs to some class C of syntactically
simple functions. One is that some regularity or “signal in the data” must be present in order for
any meaningful type of learning to be possible — if each successive example were independently
labeled by a fresh fair coin toss rather than by a fixed Boolean function f , then clearly it would be
impossible to learn any useful predictor for the labels of future examples. Another is the fact that we
are interested in the learning abilities of computationally (running time) and statistically (amount
of data required) bounded agents; in particular, computational limitations of the learner turn out
to necessitate the assumption that the underlying classification rule or target function is “not too
complex.” As is discussed further in Section 2.3, the fundamental goal of research in this area
is to understand “how complex” are the functions that can be efficiently learned; this complexity
of functions is naturally captured by a concept class C. Indeed, understanding the complexity of
Boolean functions by studying associated classes of Boolean circuits is a longstanding and standard
approach taken in the field of computational complexity theory. As we shall see, a central broad
message which emerges from the line of work on PAC learning which is surveyed in this chapter is
that while some simple functions can be learned efficiently, more complex functions often cannot.
     From a modern point of view the conceptual framework sketched above may seem natural or even
obvious, but we remark that this is an advantage bestowed by several decades of hindsight. Prior to
Valiant’s definition of the PAC learning model, there had been various efforts to formalize the study
of learning from different perspectives: for example, an “inductive inference” model of learning
grounded in computability theory had been proposed by Gold [Gol67], and a statistical model of
learning was given by Vapnik [Vap82, Vap98]. But in general, in the early 1980s having a rigorous
framework for the study of machine learning problems was very far from being a mainstream
idea; in particular, a highly novel and impactful aspect of the PAC model was the idea that both
computational and statistical considerations must play central roles in an understanding of effective
learnability. The further insight that both aspects can be studied in a quantitatively precise way
led to a rich theory; Valiant’s framework hit a sweet spot between modeling important aspects of
real learning scenarios and capturing fundamental theoretical issues of statistical and algorithmic
efficiency in learning.
     Before entering into a more technical treatment of PAC learning, we note that the version
of the PAC learning model which we have informally described above and which we present and
analyze in more detail below does not align perfectly with the discussion in [Val84]. The original
paper [Val84] additionally considers variants of the model in which learning algorithms may receive
only partial examples (if each instance in X is an n-bit string x ∈ {0, 1}n , the learning algorithm
may receive a string in {0, 1, ∗}n where each ∗ coordinate serves as a “don’t know” symbol); it
also analyzes a range of oracles (sources of information about the target function) beyond just the
random examples described above. Some subsequent work has considered settings of learning from


                                                  4
partial information in PAC-type frameworks (see for example [BDD98, BDJ+ 98, OS11, DDFS14]),
but a richer and more fully developed theory has emerged for the full information model and
consequently that model will be the focus of our discussion. Later in this article we will consider
different kinds of oracles beyond just random example oracles, including some of the ones that
Valiant proposed in [Val84].

2.2     The distribution-free PAC learning model and some variants.
Motivated by the intuitive discussion provided in the previous subsection, we now give a more
detailed description of the PAC learning model. In this subsection we first focus on defining the so-
called “distribution-independent” model of PAC learning from random examples, and then sketch
how this basic model can be altered and extended in various ways (including some extensions
already proposed for study by Valiant in [Val84]). An excellent source giving detailed definitions
of the PAC model is [KV94b].

2.2.1    Key ingredients of the PAC framework.
The instance space. As stated earlier there is a universe or instance space X of possible instances;
this is the domain for all of the functions which we will think about learning. In principle X can
be any set, but we will generally consider either the domain of all n-bit strings, i.e. X = {0, 1}n
(or equivalently X = {−1, 1}n ), or the domain of all n-dimensional real vectors, i.e. X = Rn . Here
“n” is an asymptotic parameter, and we will be centrally concerned with how the running time and
sample complexity of our learning algorithms scale as functions of n.
    Following standard practice, when we consider X = {0, 1}n we typically view the value 1 as
corresponding to “true” and 0 as corresponding to “false” (when we consider X = {−1, 1}n we
view −1 as true and 1 as false). It is helpful to think of the set X as consisting of all possible
representations of objects, where we think of a given object as being described by a vector of n
Boolean or numerical attributes. For example, the first bit of the vector describing a given object
might encode whether or not the object is red; the second bit of the vector might encode whether
or not the object is made of metal; and so on.
Concepts and concept classes. A concept f over instance space X is simply a Boolean-valued
function over the domain X, i.e a function mapping X to {0, 1} (or to {−1, 1}; this will sometimes
be more convenient). A concept can equivalently be viewed as a subset of X.
    A concept class C over instance space X is simply a set of concepts over X. In principle a concept
class can be any collection of concepts, but we will most commonly be interested in concept classes
which correspond to the set of all concepts that can be expressed using some particular type of
syntactic representation. A paradigmatic example is the concept class C over X = {0, 1}n of all
functions which are representable as Boolean conjunctions. In this example C consists of the 3n
functions from {0, 1}n to {0, 1} which are of the form ℓi1 ∧ · · · ∧ ℓij , where each ℓi is either the
Boolean literal xi or the literal xi and 1 ≤ i1 < · · · < ij ≤ n. (We will give a simple and efficient
PAC learning algorithm for this concept class in Section 2.2.2.) We will often refer to a concept
class simply by referring to the representations of the concepts in the class; for example, we will
refer to “the concept class of all conjunctions” as shorthand for “the concept class of all functions
which are representable as Boolean conjunctions.”
Distributions, target concepts, and example oracles. We write D to denote a probability


                                                  5
distribution over the instance space X. Unless otherwise specified, the distribution D may be
completely arbitrary.
    In the PAC model of learning a particular concept class C, the learning algorithm is trying to
learn an unknown target concept, which is a function f that is guaranteed to belong to C but is
otherwise unknown to the learner. The learner has access to an example oracle, which is a source
of labeled examples. The example oracle, which we denote by EX(f, D), takes no input, and each
time it is invoked it outputs a pair (x, f (x)) ∈ X × {0, 1}, where x is independently drawn from D
and f is the target concept. (We stress that the learning algorithm does not know the identity of
f within C, and that the distribution D is also unknown to the learner.).
Hypotheses and hypothesis classes. In the PAC model a learning algorithm makes some
number m of draws from EX(f, D) to obtain a labeled sample (x1 , f (x1 )), . . . , (xm , f (xm )); then it
does some computation and outputs a hypothesis h. A hypothesis is a representation of a Boolean
function from X to {0, 1} (or to {−1, 1}); if a learning algorithm for a concept class C always
outputs a hypothesis from a particular class H of hypothesis representations, we say that the
algorithm learns C using H. We will generally be concerned with hypothesis classes consisting of
those hypotheses that have some specific syntactic structure (such as the hypothesis class of all
Boolean conjunctions). Later we will also consider the computational complexity of evaluating
different types of hypothesis representations.
    The error of a hypothesis h on target concept f under distribution D is defined as

                                  errorD (h, f ) := Pr [h(x) ̸= f (x)].
                                                   x∼D

    Now we can give a precise definition of Probably Approximately Correct learning, formalizing
the intuition from Section 2.1. Fix the instance space to be either X = {0, 1}n or X = Rn , and
fix a concept class C over X. An algorithm A is said to be a PAC learning algorithm for C using
hypothesis class H if there are functions m(n, ε, δ) and t(n, ε, δ) such that the following holds: Let
D be any distribution over X and let f be any target concept in C. Let 0 < ε, δ < 1 be any
accuracy and confidence parameters. Given access to the example oracle EX(f, D) and given the
parameters ε and δ, the algorithm A makes at most m(n, ε, δ) calls to EX(f, D), runs for time at
most t(n, ε, δ), and with probability at least 1 − δ it outputs a hypothesis representation h ∈ H
satisfying errorD (h, f ) ≤ ε. (The time bound t(n, ε, δ) is often informally referred to as the running
time of the learning algorithm, and the number of oracles calls m(n, ε, δ) is referred to as its sample
complexity.)
Discussion, extensions, and variants. We will often be concerned with concept classes whose
definition involves a size parameter, such as the class C over {0, 1}n of all functions expressible as
size-s DNF formulas. (A DNF formula is an OR of Boolean conjunctions, which are often called
terms in this context, and the size of a DNF is the number of terms that are ORed together in it.)
In such settings the running time and sample complexity will also depend on the size parameter s.
    As stated earlier, the paramount goal in the PAC learning model is to obtain PAC learning
algorithms, for various concept classes, which are efficient both in terms of sample complexity and
running time. Sometimes it is of particular interest to have PAC learning algorithms in which the
hypothesis class H coincides with the concept class C (or more precisely, in which every hypothesis
representation h ∈ H represents a function in C); algorithms of this sort are referred to as proper
PAC learning algorithms. We will also be interested in non-proper PAC learning algorithms, for
which H need not align with C; however, one important restriction on H is that it would not be

                                                    6
reasonable to allow an efficient learning algorithm to output a hypothesis representation h which is
computationally very expensive to evaluate. Thus, we shall only say that a PAC learning algorithm
runs in time t if any hypothesis it generates can be evaluated on any input x ∈ X in time t as well.
(This will be true for all of the positive results that we discuss in this chapter.)
    The framework described above is often referred to as the “distribution-free” PAC learning
model because of the requirement that a learning algorithm must succeed for any distribution D.
The original work [Val84] proposed several variants and extensions of this basic model, and a number
of such variants have been extensively studied in the literature. One natural variant is to restrict
the model and only require learnability under certain particular types of probability distributions,
such as the uniform distribution over {0, 1}n or normal distributions over Rn . A different variant
of the model (proposed already in [Val84]) is to allow the learning algorithm to make “black-box”
queries on inputs x ∈ X of its choosing. Yet another variant is the “non-realizable” setting, in
which there need not be a perfect functional relationship between labels and the input instances
with which they are paired (settings of this sort can also be viewed as allowing noise to be present
in the labeling of input instances). A range of interesting phenomena manifest themselves in each
of these variants, and we will discuss each of them as well as some combinations of them later in
this survey.

2.2.2   An example of distribution-free PAC learning: Learning Boolean conjunctions.
We instantiate the above framework by considering a concrete example of a PAC learning problem
(learning Boolean conjunctions) and presenting an efficient PAC learning algorithm for this problem.
This problem was already discussed in [Val84], where an efficient algorithm was provided for it; our
analysis here incorporates some subsequent refinements leading to slightly improved quantitative
bounds, and introduces a tool (Lemma 2.1 below) which will be useful for the subsequent discussion.
    We take the domain to be X = {0, 1}n . We consider the concept class C, defined earlier, of all
 n
3 Boolean functions which are representable as Boolean conjunctions. The following “elimination
algorithm” works by eliminating those literals from the hypothesis conjunction which logically
cannot be present in it given the labeled sample:

   • Draw a sample S of m = O( 1ε · (n + log 1δ )) many labeled examples from EX(f, D).

   • Initialize the hypothesis h to be x1 ∧ x1 ∧ · · · ∧ xn ∧ xn , the conjunction of all 2n literals. For
     each positive example (x, 1) in S, remove any literal ℓ from h such that ℓ evaluates to 0 (false)
     under x. (So, for example, if n = 4 and there is a positive example (x, 1) in S with x = 1100,
     then the literals x1 , x2 , x3 and x4 would be removed from h.)

   • Output the resulting hypothesis h.

     It is clear that the elimination algorithm has running time and sample complexity which are
both poly(n, 1/ε, log(1/δ)) (by the choice of m), and thus the algorithm is computationally and
statistically efficient. It remains to show that it is PAC, i.e. that for any unknown target conjunction
f , with probability at least 1 − δ over the draw of the m-element sample S, the resulting hypothesis
h has errorD (h, f ) ≤ ε.
     This turns out to be an easy consequence of a more general result about “consistent hypothesis
finders.” A consistent hypothesis finder for concept class C using hypothesis class H is an algorithm
A with the following property: for all m, if A is given a sample S of m labeled examples (x, f (x))

                                                    7
where f is any fixed function in C, then A outputs a hypothesis h ∈ H which is consistent with
S (i.e. for each pair (x, f (x)) in S, the hypothesis h satisfies h(x) = f (x)). It is easy to see that
the third step of the elimination algorithm corresponds to a consistent hypothesis finder for the
class C of Boolean conjunctions using the hypothesis class H = C. Given this, the PAC property of
the elimination algorithm (with the claimed value of m) follows directly from the following general
result, which is proved via a simple union bound over “bad” hypotheses (hypotheses h such that
errorD (h, f ) > ε):

Claim 2.1 ([BEHW87]). Let A be a consistent hypothesis finder for a finite concept class C using a
finite hypothesis class H. Fix any f ∈ C and any distribution D, and let h be a hypothesis obtained
by running A on a sample of                                 
                                           1               1
                                      m=       ln |H| + ln
                                           ε               δ
many independent examples from EX(f, D). Then with probability 1 − δ (over the random sample
provided to A), the hypothesis h satisfies errorD (h, f ) ≤ ε.

   Thus we have obtained the following theorem:

Theorem 1. The class C of Boolean conjunctions is distribution-free PAC learnable in time
poly(n, 1/ε, log(1/δ)) using poly(n, 1/ε, log(1/δ)) samples.

Discussion: On accuracy and confidence. The logarithmic dependence on the confidence
parameter δ which is achieved in the above result is a manifestation of a general phenomenon. As
shown in [HKLW91], given any PAC-type algorithm which can achieve an ε-accurate hypothesis
with confidence 0.9 (or 0.01), by independently running the algorithm ℓ = O(log(1/δ)) times
using accuracy parameter ε/2 instead of ε, with probability 1 − δ/2 at least one of the hypotheses
h1 , . . . , hℓ thus obtained will have accuracy at least 1 − ε/2. By drawing a small additional number
of labeled examples from EX(f, D) it is possible to estimate the actual accuracy of each hi to within
±ε/4 with high confidence, and thus it is possible to obtain an ε-accurate hypothesis with overall
confidence 1 − δ with a running time and sample complexity dependence of only O(log(1/δ)) on
the confidence parameter δ. Given this, in our subsequent discussion of running times and sample
complexities for various learning algorithms we will not mention the confidence parameter δ.
     In fact, the theory of accuracy boosting [Sch90, Fre95] shows that in the general distribution-free
PAC learning model, for any learnable concept class it is always possible to achieve a dependence
on the accuracy parameter ε which is polynomial in 1/ε. This is much less obvious than the simple
argument for the confidence parameter sketched above (in particular, it is not true in certain vari-
ants of the model such as the uniform-distribution PAC learning model discussed in Section 3.4).
A rich theory of accuracy boosting has been developed over the years, encompassing many different
algorithms (including the well-known AdaBoost algorithm of Freund and Schapire [FS97]) and tech-
niques. Boosting now constitutes a well-developed and elegant theory, featuring deep connections
to complexity theory, game theory, optimization, and other areas, and is a highly influential export
from computational learning theory to more applied areas of machine learning. (For reasons of
space this survey will not go more deeply into boosting, but see [FS99, Sch03a, SF12] for excellent
overviews.)
     Given the fact that accuracy boosting is possible in the distribution-free PAC model, in our
descriptions of various distribution-free PAC learning results in Section 3.1 we will also omit the


                                                   8
dependence on the accuracy parameter ε. Thus, for conciseness we could rephrase Theorem 1
as “The class of Boolean conjunctions over n variables is distribution-free PAC learnable in time
poly(n).” (Note that giving an upper bound on the running time of a learning algorithm clearly
implies the same upper bound on the sample complexity, since a time-t learning algorithm can use
at most t examples.)
Discussion: On computational versus statistical aspects of efficient learnability. Lemma 2.1
highlights the importance of computational considerations in a theory of efficient learnability. If
C is any finite concept class, then taking H to be C, a brute-force search algorithm (to find a
consistent hypothesis in H) will always yield a consistent hypothesis finder, and by Lemma 2.1,
this means that any finite concept class C can be PAC learned with a sample complexity that is
only logarithmic in |C|. In other words, the number of samples required to learn any concept in C
is proportional to the description length which suffices to specify any concept in C. In one sense
this is a very powerful statement since it tells us, for example, that even as rich a class as C = {all
poly(n)-size Boolean circuits over {0, 1}n } can be PAC learned using only poly(n) many labeled
examples. But on the other hand, finding a consistent hypothesis from a prescribed class is often
a computationally hard problem, as we will see in Section 4.1, and this is precisely why the simple
Lemma 2.1 is not a panacea for efficient learnability: consistent hypotheses are powerful, but they
may be hard to come by.

2.3   The PAC learnability research program.
Given the PAC learning framework that we have described above, a compelling meta-question sug-
gests itself, which is to understand the running times and sample complexities that can be achieved
for PAC learning various natural concept classes of Boolean-valued functions. The overarching
goal is to determine which classes of Boolean functions are efficiently learnable and which are not.
Already in [Val84] Valiant identified this as a major potential line of research:

      “The results of learnability theory would then indicate the maximum granularity of the
      single concepts that can be acquired without programming . . . This paper attempts to
      explore the limits of what is learnable as allowed by algorithmic complexity . . . The
      identification of these limits is a major goal of the line of work proposed in this paper.”

More recently, in his 2013 book Probably Approximately Correct: Nature’s algorithms for learning
and prospering in a complex world, Valiant stated that

      “The questions of determining the most expressive classes of functions for which learning
      is still possible are the most fundamental questions of learning theory.”

    Indeed, in the years since [Val84], a broad research program has been dedicated to this goal, and
a wide range of positive and negative results on efficient learnability have been established in PAC-
type frameworks. In this spirit, the main focus of the rest of this article is on surveying the progress
that has been made towards mapping the boundary of efficient learnability in the distribution-free
PAC model and some of its chief variants. Since the literature on this topic is vast, our coverage
will necessarily be incomplete; an attempt has been made to emphasize interesting and digestible
techniques and concepts, sometimes at the expense of describing the technically most sophisticated
known results. We will see that while varying the learning model can change the scope of precisely

                                                   9
which concept classes are efficiently learnable, there is a reassuring high-level robustness to the
results that have been obtained: more complex functions tend to be hard for efficient algorithms
to learn, while simpler functions tend to be easy.


3     Positive results: PAC Learning Algorithms
In addition to defining the framework of PAC learning, [Val84] gave a number of results establish-
ing efficient learnability of several interesting concept classes in the distribution-free PAC learning
model and some of its variants. We have already seen one such algorithm, for learning Boolean
conjunctions, in Section 2.2.2, and we will see some more algorithms from [Val84] below. More
broadly, since [Val84] a wide range of different learning results have been obtained, using many dif-
ferent techniques, across different variants of the PAC learning model. In this section we will survey
a number of these variants and algorithms, and discuss some of the key underlying ingredients.
    Section 3.1 presents some of the main positive results in the distribution-free PAC learning
model that was defined in Section 2.2.1. Section 3.2 surveys some of the major results in an
augmentation of the distribution-free PAC learning model, the “PAC + membership query” model,
in which the learning algorithm is allowed to make black-box queries to the target function in
addition to receiving random labeled examples. Section 3.3 discusses several extensions of the
basic distribution-free PAC model to allow for the possibility of having noisy data of various types.
Finally, Section 3.4 considers “distribution-specific” variants of the PAC learning model, in which
the background distribution D is assumed to be some particular known “benign” distribution such
as the uniform distribution over {0, 1}n or the standard Normal distribution N (0, 1)n over Rn .
We will also consider combinations of the above models; for example, in Section 3.4 we will see
both distribution-specific algorithms for learning with membership queries and distribution-specific
agnostic learning algorithms.

3.1   Distribution-free PAC learning from random examples.
In this section we give an overview of some central algorithmic results for concept classes in the
distribution-free PAC learning model that was defined in Section 2.2.1. These results can be
grouped into several general categories based on the core underlying algorithmic technique, and
our presentation below follows this organization.
The elimination algorithm for conjunctions and disjunctions. Recall the elimination al-
gorithm from Section 2.2.2 for the concept class of all Boolean conjunctions over {0, 1}n . It is
easy to see that a dual algorithm is an efficient PAC learning algorithm for the concept class of
all Boolean disjunctions (which are ORs, rather than ANDs, of Boolean literals). This dual ver-
sion uses negative examples to eliminate literals which logically cannot be present in the target
disjunction.
    As was already established in [Val84], it is possible to learn significantly richer concept classes
than just disjunctions or conjunctions with the elimination algorithm (though at the price of an
increased running time) by using a simple yet powerful technique of feature expansion, which
plays an important role in many of the results discussed in this section. To explain this, let
us provide some definitions. A width-k disjunction is an OR of at most k Boolean literals, and
a k-CNF formula is an AND of any number of width-k disjunctions; for example, the function
f (x) = (x4 ∨ x6 ) ∧ (x1 ∨ x8 ) ∧ (x4 ∨ x5 ) is a 2-CNF formula. Since there are at most Nk = (2n)k


                                                  10
many width-k disjunctions over n Boolean variables, by viewing each width-k disjunction as a new
“meta-variable” and running the elimination algorithm for conjunctions over an expanded feature
space of Nk meta-variables rather than the original n Boolean input variables, we obtain a PAC
learning algorithm for the class of k-CNF formulas running in time poly(Nk ) = nO(k) .2
    Using the distributive law, it is easy to see that any k-term DNF formula (an OR of at most
k conjunctions of any width; for example, f (x) = (x1 ∧ x2 ∧ x3 ∧ x4 ) ∨ (x3 ∧ x5 ∧ x6 ) is a 2-term
DNF) can be expressed as a k-CNF, and thus the above-described PAC learning algorithm for
k-CNFs also PAC learns k-term DNFs, using k-CNF formulas as hypotheses. Summarizing the
above observations, we have
Theorem 2 ([Val84, PV86]). For any k, the classes Ck-CNF and CDNF(k) of k-CNF formulas and
k-term DNF formulas over {0, 1}n can each be distribution-free PAC learned in time nO(k) .
    By Boolean duality the same results hold for the classes Ck-DNF and CCNF(k) of k-DNF formulas
and k-term CNF formulas respectively.
    Information-theoretic arguments (which we mention briefly in Section 4) show that as long as k
is not too close to n, it is impossible for a PAC learning algorithm for Ck-CNF to achieve no(k) sample
complexity (and hence of course also impossible to achieve no(k) running time). These information
theoretic results do not apply to CDNF(k) : it is conceivable that there is a PAC learning algorithm
for k-term DNF formulas running in time poly(n, k). However, four decades after the nO(k) -time
algorithm for k-term DNF sketched above was given in [Val84], the nO(k) runtime of Theorem 2
is still the best result known for constant k. (We will see later that if the number of terms k is
sufficiently large, then faster running times than nO(k) are known.)
Greedy approaches for decision lists and decision trees. A 1-decision list over {0, 1}n is a
nested sequence of “if-then-else” rules in which each “if” condition checks a single Boolean literal.
For example, the decision list depicted in Figure 1 is a 1-decision list of length 3 because three
rules occur before the default output bit, which in this example is 1. A k-decision list is defined
analogously but where now each “if” condition can be a conjunction of up to k literals. It is not
difficult to show that the class of k-decision lists is a strict generalization of both the class of k-CNF
formulas and the class of k-DNF formulas.
     Rivest [Riv87] introduced the class of decision lists and gave a simple greedy algorithm which
is an efficient consistent hypothesis finder for the class of 1-decision lists using the hypothesis class
of 1-decision lists. An efficient PAC learning algorithm for 1-decision lists follows from Lemma 2.1.
This extends to a learning algorithm for k-decision lists via the feature expansion technique de-
scribed earlier in the context of k-DNF formulas (creating a new meta-variable for each length-k
conjunction), yielding the following:
Theorem 3 ([Riv87]). For any k, the class Ck-DL of k-decision lists over {0, 1}n can be distribution-
free PAC learned in time nO(k) .
    A closely related but more challenging concept class is the class of Boolean decision trees. A
size-s decision tree over {0, 1}n is an s-leaf rooted full binary tree (each internal node has two
   2
    Note that the distribution over the space of possible assignments to the Nk meta-variables induced by this
transformation is very different from the original distribution over the space of possible assignments to the n underlying
variables x1 , . . . , xn — indeed, one is a distribution over {0, 1}Nk while the other is a distribution over {0, 1}n . This
is not a problem because of the PAC guarantee that the elimination algorithm for conjunctions succeeds under any
possible input distribution.


                                                             11
                                                         x3


                                                   x2         1


                                              x7         −1


                                          1        −1

Figure 1: A 1-decision list “if x3 then output 1 else if x2 then output −1 else if x7 then output −1
else output 1.”

                                                   x3


                                 x5                                        x1


                      x1                  1                   x2                     x5



                1           −1                          -1            x4        −1        1


                                                                  1         −1

                        Figure 2: A decision tree of size eight and rank two.


childen) with an input variable xi labeling each internal node and an output bit labeling each
leaf node. The tree computes a Boolean function in the obvious way, by following the root-to-leaf
path specified by the input assignment; for example, on input 10111 the decision tree depicted in
Figure 2 would follow the rightmost path and have output 1.
    Ehrenfeucht and Haussler [EH89] introduced the notion of the rank of a decision tree. The
rank of a leaf node is zero, and the rank of a tree T with two subtrees T0 , T1 is rank(T ) =
max{rank(T0 ), rank(T1 )} if rank(T0 ) ̸= rank(T1 ) and is rank(T ) = rank(T0 ) + 1 if rank(T0 ) =
rank(T1 ). Informally, rank(T ) measures the maximum depth r of a complete 2r -leaf binary tree
which is contained in T ; note that 1-decision lists correspond precisely to trees of rank 1. Via a
simple and elegant recursive algorithm which aligns with the recursive definition of rank given above,
[EH89] gave a consistent hypothesis finder for the class of rank-r decision trees over {0, 1}n using
the same hypothesis class of rank-r decision trees. Given a sample of m examples that are labeled
according to some rank-r decision tree over {0, 1}n , their algorithm runs in time O(m · (n + 1)2r ).
Since any size-s decision tree is easily seen to have rank at most log(s), this yields a quasi-polynomial


                                                   12
time algorithm for learning decision trees:

Theorem 4 ([EH89]). For any s, the class CDT(s) of size-s decision trees over {0, 1}n can be
distribution-free PAC learned in time nO(log s) .

    Blum [Blu92] subsequently noted that Rivest’s learning algorithm for k-decision lists recovers
this result, taking k = log(s), by observing that any rank-r decision tree can be expressed as an
r-decision list. (We will see yet another algorithmic approach which recovers Theorem 4, based on
polynomial threshold functions, below.)
Solving systems of linear equations. Another algorithmic approach to PAC learning is based
on solving systems of equations. Here we work over F2 = {0, 1} and we view {0, 1}n as Fn2 ,
observing that the AND of two elements of {0, 1} corresponds to multiplication over F2 and the
XOR (parity) of two elements corresponds to addition over        P F2 .
                                   n
    A parity function over {0, 1} is a function f (x) = i∈S xi for some subset S ⊆ [n], where
addition is done over F2 . The class of all 2n parity functions over {0, 1}n corresponds to the class
of all linear functions over F2 -valued variables x1 , . . . , xn . It is easy to see that a set of examples
that have been labeled according to a parity function corresponds to a consistent system of linear
equations over F2 , and thus Gaussian elimination can be used to solve the system and find a
consistent parity function in polynomial time. This yields an efficient PAC learning algorithm for
the concept class of parity functions by Lemma 2.1.
    A generalization of the class of all parity functions is the class of all F2 -polynomials of degree
at most some fixed value k. Using the familiar feature expansion technique of creating a new
meta-variable for each monotone conjunction of up to k Boolean variables, the above consistent
hypothesis finder for parity functions extends to a consistent hypothesis finder for this class as well,
and we obtain the following:

Theorem 5 ([FS92, HSW92]). For any k, the class of degree-k F2 polynomials over {0, 1}n can be
distribution-free PAC learned in time nO(k) .

    Theorem 5 can be viewed as giving a PAC learning algorithm for the class of parity-of-bounded-
fanin-AND circuits. A related result is that the concept class of AND-of-parity circuits is also PAC
learnable in poly(n) time [FS92, HSW92]. This is achieved via a simple “closure algorithm” which
is based on the observation that the set of points in {0, 1}n that are satisfied by an AND-of-parity
circuit corresponds to a vector subspace of Fn2 , and hence the span of the positive examples is a
vector subspace of Fn2 (corresponding to an AND-of-parity circuit) which is consistent with the
                                       2
sample. Since there are at most 2O(n ) many vector subspaces of Fn2 the claimed learning result
follows from Lemma 2.1.
Linear programming and learning linear threshold functions. A linear threshold function
(LTF) over Rn is a function f (x) = sign(ℓ(x)) where ℓ(x) = w0 + w1 x1 + · · · + wn xn is a real
linear form and the function sign(·) outputs +1 on non-negative inputs and −1 on negative inputs.
Linear threshold functions, also known as linear separators and halfspaces, play a fundamental
and pervasive role throughout both theoretical and applied machine learning; indeed, they feature
prominently in many of the learning results discussed throughout the rest of this article.
    An example in Rn that is labeled according to a linear threshold function corresponds to a
linear inequality in the unknown “variables” w0 , w1 , . . . , wn ; for example, taking n = 3, the la-
beled example (−2.2, 1.4, 6; +1) corresponds to the inequality “w0 − 2.2w1 + 1.4w2 + 6w3 ≥ 0.”

                                                    13
Thus the problem of finding a linear threshold function consistent with a sample translates to
a linear programming feasibility problem, and known efficient algorithms for linear programming
(e.g. [Kha80, Kar84, Vai96]) can be used to find a feasible solution (a linear threshold function
consistent with the examples) in polynomial time.3
    While the above discussion shows that there is a polynomial-time consistent hypothesis finder
for the class C of n-variable linear threshold functions over Rn using hypothesis class H = C, since
this hypothesis class is infinite Lemma 2.1 cannot be applied. Fortunately, it turns out that a
powerful generalization of Lemma 2.1 provides the required tool for the job. Roughly speaking
(see [BEHW89] for a precise statement) this result, which follows from the pioneering work of
Vapnik and Chervonenkis [VC71] on uniform convergence of empirical probability estimates, essen-
tially states that the “ln |H|” term in Lemma 2.1 can be replaced with a combinatorial parameter
of the hypothesis class H which is known as its Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension. The Vapnik-
Chervonenkis dimension of a class of Boolean functions H over domain X (denoted V C(H)) is the
size of the largest subset of instances S ⊆ X which is shattered by H, meaning that each of the
2|S| many possible binary labelings of S is achieved by some h ∈ H. Since, as is not too difficult
to show, the VC dimension of the class of linear threshold functions over Rn is n + 1, we get the
following fundamental result:

Theorem 6 ([BEHW89]). The class of linear threshold functions over Rn can be distribution-free
PAC learned in time poly(n).

Learning polynomial threshold functions and applications. Combining the feature expan-
sion technique that we have seen earlier with the linear threshold function learning algorithm given
by Theorem 6 leads to a tool of unexpected power. A polynomial threshold function (PTF) of degree
d is a Boolean function f (x) = sign(p(x)) where p(x1 , . . . , xn ) is a real polynomial of total degree
at most d. Since any degree-d polynomial over Rn corresponds to a linear function over O(nd )-
dimensional space via our usual feature expansion technique, the VC dimension of the class of all
degree-d PTFs is at most O(nd ). By running the linear programming based consistent hypothesis
finder over this O(nd )-dimensional space, we get the following corollary of Theorem 6:

Theorem 7 ([BEHW89]). For any d, the class of degree-d polynomial threshold functions over Rn
can be distribution-free PAC learned in time nO(d) .

    An immediate consequence of Theorem 7 is that it lets us automatically transform structural
results on representing different types of Boolean functions as low-degree polynomial threshold
functions into algorithmic results for learning the corresponding concept classes. This turns out to
be a powerful approach, yielding the fastest known running times for PAC learning algorithms for
a number of concept classes over {0, 1}n .
    As a first illustration of the power of this technique, we observe that since any k-CNF or k-
DNF formula is easily seen to be equivalent to some degree-k PTF, Theorem 7 immediately lets
us recapture Theorem 2. A second illustration is that since any k-decision list is also easily seen
to be expressible as a degree-k PTF, via Blum’s observation (recall the discussion immediately
after Theorem 4) we recapture Theorem 4. While these two results have alternate proofs sketched
   3
    We remark that this discussion glosses over some subtle issues; one of these is that if the domain is Rn , then
a single coordinate of a single example is a real number which could in principle require infinitely many bits of
precision. Another is that the existence of a “strongly polynomial time” algorithm for linear programing is a famous
open question; we refer the interested reader to [Sch03b] for a discussion of these and related issues.


                                                        14
earlier, for a number of other interesting and important concept classes the PTF approach is the
only known method which achieves state of the art running times, as described below.
DNF formulas and other Boolean formulas. A longstanding goal, articulated already in [Val84] and
reiterated in [Val85], is to develop a poly(n)-time algorithm for learning DNF formulas with poly(n)
many terms. (The nO(k) running time of Theorem 2 for k-term DNFs is only poly(n) for constant
k, and for any k which is superlinear in n it is larger than 2n and hence trivial.) Note that any s-leaf
decision tree is easily seen to be expressible as an s-term DNF formula (simply by including a term
for each 1-leaf in the decision tree) but the converse is not true, so learning DNF formulas is a more
challenging problem than learning decision trees. The first non-trivial algorithm for DNF formulas
with many terms was given by Bshouty√
                                                 [Bsh96], who gave an algorithm that learns any s-term
                                                  3/2
DNF over n variables in time 2    O(  n log s log     n) . At the heart of Bshouty’s algorithm is a structural

result which shows that that any s-term DNF can be expressed as an O((n log n log s)1/2 )-decision
list (and hence as a PTF of degree O((n log n log s)1/2 )). Tarui and Tsukiji [TT99] subsequently
gave a different algorithm for learning DNF, which was based on the machinery of “approximate
inclusion/exclusion” developed by Linial and Nisan [LN90] in combination with hypothesis boosting;
                                                        1/2
their algorithm learns s-term DNF in time 2O(n log n log s) . By combining ideas involving Chebyshev
polynomials (implicit in the work of [TT99]) and decision lists (from [Bsh96]), in [KS04] it was
shown that any DNF formula with s terms can be expressed as a polynomial threshold function
of degree O(n1/3 log s). By Theorem 7 this immediately yields the following learning algorithm for
poly(n)-term DNF (where the tilde-notation hides polylogarithmic factors):

Theorem 8 ([KS04]). The class CDNF(s) of s-term DNF formulas over {0, 1}n can be PAC learned
             1/3 log s)
in time 2Õ(n             .

    The PTF approach has also yielded non-trivial PAC learning results for Boolean formulas of
arbitrary depth and fixed polynomial size. Perhaps surprisingly, quantum computing algorithms
have played a crucial role in obtaining the necessary structural results. Building on a line of work
which gave query-efficient quantum algorithms for evaluating Boolean formulas [ACR+ 10, FGG08,
RS08, Rei09], Lee [Lee09] showed that any s-leaf Boolean formula with AND, OR and NOT gates
                                                                   √
can be computed by a polynomial threshold function of degree O( s). Theorem 7 then yields the
following:

Theorem 9 ([Lee09]).
                   √     The class of all size-s (s-leaf ) Boolean formulas over {0, 1}n can be PAC
learned in time nO( s) .

Intersections of low-weight linear threshold functions. Since linear threshold functions play such a
prominent role throughout machine learning and computational learning theory, it is of significant
interest to try to develop efficient PAC learning algorithms for functions that are defined in terms of
several LTFs, such as the intersection (AND) of two or more LTFs. See Figure 3 for an illustration
of a set of examples that have been labeled according to an intersection of three LTFs. To date
this effort has only been successful for functions defined in terms of LTFs that have “low weight”
as described below.
    The weight of an LTF f over {0, 1}n is the smallest value W such thatPf can be expressed
as f (x) = sign(w0 + w1 x1 + · · · + wn xn ) where each wi is an integer and ni=1 |wi | = W. Well
known results of Muroga et al. [MTT61], which were subsequently rediscovered by many authors,
show that every LTF over {0, 1}n has weight at most 2O(n log n) ; complementing this upper bound,


                                                     15
                                                    −            −
                                            −
                                                                     −   −
                                             −                       −
                                                                 +
                                                             +
                                                    +
                                  −
                                      −                  −           +
                                                −

Figure 3: A collection of two-dimensional data points that have been labeled according to an
intersection of three LTFs (the decision boundaries for the LTFs are depicted using dashed lines).


Håstad [Hås94] has shown that there are n-variable LTFs which have weight 2Ω(n log n) . Known
distribution-free algorithms for PAC learning intersections or other combinations of LTFs have a
runtime dependence on the weight W , and are based on the PTF method as described below.
    Using techniques of Beigel et al. [BRS95] (which were in turn based on classical low-degree
rational function approximations, due to Newman [New64], for the univariate functions sign(x)),
Klivans et al. [KOS04] showed that any intersection of k LTFs of weight W is computed by a
PTF of degree O(k log k log W ). Via a different approach based on Chebyshev polynomials, it is
also shown√in [KOS04] that any intersection of k LTFs of weight W can be expressed as a PTF of
degree O( W log k); this gives a stronger bound in cases where W is small and k is large. These
structural results directly yield the following PAC learning consequences via Theorem 7:

Theorem 10 ([KOS04]). The class      √
                                        of intersections of k weight-W LTFs over {0, 1}n can be PAC
learned in time nO(min{k log k log W, W log k}) .

Limitations of the polynomial threshold function approach. Since the polynomial threshold
function approach to obtaining PAC learning algorithms is so effective, it is natural to try to
understand its limits. There is an active line of work in computational complexity theory aimed
at showing that various types of Boolean functions cannot be expressed as low-degree polynomial
threshold functions. While structural results of this type do not absolutely rule out efficient PAC
learnability of the concept classes in question, they suggest that new algorithmic techniques may
be required to learn such classes.
    The earliest lower bound results of this sort were given by Minsky and Papert [MP68] in their
celebrated work on “perceptrons.” (In our terminology, a “perceptron” is an LTF and a “perceptron
of order d” is a degree-d PTF.) They showed that the n-variable parity function has polynomial
threshold function degree exactly n, and that a particular n1/3 -term DNF formula (the “one-in-a-
box” function) has polynomial threshold degree Θ(n1/3 ). For both these results the upper bound
is established by giving an explicit polynomial, and the lower bounds use a simple symmetrization
argument to reduce the problem to one involving only univariate polynomials.
    More recently, much more sophisticated techniques have been employed to show that other
Boolean function classes do not have low-degree PTFs. In [She13a, She13b] Sherstov showed that
any PTF for the intersection of two weight-n LTFs over {0, 1}n may need to have PTF degree
Ω(log n), and that any PTF for the intersection of two general (high-weight) halfspaces may need
to have PTF degree Ω(n). Both lower bounds are optimal up to constant factors, the former by


                                                    16
the results of [KOS04] mentioned earlier and the latter because any n-variable Boolean function
trivially has PTF degree at most n. These lower bounds use a range of ingredients from polynomial
and rational function approximation, Fourier analysis, and matrix perturbation theory.
    A related line of work deals with PTF degree lower bounds for constant-depth circuits that are
composed of AND, OR and NOT gates (where the AND and OR gates may have unbounded fan-
in). These are a natural generalization of DNF and CNF formulas, which can be viewed as depth-2
circuits of this type (the NOT gates are not considered as contributing to the circuit depth), and
their learnability is of significant interest. Despite much effort, to date no nontrivial distribution-
free learning algorithms running in time 2o(n) are known even for circuits of depth 3 (though see
[ST17] for learning algorithms that achieve some slight savings over a trivial 2n runtime). Building
on a number of earlier results which use a broad spectrum of techniques [She18a, She18b, BT20],
the current state of the art is due to Sherstov and Wu [SW19], who showed that for any constant
                                                                     k−1
k, polynomial-size depth-k circuits may require PTF degree Ω̃(n k+1 ).

3.2   Distribution-free PAC learning with membership queries: the “PAC +
      MQ” model
This section deals with the basic distribution-free PAC learning model augmented with the ability
to make black-box queries to the unknown target function f . In such a query the learner specifies
an arbitrary element x ∈ X to a black-box oracle and receives as an answer the value f (x) ∈ {0, 1}.
Such queries are often referred to in the literature as membership queries, since the bit f (x) indicates
whether or nor x belongs to the set f −1 (1).
    PAC learning with membership queries is a natural and well-motivated extension of the original
PAC learning model. There are many settings in which it may be possible to query the label f (x)
of a specific example x of interest, such as when interacting with a teacher who can answer such
queries, or when each example x corresponds to a different scientific experiment that be designed
and carried out by the learner. As we shall see, the ability to make membership queries provides
significant additional power and expands the classes of functions for which we know of efficient
learning algorithms.
Exact learning. The “PAC + MQ” model is closely related to a well-studied exact learning model
which is known as the model of exact learning from membership and equivalence queries. In this
framework, which is suitable for finite domains such as X = {0, 1}n , there is no ambient probability
distribution D over the domain X, and learning proceeds in a sequence of stages. At each stage
the learner can either make a membership query as described above or an equivalence query. In
an equivalence query the learner specifies a hypothesis h : X → {0, 1}, which corresponds to the
question “Is h equivalent to the target function f (in the sense that h(x) = f (x) for every x ∈ X)?”
If h is equivalent to f then the learning process ends, and otherwise the learner is provided with a
counterexample, i.e. a point x′ ∈ X such that h(x′ ) ̸= f (x′ ).
    An easy argument [Ang88] shows that an equivalence query can be efficiently simulated in the
PAC setting simply by drawing O(log(1/δ)/ε) many random labeled examples from the example
oracle EX(f, D). If any of these labeled examples has f (x) ̸= h(x) then clearly h ̸= f and the
required counterexample has been obtained; on the other hand, if h is ε-far from f with respect to
D (so the PAC learning success criterion has not been achieved) then the probability that h and
f will agree on O(log(1/δ)/ε) many independent draws from D is at most δ. It follows that if a
concept class C has an algorithm running in time T in the model of exact learning from membership


                                                   17
and equivalence queries, then it also has an algorithm running in time poly(T, 1/ε) in the PAC +
MQ model. Indeed, nearly all of the learning algorithms in the PAC + MQ model that we discuss
below are derived from analogous algorithms in the exact learning framework.
    As a proof of concept to demonstrate the power afforded by membership queries, we briefly
consider the problem of learning an unknown k-junta. A Boolean function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}
is a k-junta if f depends on at most k of its n input coordinates; for example, for n = 1000, the
function f (x1 , . . . , xn ) = (x1 ∧x375 )∨(x1 ∧x888 ) is a 3-junta. Learning k-juntas in the PAC learning
model without membership queries is a notoriously difficult open problem; despite intensive research
effort and limited progress on the uniform-distribution restriction of the problem [MOS04, Val15],
no algorithms with a faster than brute-force nk running time are known in the distribution-free
PAC model discussed in Section 3.1. In contrast a straightforward approach, which crucially uses
membership queries to carry out an efficient binary search in order to identify relevant variables,
provides an algorithm in the model of exact learning from membership and equivalence queries that
can learn any k-junta in time poly(n, 2k ), and thus a PAC + MQ algorithm with the same running
time.
Monotone DNF formulas. A Boolean circuit or DNF formula is said to be monotone if it contains
only AND and OR gates without any negations; thus a monotone DNF formula F is simply an OR of
terms F (x) = T1 (x) ∨ · · · ∨ Ts (x) where each term is an AND of Boolean variables with no negations
allowed. In the original PAC learning model where membership queries are not available, as shown
by [KLPV87] monotone DNF formulas are essentially no easier to learn than general DNF formulas.
This is because given a DNF formula F over literals x1 , . . . , xn , x1 , . . . , xn and a distribution D over
{0, 1}n , there is a corresponding monotone DNF formula F ′ over 2n Boolean variables x′1 , . . . , x′2n ,
obtained by replacing each un-negated literal xi with x′i and each negated literal xi with x′i+n , and a
corresponding distribution D′ over {0, 1}2n , where a draw of x′ = (x′1 , . . . , x′2n ) from D′ is obtained
by drawing (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∼ D and then setting x′i = xi , x′i+n = xi for each i = 1, . . . , n. Learning
the monotone DNF F ′ under distribution D′ corresponds precisely to learning the original DNF
F under distribution D, so learning monotone DNF cannot be much easier than learning general
DNF.
    If membership queries are allowed, then the above reduction breaks down. (As one way to see
this, observe that in the context of the above reduction there are at most 2n points in the support
of distribution D′ even though D′ is a distribution over {0, 1}2n , but a membership oracle could
query any of the 22n points in {0, 1}2n .) This suggests that membership query algorithms may be
more powerful than algorithms that can only use random examples for learning monotone DNF,
and to the best of our current knowledge this seems to be the case. Indeed, already in [Ang88],
by modifying an algorithm from [Val84] Angluin gave a simple and efficient algorithm for learning
monotone DNF formulas in the model of exact learning from membership and equivalence queries.
The algorithm essentially builds the set of monotone terms in the target DNF formula one by one,
where membership queries are crucially used to discover each successive term by “walking down
the hypercube.” Translating to the PAC + MQ model, this yields the following:
Theorem 11 ([Val84, Ang88]). The class of s-term monotone DNF over {0, 1}n is learnable in
the PAC + MQ model in time poly(n, s).

Exact learning other subclasses of DNF. Apart from monotone DNF, a wide range of polyno-
mial time learning algorithms have been given for other subclasses of polynomial-size DNF formulas
in the model of exact learning from membership and equivalence queries, and as explained earlier,

                                                      18
all these results translate into PAC + MQ learning algorithms. These include polynomial-size Horn
sentences (these are essentially DNF formulas in which at most one literal per term is negated; the
learning algorithm for them, at a high level, can be viewed as an extension of the monotone DNF
learning algorithm) [AFP92]; read-twice DNF (these are DNF formulas in which each variable xi
may occur at most two times) [AP91, PR95] (see also [Han91]); and poly(n)-leaf decision trees (via
the “monotone theory” developed in [Bsh95], and via an approach based on learning generalized
automata in [BBB+ 00]).
     A particular focus of research effort has been on developing efficient algorithms to learn un-
restricted k-term DNF for k as large as possible. The current state of the art is that a range of
different algorithmic approaches can exactly learn k-term DNF over {0, 1}n in time poly(n, 2k ), but
no faster running times are yet known. Blum and Rudich [BR95] were the first to achieve poly(n, 2k )
runtime, through an algorithm based on randomized search; a different algorithmic approach is via
the monotone theory of [Bsh95]. In contrast with these more sophisticated approaches, a relatively
simple approach based on divide and conquer is given in [Bsh97], and another simple algorithm
based on automata learning is given in [Kus97].
Exact learning beyond DNF formulas. Efficient algorithms using membership and equivalence
querise have also been given for several other natural concept classes. A number of such results have
been obtained for classes of read-once Boolean formulas (in which each input variable is allowed to
occur at most once) composed of various kinds of allowed gates [AHK93, BHH95, BHHK94] (see
also [HGM94]). Roughly speaking, the read-once condition ensures that a single variable has only a
“local” effect on the target formula, and so membership queries may be used to probe for structural
information about the formula in the neighborhood of that unique occurrence. A poly(n, s)-time
algorithm has also been given for the class of multivariate polynomials over Fn2 with at most s
monomials (equivalently, the class of parities of at most s monotone conjunctions) [SS96].
     Some of the most powerful techniques for exact learning with membership and equivalence
queries are based on learning finite automata. This approach was pioneered in the paper of Angluin
[Ang87], which gave an algorithm that learns any unknown m-state deterministic finite automaton
in time poly(m, n), where n is the maximum length of any counterexample provided in response
to an equivalence query. This influential result led to a great deal of follow-up work; here we only
mention the works [BV96, OSK94, BBB+ 00] on efficiently learning multiplicity automata, which
are a generalization of deterministic finite automata. In [BBB+ 00] this approach was shown to yield
efficient algorithms for many interesting concept classes, including decision trees, various subclasses
of DNF formulas, parity of (not necessarily monotone) conjunctions over {0, 1}n (extending [SS96])
and other classes of multivariate polynomials, and more.
    We close this subsection by noting that while most PAC + MQ learning algorithms are for
concept classes over discrete domains such as {0, 1}n and are based on exact learning, there are
some exceptions. For example, [KP98] give a PAC + MQ learning algorithm for the class of
intersections of s LTFs over Rn that essentially4 runs in time poly(n, s, 1/ε) and is not based on
exact learning (see also [Bau91] for a related result).
   4
    See [KP98] for a detailed explanation of the running time dependence on various parameters which arise because
of the continuous domain Rn , such as the minimum distance between the random examples and the separating
hyperplanes defining the LTFs in the intersection.




                                                       19
3.3   PAC learning in the presence of noise.
As we have defined and discussed it so far, the PAC learning model assumes that all examples
received by a learning algorithm are labeled correctly. Of course, this may be an unrealistic as-
sumption; thus it is natural to consider extensions of the basic PAC learning model which allow
for the possibility of noise in the data. Indeed, already in [Val85] Valiant proposed a variant of his
original PAC learning model in which noisy examples may occur.
    Many possible ways to incorporate noise into the PAC learning framework have been considered;
in this subsection we briefly survey three of the most natural and widely studied noise models for
PAC learning. These are the malicious noise model (in which adversarial noise can affect both
instances and their labels), the agnostic learning model (in which adversarial noise can affect
only labels), and the relatively benign random classification noise model (in which non-adversarial
“white noise” affects only labels).
Malicious noise. One of the most difficult noise models for PAC learning is the so-called “mali-
cious” noise model. In this model, first introduced in [Val85], if the malicious noise rate is η then
independently each time the example oracle EX(f, D) is invoked and an example (x, f (x)) is drawn
with x ∼ D, with probability 1 − η the learner receives the true example (x, f (x)) but with the
remaining η probability the learner receives an arbitrary pair (x′ , b) ∈ X × {0, 1}. Since the pair
(x′ , b) is arbitrary, it should be viewed as being generated by an omniscient malicious adversary
(hence the name of the model) whose goal is to thwart the learning algorithm.
     Valiant [Val85] gave PAC learning algorithms for Boolean conjunctions and k-CNF formulas
which can handle nonzero, but quite low, rates of malicious noise. [Val85] mentioned the “possibility
that the learning phenomenon is only feasible with very low error rates,” and this intuition was
corroborated by the subsequent work of Kearns and Li [KL93]. They showed that under a mild
technical condition on the concept class C, if the malicious noise rate η exceeds 2ε/(1 + 2ε), then
no PAC learning algorithm can achieve error rate less than ε, regardless of the number of examples
or amount of computation time it uses. Thus η = Θ(ε) is an information-theoretic upper bound on
the malicious noise rate which ε-error PAC learning algorithms can tolerate.
     On the positive side, [KL93] established an extension of Lemma 2.1 to the malicious noise model:
any procedure for finding approximately consistent hypotheses from a fixed finite hypothesis class
H yields a malicious noise tolerant PAC learning algorithm provided that the malicious noise
rate is not too high (at most Θ(ε)). [KL93] also gave a generic way to modify any polynomial-
time PAC learning algorithm to handle some nontrivial level of malicious noise, essentially by
first running the algorithm multiple times to generate a collection of candidate hypotheses and
then using a fresh sample of random examples to select a high-accuracy final hypothesis from this
pool of candidates. [KL93] show that this generic approach gives a polynomial-time PAC learning
algorithm which can handle a malicious noise rate η which is roughly log(s)/s, where s is the
number of examples needed by the original polynomial-time PAC learner to achieve accuracy Θ(ε)
(with no malicious noise). Since [KL93], a number of works including [KLS09, ABL17, She21]
have given PAC learning algorithms for linear threshold functions which can handle higher rates of
malicious noise than log(s)/s for certain restricted classes of data distributions D, such as uniform
or log-concave distributions. But in general, it seems quite challenging to give distribution-free
malicious noise tolerant PAC learning algorithms for nontrivial concept classes which improve on
the generic log(s)/s result of [KL93].

Agnostic learning. Another way of relaxing the strong assumptions of the standard (noise-free)

                                                 20
PAC model is provided by the agnostic learning model. This model was introduced by Kearns et
al. in [KSS94] and was based in part on the decision theoretic learning model studied by Haussler
in [Hau92].
     In the agnostic PAC learning model, as in the standard PAC model, the labeled examples
received by the learning algorithm are assumed to be independently and identically distributed
(note that this is not the case in the malicious noise model). But unlike standard PAC learning,
in agnostic learning each labeled example is a pair (x, y) drawn from an arbitrary distribution P
over labeled examples X × {0, 1}. Thus the examples received by the learner are not assumed to
be labeled by functions in any particular concept class, and indeed there need not be a functional
dependence between the input instances x and their associated labels y at all, since the distribution
P may have a nonzero probability of outputting both (x, 0) and (x, 1). Agnostic learning is also
sometimes referred to as “non-realizable” PAC learning; the original name for the model was chosen
“to emphasize the fact that as designers of learning algorithms, we may have no prior knowledge
about the target function” [KSS94].
     In agnostically learning a concept class C the crucial quantity (given the distribution P) is the
value OPTC , which is the minimum possible prediction error of any concept c ∈ C, i.e.,

                                   OPTC = inf     Pr [c(x) ̸= y].
                                            c∈C (x,y)∼P

The goal of an “agnostic learning algorithm for C” is to generate a hypothesis h (which need not
belong to C) satisfying error(h, P) ≤ OPTC + ε, where error(h, P) = Pr(x,y)∼P [h(x) ̸= y]; in other
words, the goal is to predict almost as well as the best concept in C (C is sometimes referred to as
a “touchstone” class in this context). Agnostic learning can thus be viewed as learning C with a
fixed distribution of adversarial noise in the labels that affects an OPTC fraction of the examples.
     [KSS94] gave a range of results indicating that agnostic learning can be quite challenging; in
particular, they showed that an efficient agnostic learning algorithm for conjunctions implies an
efficient PAC learning algorithm for DNF. Only a few distribution-free polynomial-time agnostic
learning algorithms are known, for fairly simple concept classes (though we will see later that more
is possible for some natural fixed distributions). These include certain one-dimensional “piecewise”
concepts over the real line [KSS94], certain types of decision trees (over non-Boolean domains) of
depth at most two [AHM95], certain types of constant-dimensional geometric patterns [GKS97],
and certain simple types of two-layer neural networks with bounded fan-in [LBW96].
     In [KKMS08] Kalai et al. gave a general method for agnostic learning which is similar in spirit
to the “PTF method” described earlier for the original PAC learning model. Recall that the
PTF method shows that a fairly weak kind of polynomial approximation implies PAC learnability:
if, for every concept f in a concept class C over {0, 1}n , there is a degree-d polynomial whose
sign agrees with f , then the class C is PAC learnable in time nO(d) via polynomial-time linear
programming. Kalai et al. showed, using a polynomial-time algorithm for L1 regression, that if
every concept in C can be approximated by a low-degree polynomial in a stronger sense, namely
pointwise approximation, then C is agnostically learnable:
Theorem 12 ([KKMS08]). Let C be a concept class over {0, 1}n such that for every f ∈ C, there
is a degree-d polynomial p for which |p(x) − f (x)| < ε for all x. Then C can be agnostically learned
to error OPTC + ε in time poly(nd , 1/ε).
   As an application, [KKMS08] used Theorem 12 to give a sub-exponential time algorithm for
agnostically learning disjunctions (or conjunctions). Incorporating a sharp bound, due to Buhrman

                                                 21
et al. [BCdWZ99], on the degree of pointwise polynomial approximators for disjunctions in terms
of the error parameter ε, this result is
Corollary 1 ([KKMS08, BCdWZ99]). The class C of Boolean√         disjunctions (or conjunctions) is
                                                     O( n log(1/ε))
agnostically learnable to accuracy OPTC + ε in time n               .

Random classification noise. Finally, we consider the model of random classification noise
(RCN). In this noise model, which was proposed by Angluin and Laird [AL88], if the noise rate
is 0 < η < 1/2 then each example is drawn from EX(f, D) but with probability η the label is
flipped and the negation of f (x) rather than f (x) is given to the learner as the label of x. Given
the “non-adversarial” nature of the noise in this model, one might hope that relatively high noise
rates can (at least sometimes) be tolerated, and this turns out to be the case. Angluin and Laird
proved a number of general results about this model, and in particular gave an efficient PAC
learning algorithm for conjunctions in the presence of RCN at any rate η < 1/2 (the efficiency of
the algorithm degrades inverse polynomially in the parameter 1/2 − η, which can be shown to be
unavoidable for any algorithm).
    While a handful of other RCN-tolerant learning algorithms were discovered for some specific
concept classes in the years following [AL88], a major advance came with the elegant work of
Kearns [Kea98], which defined a new variant of the PAC learning model called the Statistical
Query (SQ) learning model. In this model the learning algorithm no longer receives individual
random examples from EX(f, D); rather, the learner interacts with a “statistical query” oracle
which provides statistical information about the distribution of labeled examples. More precisely,
a statistical query oracle is invoked by specifying a property of labeled examples (i.e. a function
ϕ : X × {0, 1} → {0, 1}) and a tolerance parameter 0 < τ < 1, and in response the oracle returns a
±τ -additively accurate estimate of Ex∼D [ϕ(x, f (x))], where f is the target function being learned.
    It is straightforward to show that if a concept class C is efficiently learnable in the SQ model
then it is also efficiently PAC learnable. (Here “efficient” SQ learning meaning that “not too many”
queries are made, that all query functions are efficiently evaluable, and that all tolerance parameters
are “not too small”). The significance of the SQ model for noise-tolerant PAC learning is that, as
Kearns showed in [Kea98], any concept class C that is efficiently learnable in the SQ model is in
fact also efficiently learnable in the PAC model even in the presence of random classification noise
at any noise rate η < 1/2. (As mentioned earlier for the [AL88] result, “efficient” RCN-tolerant
                                                           1
PAC learning here allows for an (unavoidable) poly( 1/2−η     ) dependence on the noise rate η.)
    This turns out to give a powerful and general method for designing RCN-tolerant PAC learning
algorithms. [Kea98] showed that many known PAC learning algorithms, including most of the
PAC learning algorithms described so far in this survey, can be shown to have SQ-model analogues,
and thus the corresponding learning problems can be solved in the RCN model. Subsequent work
showed that other PAC learning algorithms can be reworked to tolerate RCN using this approach
as well; in particular, in [BFKV97] Blum et al. gave a new polynomial-time algorithm for learning
linear threshold functions, and showed that this new algorithm can be recast in the SQ model.
This means that all of the PAC learning results obtained via the “PTF method”, described earlier,
extend to the RCN model.
    Given the results described above it is natural to wonder whether every concept class which
is efficiently PAC learnable is also efficiently SQ learnable. Since SQ-learnable concept classes
are PAC-learnable with RCN, this would establish an equivalence between PAC learning with and
without RCN. Already in [Kea98] Kearns considered this question and gave a negative answer, by

                                                  22
showing that there is no efficient SQ learning algorithm for the class of parity functions over {0, 1}n
(recall that, as described earlier, this class is efficiently PAC learnable in the standard model). The
problem of learning parity with RCN is closely related to longstanding hard problems of decoding
random linear codes and solving systems of noisy linear equations. Despite much effort no efficient
algorithm is known for learning parity with RCN, and it is commonly believed that no polynomial-
time algorithm exists. (The current state of the art is a 2O(n/ log n) -time algorithm for noise rate η
any constant less than 1/2, due to Blum et al. [BKW03].)
    We close this discussion of noisy PAC learning with a remark about the SQ model: an at-
tractive feature is that (as demonstrated by the negative result of [Kea98] for the class of parities
mentioned above) it is possible to prove unconditional information-theoretic hardness results for
various learning problems in the SQ framework. A number of techniques have been developed
for doing this, both for the usual “high-accuracy” learning notion that we have been considering
throughout this survey and also for a notion of “weak” learning in which the goal is only to achieve
accuracy slightly greater than 1/2; see e.g. [BFJ+ 94, Sim07, Szö09, Fel12a]. We further remark that
in the decades since [Kea98] the Statistical Query model has been shown to be of great relevance
and utility in a number of related areas of theoretical computer science, including the study of
differential privacy [BDMN05, DMNS06], the study of adaptive data analysis [DFH+ 15], and the
study of a computational model of evolution that was introduced by Valiant [Fel08, Val09].

3.4   Distribution-specific PAC learning
The PAC learning model and its variants that we have discussed so far have all been “distribution-
free,” since the learning algorithm must succeed for any possible (unknown and arbitrarily complex)
distribution D over the domain X. An important strand of research in computational learning the-
ory relaxes this requirement by considering distribution-specific PAC learning; so now our learning
algorithms will only be required to succeed in producing a high-accuracy hypothesis with high
probability if the background distribution D is some specific, usually known (and usually highly
structured), distribution, such as a product distribution over {−1, 1}n or a Gaussian distribution
over Rn .
    Imposing a strong distributional assumption of this sort arguably runs contrary to the spirit
of the original distribution-free PAC model, in which the distribution D was meant to capture
an unknown and arbitrarily complex learning environment. But on the other hand, distribution-
specific PAC learning turns out to give rise to a host of interesting algorithmic problems with rich
connections to other areas, and to allow for a much wider range of positive results and algorithmic
techniques than the original distribution-free model. For this reason, distribution-specific PAC
learning has been the subject of intensive study.
    Of course, the first question in the study of distribution-specific learning is what distributions
will be considered. For learning over the domain {−1, 1}n , product distributions (in which the
values of all n coordinates are mutually independent) are the most commonly studied type of
fixed distribution. In this overview we will focus on learning under the uniform distribution over
{−1, 1}n , which is the simplest and most natural product distribution over the Boolean domain.
But we first make two remarks: (1) In many cases, analogues of the uniform-distribution results
we describe can be established for broader classes of product distributions. (2) There is also a
rich body of work on distribution-specific learning over the continuous domain Rn , with the two
most intensively studied distributions being the uniform distribution over the unit sphere and the
Gaussian distribution on Rn . This research has covered a wide range of topics including learn-

                                                  23
ing intersections of halfspaces [BK97, Vem10]; agnostic learning of geometrically defined concepts
including intersections of halfspaces, convex sets, sets with bounded Gaussian surface area, and
polynomial threshold functions [KKMS08, KOS08, DKK+ 23]; and learning halfspaces in the pres-
ence of malicious noise [KLS09, ABL17]. We also remark that some of these results have been
extended to somewhat broader classes of distributions such as log-concave distributions over Rn ,
see e.g. [KKMS08, KKM13, ABL17].
Uniform-distribution learning. One of the earliest papers to consider uniform-distribution
learning over {−1, 1}n was due to Kearns, Li, Pitt and Valiant [KLPV87], which showed, among
other results, that the class of read-once DNF formulas (i.e. DNF formulas in which each variable
occurs at most once) is PAC learnable in poly(n, 1/ε) time under the uniform distribution (see also
[PH89]). [KLPV87] also showed, via a reduction, that in the distribution-free PAC model, read-
once DNF are polynomial-time learnable if and only if the unrestricted class of all poly(n)-size DNF
is polynomial-time learnable. Since distribution-free PAC learning of unrestricted DNF seems to
be hard, this was an early indication that uniform-distribution PAC learning can indeed be easier
than distribution-free PAC learning.
    In follow-up work, Kearns, Li and Valiant [KLV94] gave more evidence that uniform-distribution
PAC learning is strictly easier than distribution-free PAC learning. [KLV94] considered the problem
of learning arbitrary monotone Boolean functions (i.e. functions for which flipping an input bit from
0 to 1 can never flip the output value from 1 to 0), and gave a poly(n)-time algorithm that achieves
error rate 1/2 − Ω(1/n) under the uniform distribution (such a performance guarantee is often
referred to as “weak learning”). In contrast, an easy information-theoretic argument shows that no
2o(n) -time algorithm can achieve such an error rate in the distribution-free model.
    To gain some intuition for why uniform-distribution learning can be easier than distribution-free
PAC learning, it is instructive to consider the problem of learning polynomial-size DNF formulas.
Under the uniform distribution, any term of length more than t is satisfied by a uniform random
input with probability only 2−t ; it follows that for any poly(n)-term DNF formula F , there is an
O(log(n/κ))-DNF formula F ′ such that F and F ′ agree with probability 1 − κ on uniform random
inputs from {0, 1}n . Building on this observation, [Ver90] proved the following theorem:
Theorem 13 ([Ver90]). The class of all poly(n)-term DNF formulas is PAC learnable under the
uniform distribution in time nO(log(n/ε)) , using poly(n/ε) many uniform random labeled examples.
    In contrast with Theorem 13, recall that for the distribution-free PAC learning model, no faster
                     1/3
algorithm than 2Õ(n ) is known for learning the class of poly(n)-term DNF (indeed, an arbitrary
distribution can have high probability of satisfying a term even of length Θ(n), so the simple
observation mentioned above does not hold for the distribution-free model).
    A number of other early results used ad hoc techniques to give efficient uniform-distribution
learning algorithms for various concept classes [GKS93, Sch94, HM91, Han93, GMH96]. A different
approach to uniform-distribution learning was pioneered in the influential 1989 paper of Linial,
Mansour and Nisan [LMN89] (the journal version appeared in 1993 [LMN93]), based on Fourier
analysis of Boolean functions, which has since emerged as a very useful tool both for uniform-
distribution learning and in many other branches of theoretical computer science (see [O’D14] and
the many references therein).
Fourier analysis of Boolean functions and the low-degree algorithm. We recall only the
very basics; see the survey [dW08] for a brief introduction or the book of O’Donnell [O’D14] for a
detailed treatment. The starting point is the simple observation that any function f : {−1, 1}n → R

                                                 24
has a unique expression as a multilinear polynomial. The Fourier representation of f is simply this
representation; i.e. writing f : {−1, 1}n → R as
                                                          X       Y
                                   f (x1 , . . . , xn ) =   fb(S)   xi ,                        (1)
                                                        S⊆[n]       i∈S


the 2n real coefficients (fb(S))S⊆[n] are the Fourier   coefficients of f . (To motivate this terminol-
ogy, observe that the 2n parity functions ( i∈S xi )S⊆[n] form an orthonormal basis for the vec-
                                               Q
tor space of all real-valued functions over {−1, 1}n , where the relevant inner product
                                                                                      P bis ⟨f, g⟩ :=
Ex∼{−1,1}n [f (x)g(x)].) The Fourier L1 -norm of f is the sum of magnitudes             S |f (S)| of f ’s

                            P ∥f ∥1 .b Another
Fourier coefficients, denoted                   crucial quantity is the Fourier L2 -norm of f , written
                                b
                                         2 1/2
∥f ∥2 , which is equal to ( S⊆[n] f (S) ) . A simple argument using orthonormality of the ba-
  b
                                  P
sis functions gives that ⟨f, g⟩ = S fb(S)b  g (S), and in particular, for any Boolean-valued function
f : {−1, 1} → {−1, 1}, Parseval’s identity says that ∥fb∥2 = ⟨f, f ⟩ = 1.
            n
                                                                2
    The paper of [LMN93] made two significant contributions. The first of these, the “low-degree
algorithm,” usesQthe simple fact that each Fourier coefficient fb(S) is equal to Ex∼{−1,1}n [f (x)χS (x)],
where χS (x) = i∈S xi is the parity (basis) function over the variables in S. From this it can be
shown that if every concept in C can be approximated by a low-degree polynomial in a fairly
weak sense (L2 -approximation under the uniform distribution), then C is uniform-distribution PAC
learnable from random examples. The learning algorithm works simply by estimating each of the
low-degree Fourier coefficients and using them to build a real-valued hypothesis polynomial, which
can be easily converted to a Boolean hypothesis:

Theorem 14 (Low-degree algorithm [LMN93]). Let C be a concept class of {−1, 1}-valued functions
over {−1, 1}n such that for every f ∈ C, there is a degree-d polynomial p for which Ex∼{−1,1}n [(p(x)−
f (x))2 ] ≤ ε (equivalently, |S|>d fb(S)2 < ε). Then C can be PAC learned to error O(ε) in time
                            P

nO(d) .

    It is interesting that, as was observed earlier in other settings, there is a close connection between
a suitable notion of polynomial approximation and learnability.
    The second contribution of [LMN93] was specific to the class AC0 of constant-depth, polynomial-
size AND/OR/NOT circuits of unbounded fan-in. These circuits are of great interest in complexity
theory and are a significant extension of polynomial-size DNF and CNF formulas (the depth-two
case). Using an important result from complexity theory (Håstad’s influential “switching lemma”
[Hås86]) and Fourier analysis of Boolean functions, [LMN93] showed that every AC0 circuit has
almost all of its “Fourier weight” concentrated on degree at most polylog(n). Combining this with
the low-degree algorithm, they gave a quasi-polynomial time algorithm for learning AC0 :

Theorem 15 ([LMN93]). The class of poly(n)-size, depth-d circuits over {0, 1}n can be PAC
                             d
learned in time nO((log(n/ε)) .

     (See [Hås01, Tal17] for some slight quantitative improvements on this bound.)
     A number of other uniform-distribution learning results have been obtained, based on the low-
degree algorithm, by establishing Fourier concentration for various classes of functions. A partial
list of the concept classes for which such Fourier concentration results have been obtained includes
the class of all “juntas-of-LTFs” (i.e. Boolean functions g(h1 , . . . , hk ) where g is any k-variable


                                                   25
Boolean function and the hi ’s are any LTFs) [KOS04]; various augmentations of AC0 which allow
for a small number of LTF gates in addition to the usual AND and OR gates [GS10, Kan14]; and
degree-d polynomial threshold functions [DRST14, HKM14, Kan14].
The junta barrier. While the positive results described above capture some rather expressive
classes of functions, on the other hand even fairly simple functions can resist the low-degree al-
gorithm as far as poly(n)-time learning is concerned. As was discussed earlier, a function f :
{−1, 1}n → {−1, 1} is a k-junta if it depends on only k of the n input variables, i.e. f (x1 , . . . , xn ) =
g(xi1 , . . . , xik ) for some i1 < · · · < ik . Since poly(n)-size DNFs, CNFs and decision trees can all
compute log(n)-juntas, obtaining poly(n)-time learning algorithms for log(n)-juntas is a prerequi-
site for polynomial-time learning of any of those richer classes. It is easy to see that a k-junta
can compute the parity function over k variables, and hence it may have no Fourier weight below
level k, so the low-degree algorithm will not help learn such functions faster than time ≈ nk . In-
deed, it is a major challenge to give uniform-distribution learning algorithms for k-juntas that run
much faster than time nk ; intuitively, the chief obstacle is how to identify the k relevant variables
faster than brute-force search. Despite significant effort only a few positive results [MOS04, Val15]
are known, with the fastest current uniform-distribution junta learning algorithm, due to Gregory
Valiant [Val15], running in time ≈ n0.6k .
Monotone functions. For monotone functions, it is easy to identify relevant variables by estimat-
ing degree-1 Fourier coefficients, and indeed it is folklore that monotone k-juntas can be learned in
poly(2k , n) time from uniform random examples. Beyond juntas, learning different kinds of mono-
tone functions under the uniform distribution has been the focus of much research. Building on the
aforementioned work of Kearns et al. [KLV94], several authors have studied the problem of learning
arbitrary monotone Boolean functions. This line of work culminated with a Fourier-based algo-
rithm, due to O’Donnell and Wimmer [OW13], which learns any monotone f : {−1, 1}n → {−1, 1}
                                 √
to within error 1/2 − Ω(log(n)/ n); this accuracy matches an information-theoretic lower bound,
due to Blum et al. [BBL98], for poly(n)-time algorithms learning monotone functions. On the other
end of the spectrum of tradeoffs between runtime and error rate, Bshouty and Tamon [BT96] used
the low-degree
          √     algorithm to show that any monotone Boolean function can be learned to error ε in
time nO( n/ε) , and a near-matching lower bound was given by Blais et al. [BCO+ 15]. Several other
classes of monotone functions have also been studied from the perspective of uniform-distribution
learning, with the current state-of-the-art results for monotone DNF formulas [Ser04, Fel12b] and
monotone decision trees [OS07] being heavily based on Fourier techniques.
Agnostic uniform-distribution learning. Researchers have also considered agnostic uniform-
distribution learning; in this framework the joint distribution P over {−1, 1}n ×{0, 1} is promised to
have its marginal distribution over {−1, 1}n be the uniform distribution. The aforementioned work
of Kalai et al. [KKMS08], shows that by using L1 regression in place of the low-degree algorithm,
every concept class C that can be learned using the low-degree algorithm (i.e. every class of functions
that have “Fourier concentration,” or equivalently, have low-degree-polynomial L2 -approximators
under the uniform distribution) can in fact be agnostically learned under the uniform distribution
(with a slightly worse running time). Thus, the uniform-distribution learning results mentioned
above which are based on Fourier concentration, including [BT96, KOS04, GS10, Kan14, DRST14,
HKM14], all extend to uniform-distribution agnostic learning.
Uniform-distribution PAC learning with membership queries. A significant body of re-
search has also considered uniform-distribution PAC learning algorithms which are allowed to make

                                                     26
membership queries. As we describe below, it turns out that membership queries are very useful
for uniform-distribution learning; indeed, we have already seen evidence of this in the gap between
the nΘ(k) fastest-known running time for learning k-juntas under the uniform distribution from
random examples only [Val15], and the poly(n, 2k ) running time that is achievable if membership
queries are allowed (recall the discussion of junta learning in Section 3.2).
     An important tool for uniform-distribution membership-query learning was provided by Kushile-
vitz and Mansour [KM93]. Building on ideas of Goldreich and Levin [GL89], who gave an effi-
cient list-decoding algorithm for the Hadamard code in a cryptographic context, [KM93] gave a
membership-query algorithm for efficiently identifying all “heavy” (large-magnitude) Fourier co-
efficients of a Boolean function. The key ingredient is a procedure (which makes crucial use of
membership queries) to estimate the sum of squares of all Fourier coefficients which match a par-
ticular “prefix” of {1, . . . , n}, i.e. the quantity
                                                   X
                                                      fb(S)2 ,                                  (2)
                                           S⊆[n]:S∩[r]=T

where r is any value in {1, . . . , n} and T is any subset of {1, . . . , r}. Given this procedure, the main
algorithm of [KM93] uses a “branch-and-prune” approach of considering increasing prefix lengths
1, 2, . . . while maintaining a set of r-bit prefixes (corresponding to subsets T ⊆ [r]) for which (2)
is estimated to be at least β. Parseval’s identity ensures that the set of r-bit prefixes that are
maintained at any stage cannot be of size larger than O(1/β), which is crucial for the efficiency
of the overall approach. Using the fact that any coefficient S ⊆ [n] such that |fb(S)| ≥ β > 0 will
always give rise to such a “heavy” prefix, it can be argued that this algorithm efficiently constructs
a list which contains all “heavy” Fourier coefficients (of magnitude, say, at least 2β) and does not
contain any “light” Fourier coefficients (of magnitude, say, less than β/2).
    Given this ability to find “heavy” Fourier coefficients, a bit more analysis yields the following
result for learning functions with small Fourier L1 norm:

Theorem 16 ([KM93]). The class of all functions from {−1, 1}n to {−1, 1} which have Fourier L1
norm at most M is learnable, under the uniform distribution with membership queries, to accuracy
ε in time poly(n, M, 1/ε).

   Kushilevitz and Mansour additionally proved that size-s decision trees have Fourier L1 norm
at most s, and thereby obtained the following important corollary:

Corollary 2 ([KM93]). The class of size-s decision trees is PAC learnable, under the uniform
distribution with membership queries, in time poly(n, s, 1/ε).

    We briefly mention a few even more powerful uniform-distribution membership-query learning
results, proved using a range of different techniques. Going beyond decision trees, Jackson [Jac97]
gave an efficient algorithm for learning DNF formulas:

Theorem 17 ([Jac97]). The class of s-term DNF formulas is PAC learnable, under the uniform
distribution with membership queries, in time poly(n, s, 1/ε).

    The [Jac97] algorithm combines the influential technique of accuracy boosting [Sch90, Fre95]
with the basic [KM93] algorithm, augmented to find “heavy” Fourier coefficients of certain real-
valued functions which arise through the use of boosting. (See also [Fel10] for a variant of the

                                                    27
algorithm which uses an alternative approach based on agnostic boosting and does not involve
finding Fourier coefficients of non-Boolean functions.)
    Gopalan, Klivans and Meka [GKM12] gave an algorithm which combines ideas from exact
learning of branching programs using queries [Ang87, BBB+ 00] and complexity-theoretic work on
approximating LTFs using branching programs [MZ13] to efficiently learn combinations of LTFs
with membership queries:
Theorem 18 ([GKM12]). Let CLT F,any,k be the class of all Boolean functions over {0, 1}n which
can be expressed as g(h1 , . . . , hk ) where each hi is a linear threshold function and g is an arbitrary
k-variable Boolean combining function. The class CLT F,any,k can be PAC learned with membership
queries under the uniform distribution over {0, 1}n in time (n/ε)O(k) .
   In an intriguing result, Carmosino et al. [CIKK16] used a number of advanced ingredients from
complexity theory, including the “natural proofs” of Razborov and Rudich [RR97] and the Nisan-
Wigderson pseudorandom generator [NW94], to give a quasi-polynomial time algorithm for learning
AC0 [p], the class of constant-depth AND/OR/NOT circuits augmented with “mod p” gates:
Theorem 19 ([CIKK16]). For every prime p ≥ 2, the class of size-s AC0 [p] circuits is PAC
learnable, under the uniform distribution with membership queries, in time exp(poly(log(ns/ε))).
    Finally, Gopalan, Kalai and Klivans [GKK08] combined Fourier techniques with tools from
convex optimization to give an efficient agnostic uniform-distribution membership-query learning
algorithm for functions with bounded Fourier L1 norm:
Theorem 20 ([GKK08]). Let C be a concept class over {0, 1}n such that every f ∈ C has Fourier
L1 norm at most s. Then C can be agnostically learned to error OPTC + ε, under the uniform
distribution using membership queries, in time poly(n, s, 1/ε).
    Since, as mentioned earlier, size-s decision trees have Fourier L1 -norm at most s, this gives
an efficient uniform-distribution membership-query agnostic learning algorithim for decision trees.
(This result has subsequently been reproved using a number of different approaches, see [KK09,
Fel10].)


4    Hardness of PAC learning
In this section we discuss computational barriers to efficient PAC learnability of different classes of
Boolean functions. The results which we describe are rigorous theoretical statements establishing
formal limitations on what can be PAC learned by efficient algorithms, based on the presumed
intractability of various computational problems. (See the end of this introductory subsection for
a brief discussion of why computational hardness assumptions of some sort are required.)
    The negative results we present come in two general flavors. The first of these, which include
the earliest negative results for PAC learning (originally given in work of Pitt and Valiant [PV86,
PV88]), are representation-dependent statements which establish computational hardness for PAC
learning algorithms that use a particular form of hypothesis representation, such as hardness of
proper learning. Results of this kind are generally based on NP-hardness; a suite of sophisticated
techniques and powerful results have been employed in this area, and we briefly survey some of
this work in Section 4.1. The second strand, which is our main focus, consists of representation-
independent hardness results, which show that certain types of functions are inherently unpredictable

                                                   28
no matter what kind of efficiently evaluatable hypothesis representation a learning algorithm may
use. As we detail in Section 4.2, negative results of this sort were first obtained in the original work
of Valiant [Val84] and the subsequent work of Kearns and Valiant [KV94a]. Results of this sort were
first based on hardness assumptions from cryptography; since, broadly speaking, cryptography is
about representing information in a way which makes it impossible for an adversarial observer to
learn the information, this should perhaps not be a surprise. However, more recent work has also
fruitfully employed average-case hardness assumptions arising from complexity theory.
On the need for assumptions to obtain computational hardness results. We briefly
remark that our inability to prove strong lower bounds against general models of computation
in complexity theory carries over to computational learning theory, and necessitates the use of
unproven hardness assumptions, such as P ̸= NP, in this area as well. To see this, observe that if
P = NP then there would be a polynomial-time consistent hypothesis finder for any “reasonable”
concept class (including the class of all unrestricted polynomial-size Boolean circuits), and hence by
Lemma 2.1 we would get a proper polynomial-time learning algorithm for any such concept class.
Thus, in order to obtain computational hardness results for learning “reasonable” concept classes,
we must make computational hardness assumptions which are at least as strong as P ̸= NP.
    We remark in this context that many information-theoretic lower bounds on learning are well
known; indeed, the “Fundamental Theorem of Statistical Learning” (to use the terminology of
[SSBD14]) states that the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension of a concept class characterizes, up
to constant factors, the number of examples which are information-theoretically necessary and
sufficient for PAC learning [VC71, BEHW89]. This result is easily seen to imply that even the
broad class of all polynomial-size Boolean circuits can be PAC learned using a polynomial number
of examples, albeit by an exponential-time algorithm. But as we will see in the rest of this section,
it turns out that there are profound computational obstacles to obtaining polynomial-time PAC
learning algorithms for rich concept classes.

4.1    Representation-dependent hardness
A representation-dependent hardness-of-learning result is a statement of the following general type:
“Assuming (some computational hardness assumption such as NP ̸= RP), there is no polynomial-
time PAC learning algorithm which uses hypothesis representations from class H to PAC learn
concept class C.” The first results of this sort were established in the influential work of Pitt
and Valiant [PV86, PV88]. This paper gave a range of hardness results, including the following:
assuming that NP ̸= RP, then (i) for each k ≥ 4, the class of monotone k-term DNF is not
PAC learnable in polynomial time using the hypothesis class of (2k − 3)-term DNF; (ii) the class
of monotone read-once (AND, OR, NOT) Boolean formulas5 is not properly PAC learnable in
polynomial time; (iii) the class of Boolean threshold functions6 is not properly PAC learnable in
polynomial time. These proofs all work by giving reductions from known NP-complete problems to
the problem of finding representations of concepts that are consistent with certain sets of labeled
examples, where the representation must belong to the hypothesis class for which the hardness
result is being shown.
    To make this more concrete, we give a simple example of such an argument by sketching a proof
   5
   A formula is read-once if each input variable occurs at most once in it.
   6
   A Boolean threshold function is a linear threshold function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} of the form f (x) = sign(u · x − k),
where each coordinate ui of u belongs to {0, 1}.



                                                          29
                                 1

                                                           S + = 01111                S − = 00111
                                                                 10111                      10011
                       2         5         4                     11011                      10110
                                                                 11101                      01101
                                                                 11110                      11001
                                 3                                                          11100


Figure 4: An input graph G with n = 5 nodes and m = 6 edges, and the output S + ∪ S − of the
transformation T .


that if NP ̸= RP, then there is no polynomial-time proper PAC learning algorithm for the class
of 3-term DNF formulas. (Our discussion below follows the argument presented in Chapter 1 of
[KV94b].) The proof is a reduction from the well-known NP-complete problem of graph 3-coloring:
given as input an undirected graph, the problem is to determine whether it can be validly vertex-
colored (meaning that the two endpoints of every edge are assigned different colors) using a palette
of only three colors.
    The key to the reduction is a simple mapping M which takes as input a graph with n nodes and
m undirected edges (which is the input to the 3-coloring problem), and outputs a set S = S + ∪ S −
of n positively labeled examples and m negatively labeled examples. In more detail, for each vertex
i ∈ [n] there is a positive example which is the n-bit string with      a 0 in only the i-th coordinate
                                                                 [n]
                                                                     
and 1’s in all other coordinates, and for each edge {i, j} ∈ 2 there is a negative example which
is the n-bit string with 0s only in positions i and j and 1’s in all other coordinates. (See Figure 4
for an illustration of a possible input graph and the output of the mapping M on this graph.) The
crucial property of this mapping, which is not difficult to show, is the following: the graph G has a
valid vertex-coloring using three colors if and only if there is a three-term DNF formula T1 ∨ T2 ∨ T3
which labels all of the examples in S + as positive and all of the examples in S − as negative.
    Given this, the crux of the argument is to show that any polynomial-time proper PAC learn-
ing algorithm A for the concept class of 3-term DNF formulas could be used to determine, in
randomized polynomial time, whether or not an input graph can be validly vertex-colored using
three colors. The idea is to first perform the mapping M on the input graph G and then run the
learning algorithm A, using the uniform distribution over S + ∪ S − to simulate the example oracle
EX(c, D).7 Roughly speaking, if the graph has a valid 3-coloring then (with an appropriate set-
ting of parameters) the PAC learning algorithm will with high probability construct a hypothesis
3-term DNF which correctly labels all of the examples in S + ∪ S − , whereas if the graph has no
valid 3-coloring then since no such DNF exists the learning algorithm surely will not output one.
Thus, by checking whether or not the output of the learning algorithm is a 3-term DNF consistent
with S + ∪ S − , it is possible to efficiently and correctly (with high probability) determine whether
or not the graph has a valid 3-coloring.
Representation-dependent hardness of learning and hardness of approximation. In the
simple argument sketched above, the hardness of properly learning 3-term DNFs is established using
the NP-completeness of determining whether or not a graph has a valid 3-coloring. Given this, it
   7
     This is where random bits are used, and explains why the conclusion of the argument is about NP versus RP
rather than NP versus P.


                                                     30
is should not be surprising that result (i) of [PV88] mentioned earlier, namely the hardness of PAC
learning k-term monotone DNF using (2k − 3)-term DNF hypotheses, is established using the NP-
hardness of approximating the minimum number of colors needed to color a k-colorable graph. This
connection between computational hardness of representation-dependent learning and hardness of
approximation, which was first made in [PV88], turned out to be pivotal in subsequent work. The
1990s and subsequent decades witnessed an explosion of research in hardness of approximation that
resulted from the PCP theorem and the techniques employed in its proof;8 this progress in turn led
to a wide range of different hardness results for representation-dependent learning, some of which
are briefly summarized below.
    One line of work gave representation-dependent hardness results in the original distribution-free
PAC learning model. Results of this sort show that under suitable complexity-theoretic hardness
assumptions, various specific concept classes C are not PAC learnable in polynomial time using
various specific hypothesis classes H. [ABF+ 09] showed that DNF formulas and intersections of
LTFs are not properly PAC learnable unless NP=RP, and that polynomial-size decision trees are not
properly PAC learnable under a different hardness assumption. [KS08] showed that unless NP=RP,
for any constant k the class CDNF(2) of two-term DNFs cannot be PAC learned to accuracy 1/2+1/k
in polynomial time using CDNF(k) hypotheses, and [KS11] showed that under the same assumption,
for any constant k the class of intersections of two LTFs cannot be PAC learned in polynomial
time using the hypothesis class of arbitrary functions of k LTFs. Recently [GS21] unified these two
results by showing hardness of learning CDNF(2) using the hypothesis class of arbitrary functions of
k LTFs. Even more recently, [KST23b] have shown that under the randomized exponential time
hypothesis, no PAC learning algorithm for s-term DNFs, size-s decision trees, or log(s)-juntas can
use DNF hypotheses and run in time nÕ(log log s) time (see [Bsh23] for an extension to monotone
versions of these classes).
    A related strand of research proves hardness of representation-dependent agnostic learning.
Strengthening an earlier result of [BDEL03], [FGKP06] showed that if P ̸= NP, then even if there
is an LTF that correctly classifies a 1 − ε fraction of a data set of labeled examples over Rn , no
polynomial-time algorithm can find an LTF that is correct on a 1/2 + ε fraction of the examples,
for any constant ε > 0 (i.e. it is hard to agnostically properly learn LTFs even to 51% accuracy).
[GR09] subsequently extended this hardness result to labeled examples over {0, 1}n , and [FGRW09]
extended it to the setting where there is a Boolean conjunction that correctly classifies 1−ε fraction
of the examples. [GKS10] established hardness of agnostically learning parities using low-degree
F2 -polynomial hypotheses, and [DOSW11, BGS18] established hardness of agnostically learning
LTFs using low-degree PTF hypotheses.
    Finally, a few papers have even established representation-dependent hardness of proper learning
when membership queries are allowed. [Fel09] extended the DNF hardness results of [ABF+ 09] by
showing that if NP ̸= RP then there is no polynomial-time proper PAC learning algorithm for DNF
formulas even when the learning algorithm has access to an MQ oracle, and [KST23a] extended
the decision tree hardness results of [ABF+ 09] by showing that under a plausible assumption about
the exponential-time hardness of SAT, there is no polynomial-time proper PAC learning algorithm
for decision trees even when the learning algorithm has access to an MQ oracle.
  8
      Note that the early work of Pitt and Valiant [PV86, PV88] preceded these developments.




                                                        31
4.2     Representation-independent hardness
The representation-dependent hardness results discussed in Section 4.2 provide useful insights for
designers of learning algorithms, by giving strong evidence that prospective algorithms which use
various particular hypothesis classes are unlikely to be provably correct and efficient. Even stronger
evidence of hardness is provided by representation-independent hardness results, which rule out the
existence of provably correct and efficient learning algorithms that use any kind of efficiently evalu-
atable hypothesis (under suitable hardness assumptions). Three main approaches have been taken
to establish such results, based on the cryptographic study of pseudorandomness; on public-key
cryptography; and, most recently, on average-case hardness assumptions arising from complexity
theory.

4.2.1    Pseudorandomness
Already in [Val84] Valiant noted that the cryptographic notion of pseudo-random functions, which
had just recently been developed at that time in the seminal work of Goldreich, Goldwasser and
Micali [GGM86], provides a source of concept classes that are information-theoretically learnable
from polynomially many examples but computationally hard to learn. A pseudo-random function
family (PRFF) is a class F of functions {fs : s ∈ {0, 1}n }, where each fs : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}
is computable by a Boolean circuit of poly(n) size, with the following crucial property (roughly
speaking): any poly(n)-time distinguishing algorithm A which is given black-box oracle access
(i.e. MQ access) to an unknown f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} cannot distinguish between the two possibilities
                                                                                   n
that (i) f is a truly random function drawn uniformly at random from all 22 functions from
{0, 1}n to {0, 1}, versus (ii) f = fs is a uniform random member of F, i.e. a “pseudo-random”
function. Note that F is a set of “only” 2n functions, each of which is efficiently computable. As
Valiant observed, this definition implies that any PRFF F must be a concept class that is hard
for any polynomial-time algorithm to learn, even under the uniform distribution and even given
membership queries. (This is because any polynomial-time learning algorithm for F would, with
high probability, generate a high-accuracy hypothesis when run on f ∈ F , but could not do so when
run on a truly random function; since it is easy to estimate the accuracy of a hypothesis using a
few random examples, such a purported efficient learning algorithm for F would easily yield a
polynomial-time distinguisher between truly random and pseudo-random functions.) Since various
widely accepted hardness assumptions, such as the existence of any one-way function [HILL99], are
known to imply the existence of PRFFs, this shows that under such assumptions the class of all
poly(n)-size Boolean circuits is not efficiently PAC learnable even under the uniform distribution
with membership queries.
     The argument sketched above establishes that if C is a concept class which contains a pseu-
dorandom function family, then C must be hard to learn. Naor and Reingold [NR04] proved that
if factoring Blum integers (integers of the form N = pq where p, q are primes congruent to 3
mod 4) is super-polynomially hard, then depth-5 circuits composed of Majority gates can compute
pseudorandom functions and hence cannot be learned in polynomial time, even with membership
queries and even under the uniform distribution. Kharitonov had earlier [Kha93] obtained similar
hardness-of-learning results, using similar assumptions, via an argument based on the existence
of suitable pseudorandom generators; [Kha93] also showed, under a stronger but still plausible
hardness assumption (that random Blum integers are hard to factor even in some sub-exponential
time bound), that the quasi-polynomial running time of the [LMN93] uniform-distribution learning


                                                  32
algorithm for AC0 circuits is close to best possible, even if membership queries are allowed.
    A conceptually different approach, first explored in seminal work of Kearns and Valiant [KV94a],
turns out to establish hardness of learning for different, and in some cases even simpler, classes of
Boolean circuits than those discussed above. We turn to this approach, and to the work of [KV94a],
next.

4.2.2    Public-key cryptography.
One of the central insights underlying [KV94a] is that the existence of secure public-key cryp-
tosystems (first proposed by Diffie and Hellman [DH76]) implies the hardness of learning problems
associated with the decryption function of the cryptosystem. Recall that a public-key cryptosystem
is a scheme that enables two parties, Alice and Bob, to communicate privately even in the presence
of an eavesdropper Eve who can read the messages that are sent between them. The central notion
enabling public-key cryptography is that of a “trapdoor function;” intuitively, this is an (encryp-
tion) function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n that is polynomial-time computable by any party, but which
is such that the (decryption) function f −1 can only be computed in polynomial time by a party
which is in possession of certain secret “trapdoor” information. (It is useful to think of the trapdoor
function as being “created” by one of the parties, and of the trapdoor information as only being
available to the creator of the trapdoor function.) Trapdoor functions enable public-key cryptogra-
phy9 in the following way: Alice publishes an algorithm for computing a trapdoor function f which
she has created, thus making it possible for any party, including Bob, to compute f given an input
x. To send a message x to Alice, Bob simply computes f (x) and sends the result to her. Since
Alice created the trapdoor function f and is in possession of the secret trapdoor information, she
can efficiently invert f on the input f (x) that Bob has provided and thereby recover the original
message x; but the eavesdropper Eve, even though she is in possession of the encrypted message
f (x), lacks the trapdoor information which would enable her to invert f , so she is unable to obtain
x.
    The first crucial observation of [KV94a] is that the security of such a cryptosystem implies
that the decryption function f −1 must be hard to learn. The reasoning is as follows: Since the
eavesdropper Eve can compute f on inputs of her choosing, she can create a data set of “labeled
examples” of the form (y, f (y)). Viewing each such pair (y, f (y)) as (f −1 (x), x), this means that
Eve can create a data set of examples labeled by the decryption function f −1 ; if this decryption
function were efficiently learnable, then Eve would be able to construct a high-accuracy hypothesis
h for f −1 , which violates the assumed security of the cryptosystem. Of course, a number of technical
issues have to be dealt with in order to translate this high-level intuition into a formal proof (the
trapdoor function f must be a permutation or close to a permutation; we ultimately want hard-
to-learn Boolean functions with single-bit outputs rather than n-bit-string outputs; etc), but the
central idea is as sketched above.
    [KV94a] showed that several different number-theoretic problems, each of which is conjectured
to be hard in the average-case, can serve as the required hard-to-invert decryption functions in the
framework proposed above. These include factoring Blum integers, inverting the RSA “modular
exponentiation” function, and detecting quadratic residues. Following [KV94b], we discuss (a
slightly modified version of) the specific case of inverting the RSA function with exponent 3 in some
  9
    More precisely, secure communication from Bob to Alice; secure communication from Alice to Bob can of course
be achieved simply by swapping the roles of the two parties.



                                                      33
detail, towards illustrating a second central idea of [KV94a]. The encryption function f is defined
as f (x) = fN (x) = x3 mod N , where N = pq is the product of two n-bit primes p, q that are both
                                                         −1
congruent to 2 mod 3. The decryption function is fN         (y) = y d mod N , where d = (2(p − 1)(q −
1) + 1)/3; elementary number theory shows that fN is a bijection from Z∗N = {i ∈ {1, . . . , N −
                                             −1
1} : gcd(i, N ) = 1} to itself, and that fN     is as defined above. Intuitively, the secret trapdoor
                                                                                                  −1
information is the factorization p, q of N ; given this information it is easy to compute fN          in
polynomial time. But a widely-accepted cryptographic assumption (the intractability of computing
discrete cube roots) states that no poly(n)-time algorithm can, given an N which is the product of
                                                                                                  −1
random n-bit primes p, q congruent to 2 mod 3 and a random input y, successfully compute fN          (y)
with 1/poly(n) success probability. Under this assumption, it can be shown that the concept class
                              −1                                                  −1
consisting of all functions fN   (x)i (the i-th bit of the n-output-bit function fN  ; note that every
such functions is computable by a poly(n)-size circuit) cannot be PAC learned in poly(n) time.
Hence, any class of Boolean circuits that is capable of performing modular exponentiation — i.e.
of computing functions of the form xd mod N where d, N are O(n)-bit numbers — cannot be PAC
learned in polynomial time.
    With the above sketch in hand, we now arrive at a second key insight of [KV94a], which is
that by using “encoding tricks” to create an augmented version of the input, it is possible to
significantly reduce the circuit complexity of the decryption function while still maintaining the
property that the decryption function is hard to learn. In the context of the previous paragraph,
                                                 −1
computing the original decryption function fN       (y) = y d mod N using the standard approach of
“repeated squaring” appears to require circuit depth Ω(n) (recall that d = (2(p − 1)(q − 1) + 1)/3
                                                                                            −1
is an n-bit-long integer). The clever observation of [KV94a] is to consider, instead of fN     (y) = y d
mod N , a variant of this function which is given as its input not the string y but an augmented
input consisting of a list of successive squared powers of y, i.e.
                                                                            O(n)
              (y   mod N, y 2   mod N, y 4    mod N, y 8   mod N, . . . , y 2      mod N )          (3)

(the output of the function is y d mod N as before). As Angluin put it in [Ang92], this amounts
to “mov[ing] some tasks that are computationally onerous but cryptographically irrelevant into the
“input”.” (It is interesting to compare this trick with the “feature expansion” technique that was
useful for obtaining many of the positive results described earlier.)
    The above-described variant function must still be hard to learn, because it is easy for any
prospective learning algorithm which receives only the original input y mod N to efficiently con-
struct the augmented input; so if there were an efficient learning algorithm for the variant function,
then there would be an efficient learning algorithm for the original function. (The input length of
the variant function is quadratic in the original input length |y| = O(n), but this is immaterial for
polynomial-time algorithms.) For a designer of lower bounds for learning algorithms, the consid-
erable advantage of considering the variant function is that its circuit complexity is (to the best
of our present knowledge) much lower than the circuit complexity of the original function. This
is because computing the variant function given Equation (3) as input only requires performing
                                                                      i
multiplication mod N of a suitable subset of the input values y 2 mod N , to build the desired
exponent d using its binary representation. Results of Beame, Cook and Hoover [BCH86] show
that this “iterated multiplication mod N ” computation can be performed by a Boolean circuit of
only O(log n) depth. Since such circuits are well-known to be equivalent to the complexity class
NC1 of poly(n)-size, O(log n)-depth Boolean formulas, this gives the following striking result: under
a suitable average-case hardness assumption (about factoring integers of the form N = pq where

                                                  34
p, q are congruent to 2 mod 3), the concept class NC1 has no poly(n)-time PAC learning algorithm.
Using similar ideas, and building on known reductions from circuit complexity and learning theory
[CSV84, PW88, Rei87], in [KV94a] it is also shown that under similar hardness assumptions, nei-
ther the the class of deterministic finite automata of poly(n) size, nor the class of constant-depth
circuits composed of Majority gates, has a poly(n)-time PAC learning algorithm.
    A number of subsequent works have built on the ideas of [KV94a] to establish hardness of
representation-independent learning, based on public-key cryptography, for even more limited con-
cept classes or for even more powerful learning paradigms; we survey a few such results below.
    Angluin and Kharitonov [AK95] extended the basic [KV94a] hardness technique by showing
that the existence of public-key cryptosystems secure against chosen ciphertext attack implies
hardness of learning for the corresponding decryption functions even if membership queries are
allowed. Based on known public-key cryptosystems conjectured to be secure against chosen ci-
phertext attack, [AK95] extended several of the hardness results of [KV94a] to hold even against
poly(n)-time learning algorithms that can make membership queries. [AK95] also showed, using
the cryptographic notion of public-key signature schemes, that under a plausible assumption about
the existence of certain one-way functions, the class of poly(n)-size DNF formulas is either poly(n)-
time PAC learnable without membership queries, or is not poly(n)-time PAC learnable even if
membership queries are allowed — in short, “membership queries won’t help.”
    Klivans and Sherstov [KS09] extended the [KV94a] approach by analyzing lattice-based cryp-
tosystems due to Regev [Reg04, Reg05] (see also [FGKP06] for related results). [KS09] showed that
the decryption function for Regev’s cryptosystems can be computed as an intersection of poly(n)
many degree-2 PTFs. Using a simple feature expansion argument, it can be shown that an effi-
cient learning algorithm for intersections of degree-2 PTFs yields an efficient learning algorithm for
intersections of halfspaces. Thus [KS09] showed (among other results) that assuming that there
does not exist a poly(n)-time approximation algorithm (in a suitable approximation regime) for
the “unique shortest vector problem” on lattices (which is the hardness assumption underlying the
Regev cryptosystem), for any constant c > 0 the concept class of intersections of nc halfspaces over
{0, 1}n has no poly(n)-time PAC learning algorithm.
    More recently, Applebaum et al. [ABW10] proposed new public-key cryptosystems based on the
conjectured average-case hardness of various combinatorial problems, and provided some evidence
for the average-case hardness of these problems. These public-key cryptosystems have decryption
functions that can be computed by O(log n)-juntas, and thus under the [ABW10] average-case
hardness assumptions, there is no poly(n)-time PAC learning algorithm for the class of O(log n)-
juntas.

4.2.3   Hardness based on average-case complexity assumptions.
The past decade or so has witnessed another exciting line of work on representation-independent
hardness of learning, based on average-case hardness assumptions from complexity theory. From
a results perspective, this line of research is notable because it establishes computational hardness
of learning various concept classes that consist of relatively simple functions, coming quite close to
classes of functions which are known to be efficiently PAC learnable. From a techniques perspective,
it is interesting that this new strand of research takes a different approach from prior work and is
not based on the (presumed) intractability of computing the decryption function of a public-key
cryptosystem. Instead, the key underlying hardness assumptions are that it is difficult to efficiently
refute certain particular types of unsatisfiable random constraint satisfaction problems.

                                                 35
    To explain the general framework, we begin by briefly recalling some relevant background about
the familiar constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) known as k-SAT. The k-SAT problem is based
on the OR-predicate of arity k (which we have been referring to as a “clause” of width k); a
random k-SAT formula of size m is obtained by ANDing together m random clauses of width
k to form a random k-CNF of size m. In an influential paper, Feige [Fei02] conjectured that if
m ≥ Cn for a suitably large constant C, then random 3-SAT formulas of size m are hard to
refute; this means, roughly speaking, that no efficient algorithm can distinguish such a random
formula from a satisfiable formula of the same size. (It is well known that for such large m, a
random 3-SAT formula will with overwhelmingly high probability be unsatisfiable.) Feige [Fei02]
showed that this and related hardness assumptions, which are consistent with the current state of
the art for known refutation algorithms, lead to surprising consequences in complexity theory and
hardness of approximation. In a similar spirit, the strand of work we are now discussing showed that
assumptions of this flavor lead to strong representation-independent hardness-of-learning results.
    The first result of this sort was due to Daniely, Linial and Shalev-Shwartz [DLS14]. This work
proposed a rather strong generalization of Feige’s hardness-of-refutation assumption from [Fei02],
called the “strong random CSP assumption;” this assumption dealt with a range of non-standard
predicates other than the 3-way OR-predicate, and assumed hardness of refutation even for val-
ues of m much larger than Cn. Under this new assumption, [DLS14] established representation-
independent hardness for a number of well-studied concept classes, including ω(1)-size DNF formu-
las and intersections of ω(1) many halfspaces, as well as some results on representation-independent
hardness of agnostic learning. The technical details of how [DLS14] does this are beyond the scope
of this article, but at a very high level, this is accomplished by relating the assumed hardness of
refutation to the hardness of distinguishing between a sample of correctly labeled examples and a
sample of randomly labeled examples.
    As it turns out, soon after the appearance of [DLS14] the specific “strong random CSP as-
sumption” of [DLS14] was shown to be false by Allen et al. [AOW15], who gave an efficient refuta-
tion algorithm for this particular problem. However, the general approach introduced by [DLS14]
turned out to be quite adaptable to using different assumptions, and (at the time that this article
was written) this general approach is currently the source of quite a number of state-of-the-art
representation-independent hardness of learning results, based on assumptions that have withstood
considerable scrutiny, as briefly surveyed below.
    Daniely et al [DSS16] showed that no poly(n)-time algorithm can learn ω(log n)-term DNF
formulas, using an assumption that is considerably weaker and more standard than the “strong
random CSP assumption” of [DLS14]. The assumption of [DSS16], like that of Feige [Fei02], only
involves the OR-predicate; it is that given any d, there exists some large enough value k(d) such that
random k(d)-SAT instances are hard to refute. [DSS16] further showed that this same assumption
implies the hardness of various other learning problems, including learning intersections of ω(log n)
many halfspaces, agnostically learning conjunctions, halfspaces, or parities, and learning sparse
PTFs. The DNF and intersection-of-halfspaces hardness results of [DSS16] were subsequently
strengthened by Daniely and Vardi [DV21] to hold for ω(1)-term DNF and intersections of ω(1)
many halfspaces, under a slightly different hardness assumption.
    In [Dan16], Daniely similarly eliminated the need for the non-standard “strong random CSP
assumption” of [DLS14] to achieve hardness results for agnostically learning a single halfspace. He
used a hardness assumption based on the k-XOR predicate (corresponding to parity of k variables),
and showed that if random k-XOR formulas of sufficiently large size are hard to refute, then for


                                                 36
any arbitrarily small constant η > 0, no polynomial-time algorithm can find a hypothesis whose
accuracy is even 1/2 + 1/poly(n), given examples from a joint distribution D over Rn × {−1, 1} for
which some halfspace correctly labels a 1 − η fraction of examples from D.


5    Conclusion
We have seen how Valiant’s seminal paper [Val84] gave rise to a rich and multifaceted theory of com-
putationally efficient learning, which is being actively investigated to this day. Extending beyond
the scope of this article, in the decades since [Val84] the PAC learning framework has grown to en-
compass a broad range of topics and questions that go beyond the learnability and non-learnability
of specific classes of Boolean functions. Within the realm of computational learning theory, these
include, among many other topics, the study of accuracy boosting methods (which, as mentioned in
Section 2.2.2, are widespread and useful in computational learning); PAC-style models of learning
for non-Boolean valued functions; and PAC-style learning in unsupervised scenarios where examples
are unlabeled. Variants of the PAC learning model have played a central role in investigating a
variety of other phenomena in learning, including privacy, active learning, memory-sample trade-
offs, streaming, and reproducibility. Rich connections have also been established between the PAC
learning framework and many other subfields of theoretical computer science apart from learning,
including but not limited to property testing, algorithmic game theory, computational complexity,
statistical algorithms, and cryptography. Zooming out even more, “PAC-style thinking” has had
a tremendous influence on the development of machine learning over the past forty years, and has
served as a source of conceptual scaffolding for the study of phenomena such as neural computation
and evolution [Val00, Val09, Val13]. It will be exciting to see where the next forty years of reflection
on the ideas from [Val84] take us.


Acknowledgements
I thank the referees for their very helpful comments and corrections, which greatly improved this
chapter.

References
[ABF+ 09]   Michael Alekhnovich, Mark Braverman, Vitaly Feldman, Adam R. Klivans, and Toniann Pitassi. The
            complexity of properly learning simple concept classes. Journal of Computer & System Sciences,
            74(1):16–34, 2009. 4.1
[ABL17]     Pranjal Awasthi, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Philip M. Long. The power of localization for efficiently
            learning linear separators with noise. J. ACM, 63(6):50:1–50:27, 2017. 3.3, 3.4
[ABW10]     Benny Applebaum, Boaz Barak, and Avi Wigderson. Public-key cryptography from different assump-
            tions. In Proc. 42nd Annual Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 171–180, 2010. 4.2.2
[ACR+ 10]   Andris Ambainis, Andrew M. Childs, Ben Reichardt, Robert Spalek, and Shengyu Zhang. Any AND-
            OR formula of size n can be evaluated in time n1/2+o(1) on a quantum computer. SIAM J. Comput.,
            39(6):2513–2530, 2010. 3.1
[AFP92]     Dana Angluin, Michael Frazier, and Leonard Pitt. Learning conjunctions of Horn clauses. Machine
            Learning, 9:147–164, 1992. 3.2
[AHK93]     Dana Angluin, Lisa Hellerstein, and Marek Karpinski. Learning read-once formulas with queries. J.
            ACM, 40(1):185–210, 1993. 3.2


                                                      37
[AHM95]     Peter Auer, Robert C. Holte, and Wolfgang Maass. Theory and applications of agnostic PAC-learning
            with small decision trees. In Proc. Twelfth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
            pages 21–29, 1995. 3.3
[AK95]      Dana Angluin and Michael Kharitonov. When won’t membership queries help? Journal of Computer
            and System Sciences, 50(2):336–355, 1995. 4.2.2
[AL88]      Dana Angluin and Philip Laird. Learning from noisy examples. Machine Learning, 2(4):343–370, 1988.
            3.3
[Ang87]     Dana Angluin. Learning regular sets from queries and counterexamples. Information and Computation,
            75(2):87–106, 1987. 3.2, 3.4
[Ang88]     Dana Angluin. Queries and concept learning. Machine Learning, 2:319–342, 1988. 3.2, 11
[Ang92]     Dana Angluin. Computational learning theory: Survey and selected bibliography. In Proc. 24th Annual
            Symposium on Theory of Computation (STOC), pages 351–369, 1992. 4.2.2
[AOW15]     Sarah R. Allen, Ryan O’Donnell, and David Witmer. How to refute a random CSP. In Proc. 56th
            Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 689–708, 2015. 4.2.3
[AP91]      Howard Aizenstein and Leonard Pitt. Exact learning of read-twice DNF formulas (extended abstract).
            In Proc. 32nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 170–179, 1991. 3.2
[Bau91]     Eric Baum. Neural net algorithms that learn in polynomial time from examples and queries. IEEE
            Trans. on Neural Networks, 2:5–19, 1991. 3.2
[BBB+ 00]   Amos Beimel, Francesco Bergadano, Nader H. Bshouty, Eyal Kushilevitz, and Stefano Varricchio. Learn-
            ing functions represented as multiplicity automata. J. ACM, 47(3):506–530, 2000. 3.2, 3.4
[BBL98]     Avrim Blum, Carl Burch, and John Langford. On learning monotone boolean functions. In Proc. 39th
            Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 408–415, 1998. 3.4
[BCdWZ99] Harry Buhrman, Richard Cleve, Ronald de Wolf, and Christof Zalka. Bounds for small-error and zero-
          error quantum algorithms. In Proc. 40th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
          (FOCS), pages 358–368, 1999. 3.3, 1
[BCH86]     Paul Beame, Stephen A. Cook, and H. James Hoover. Log depth circuits for division and related
            problems. SIAM J. Comput., 15(4):994–1003, 1986. 4.2.2
[BCO+ 15]   Eric Blais, Clément Canonne, Igor Oliveira, Rocco A. Servedio, and Li-Yang Tan. Learning circuits with
            few negations. In Proc. 18th International Workshop on Randomization and Computation (RANDOM),
            pages 512–527, 2015. 3.4
[BDD98]     Shai Ben-David and Eli Dichterman. Learning with restricted focus of attention. Journal of Computer
            & System Sciences, 56(3):277–298, 1998. 2.1
[BDEL03]    Shai Ben-David, Nadav Eiron, and Philip M. Long. On the difficulty of approximately maximizing
            agreements. Journal of Computer & System Sciences, 66, 2003. 4.1
[BDJ+ 98]   Andreas Birkendorf, Eli Dichterman, Jeffrey Jackson, Norbert Klasner, and Hans Ulrich Simon. On
            restricted-focus-of-attention learnability of Boolean functions. Machine Learning, 30:89–123, 1998. 2.1
[BDMN05]    Avrim Blum, Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, and Kobbi Nissim. Practical privacy: the sulq frame-
            work. In Proc. 24th Symposium on Principles of Database Systems, pages 128–138, 2005. 3.3
[BEHW87]    Anselm Blumer, Andrzej Ehrenfeucht, David Haussler, and Manfred K. Warmuth. Occam’s razor.
            Information Processing Letters, 24:377–380, 1987. 2.1
[BEHW89]    Anselm Blumer, Andrzej Ehrenfeucht, David Haussler, and Manfred K. Warmuth. Learnability and the
            Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension. J. ACM, 36(4):929–965, 1989. 3.1, 6, 7, 4
[BFJ+ 94]   Avrim Blum, Merrick L. Furst, Jeffrey Jackson, Michael J. Kearns, Yishay Mansour, and Steven Rudich.
            Weakly learning DNF and characterizing statistical query learning using Fourier analysis. In Proc. 26th
            Annual Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 253–262, 1994. 3.3
[BFKV97]    Avrim Blum, Alan Frieze, Ravi Kannan, and Santosh Vempala. A polynomial time algorithm for learning
            noisy linear threshold functions. Algorithmica, 22(1/2):35–52, 1997. 3.3
[BGS18]     Arnab Bhattacharyya, Suprovat Ghoshal, and Rishi Saket. Hardness of learning noisy halfspaces using
            polynomial thresholds. In Proc. Conference On Learning Theory (COLT), pages 876–917, 2018. 4.1


                                                       38
[BHH95]     Nader H. Bshouty, Thomas R. Hancock, and Lisa Hellerstein. Learning boolean read-once formulas over
            generalized bases. Journal of Computer & System Sciences, 50(3):521–542, 1995. 3.2
[BHHK94]    Nader H. Bshouty, Thomas R. Hancock, Lisa Hellerstein, and Marek Karpinski. An algorithm to learn
            read-once threshold formulas, and transformations between learning models. Computational Complexity,
            4:37–61, 1994. 3.2
[BK97]      Avrim Blum and Ravi Kannan. Learning an intersection of a constant number of halfspaces under a
            uniform distribution. Journal of Computer & System Sciences, 54(2):371–380, 1997. 3.4
[BKW03]     Avrim Blum, Adam Kalai, and Hal Wasserman. Noise-tolerant learning, the parity problem, and the
            statistical query model. J. ACM, 50(4):506–519, 2003. 3.3
[Blu92]     Avrim Blum. Rank-r decision trees are a subclass of r-decision lists. Information Processing Letters,
            42(4):183–185, June 1992. 3.1
[BR95]      Avrim Blum and Steven Rudich. Fast learning of k-term DNF formulas with queries. Journal of
            Computer & System Sciences, 51(3):367–373, 1995. 3.2
[BRS95]     Richard Beigel, Nick Reingold, and Daniel Spielman. PP is closed under intersection. Journal of
            Computer & System Sciences, 50(2):191–202, 1995. 3.1
[Bsh95]     Nader H. Bshouty. Exact learning via the monotone theory. Information and Computation, 123(1):146–
            153, 1995. 3.2
[Bsh96]     Nader H. Bshouty. A subexponential exact learning algorithm for DNF using equivalence queries.
            Information Processing Letters, 59(1):37–39, 1996. 3.1
[Bsh97]     Nader H. Bshouty. Simple learning algorithms using divide and conquer. Computational Complexity,
            6:174–194, 1997. 3.2
[Bsh23]     Nader H. Bshouty. Superpolynomial lower bounds for learning monotone classes. In Approximation,
            Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, APPROX/RANDOM
            2023, pages 34:1–34:20, 2023. 4.1
[BT96]      Nader H. Bshouty and Christino Tamon. On the Fourier spectrum of monotone functions. J. ACM,
            43(4):747–770, 1996. 3.4
[BT20]      Mark Bun and Justin Thaler. A nearly optimal lower bound on the approximate degree of AC0 . SIAM
            J. Comput., 49(4), 2020. 3.1
[BV96]      Francesco Bergdano and Stefano Varricchio. Learning behaviors of automata from multiplicity and
            equivalence queries. SIAM J. Comput., 25(6):1268–1280, 1996. 3.2
[CIKK16]    Marco L. Carmosino, Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets, and Antonina Kolokolova. Learning al-
            gorithms from natural proofs. In Proc. 31st Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), volume 50,
            pages 10:1–10:24, 2016. 3.4, 19
[CSV84]     Ashok K. Chandra, Larry Stockmeyer, and Uzi Vishkin. Constant depth reducibility. SIAM J. Comput.,
            13(2):423–439, 1984. 4.2.2
[Dan16]     Amit Daniely. Complexity theoretic limitations on learning halfspaces. In Proc. 48th Annual Symposium
            on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 105–117, 2016. 4.2.3
[DDFS14]    Anindya De, Ilias Diakonikolas, Vitaly Feldman, and Rocco A. Servedio. Nearly optimal solutions for
            the chow parameters problem and low-weight approximation of halfspaces. J. ACM, 61(2):11:1–11:36,
            2014. 2.1
[DFH+ 15]   Cynthia Dwork, Vitaly Feldman, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Aaron Leon Roth.
            Preserving statistical validity in adaptive data analysis. In Proc. 47th Annual Symposium on Theory of
            Computing (STOC), pages 117–126, 2015. 3.3
[DH76]      Whitfield Diffie and Martin E Hellman. New directions in cryptography. IEEE Transactions on Infor-
            mation Theory, IT-22(6):644–654, November 1976. 4.2.2
[DKK+ 23]   Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel M. Kane, Vasilis Kontonis, Christos Tzamos, and Nikos Zarifis. Agnostically
            learning multi-index models with queries. Available at https://arxiv.org/pdf/2312.16616.pdf, 2023. 3.4
[DLS14]     Amit Daniely, Nati Linial, and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. From average case complexity to improper learning
            complexity. In Proc. 46th Annual Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 441–448. ACM,
            2014. 4.2.3


                                                       39
[DMNS06]   Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam D. Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in
           private data analysis. In Third Theory of Cryptography Conference, TCC 2006, volume 3876 of Lecture
           Notes in Computer Science, pages 265–284. Springer, 2006. 3.3
[DOSW11]   Ilias Diakonikolas, Ryan O’Donnell, Rocco A. Servedio, and Yi Wu. Hardness results for agnostically
           learning low-degree polynomial threshold functions. In Proc. 22nd Annual Symposium on Discrete
           Algorithms (SODA), pages 1590–1606, 2011. 4.1
[DRST14]   Ilias Diakonikolas, Prasad Raghavendra, Rocco A. Servedio, and Li-Yang Tan. Average sensitivity and
           noise sensitivity of polynomial threshold functions. SIAM J. Comput., 43(1):231–253, 2014. 3.4
[DSS16]    Amit Daniely and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Complexity theoretic limitations on learning DNF’s. In Proc.
           29th Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), volume 49 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
           pages 815–830, 2016. 4.2.3
[DV21]     Amit Daniely and Gal Vardi. From local pseudorandom generators to hardness of learning. In Proc.
           34th Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), volume 134 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
           pages 1358–1394, 2021. 4.2.3
[dW08]     Ronald de Wolf. A Brief Introduction to Fourier Analysis on the Boolean Cube. Number 1 in Graduate
           Surveys. Theory of Computing Library, 2008. 3.4
[EH89]     Andrzej Ehrenfeucht and David Haussler. Learning decision trees from random examples. Information
           and Computation, 82(3):231–246, 1989. 3.1, 4
[Fei02]    Uriel Feige. Relations between average case complexity and approximation complexity. In Proc. 34th
           Annual Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 534–543, 2002. 4.2.3
[Fel08]    Vitaly Feldman. Evolvability from learning algorithms. In Proc. 40th Annual Symposium on Theory of
           Computing (STOC), pages 619–628, 2008. 3.3
[Fel09]    Vitaly Feldman. Hardness of approximate two-level logic minimization and pac learning with member-
           ship queries. Journal of Computer & System Sciences, 75(1):13–26, 2009. 4.1
[Fel10]    Vitaly Feldman. Distribution-specific agnostic boosting. In Proc. 1st Innovations in Computer Science
           (ICS), pages 241–250, 2010. 3.4, 3.4
[Fel12a]   Vitaly Feldman. A complete characterization of statistical query learning with applications to evolv-
           ability. Journal of Computer & System Sciences, 78(5):1444–1459, 2012. 3.3
[Fel12b]   Vitaly Feldman. Learning DNF Expressions from Fourier Spectrum. In Proc. Conference on Learning
           Theory (COLT), pages 17.1–17.19, 2012. 3.4
[FGG08]    Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, and Sam Gutmann. A quantum algorithm for the hamiltonian NAND
           tree. Theory of Computing, 4(1):169–190, 2008. 3.1
[FGKP06]   Vitaly Feldman, Parikshit Gopalan, Subhash Khot, and Ashok Ponnuswami. New results for learning
           noisy parities and halfspaces. In Proc. 47th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
           (FOCS), pages 563–576, 2006. 4.1, 4.2.2
[FGRW09]   Vitaly Feldman, Venkatesan Guruswami, Prasad Raghavendra, and Yi Wu. Agnostic learning of mono-
           mials by halfspaces is hard. In Proc. 50th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
           (FOCS), pages 385–394, 2009. 4.1
[Fre95]    Yoav Freund. Boosting a weak learning algorithm by majority.         Information and Computation,
           121(2):256–285, 1995. 2.2.2, 3.4
[FS92]     Paul Fischer and Hans Ulrich Simon. On learning ring-sum expansions. SIAM J. Comput., 21(1):181–
           192, 1992. 5, 3.1
[FS97]     Yoav Freund and Robert E. Schapire. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an
           application to boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 55(1):119–139, 1997. 2.2.2
[FS99]     Yoav Freund and Robert E. Schapire. A short introduction to boosting. J. Japan. Soc. Artif. Intel.,
           14(5):771–780, 1999. 2.2.2
[GGM86]    Oded Goldreich, Shafi Goldwasser, and Silvio Micali. How to construct random functions. Journal of
           the ACM, 33(4):792–807, October 1986. 4.2.1
[GKK08]    Parikshit Gopalan, Adam Kalai, and Adam R. Klivans. Agnostically learning decision trees. In Proc.
           47th Annual Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 527–536, 2008. 3.4, 20


                                                     40
[GKM12]    Parikshit Gopalan, Adam R. Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Learning functions of halfspaces using prefix
           covers. Journal of Machine Learning Research - Proceedings Track, 23:15.1–15.10, 2012. 3.4, 18
[GKS93]    Sally A. Goldman, Michael J. Kearns, and Robert E. Schapire. Exact identification of read-once formulas
           using fixed points of amplification functions. SIAM J. Comput., 22(4):705–726, 1993. 3.4
[GKS97]    Sally A. Goldman, Stephen S. Kwek, and Stephen Scott. Agnostic learning of geometric patterns. In
           Proc. Tenth annual Conference on Computational Learning Lheory, pages 325–333, 1997. 3.3
[GKS10]    Parikshit Gopalan, Subhash Khot, and Rishi Saket. Hardness of reconstructing multivariate polynomials
           over finite fields. SIAM J. Comput., 39(6):2598–2621, 2010. 4.1
[GL89]     Oded Goldreich and Leonid Levin. A hard-core predicate for all one-way functions. In Proc. 21st Annual
           Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 25–32, 1989. 3.4
[GMH96]    Mostefa Golea, Mario Marchand, and Thomas R. Hancock. On learning µ-perceptron networks on the
           uniform distribution. Neural Networks, 9:67–82, 1996. 3.4
[Gol67]    E. Mark Gold. Language identification in the limit. Information and Control, 10(5):447–474, 1967. 2.1
[GR09]     Venkatesan Guruswami and Prasad Raghavendra. Hardness of learning halfspaces with noise. SIAM J.
           Comput., 39(2):742–765, 2009. 4.1
[GS10]     Parikshit Gopalan and Rocco A. Servedio. Learning and lower bounds for AC 0 with threshold gates. In
           Proc. 14th International Workshop on Randomization and Computation (RANDOM), pages 588–601,
           2010. 3.4
[GS21]     Suprovat Ghoshal and Rishi Saket. Hardness of learning DNFs using halfspaces. In Proc. 53rd Annual
           Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 467–480, 2021. 4.1
[Han91]    Thomas R. Hancock. Learning 2µ DNF formulas and kµ decision trees. In Proc. Fourth Annual Workshop
           on Computational Learning Theory (COLT), pages 199–209, 1991. 3.2
[Han93]    Thomas R. Hancock. Learning kµ decision trees on the uniform distribution. In Proc. Sixth Annual
           Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT), pages 352–360, 1993. 3.4
[Hås86]   Johan Håstad. Computational Limitations for Small Depth Circuits. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986.
           3.4
[Hås94]   Johan Håstad. On the size of weights for threshold gates. SIAM J. Discrete Math., 7(3):484–492, 1994.
           3.1
[Hås01]   Johan Håstad. A slight sharpening of LMN. Journal of Computer & System Sciences, 63(3):498–508,
           2001. 3.4
[Hau92]    David Haussler. Decision theoretic generalizations of the PAC model for neural net and other learning
           applications. Information and Computation, 100:78–150, 1992. 3.3
[HGM94]    Thomas R. Hancock, Mostefa Golea, and Mario Marchand. Learning nonoverlapping perceptron net-
           works from examples and membership queries. Machine Learning, 16(3):161–183, 1994. 3.2
[HILL99]   Johan Håstad, Russell Impagliazzo, Leonid Levin, and Michael Luby. A pseudorandom generator from
           any one-way function. SIAM J. Comput., 28(4):1364–1396, 1999. 4.2.1
[HKLW91]   David Haussler, Michael J. Kearns, Nick Littlestone, and Manfred K. Warmuth. Equivalence of models
           for polynomial learnability. Information and Computation, 95(2):129–161, 1991. 2.2.2
[HKM14]    Prahladh Harsha, Adam R. Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Bounding the sensitivity of polynomial threshold
           functions. Theory Comput., 10:1–26, 2014. 3.4
[HM91]     Thomas R. Hancock and Yishay Mansour. Learning monotone k-µ DNF formulas on product distribu-
           tions. In Proc. Fourth Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT), pages 179–193,
           1991. 3.4
[HSW92]    David Helmbold, Robert Sloan, and Manfred K. Warmuth. Learning integer lattices. SIAM J. Comput.,
           21(2):240–266, 1992. 5, 3.1
[Jac97]    Jeffrey R. Jackson. An efficient membership-query algorithm for learning DNF with respect to the
           uniform distribution. Journal of Computer & System Sciences, 55:414–440, 1997. 3.4, 17, 3.4
[Kan14]    Daniel M. Kane. The correct exponent for the Gotsman-Linial conjecture. computational complexity,
           23:151–175, 2014. 3.4


                                                      41
[Kar84]    Narendra Karmarkar. A new polynomial time algorithm for linear programming. Combinatorica, 4:373–
           395, 1984. 3.1
[Kea98]    Michael J. Kearns. Efficient noise-tolerant learning from statistical queries. J. ACM, 45(6):983–1006,
           1998. 3.3
[Kha80]    Leonid G. Khachiyan. Polynomial algorithms in linear programming. USSR Computational Mathematics
           and Mathematical Physics, 20(1):53 – 72, 1980. 3.1
[Kha93]    Michael Kharitonov. Cryptographic hardness of distribution-specific learning. In Proc. 25th Annual
           Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 372–381, 1993. 4.2.1
[KK09]     Adam Kalai and Varun Kanade. Potential-based agnostic boosting. In Advances in Neural Information
           Processing Systems 22 (NIPS), pages 880–888, 2009. 3.4
[KKM13]    Daniel M. Kane, Adam R. Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Learning halfspaces under log-concave densi-
           ties: Polynomial approximations and moment matching. In Proc. 26th Conference on Learning Theory
           (COLT), pages 522–545, 2013. 3.4
[KKMS08]   Adam Kalai, Adam R. Klivans, Yishay Mansour, and Rocco A. Servedio. Agnostically learning halfs-
           paces. SIAM J. Comput., 37(6):1777–1805, 2008. 3.3, 12, 3.3, 1, 3.4, 3.4
[KL93]     Michael J. Kearns and Ming Li. Learning in the presence of malicious errors. SIAM J. Comput.,
           22(4):807–837, 1993. 3.3
[KLPV87]   Michael J. Kearns, Ming Li, Leonard Pitt, and Leslie G. Valiant. On the learnability of Boolean formulae.
           In Proc. Nineteenth Annual Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 285–295, 1987. 3.2,
           3.4
[KLS09]    Adam R. Klivans, Philip M. Long, and Rocco A. Servedio. Learning Halfspaces with Malicious Noise.
           Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10:2715–2740, 2009. 3.3, 3.4
[KLV94]    Michael J. Kearns, Ming Li, and Leslie G. Valiant. Learning Boolean formulas. J. ACM, 41(6):1298–
           1328, 1994. 3.4, 3.4
[KM93]     Eyal Kushilevitz and Yishay Mansour. Learning Decision Trees Using the Fourier Spectrum. SIAM J.
           Comput., 22(6):1331–1348, December 1993. 3.4, 3.4, 16, 2, 3.4
[KOS04]    Adam R. Klivans, Ryan O’Donnell, and Rocco A. Servedio. Learning intersections and thresholds of
           halfspaces. Journal of Computer & System Sciences, 68(4):808–840, 2004. 3.1, 10, 3.1, 3.4
[KOS08]    Adam R. Klivans, Ryan O’Donnell, and Rocco A. Servedio. Learning geometric concepts via Gaussian
           surface area. In Proc. 49th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages
           541–550, 2008. 3.4
[KP98]     Stephen Kwek and Leonard Pitt. PAC learning intersections of halfspaces with membership queries.
           Algorithmica, 22(1/2):53–75, 1998. 3.2, 4
                                                                                     1/3
[KS04]     Adam R. Klivans and Rocco A. Servedio. Learning DNF in time 2Õ(n               )
                                                                                               . Journal of Computer &
           System Sciences, 68(2):303–318, 2004. 3.1, 8
[KS08]     Subhash Khot and Rishi Saket. Hardness of minimizing and learning DNF expressions. In Proc. 49th
           Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 231–240, 2008. 4.1
[KS09]     Adam R. Klivans and Alexander A. Sherstov. Cryptographic hardness for learning intersections of
           halfspaces. Journal of Computer & System Sciences, 75(1):2–12, 2009. 4.2.2
[KS11]     Subhash Khot and Rishi Saket. On the hardness of learning intersections of two halfspaces. Journal of
           Computer & System Sciences, 77(1):129–141, 2011. 4.1
[KSS94]    Michael J. Kearns, Robert E. Schapire, and Linda Sellie. Toward efficient agnostic learning. Machine
           Learning, 17(2/3):115–141, 1994. 3.3
[KST23a]   Caleb Koch, Carmen Strassle, and Li-Yang Tan. Properly learning decision trees with queries is NP-hard.
           In Proc. 64th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2023, 2023. 4.1
[KST23b]   Caleb Koch, Carmen Strassle, and Li-Yang Tan. Superpolynomial lower bounds for decision tree learning
           and testing. In Proc. 2023 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2023, pages 1962–
           1994, 2023. 4.1



                                                       42
[Kus97]   Eyal Kushilevitz. A simple algorithm for learning O(log n)-term DNF. Information Processing Letters,
          61(6):289–292, 1997. 3.2
[KV94a]   Michael J. Kearns and Leslie G. Valiant. Cryptographic limitations on learning Boolean formulae and
          finite automata. J. ACM, 41(1):67–95, 1994. 1, 4, 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.2
[KV94b]   Michael J. Kearns and Umesh Vazirani. An Introduction to Computational Learning Theory. MIT Press,
          Cambridge, MA, 1994. 2.2, 4.1, 4.2.2
[LBW96]   Wee Sun Lee, Peter L. Bartlett, and Robert C. Williamson. Efficient agnostic learning of neural networks
          with bounded fan-in. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 42(6):2118–2132, 1996. 3.3
[Lee09]   Troy Lee. A note on the sign-degree of formulas. Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/0909.4607, 2009.
          3.1, 9
[LMN89]   Nathan Linial, Yishay Mansour, and Noam Nisan. Constant depth circuits, Fourier transform, and
          learnability. In Proc. 30th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages
          574–579, 1989. 3.4
[LMN93]   Nathan Linial, Yishay Mansour, and Noam Nisan. Constant depth circuits, Fourier transform, and
          learnability. J. ACM, 40(3):607–620, 1993. 3.4, 3.4, 14, 3.4, 15, 4.2.1
[LN90]    Nathan Linial and Noam Nisan. Approximate inclusion-exclusion. Combinatorica, 10(4):349–365, 1990.
          3.1
[MOS04]   Elchanan Mossel, Ryan O’Donnell, and Rocco A. Servedio. Learning functions of k relevant variables.
          Journal of Computer & System Sciences, 69(3):421–434, 2004. 3.2, 3.4
[MP68]    Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert. Perceptrons: An Introduction to Computational Geometry. MIT
          Press, Cambridge, MA, 1968. 3.1
[MTT61]   Saburo Muroga, Iwao Toda, and Satoru Takasu. Theory of majority switching elements. J. Franklin
          Institute, 271(5):376–418, 1961. 3.1
[MZ13]    Raghu Meka and David Zuckerman. Pseudorandom generators for polynomial threshold functions. SIAM
          J. Comput., 42(3):1275–1301, 2013. 3.4
[New64]   Donald J. Newman. Rational approximation to |x|. Michigan Mathematical Journal, 11:11–14, 1964.
          3.1
[NR04]    Moni Naor and Omer Reingold. Number-theoretic constructions of efficient pseudo-random functions.
          J. ACM, 51(2):231–262, 2004. 4.2.1
[NW94]    Noam Nisan and Avi Wigderson. Hardness versus randomness. Journal of Computer & System Sciences,
          49:149–167, 1994. 3.4
[O’D14]   Ryan O’Donnell. Analysis of Boolean Functions. Cambridge University Press, 2014. 3.4
[OS07]    Ryan O’Donnell and Rocco A. Servedio. Learning monotone decision trees in polynomial time. SIAM
          J. on Comput., 37(3):827–844, 2007. 3.4
[OS11]    Ryan O’Donnell and Rocco A. Servedio. The Chow parameters problem. SIAM J. Comput., 40(1):165–
          199, 2011. 2.1
[OSK94]   Hiroyuki Ohnishi, Hiroyuki Seki, and Tadao Kasami. A polynomial time learning algorithm for recog-
          nizable series. IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst. E77-D, 10(5):1077–1085, 1994. 3.2
[OW13]    Ryan O’Donnell and Karl Wimmer. KKL, Kruskal-Katona, and monotone nets. SIAM J. Comput.,
          42(6):2375–2399, 2013. 3.4
[PH89]    Giulia Pagallo and David Haussler. A greedy method for learning µ-DNF functions under the uniform
          distribution. Technical report, University of California at Santa Cruz, UCSC-CRL-89-12, 1989. 3.4
[PR95]    Krishnan Pillaipakkamnatt and Vijay Raghavan. Read-twice DNF formulas are properly learnable.
          Information and Computation, 122(2):236–267, 1995. 3.2
[PV86]    Leonard Pitt and Leslie G. Valiant. Computational limitations on learning from examples. Technical
          Report Technical Report TR-05-86, Harvard University, Aiken Computation Lab, 1986. 2, 4, 4.1, 8
[PV88]    Leonard Pitt and Leslie G. Valiant. Computational limitations on learning from examples. J. ACM,
          35(4):965–984, 1988. 4, 4.1, 4.1, 8


                                                     43
[PW88]     Leonard Pitt and Manfred K. Warmuth. Reductions among prediction problems: on the difficulty of
           predicting automata. In Proc. Third Structure in Complexity Theory Conference, pages 60–69, 1988.
           4.2.2
[Reg04]    Oded Regev. New lattice-based cryptographic constructions. J. ACM, 51(6):899–942, 2004. 4.2.2
[Reg05]    Oded Regev. On lattices, learning with errors, random linear codes, and cryptography. In Proc. 35th
           Annual Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 84–93, 2005. 4.2.2
[Rei87]    John H. Reif. On threshold circuits and polynomial computation. In Proceedings of the Second Annual
           Conference on Structure in Complexity Theory, pages 118–123. IEEE Computer Society, 1987. 4.2.2
[Rei09]    Ben Reichardt. Span programs and quantum query complexity: The general adversary bound is nearly
           tight for every boolean function. In Proc. 50th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
           (FOCS), pages 544–551, 2009. 3.1
[Riv87]    Ron Rivest. Learning decision lists. Machine Learning, 2(3):229–246, 1987. 3.1, 3
[RR97]     Alexander Razborov and Steven Rudich. Natural proofs. Journal of Computer & System Sciences,
           55(1):24–35, 1997. 3.4
[RS08]     Ben Reichardt and Robert Spalek. Span-program-based quantum algorithm for evaluating formulas. In
           Proc. 40th Annual Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 103–112, 2008. 3.1
[Sch90]    Robert E. Schapire. The strength of weak learnability. Machine Learning, 5(2):197–227, 1990. 2.2.2, 3.4
[Sch94]    Robert E. Schapire. Learning probabilistic read-once formulas on product distributions. Machine Learn-
           ing, 14(1):47–81, 1994. 3.4
[Sch03a]   Robert E. Schapire. The Boosting Approach to Machine Learning: An Overview, pages 149–171. Springer
           New York, New York, NY, 2003. 2.2.2
[Sch03b]   Alexander Schrijver. Preliminaries on algorithms and complexity. In Combinatorial Optimization:
           Polyhedra and Efficiency. Springer, 2003. 3
[Ser04]    Rocco A. Servedio. On learning monotone DNF under product distributions. Information and Compu-
           tation, 193(1):57–74, 2004. 3.4
[SF12]     Robert E. Schapire and Yoav Freund. Boosting: Foundations and Algorithms. MIT Press, Cambridge,
           Massachusetts, 2012. 2.2.2
[She13a]   Alexander A. Sherstov. The intersection of two halfspaces has high threshold degree. SIAM J. Comput.,
           42(6):2329–2374, 2013. 3.1
[She13b]   Alexander A. Sherstov. Optimal bounds for sign-representing the intersection of two halfspaces by
           polynomials. Combinatorica, 33(1):73–96, 2013. 3.1
[She18a]   Alexander A. Sherstov. Breaking the Minsky-Papert Barrier for Constant-Depth Circuits. SIAM J.
           Comput., 47(5):1809–1857, 2018. 3.1
[She18b]   Alexander A. Sherstov. The power of asymmetry in constant-depth circuits.           SIAM J. Comput.,
           47(6):2362–2434, 2018. 3.1
[She21]    Jie Shen. Sample-optimal PAC learning of halfspaces with malicious noise. In Proc. 38th International
           Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 9515–9524, 2021. 3.3
[Sim07]    Hans Ulrich Simon. A characterization of strong learnability in the statistical query model. In 24th
           Annual Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS), pages 393–404, 2007. 3.3
[SS96]     Robert E. Schapire and Linda Sellie. Learning sparse multivariate polynomials over a field with queries
           and counterexamples. J. Comput. & Syst. Sci., 52(2):201–213, 1996. 3.2
[SSBD14]   Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to Algo-
           rithms. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2014. 4
[ST17]     Rocco A. Servedio and Li-Yang Tan. What circuit classes can be learned with non-trivial savings? In
           Proceedings of the 8th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science (ITCS), pages 30:1–30:21, 2017. 3.1
[SW19]     Alexander A. Sherstov and Pei Wu. Near-optimal lower bounds on the threshold degree and sign-rank
           of AC0 . In Proc. 51st Annual Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 401–412, 2019. 3.1



                                                      44
[Szö09]   Balázs Szörényi. Characterizing statistical query learning: Simplified notions and proofs. In Proc. 20th
           International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT), pages 186–200, 2009. 3.3
[Tal17]    Avishay Tal. Tight bounds on the Fourier spectrum of AC 0 . In Proc. 32nd Computational Complexity
           Conference (CCC), pages 15:1–15:31, 2017. 3.4
[TT99]     Jun Tarui and Tatsuie Tsukiji. Learning DNF by approximating inclusion-exclusion formulae. In Proc.
           Fourteenth Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), pages 215–220, 1999. 3.1
[Vai96]    Pravin M. Vaidya. A new algorithm for minimizing convex functions over convex sets. Math. Prog.,
           73(3):291–341, 1996. 3.1
[Val84]    Leslie G. Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27(11):1134–1142, 1984. 1,
           2.1, 2.2, 2.2.1, 2.2.2, 2.3, 3, 3.1, 2, 3.1, 3.1, 3.2, 11, 4, 4.2.1, 5
[Val85]    Leslie G. Valiant. Learning disjunctions of conjunctions. In Proc. Ninth International Joint Conference
           on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 560–566, 1985. 3.1, 3.3
[Val00]    Leslie G. Valiant. Circuits of the mind. Oxford University Press, 2000. 5
[Val09]    Leslie G. Valiant. Evolvability. J. ACM, 56(1):3:1–3:21, 2009. 3.3, 5
[Val13]    Leslie G. Valiant. Probably Approximately Correct: Nature’s Algorithms for Learning and Prospering in
           a Complex World. Basic Books, New York, 2013. 2.1, 5
[Val15]    Gregory Valiant. Finding correlations in subquadratic time, with applications to learning parities and
           the closest pair problem. J. ACM, 62(2):Art. 13, 2015. 3.2, 3.4
[Vap82]    Vladimir Vapnik. Estimation of Dependences Based on Empirical Data. Springer Series in Statistics,
           Heidelberg, 1982. 2.1
[Vap98]    Vladimir Vapnik. Statistical Learning Theory. Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1998. 2.1
[VC71]     Vladimir Vapnik and Alexey Chervonenkis. On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of events
           to their probabilities. Theory Probab. Appl., 16:264–280, 1971. 3.1, 4
[Vem10]    Santosh Vempala. A random-sampling-based algorithm for learning intersections of halfspaces. J. ACM,
           57(6:32), 2010. 3.4
[Ver90]    Karsten A. Verbeurgt. Learning DNF under the uniform distribution in quasi-polynomial time. In Proc.
           Third Annual Workshop on Computational Learning Theory, pages 314–326, 1990. 3.4, 13




                                                        45
