                                                       Local Computation of Maximal Independent Set
                                                                                    Mohsen Ghaffari∗
                                                                                            MIT
                                                                                      ghaffari@mit.edu
arXiv:2210.01104v1 [cs.DS] 3 Oct 2022




                                                                                         Abstract
                                                  We present a randomized Local Computation Algorithm (LCA) with query complexity
                                              poly(∆) · log n for the Maximal Independent Set (MIS) problem. That is, the algorithm de-
                                              termines whether each node is in the computed MIS or not using poly(∆) · log n queries to the
                                              adjacency lists of the graph, with high probability, and this can be done for different nodes
                                              simultaneously and independently. Here ∆ and n denote the maximum degree and the number
                                              of nodes. This algorithm resolves a key open problem in the study of local computations and
                                              sublinear algorithms (attributed to Rubinfeld).




                                           ∗
                                             Supported in part by funding from the European Research Council (ERC), under the European Union’s Horizon
                                        2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement 853109).
1        Introduction and Related Work
When dealing with massive data, even linear time algorithms might be too slow. A natural and
useful paradigm in the area of sublinear algorithms, especially when dealing with problems where
the output may be large (and thus computing or even storing the entire output may be infeasible),
is that of local computations. Here, the algorithm should be able to compute any particular part
of the output in sublinear time. In this paper, we study local computation algorithms for the
well-studied Maximal Independent Set (MIS) problem. Before describing our contribution, let us
review the background of the problem, including the model and the known results.

1.1       Background: Prior Work and Model
We review the prior work on local computations of MIS in two categories, after recalling the formal
model. We note that the results in the first category were obtained before the introduction of the
formal model (and technically, provide a weaker expected-per-vertex query complexity guarantee).
Local Computation Algorithms. As introduced by Rubinfeld et al. [RTVX11] and Alon et
al. [ARVX12], a Local Computation Algorithm (LCA) has query access to the graph where each
query (v, i) returns the ith neighbor of vertex v (or ∅, if there is no such neighbor). The algorithm
also has access to a string of randomness. In the case of the MIS problem, when questioned about
a vertex v, the algorithm performs a number of queries to the graph (and the string of randomness)
and outputs a YES/NO answer indicating whether v is in the MIS or not. These outputs are
independent of the questions to the algorithm, and indeed, one can question the algorithm about
different vertices simultaneously and independently. The measure of complexity is the worst-case
number of queries the algorithm performs to answer any single question. We use n and ∆ to denote
the number of vertices and the maximum degree, and the focus is generally on graphs where ∆ ≪ n.
See [RTVX11, ARVX12] for related work, motivations, and applications, and [LM17] for a survey.
See also Lovasz’s book on large networks and graph limits [Lov12, Section 22.3], which discusses
such local computations and connections to distributed local algorithms.

Category I (Expected Query Complexity Per Vertex). Nguyen and Onak [NO08], as
the core technical ingredient of their celebrated sublinear time approximation algorithms work,
developed the first local algorithm for MIS. Their algorithm simulates the Randomized Greedy
MIS (RGMIS) algorithm, in the sense that the YES/NO answers to the questions of whether a
vertex v is in the MIS or not are the same as those of one execution of RGMIS. In RGMIS, we
process the vertices according to a random order π and add each vertex to the MIS if and only if
none of its neighbors that appeared earlier in the order π have been added to the MIS. Nguyen
and Onak’s local algorithm answers each question in expected 2O(∆) queries to the graph, where
the expectation is over the randomness of the order π.
    Nguyen and Onak used this approach as a local computation for maximal matching1 . Through
this, they directly obtained a sublinear-time approximation algorithm for the size of maximal match-
ing (and some other related problems such as approximate minimum vertex cover), by invoking the
local computation on a small number of randomly selected vertices and determining what fraction
of them are matched. It is worth noting that this itself was inspired by, and an improvement on,
the insightful work of Parnas and Ron [PR07], who had developed a sublinear time approximation
algorithm for the size of minimum vertex cover by devising a local computation procedure for it
(via simulating a local distributed algorithm of that problem).

    1
        Maximal matching is a special (and simpler) case of the maximal independent set problem, on line graphs.


                                                           1
    Yoshida, Yamamoto, and Ito [YYI09] provided an ingenious analysis for a variant of the ap-
proach of Nguyen and Onak, which improved the bound to expected O(∆), though in a certain
weaker sense: for a random permutation π used in RGMIS and for a random vertex v, the expected
query complexity to determine whether v is in the MIS or not is O(∆). This bound holds also if
one replaces ∆ with average degree ∆. ¯ However, for some vertices, even under a random permu-
tation, the expected number of queries to answer the question might be much larger. This weaker
guarantee was still sufficient for the sublinear-time approximation application because there one
deals with questions about random vertices. See [ORRR12,Beh21] for other improvements on these
sublinear-time size approximation algorithms.

Category II (Query Complexity For All Vertices). The algorithms discussed in the first
category have bounds on the expected query complexity of each node (or just a random node). A
stronger notion, which is indeed the prevalent measure of interest in the study of LCAs, is to have
an upper bound on the query complexity of all nodes. This bound itself may hold in expectation,
or even better, with high probability2 . Notice that the naive bound that follows directly from the
per-vertex expected query complexity, via Markov’s inequality and a union bound over all vertices,
includes an n factor, and is thus uninteresting in the area of sublinear algorithms3 .
    Rubinfeld et al. [RTVX11] and Alon et al. [ARVX12], in their work that introduced the model,
provided an MIS LCA with query complexity of ∆O(∆ log ∆) poly(log n). The algorithm is based on
Luby’s classic parallel/distributed MIS algorithm [Lub85]. This LCA also uses a random string of
the same length (and no other memory, besides these). Concretely, when questioned about any
vertex v, the algorithm performs only ∆O(∆ log ∆) poly(log n) queries to the input graph (and the
randomness), with high probability. A natural question that has remained open since then, and was
raised frequently by Rubinfeld (e.g., her 2016 TCS+ talk https://youtu.be/R8J61RYaaDw?t=2164,
her 2017 CICS Distinguished Lecture https://youtu.be/fczTaR-KSd8, and her Keynotes Talks at
ICALP 2017 and PODC 2019) and others (see, e.g., [MRVX12, LRY17, GU19, Beh21]) is this:
                     Is there an LCA for MIS with poly(∆ log n) query complexity?

    There has been a sequence of improvements. The complexity was improved to 2O(∆) poly(log n)
by Vardi and Reinhold [RV16], by showing that a variant of the Nguyen-Onak algorithm has this
query complexity (for all vertices); that is, the query complexities are concentrated around the
2O(∆) expected bound shown by Nguyn and Onak. Later, the bound was improved by devis-
ing new algorithms: Levi, Rubinfeld and Yodpinyanee [LRY17] achieved a query complexity of
      2
∆O(log ∆) poly(log n); Ghaffari achieved a query complexity of ∆O(log ∆) poly(log n); and finally
Ghaffari and Uitto [GU19] improved the query complexity to ∆O(log log ∆) poly(log n).
    However, all these bounds remain quite far from the poly(∆ log n) target. Indeed, to the best of
our knowledge, even the simpler question of whether one can obtain a local MIS algorithm that, for
each questioned vertex, has expected query complexity poly(∆)—instead of “for a random vertex”,
as provided by Yoshida et al. [YYI09]—has remained open.
Side Remark. If we limit ourselves to graphs with constant or slightly super constant degrees,
and focus instead on the dependency on n, then a better bound follows from the algorithm of
   2
      We use the phrase with high probability (w.h.p.) to indicate that an event takes place with probability at least
1 − 1/nc for a fixed constant c ≥ 2, which can be set desirably large by adjusting other constants.
    3
      Here, unlike standard centralized computations, we cannot simply re-run the algorithm for O(log n) iterations,
stopping each iteration after say twice the expected time, and use this to turn our expected complexity into a bound
that holds with probability 1 − 1/n. This is because, which of those O(log n) executions would be used is a non-local
decision and depends on the questioned vertex, and if we do not fix one choice for all vertices, the output at different
vertices could be inconsistent.


                                                           2
                                                                             2
Even, Medina, and Ron [EMR18], which has a query complexity of ∆O(∆ ) log∗ n, later improved
to ∆O(∆) log∗ n [LM17]. These bound are sublinear in n only for graphs with ∆ = o(log n/ log log n).

1.2   Our Contribution
We present a randomized local computation algorithm that resolves the aforementioned question
and achieves a poly(∆ log n) query complexity. We also note that the expected query complexity
for each questioned vertex is poly(∆).

Theorem 1.1. There is a Local Computation Algorithm that computes an MIS such that, when
questioned about any vertex v, it answers whether v is in the MIS or not using expected poly(∆)
queries, and at most poly(∆ log n) with probability at least 1 − 1/ poly(n). More concretely, for any
ε > 0 and any vertex v, with probability at least 1 − ε, the algorithm uses at most poly(∆) · log(1/ε)
queries to answer the question about v (if asked). Furthermore, the algorithm can be transformed
into one with poly(∆ log n) query complexity and using only poly(∆ log n) bits of randomness.

    We remark that the constant in the exponent of our current bound poly(∆) is not small. We
did not attempt to optimize that constant in this writing. We instead prioritized the simplicity
of the algorithm and its analysis. It remains an interesting question whether one can achieve a
better—e.g., linear or quadratic—dependency on ∆.
    MIS’s centrality in this area is in part due to the fact that many other problems can be easily
reduced to it. Using well-known reductions, we get local computation algorithms with the same
asymptotic complexity for maximal matching, 2-approximate vertex cover, (∆ + 1) vertex coloring,
and even its strengthening to (deg + 1) list coloring where each node v should choose its color from
a prescribed list of degree(v) + 1 many colors, and of course its special case of (2∆ − 1) edge (list)
coloring.

1.3   A High-Level Outline of Our Method
Similar to many of the prior work in local computation algorithms, and following a connection first
used by Paras and Ron [PR07] (see also Lovasz [Lov12, Section 22.3]), the core ingredient of our
LCA is to simulate a local distributed algorithm for (nearly) maximal independent set. Let us first
explain this connection. In a distributed algorithm, initially, nodes do not know the topology of
the graph, and per round each node of the graph talks to all of its neighbors. Because of this, it
can be shown that a node’s behavior after T rounds is a function of only the information initially
available to the nodes within its distance T . Since the number of the latter nodes is at most ∆T ,
this indicates that any T -round local distributed algorithm can be turned into an LCA with query
complexity ∆T .
    This connection, per se, is insufficient for obtaining a poly(∆) query LCA. By a celebrated
lower bound of Kuhn, Moscibroda, and Wattenhofer [KMW16], any distributed algorithm for MIS
needs round complexity Ω(log ∆/ log log ∆). Hence, by only following the Parnas-Ron principle
of directly simulating a distributed algorithm in a black-box fashion, we cannot obtain a query
complexity below ∆Ω(log ∆/ log log ∆) .
    To obtain our LCA, we use an adaptation of the local distributed algorithm of [Gha16] to
compute a near-maximal independent set (the adjustment to an MIS is easy and standard). We
adapt the algorithm in such a way that, while maintaining its T = Θ(log ∆) round complexity,
it has additional properties that allow us to simulate it using an LCA with query complexity of
∆ · 2Θ(T ) . We emphasize that this is a deterministic guarantee; the probabilistic aspects are in the
near-maximality of the computed independent set. To describe the key new property, let us use an


                                                  3
informal definition of (causal) influence: let us say node u is causally influenced by node v if node
u reads a message of node v or if u reads a message of another node w who is influenced by node
v. The former is a direct influence and the latter is an indirect influence. The reason for the naive
∆T bound in LCA simulations of T -round distributed local algorithms is that per round each node
reads the messages of (up to) ∆ neighbors, and these factors multiply over different rounds. To
reach a query complexity of poly(∆), we adapt the local distributed algorithm in such a way that
in “most” of the rounds (this is an oversimplification, but provides the right intuition), each node
reads the messages of only few neighbors. Ideally, this would have been reading the messages of
only Θ(1) neighbors per round. But we do not achieve that. Instead, our adaptation is such that
if in a given round a node needs to read the messages of many, say 2Θ(k) neighbors, this is needed
only for messages that were sent some Θ(k) rounds earlier. Because of this, in a sense, we can
amortize the high 2Θ(k) increase factor in the influence to the elapsed Θ(k) time. This allows us to
show that overall, each node is influenced by only ∆ · 2Θ(T ) other nodes. The LCA will be able to
simulate the local algorithm basically by (adaptively) tracing which messages need to be read, and
that brings the query complexity down to ∆ · 2Θ(T ) = poly(∆).
     We note that the best previously known query complexity ∆O(log log ∆) poly(log n) [GU19] also
was based on a (different) adaptation of the algorithm of [Gha16]. Moreover, somewhat similar
properties turned out to be useful for parallel algorithms [GU19, GH21]. The LCA of [GU19]
simulated the local distributed algorithm by breaking the Θ(log ∆) rounds of the local algorithm
into batches and ensuring that the simulation is done in such a way that the degree per batch drops
to at most exponential in the batch√length. For instance, in the basic√ version of the algorithm where
there is only one scale, we have Θ( log ∆) batches
                                                 √    each  of length  log ∆ rounds, and the simulation
ensures that the degree per batch drops to 2   Θ(  log ∆) . However, this approach comes at a cost and
the best achievable query complexity is ∆O(log log ∆) . In particular, even in the most efficient version,
which includes Θ(log log ∆) scales of batches, where the ith scale batches are of length 2i , we lose
a ∆ factor in the query complexity per scale. That leads to the query complexity of ∆O(log log ∆) .
To achieve a poly(∆) algorithm, here, we directly design the distributed local algorithm in such a
way that each node is influenced (through chains of read messages) by at most poly(∆) nodes.
     We are hopeful that techniques similar to our approach can be developed for other graph
problems, by devising local distributed algorithms that read only few messages in most rounds and
thus have much lower causal influence per node than the naive ∆T bound. This would provide
a (hopefully general) recipe for achieving (centralized) local computation algorithms with small
query complexity, well below the Parnas-Ron direct simulation principle [PR07].
     Finally, we note that there is some superficial similarity between one numerical aspect of our
analysis and that of a matching approximation of Kapralov et al. [KMNFT20] in the streaming
model and the local computation algorithms model. Very roughly speaking, in both places, we
effectively make the number of neighbors on which a recursion is invoked to be a constant (in an
amortized sense). To the best of our understanding, the similarity stops at this level. In particular,
the algorithm of Kapralov et al. [KMNFT20] provides no solution for the MIS problem, and not
even for the much simpler special case of MIS on line graphs, i.e., the maximal matching problem.
The strict maximality requirement makes the MIS problem much harder technically.

1.4   Preliminaries
Distributed LOCAL model [Lin92]. Consider an undirected graph G = (V, E) with n = |V |
where there is one processor on each node of the graph. Each processor/node has a unique identifier
in {1, . . . , n10 }. Initially, each node knows only its neighbors. Per round, each node can send one
arbitrary-size message to all of its neighbors and receives their messages (we discuss which messages


                                                    4
are read, soon). In the end, each node v should know its own part of the output. For instance, in
the MIS problem, node v should know whether v in the computed MIS or not.
Reading Messages Selectively, and Influence. In this paper, in order to devise a LOCAL-model
algorithm suitable for efficient LCA simulation, we take some extra care in how the communications
of the LOCAL model are performed. Per round, each node sends its message to all of its neighbors.
However, on the receiving end, each node will choose which of the received messages it reads. In
particular, each node will have a set of “relevant neighbors” for each round (which was determined in
earlier rounds) and it will read only the content of messages received from those relevant neighbors.
So, the node discards the content of the messages from other neighbors and even ignores whether
any of the other neighbors sent a message or not in that round. If a node v has read a message of
a neighbor u, we say that u has influenced v (directly). If node v reads a message of a neighbor u
who is influenced by a node w, we say node v is influenced by node w.
Notations. We use Γ(v) to denote the set of neighbors of node v in graph G, and Γr (v) for r ≥ 1
to denote the set of all nodes within distance at most r from v. Notice that Γ1 (v) = Γ(v) ∪ {v}.
We also use Γ(I) for a set I ⊂ V of vertices to indicate all vertices that have a neighbor in I, i.e.,
Γ(I) = ∪v∈I Γ(v). For a positive integer T , we use [T ] as a shorthand for {1, 2, . . . , T }.


2     The Algorithm
In Section 2.1, we first describe a near-maximal independent set algorithm in the LOCAL model of
distributed computing. Then, in Section 2.2, we discuss some observations and properties of this
algorithm. Afterward, in Section 2.3, we discuss how, thanks to these properties, the algorithm can
be simulated efficiently in a sequential manner, in the setting of Local Computation Algorithms.
Then, in Section 2.4, we present the analyses which prove this efficiency and that the algorithm
indeed computes a near-maximal independent set. We conclude in Section 2.5 by discussing how
this algorithm can be turned into a maximal independent set algorithm.

2.1   The LOCAL Algorithm

General Outline. As the core ingredient, we describe a randomized algorithm that computes a
near-maximal independent set I. The near-maximality is in the sense that if we remove set I and
its neighbors Γ(I) from the graph, with probability 1 − 1/ poly(n), in the subgraph induced by the
remaining vertices V \ (I ∪ Γ(I)), each connected component has at most poly(∆) log n vertices.
Moreover, each node v is in this remaining part with probability at most 1/ poly(∆). Because of
the former property, it will be easy to turn this near-maximal independent set algorithm into a
maximal independent set algorithm, with only a factor of poly(∆) log n increase in the number of
queries, simply by identifying the remaining component of the questioned vertex and using the
deterministic greedy MIS procedure on this small component. This is explained in Section 2.5. In
fact, for each vertex v and any ε > 0, with probability 1 − ε, the component of v has size at most
poly(∆) log(1/ε). Thus, for each vertex v, with probability 1 − ε, the query complexity of the LCA
when questioning vertex v is at most poly(∆) log(1/ε).
    To provide the aforementioned near-maximal independent set algorithm, we present a T -round
randomized algorithm in the LOCAL model of distributed computing that computes a near-
maximal independent set with the same guarantees as mentioned above, where T = Θ(log ∆).
The base of this algorithm is an adaptation of Ghaffari’s T -round algorithm [Gha16]. The differ-
ences will be in how we adapt the algorithm so that it can be simulated with only poly(∆) query



                                                  5
complexity in the LCA model, unlike the ∆Θ(log ∆) query complexity of the algorithm of [Gha16].
We will discuss those differences later, after reviewing the common and basic ingredients.
   The basic operation in both algorithms is a probabilistic marking process, which determines the
nodes that attempt to join the independent set in one round. We next discuss this basic marking
process and mention how we will determine all the randomness used for this process at the very
beginning of the algorithm. We will then discuss how our algorithm departs from that of [Gha16]
and leads to a poly(∆) query complexity in the LCA model.
Marking process. The basic operation in each round of the algorithm is a randomized marking
process, which determines the nodes that attempt to join the independent set I. Concretely, per
round t each node v is marked with a certain probability pt (v). Then, in that round, if node v is
marked and none of its neighbors is marked, node v gets added to the independent set I, and we
remove node v and all of its neighbors from the graph.
      Each node v starts with a marking probability p1 (v) = 1/2⌈log ∆⌉+1 ; this is the marking prob-
ability in the first round. During the algorithm, in each round t ∈ [1, T ], we will set either
pt+1 (v) ← pt (v)/2 or pt+1 (v) ← min{2pt (v), 1/2}. We will later discuss how this decision is done,
in the main body of the algorithm. Let us now remark a smoothness property of this probability:
the probability pt (v) changes by at most a 2 factor per round, and concretely, for any two rounds
                                                           ′
t, t′ ∈ [T ] where t′ ≤ t − 1, we have pt (v) ≤ pt′ · 2(t−t ) .
      Next, we explain our way of viewing the randomness used in this marking process, and how we
fix it at the beginning of the algorithm.
Fixing the randomness of marking. At the beginning of the algorithm, for each node v ∈ V
and each round t ∈ [1, T ], we choose a uniformly random number ρt (v) ∈ [0, 1], independently of all
other vertices and all other rounds. We note that a random number with Θ(log ∆) bits of precision
suffices. The interpretation is this: suppose we want to mark node v with a given probability
pt (v) ∈ [0, 1] in round t. Then, we consider v marked in round t if and only if ρt (v) ≤ pt (v). We fix
all the randomness at the beginning of the algorithm. Furthermore, this is the only randomness that
we will use in the algorithm. Intuitively, having fixed all the randomness at the beginning, we are
dealing with a deterministic process. This determinism is helpful when we want to devise an LCA
simulation of this LOCAL algorithm and discuss that the LCA performs the same computation
and outputs the same independent set.

Intuitive discussions—query complexity in LCA simulation of the LOCAL algorithm.
As mentioned before, our near-maximal independent set algorithm is a T -round process in the
LOCAL model. We devise the algorithm in such a way that it can be simulated efficiently in the
LCA model, with query complexity poly(∆) ≪ ∆T . We emphasize that this query complexity
statement is deterministic. The probabilistic aspect will be only in the near-maximality guarantee.
    Concretely, we want that the behavior of each node depends on only poly(∆) other nodes; this
allows us to simulate the algorithm in the LCA model with a poly(∆) query complexity. Recalling
the definition of influence from Section 1.3 and Section 1.4, the new T -round algorithm is devised
such that each node is influenced by only ∆·2Θ(T ) other nodes. Informally, the 2Θ(T ) factor accounts
for an increase of a constant factor per round, which comes roughly from each node being influenced
directly by constant many of its neighbors. The ∆ factor is the influence in the very first round, as
in that round each node checks all the messages received from all of the neighbors (e.g., to initialize
the sets of “relevant neighbors”, which we will discuss soon).
    In particular, unlike in the original algorithm [Gha16] where each node reads the messages of
all of its up to ∆ neighbors in each round, we would like to make nodes read messages of only few
neighbors per round. As mentioned above, this would be ideally just a constant number of neighbors


                                                   6
per round, with the exception of the very first round where we allow reading messages of all the
up to ∆ neighbors. We do not achieve this exact property, but we get it in a certain amortized
sense: The new distributed algorithm is devised such that if v has to read many messages in round
t, say 2Θ(k) many messages for some number k, then these should be messages that were sent much
earlier, in rounds before t − Θ(k). Said differently and informally, the algorithm is devised such
that, if there are many neighbors of node v, say 2Θ(k) that are attempting to join the independent
set in a given round, then node v can sleep for Θ(k) rounds without reading their messages. The
concrete way through which we achieve this is by building a certain set Nt (v) of relevant neighbors
for round t, which is initialized to include all nodes that might get marked in round t and then
refined over time as we get closer to round t, to smaller and smaller sets. If at some point Nt (v)
is “too large” compared to the related size threshold, then node v sleeps for a number of rounds
including round t.
    Next, we describe the algorithm. Afterward, in Section 2.2, we present some observations
regarding the size of Nt (v) and the number of messages read in each given round sent in each
earlier round. These observations formalize the above intuitive statements. We later use these
properties in Section 2.3 to argue that we can develop an LCA simulation of the near-maximal
indepdendent set algorithm of the LOCAL model with query complexity poly(∆).

The Algorithm—Initialization. We next describe the LOCAL algorithm for a near-maximal
independent set. We first discuss round 1 which involves a special initial preparation for all the
future rounds [1, T ]. We comment that, in round 1, each node v sends and receives messages to
and from all of its up to ∆ neighbors, and reads all the received messages.

  Initialization (in round 1)–Determining Relevant Neighbors for Future Rounds.
  In each round of the algorithm, each node v will read the messages sent by only a selected
  subset of its neighbors. In the beginning of round 1, node v creates a set of relevant neighbors
  Nt (v) for each future round t ∈ [1, T ]. In particular, in round 1, we build the set Nt (v) for
  each round t ∈ [1, T ] as follows: Each node u sends ρt (u) for each round t ∈ [1, T ] to each
  of its neighbors. Each node reads all received messages in this round. So, each node v learns
  ρt (u) for each neighbor u ∈ Γ(v) and for each round t ∈ [1, T ]. Then, node v includes each
                                                                                  t−1
  neighbor u ∈ Γ(v) in the set Nt (v) if and only if ρt (u) ≤ p1 (u) · 2(t−1) ≤ 22∆ . Notice that
  since pt (u) ≤ p1 (u) · 2(t−1) , and given how we use the random numbers ρt (u) for the marking
  decision, this preliminary set Nt (v) includes all neighbors of v that can be marked in round t.
       By default, we would think that node v is allowed to read messages from all neighbors in
  Nt (v) during round t. However, these sets Nt (v) might be too large and that would require
  node v to read messages from many neighbors (e.g., to see whether any of them is marked). To
  circumvent that, we do as follows: for each round t ∈ [1, T ], if we have |Nt (v)| > 25(t−1) + K,
  then let z be the greatest integer such that |Nt (v)| > 25(t+z−1) + K. In that case, we declare
  node v sleeping for rounds [t, t + z]. Here, δ ∈ (0, 0.01) is a desirably small positive constant
  and K = 20 log(1/δ) is a large constant.
  Comment 1: We see later how sleeping affects the algorithm. For now, consider this intuition:
  a node sleeping in a given round will not attempt to be added to the independent set. Therefore,
  it also does not need to read in that round whether its neighbors are marked (the node will
  read this information later, once it is not sleeping anymore, to see if any of those neighbors
  joined the independent set or not).
  Comment 2: In the course of the algorithm, until we reach round t, we will further refine the



                                                 7
 set Nt (v) in a gradual manner. This will be explained soon in the main body of the algorithm.
 Also, this will happen for all such sets Nt (v) for different t simultaneously. We emphasize that
 we will never add any new vertex to the set Nt (v), but we may remove vertices from it.


The Algorithm—Main Body. We next describe the main part of the algorithm, which happens
during rounds 1 to T . Some intuition or remarks are provided in the footnotes.

 Main body of the near-maximal independent set algorithm (rounds 1 to T ). Let
 δ ∈ (0, 0.01) be a desirably small positive constant, and K = 20 log 2 (1/δ); intuitively, we think
 of K as a large enough constant. We describe the process in a round t ∈ [1, T ] for a node v,
 which involves four steps. All vertices perform the process of round t simultaneously.
    • Step 1: Suppose that v is not sleeping in round t. If node v was sleeping for rounds
      [t′ , t − 1] and is not sleeping in round t, then node v reads the messages sent by its
      neighbors in Nr (v) for any r ∈ [t′ , t − 1]. If any such neighbor w ∈ Nr (v) had joined
      the independent set I, then v is considered dead, it stops participating in the rest of the
      algorithm and sends a message to all of its neighbors describing that v is dead.
    • Step 2: In round t, for each round t′′ ∈ [t, T ] such that v has not been declared sleeping
      in round t′′ , we do as followsa (sequentially, going over different rounds t′′ one by one):

             – For each earlier round r from t−2(t′′ −t) to t−(t′′ −t)−1, node v does the followingb
               (sequentially, going over different rounds r one by one):
                  ∗ Node v reads the messages that were sent during round r by the neighbors
                    in the set Nt′′ (v). We emphasize that this is done only if node v has not been
                    declared sleeping for this round t′′ , so we know that Nt′′ (v) cannot be too large—
                    the exact bounds are discussed later. Then, node v checks and refines Nt′′ (v)
                    by keeping in Nt′′ (v) only vertices u such that u is not dead and for which
                                           ′′
                    ρt′′ (u) ≤ pr (u) · 2(t −r) .
                     In the end of processing all messages sent by neighbors in Nt′′ (v) during round
                                                           ′′
                     r, if we still have |Nt′′ (v)| > 25(t −r) + K, then we declare node v sleeping in
                     rounds [t′′ , t′′ + (t′′ − r)] and we end this for loop, thus proceeding to the next
                     value of t′′ . Otherwise, we proceed to the next value of r.

    • Step 3: Suppose that node v is sleeping in round t. Then, we call it marked in this round
      iff ρt (u) ≤ pt (v). Moreover, we set pt+1 (v) ← pt (v)/2, send pt+1 (v) to the neighbors, and
      proceed to the next round, thus skipping step 4.
    • Step 4: Suppose that node v is not sleeping in round t. Then, we consider node v marked
      in round t iff ρt (v) ≤ pt (v). Node v sends a message declaring whether it is marked or
      not to its neighbors. If node v is marked and no neighbor in Nt (v) is marked, then node
      v joins the independent set I and sends a message to all of its neighbors describing that v
      joined the independent set I. Suppose v did not join the independent set I (either because
      it was not marked, or because it had a marked neighbor). Then, if any neighbor in Nt (v)
      was marked, we set pt+1 (v) ← pt (v)/2, and otherwise we set pt+1 (v) ← min{2pt (v), 1/2}.
      Node v sends a message to its neighbors describing the value of pt+1 (v).
    a
        We emphasize that this this step happens even if node v is declared sleeping for the current round t.
    b
        The reason for the choice of this [t − 2(t′′ − t), t − (t′′ − t) − 1] interval will become clearer when we discuss



                                                             8
  the size of the relevant neighbor set in Claim 2.1; we use this to bound the number of messages that a node
  reads in Claim 2.2, and later in the simulation of the algorithm in the LCA model, in Lemma 2.3. Intuitively,
  we need that this interval has length Θ(t′′ − t), so that the guarantee that we have about the size of Nt′′ (v) from
  checks in earlier rounds (as v is not declared sleeping for round t′′ ) allows us to read all messages sent in these
                                                           ′′
  rounds while having a bound on |Nt′′ (v)| that is 2O(t −t) + K. On the other hand, we could end the interval
  somewhat later, e.g., in round t − 1, but we would not gain anything asymptotically, because even after reading
                                                                                                            ′′
  messages sent in round t − 1, the best bound that we would have on the size of |Nt′′ (v)| would be 25(t −t) + K.




2.2    Observations regarding the number of messages read per round
The following two observations capture a crucial property of the algorithm, which is one of the
key reasons for the perhaps strange design of the LOCAL algorithm. Informally, they show that
the only time that a node needs to read many messages in a particular round t, say 2Θ(k) many
messages, is when it is reading messages of a much earlier round t − Θ(k). Said differently, in a
round t, we need to reach only constant messages from the previous round, or indeed the previous
O(1) rounds, and more generally at most 2Θ(k) messages from an earlier round t−Θ(k). Notice that
this is quite different than usual LOCAL algorithms, where per round t, each node should read up
to all the ∆ messages sent by the neighbors even in round t − 1 (and tracing those messages naively
suggest that, in round t, the node is influenced by up to ∆t nodes overall, directly or indirectly).
One can see that, because of the new bound, the number of nodes that influence each particular
node can be bounded by poly(∆) · 2Θ(T ) . Instead of formally discussing this point, we later see how
these observations allow us to obtain an LCA with poly(∆) · 2Θ(T ) query complexity for simulating
the above T round algorithm.

Claim 2.1. At the end of round t, the set of relevant neighbors Nt′′ (v) for a future round t′′ > t + 1
                      ′′
has size at most 210(t −t+1) + K, unless v has been declared sleeping for round t′′ . We emphasize
that this statement is deterministic.

Proof. In round t, node v examines the messages sent by nodes in Nt′′ (v) during rounds [t − 2(t′′ −
t), t − (t′′ − t) − 1], round by round, and refines Nt′′ (v) accordingly. In particular, if at the end,
                                                          ′′               ′′
in round r = t − (t′′ − t) − 1, we have |Nt′′ (v)| > 25(t −r) + K = 210(t −t+1) + K, then node v is
declared sleeping for rounds [t′′ , t′′ + (t′′ − r)].

Claim 2.2. In any round t ∈ [T ], for any past round t′ ≤ t − 1, any node v reads the messages of
               ′
at most 225(t−t +1) + K(t − t′ ) neighbors sent during round t′ .

Proof. In round t, node v needs to read the message sent by a neighbor u in round t′ ≤ t − 1 for two
purposes: (A) to perform step 1, which requires knowing whether u joined the independent set I
in round t′ or not for u ∈ Nt′ (v), and (B) to perform step 2, which requires, for every future round
t′′ ≥ t, knowing the marking probability of node u ∈ Nt′′ (v) in each round r ∈ [t−2(t′′ −t), t−(t′′ −t)].
We discuss these two cases separately.
   • Part (A), messages of step 1. Suppose that v is not sleeping in round t, as otherwise it
     reads no messages in step 1. Then, for the earlier round t′ ≤ t − 1, during step 1 of round t,
     node v will read messages sent in round t′ by nodes in Nt′ (v) to see if any of them joined the
     independent set I during round t′ . Since the set Nt′ (v) does not grow over time, it suffices
     that node v reads the message of each neighbor u sent during round t′ only if u ∈ Nt′ (v)
     in the earlier round q = t′ − (t − t′ ). Notice that t′ − q = t − t′ . We have two cases: (I)
     Suppose q ≥ 1, which means t′ > t/2. Since node v was not declared sleeping for round
     t by the end of round q, by Claim 2.1, we get that in the of round q we must have had


                                                           9
                              ′                  ′
      |Nt′ (v)| ≤ 210(t −q+1) + K = 210(t−t +1) + K. (II) Suppose that q ≤ 0, which means t′ ≤ t/2.
      Notice that in this case talking about an event that happened in round q is meaningless as
      q ≤ 0. But here we can rely on the initialization performed at the beginning of round 1.
      In particular, if at that point we had |Nt′ (v)| > 25(t−1) + K, then node v would have been
      declared sleeping for rounds [t′ , t] which includes round t. Since v is not sleeping in round t,
      we must have had |Nt′ (v)| ≤ 25(t−1) + K. We have t′ ≤ t/2 which means (t − t′ ) ≥ t/2. Hence,
                                                ′
      we can conclude that |Nt′ (v)| ≤ 210(t−t +1) + K.
   • Part (B), messages of step 2. During step 2 of round t, mode v might read the messages
     sent in a past round t′ ≤ t − 1, by neighbors in Nt′′ (v) for different future rounds t′′ ≥ t.
     First, let us discuss a fixed future round t′′ ≥ t. Suppose that t′′ was not declared a sleeping
     round for v in the rounds before t, as otherwise we do not process any messages from Nt′′ (v)
     in step 2 of round t. Let q = t − (t′′ − t). If q ≤ 1, then there are no messages from
     rounds [t − 2(t′′ − t), t − (t′′ − t) − 1] to be checked in step 2 of round t for future round
     t′′ , because t − (t′′ − t) − 1 = q − 1 ≤ 0 and there is no such round. Suppose q ≥ 1. Node
     v was not declared sleeping in round t′′ when we refined Nt′′ (v) during step 2 of the earlier
     round q = t − (t′′ − t). Hence, by Claim 2.1, in the end of round q, we must have had
                       ′′                  ′′
     |Nt′′ (v)| ≤ 210(t −q+1) + K ≤ 220(t −t+1) + K. Thus, also in the beginning of round t (even
                                                                         ′′               ′′
     before performing any of its steps), we must have |Nt′′ (v)| ≤ 210(t −q+1) +K ≤ 220(t −t+1) +K.
      In round t, we read messages from neighbors in Nt′′ (v) sent during rounds [t − 2(t′′ − t), t −
      (t′′ − t) − 1], and we gradually filter Nt′′ (v) accordingly. In this lemma, we are interested in
      how many messages sent in the particular round t′ are read in round t. So, support t′ is a
      round in this interval [t − 2(t′′ − t), t − (t′′ − t) − 1] for which we read during round t the
      messages that were sent by nodes in Nt′′ (v) during round t′ . Since we have upper bounded
                        ′′                  ′′
      |Nt′′ (v)| ≤ 210(t −q+1) + K ≤ 220(t −t+1) + K at the beginning of round t, the number of
      messages read during round t sent during earlier round t′ by neighbors in Nt′′ (v) is at most
            ′′
      220(t −t+1) + K.
      Now, we can sum the above over different choices of t′′ . Notice that in the above, t′′ was a
                                  ′)
      round in the interval [ (t−t
                                2    + t, (t − t′ ) + t]. Hence, the total number of messages that node v
      will read during round t sent at the earlier round t′ ≤ t − 1, summed up over all the relevant
      choices of future rounds t′′ ≥ t, is at most
           (t−t′ )+t
                                  ′′                      ′                            ′
                 X
                          (220(t −t+1) + K) ≤ 2 · 220(t−t +1) + K · (t − t′ ) ≤ 225(t−t +1) + K(t − t′ ).
                 (t−t′ )
         t′′ =     2
                         +t


2.3   LCA Simulation
We devise a (recursive) LCA that allows us to simulate the above LOCAL procedure, so that we can
determine each node’s status at the end of the algorithm using poly(∆) queries. We first provide
an intuitive discussion and then present the formal result.
What needs to be done in a simulation. For any t ∈ [1, T ], let us use Q(t) to denote the
subroutine (or oracle) that receives a node v as an input and simulates its behavior for rounds
[1, t]. Slightly abusing notation, we also use |Q(t)| to refer to (the worst case over all vertices v of)
the number of queries during the run of Q(t) called on node v. When Q(t) is called upon node v,
we need to perform three things: (1) Simulate node v in rounds [1, t − 1], which can be done by
calling Q(t − 1) on v. (2) For each round r ∈ [1, t − 1], simulate neighbors Nr (v) and see if any of
them joins the independent set I in round r, which would mean we declare node v dead by round


                                                         10
t (note that it is possible that a neighbor has joined the independent set I in a much earlier round
r ≪ t and node v reads that message only in round t, because v was sleeping before that). (3) We
also need to simulate some of the neighbors of v for rounds [1, t − 1]; these are neighbors that may
influence node v in round t. For the intuitive discussion, let us focus on only this third part. This
part itself can turn out to be too expensive in terms of query complexity, if not done right.
Intuitive discussion of the naive simulation. For this third part, the question is which
neighbors should be simulated for rounds [1, t − 1] and how many such neighbors are there? Let us
simplify the problem for now and ignore that in round t we also do some refinement work for future
rounds t′′ . So, for now, we are just interested in the marking process and the independent set that
is created up to (and including) round t, ignoring the preparation work for the future rounds.
    Consider the procedure Q(t). Before the beginning of round 1, we have read the randomness
of all the up to ∆ neighbors of node v and have formed the initial set Nt (v) of neighbors that
can influence node v in round t. At that point, all that we know is that this set has size at
most 25t + K, as otherwise we would have put v to sleep in round t and thus it would not read
the messages of its neighbors for the sake of the marking process of round t. Naively, we would
think of calling Q(t − 1) on each of those neighbors. However, this would lead to the recursive
complexity |Q(t)| = ∆ + (25t + K) · |Q(t − 1)| > 25t · |Q(t − 1)|. The solution to this recursion
                    2
is |Q(T )| ≥ 2Θ(T ) . That is, to simulate the T = Θ(log ∆) round algorithm, this would have
                          2
query complexity 2Θ(log ∆) = ∆Θ(log ∆) , which is well beyond our target complexity of poly(∆),
and essentially no better than a naive simulation of any Θ(log ∆) round algorithm.
Remedy (intuitive but imprecise explanation). Let us instead use the guarantees of the
LOCAL algorithm, and in particular the observations described in Section 2.2. These allow us to
gradually filter out Nt (v). Suppose we simulate this initial set of 25t + K neighbors in Nt (v) for 1
round. At this point, the set Nt (v) of relevant neighbors should shrink to 25(t−1) + K or otherwise
we would declare node v sleeping in round t and thus would not need to simulate it. More generally,
if we have simulated the previous set Nt (v) of relevant neighbors for t′ many rounds, the remaining
                                      ′
set size should drop to at most 25(t−t ) + K, as otherwise we would declare node v sleeping in round
t. Using this, we get the following recursion

                                                                                                   
                        5t                  5(t−1)                            10
      |Q(t)| = ∆ + (2 + K) · |Q(1)| + (2             + K) · |Q(2)| + · · · + (2    + K) · |Q(t − 1)| .

Recall that K is a large constant. The solution is |Q(T )| ≤ ∆ · exp(Θ(T )), as can be proved by
induction. Once we set T = Θ(log ∆), this gives the overall query complexity of poly(∆) for (this
partial) simulation the T -round LOCAL algorithm on any single node v. This discussion ignores
some of the other computations that have to be performed for each node in a round, but provides
the right intuition for the overall complexity. We next present the formal statement and analysis.
Lemma 2.3. There is a local computation algorithm that simulates the above LOCAL algorithm.
When questioned about any single node v, it performs poly(∆) queries to the graph, and poly(∆)
computations, and answers whether v ∈ I or v ∈ Γ(I) or v ∈
                                                         / (I ∪ Γ(I)). Here, I is the independent
set computed in the course of the LOCAL algorithm.
Proof of Lemma 2.3. For any t ∈ [1, T ], let us use Q(t) to denote the LCA subroutine that receives
any node v as an input and simulates its behavior for rounds [1, t]. Slightly abusing notation, we
also use |Q(t)| to refer to the number of queries during Q(t) (worst case over all vertices v).
    Furthermore, again with some abuse of notation, let us use Q(0) to indicate the subroutine that
includes all the initialization steps that a node performs before even the first round: setting its

                                                     11
p1 (v), forming the initial neighbor sets Nt (v) for all t ∈ [T ] by checking the neighbors u (concretely
their random values ρt (u)) and declaring v sleeping in rounds [t, z] if Nt (v) > 25(t+z−1) + K. Notice
that all of these can be performed using only ∆ queries to the graph (to determine the neighbors).
Hence, we will use |Q(0)| = ∆ as our base case.
    When Q(t) is called upon node v, we first call Q(t − 1) on node v. This takes care of simulating
node v for rounds 1 to t − 1. What remains is to simulate node v for round t, for all the four steps of
the algorithm in that round. Of course, this will incur simulating some of the neighbors that may
influence node v in round t for some of the previous rounds. We discuss this next, by examining
each of the steps of the LOCAL algorithm separately.
Simulating Step 1. Let us first discuss step 1 of round t. If node v is sleeping in round t (indicated
because of the simulation of v for rounds 1 to t − 1), nothing needs to be done. Suppose this is
not the case. Then, for each earlier round r ∈ [1, t − 1], we need to process Nr (v) and determine
whether any of those nodes joined the independent set I, which would thus make us declare node
v dead (i.e., it cannot join I). We divide this range into two parts of [1, ⌊t/2⌋] and [⌊t/2⌋ + 1, t − 1].
   • The First Half. For each r ∈ [1, ⌊t/2⌋], we do as follows: from the simulation of rounds up
     to t − 1, which includes Q(0), we know that v has identified the initial set of Nr (v) in round
     1. Notice that if Nr (v) > 25(t−1) + K, then node v would have been declared sleeping for
     rounds [r, t]. Hence, we conclude that we must have Nr (v) ≤ 25(t−1) + K. Then, we simply
     call Q(r) on all of these at most 25(t−1) + K neighbors that are in Nr (v) in round 1. This
     costs (25(t−1) + K) · |Q(r)| queries for each round r ∈ [1, ⌊t/2⌋].
   • The Second Half. For each r ∈ [⌊t/2⌋ + 1, t − 1], we do as follows: from the simulation
     of rounds up to t − 1, which includes Q(0), we know that v has identified the initial set of
     Nr (v) in round 1. Then, for each round s from 1 to r − (t − r), we call Q(s) on the set
     Nr (v) of neighbors remaining after we have processed the neighbors in Nr (v) up to round s.
     Notice that if |Nr (v)| > 25(r−s) + K, we would declare node v sleeping in round [r, r + (r − s)],
     which includes round t. The latter is because s ≤ r − (t − r) = 2r − t, which implies
     r + (r − s) ≥ 2r − (2r − t) = t. Hence, we must have had |Nr (v)| ≤ 25(r−s) + K after having
     processed messages of rounds up to s. Hence, in total, for each round r ∈ [⌊t/2⌋ + 1, t − 1],
                                        Pr−(t−r) 5(r−s+1)
     the query complexity is at most s=1        (2         + K) · Q(s).
Summarized over all rounds of both halves, the query complexity to perform step 1 is at most

                     ⌊t/2⌋
                      X                                     t−1
                                                          X          r−(t−r)
                                                                        X                                 
                                  5(t−1)                                          5(r−s+1)
                              (2           + K) · |Q(r)| +                       (2          + K) · |Q(s)|
                       r=1                                   r=⌊t/2⌋    s=1
                    ⌊t/2⌋
                     X                                     r−1
                                                         X                          
                               10(t−r)                            5(t−s)
        ≤                    (2            + K) · |Q(r)| +     2(2       + K) · |Q(s)|
                     r=1                                     s=1
                    r−1
                   X                              
                              10(t−s)
        ≤                  3(2        + K) · |Q(s)|                                                           (1)
                     s=1

Simulating Step 2. Let us now discuss step 2 of round t. Here, the algorithm involves a separate
process for each t′′ ≥ [t, T ] that has not been declared sleeping for node v. Let us focus on
one of these rounds. Let q = t − (t′′ − t). If q ≤ 1, then there are no messages from rounds
[t − 2(t′′ − t), t − (t′′ − t) − 1] to be checked in step 2, as there is no such round. This is also the
case if t′′ = t, in which case the interval is also empty. Hence, suppose q ≥ 1 and t′′ ≥ t + 1. Notice
that at the end of round q, when we read messages from rounds up to r = t − 2(t′′ − t) − 1, node

                                                        12
                                                                                                                   ′′
v was not declared sleeping for round t′′ , which means we must have had Nt′′ (v) ≤ 25(t −r) + K =
      ′′
25(3(t −t)+1) + K. Next, for each earlier round t′ from t − 2(t′′ − t) to t − (t′′ − t) − 1, the algorithm
refines Nt′′ (v) sequentially. If after processing messages of round t′ ∈ [t − 2(t′′ − t), t − (t′′ − t) − 1]
                       ′′  ′
we have Nt′′ (v) > 25(t −t ) + K, then we declare node v sleeping in rounds [t′′ , t′′ + (t′′ − t′ )] and thus
we do not need to continue this process for that future round t′′ (in this current round t). Notice
                                                                   ′)
that writing the relation in terms of t′′ , we can say t′′ ∈ [ (t−t
                                                                 2    + t, (t − t′ ) + t]. Hence, the number
                                                                                            ′′ ′
of messages to be read after we have processed round t is at most Nt′′ (v) ≤ 25(t −t ) . Because of
                                                            ′

this, we can upper bound the query complexity of processing the messages related to Nt′′ (v) by

                                                                          t−(t′′ −t)−1
            5(3(t′′ −t)+1)                                                                      ′′ ′
                                                                                X
                             + K) · |Q(t − 2(t′′ − t))| +                                  (25(t −t ) + K) · |Q(t′ )| .
                                                                                                                     
         (2                                                                                                               (∗)
                                                                       t′ =t−2(t′′ −t)+1

   Notice also that we need to calculate the summation of (∗) over different t′′ . Let us examine the
summation of the above bound over different t′′ , by analyzing each of the two terms of (∗) separately.
By setting s = t−2(t′′ −t), the first term in (∗) can be simply upperPbounded as (220(t−s) +K)·Q(s).
Hence, the summation over different t can be upper bounded by t−1
                                         ′′
                                                                        s=1 (2
                                                                              20(t−s) + K) · Q(s).

   For the second term in (∗), for each particular t′ ≤ t − 2, the summation over different t′′ is
upper bounded by
                  (t−t′ )+t
                                       ′′   ′                                   ′
                     X
                                  (25(t −t ) + K) · |Q(t′ )| ≤ (2 · (210(t −t) ) + K(t − t′ )) · |Q(t′ )|.
                         ′
                t′′ = (t−t
                        2
                           )
                             +t

Therefore, overall, the query complexity of step 2 of round t can be upper bounded by
                                            t−1
                                            X
                                                  2 · (220(t−s) + K(t − s)) · |Q(s)|.                                     (2)
                                            s=1


Simulating Step 3. This step happens only when node v has been declared sleeping for round
t and in this case node v is does not read any messages of the neighbors in this round, and thus
there is no extra query needed.
Simulating Step 4. This step happens only when v is not sleeping in round t. In that case, we
determine whether v is marked or not, i.e., whether it attempts to join the independent set I in
round t or not. The only message that needs to be read from the neighbors is whether any neighbor
in Nt (v) also got marked or not. Since node v was not declared sleeping for round t in the earlier
round t − 1, we know that at that point we must have had Nt (v) ≤ 210 + K. Hence, the query
complexity of this step is simply calling Q(t − 1) on each of these at most 210 + K neighbors, which
is upper bounded by (25 + K) · |Q(t − 1)|.
    Overall, we can thus upper bound the query complexity of simulating v up to round t as
                                                         t−1
                                                        X                                          
                                                                      20(t−s)
                        |Q(t)| ≤ |Q(t − 1)| +                   10(2            + K(t − s)) · |Q(s)|
                                                          s=1

   Recall the base Q(0) = ∆. Using a simple induction, one can show that the solution to the
recursion is bounded as Q(T ) ≤ ∆ ·2CT , where C is a sufficiently large constant. Hence, to simulate
each node’s behavior in the LOCAL algorithm that has round complexity T = Θ(log ∆), the query
complexity is poly(∆).

                                                                 13
2.4     Analysis of the LOCAL Algorithm

Intuitive Discussion. The general idea in the analysis is to show that despite the changes in
the LOCAL algorithm (which are the whole reason that we can now achieve the poly(∆) query
complexity), we can follow an analysis roughly along the lines of that of the original algorithm
of [Gha16]. Let us provide an intuitive outline. We comment this intuition is quite imprecise and
inaccurate; the precise statements needs many definition and are presented after this intuition. We
will show that, unless an unlikely event of probability at most 1/ poly(∆) happens, there will be
a constant fraction of rounds that are good for v, in the sense that in each such round, either v
joins the MIS or a neighbor of v joins the MIS. In particular, we will show that with probability
1 − 1/ poly(∆), all except a negligible minority of the decisions of a node to sleep are correct,
meaning that the size of the neighborhood that was going to be marked in round t was too large,
and in the normal course of the algorithm the node would have not been able to join the independent
set in this round. Having shown that, we use the dynamic of the algorithm to argue that in rounds
where many neighbors of v are attempting to join, either we are in a good round and there is a
constant probability that at least one of them will succeed to join the independent set, or we are
in such a round that the number of those attempting neighbor will shrink considerably. This will
allow us to say that there cannot be a large fraction of rounds where too many of the neighbors
of v are attempting (and still none of them joins the independent set). Because of this, we will be
able to show that unless there are a constant fraction of good rounds where neighbors of v have
a constant probability per round of joining I, there should be a constant fraction of good rounds
such that v has a considerable probability of attempting to join in this round and such that with
constant probability no neighbor will block it.
    We next proceed to the analysis. For that, we first need to define a set of terminologies and
notations. Afterward, we present a number of key claims about the behavior of the algorithm, and
at the end, in Lemma 2.13 and Lemma 2.14, we show that each connected component of the graph
induced by the remaining vertices V \ (I ∪ Γ(I)) has size poly(∆) log n, with high probability.

2.4.1   Terminology and Round Classification
                        P
Let us define dt (v) = u∈Γ(v) pt (v). For each node v, we classify the rounds into a few different
(not necessarily disjoint) possibilities:
   • Sleeping Mistake Rounds: Recall that if in a round t′ and for a node v, we have |Nt (v)| >
            ′
     25(t−t ) + K for some future round t ≥ t′ + 1, then we declare      Pnode v sleeping for ′rounds
     [t, t + (t − t′ )]. We say this was a mistake if at time t′ we had u∈Γ(v) pt′ (u) ≤ 24(t−t ) . And
     in this case we have created t − t′ + 1 rounds where node v would be sleeping by mistake. If
     this mistake happens, we call the time interval [t′ + 1, t + t − t′ ] a sleeping mistake period for
     node v, or simply a mistake period for v, and each round in this interval a mistaken round
     for v. Any round that is not mistaken is called an intact round.
        Similarly, before the beginning of round 1, we examine Nt (v) and if |Nt (v)| > 25(t−1) + K,
        we will put v to sleep for some rounds. Let z be the greatest integer such that |Nt (v)| >
        25(t+z−1) +PK. Then, we put v to sleep for rounds [t, t + z]. Noting that in round 1 we must
                                           1
        have had u∈Γ(v) p1 (u) ≤ ∆ · 2∆       = 12 and as pt (u) ≤ 2t−1 p1 (u), any such event for z ≥ 1
        is a mistake (i.e., significant deviation from the expectation of |Nt (v)|, and we consider the
        interval [t, t + z] as a mistake period, and each of its rounds as a mistaken round for v.
   • Sleeping Round: We say node v is sleeping in round t if v has been put to sleep in round
     t in one of the earlier rounds t′ ≤ t − 1 (either correctly or by mistake).


                                                   14
    • Heavy Round: We say node v is heavy    Pin round t if v is not sleeping in this round and
      when we reach round t, we have dt (v) = u∈Γ(v) pt (v) ≥ Cδ = log(1/δ).
    • Light Round: We say node v is light
                                        P in round t if v is not sleeping in this round and when
      we reach round t, we have dt (v) = u∈Γ(v) pt (v) ≤ δ.
    • Moderate Round: We say node v is moderate in round t if v is not sleeping in this round
      and when we reach round t, we have dt (v) ∈ (δ, Cδ ).
    • Wrong Down Move: If in an intact round t, node v is light but sets pt+1 (v) ← pt (v)/2, we
      call this a wrong down move.
    • Wrong Up Move: If in an intact round t where dt (v) ≥ δ and t is not a good type-2 round
      for v, we have dt+1 (v) > 0.7dt (v), we call this a wrong up move for v.
    • Type-1 Good Round: We call a round t a good round of type-1 if this is a light or moderate
      round for v, but not a sleeping round, and we have pt (v) = 1/2.
    • Type-2 Good Round: Let Ht (v) ⊆ Γ(v) be the neighbors of v that are heavy or sleeping
      in round v. Then, we call round t a good round of type-2 for v if dt (v) ≥ δ and we have
      P                    19
         u∈Ht (v) pt (v) ≤ 20 dt (v). Notice that node v might be sleeping in such a round.


2.4.2    Key Lemmas
Claim 2.4. The probability of each round t being a mistaken round for v is at most δ5 . Moreover,
with probability 1 − 1/ poly(∆), the total number of mistaken rounds (which includes rounds in
which node v is sleeping by mistake) is at most δT for a small constant δ ∈ (0, 0.01). Furthermore,
this holds independent of the randomness of nodes V \ Γ(v).
Proof. We first discuss the probability that each round t is a sleeping mistake and upper bound
this by δ5 . Then, we argue that the total number of mistakes is at most δT , with probability
1 − 1/ poly(∆). We note that the latter does not follow immediately from the former as there are
some dependencies.
Sleeping Mistake Probability Per Round. We first consider sleeping decisions made before
the beginning of round 1. Choose a round t′ ≤ t and let us first consider the creation of Nt′ (v)
before the beginning of round 1, and the sleeping rounds it may cause, if Nt′ (v) is too large. Recall
                                                                 1
for that for each neighbor u ∈ Γ(v), we have p1 (u) ≤ 2∆           . Moreover, we include in Nt′ (v) neighbor
                                         t′ −1                                 ′
u if and only if we have ρt′ (u) ≤ 2           p1 (u). Hence, E[|Nt′ (v)|] ≤ 2t −2 . We put v to sleep for round
                                                                     ′
t′ , and some rounds after, only if we have |Nt′ (v)| > 25(t −1) + K, where K = 20 log(1/δ). If z is
                                                       ′
the greatest integer such that |Nt′ (v)| > 25(t +z−1) + K, then we put v to sleep for rounds [t′ , t′ + z].
Moreover, whether a neighbor u is in Nt′ (v) or not simply depends on its own randomness ρt′ (u)
and is independent of all other neighbors. Hence, by Chernoff bound, the probability of this event
                              ′                                                ′
is at most 2 · exp(−(25(t +z−1) + 20 log(1/δ))/3) ≤ δ5 exp(−Θ(25(t +z−1) )) ≤ δ5 exp(−(24(t+z−1) )).
This means the probability that we put v to sleep for round t because of a particular prior round
t′ ≤ t is at most δ5 exp(−(24(t−1) )). Hence, by a union bound over all t′ ∈ [1, t], we get that the
probability that we put v to sleep for round t′ is at most δ5 · t · exp(−(24(t−1) )) ≤ δ5 .
      Next, let us consider sleeping decisions made in the course of the algorithm, in some round
t′ ≥ 1. Consider a future round t ≥ t′ + 1. We declare v sleeping for rounds                             ′
                                                                                         P [t, t + (t − t )](t−t
                                                                                                              if in
         ′                      5(t−t′)                                                                          ′)
round t we had |Nt | > 2                + K. Notice that in this round E[|Nt |] ≤ u∈Γ(v) pt′ (v) · 2                .
Moreover, whether a neighbor u is in Nt (v) or not simply depends on its own randomness ρt (u)
and
P is independent3(t−t  of all other neighbors. Hence, by Chernoff, the probability that we actually had
                          ′)
           p
    u∈Γ(v) t ′ (v) ≤ 2       and made this mistake of putting v into sleep for rounds [t, t + (t − t′)] is at
                        ′                             ′
most 2 · exp(−(25(t−t ) + K)/3) ≤ δ5 2−(4(t−t )) , given that K = 20 log 1/δ. Hence, by a union bound

                                                         15
          ′ ∈ [1, t − 1], we get that the probability that round t was a mistaken round for node v is
over all tP
at most t−1        5 −(4(t−t′ )) ≤ δ 5 .
            t′ =1 δ 2
The Total Number of Sleeping Mistakes. Let us consider a round t′ and the set Nt′ (v) that
we build for it and gradually refine it. Notice that, as discussed above, if Nt′ (v) crosses a certain
threshold, then we put node v into sleep for round t′ as well as a number of rounds after it. Notice
also that this can happen only once; that is, only one time because of Nt′ (v) we put node v into
sleep for some rounds that includes round t′ , and from that point on we do not refine Nt′ (v). Let
   ′
Rt (v) be the number of rounds that we put v into sleep because of |Nt′ (v)| crossing a threshold in
any previous round t′′ ≤ t′ . As discussed above, before the beginning of round 1, we put v into sleep
for z + 1 rounds — that is, the period [t′ , t′ + z]— with probability at most δ5 exp(−(24(t+z−1) )).
If that happened, v is sleeping in round t′ and we do not create any additional sleeping because of
|Nt′ (v)|. Otherwise, in each later round r ∈ [1, t′ ], we put v into sleep for t′ − r + 1 rounds —that
is, the period [t′ , t′ + (t′ − r)]—with probability at most δP5 2−(4(t′ −r)) .
                                    ′                                     ′
     We can conclude that E[Rt (v)] ≤ δ/2. Therefore, E[ Tt′ =1 Rt (v)] ≤ δT /2. Furthermore, the
                                           ′
distribution of the random variable Rt (v) is stochastically dominated by a geometric distribution.
                                                   ′
More precisely, for any k ≥ 1, we have Pr[Rt (v) = k] ≤ δ2 · 2−(2k) . Since the random variables
   ′
Rt (v) are all independent for different values of t′ , and as each is from a distribution stochastically
dominating by a geometric distribution,      using standard concentration arguments [Doe18, Theorem
                                      PT     t′
1.10.32], we can conclude that t′ =1 R (v) is concentrated around its expectation and we thus
          PT         ′
have Pr[ t′ =1 Rt (v) ≥ δT ] ≤ exp(−Θ(δT )) = 1/ poly(∆).
     Finally, notice that in this argument, we only examined the random variables that impact
whether a neighbor u ∈ Γ(v) is in Nt (v) or not. Hence, the guarantee holds independent of the
randomness of nodes V \ Γ(v).

     We will sometimes make use of the following elementary helper lemma (very much like a union
bound) to say that conditioning on an event that happens with probability almost 1 does not change
the probabilities too much. In particular, the latter for us will be the event that a particular round
is intact, which we know happens with probability at least 1 − δ5 , from Claim 2.4.

Lemma 2.5. Consider an event E ′ which happens in round t with probability Pr[E ′ ]. Also, let EI
be another event, in our particular case, the event that round t is intact for node v. Then, we have
Pr[E ′ |EI ] ≥ Pr[E ′ ] − (1 − Pr[EI ]).

Proof. We have Pr[E ′ |EI ] ≥ Pr[E ′ ∩ EI ] ≥ Pr[E ′ ] − Pr[E ′ ∩ E¯I ] ≥ Pr[E ′ ] − (1 − Pr[EI ]).

Claim 2.6. In each intact round t where v is light, with probability at least 1 − 2δ, we have
pt+1 (v) ← min{2pt (v), 1/2}. In other words, the probability of each round being a wrong down
move is at most 2δ. This statement holds independent of the randomness of nodes V \ Γ(v).

                                           P we have dt (v) ≤ δ. Hence, the probability that any of
Proof. In an intact round t where v is light,
the neighbors of v is marked is at most u∈Γ(v) pt (u) = dt (u) ≤ δ. Therefore, with probability at
least 1 − δ, no neighbor is marked. This proves the claim, because if node neighbor gets marked,
we set pt+1 (v) ← min{2pt (v), 1/2}. Finally, we note that we should condition on that round t is
an intact round and v was not mistakenly put to sleep for round t. Each round is an intact round
with probability at least 1 − δ5 , as shown in Claim 2.4. Hence, by Lemma 2.5, the probability that
no neighbor is marked remains at least 1 − δ − δ5 ≥ 1 − 2δ.

Claim 2.7. In each intact round t where v is heavy, with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
pt+1 (v) ← pt (v)/2. This statement holds independent of the randomness of nodes V \ Γ(v).


                                                        16
Proof. In an intact round t where v is heavy, we have dt (v) ≥ Cδ = log2 (1/δ). Notice that each
neighbor u ∈ Γ(v) is marked with probability pt (v), and regardless of whetherQu is sleeping in this
round or not. Thus, the probability that no neighbor of v is marked is at most u∈Γ(v) (1 − pt (u)) ≤
  P
e− u∈Γ(v) pt (u) = e−dt (v) ≤ δ/2. Hence, with probability at least 1 − δ/2, at least one neighbor is
marked. Finally, we note that we should condition on that round t is an intact round and v was
not mistakenly put to sleep for round t. Each round is an intact round with probability at least
1 − δ5 , as shown in Claim 2.4. Hence, by Lemma 2.5, even conditioning on round t being an
intact round for v, we know that the probability that some neighbor of v is marked is at least
1 − δ/2 − δ5 ≥ 1 − δ. Thus, with probability at least 1 − δ, some neighbor of v is marked and node
v sets pt+1 (v) ← pt (v)/2.

Claim 2.8. In each intact round t where v is sleeping, we have pt+1 (v) ← pt (v)/2.

Proof. Follows directly and deterministically, because the algorithm sets pt+1 (v) ← pt (v)/2 in step
3 of each sleeping round.

Claim 2.9. In each intact round t where dt (v) ≥ δ but t is not a good type-2 round for v, with
probability at least 1 − 10δ, we have dt+1 (v) ≤ 0.7dt (v). In other words, the probability of each
round being a wrong up move is at most 10δ. This statement holds independent of the randomness
of nodes V \ Γ2 (v).
    Moreover, a similar statement holds for sleeping rounds that are not good type-2 rounds, in an
amortized sense: consider a node v that is put to sleep in a round t′ for the period [t, t + (t − t′ )],
and this was not a mistake. We have two cases:
   • Either each round r ∈ [t, t + (t − t′ )] has dr (v) ≥ δ, in which case either r is a good type-2
     round or, with probability at least 1 − 10δ, we have dr+1 (v) ≤ 0.7dr (v). Here, the statement
     depends only on the randomness of round r.
                                                                                                ′′   ′
   • Otherwise—if there is at least one round r such that dr (v) ≤ δ—we have dt′′ (v) ≤ (0.7)t −t dt′ (v)
     where t′′ = t + (t − t′ ).

Proof. Consider
              P a round t in which   dt (v) ≥ δ. Suppose that this is not a good type-2 round for v,
                                19
which means u∈H(v) pt (v) ≤ 20 dt (v) where H(v) ⊆ Γ(v) is the neighbors of v that are heavy or
sleeping in round t. Let us call each neighbor w ∈ H(v) who sets pt+1 (w) ← {2pt (w), 1/2} wrong.
By Claim 2.7, any neighbor w ∈ H(v) will set pt+1 (w) ← pt (w)/2 with probability at least 1 − δ.
Thus, each neighbor in w ∈ H(v) is wrong with probability at most δ. Let W ⊂ H(v) be those
that were wrong. Hence, we have
                                   X                       X
                               E[         pt+1 (w)] ≤ 2δ ·     pt (w).
                                  w∈W (v)                 w∈H(v)
                                                                             P
Therefore, by Markov’s inequality, with probability at least 1 − 10δ, we have w∈W (v) pt+1 (w) ≤
 1   P                                 ′                              ′       ′
10 ·   w∈H(v) pt (w). Every neighbor w ∈ H(v) \ W (v) sets pt+1 (w ) = pt (w )/2. Hence, with




                                                  17
probability at least 1 − 10δ, we have
                          X
              dt+1 (v) =       pt+1 (w)
                          w∈Γ(v)
                             X                        X                          X
                      =                 pt+1 (w) +             pt+1 (w) +                    pt+1 (w)
                          w∈Γ(v)\H(v)                w∈W (v)                w∈(H(v)\W (v))
                               X                     1    X                       X
                      ≤2                 pt (w) +       ·   pt (w) +                          pt (w)/2
                                                     10
                           w∈Γ(v)\H(v)                  w∈H(v)               w∈(H(v)\W (v))
                           2   X          1    X         1  X
                      ≤      ·   pt (w) +    ·   pt (w) + ·   pt (w)
                          20              10             2
                              w∈H(v)                   w∈H(v)                  w∈H(v)

                      = 0.7dt (v)

Let us now consider the second part of the claim, where a node v is put to sleep in a round t′ for
                   (t − t′ )], and this was not by a mistake. The latter part means that at time t′ ,
the period [t, t + P
                                               ′
we had dt′ (v) = u∈Γ(v) pt′ (v) ≥ 23(t−t ) . We have already analyzed rounds r in this period in
which we have dr (v) ≥ δ. In the complementary case, suppose that there is at least one round
r in the interval during which we have dr (v) ≤ δ. Then at the end of the interval, we have
               ′               ′                 ′′ ′
dr (v) ≤ δ2(t−t ) ≤ (0.5)2(t−t ) dt′ (v) = (0.5)t −t dt′ (v).

Claim 2.10. With probability 1 − 1/ poly(∆), the total number of wrong moves for a node v is at
most 20δT . Moreover, this holds independent of the randomness of nodes V \ Γ2 (v).

Proof. By Claims 2.6 and 2.9, the probability of each intact round being a wrong down move or a
wrong up move is at most 10δ. Furthermore, whether an intact round is a wrong up or down move
depends only on the randomness used in the marking of that round, and is independent of other
rounds. Hence, by Chernoff bound, With probability 1 − 1/ poly(∆), the total number of wrong
moves for a node v is at most 20δT . In determining whether a round is a wrong up or down move,
we only examined the randomness of v, its neighbors and the neighbors of its neighbors. Hence,
the statement holds independent of the randomness of nodes V \ Γ2 (v).

Claim 2.11. In each intact good round of type-1, with probability at least δ2 /3, node v joins the
independent set I. This statement holds independent of the randomness of nodes V \ Γ(v).

Proof. In an intact good round of type-1, we have dt (v) ≥ Cδ = log(1/δ) and pt (v) = 1/2. In this
round, node v is marked with probability 1/2 and independentPof that, the probability that none
of its neighbors is marked is at least u∈Γ(v) (1 − pt (u)) ≥ 4− u∈Γ(v) pt (u) = δ2 . Finally, we had
                                      Q

conditioned on t being an intact round. Since any round is intact with probability at least 1 − δ5 ,as
shown in Claim 2.4, we conclude that the probability that node v joins the independent set I is at
least δ2 /2 − δ5 ≥ δ2 /3.

Claim 2.12. In each intact good round of type-2, with probability at least δ3 /50, one of the neighbors
of node v joins the independent set I. This statement holds independent of the randomness of nodes
V \ Γ2 (v).

Proof. Let H(v) ⊆ Γ(v) be the neighborsP of v that are 19
                                                        heavy in roundPt or sleeping. In an intact
round of type-2, we have dt (v) ≥ δ and u∈H(v) pt (v) ≤ 20 dt (v). Thus, u∈(Γ(v)\H(v)) pt (v) ≥ δ/20.
We scan the neighbors in (Γ(v)\H(v)) one by one until we find the first marked neighbor.
                                                                                P          The prob-
                                                   Q                           − u∈(Γ(v)\H(v)) pt (v)
ability that we find no marked neighbor is at most u∈Γ(v)\H(v) (1 − pt (u)) ≤ e                       ≤

                                                       18
e−δ/20 ≥ 1 − δ/40. In other words, with probability at least δ/40 we find a marked neigh-
bor in (Γ(v) \ H(v)). Let w be such a neighbor. Notice that w is not sleeping and we have
dt (w) ≤ Cδ = log(1/δ). Hence,
                           P    the probability that none of the neighbors of w marked is at least
                          − u∈Γ(w) pt (u)
                                          = δ2 . Therefore, with probability at least δ3 /40, at least
Q
   u∈Γ(w) (1 − pt (u)) ≥ 4
one of the neighbors of v joins the independent set I. Finally, we had conditioned on t being an
intact round. Since any round is intact with probability at least 1 − δ5 , as shown in Claim 2.4,
we conclude that the probability that a neighbor of node v joins the independent set I is at least
δ3 /40 − δ5 ≥ δ3 /50.

2.4.3   Proof of the Main Statement
Lemma 2.13. In the T = Θ(log ∆) round algorithm, for each node v, with probability 1 −
1/ poly(∆), we have v ∈ (I ∪ Γ(I)). Moreover, this statement holds independent of the random-
ness of nodes V \ Γ2 (v).

Proof. To prove the lemma, we show that with probability at least 1 − 1/ poly(∆), we have at least
0.1T good rounds for v (in fact, without examining the marking outcome of the good rounds).
Then, we use Claim 2.11 and Claim 2.12 to argue that with probability at least 1 − 1/ poly(∆), we
must have v ∈ (I ∪ Γ(I)).
    First, note that by Claim 2.10 and Claim 2.4, we have at most 25δT rounds that are wrong
moves or mistakenly sleeping. Recall also that δ is a constant that we adjust to be desirably small.
    Next, consider the set of all moderate, heavy, and sleeping rounds for v. Each such round is
either a good type-2 round or a round t in which we have dt+1 ≤ 0.7 · dt (v), or else it is either a
wrong up move round or a mistakenly sleeping round (we separated the latter two kind as they are
a tunably-small fraction, by decreasing δ). Suppose we have less than 0.1T good rounds of type
2, as otherwise we are done. In round 1, we have dt (v) ≤ 1/2. In any round (and as particularly
relevant in this argument, any good type-2 round or any wrong or mistaken round), we know that
dt+1 (v) ≤ 2dt (v). We have at most 0.1T +25δT such 2-factor increases during moderate, heavy, and
sleeping rounds. Any remaining round among moderate, heavy, and sleeping rounds is a decrease
by an 0.7 factor, i.e., where we have dt+1 ≤ 0.7 · dt (v). Since any increase round increases d(v) by
at most a 2 factor and any decrease round reduces d(v) by a factor of at most 0.7, and given that
(0.7)2 ≤ 1/2, we can have at most 0.3T + 75δT rounds in which v is moderate, heavy, or sleeping.
    What remains are light rounds for v, and a tunably-small minority of wrong or mistaken rounds
(namely at most 25δT ). So, we must have at least 0.7T − 100δT light rounds. Each light round is
                                                                                               1
either a wrong down move or we have pt+1 (v) = min{2·pt (v), 1/2}. We start with p1 (v) = 2∆      and in
each light round that is not a wrong down move, we have pt+1 (v) = min{2·pt (v), 1/2}. In each other
round, we have pt+1 (v) ≥ pt /2. Hence, in at least (0.7T −100δT )−(log ∆+1+0.3T +75δT ) ≥ 0.1T
light rounds, node v is not sleeping and we have pt (v) = 1/2. Here, we have used that δ < 0.001.
These are good rounds of type 2.
    In conclusion, node v has at least 0.1T good rounds, with probability 1 − 1/ poly(∆). By
Claim 2.11 and Claim 2.12, in each good round, node v joins the independent set I or has a
neighbor join I with probability at least δ3 /50. Hence, the probability that v ∈    / (I ∪ Γ(I)) is at
most (1 − δ3 /50)0.1T ≤ 1/ poly(∆), where we use that the constant in the length T = Θ(log ∆) is
chosen large enough (e.g., greater than 1000/δ3 , where δ itself was a small constant fixed earlier).

Lemma 2.14. Let I be the independent set computed in Lemma 2.13. Let H be the subgraph of G
induced by the subset V \(I ∪ Γ(I)) of vertices. Then, with probability 1− 1/ poly(n), each connected
component of H has at most O(∆4 log n) vertices. Furthermore, for each node v and for any ε > 0,
the connected component of v in H has size at most O(∆4 log(1/ε)).

                                                  19
Proof Sketch. This is a standard proof, which is sometimes called a shattering proof, and the first
version of it appeared in Beck’s breakthrough algorithm for Lovasz Local Lemma [Bec91]. See,
e.g., [RTVX11, Lemma 4.6] or [Gha16, lemma 4.2] for applications of this in the case of the MIS
problem. To be self-contained, we provide a short and informal (and slightly imprecise) sketch.
    By Lemma 2.13, each node v is in H with probability at most 1/∆20 . We note that any
probability 1/∆c , for any constant c, would be achievable in Lemma 2.13, by adjusting the constant
in the round complexity T = Θ(log ∆) of the LOCAL algorithm. The bound of 1/∆20 will suffice
for our argument in this lemma. Also, for any two nodes that are 5 or more hops apart, this
statement holds independently, as for each of them it depends only on the randomness of nodes
within its distance 2. Let T be a tree embedded in G1 0 such that any two neighbors in T have
distance at most 10 in G and any two nodes in T have distance at least 5 in G. The probability
that all vertices of T are in H is at most ( ∆120 )|T | . On the other hand, there are at most n(4∆10 )|T |
many trees of size |T | that can be embedded in graph G10 . Namely, there are n places as the
root, 4|T | different tree topologies, and at most ∆10 ways to choose each node in the tree once its
parent has been chosen, among the less than ∆10 nodes within 10 hops of its parent. Therefore,
for |T | = Θ(log n), with probability at least 1 − 1/ poly(n), there is no such tree in H. Hence, with
probability at least 1 − 1/ poly(n), there is no connected component of size exceeding Θ(∆4 log n)
in H, because any such component includes all the vertices of a tree of size Θ(log n) embedded in
G10 with the aforementioned properties (as can be seen by a greedy argument of taking any vertex
in the component of H and removing others within its distance 4, which are at most Θ(∆4 ) many).
    Also note that if we fix node v itself and we are only interested in the component of v, we have
already fixed the root of the tentative embedding of |T |. Then, by setting |T | = Θ(log 1/ε), we get
that with probability 1 − ε, the component of v has at most Θ(∆4 log n) vertices.

Corollary 2.15. There is a local computation algorithm that, when queried on any single node v,
performs poly(∆) computation and answers whether v ∈ I, v ∈ Γ(I), or v ∈     / (I ∪ Γ(I)). Moreover,
letting H be the subgraph of G induced by the subset V \(I ∪Γ(I)) of vertices. Then, with probability
1 − 1/ poly(n), each connected component of H has at most O(∆4 log n) vertices.

Proof. Follows directly from Lemma 2.3, Lemma 2.13, and Lemma 2.14.

2.5   The Complete LCA Algorithm for MIS
Theorem 2.16. There is a local computation algorithm that, when queried on any single node v,
performs poly(∆) log n computation and answers whether v ∈ I ′ or not, where I ′ is a maximal
independent set, with probability 1 − 1/ poly(n). Furthermore, for each node v, the expected query
complexity to answer this question is poly(∆), and for any ε > 0, with probability at least 1 − ε,
the query complexity is at most poly(∆) log(1/ε).

Proof. When queried on each node v, we first call the LCA of Corollary 2.15 which uses poly(∆)
queries and answers whether v ∈ I, v ∈ Γ(I), or v ∈   / (I ∪ Γ(I)). If v ∈ I or v ∈ Γ(I), we are done
and we terminate. Otherwise, we perform more queries to reveal the connected component of v
in the subgraph H induced by the subset V \ (I ∪ Γ(I)). From Corollary 2.15, we know that for
each ε > 0, with probability at least 1 − ε, the size of the connected component of v is at most
poly(∆) log(1/ε), and, with probability at least 1 − 1/ poly(n), this size is at most poly(∆) log n.
    Suppose that v ∈ / (I ∪Γ(I)). We perform a breadth first search, using the LCA of Corollary 2.15,
to reveal all the nodes in the component of v in H. Concretely, we first call the LCA of Corollary 2.15
on each of the neighbors of v. Then, we repeat the same procedure for all neighbors u ∈   / (I ∪ Γ(I)),
calling the LCA of all of their neighbors, and similarly repeat it on each of their neighbors that turn


                                                    20
out to be in V \(I ∪Γ(I)), and so on. This BFS will reveal all the nodes in the connected component
of the subgraph induced by V \ (I ∪ Γ(I)) that contains v, at the expense of poly(∆) queries per
each node in this component. From Corollary 2.15, we know that any connected component of H
has at most O(∆4 log(1/ε)) vertices, with probability at least 1 − ε. Hence, the number of queries
needed to produce the component (i.e., determining all of its nodes and edges) is O(∆4 log(1/ε))
with probability at least 1−ε, and in particular O(∆4 log n) with probability at least 1−1/ poly(n).
    Once the component of v is determined, we augment I to be a maximal independent set I ′ by
adding to I a maximal independent set of this connected component of H. This can be computed in
any arbitrary fixed manner (in a way that is independent of the questioned vertex v). For instance,
we use the lexicographically-first greedy MIS, which processes the vertices of the component one
by one according to an increasing ordering of their identifiers and adds to I ′ any vertex for which
we have not added any of its neighbors to I ′ before. This part does not add any new queries to the
computation as we have already revealed all of the nodes and edges of the component.

    Finally, we comment that by a technique of Alon et al. [ARVX12] one can transform the
above algorithm into one with poly(∆ log n) query complexity that uses only poly(∆ log n) bits
of randomness—the base observation is that poly(∆ log n)-wise independence suffices for our anal-
ysis.


References
[ARVX12]     Noga Alon, Ronitt Rubinfeld, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Space-efficient local computa-
             tion algorithms. In Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
             (SODA), pages 1132–1139, 2012.

[Bec91]      József Beck. An algorithmic approach to the lovász local lemma. i. Random Structures
             & Algorithms, 2(4):343–365, 1991.

[Beh21]      Soheil Behnezhad. Time-optimal sublinear algorithms for matching and vertex cover.
             In Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages
             to appear, arXiv:2106.02942, 2021.

[Doe18]      Benjamin Doerr. Probabilistic tools for the analysis of randomized optimization
             heuristics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.06733, 2018.

[EMR18]      Guy Even, Moti Medina, and Dana Ron. Best of two local models: Centralized local
             and distributed local algorithms. Information and Computation, 262:69–89, 2018.

[GH21]       Mohsen Ghaffari and Bernhard Haeupler. A time-optimal randomized parallel al-
             gorithm for mis. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
             Algorithms (SODA), pages 2892–2903. SIAM, 2021.

[Gha16]      Mohsen Ghaffari. An improved distributed algorithm for maximal independent set.
             In ACM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 270–277, 2016.

[GU19]       Mohsen Ghaffari and Jara Uitto. Sparsifying distributed algorithms with ramifications
             in massively parallel computation and centralized local computation. In Proceedings
             of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1636–1653,
             2019.



                                                21
[KMNFT20] Michael Kapralov, Slobodan Mitrović, Ashkan Norouzi-Fard, and Jakab Tardos. Space
          efficient approximation to maximum matching size from uniform edge samples. In
          Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages
          1753–1772, 2020.

[KMW16]     Fabian Kuhn, Thomas Moscibroda, and Roger Wattenhofer. Local computation:
            Lower and upper bounds. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 63(2):1–44, 2016.

[Lin92]     Nathan Linial. Locality in distributed graph algorithms. SIAM Journal on Computing
            (SICOMP), 21:193–201, 1992.

[LM17]      Reut Levi and Moti Medina. A (centralized) local guide. Bulletin of EATCS, 2(122),
            2017.

[Lov12]     László Lovász. Large networks and graph limits, volume 60. American Mathematical
            Soc., 2012.

[LRY17]     Reut Levi, Ronitt Rubinfeld, and Anak Yodpinyanee. Local computation algorithms
            for graphs of non-constant degrees. Algorithmica, 77(4):971–994, 2017.

[Lub85]     Michael Luby. A simple parallel algorithm for the maximal independent set problem.
            In Proceedings of the seventeenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing
            (STOC), pages 1–10, 1985.

[MRVX12]    Yishay Mansour, Aviad Rubinstein, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Converting online
            algorithms to local computation algorithms. In Proceedings of the International Col-
            loquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP), pages 653–664, 2012.

[NO08]      Huy N Nguyen and Krzysztof Onak. Constant-time approximation algorithms via
            local improvements. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Computer
            Science (FOCS), pages 327–336, 2008.

[ORRR12]    Krzysztof Onak, Dana Ron, Michal Rosen, and Ronitt Rubinfeld. A near-optimal
            sublinear-time algorithm for approximating the minimum vertex cover size. In Pro-
            ceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1123–
            1131, 2012.

[PR07]      Michal Parnas and Dana Ron. Approximating the minimum vertex cover in sublinear
            time and a connection to distributed algorithms. Theoretical Computer Science, 381(1-
            3):183–196, 2007.

[RTVX11]    Ronitt Rubinfeld, Gil Tamir, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Fast local computation
            algorithms. In Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science (ITCS), pages 223–238,
            arxiv:1104.1377, 2011.

[RV16]      Omer Reingold and Shai Vardi. New techniques and tighter bounds for local com-
            putation algorithms. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 82(7):1180–1200,
            2016.

[YYI09]     Yuichi Yoshida, Masaki Yamamoto, and Hiro Ito. An improved constant-time ap-
            proximation algorithm for maximum matchings. In Proceedings of the Symposium on
            Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 225–234, 2009.


                                              22
