                                         The Landscape of Distributed Complexities on
                                                     Trees and Beyond
                                              Christoph Grunau∗             ○
                                                                            r            Václav Rozhoň          ○
                                                                                                                  r
                                                    ETH Zurich                                 ETH Zurich
arXiv:2202.04724v2 [cs.DS] 23 Sep 2022




                                                cgrunau@inf.ethz.ch                          rozhonv@ethz.ch

                                                                        Sebastian Brandt
                                                          CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
                                                                           brandt@cispa.de

                                                                      September 26, 2022


                                                                              Abstract
                                                    We study the local complexity landscape of locally checkable la-
                                                beling (LCL) problems on constant-degree graphs with a focus on
                                                complexities below log˚ n. Our contribution is threefold:
                                                  1. Our main contribution is that we complete the classification of
                                                     the complexity landscape of LCL problems on trees in the LOCAL
                                                     model, by proving that every LCL problem with local complexity
                                                     oplog˚ nq has actually complexity Op1q. This result improves
                                                     upon the previous speedup result from oplog log˚ nq to Op1q by
                                                     [Chang, Pettie, FOCS 2017].
                                                  2. In the related LCA and VOLUME models [Alon, Rubinfeld, Vardi,
                                                     Xie, SODA 2012, Rubinfeld, Tamir, Vardi, Xie, 2011, Rosen-
                                                     baum, Suomela, PODC 2020], we prove the same speedup from
                                                     oplog˚ nq to Op1q for all constant-degree graphs.
                                                  3. Similarly, we complete the classification of the LOCAL complex-
                                                     ity landscape of oriented d-dimensional grids by proving that
                                                     any LCL problem with local complexity oplog˚ nq has actually
                                                     complexity
                                                            a Op1q. This improves upon the previous speed-up
                                                     from op d log˚ nq by Suomela, explained in [Chang, Pettie, FOCS
                                                     2017].
                                          ∗
                                              The author ordering was randomized.

                                                                                    1
1       Introduction
One fundamental aspect in the theory of distributed computing is locality:
for a given graph problem, how far does each individual node has to see
in order to find its own part of a globally correct solution. The notion of
locality is captured by the local complexity of the LOCAL model of distributed
computing [36]. In recent years, our understanding of locality has improved
dramatically by studying it from a complexity theoretical perspective [41, 19,
21, 17, 8]. That is, characterizing the local complexity of all problems from a
certain class of problems at once. Essentially all the past research has focused
on the study of so-called Locally Checkable Labeling problems (LCLs) [41].
Informally speaking, LCLs are graph problems that can be verified efficiently.
That is, if a given output looks correct in the local neighborhood of each node,
then the output is guaranteed to be a globally correct solution. Prominent
examples of LCLs are Maximal Independent Set, Maximal Matching and
all kinds of coloring problems. LCLs are only defined for constant-degree
graphs.
    Interestingly, the study of local complexity has also been shown to be
quite relevant for other subfields of computer science such as local computa-
tion algorithms or massively parallel computation [44, 28], and is finding its
applications in subareas of discrete mathematics as well [34, 13, 1].

Below log˚ n A classical result of Linial [36] shows that the deterministic
LOCAL complexity of Op∆2 q-coloring a graph with maximum degree ∆ is
Θplog˚ nq.1 In particular, this result directly implies that many basic sym-
metry breaking problems like (∆ ` 1)-coloring have a deterministic LOCAL
complexity of Θplog˚ nq on constant-degree graphs. In contrast, there are
many basic problems with complexity Op1q. An example is to “find the max-
imum degree of a node in your 2-hop neighborhood”. The common theme
for all our contributions is to understand what happens in between the two
worlds. By a result of Chang and Pettie [21], whose proof was inspired by
ideas introduced by Naor and Stockmeyer [41], we know that all LCLs with
local complexity oplog log˚ nq have, in fact, complexity Op1q.
    Complementing this result, the paper [11] gave examples of LCLs with
complexities between Θplog log˚ nq and Θplog˚ nq. Roughly speaking, ex-
amples of those problems are the following: one is asked to solve a basic
Θplog˚ nq-complexity problem on a path. The input graph, however, is not
just a path. It is a path P plus a shortcutting structure on top of it that
    The function log˚ pnq is defined as the minimum number of times one needs to repeat-
    1

edly apply the log function to n until the result becomes at most 1.



                                           2
ensures that the t-hop neighborhood of each node u P P in the full input
graph G actually contains the f ptq-hop neighborhood of u in the subgraph
P for some function f . This results in a problem with complexity equal to
Θpf ´1 plog˚ nqq. The growth rate of the function f can range from linear (if
no shortcutting is involved) up to exponential, since the neighborhood at
distance t in the full graph G can contain up to roughly ∆t nodes. Hence we
obtain complexities from the range Θplog log˚ nq ´ Θplog˚ nq. It should be
noted that such constructed problems have a special structure. In fact, one
can observe the following two points:

   1. To construct such a problem, the input graph needs to contain short-
      cuts and, hence, cycles. In Theorem 1.1 we prove that if the input
      graph is a tree, there cannot be any such problems. This completes the
      classification of LCLs on trees.

   2. Although the necessary radius that a node u needs to check to solve the
      constructed problem can be only Oplog log˚ nq, the number of nodes
      that u needs to look at to solve the problem is still Oplog˚ nq. In
      Theorem 1.3 we prove that in the VOLUME complexity model, where
      the main measure is the number of nodes u needs to query, not the
      radius, there are in fact no complexities between ωp1q and oplog˚ nq.

1.1    Main Contribution: Finishing the Classification of
       LCLs on Trees
In this section we present a prominent achievement of the theory of LCLs:
by a long line of work [9, 11, 14, 19, 21, 23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 36, 40, 41, 43], we
now know that there are only four types of LCL problems, as described in
Figure 1, bottom left:

 (A) Problems that can be solved in Op1q rounds.

 (B) Problems with complexity (both randomized and deterministic) in the
     range Θplog log˚ nq ´ Θplog˚ nq; these include basic symmetry breaking
     problems like (∆ ` 1)-coloring and maximal independent set.

 (C) Problems with randomized complexity poly log log n and deterministic
     complexity poly log n; these problems can be solved by reformulating
     them as an instance of the Lovász local lemma (LLL).

 (D) Global problems with complexity Ωplog nq; their randomized and de-
     terministic complexity is the same up to a polylogarithmic factor.


                                        3
    One particular focus in the long line of work on complexities of LCLs has
been on understanding the complexity landscape on trees—not only because
trees are a natural subclass of general graphs, but also because they turned
out to be important for the development of understanding the complexities on
general graphs; in particular many lower bounds for LCLs are proven on trees,
e.g., via the round elimination technique [15]. As a result the complexity
landscape on trees is quite well understood: previous to our work, each LCL
on trees was known to have one of the following complexities (unless stated
otherwise, the deterministic and randomized complexities are the same):
   1. Op1q,

   2. in the range Θplog log˚ nq ´ Θplog˚ nq,

   3. deterministic complexity Θplog nq and randomized complexity Θplog log nq,

   4. complexity Θplog nq,

   5. complexity Θpn1{k q for some positive integer k.
    This follows from a long line of work [41, 14, 19, 21, 18, 9, 20]. The
only missing piece was to determine for which complexities in the range
Θplog log˚ nq ´ Θplog˚ nq there actually exists an LCL with that complexity.
We complete the complexity landscape of LCLs on trees by showing that any
LCL with a complexity in this range has actually complexity Θplog˚ nq. That
is, we prove that any LCL on trees with complexity oplog˚ nq has complexity
Op1q.

Theorem 1.1 (Informal version of Theorem 3.11). Let ∆ be any fixed positive
integer. Any LCL on trees (with maximum degree at most ∆) with LOCAL
complexity oplog˚ nq has, in fact, LOCAL complexity Op1q.

    Put together with the aforementioned work on the classification of LCLs
on trees, we get the following corollary (see Figure 1, top left, for an illustra-
tion).

Corollary 1.2 (Classification of LCLs on trees, see Figure 1). Let Π be an
LCL on trees. Then the deterministic/randomized LOCAL complexity of Π
is one of the following:

  1. Op1q,

  2. Θplog˚ nq,

  3. Θplog nq deterministic and Θplog log nq randomized,

                                        4
  4. Θplog nq,

  5. Θpn1{k q for k P N.
Moreover, all mentioned complexity classes are non-empty, i.e., for each class
(and each k), there exists some LCL with the indicated complexity.
    An intriguing implication of our work is that the complexity landscape of
LCLs on trees is discrete, while the landscape of LCLs on general (constant-
degree) graphs contains “dense” regions (in classes (B) and (D) [11, 9]). It
would be interesting to see to what extent this is a more general phenomenon
beyond LCLs on constant-degree graphs.
    We also note that for any LCL problem Π, its complexity T on trees is
the same as its complexity on high-girth graphs (assuming that the girths are
at least a suitable additive constant larger than 2T ). The reason is that, due
to the definition of an LCL problem, the correctness of a claimed solution
only depends on the correctness of the solution in each node neighborhood
of radius T plus some constant. We conclude that our gap result also applies
to high-girth graphs (roughly speaking with girths from ωplog˚ nq).

Our method, in a nutshell Our approach is based on the round elim-
ination technique [15], a highly successful technique for proving local lower
bounds. In essence, round elimination is an explicit process that takes an
LCL Π on trees as input and returns an LCL Π1 with complexity exactly one
round less. More precisely:
 (1) If there is a T -round randomized algorithm A for Π, then there is also
     a pT ´ 1q-round randomized algorithm A1 for Π1 such that the (local)
     failure probability of A1 is bounded by a reasonable function of the
     (local) failure probability of A.

 (2) If we have a pT ´1q-round algorithm A1 for Π1 , we can use it to construct
     a T -round algorithm A for the original problem Π; if A1 is deterministic,
     then A is deterministic as well.
    So far, in the literature, the standard use case for applying round elimina-
tion has been to prove lower bounds for some concrete, fixed problem such as
maximal matching or Lovász local lemma [14, 15, 5, 7]. We provide a novel
application of round elimination by showing that, perhaps surprisingly, it
can also be used to prove gap results, which are results that reason about
all LCLs on a given graph class. More precisely, we show that with the tool
of round elimination at hand, there is an elegant way to prove Theorem 1.1,
which roughly proceeds as follows.

                                       5
                               LOCAL, trees                                                      LOCAL, oriented grids
                                                                                                                                               √
                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                       n                                                                           n
                                                                 1/k
                                                             n
                                                     log n
                                                                                                       randomized
                           randomized

                                        log log n


 this work                     log∗ n                                          this work                log∗ n

                                                                                        √
              log log∗ n
                                                                                        d
                                                                                            log∗ n


          1                                                                     1
                                                                                                  √                                                    √
               1      log log∗ n log∗ n log log n           log n          n            1         d
                                                                                                      log∗ n log∗ n                                    d
                                                                                                                                                           n
                                 deterministic                                                            deterministic




                     LOCAL, general graphs
                                                                       n                              VOLUME, general graphs
                                                                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                             1/k
                                                    log n                                                                                n

                     randomized                                                                                                  log n
                                                                                                                   log n/ log log n
                                                             ?                                  randomized
                                  log log n
                                                                                                                   log log n

                        log∗ n
                                                                               this work                  log∗ n


     log log∗ n
                                                                                        log log∗ n


 1                                                                                  1
                           ∗        ∗
      1            log log n log n log log n            log n              n                1     log log∗ n log∗ n log log n        log n                 n
                               deterministic                                                                deterministic

Figure 1: The LCL landscape of local complexities on trees (top left), ori-
ented grids (top right), general constant-degree graphs (bottom left) and
the landscape of the volume model (bottom right). Blue circles correspond
to possible deterministic and randomized local complexities, while the red
color means that no problems with the given complexity are possible in the
area. The arrows point to our contribution: completion of the classification
of LCLs on trees and oriented grids by 6 showing that there are no problems
                                  ˚
with complexities between Θplog nq and Op1q. We now also understand the
landscape of the VOLUME/ LCA model in the regime of low complexities.
See [46] for a friendly introduction to the topic of LCL landscapes.
     We start with any problem Π for which there exists a randomized al-
gorithm A that solves Π in T pnq “ oplog˚ nq rounds, with probability 1 ´
1{ polypnq. We fix some sufficiently large number n0 of nodes, and apply
bullet point (1) T “ T pn0 q times to get a 0-round algorithm ApT q for a
certain problem ΠpT q . By analyzing the development of the (local) failure
probabilites of the algorithms appearing during the T applications of (1), we
can show that algorithm ApT q still has a large probability of success, and
the fact that ApT q is a 0-round algorithm enables us to infer that ΠpT q is in
fact so easy that it can be solved with a deterministic 0-round algorithm.
Finally, we apply bullet point (2) T times to obtain a deterministic T -round
algorithm for the original problem Π. Due to fixing the number of nodes to
n0 , the obtained T -round algorithm is only guaranteed to produce a correct
output on n0 -node trees; however, due to the nature of 0-round algorithms
and the precise definition of the round elimination process (which are both
independent of the number of nodes of the input graph), the obtained algo-
rithm can be shown to also work on trees with an arbitrary number of nodes,
with precisely the same, constant runtime T pn0 q “ Op1q.
     Unfortunately, the known approach for analyzing the change of (local)
failure probability in bullet point (1) considers only the restricted setting
of regular graphs and LCLs without inputs2 (which usually suffices when
proving a lower bound for a concrete LCL). One of our technical contributions
is to develop an extension that also works in the general setting of irregular
graphs and LCLs with inputs, which might be of independent interest.

Further related work Previous to our work, the gap result of Theorem 1.1
was known for a subclass of LCLs, called homogeneous LCLs [12]. Roughly
speaking, problems in this class require the output of a node u to be correct
only if the part of the tree around u is a perfect ∆-regular tree without any
inputs. In contrast, our argument works in full generality, i.e., the degrees of
nodes can differ and there can be inputs in the graph. Also, we believe that
our argument is substantially simpler conceptually.
    A recent work [8] gave a complete classification of possible complexities
of LCLs on rooted regular trees, showing that each LCL on such trees has a
complexity of Op1q, Θplog˚ nq, Θplog nq, or Θpn1{k q for some positive integer
k (and all of these complexity classes are nonempty). Moreover, the com-
plexity of each LCL is independent of whether randomization is allowed and
   2
    We say that an LCL is an LCL without inputs if the correctness of a solution does
not depend on input labels in the graph (such as lists in a list coloring problem). In the
general setting, an LCL allows the correctness to depend on input labels (though we might
emphasize this by using the term LCL with inputs).



                                            7
whether the LOCAL or the CONGEST model3 is considered. We note that
their approach relies heavily on the provided orientation and, to the best of
our knowledge, does not generalize to unrooted trees. We will discuss the
decidability results from this work in Section 1.4.
    Even more recently, a paper [10] showed that the asymptotic complexity
of any LCL problem on trees is the same in the LOCAL and the CONGEST
model. This implies that the complexity landscape of LCLs on trees in
CONGEST is precisely the same as in LOCAL, and in particular extends our
gap between ωp1q and oplog˚ nq to the CONGEST model. They also show
that their result does not extend to general graphs by explicitly providing an
LCL with different complexities in LOCAL and CONGEST.

1.2    Speedup in the VOLUME Model
Recently, Rosenbaum and Suomela[42] initiated the study of the complexity
landscape of locally checkable problems in the VOLUME model on general
constant-degree graphs, as was done before in the LOCAL model. In the
VOLUME model, a node v can adaptively probe its local neighborhood in
order to determine its local output. In comparison to the LOCAL model, v
does not learn its entire local neighborhood. Instead, it can only explore
parts of it before computing its output. The VOLUME model is very similar
(and, in the complexity regime we consider, identical, due to the work of [30])
to the well-studied LCA model [2, 44]. The basic landscape of LCLs in the
VOLUME model following from [42, 16] is summarized in the bottom right
part of Figure 1. Note that while their work focuses on giving examples of
problems of high complexities, such as Θpn1{k q for k P N, we settle how the
landscape looks for the class of symmetry breaking problems.

Theorem 1.3 (Informal version of Theorem 4.1). If the deterministic or
randomized VOLUME complexity of an LCL is oplog˚ nq, it is, in fact, Op1q.

    We note that together with a result of [16], Theorem 1.3 implies that the
only deterministic VOLUME complexities for LCLs when identifiers can be
from an exponential range are Θp1q, Θplog˚ nq and Θpnq. We find it interest-
ing that the VOLUME complexity landscape is in this regard substantially
cleaner than the LOCAL complexity landscape that contains complexities be-
tween Θplog log˚ nq and Θplog˚ nq, while one would, a priori, assume that the
usage of a finer measure in the VOLUME model will lead to a subtler and
more complicated landscape. The reason is simple and sketched next.
  3
     The CONGEST model differs from the LOCAL model in that it only allows messages
of size Oplog nq bits.


                                        8
Our method in a nutshell We adapt the Ramsey-theoretical argument
of [41], which was improved by [21], to the VOLUME model. We observe
that the heart of their argument is essentially a VOLUME model argument
that shows that algorithms with oplog˚ nq VOLUME complexity can be made
order-invariant and, hence, they can be sped up to complexity Op1q. The
VOLUME nature of the argument is exactly the reason why the original ar-
                                                              ˚
gument applied to the LOCAL
                         a ˚ model gives only an oplog log nq speedup in
general graphs and an op log nq speedup in two-dimensional grids as this is
the local complexity that implies oplog˚ nq volume. The main conceptual dif-
ference between our proof and the original approach [41, 21] is that VOLUME
model algorithms can perform adaptive probes unlike LOCAL algorithms.

1.3    Speedup in Oriented Grids
Our third result completes the LOCAL complexity landscape for LCLs on
oriented grids by proving that there are no local complexities between ωp1q
and oplog˚ nq.
    In an oriented grid, all the edges are oriented in a consistent matter.
Moreoever, each edge is labeled with a value from rds, indicating the dimen-
sion the edge corresponds to.
    Oriented grids may be a bit too special model to consider from the per-
spective of distributed computing. However, in the related fields where
ideas from local algorithms can be applied, such the study of factors of iid
solutions[34, 33, 45, 32] or constructions in descriptive combinatorics includ-
ing the famous circle squaring problem [35, 31, 38, 39, 24], oriented grids are
often the graph class under consideration.

Theorem 1.4. [Informal version of Theorem 5.1] Let d be a fixed positive
constant. Any LCL on a d-dimensional oriented grid with local complexity
oplog˚ nq has, in fact, local complexity Op1q.

    The above theorem together with the work of [19, 21, 17] implies the
following characterization of possible local complexities on oriented grids.

Corollary 1.5. Let d be a fixed positive constant. Then the determinis-
tic/randomized complexity of an LCL problem on a d-dimensional oriented
grid is one of the following:

  1. Op1q,

  2. Θplog˚ nq,
       ?
  3. Θp d nq.

                                      9
    Sometimes one considers the case of unoriented grids, that is, just the
underlying graph of an oriented grid, without any additional labeling (in
the study of randomized processes and descriptive combinatorics, the grid
is usually oriented). Our result unfortunately does not generalize to this
case, as those graphs do not locally induce an implicit order on vertices. We
conjecture, however, that the local complexity landscape remains the same.

Conjecture 1.6. On unoriented grids, all LCL problems with complexity
oplog˚ nq have local complexity Op1q.

1.4    Decidability
While understanding the complexity landscapes of LCL problems in different
models and on different graph classes is certainly interesting in its own right,
it also constitutes the first step towards a more ambitious goal—that of
deciding for a given LCL problem how fast it can be solved, i.e., into which
complexity class it falls. Unfortunately, it is known that this is not possible
on general graphs: a result by Naor and Stockmeyer [41] states that it is
undecidable whether a given LCL can be solved in constant time. More
specifically, the work of Naor and Stockmeyer implies that, on d-dimensional
oriented
    ?     grids, it is undecidable whether a given LCL has complexity Op1q or
Θp d nq. For the case of toroidal oriented grids, i.e., grids that wrap around
(in the natural sense), it is undecidable whether a given LCL has complexity
Oplog˚ nq or is a global problem [17].
    However, if we restrict attention to trees, no undecidability results are
known, i.e., it is entirely possible that one day a procedure is developed that
takes as input an arbitrary LCL and returns its complexity on trees. While
it turned out that decidability questions for LCLs are quite complex already
in very simple settings, considerable effort has gone into making progress
towards this exciting goal. On the positive side, it is known that in paths
and cycles the only LOCAL complexities are Op1q, Θplog˚ nq, and Θpnq, and
it can be decided in polynomial time into which class a given LCL problem
falls, provided that the LCL does not have inputs [41, 17, 21, 22]. When
considering general LCLs (i.e., LCLs with inputs) on paths and cycles, it
remains decidable which asymptotic complexity a given LCL has, but the
question becomes PSPACE-hard [3]. The PSPACE-hardness result extends
to the case of LCLs without inputs on constant-degree trees, which was
subsequently improved by Chang [20] who showed that in this setting the
question becomes EXPTIME-hard.
    Nevertheless, there are also good news regarding decidability on trees
beyond cycles and paths. For instance, the asymptotic complexity of prob-

                                      10
lems from a natural subclass of LCLs, called binary labeling problems can be
decided efficiently [4]. Moreover, in their work providing the complexity clas-
sification of LCLs on regular rooted trees [8], the authors showed that it is
decidable into which of the four complexity classes Op1q, Oplog˚ nq, Θplog nq,
and nΘp1q a given LCL without inputs falls. The decidability is achieved
by defining so-called “certificates” for Oplog nq-round, Oplog˚ nq-round, and
constant-round solvability—for each T from tOplog nq, Oplog˚ nq, Op1qu, an
LCL problem is T -round solvable if and only if there exists a certificate for
T -round solvability for the given LCL problem, and the existence of such
a certificate is decidable. Unfortunately, the definitions of these certificates
rely heavily on the fact that the input tree is rooted (in particular on the
availability of a canonical direction in the tree, which is given by the parent-
child relation); it is entirely unclear how such an approach could be extended
to unrooted trees.
     On unrooted trees, Chang and Pettie [21] showed that it is decidable
whether a given LCL can be solved in logarithmic time or requires polynomial
time, and Chang [20] showed that in the latter case (i.e., if the given LCL
has complexity Θpn1{k q for some positive integer k) the exact exponent is
decidable. However, decidability on (unrooted) trees below Θplog nq is wide
open; in fact, even the following simple question is a major open problem in
the complexity theory of LCLs.
Question 1.7. Is it decidable whether a given LCL can be solved in constant
time on (constant-degree) trees?
    Note that constant-time-solvability of LCLs on trees is semidecidable as
for each constant c and fixed LCL Π, there are only constantly many different
candidate c-round LOCAL algorithms for solving Π—the difficult direction is
to prove (or disprove) semidecidability for the impossibility of constant-time-
solvability. While our proof of Theorem 1.1 does not settle Question 1.7,
it may be a first step towards a resolution as it reduces the problem to
proving (or disproving) semidecidability of an Ωplog˚ nq-round lower bound
for the given LCL. Note that this avoids consideration of all the “messy”
complexities shown to exist between Θplog log˚ nq and Θplog˚ nq in general
                                         α   ˚
(constant-degree) graphs (such as 2Θplog log nq for any positive rational num-
ber α ď 1) [11].

1.5    Organization of the Paper
In Section 2 we formally define the settings that we work with, and prove
basic technical results. In Section 3 we prove the speedup theorem for trees
in the LOCAL model, i.e., Theorem 1.1. In Section 4 we prove the speedup

                                      11
theorem in the VOLUME model, i.e., Theorem 1.3. In Section 5 we prove the
speedup theorem for oriented grids in the LOCAL model, i.e., Theorem 1.4.


2     Preliminaries
We use classical graph-theoretical notation, e.g. we write G “ pV, Eq for an
unoriented graph. A half-edge is a pair h “ pv, eq, where v P V , and e P E is
an edge incident to v. We denote the set of half-edges of G by H “ HpGq,
i.e., H “ tpv, eq | v P e, v P V, e P Eu. Furthermore, for every vertex v 1 , we
denote the set of half-edges pv, eq P H where v “ v 1 by Hrv 1 s, and for every
edge e1 , we denote the set of half-edges pv, eq P H where e “ e1 by Hre1 s.
Often we assume that G additionally carries a labeling of vertices or half-
edges. We use BG pu, rq to denote the ball of radius r around a node u in G
and we call it the r-hop neighborhood of u. When talking about half-edges in
BG pu, rq, we mean all half-edges pv, eq such that v P BG pu, rq. For example,
BG pu, 0q contains all half-edges incident to u.
     The reader should keep in mind that our setting is graphs of maximum
degree bounded by some constant ∆. This is sometimes explicitly stated (or
it is implied by the constraints) but most of the time it is tacitly assumed.
Of special interest to us will be the class of all trees with maximum degree at
most ∆, which we denote by T . Similarly, we denote the class of all forests
with maximum degree at most ∆ by F. Moreover, for any positive integer
n, any set N of positive integers, and any G P tF, T u, we will use Gn , resp.
GN , to denote the class of members of G with n nodes, resp. with a number
of nodes that is contained in N .

2.1    LOCAL Model and LCL Problems
In this section, we define our main model of computation and discuss the
problem class considered in this work. Our main model of computation is
the LOCAL model [37]. Although it is often convenient to think about LOCAL
algorithms as message-passing procedures, it will be simpler to work with the
following equivalent definition.
Definition 2.1 (LOCAL model). The input to a problem in the LOCAL
model is an n-node graph G, for some positive integer n. Each node of the
graph is considered as a computational entity and equipped with a globally
unique identifier, i.e., positive integer from a polynomial range (in the case
of deterministic algorithms), or with a private random bit string (in the
case of randomized algorithms). Additionally, depending on the problem
considered, other inputs might be stored at the nodes or half-edges. In a

                                      12
T -round algorithm each node v is aware of the number n of nodes of the
input graph4 and of its T -hop neighborhood, i.e., of all nodes in distance at
most T from v, all edges that have at least one endpoint in distance at most
T ´ 1 from v, and all half-edges whose endpoint is in distance at most T from
v (as well as all inputs stored therein). Based on this information, v has to
decide on its output whose specification is given by the considered problem.
In other words, a T -round algorithm is simply a function (parameterized by
n) from the the space of all possible (labeled) T -hop neighborhoods of a node
to the space of outputs. Which neighborhoods are “possible” is determined
by the considered problem and the considered graph class.
    For technical reasons, we will also assume that each graph comes with
a port numbering, i.e., each node v has degpvq ports 1, . . . , degpvq, and each
edge incident to v is connected to v via a unique one of those ports. In
other words, the ports at a node provide a total order on the set of incident
edges. It is straightforward to verify that the addition of a port numbering
does not change the computational power of the model (asymptotically) as
each node can infer a total order on the set of incident edges from the unique
identifiers of its neighbors (in the deterministic case) or from the random bits
of its neighbors, with arbitrarily large success probability (in the randomized
case).
    The class of problems considered in this work are LCL problems (or LCLs,
for short), which were introduced by Naor and Stockmeyer [41]. In their
seminal paper, Naor and Stockmeyer provided a definition for LCL problems
where input and output labels were assigned to nodes, and remarked that a
similar definition can be given for edge-labeling problems. A modern defi-
nition that captures both kinds of LCL problems (and their combinations)
assigns labels to half-edges (instead of vertices or edges). Before we can
provide this definition, we need to define some required notions.
    A half-edge labeling of a graph G (with labels from a set Σ) is a function
f : HpGq Ñ Σ. A Σin -Σout -labeled graph is a triple pG, fin , fout q consisting of a
graph G and two half-edge labelings fin : HpGq Ñ Σin and fout : HpGq Ñ Σout
of G. We analogously define a Σin -labeled graph by omitting fout .
    We can now define an LCL problem as follows.
Definition 2.2 (LCL problem). An LCL problem Π is a quadruple pΣin , Σout , r, Pq
where Σin and Σout are finite sets, r is a positive integer, and P is a fi-
   4
     Our results work equally well in the setting where only some upper bound n1 on n
is given to the nodes; in that case, as usual, the complexities are functions of n1 instead
of of n. We remark that our setting where the nodes are aware of the exact value of n
is in fact the more difficult one (for our approach) as evidenced by the issue discussed in
Section 3.1.


                                            13
nite collection of Σin -Σout -labeled graphs. A correct solution for an LCL
problem Π on a Σin -labeled graph pG, fin q is given by a half-edge label-
ing fout : HpGq Ñ Σout such that, for every node v P V pGq, the triple
                    1
pBG pv, rq, fin1 , fout                                                   1
                        q is isomorphic to a member of P, where fin1 and fout are
the restriction of fin and fout , respectively, to BG pv, rq.

    Intuitively, the collection P provides the constraints of the problem by
specifying how a correct output looks locally, depending on the respective
local input. From the definition of a correct solution for an LCL problem
it follows that members of P that have radius ą r can be ignored. Also
the finiteness of P automatically implies that we are restricting ourselves to
graphs of degree at most ∆ for some constant ∆.
    The main tool in our proof of Theorem 1.1, the round elimination tech-
nique, applies (directly) only to a subclass of LCL problems: roughly speak-
ing, it is required that the local correctness constraints specified by P can be
translated into node and edge constraints, i.e., correctness constraints that
can be verified by looking at the label configurations on each edge and around
each node. The definition of this subclass of LCL problems is given in the
following. Note that, despite the complicated appearance, the definition is
actually quite intuitive: essentially, in order to define the LCL problem, we
simply specify a set of label configurations that are allowed on an edge, a set
of label configurations that are allowed around a node, and an input-output
label relation that specifies for each input label which output label is allowed
at the same half-edge.

Definition 2.3 (Node-edge-checkable LCL problem). A node-edge-checkable
LCL Π is a quintuple pΣΠ             Π                              Π         Π
                               in , Σout , NΠ , EΠ , gΠ q, where Σin and Σout are finite sets,
EΠ is a collection of cardinality-2 multisets tB1 , B2 u with B1 , B2 P ΣΠ           out , NΠ “
   1    2                                         i
pNΠ , NΠ , . . . q consists of collections NΠ of cardinality-i multisets tA1 , . . . , Ai u
                                                     ΣΠ
with A1 , . . . , Ai P ΣΠ
                        out , and gΠ : Σin Ñ 2
                                              Π       out is a function that assigns to each

label from Σin a subset of the labels of ΣΠ
                  Π
                                                        out . A correct solution for a node-
edge-checkable LCL Π on a ΣΠ           in  -labeled  graph    pG, fin q is given by a half-edge
                                 Π
labeling fout : HpGq Ñ Σout such that

   1. for every node v P V pGq, the multiset consisting of the labels assigned
                                                          degpvq
      by fout to the half-edges in Hrvs is contained in NΠ       ,

   2. for every edge e P EpGq, the multiset consisting of the labels assigned
      by fout to the half-edges in Hres is contained in EΠ , and

   3. for every half-edge h P HpGq, the label fout phq is contained in the label
      set gΠ pfin phqq.


                                              14
We call NΠ the node constraint of Π and EΠ the edge constraint of Π. More-
over, we call the elements tA1 , . . . , Ai u of NΠi node configurations and the
elements tB1 , B2 u of EΠ edge configurations (of Π). In a LOCAL algorithm
solving a node-edge-checkable problem Π, each node is supposed to output
a label for each incident half-edge such that the induced global half-edge
labeling is a correct solution for Π.

    Even though the round elimination technique can be applied directly only
to node-edge-checkable LCL problems, the results we obtain apply to all LCL
problems. The reason for this is that for each LCL problem Π there exists
a node-edge-checkable LCL problem Π1 such that the time complexities of
Π and Π1 differ only by an additive constant, as we show in Lemma 2.6.
This fact suffices to lift our results for node-edge-checkable LCL problems to
general LCL problems: in particular, the existence of an LCL problem with
time complexity in ωp1q and oplog˚ nq would imply the existence of a node-
edge-checkable LCL problem with the same complexity constraints, leading
to a contradiction.
    Before stating and proving Lemma 2.6, we formally define the local fail-
ure probability of an algorithm solving a node-edge-checkable LCL, and the
complexity of an LCL problem.

Definition 2.4 (Local failure probability). Let Π “ pΣΠ        Π
                                                         in , Σout , NΠ , EΠ , gΠ q
be some node-edge-checkable LCL problem. We say that a half-edge labeling
fout : HpGq Ñ Σout is incorrect on some edge e “ tu, vu of graph pG, fin q if

   1. tfout ppu, eqq, fout ppv, eqqu R EΠ , or

   2. fout ppu, eqq R gΠ pfin ppu, eqqq or fout ppv, eqq R gΠ pfin ppv, eqqq.

Similarly, we say that fout is incorrect at some node v if
                             degpvq
   1. tfout phquhPHrvs R NΠ           , or

   2. fout phq R gΠ pfin phqq for some h P Hrvs.

We say that an algorithm A fails on some edge e, resp. at some node v, if
the output produced by A is incorrect on e, resp. at v. Furthermore, we
say that a (randomized) algorithm A has local failure probability p on some
graph G if p is the smallest (real) number such that, for each edge e and
node v in G, the probability that A fails on e, resp. at v, is upper bounded
by p. Moreover, for each n, the local failure probability of A on some class of
n-node graphs is the maximum of the local failure probabilities of A on the
graphs in the class. (In contrast, the definition of (global) failure probability


                                             15
is as commonly used, i.e., we say that A has (global) failure probability
p “ ppnq if the (worst-case) probability that A does not produce a correct
solution for Π is upper bounded by p and p is minimal under this constraint.)
   The LOCAL complexity of a (node-edge-checkable or common) LCL is
simply the minimum complexity of an algorithm A that solves it on all
graphs.
Definition 2.5 (Complexity of an LCL problem). The determinstic (round)
complexity of an LCL Π is the function T : N Ñ N Y t0u satisfying that for
each n P N, there exists a deterministic algorithm An solving Π in T pnq
rounds on all n-node graphs G with each half-edge labeled with a label from
Σin , but no deterministic algorithm solving Π in T pnq ´ 1 rounds on this
class of graphs. The randomized (round) complexity of an LCL Π is defined
analogously, where deterministic algorithms are replaced by randomized al-
gorithms with a (global) failure probability of at most 1{n.
    When we talk about the complexity of an LCL on trees, we further restrict
the above definition to graphs that are trees (and similarly for other graph
classes).
    Now we are ready to state and prove the following lemma, which ensures
that we can restrict attention to node-edge-checkable LCLs.
Lemma 2.6. For any LCL problem Π, there exists a node-edge-checkable
LCL problem Π1 such that (in both the randomized and deterministic LOCAL
model) the complexities of Π and Π1 on trees (and on forests) are asymptot-
ically the same.
Proof. Suppose Π “ pΣin , Σout , r, Pq is an LCL. We create a node-edge-
                       1   Π1
checkable LCL Π1 “ pΣΠ
                     in , Σout , NΠ1 , EΠ1 , gΠ1 q as follows:

   • ΣΠ
        1
      in “ Σin .

   • ΣΠ
        1
       out contains all possible labelings of r-hop neighborhoods of a node,
     each neighborhood has marked a special half-edge, each vertex and
     each edge has an order on incident half-edges and each half-edge is
     labeled with a label from Σout , moreover, the labeling by Σout has to
     be accepted by P.
   • NΠ1 contains such sets S “ tσ1 , . . . , σd u with σi P ΣΠ
                                                              1
                                                              out such that there
     exists an r-hop neighborhood N of a node u of degree d together with
     each node and each edge having an order on incident half edges and
     such that half-edges have labels from Σout such that we can assign labels
     from S to half-edges around u in such a way that each σi assigned to
     pu, ei q describes N with the special half-edge of σi being ei .

                                      16
   • EΠ1 is defined analogously to NΠ1 , but we require an existence of a
     neighborhood of an edge e that is consistent from the perspective of
                    1
     labels from ΣΠout assigned to pu, eq and pv, eq.

   • gΠ1 maps each label τ P Σin to the set of labels σ P ΣΠ
                                                                     1
                                                           out such that the
     special half-edge of σ is labeled by τ .

     Suppose we have a valid solution of Π. Then, in r rounds each half-edge
can decide on its Π1 -label by encoding its r-hop neighborhood, including port
numbers of each vertex and each edge that give ordering on its half-edges,
                         1
into a label from ΣΠ   out . The constraints NΠ1 , EΠ1 , gΠ1 will be satisfied.
     On the other hand, suppose we have a valid solution for Π1 . In 0-rounds,
each half-edge pv, eq can label itself with the label on the special half-edge
in its Π1 -label fout
                    1
                       ppv, eqq. We claim that the Π-labeling we get this way
around a half-edge pu, eq is isomorphic to the Σin -labeling described by the
label fout ppv, eqq, hence the new labeling is a solution to Π1 . To see this,
consider running a BFS from pv, eq. The node constraints NΠ1 and the edge
                                                           1
constraints EΠ1 are ensuring that the labels from ΣΠ      out of visited half-edges are
describing compatible neighborhoods, while the function g ensures that the
description of Σin labels in the r-hop neighborhood of u by the labels from
   1
ΣΠout agrees with the actual Σin labeling of the r-hop neighborhood of u. As
             1
the label fout  ppv, eqq needs to be accepted by P, we get that P accepts the
r-hop neighborhood of u, as needed.
    It is crucial that the way in which we define the node-edge-checkable LCL
problem Π1 in Lemma 2.6 guarantees that the considered (input-labeled)
graph class remains the same as for Π (and does not turn into a graph class
with a promise on the distribution of the input labels, which would be the
result of the straightforward approach of defining Π1 by encoding the input
labels contained in a constant-sized ball in Π in a single input label in Π1 ,
and doing the same for output labels). If this property was not guaranteed,
it would be completely unclear (and perhaps impossible) how to extend the
round elimination framework of [15] to our setting with input labels.

2.2     Order-Invariant Algorithms
In this section, we formally define the notion of an order-invariant algo-
rithm and introduce further computational models of interest. We also show
that oftentimes order-invariant algorithms can be sped up to improve the
round/probe complexity, both in the LOCAL and the VOLUME model.



                                          17
Definition 2.7 (Order-invariant LOCAL algorithm [41]). A deterministic
T pnq-round LOCAL algorithm A is called order-invariant if the following
holds: Consider two assignments of distinct identifiers to nodes in BG pv, T pnqq
denoted by µ and µ1 . Assume that for all u, w P BG pv, T pnqq it holds that
µpuq ą µpwq if and only if µ1 puq ą µ1 pwq. Then, the output of A on the set
of half-edges Hrvs will be the same in both cases.

    Next, we define the notions necessary for Section 4. We start by defining
the VOLUME model [42]. We define the VOLUME model in a more mathe-
matically rigorous way compared to [42], as this will help us later with the
proofs. Before defining the VOLUME model, we start with one more defini-
tion.

Definition 2.8. For an arbitrary S Ď N, we define

          T uplesS “ tpid, deg, inq : id P S, deg P r∆s, in : rdegs ÞÑ Σin u

and for i P N, we define

           T uplesi,S “ tpt1 , t2 , . . . , ti q : for every j P ris, tj P T upleS u.
    For a given i P N and ` P r2s, let

     tp`q “ ppid`1 , deg1 , in1 q, pid`2 , deg2 , in2 q, . . . , pid`i , degi , ini qq P T uplesi,N

be arbitrary. We say that the tuples tp1q and tp2q are almost identical if for
every j1 , j2 P ris, id1j1 ă id2j2 implies id2j1 ă id2j2 , id1j1 ą id1j2 implies id2j1 ą id2j2
and id1j1 “ id1j2 implies id2j1 “ id2j2 .

     A tuple in T uplesS can encode the local information of a node v, including
its ID, its degree and the input assigned to each of its incident half-edges,
i.e., inpkq is the input assigned to the k-th half edge. We denote with tv the
tuple that encodes the local information of v. A tuple in T uplesi,S can be
used to encode all the information (modulo the number of nodes of the input
graph) that a node knows about the input graph after having performed i ´ 1
probes. The notion of almost identical tuples will be helpful for defining the
notion of order-invariance for the VOLUME model.

Definition 2.9 (VOLUME model). Let Π “ pΣin , Σout , r, Pq be an LCL prob-
lem. A deterministic VOLUME model algorithm A for Π with a probe com-
plexity of T pnq can be seen as a set of computable functions fn,i for every
n P N and i P rT pnq ` 1s with fn,i : T uplesi,N ÞÑ ris ˆ r∆s for i P rT pnqs en-
                                                                      r∆s
coding the i-th adaptive probe and fn,T pnq`1 : T uplesT pnq`1,N ÞÑ Σout , where

                                                  18
  r∆s
Σout refers to the set of functions mapping each value in r∆s to a value in
Σout , encoding the output that A assigns to the incident half edges of the
queried node. Next, we have to define what it means for A to be a valid
algorithm. To that end, let pG, fin q be an arbitrary Σin -labeled graph on
n nodes with each node in G being equipped with an identifier and a port
assignment (To simplify the technical definition, we assume that G does not
contain any isolated node).
     The algorithm A defines a half-edge labeling fout,A,pG,fin q : HpGq ÞÑ Σout
as follows: Let pv, eq P HpGq be an arbitrary half-edge of G. We define tp0q “
ptv q and for i P t1, 2, . . . , T pnqu, we obtain tpiq from tpi´1q “ ptv0 , tv1 , . . . , tvi q
as follows. Let pj, pq “ fn,i ptpi´1q q and vi`1 the node in G such that tvj , vi`1 u
is the p-th edge incident to vj (we assume that the degree of vj is at least p).
Then, tpiq “ ptv0 , tv1 , . . . , tvi`1 q. Finally, fn,T pnq`1 ptv0 , tv1 , . . . , tvT pnq q defines a
function g mapping each value in r∆s to a value in Σout . Let e be the p-th
edge incident to v. We define fout,A,pG,fin q ppv, eqq “ gppq.
     We say that A solves Π if fout,A,pG,fin q is a valid output labeling for every
Σin -labeled graph pG, fin q with each node in G having a unique ID from a
polynomial range, is equipped with a port labeling, and G does not contain
an isolated node.
    The notion of an order-invariant algorithm naturally extends to algo-
rithms in the VOLUME model.
Definition 2.10. (Order-invariant VOLUME algorithm) We say that A is
order invariant if for every n P N and i P rT pnq ` 1s, fn,i ptq “ fn,i pt1 q for
every t, t1 P T uplesi,S with t and t1 being almost identical.
    We will use the following basic speed-up result for order-invariant algo-
rithms in both the LOCAL and the VOLUME model.
Theorem 2.11 (Speed-up of order-invariant algorithms (cf. [19])). Let A be
an order-invariant algorithm solving a problem Π in f pnq “ oplog nq rounds
of the LOCAL model or with f pnq “ opnq probes of the VOLUME model.
Then, there is an order-invariant algorithm solving Π in Op1q rounds of the
LOCAL model or, equivalently, Op1q probes in the VOLUME model.
Proof. The result for the LOCAL model is proven in [19]. The proof for the
VOLUME model follows in the exact same manner. We provide it here for
completeness. Let n0 be a fixed constant such that ∆r`1 ¨pT pn0 q`1q ď n0 {∆.
We now define a VOLUME algorithm A1 with probe complexity T 1 pnq “
minpn, T pn0 qq “ Op1q as follows. For n P N and i P rT 1 pnq ` 1s, we define
 A1      A
fn,i “ fminpn,n 0 q,i
                      . It remains to show that A1 indeed solves Π. For the
sake of contradiction, assume that this is not the case. This implies the

                                                 19
existence of a Σin -labeled graph pG, fin q on n ě n0 nodes (with IDs from
a polynomial range, port assignments, and no isolated nodes) such that A1
”fails” on pG, fin q. Put differently, there exists a node v such that A1 produces
a mistake in the r-hop neighborhood of v. The r-hop neighborhood of v
consists of at most ∆r`1 vertices. To answer a given query, A1 ”sees” at
most T pn0 q ` 1 nodes. Hence, to compute the output of all the nodes in
the r-hop neighborhood of v, A1 ”sees” at most ∆r`1 pT pn0 q ` 1q ď n∆0 many
nodes. We denote the set consisting of those nodes as V visible . Now, let
pG1 , fin
        1
          q be a Σin -labeled graph on n1 nodes (with IDs from a polynomial
range, port assignments, and no isolated nodes) such that every u P V visible
is also contained in G1 , with its degree being the same in both graphs, as
well as the input assigned to each of its incident half edges. The assigned ID
can be different, however, the relative orders of the IDs assigned to nodes in
V visible in G and G1 are the same. As ∆r`1 pT pn0 q ` 1q ď n∆0 , such a pG1 , fin
                                                                                1
                                                                                   q
                                              1               A1     A1
exists. As A is order invariant, so is A . Moreover, fn,i “ fn1 ,i for any i.
Hence, it follows that A1 assigns the same output to all the half-edges in the
r-hop neighborhood of v in G and G1 . Therefore, A1 also fails on the graph
G1 . From the way we defined A1 , this directly implies that A also fails on
G, a contradiction with the assumption that A is a correct algorithm. This
finishes the proof.

LCA model We now briefly discuss the related LCA model. A deterministic
local computation algorithm (LCA) is similar to a deterministic VOLUME
algorithm, with two small differences. First, an LCA can perform so-called
far probes and second, it can assume that each node in the n-node input
graph has a unique ID in the set t1, 2, . . . , nu. However, far probes are not
of any help in the complexity regime we consider.

Theorem 2.12 (cf. [30], Theorem 1). Any LCL problem that can be solved
by an LCA with probe complexity tpnq can also be solved by an LCA with
probe complexity
         a       Optpnlogpnq qq that does not perform any far probes, provided
tpnq “ op logpnqq.

   In particular, an LCA with probe complexity oplog˚ nq implies an LCA for
the same problem that does not perform any far probes and has a probe com-
plexity of oplog˚ nq. Hence, we can focus on showing that any LCA that does
not perform any far probes with a probe complexity of oplog˚ nq implies an
LCA for the same problem with a probe complexity of Op1q. However, an LCA
that does not perform any far probes is the same as a VOLUME algorithm,
with the only difference being that the LCA algorithm only has to produce
a valid output if each node in the n-node input graph has a unique ID from

                                        20
the set t1, 2, . . . , nu. However, one can show with a very simple argument
that a VOLUME algorithm (LCA without far probes) with probe complexity
T pnq “ oplog˚ nq that assumes unique IDs from the set t1, 2, . . . , nu implies a
volume algorithm with probe complexity T 1 pnq “ T pnk q “ oplog˚ nq that only
assumes IDs from the set t1, 2, . . . , nk u for an arbitrary constant k. Hence,
from the discussion above, a speed-up result from oplog˚ nq to Op1q in the
VOLUME model directly implies the same speed-up in the LCA model.


3     The LOCAL Model Gap on Trees
In this section we prove the ωp1q ´ oplog˚ nq gap for LCLs on trees in the
LOCAL model. We do so by proving Theorem 3.11 (which is the slightly more
formal version of Theorem 1.1) by explicitly designing, for any given (node-
edge-checkable) LCL problem Π with complexity oplog˚ nq, a constant-round
algorithm. As explained in Section 1.1, a very rough outline of our approach
is to generate from Π a sequence of node-edge-checkable LCL problems of
decreasing randomized local complexities (where we allow the local failure
probability to grow along the problems in the sequence), find a problem in the
sequence that can be solved in 0 rounds with a reasonably low local failure
probability, show that there exists a 0-round deterministic algorithm for that
problem, and turn this algorithm into a constant-round algorithm for Π by
going back up the sequence of problems and arguing that the deterministic
complexities increase slowly along the sequence in this direction. While the
round elimination framework [15, 5] provides a blueprint how to generate a
suitable sequence, it unfortunately only does so for LCLs on regular trees
without inputs. We provide an extension of the framework that also works
for LCLs on irregular trees (or forests) with inputs.
    We will start in Section 3.1 by extending the definition of the round
elimination problem sequence to the setting with inputs (and taking care of
a technical issue). In Section 3.2, we will carefully bound the evolution of
failure probabilities along a sequence of algorithms with decreasing runtimes
that solve the problems in the defined problem sequence. Section 3.3 takes
care of the reverse step, i.e., showing that the deterministic complexities of
the problems in the problem sequence do not increase fast when traversed
towards Π. Finally, in Section 3.4, we will put everything together and prove
Theorem 3.11.




                                       21
3.1      The Problem Sequence
Similarly to the approach in [15], we define, for any node-edge-checkable
LCL problem Π, two node-edge-checkable problems RpΠq and RpΠq. The
problems in the aforementioned sequence are then obtained by iteratively
applying RpRp¨qq, starting with Π.

Definition 3.1 (RpΠq). Let Π “ pΣΠ                 Π
                                            in , Σout , NΠ , EΠ , gΠ q be a node-edge-
checkable LCL problem. We define a new node-edge-checkable LCL prob-
                  RpΠq   RpΠq
lem RpΠq “ pΣin , Σout , NRpΠq , ERpΠq , gRpΠq q by specifying the five compo-
                                  RpΠq                   RpΠq          Π
nents. We start by setting Σin :“ ΣΠ        in and Σout         :“ 2Σout , i.e., the input
label set of RpΠq is simply the input label set of Π, and the output label set
of RpΠq is the power set of the output label set of Π. Next, we define gRpΠq
by setting gRpΠq p`q :“ 2gΠ p`q for any label ` P ΣΠ  in , i.e., intuitively speaking, in
problem RpΠq an input label ` on some half-edge requires that the output
label on the same half-edge is a subset of the set of output labels that were
allowed in Π on a half-edge with input label `.
    We define the edge constraint ERpΠq of RpΠq as the set of all cardinality-2
                                           RpΠq
multisets tB1 , B2 u such that B1 , B2 P Σout and, for all b1 P B1 , b2 P B2 , we
have tb1 , b2 u P EΠ . Finally, we define the node constraint NRpΠq of RpΠq as
                                                 i
follows. For each integer i ě 1, define NRpΠq          as the set of all cardinality-i
                                                             RpΠq
multisets tA1 , . . . , Ai u such that A1 , . . . , Ai P Σout and there exists some
selection pa1 , . . . , ai q of labels from A1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Ai such that ta1 , . . . , ai u P NΠi .

    Note that our definition of RpΠq differs slightly from the usual definition
of RpΠq as given in, e.g., [7] (beyond the obvious differences due to the fact
that we consider LCL problems with input labels): our definition does not
remove so-called “non-maximal” configurations. Removing such configura-
tions can be beneficial when trying to determine the complexity of specific
problems, but is not required (or helpful) in our setting, where we want to
argue about the complexity of many problems at once.

Definition 3.2 (RpΠq). The problem RpΠq differs from RpΠq only in the
                                                                             RpΠq
node and edge constraints; for the remaining three parameters we set Σin :“
  RpΠq   RpΠq     RpΠq
Σin , Σout :“ Σout , and gRpΠq :“ gRpΠq .
    We define the node constraint NRpΠq of RpΠq as follows. For each integer
                i
i ě 1, define NRpΠq as the set of all cardinality-i multisets tA1 , . . . , Ai u such
                         RpΠq
that A1 , . . . , Ai P Σout and, for all pa1 , . . . , ai q P A1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Ai , we have
ta1 , . . . , ai u P NΠi . Moreover, we define the edge constraint ERpΠq of RpΠq
                                                                                          RpΠq
as the set of all cardinality-2 multisets tB1 , B2 u such that B1 , B2 P Σout

                                              22
and there exists some selection pb1 , b2 q of labels from B1 ˆ B2 such that
tb1 , b2 u P EΠ .
    Note that, although the function Rp¨q can take any arbitrary node-edge-
checkable LCL problem as argument, we will use as arguments only problems
that are of the form RpΠq for some node-edge-checkable LCL problem Π.
    Recall that T , resp. F, denotes the class of all trees, resp. forests, of
maximum degree at most ∆. Before turning to the analysis of the evolution
of the aforementioned failure probabilities, there is a technical issue we have
to discuss. A crucial argument in said analysis is, roughly speaking, that
if you consider some (sufficiently small) neighborhood of a node (or edge),
and a set of extensions of this neighborhood via different edges leaving the
neighborhood5 , then there must also be a graph in the considered graph
class that (simultaneously) contains all extensions of the set (together with
the neighborhood). Here the term “considered graph class” describes the
input graph class restricted to the members that are consistent with the
knowledge of the nodes about the number n of nodes, i.e., in particular if all
nodes are aware of the exact value of n (as they are in our definition of the
LOCAL model), then the considered graph class contains only n-node graphs.
Now, if the input graph class is T , it follows that the aforementioned crucial
argument does not hold in general: if all extensions in the considered set
“conclude” the tree (i.e., do not have leaving edges except those connecting
them to the considered initial neighborhood) and the combined number of
nodes in the initial neighborhood and the considered extensions does not
happen to be precisely n, then there is no n-node tree that contains the
neighborhood together with all considered extensions.
    We solve this issue by proving our main theorem first for the class F
of forests (which do not have the aforementioned issue as the number of
nodes6 in some maximal connected component is not known to the nodes)
in Theorem 3.10 and then lifting it to T in Theorem 3.11 by showing that,
for node-edge-checkable LCL problems, a complexity of oplog˚ nq on trees
implies a complexity of oplog˚ nq on forests. Lemma 3.3 provides this relation
between trees and forests; in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 we will then exclusively
work with forests. Note that the complexity of any LCL problem Π on F is
trivially at least as large as its complexity on T as T is a subclass of F.
   5
      An extension via some leaving edge is simply a possibility of how the graph could
continue for the next hop beyond the respectively chosen leaving edge that is consistent
with (some graph in) the considered graph class.
    6
      We remark that the issue does not occur in the variant of the LOCAL model in which
nodes are only aware of some upper bound on the number of nodes, but we believe that it
is important to ensure that the correctness of (our) results does not depend on such minor
details in the model specification.


                                           23
Lemma 3.3. Let Π be some node-edge-checkable LCL problem that has de-
terministic, resp. randomized, complexity oplog˚ nq on T . Then the deter-
ministic, resp. randomized, complexity of Π on F is in oplog˚ nq.

Proof. Let A be a (deterministic or randomized) algorithm solving Π on T
in T pnq P oplog˚ nq rounds (and observe that the existence of A (even if it is
randomized) implies that a correct global solution exists). We design a new
algorithm A1 solving Π on F in oplog˚ nq rounds. Algorithm A1 proceeds as
follows on any n-node input forest G1 P F, where, for any node u, we denote
the (maximal) connected component containing u by Cu and the number of
nodes in Cu by |Cu |.
    First, each node collects its (2T pn2 q ` 2)-hop neighborhood in G1 . Then,
based on the collected information, each node u determines whether there
exists a node v in Cu such that the (T pn2 q`1)-hop neighborhood of v contains
all of Cu .
    If such a node v exists, then each node in Cu is aware of the whole com-
ponent Cu and can simply choose the same solution for Π on Cu (by mapping
component Cu (including unique identifiers or random bits) in some arbitrary,
but fixed, deterministic fashion to some correct solution), and then output
the part of the solution it is responsible for. Note that this requires all nodes
in Cu to be distinguishable from each other (so that each node knows which
part of the solution on Cu it is responsible for); for deterministic algorithms
this is guaranteed by the unique identifiers, for randomized algorithms it is
guaranteed with probability at least 1 ´ 1{n2 by having each node interpret
its first r4 log ns random bits as an identifier (which guarantees uniqueness
of the created identifiers with probability at least 1 ´ 1{n2 ).
    If no such node v exists, then u simply executes A with input parameter7
n2 (and each node in Cu will do likewise). In this case, due to the fact that
no (T pn2 q ` 1)-hop node neighborhood fully contains Cu , it holds for each
node v in Cu that the (T pn2 q ` 1)-hop neighborhood of v in G1 is isomorphic
to the (T pn2 q ` 1)-hop neighborhood of some node w in some n2 -node tree
G P T . Hence, if A1 fails on some node v in Cu or on some edge incident to v,
then A fails on some node w in some n2 -node tree, or on some edge incident
to w. Since the failure probability of A on n2 -node trees is at most 1{n2 , it
holds for any node w in any n2 -node tree that the probability that A fails
on w or an edge incident to w is at most 1{n2 . It follows for each node v in
Cu that the probability that A1 fails on v or an edge incident to v is at most
1{n2 .
   7
    Recall that each node receives as input a parameter representing the number of nodes.
Note that nothing prevents us from executing an algorithm using an input parameter that
does not represent the correct number of nodes.


                                           24
    Now, a union bound over all components Cu of the first kind (“such a
node v exists”) and all nodes in components Cu of the second kind (“no such
node v exists”) yields that A1 fails with probability at most 1{n. Note that
if A is deterministic, then all of the above failure probabilities are 0, and A1
is deterministic as well.
    For the runtime of A1 , observe that in either of the two considered cases,
the initial collection of u’s (2T pn2 q`2)-hop neighborhood suffices to compute
u’s output in A1 . Since T pnq P oplog˚ nq implies 2T pn2 q ` 2 P oplog˚ nq, it
follows that the runtime of A1 , and therefore also the complexity of Π on F,
is in oplog˚ nq.

3.2     From Harder to Easier Problems
Recall that, for any set N of positive integers, FN denotes the class of forests
with a number of nodes that is contained in N . The goal of this section is to
prove the following theorem.

Theorem 3.4. Let Π be a node-edge-checkable LCL problem and A a ran-
domized algorithm solving Π on F with runtime T pnq and local failure prob-
ability at most p ď 1.8 Let N be the set of all positive integers n satisfying
T pnq ` 2 ď log∆ n. Then, there exists a randomized algorithm A1 solving
RpRpΠqq on FN with runtime maxt0, T pnq ´ 1u and local failure probability
at most Sp1{p3∆`3q , where
                                                      RpΠq       T pnq`1
                S “ p10∆p|ΣΠ            Π
                           in | ` maxt|Σout |, |Σout |uqq
                                                         4∆
                                                                           .

    In other words, we want to show, roughly speaking, that we can solve
RpRpΠqq at least one round faster than Π if we allow the indicated increase in
the local failure probability of the randomized algorithm solving the problem.
    For the proof of Theorem 3.4, we will make use of an approach that is
an extension of the approach known for the setting of LCLs on regular trees
without inputs (see, e.g., [5, 7, 6]). More specifically , we will explicitly
define an algorithm A1 (depending on A) that satisfies the properties stated
in Theorem 3.4. While in the regular setting without inputs, the possibilities
how the input graph could continue beyond the view of a node v differ only in
the random bits of the nodes beyond v’s view, the irregularity and inputs in
our setting require us to first perform a simulation step in the definition of A1
that simulates all possible topologies and inputs that a node could encounter
(not too far) beyond its view before considering the randomness contained in
   8
    Note that (bounds on) local failure probabilities such as p also (possibly) depend on
the number n of nodes; however, for better readability we will omit this dependency.


                                           25
each such extension defined by the combination of topology and inputs. As
we show, the resulting more complex definition of A1 still allows us to give
an upper bound on the increase of the local failure probability from A to A1
that suffices for our purposes.
    It should be noted that, due to the fact that we consider a large class of
LCL problems at once (and not a single fixed LCL problem, in which case
certain simplification techniques might be applicable), the increase in the
number of output labels from Π to RpRpΠqq is doubly exponential. Since
the bound on the local failure probability of A1 depends (superlinearly) on
the number of output labels of Π, and, ultimately, we want to apply The-
orem 3.4 iteratively (starting with Π), we cannot apply Theorem 3.4 more
than Θplog˚ nq times before the local failure probability grows too large. This
provides a (different) explanation why we cannot extend the ωp1q ´ oplog˚ nq
gap further with our approach (which also follows from the fact that there
are problems with complexity Θplog˚ nq).
    Note that we will define A1 for all forests from F, but will prove the
guarantee on the local failure probability of A1 only for the forests in FN . Also
recall that, for any node u in a graph G, we denote the r-hop neighborhood
of u in G by BG pu, rq. By abuse of notation, we will use BG pu, rq both for all
the information contained in the r-hop neighborhood of u (i.e., the topology,
inputs, and random bits) and for the respective subgraph of G (including
input information, but no random bits).

Deriving A1 Let A be a randomized algorithm for some node-edge-checkable
LCL problem Π with runtime T “ T pnq. If T “ 0, we can simply let A1 sim-
ulate A, and then, for each half-edge h, transform the intermediate output
                                                                  RpRpΠqq
` P ΣΠ out returned by A on h into the final output tt`uu P Σout          on h.
By construction, A1 fails on some edge, resp. node, if and only if A fails on
the same edge, resp. node; since p ď Sp1{p3∆`3q for the S specified in Theo-
rem 3.4, it follows that A1 satisfies the properties required in Theorem 3.4.
Hence, we will assume in the following that T ě 1.
    In order to derive A1 from A, we first derive an “intermediate” algorithm
A1{2 for RpΠq from A, and then we derive A1 from A1{2 . As we will show
later, A1{2 solves RpΠq (on FN ) with a moderately increased local failure
probability (and, intuitively speaking, very slightly reduced runtime) com-
pared to A; a similar moderate increase in local failure probability (and slight
decrease in runtime) is incurred when going from A1{2 to A1 .
    Deviating from the usual convention that nodes are the entities perform-
ing the computation, we will assume for A1{2 that the edges of the input
forest perform the computation. This is not in contradiction with the defi-


                                       26
nition of the LOCAL model as A1{2 is only a construct defined for the design
of A1 ; the actual computation in A1 is performed by the nodes. Algorithm
A1{2 proceeds as follows.
    Each edge e “ tu, vu in the input forest G P F first collects all information
(i.e., the topology, inputs, and random bits) contained in the union BG pe, T ´
1{2q :“ BG pu, T ´ 1q Y BG pv, T ´ 1q of the (T ´ 1)-hop neighborhoods of
u and v. Then, e determines the output label `1 it outputs on half-edge
pu, eq as follows, depending on some parameter 0 ă K ď 1 that we will
choose later. Label `1 is simply the set of all labels ` such that there exists
an input forest G1 P F (including input labels) and an edge e1 in G1 such
that BG1 pe1 , T ´ 1{2q – BG pe, T ´ 1{2q and the probability that the node
u1 corresponding to u in the isomorphism outputs ` on pu1 , e1 q according to
A is at least K, conditioned on the assumption that the random bits in
BG1 pe1 , T ´ 1{2q are the same as in BG pe, T ´ 1{2q. Here, the isomorphism
is w.r.t. the topology and the input labels. In other words, in A1{2 , edge
e outputs on pu, eq the set of all labels ` for which the probability that, in
A, node u outputs ` on pu, eq, conditioned on the random bits that e has
collected, is at least K for at least one possible extension of (the topology
and input labels of) the graph beyond the pT ´ 1{2q-hop view of e. Edge
e computes the output label on half-edge pv, eq analogously. This concludes
the description of A1{2 ; in the following we derive A1 from A1{2 in a fashion
dual to how we derived A1{2 from A.
    In A1 , each node u first collects all information contained in BG pu, T ´ 1q.
Then, for each incident edge e, node u determines the output label `2 it
outputs on half-edge pu, eq as follows, depending on some parameter 0 ă
L ď 1 that we will choose later. Label `2 is simply the set of all labels `1
such that there exists an input forest G2 P F and a node u2 in G2 such
that BG2 pu2 , T ´ 1q – BG pu, T ´ 1q and the probability that the edge e2
corresponding to e in the isomorphism outputs `1 on pu2 , e2 q according to
A1{2 is at least L, conditioned on the assumption that the random bits in
BG2 pu2 , T ´ 1q are the same as in BG pu, T ´ 1q. In other words, in A1 , node
u outputs on pu, eq the set of all labels `1 for which the probability that, in
A1{2 , edge e outputs `1 on pu, eq, conditioned on the random bits that u has
collected, is at least L for at least one possible extension of (the topology and
input labels of) the graph beyond the pT ´ 1q-hop view of u. This concludes
the description of A1 .
    In the following, for all forests in FN , we bound the local failure proba-
bility of A1{2 , depending on (the bound on) the local failure probability of
A. We start by proving two helper lemmas. For any edge e, resp. node u,
let p˚e , resp. p˚u , denote the probability that A1{2 fails at edge e, resp. node u.
Moreover, for graphs G, G1 , let fin , resp. fin1 , be the functions that, for each

                                         27
half-edge in G, resp. G1 , return the input label of the half-edge. Finally, we
will use Aphq and A1{2 phq to denote the labels that A and A1{2 , respectively,
output on some half-edge h.

Lemma 3.5. Let e “ tu, vu be an arbitrary edge in an arbitrary forest G P
                                                       2∆T `1
FN . It holds that p˚e ď ps{pK 2 q, where s “ p3|ΣΠ
                                                  in |q       .

Proof. Consider an arbitrary assignment of random bits in BG pe, T ´ 1{2q
for which A1{2 fails on e, i.e., for which

   1. the cardinality-2 multiset of labels that A1{2 outputs on pu, eq and pv, eq
      is not contained in ERpΠq
      , i.e., tA1{2 ppu, eqq, A1{2 ppv, eqqu R ERpΠq , or

   2. we have A1{2 ppu, eqq R gRpΠq pfin1 ppu, eqqq or A1{2 ppv, eqq R gRpΠq pfin1 ppv, eqqq.

First, consider the case that Condition 1 is satisfied. Then, by the definition
of RpΠq, there are two labels `u P A1{2 ppu, eqq, `v P A1{2 ppv, eqq such that
t`u , `v u R EΠ . Moreover, by the definition of A1{2 , there is a forest G1 P FN
containing9 BG pe, T ´ 1{2q such that |V pG1 q| “ |V pGq| and, conditioned
on the already fixed random bits in BG1 pe, T ´ 1{2q “ BG pe, T ´ 1{2q, the
probability that A, when executed on G1 , returns `u on pu, eq and `v on pv, eq
is at least K 2 . Note that we use here that the input graph is a forest: in
order to be able to simply multiply the two probabilities of `u being returned
on pu, eq and `v being returned on pv, eq (which are both lower bounded
by K), we require that those two probabilities are independent (which is
guaranteed if the input graph is a forest, as then BG1 pu, T qzBG1 pe, T ´1{2q and
BG1 pv, T qzBG1 pe, T ´1{2q are disjoint). Note further that we use that G P FN
(which implies that the number of nodes in BG pe, T ´ 1{2q is sufficiently
small compared to |V pGq|) to guarantee the property |V pG1 q| “ |V pGq|,
and that this property is needed because the lemma statement relating the
probabilities p˚e and p (which technically speaking are functions of the number
n of nodes) is supposed to hold for any fixed n. Finally, note that this is a
place where it is crucial that we consider forests, not trees, as on trees is might
be the case that no graph G1 as described exists: if the two extensions beyond
BG pe, T ´ 1{2q that are responsible for the containment of `u in A1{2 ppu, eqq
and of `v in A1{2 ppv, eqq both have no edges leaving the respective extension
except those connecting them to BG pe, T ´ 1{2q, and the total number of
nodes in the union of BG pe, T ´1{2q and those two extensions does not happen
   9
    For better readability, we refrain from using the mathematically precise term “isomor-
phism” in the following, and instead identify isomorphic objects with each other, e.g., we
consider BG pe, T ´ 1{2q to be a subgraph of G1 if it is isomorphic to some subgraph of G1 .


                                            28
to be precisely n, then those two extensions cannot appear simultaneously if
we assume the input graph to be an n-node tree.
    Now consider the case that Condition 2 is satisfied. Then, by the defini-
tion of RpΠq, there is some label `u P A1{2 ppu, eqq satisfying `u R gΠ pfin1 ppu, eqqq
or some label `v P A1{2 ppv, eqq satisfying `v R gΠ pfin1 ppv, eqqq. With an analo-
gous argumentation to the one used in the previous case, we obtain that there
is a forest G1 P FN containing BG pe, T ´ 1{2q such that |V pG1 q| “ |V pGq|
and the probability that A, when executed on G1 , fails on e is at least K.
    Since 0 ă K ď 1, we can conclude that in either case the probability
(conditioned on the already fixed random bits in BG1 pe, T ´ 1{2q) that, in G1 ,
A fails on e is at least K 2 . Observe that the output of A on the two half-
edges belonging to e depends only on BG1 pe, T `1{2q “ BG1 pu, T qYBG1 pu, T q.
Given the fixed topology and input in BG1 pe, T ´ 1{2q, there are at most s :“
           2∆T `1
p3|ΣΠin |q        different possibilities for the topology and input in BG1 pe, T `
1{2q: there are at most 2∆T nodes in BG1 pe, T ` 1{2qzBG1 pe, T ´ 1{2q, and for
each of the ∆ possible ports of such a node, there are at most 3 possibilities
regarding topology (being connected to a node in BG1 pe, T ´ 1{2q, being
connected to a node outside of BG1 pe, T ` 1{2q, or non-existing due to the
degree of the node being too small) and at most |ΣΠ        in | possibilities regarding
the input label on the half-edge corresponding to that port. Let B denote the
set of different balls of the form BG1 pe, T ` 1{2q (for some G1 ) that contain
BG pe, T ´ 1{2q. As shown above, |B| ď s.
    Now, forget the fixing of the random bits in BG pe, T ´ 1{2q. By the above
discussion, it follows that there is some ball B P B (and therefore also some
forest G1 ) containing BG pe, T ´ 1{2q such that the probability that A, when
executed on B (or G1 ), fails on e is at least pp˚e {sq ¨ K 2 . Since this probability
is upper bounded by p, we obtain p˚e ď ps{pK 2 q, as desired.

Lemma 3.6. Let u be an arbitrary node in an arbitrary forest G P FN . It
                                 ps∆               Π 2∆T `1
holds that p˚u ď p ` |ΣΠ
                       out |∆K ` K , where s “ p3|Σin |q    .
                                                                                    p1q
Proof. Let e1 , . . . , edegpuq denote the edges incident to u. Moreover, let pu
denote the probability that
                                   degpuq     p2q
tA1{2 ppu, ei qqu1ďiďdegpuq R NRpΠq and pu the probability that there exists
some 1 ď i ď degpuq satisfying A1{2 ppu, ei qqu R gRpΠq pfin ppu, ei qqq. Since
those two conditions together cover all cases in which A1{2 fails at u, we have
       p1q      p2q                            p1q
p˚u ď pu ` pu . We start by bounding pu .
    Observe that correctness at u, for both A and A1{2 , depends only on
BG pu, T q. Given the topology and input in BG pu, T q (which is already fixed
since we are considering some fixed graph G), we call, for each label ` P ΣΠ   out
and each 1 ď i ď degpuq, an assigment of random bits in BG pu, T q bad for

                                         29
the pair p`, iq if Appu, ei qq “ ` and ` R A1{2 ppu, ei qq (under this assignment).
Observe that the definition of A1{2 ensures, for each fixed assignment of ran-
dom bits in BG pei , T ´ 1{2q, that if ` R A1{2 ppu, ei qq under this assignment10 ,
then the probability that Appu, ei qq “ ` (conditioned on the fixed assignment
in BG pei , T ´ 1{2q) is smaller than K. Hence, (prior to fixing any random
bits) for each pair p`, iq P ΣΠ out ˆ t1, . . . , degpuqu, the probability that an as-
signment of random bits in BG pu, T q is bad for p`, iq is smaller than K. It
follows by a union bound that the probability that an assignment of random
bits is bad for some pair p`, iq P ΣΠ  out ˆ t1, . . . , degpuqu is upper bounded by
|ΣΠout | ¨ ∆ ¨ K.
    Now, consider an arbitrary assignment of random bits in BG pu, T q such
                                     degpuq
that tA1{2 ppu, ei qqu1ďiďdegpuq R NRpΠq under this assignment. We argue that
then A fails at u or there is some pair p`, iq P ΣΠ     out ˆ t1, . . . , degpuqu such that
the assignment is bad for p`, iq: indeed, if there is no such pair and A does
not fail at u, then, for each 1 ď i ď degpuq, we have Appu, ei qq P A1{2 ppu, ei qq,
which (combined again with the correctness of A at u) would imply, by the
                  degpuq                                             degpuq
definition of NRpΠq , that tA1{2 ppu, ei qqu1ďiďdegpuq P NRpΠq , contradicting
                                                                                     p1q
the stated property of the considered assignment. We conclude that pu ď
p ` |ΣΠ  out | ¨ ∆ ¨ K.
                               p2q
    Next, we bound pu . By a union bound, it follows from the definition
     p2q
of pu that there is some 1 ď i ď degpuq such that the probability that
                                                       p2q           p2q
A1{2 ppu, ei qq R gRpΠq pfin ppu, ei qqq is at least pu { degpuq ě pu {∆.
    Consider an arbitrary assignment of random bits in BG pei , T ´ 1{2q such
that A1{2 ppu, ei qq R gRpΠq pfin ppu, ei qqq. Then, by the definition of RpΠq, there
is some label ` P A1{2 ppu, ei qq satisfying ` R gΠ pfin ppu, ei qqq. Moreover, by the
definition of A1{2 , there is some ball BG1 pu, T q (in some forest G1 P FN sat-
isfying |V pG1 q| “ |V pGq|) containing BG pei , T ´ 1{2q such that, conditioned
on the already fixed random bits in BG1 pei , T ´ 1{2q “ BG pei , T ´ 1{2q, the
probability that A, when executed on BG1 pu, T q (or G1 ), returns ` on pu, ei q is
at least K. Note that since ` R gΠ pfin ppu, ei qqq, returning ` on pu, ei q implies
that A fails at u.
    As already established in the proof of Lemma 3.5, there are at most
                    2∆T `1
s :“ p3|ΣΠ    in |q        different possibilities for the topology and input of a ball
BG1 pei , T ` 1{2q containing BG pei , T ´ 1{2q, which implies the same bound
on the number of different balls BG1 pu, T q containing BG pei , T ´ 1{2q. Anal-
ogously to before (and forgetting the fixing of the random bits in BG pei , T ´
1{2q), we obtain that there is some ball BG1 pu, T q (in some forest G1 satisfying
  10
    Note that A1{2 ppu, ei qq is uniquely determined after fixing the random bits in
BG pei , T ´ 1{2q.



                                            30
|V pG1 q| “ |V pGq|) containing BG pei , T ´ 1{2q such that the probability that
                                                                    p2q
A, when executed on BG1 pu, T q (or G1 ), fails at u is at least pppu {∆q{sq ¨ K.
                                                             p2q
Since this probability is upper bounded by p, we obtain pu ď ps∆{K, which
implies
                                                  ps∆
                          p˚u ď p ` |ΣΠout |∆K `       ,                   (3.1)
                                                   K
as desired.
   By using Lemmas 3.5 and 3.6 and choosing K suitably, we now give an
upper bound on the local failure probability of A1{2 on FN .

Lemma 3.7. Algorithm A1{2 has local failure probability at most 2∆ps `
                                         2∆T `1
|ΣΠ
  out |qp
          1{3
              on FN , where s “ p3|ΣΠ
                                    in |q       .

Proof. Choose the parameter in the definition of A1{2 as K :“ p1{3 . Then,
by Lemma 3.6, for each node u in the input forest G, we obtain

              p˚u ď p ` |ΣΠ
                          out |∆p
                                  1{3
                                      ` s∆p2{3 ď 2∆ps ` |ΣΠ
                                                          out |qp
                                                                  1{3
                                                                      ,

and, by Lemma 3.5, for each edge e in G, we obtain

                         p˚e ď sp1{3 ď 2∆ps ` |ΣΠ
                                                out |qp
                                                        1{3
                                                            .

The lemma statement follows by the definition of local failure probability.
      Next, we prove an analogous statement to Lemma 3.7 relating the local
failure probabilities of A1{2 and A1 . For any edge e, resp. node u, let p1e , resp.
p1u , denote the probability that A1 fails at edge e, resp. node u.

Lemma 3.8. If A1{2 has local failure probability at most p˚ ď 1 on FN , then
                                                 RpΠq
A1 has local failure probability at most 3ps ` |Σout |qpp˚ q1{p∆`1q on FN , where
                T `1
s “ p3|ΣΠin |q
              2∆
                     .

Proof. We start by obtaining analogous statements to Lemmas 3.5 and 3.6.
By simply exchanging the roles of nodes and edges11 and reducing the radii
of the considered balls by 1{2 (as well as using parameter L instead of K, and
        RpΠq
using Σout instead of ΣΠ  out ), we directly obtain analogous proofs resulting in
the following two statements, (assuming the stated upper bound p˚ on the
local failure probability of A1{2 ):
  11
    Note that, as usual for round elimination, all proofs also directly extend to hyper-
graphs. Hence, exchanging the roles of nodes and edges is very natural: a node v of degree
degpvq simply becomes a hyperedge containing degpvq endpoints, while an edge becomes
a node of degree 2.

                                           31
   1. For any node u in the input forest G, we have p1u ď p˚ s{pL∆ q.
                                                           RpΠq
   2. For any edge e in G, we have p1e ď p˚ ` |Σout | ¨ 2L ` p˚ ¨ 2s{L.

Note that, compared to Lemmas 3.5 and 3.6, each 2 has been replaced by
∆ and vice versa, simply because the roles of edges (that end in 2 nodes)
and nodes (that “end” in at most ∆ edges) are reversed in the analogous
proofs. Also observe that, technically, the expression for s that we obtain
                                    ∆¨∆pT ´1q`1
in the new proofs is p3|ΣΠ     in |q            ; however, since this is upper bounded
by the original expression for s, the obtained statements also hold for the
                        2∆T `1
original s “ p3|ΣΠin |q         (which we will continue to use).
    Now, analogously to the choice of K “ p1{p2`1q in the proof of Lemma 3.7,
set L :“ pp˚ q1{p∆`1q . We obtain, for each edge e in G,
               RpΠq                                                    RpΠq
p1e ď p˚ ` |Σout | ¨ 2pp˚ q1{p∆`1q ` 2spp˚ q∆{p∆`1q ď 3ps ` |Σout |qpp˚ q1{p∆`1q ,

and, for each node u in G,
                                                    RpΠq
                 p1u ď spp˚ q1{p∆`1q ď 3ps ` |Σout |qpp˚ q1{p∆`1q .

Again, the lemma statement follows by the definition of local failure proba-
bility.
   Combining Lemmas 3.7 and 3.8, we are finally ready to prove Theo-
rem 3.4.
Proof of Theorem 3.4. Let S be as specified in the theorem, and let A1 be as
derived before. As already argued during the definition of A1 , if the runtime
T “ T pnq of A is 0, then A1 satisfies the stated properties regarding runtime
and local failure probability. Hence, assume in the following that T ě 1.
     From the definition of A1 , it follows directly that the runtime of A1 is T ´1.
It remains to show that A1 has local failure probability at most Sp1{p3∆`3q
on FN . We start by showing that A1 has local failure probability at most
S 1 p1{p3∆`3q on FN , where
                          T `1       RpΠq                     T `1
   S 1 :“ 3 ¨ pp3|ΣΠ
                   in |q
                        2∆
                                 ` |Σout |q ¨ p2∆pp3|ΣΠ
                                                      in |q
                                                           2∆
                                                                     ` |ΣΠ
                                                                         out |qq
                                                                                 1{p∆`1q
                                                                                         .
                                            T `1
Indeed, if p satisfies 2∆pp3|ΣΠ    in |q
                                         2∆
                                               ` |ΣΠout |qp
                                                            1{3
                                                                ď 1, then this is a direct
consequence of Lemmas 3.7 and 3.8. If p does not satisfy the given condition,
then the straightforward combination of Lemmas 3.7 and 3.8 does not work,
as the condition p˚ ď 1 in Lemma 3.8 is not satisfied. However, in this case,
                     2∆T `1
i.e., if 2∆pp3|ΣΠ
                in |q         ` |ΣΠ
                                  out |qp
                                           1{3
                                               ą 1, we obtain S 1 p1{p3∆`3q ą 1, which
trivially implies that A has local failure probability at most S 1 p1{p3∆`3q .
                            1



                                               32
   Now, the theorem statement follows from the fact that S 1 ď S, which in
turn follows from
                     T `1       RpΠq                           T `1
S 1 “ 3 ¨ pp3|ΣΠ
               in |q
                    2∆
                            ` |Σout |q ¨ p2∆pp3|ΣΠ
                                                 in |q
                                                      2∆
                                                                      ` |ΣΠ
                                                                          out |qq
                                                                                  1{p∆`1q

                     RpΠq       T `1                                  T `1
   ď p9p|ΣΠ
          in | ` |Σout |qq
                          2∆
                                       ¨ p6∆p|ΣΠ        Π
                                               in | ` |Σout |qq
                                                                2∆

                                          RpΠq        T `1                                  RpΠq     T `1
   ď p10∆p|ΣΠ            Π
            in | ` maxt|Σout |, |Σout |uqq
                                          2∆
                                                             ¨ p10∆p|ΣΠ            Π
                                                                      in | ` maxt|Σout |, |Σout |uqq
                                                                                                    2∆

                                          RpΠq        T `1
   “ p10∆p|ΣΠ            Π
            in | ` maxt|Σout |, |Σout |uqq
                                          4∆

   “S .




3.3     From Easier to Harder Problems
In this section, we prove the following lemma, which, in a sense, provides a
counterpart to Theorem 3.4: it states that the time needed to solve some
problem Π is not much larger than the time needed to solve RpRpΠqq. It is
a simple extension of one direction of [15, Theorem 4.1] to the case of graphs
with inputs. We note that the lemma also holds for randomized algorithms
(with essentially the same proof), but we will only need the deterministic
version.

Lemma 3.9. Let Π be a node-edge-checkable LCL problem and let A be a
deterministic algorithm solving RpRpΠqq in T pnq rounds, for some function
T (on some arbitrary class of graphs). Then there exists a deterministic
algorithm A1 solving Π in T pnq ` 1 rounds.

Proof. We will define A1 as follows, depending on A.12
    For each half-edge h, let Aphq denote the output label that A outputs at
h. In A1 , each node v starts by computing Aphq for each half-edge h “ pw, eq
such that w is a neighbor of or identical to v and e is an edge incident to
v. As, in A, each neighbor of v computes its output in T pnq rounds, v can
compute all mentioned Aphq in T pnq ` 1 rounds, by simulating A. Node
v will decide on its output solely based on the information collected so far,
which implies that the runtime of A1 is T pnq ` 1.
    For choosing its output, v proceeds in two steps (computed without gath-
ering any further information). In the first step, for each incident edge e “
tv, wu, node v chooses, in some deterministic fashion, a label Lpv,eq P Appv, eqq
and a label Lpw,eq P Appw, eqq such that tLpv,eq , Lpw,eq u P ERpΠq . Such a pair
  12
    Note that the A and A1 considered here are not the same as the ones considered in
Section 3.2.


                                                 33
of labels exists, by the definition of ERpRpΠqq (and the fact that A correctly
                                                        degpvq
solves RpRpΠqq). Moreover, the definition of NRpRpΠqq implies that the mul-
                                       degpvq
tiset tLpv,e1 q ue1 Qv is contained in NRpΠq , and the definition of gRpRpΠqq implies
that Lpv,eq P gRpΠq pipv,eq q and Lpw,eq P gRpΠq pipw,eq q where ipv,eq , ipw,eq P ΣΠ
                                                                                    in de-
note the input labels assigned to pv, eq and pw, eq, respectively. Note also
that since the labels Lpv,eq and Lpw,eq are chosen in a deterministic fashion,
depending only on Appv, eqq and Appw, eqq, node v and node w will compute
the same label Lpv,eq and the same label Lpw,eq . We conclude that labeling
each half-edge h with label Lh yields a correct solution for RpΠq.
    In the second step, v computes the final output for each half-edge incident
to v, in a fashion analogous to the first step. More precisely, for each incident
edge e, node v chooses a final output label `pv,eq P Lpv,eq such that the multiset
                                    degpvq
t`pv,e1 q ue1 Qv is contained in NΠ        . Such labels `pv,eq exist, by the definition
        degpvq
of NRpΠq (and the fact that the labeling assigning Lh to each half-edge
h correctly solves RpΠq). Moreover, the definition of ERpΠq implies that,
for any edge e “ tv, wu, the multiset t`pv,eq , `pw,eq u is contained in EΠ , and
the definition of gRpΠq implies that, for any half-edge pv, eq, we have `pv,eq P
gΠ pipv,eq q.
    We conclude that labeling each half-edge h with label `h yields a correct
solution for Π. It follows that A1 solves Π in T pnq ` 1 rounds, as desired.

3.4     Proving the Gap
In this section, we will finally prove our main result that on forests or trees,
any LCL problem with complexity oplog˚ nq can be solved in constant time.
We will first take care of the case of forests.
Theorem 3.10. Let Π be an arbitrary LCL problem that has (deterministic
or randomized) complexity oplog˚ nq on F. Then Π can be solved in constant
time on F (both deterministically and randomized).
Proof. Observe that, by Lemma 2.6, it suffices to prove the theorem for
node-edge-checkable LCL problems. Hence, assume in the following that
Π is node-edge-checkable (and has deterministic or randomized complexity
oplog˚ nq on F).
    Observe further that if each node independently chooses an identifier (of
length Oplog nq bits) uniformly at random from a set of size n3 , then the
probability that there are two nodes that choose the same identifier is at
most 1{n, by a union bound over all pairs of nodes. Hence, a deterministic
algorithm solving Π in oplog˚ nq rounds can be transformed into a random-
ized algorithm with the same runtime and a failure probability of at most

                                           34
1{n by having each node create its own identifier from its random bits be-
fore executing the deterministic algorithm. Thus, we can assume that the
oplog˚ nq-round algorithm for Π guaranteed in the theorem is randomized
and fails with probability at most 1{n. Let A denote this algorithm, and
observe that the bound of 1{n on the failure probability of A implies that
also the local failure probability of A is bounded by 1{n.
    Let T pnq denote the runtime of A on the class of n-node forests from F.
Let n0 be a sufficiently large positive integer; in particular, we require that

                                        T pn0 q ` 2 ď log∆ n0 ,                                               (3.2)

                                        2T pn0 q ` 5 ď log˚ n0 ,                                              (3.3)
and                           `                           ˘p3∆`3qT pn0 q
                                  pS ˚ q2 ¨ plog n0 q2∆                       ă n0                            (3.4)
                                                       T pn q`1
where S ˚ :“ p10∆p|ΣΠ  in | ` log n0 qq
                                       4∆ 0
                                                . Since T pnq P oplog˚ nq (and ∆
and ΣΠ in are fixed constants), such an n0 exists. Moreover, for simplicity,
define f p¨q :“ RpRp¨qq, and recall that Fn0 denotes the class of all forests
from F with n0 nodes. Repeatedly applying f p¨q, starting with Π, yields
a sequence of problems Π, f pΠq, f 2 pΠq, . . . . Our first goal is to show that
there is a 0-round algorithm solving f T pn0 q pΠq on Fn0 with small local failure
probability, by applying Theorem 3.4 repeatedly.
                                                                     Rpf i pΠqq            f i pΠq       RpRpf i pΠqqq
    Recall that for any integer i ě 0, we have Σout                                 “ 2Σout and Σout                     “
  Rpf i pΠqq
 Σout
2              , by definition. This implies that for any 0 ď i ď T pn0 q, we have
                                                                                     Π
                                                                                   2Σout
                                                                                  .
                                         f i pΠq      Rpf i pΠqq             ..
                            maxt|Σout |, |Σout                     |u ď 22

where the power tower is of height 2T pn0 q ` 3. By (3.3), we obtain that
                         f i pΠq       Rpf i pΠqq
                 maxt|Σout |, |Σout                 |u ď log n0 for all 0 ď i ď T pn0 q.                      (3.5)
                                                              T pn q`1                               f T pn0 q pΠq
Recall that S ˚ “ p10∆p|ΣΠ       in | ` log n0 qq
                                                 4∆ 0
                                                      and note that Σin       “
 f T pn0 q´1 pΠq            Π
Σin              “ . . . “ Σin . By the above discussion, we conclude that when
applying Theorem 3.4 to problem f i pΠq for some 0 ď i ď T pn0 q, then the
parameter S in the obtained upper bound Sp1{p3∆`3q (in Theorem 3.4) is up-
per bounded by S ˚ . Hence, by applying Theorem 3.4 T pn0 q times, each time
using the upper bound S ˚ p1{p3∆`3q (instead of Sp1{p3∆`3q with the respective
S from Theorem 3.4), we obtain that there exists a randomized algorithm



                                                       35
A˚ solving f T pn0 q pΠq on Fn0 in 0 rounds with local failure probability p˚ at
most
                                                2                          T pn0 q´1                       T pn0 q
  S ˚ ¨ pS ˚ q1{p3∆`3q ¨ pS ˚ q1{p3∆`3q ¨ . . . ¨ pS ˚ q1{p3∆`3q                       ¨ 1{pn0 q1{p3∆`3q
            řT pn0 q´1
                         p1{p3∆`3qi q                            T pn0 q
   “ pS ˚ q i“0                         ¨ 1{pn0 q1{p3∆`3q
                                    T pn0 q
   ď pS ˚ q2 ¨ 1{pn0 q1{p3∆`3q
   ă 1{plog n0 q2∆
       ´ T pn q ¯2∆
           f   0 pΠq
   ď 1{ Σout         ,

where the second-to-last inequality follows from (3.4), and the last inequality
from (3.5). Note that (3.2) guarantees the applicability of Theorem 3.4 to the
graph class Fn0 for our purposes. Moreover, we can assume that A˚ outputs
                          f T pn0 q pΠq
only labels from Σout                   (even if it fails), as otherwise we can turn A˚ into
such an algorithm (with the same runtime and a smaller or equally small
local failure probability) by simply replacing each label that A˚ outputs at
                                                     f T pn0 q pΠq
some node and is not contained in Σout                             by some arbitrary label from
  f T pn0 q pΠq
Σout            .
     Our next step is to show that the obtained bound on the local failure
probability p˚ of A˚ implies that there exists a deterministic algorithm solv-
ing f T pn0 q pΠq on Fn0 in 0 rounds. To this end, let I be the set of all tuples
I “ pi1 , . . . , ik q consisting of k P t1, . . . , ∆u labels from ΣΠ        in , and O the set of
                                                                                           f T pn0 q pΠq
all tuples O “ po1 , . . . , ok q consisting of k P t1, . . . , ∆u labels from Σout                      .
We say that I “ pi1 , . . . , ik q, resp. O “ po1 , . . . , ok q, is the input tuple, resp.
output tuple, of some node v if degpvq “ k and, for each 1 ď j ď k, we have
that ij is the input label assigned to, resp. the output label returned by A˚
at, the half-edge incident to v corresponding to port j at v.
     Since the runtime of A˚ is 0 rounds, any node v chooses its output tuple
solely based on its random bit string and its input tuple. We now define a
function Adet : I Ñ O (that will constitute the desired deterministic algo-
rithm) as follows. Consider an arbitrary tuple I “ pi1 , . . . , ik q P I and let v
                                                                                            f T pn0 q pΠq
be a node with input label I. Since A˚ outputs only labels from Σout
                                              ´ T pn q ¯∆
                                                  f    0 pΠq
and k ď ∆, there are at most Σout                                   different possibilities for the
output tuple of v. Hence,          ´ there exists        a tuple O P O that v outputs with
                                                ¯       ∆
                                        f T pn0 q pΠq
probability at least 1{ Σout           (when executing A˚ ). Fix such an O
arbitrarily, and set Adet pIq “ O. This concludes the description of Adet .
Note that the definition of Adet is independent of the choice of v (under the
given restrictions) as the only relevant parameters are the input tuple at v

                                                            36
(which is fixed) and the random bit string at v (which comes from the same
distribution for each node).
     We claim that for any two (not necessarily distinct) configurations I, I 1 P
I, and any two (not necessarily distinct) labels o P Adet pIq and o1 P Adet pI 1 q,
we have to, o1 u P Ef T pn0 q pΠq . For a contradiction, assume that there are two
configurations I “ pi1 , . . . , ik q, I 1 “ pi11 , . . . , i1k1 q from I and two labels o P
Adet pIq and o1 P Adet pI 1 q satisfying to, o1 u R Ef T pn0 q pΠq . Let O “ po1 , . . . , ok q
and O1 “ po11 , . . . , o1k1 q be the tuples that I and I 1 , respectively, are mapped
to by Adet , i.e., Adet pIq “ O and Adet pI 1 q “ O1 . Let j P t1, . . . , ku and
j 1 P t1, . . . , k 1 u be two ports/indices such that oj “ o and o1j 1 “ o1 . Consider
a forest (with n0 nodes) containing two adjacent nodes v, v 1 such that I is
the input tuple of v, I 1 is the input tuple of v 1 , and the edge e :“ tv, v 1 u
corresponds to port j at v and to port j 1 at v 1 . By the definition of Adet ,
we know that, when executing A˚ , the probability that v outputs o on half-
edge pv, eq and the probability that v 1 outputs o1 on half-edge pv 1 , eq are
                          ´ T pn q ¯∆
                             f   0 pΠq
each at least 1{ Σout                    . Since these two events are independent (as
one depends on the random bit string of v and the other on the random
bit string of v 1 ), it follows that the probability that the output on edge
                                    ´ T pn q ¯2∆
                                       f   0 pΠq
e is to, o1 u is at least 1{ Σout                   . Now, to, o1 u R Ef T pn0 q pΠq yields a
                                                                          ˚
contradiction
           ´                ¯ fact the local failure probability of A is strictly smaller
                       to the
                             2∆
             f T pn0 q pΠq
than 1{ Σout         , proving the claim.
   Observe that for any configuration I “ pi1 , . . . , ik q from I, we also have
that

   1. Adet pIq (or, more precisely, the unordered underlying multiset) is con-
      tained in NfkT pn0 q pΠq , and

   2. for each port 1 ď j ď k, the entry from Adet pIq corresponding to port
      j is contained in gf T pn0 q pΠq pij q,

as otherwise for each node v ´with input¯tuple I, algorithm A˚ would fail at
                                                        ∆
                                        f T pn0 q pΠq
v with probability at least 1{ Σout          , yielding again a contradiction to
the aforementioned upper bound on the local failure probability of A˚ . By
the above discussion, we conclude that the output returned by Adet is correct
at each node and each edge, and therefore Adet constitutes a deterministic
0-round algorithm solving f T pn0 q pΠq on Fn0 .
    By definition, algorithm Adet is simply a function from I to O. Hence,
while technically Adet has been defined only for forests from Fn0 , we can
execute Adet also on forests with an arbitrary number of nodes and it will


                                                37
still yield a correct output. We conclude that Adet constitutes a deterministic
0-round algorithm solving f T pn0 q pΠq on F.
     Now, we can simply apply Lemma 3.9 T pn0 q times, starting with f T pn0 q pΠq,
and obtain that there exists a deterministic algorithm solving Π on F in
T pn0 q rounds (which implies the existence of a randomized algorithm solving
Π on F in T pn0 q rounds, using the same argument as in the beginning of
the proof). As n0 is a fixed positive integer (depending only on ∆ and Π), it
follows that Π can be solved in constant time on F (both deterministically
and randomized).
   Now, by combining Theorem 3.10 with Lemma 3.3 and Lemma 2.6 (which
guarantees that Lemma 3.3, which is stated for node-edge-checkable LCL
problems, can be applied), we obtain our main result as a corollary.

Theorem 3.11 (Formal version of Theorem 1.1). Let Π be an arbitrary
LCL problem that has (deterministic or randomized) complexity oplog˚ nq on
T . Then Π can be solved in constant time on T (both deterministically and
randomized).


4     The VOLUME Model Gap
In this section, we show that a deterministic or randomized VOLUME al-
gorithm (LCA) with a probe complexity of oplog˚ nq implies a deterministic
VOLUME algorithm (LCA) with a probe complexity of Op1q. We first show
the speed-up only for deterministic VOLUME algorithms and later discuss
how to extend the result to the full generality.

Theorem 4.1. There does not exist an LCL with a deterministic VOLUME
complexity between ωp1q and oplog˚ nq.

Proof. Consider some LCL Π “ pΣin , Σout , r, Pq. Let A be a VOLUME model
algorithm with a probe complexity of T pnq “ oplog˚ nq that solves Π. We
show that this implies the existence of a VOLUME model algorithm that
solves Π and has a probe complexity of Op1q. To do so, we first show that we
can turn A into an order-invariant algorithm with the same probe complexity.
Once we have shown this, Theorem 2.11, which shows a speed-up result for
order-invariant algorithms, implies that there also exists a VOLUME model
algorithm for Π with a probe complexity of Op1q, as needed.
    We start by proving the lemma below, which, informally speaking, states
that there exists a sufficiently large set Sn Ď rns such that A is order-invariant
as long as the IDs it ”encounters” are from the set Sn . The proof adapts


                                       38
a Ramsey-theoretic argument first introduced in [41] and further refined in
[19] in the context of the LOCAL model to the VOLUME model.
Lemma 4.2. There exists a n0 P N such that the following holds for every
n ě n0 . There exists a set Sn Ď rns of size pT pnq ` 1q ¨ ∆r`1 such that for
every i P rT pnq ` 1s and t, t1 P T uplesi,Sn it holds that fn,i ptq “ fn,i pt1 q if t
and t1 are almost identical.
Proof. Consider an n P N. We denote with H a complete pT pnq ` 1q-uniform
hypergraph on n nodes. Each node in H corresponds to a (unique) ID in the
set t1, 2, . . . , nu. For each hyperedge X Ď t1, 2, . . . , nu we define a function
fX .
     The input to fX is a tuple t “ pt1 , . . . , tT pnq`1 q P T uplesT pnq`1,rT pnq`1s .
For j P rT pnq ` 1s, let tj “ pidj , degj , inj q. We define a new tuple tX        j “
   X                           X
pidj , degj , inj q, where idj is the idj -th smallest element in X. We now
define


       fX ptq “ pfn,1 ptX           X X                            X X               X
                        1 q, fn,2 pt1 , t2 q, . . . , fn,T pnq`1 pt1 , t2 , . . . , tT pnq`1 qq.

    We now prove two things. First, we show that for n being sufficiently
large, there exists a set Snbig Ď rns of size pT pnq ` 1q ¨ ∆r`1 ` T pnq ` 1 such
that for any two hyperedges X, Y Ď Snbig , fX “ fY . This will follow by
Ramsey Theory and an upper bound on the number of possible different
functions fX . Second, let Sn be the set one obtains from Snbig by discarding
the T pnq`1 largest elements of Snbig . We show that Sn satisfies the conditions
of Lemma 4.2.
    For the Ramsey-theoretic argument, we start by upper bounding the total
number of possible functions. Note that |T uplesrT pnq`1s | ď pT pnq ` 1q ¨ ∆ ¨
|Σin |∆ and therefore the possible number of inputs to the function f X is
                             `                          ˘T pnq`1
|T uplesT pnq`1,rT pnq`1s | ď pT pnq ` 1q ¨ ∆ ¨ |Σin´|∆          “ T pnqOpT
                                                                        ¯
                                                                            pnqq
                                                                                 . Note
                                                      ŚT pnq                        r∆s
that the output of fX is contained in the set            i“1 pris ˆ r∆sq ˆ pΣout q
and therefore there are at most pT pnq ¨ ∆qT pnq ¨ |Σout |∆ “ T pnqOpT pnqq possible
                                            `          ˘T pnqOpT pnqq
outputs. Hence, there exist at most T pnqOpT pnqq                     different possible
functions. Let Rpp, m, cq denote the smallest number such that any p-uniform
complete hypergraph on Rpp, m, cq nodes with each hyperedge being assigned
one of c colors contains a monochromatic clique of size m. It holds that
log˚ pRpp, m, cqq “ p ` log˚ m ` log˚ c ` Op1q [21].
     Setting p “ T pnq ` 1, m “ pT pnq ` 1q ¨ ∆r`1 ` T pnq ` 1 and c “
`               ˘T pnqOpT pnqq
  T pnqOpT pnqq                , we can conclude that H contains a set Snbig Ď rns
of size m such that for any two hyperedges X, Y Ď Snbig , fX “ fY as long as

                                                 39
log˚ pnq ě T pnq ` 1 ` log˚ m ` log˚ c ` Op1q, which is the case for sufficiently
large n as T pnq “ oplog˚ nq, log˚ m “ opT pnqq and log˚ c “ opT pnqq.

     Now, let Sn be the set one obtains form Snbig by discarding the T pnq ` 1
largest elements from Snbig . Let i P rT pnq ` 1s and tp`q “ ppid`1 , deg1 , in1 q,
pid`2 , deg2 , in2 q, . . . , pid`i , degi , ini qq P T uplesi,Sn for ` P r2s such that tp1q and
tp2q are almost identical. It remains to show that fn,i ptp1q q “ fn,i ptp2q q. For ` P
r2s, let X ` Ď Snbig such that tid`1 , id`2 , . . . , id`i u contains the |tid`1 , id`2 , . . . , id`i u|-
th lowest elements of X ` . Now, let t “ pt1 , t2 , . . . , tT pnq`1 q P ST pnq`1,rT pnq`1s
                                              `
such that for every j P ris, tX            j    “ pid`j , degj , inj q . Note that it follows from
the way we defined X and X 2 and the fact that tp1q and tp2q are almost
                                   1

identical that such a tuple t exists. As X ` Ď Snbig , we have fX 1 ptq “ fX 2 ptq.
In particular, this implies that
                              1     1          1               2     2           2
     fn,i ptp1q q “ fn,i ptX    X            X            X    X            X            p2q
                           1 , t2 , . . . , ti q “ fn,i pt1 , t2 , . . . , ti q “ fn,i pt q,

    which finishes the proof.


     We now construct an order-invariant algorithm A1 with probe complexity
T 1 pnq “ maxpOp1q, T pnqq “ oplog˚ nq. Note that it is easy to make A1 order-
invariant for every input graph having fewer than n0 nodes. For n ě n0 ,
we have T 1 pnq “ T pnq and for every i P t1, 2, . . . , T 1 pnqu and tuple t “
ppid1 , deg1 , in1 q, pid2 , deg2 , in2 q, . . . , pidi , degi , ini qq P T uplesi,N , we define

       A  1       A 1
      fn,i ptq “ fn,i pt “ pid11 , deg1 , in1 q, pid12 , deg2 , in2 q, . . . , pid1i , degi , ini qq

    where id11 , . . . , id1i is chosen in such a way that tid11 , . . . , id1i u contains the
|tid11 , . . . , id1i u|-th smallest elements of Sn and t and t1 are almost identical.
It is easy to verify that A1 is indeed order-invariant.
    It remains to show that A1 indeed solves Π. For the sake of contradiction,
assume that this is not the case. This implies the existence of a Σin -labeled
graph pG, fin q on n nodes (with each node having a unique ID from a polyno-
mial range, a port assignment, and G does not have any isolated nodes) such
that A1 ”fails” on pG, fin q. Put differently, there exists a node v such that A1
produces a mistake in the r-hop neighborhood of v. The r-hop neighborhood
of v consists of at most ∆r`1 vertices. To answer a given query, A1 ”sees”
at most T pnq ` 1 nodes. Hence, to compute the output of all the half-edges
in the r-hop neighborhood of v, A1 ”sees” at most ∆r`1 pT pnq ` 1q ď |Sn |
many nodes. We denote this set of nodes by V visible . Even if the IDs of
nodes outside of V visible are changed, A1 still fails around v. Moreover, as A1

                                                   40
is order-invariant, changing the IDs of the nodes in V visible in a manner that
preserves the relative order does not change the fact that A1 fails around v.
Hence, we can find a new assignment of IDs such that each node in V visible
is assigned an ID from the set Sn such that A1 still fails around v. However,
from the way we defined A1 and the property that Sn satisfies, it follows that
A1 and A produce the same output in the r-hop neighborhood around v.
This contradicts the fact that A is a correct algorithm.


    We already argued in the preliminaries that Theorem 4.1 also implies that
there does not exist an LCL with a deterministic LCA complexity between
ωp1q and oplog˚ nq.
    As noted in [42], the derandomization result by [19] can be used to
show that randomness does not help (up to an additive constant in the
round/probe complexity) in the LOCAL and VOLUME model for complex-
ities in Oplog˚ nq, and the same is true for the LCA model.
    Hence, we obtain the following more general theorem.

Theorem 4.3. There does not exist an LCL with a randomized/deterministic
LCA/VOLUME complexity between ωp1q and oplog˚ nq.


5    Speedup in Grids
In this section we prove that on d-dimensional oriented grids, any oplog˚ nq-
round LOCAL algorithm for an LCL problem Π (with input labels) can be
turned into a LOCAL algorithm for Π with a round complexity of Op1q. An
oriented d-dimensional grid is a grid where each edge is labeled with a label
from rds that says which dimension this edge corresponds to. Moreover, all
edges corresponding to the same dimension are consistently oriented. The
grid is assumed to be toroidal, that is, without boundaries. We believe, but
do not prove, that the same result can be shown also for non-toroidal grids,
that is, grids with boundaries. From now on fix a dimension d.

Theorem 5.1. There is no LCL problem Π with a randomized/deterministic
LOCAL complexity between ωp1q and oplog˚ nq in d-dimensional oriented grids
for d “ Op1q.

    The proof of the speedup is a relatively simple extension of an argument
of Suomela in the paper of Chang and Pettie [19]. There, the argument is
proven for LCLs without inputs on unoriented grids. It shows that every
oplog˚ nq-round algorithm can be even sped up to a 0-round algorithm. This


                                      41
is not the case anymore with inputs, which makes the proof slightly more
involved.
    The high-level idea of the proof is the following. First, we observe that a
LOCAL algorithm on oriented grids implies a PROD-LOCAL algorithm with
the same asymptotic complexity. A PROD-LOCAL algorithm is defined as
follows.

Definition 5.2 (PROD-LOCAL model). An algorithm in the PROD-LOCAL
model is defined as an algorithm in the LOCAL model, but it expects that
each node u P V pGq for G an oriented grid gets an ordered sequence of d
identifiers id1 puq, . . . , idd puq P rnOp1q s, one for each dimension of the input
grid G. We require that the i-th identifier idi puq, idi pvq of two nodes u, v is
the same if and only if the two nodes have the same i-th coordinate in G.
    An order-invariant PROD-LOCAL model is defined as follows. We say that
two identifier assignments are order-indistinguishable in some neighborhood
around a node u if for any two nodes v, w in that neighborhood of u and
any i, j P rds, the i-th identifier of one node is either smaller than the j-
th identifier of the other node in both ID assignments or larger in both ID
assignments. Then, an order-invariant tpnq-round PROD-LOCAL algorithm
outputs the same value at the half edges of a node in case two ID assignments
are order-indistinguishable in its tpnq-hop neighborhood.

   We have the following fact:

Proposition 5.3. If an LCL Π allows has local deterministic/randomized
complexity tpnq in the LOCAL model, it has complexity tpnq in the PROD-LOCAL
model.

Proof. By result of [19], a tpnq round randomized algorithm in the local
                           2
model implies a tp2Opn q q round deterministic algorithm. This implies that
we can turn an Oplog˚ nq-rounds randomized algorithm into Oplog˚ nq-rounds
deterministic one.
    Each of the d identifiers of a node are bounded by nc for some fixed
constant
     řd c in the     PROD-LOCAL model. Assigning each node the identifier
                cpi´1q
I “ i“1 Ii ¨ n         , where pIi q is its i-th identifier results in globally unique
identifiers from a polynomial range. This allows simulation of the determin-
istic LOCAL algorithm in the PROD-LOCAL model as needed.
   Next, we argue that an oplog˚ nq-round PROD-LOCAL algorithm can be
turned into an order-invariant PROD-LOCAL algorithm. To show the exis-
tence of such an order-invariant algorithm, we use a Ramsey theory based
argument very similar to the one in Section 4 and [19].


                                         42
Proposition 5.4. If there is a tpnq “ oplog˚ nq round PROD-LOCAL algo-
rithm for an LCL Π, then there is also an order-invariant PROD-LOCAL
algorithm with the same round complexity.

Proof. The algorithm A of local complexity tpnq can be seen as a function
that maps p2tpnq`1qˆp2tpnq`1q sized grids with edges consistently oriented
and labeled with numbers from rds. Moreover, each vertex has a d-tuple of
its identifiers and each half-edge a label from Σin . The function A maps this
input to an output label for each half-edge incident to a given node. Let
Rpp, m, cq be defined as in the previous section and let H be a hypergraph
on nOp1q nodes, each representing an identifier.

  1. Assume we have a tpnq-hop neighborhood already labeled without as-
     signed identifiers and we want to assign the identifiers. There are at
     most p “ d ¨ p2tpnq ` 1q numbers to assign.

  2. Assume we have a tpnq ` r-hop neighborhood already labeled without
     assigned identifiers and we want to assign the identifiers. There are at
     most m “ d ¨ p2ptpnq ` rq ` 1q numbers to assign. Here, r is the local
     checkability radius of the problem.

  3. The number z is defined to be the number of possible input neighbor-
                                                                      d
     hoods not labeled with identifiers. We have z ď |Σin |2dp2tpnq`1q . Note
     that the extra 2d-factor in the exponent comes from the fact that we
     label half-edges.

  4. Finally, c is the number of colors such that each color encodes a dis-
     tinct function which takes as input one of the z possible neighborhoods
     labeled with Σin inputs. Moreover, for each such neighborhood we fix
     a given permutation on p elements π. The function outputs a tuple of
     d output labels from Σout , one entry corresponding to each half-edge
     incident to a vertex. Hence, for the number of such colors c we have
     c “ |Σout |dp!z .

    We color each p-edge T of H by the following color out of c colors: we
consider all of the z possible ways of labeling the tpnq-hop neighborhood
with labels from Σin and all p! ways of how one can assign a set of p different
identifiers of T to that neighborhood (we think of T as a sorted list on
which we apply π and then in this order we fill in identifiers to the tpnq-hop
neighborhood). For each such input (out of p! ¨ z possible) we now apply A
to that neighborhood and record the output from Σdout . This gives one of c
possible colors. We now use the bound log˚ Rpp, m, cq “ p ` log˚ m ` log˚ c `


                                      43
Op1q as in the previous section. Hence, as we assume tpnq “ oplog˚ nq, this
implies |V pHq| ě Rpp, m, cq, and therefore there exists a set S Ď V pHq of m
distinct IDs such that all p-sized subsets T Ď S have the same color.
    We now define the new algorithm A1 as follows. Let N be a neighborhood
from the order-invariant PROD-LOCAL model; take an arbitrary p-sized sub-
set T Ď S and label N with identifiers from T by the permutation π given
by the order on N that we got. Then, apply A on this input.
    First, this algorithm is well defined as it does not matter which T we
pick, the algorithm always answers the same because every T Ď S is colored
by the same color. Second, the algorithm is correct, since for any ptpnq ` rq-
hop neighborhood that has at most m vertices we can choose some way of
assigning identifiers from S (S “ m) to that neighbourhood and A1 answers
the same as what A would answer with this assignment of identifiers for all
nodes within the local checkability radius.
    Once we have the order-invariant algorithm with a round complexity of
oplog˚ nq, an easy adaptation of the proof for Theorem 2.11 implies that we
can turn it into an order-invariant PROD-LOCAL algorithm with a round
complexity of Op1q. However, because of the oriented-grid, we get a local or-
der on the vertices for free, so we can turn the order-invariant PROD-LOCAL
algorithm into an (order-invariant) LOCAL algorithm, thus finishing the proof.
Proposition 5.5. If an LCL Π has complexity opn1{d q in the order-invariant
PROD-LOCAL model, it has deterministic/randomized/deterministic order-
invariant local complexity Op1q in the LOCAL model.
Proof. This is an argument very similar to [21]. Let A be the algorithm in
the PROD-LOCAL model. We choose n0 large enough and run A “fooled”
into thinking that the size of the grid is n0 . As the order on the identifiers,
choose the order where two identifiers idi puq, idj pvq have idi puq ă idj pvq if
and only if either i ă j or i “ j and v is further than u in the i-th coordinate
(the notion of “further than” is given by the orientation of the grid). A
standard argument as in [21] shows that if n0 is chosen large enough, the
“fooled” algorithm needs to be correct, as otherwise A would be incorrect
when being run on grids of size n0 .
   Theorem 5.1 follows by application of Propositions 5.3 to 5.5.


Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Yi-Jun Chang, Mohsen Ghaffari, Jan Grebı́k, and
Dennis Olivetti for helpful comments and discussions.

                                       44
   CG and VR were supported by the European Research Council (ERC)
under the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
(grant agreement No. 853109).


References
 [1]

 [2] Noga Alon, Ronitt Rubinfeld, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Space-efficient
     local computation algorithms. In Proceedings of the twenty-third an-
     nual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 1132–1139.
     SIAM, 2012.

 [3] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Yi-Jun Chang, Dennis Olivetti, Mikaël
     Rabie, and Jukka Suomela. The distributed complexity of locally check-
     able problems on paths is decidable. In Peter Robinson and Faith
     Ellen, editors, Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium on Principles
     of Distributed Computing, PODC 2019, Toronto, ON, Canada, July 29
     - August 2, 2019, pages 262–271. ACM, 2019. doi:10.1145/3293611.
     3331606.

 [4] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Yuval Efron, Juho Hirvonen, Yan-
     nic Maus, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela. Classification of dis-
     tributed binary labeling problems. In 34th International Symposium
     on Distributed Computing, DISC 2020, October 12-16, 2020, Virtual
     Conference, pages 17:1–17:17, 2020. arXiv:1911.13294, doi:10.4230/
     LIPIcs.DISC.2020.17.

 [5] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Juho Hirvonen, Dennis Olivetti, Mikaël
     Rabie, and Jukka Suomela. Lower bounds for maximal matchings and
     maximal independent sets. In Proc. Foundations of Computer Science
     (FOCS), 2019.

 [6] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Fabian Kuhn, and Dennis Olivetti. Dis-
     tributed ∆-coloring plays hide-and-seek. CoRR, abs/2110.00643, 2021.
     URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.00643, arXiv:2110.00643.

 [7] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, and Dennis Olivetti. Distributed
     lower bounds for ruling sets. In 61st IEEE Annual Symposium on
     Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2020, Durham, NC, USA,
     November 16-19, 2020, pages 365–376, 2020. arXiv:2004.08282, doi:
     10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00042.

                                     45
 [8] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Dennis Olivetti, Jan Studený, Jukka
     Suomela, and Aleksandr Tereshchenko. Locally checkable problems in
     rooted trees. In Avery Miller, Keren Censor-Hillel, and Janne H. Ko-
     rhonen, editors, PODC ’21: ACM Symposium on Principles of Dis-
     tributed Computing, Virtual Event, Italy, July 26-30, 2021, pages 263–
     272. ACM, 2021. doi:10.1145/3465084.3467934.

 [9] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela.
     Almost global problems in the local model. Distributed Computing,
     pages 1–23, 2020.

[10] Alkida Balliu, Keren Censor-Hillel, Yannic Maus, Dennis Olivetti, and
     Jukka Suomela. Locally checkable labelings with small messages. In Seth
     Gilbert, editor, 35th International Symposium on Distributed Comput-
     ing, DISC 2021, October 4-8, 2021, Freiburg, Germany (Virtual Confer-
     ence), volume 209 of LIPIcs, pages 8:1–8:18. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-
     Zentrum für Informatik, 2021. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.DISC.2021.8.

[11] Alkida Balliu, Juho Hirvonen, Janne H Korhonen, Tuomo Lempiäinen,
     Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela. New classes of distributed time
     complexity. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Sympo-
     sium on Theory of Computing, pages 1307–1318, 2018.

[12] Alkida Balliu, Juho Hirvonen, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela.
     Hardness of minimal symmetry breaking in distributed computing. In
     Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed
     Computing, pages 369–378, 2019.

[13] Anton Bernshteyn. Distributed algorithms, the Lovász local lemma, and
     descriptive combinatorics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04905, 2020.

[14] S. Brandt, O. Fischer, J. Hirvonen, B. Keller, T. Lempiäinen, J. Rybicki,
     J. Suomela, and J. Uitto. A lower bound for the distributed Lovász local
     lemma. In Proc. 48th ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing (STOC),
     pages 479–488, 2016.

[15] Sebastian Brandt. An automatic speedup theorem for distributed prob-
     lems. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium on Principles of
     Distributed Computing, PODC 2019, Toronto, ON, Canada, July 29 -
     August 2, 2019, pages 379–388, 2019. doi:10.1145/3293611.3331611.

[16] Sebastian Brandt, Christoph Grunau, and Václav Rozhon. The random-
     ized local computation complexity of the Lovász local lemma. CoRR,


                                      46
    abs/2103.16251, 2021.      URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.16251,
    arXiv:2103.16251.

[17] Sebastian Brandt, Juho Hirvonen, Janne H. Korhonen, Tuomo
     Lempiäinen, Patric R.J. Östergård, Christopher Purcell, Joel Rybicki,
     Jukka Suomela, and Przemyslaw Uznański. LCL problems on grids.
     page 101–110, 2017. doi:10.1145/3087801.3087833.

[18] Y.-J. Chang, Q. He, W. Li, S. Pettie, and J. Uitto. The complexity of
     distributed edge coloring with small palettes. In Proc. 29th ACM-SIAM
     Symp. on Discrete Algorithms, pages 2633–2652, 2018.

[19] Y.-J. Chang, T. Kopelowitz, and S. Pettie. An exponential separa-
     tion between randomized and deterministic complexity in the LOCAL
     model. In Proc. 57th IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science
     (FOCS), 2016.

[20] Yi-Jun Chang. The Complexity Landscape of Distributed Locally
     Checkable Problems on Trees. In Hagit Attiya, editor, 34th International
     Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC 2020), volume 179 of Leib-
     niz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 18:1–18:17,
     Dagstuhl, Germany, 2020. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für In-
     formatik. URL: https://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2020/
     13096, doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.DISC.2020.18.

[21] Yi-Jun Chang and Seth Pettie. A time hierarchy theorem for the LOCAL
     model. In Proc. 58th IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science
     (FOCS), pages 156–167, 2017.

[22] Yi-Jun Chang, Jan Studený, and Jukka Suomela. Distributed graph
     problems through an automata-theoretic lens. In Tomasz Jurdzinski
     and Stefan Schmid, editors, Structural Information and Communication
     Complexity - 28th International Colloquium, SIROCCO 2021, Wroclaw,
     Poland, June 28 - July 1, 2021, Proceedings, volume 12810 of Lecture
     Notes in Computer Science, pages 31–49. Springer, 2021. doi:10.1007/
     978-3-030-79527-6\_3.

[23] Richard Cole and Uzi Vishkin. Deterministic coin tossing with applica-
     tions to optimal parallel list ranking. Information and Control, 70(1):32–
     53, 1986.

[24] Clinton T. Conley, Jan Grebı́k, and Oleg Pikhurko. Divisibility of
     spheres with measurable pieces, 2020. arXiv:2012.07567.


                                      47
[25] Manuela Fischer, Mohsen Ghaffari, and Fabian Kuhn. Deterministic
     distributed edge-coloring via hypergraph maximal matching. In Proc.
     58th IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2017.

[26] Mohsen Ghaffari, Christoph Grunau, and Václav Rozhoň. Improved
     deterministic network decomposition. 2020. arXiv:2007.08253.

[27] Mohsen Ghaffari, David Harris, and Fabian Kuhn. On derandomizing
     local distributed algorithms. In Proc. Foundations of Computer Science
     (FOCS), pages 662–673, 2018.

[28] Mohsen Ghaffari, Fabian Kuhn, and Jara Uitto. Conditional hard-
     ness results for massively parallel computation from distributed lower
     bounds. In Proc. Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2019.

[29] Mohsen Ghaffari and Hsin-Hao Su. Distributed degree splitting, edge
     coloring, and orientations. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual
     ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 2505–2523. So-
     ciety for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2017.

[30] Mika Göös, Juho Hirvonen, Reut Levi, Moti Medina, and Jukka
     Suomela. Non-local probes do not help with many graph problems.
     In Cyril Gavoille and David Ilcinkas, editors, Distributed Computing,
     pages 201–214, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2016. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

[31] Lukasz Grabowski, András Máthé, and Oleg Pikhurko. Measurable circle
     squaring. Ann. of Math., 185(2):671–710, 2017.

[32] Jan Grebı́k and Václav Rozhoň. Of toasts and tails, 2021. arXiv:
     2103.08394.

[33] Alexander Holroyd, Thomas Liggett, et al. Symmetric 1-dependent col-
     orings of the integers. Electronic Communications in Probability, 20,
     2015.

[34] Alexander E. Holroyd, Oded Schramm, and David B. Wilson. Fini-
     tary coloring. Ann. Probab., 45(5):2867–2898, 09 2017. doi:10.1214/
     16-AOP1127.

[35] Miklós Laczkovich. Equidecomposability and discrepancy; a solution of
     Tarski’s circle-squaring problem. J. Reine Angew. Math., 404:77–117,
     1990.




                                    48
[36] Nathan Linial. Distributive graph algorithms – global solutions from
     local data. In Proc. 28th IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer
     Science (FOCS), pages 331–335, 1987.

[37] Nati Linial. Locality in distributed graph algorithms. SIAM Journal on
     Computing, 21(1):193–201, 1992.

[38] Andrew S. Marks and Spencer T. Unger. Borel circle squaring. Ann. of
     Math., 186(2):581–605, 2017.

[39] András Máthé, Jonathan A. Noel, and Oleg Pikhurko. Circle squaring
     with Jordan measurable pieces. work in progress.

[40] Moni Naor. A lower bound on probabilistic algorithms for distributive
     ring coloring. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 4(3):409–412,
     1991.

[41] Moni Naor and Larry Stockmeyer. What can be computed locally?
     SIAM Journal on Computing, 24(6):1259–1277, 1995.

[42] Will Rosenbaum and Jukka Suomela. Seeing far vs. seeing wide: Vol-
     ume complexity of local graph problems. In Proceedings of the 39th
     Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC ’20, page
     89–98, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machin-
     ery. doi:10.1145/3382734.3405721.

[43] Václav Rozhoň and Mohsen Ghaffari. Polylogarithmic-time deter-
     ministic network decomposition and distributed derandomization. In
     Proc. Symposium on Theory of Computation (STOC), 2020.

[44] Ronitt Rubinfeld, Gil Tamir, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Fast local com-
     putation algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1104.1377, 2011.

[45] Yinon Spinka. Finitely dependent processes are finitary. Ann. Probab.,
     48(4):2088–2117, 2020.

[46] Jukka Suomela. Landscape of locality. https://jukkasuomela.fi/
     landscape-of-locality/, 2020.




                                    49
