                                          Network coding in undirected graphs is either very helpful
                                                            or not helpful at all

                                                       Mark Braverman ∗ 1 , Sumegha Garg †1 , and Ariel Schvartzman ‡1
                                                             1 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
arXiv:1608.06545v1 [cs.IT] 23 Aug 2016




                                                                                      August 24, 2016



                                                                                            Abstract
                                                   While it is known that using network coding can significantly improve the throughput of
                                               directed networks, it is a notorious open problem whether coding yields any advantage over
                                               the multicommodity flow (MCF) rate in undirected networks. It was conjectured in [9] that the
                                               answer is ‘no’. In this paper we show that even a small advantage over MCF can be amplified
                                               to yield a near-maximum possible gap.
                                                   We prove that any undirected network with k source-sink pairs that exhibits a (1 + ε) gap
                                               between its MCF rate and its network coding rate can be used to construct a family of graphs G 0
                                               whose gap is log(| G 0 |)c for some constant c < 1. The resulting gap is close to the best currently
                                               known upper bound, log(| G 0 |), which follows from the connection between MCF and sparsest
                                               cuts.
                                                   Our construction relies on a gap-amplifying graph tensor product that, given two graphs
                                               G1 , G2 with small gaps, creates another graph G with a gap that is equal to the product of the
                                               previous two, at the cost of increasing the size of the graph. We iterate this process to obtain a
                                               gap of log(| G 0 |)c from any initial gap.




                                            ∗ mbraverm@princeton.edu. Supported in part by an NSF CAREER award (CCF-1149888), NSF CCF-1525342, a
                                         Packard Fellowship in Science and Engineering, and the Simons Collaboration on Algorithms and Geometry.
                                            † sumeghag@cs.princeton.edu
                                            ‡ acohenca@cs.princeton.edu



                                                                                                1
1   Introduction
The area of network coding addresses the following basic problem: in a distributed communi-
cation scenario, can one use coding to outperform packet routing-based solutions? While the
problem of communicating information over a network can be viewed as the process of moving
information packets between terminals, a key distinction between moving packets and moving
commodities is that information packets can be re-encoded by intermediate nodes. For example, a
node which receives packets P1 and P2 can calculate and transmit the bitwise XOR packet P1 ⊕ P2
to its neighbor. This operation has no analogue in multicommodity flow scenarios.
     Whether (and to what extent) this ability confers any benefits over the simple routing-based
solution, depends on the specific goal of the communication at hand. Such goals may include
uni-cast and multi-cast throughput, error-resilience and security, to name a few. These questions
have been the subject of active study in the recent past. A summary of major directions can be
found in the books [11, 12], and surveys [3, 13].
     In this paper we focus on noiseless unicast communication. The network is a capacitated graph
G with k source-sink terminal pairs (si , ti ). Each source vertex si wants to transmit an information
stream to ti . The network coding rate NC( G ) is the maximum rate at which transmission between
all pairs can happen simultaneously, given the capacity constraints.
     If we forbid coding, and restrict nodes to forwarding information packets that they receive, the
problem becomes equivalent to multicommodity flow over G — the very well-studied problem of
maximizing the rate MCF( G ) at which commodities are moved from sources to sinks subject to
the capacity constraints (see e.g. [2] for background). Clearly, the multicommodity rate can always
be achieved — but can it be beaten using “bit tricks”?
     If the graph G is directed, there are well-known examples which show that coding can improve
throughput in a very dramatic way [1, 5]. There is a family of examples G, where the gap between
the multicommodity flow rate and network coding throughput is as large as O(| G |). Despite
substantial effort, it is not clear whether coding confers any benefit over routing in undirected
networks. Li and Li [9] conjectured that the answer is ‘no’. This conjecture is currently open.
     It is known that the Li and Li conjecture holds in some special cases. Naturally, it holds when-
ever the sparsity of the graph matches the multicommodity flow rate. For cases where these quan-
tities are not equal, [6] and [7] show that the conjecture is true for the Okamura-Seymour graph
and [1, 6] show it for an infinite family of bipartite graphs. Empirical evidence also suggests that
the conjecture is true [10].
     One simple case where coding rate cannot exceed capacity is the case when the channel is a
single edge: two parties cannot be sending messages to each other at a total rate exceeding the
channel’s capacity. This is a simple consequence of Shannon’s Noiseless Coding Theorem. As
a simple corollary, the sparsest cut in G provides an upper bound for the network coding rate
NC( G ). The sparsity of a cut (U, V \ U ) is defined as

                                                      Capacity(U, V \ U )
                            Sparsity(U, V \ U ) :=                                                 (1)
                                                      Demand(U, V \ U )

If we merge the vertices on either side of the cut, the network coding rate becomes Sparsity(U, V \
U ). Merging nodes can only increase network coding rate, and thus we have NC( G ) ≤ Sparsity(U, V \
U ). Since the sparsity of G is defined as the minimum of (1) over all cuts, we have NC( G ) ≤
Sparsity( G ).


                                                  2
    As discussed below, the multicommodity flow problem is very well-studied. In the one com-
modity case, the Max-Flow Min-Cut Theorem asserts that sparsity is equal to the flow rate. In
the multicommodity case, the sparsity is still an upper bound on the multicommodity flow rate
MCF( G ), but it might be loose by a factor of log | G |:

                         Sparsity( G )/O(log | G |) ≤ MCF( G ) ≤ Sparsity( G ).                         (2)

Thus the advantage one can gain for network coding over undirected graphs is at most O(log | G |):

               NC( G )/O(log | G |) ≤ Sparsity( G )/O(log | G |) ≤ MCF( G ) ≤ NC( G ).                  (3)

The Li and Li conjecture asserts that the rightmost ‘≤’ is indeed an equality. Our main result is
that either the conjecture is true, or it must be nearly ‘completely false’: the gap between NC( G )
and MCF( G ) can be as high as poly-logarithmic in | G |.

Theorem 1.1. Given a graph G that achieves a gap of 1 + e between the multicommodity flow    rate and
                                                                                                     c the
                                                                   e that achieve a gap of O log | G
network coding rate, we can construct an infinite family of graphs G                               e| for
some constant c < 1 that depends on the original graph G.

   In order to prove Theorem 1.1, we will show a simpler construction that can be applied repeat-
edly.

Theorem 1.2. Given a graph G of size n with a gap of 1 + e between the multicommodity flow rate and
                                                                   2
the network coding rate, we can create another graph G 0 of size nc and a gap of (1 + e)2 , where c depends
on the diameter of the graph G.

Proof outline. The main part of the construction is to define a graph tensor on graphs G1 and G2
that have gaps of 1 + e1 and 1 + e2 respectively, between the multicommodity flow rate and the
network coding rate, which gives a new graph G with a gap of (1 + e1 )(1 + e2 ) while keeping
a check on the size of G. We can then take a graph with a small gap and tensor it with itself
to produce a graph with an even larger gap. Repeatedly tensoring the output of the previous
iteration with itself will give us Theorem 1.1.
    In G2 , network coding allows us to send more information from every source to its correspond-
ing sink than what simple flows allow. We construct a gadget for the graph tensor exploiting this
fact as in Figure 2. We replace each edge of G1 by a copy of G2 with endpoints at a deterministic
source-sink pair. We keep the source-sink pairs of G1 and edges of G2 .
    For simplicity, assume that each edge in Figure 1 has capacity 1. Then the effective capacity at
each edge seen by G1 under network coding is more than that under flows. Intuitively, replacing
each edge with a source-sink pair of G2 should give network coding a “capacity advantage” of
(1 + e2 ) over multicommodity flow. Since the information transferred grows linearly with the
capacity, the new information exchanged between source-sink pairs in the gadget under network
coding should be (1 + e1 )(1 + e2 ) times the information exchanged under flows.
    We need to be careful because G2 exhibits a gap only when we need to send information from
all sources simultaneously. We address this by adding more copies of G1 to the graph tensor and
replacing its edges with other source-sink pairs of the copies of G2 as in Figure 3. In each copy of
G1 we replace all edges with the same source-sink pair of G2 . At the same time, each copy of G2


                                                    3
          Figure 1: Graph G1 and G2 .                     Figure 2: Basic gadget that embeds a copy of
                                                          G2 into each edge of G1 . The edges coming
                                                          out of the copies will be used to connect to
                                                          other copies of the outer graph (G1 ). Labelled
                                                          source-sink pairs of G2 are just for reference.
                                                          The thin edges are just an artifact and their re-
                                                          spective end points represent a single vertex.




(a) A cheating path is highlighted with dashed            (b) An honest path is highlighted with dotted
edges.                                                    edges.

Figure 3: Two copies of G1 (with source-sink pairs s1 − t1 , s2 − t2 and s10 − t10 , s20 − t20 , respectively)
have 8 edges. These edges are replaced with 4 copies of G2 , each copy having two source-sink
pairs. All edges in the first copy of G1 are replaced with s1X -t1X source-sink pairs of G2 ; edges in
the second copy of G2 are replaced with s2X -t2X source-sink pairs of G2




                                                      4
serves to replace the same edge in all copies of G1 . This is done to facilitate the proof of the upper
bound on the MCF rate in the resulting graph.
    Our work is not done here. It is easy to get a lower bound on the network coding rate on the
final graph G by just showing a network coding solution. For this, informally, we just compose
the network coding solutions for G1 and G2 . The hard part is to get an upper bound on the
multicommodity flow rate. Since MCF is a linear program, we can upper bound the value of
multicommodity flows by looking at the dual solution of its relaxed linear program. This dual,
described in Section 2, involves computing shortest distances between source-sink pairs under
some metric. This metric readily tensorizes: we can take the length of an edge in a copy of G2 to
be the product of the length of that edge in G2 times the length of the edge(s) in G1 this particular
copy of G2 is replacing. The problem is to get the lengths of whole paths to tensorize.
    What could go wrong? Consider Figure 3. We would ideally want the dotted paths as in
Figure 3b to be the shortest path between S1 and T1 in G 0 , since its length is the length of the
shortest s1 − t1 path in G1 times the length of the shortest s1X − t1X path in G2 . Unfortunately,
during the tensoring operation we inadvertently introduce additional s1 − t1 paths that do not
correspond to “products” of paths from G1 and G2 . For example, the dashed path in Figure 3a is a
“cheating” path which can make the distance between s1 and t1 shorter than expected. We deter
the use of “cheating” paths by increasing the number of hops between different copies of G1 that
a path has to take before it reaches the same copy again. The technical ingredient which prevents
such cheating is in the design of the bipartite graph which tells which copy of G1 should use which
copies of G2 (and how to connect them). To prevent cheating, the bipartite graph will need to be
of high girth. The crucial part of the construction is thus constructing high girth bipartite graphs
while still keeping check on the size so as to get a O(log(size)c ) (c < 1) gap when the tensor is
applied repeatedly.

Discussion. A natural question arises: Can we have a tensor construction that starts with a
graph G having some gap between the multicommodity flow rate and the network coding rate
and outputs a graph G 0 with gap ω (log(| G 0 |)), thus contradicting (3) and proving the Li and Li
conjecture? We address this question with respect to our construction in Section 4. We show that
the MCF vs. Sparsest Cut gap tensorizes for our construction, and thus the tensorization process
on its own cannot cause the gap to exceed O(log | G 0 |).
    At the same time, if one’s goal is to prove the conjecture, it might be easier to reach a contra-
diction to the gap being (log | G |)c than to a constant gap.


2    Preliminaries
In this section we introduce the problems that we will be interested in studying and any relevant
notation. Where appropriate, we use the same notation and definitions as [1, 5].
    When G = (V, E) is a graph, we specify vertex set of G with V ( G ) when the underlying
graph G is not clear from the context. Similarly E( G ) represents the edge set for graph G. The set
{1, 2, ..., n} is represented by [n]. I ( G ) denotes the set of k source-sink pairs (si , ti ), i ∈ [k], si , ti ∈ V.
Given a bipartite graph B = (V1 , V2 , E), we denote the left side of the graph by V1 ( B) and the right
by V2 ( B). A bipartite graph is (r, s) bi-regular when each vertex on the left side has degree r
whereas each vertex on right side has degree s.



                                                          5
2.1     Network coding
Definition 2.1. An instance of the k-pairs communication problem consists of

      • a graph G = (V, E),

      • a capacity function c : E → R+ ,

      • a set I of commodities of size k, each of which can be described by a triplet of values (si , ti , di )
        corresponding to the source node, the sink node and the demand of commodity i.

    In line with [1], for undirected graphs we consider each edge e as two directed edges ~e, e~,
whose capacities will be defined later. It will also be convenient to think of source and sink nodes
as edges. Therefore, for every source and sink pair (si , ti ), we create new nodes Si , Ti and connect
them via single edges to si , ti respectively. These edges are of unbounded capacity and we will
refer to these as the source and sink edges respectively. Every source Si wants to communicate a
message to its sink.
    We give the formal definition of a network coding solution in Appendix A. Let Mi be the set
of messages the i-th source-sink pair wants to communicate, and M = ∏i Mi . Let ∆(e) be the
alphabet of characters available at edge e. Informally, the solution to a network coding problem
must specify for each edge e a function f e : M → ∆(e), which dictates the character transmitted
on that edge. The function f e must be computable from the characters on the incoming edges at
the sender end point. The message at the source and sink edges of any commodity must agree.
    The network coding rate (henceforth known as coding rate) is the largest value r such that
for each source-sink pair at least r · di information is transmitted while preserving the capacity
constraint on all edges.

2.2     Multicommodity flow problems and sparsity cuts.
A flow problem consists of a graph G = (V, E) with k commodities together with k pairs of
nodes (si , ti ) and quantities di . The goal is to transmit di units of commodity i from si to ti while
keeping the total sum of commodities that go through a given edge e below its capacity c(e).
There are many optimization problems surrounding this problem. We will focus on the following
one: what is the largest λ such that at least λ fraction of each commodity’s demand is routed?
This is justified by assuming that no commodity is prioritized over another and that all resources
are shared. We refer to this quantity as the flow rate of the graph. There are well-known linear
programming formulations for these problems (see LP 5 in Section B in the appendix). Since we
will be interested in providing provable upper bounds to the flow rate, it will suffice to look at
the dual of this problem. In particular, we use the variables on the following dual LP to provide
upper bounds on the flow rate of the sequence of graphs we create. We will refer to the w(u,v) as
the weight of edge (u, v) in the dual solution.




                                                       6
                   minimize ∑ w(u,v) c(u, v)
                              u,v
                   subject to ∑ l (si , ti )di ≥ 1         (Distance Constraint)
                              (si ,ti )                                                              (4)
                                 ∑ w(u,v) ≥ l (si , ti ) ∀i ∈ [k], p ∈ Pi
                              (u,v)∈ p

                             w(u,v) ≥ 0                    ∀(u, v) ∈ E ∧ ∀(u, v) = (si , ti )
    This LP introduces a semi-metric on the graph which assigns weights to the edges. l (si , ti ) is
the shortest distance between i −th source-sink pair w.r.t. this metric. The goal is to minimize
the weighted length of the edges of the graph while maintaining a certain separation between
the source-sink pairs. Zero weight edges can be problematic for our graph tensor since they may
reduce the weighted girth of the graph in ways we cannot account for. Our tensor, however, does
not produce new zero weight edges. Therefore it suffices for our purposes to show that we can
get rid of them at the beginning of the construction.

Lemma 2.2. If G is a graph such that the gap between the flow rate and the coding rate is (1 + e), a new
graph G 0 can be constructed such that the gap does not decrease and all the edge weights in LP (4) are
non-zero.

Proof. We defer the proof of this lemma to Section B of the appendix.

      Interestingly, this lemma is not true for directed graphs.


3     Construction
In this section we present the construction of our graph tensor and prove our main results, The-
orems 1.1 and 1.2. The construction takes two graphs with small gaps and tensors them in such
a way that the resulting graph has a gap equal to the product of the previous gaps. Iteratively
tensoring a graph with a small gap with itself will yield our main results.
    Throughout this section, when referring to a graph Gi = (Vi , Ei ), i ∈ [2], k i is the number of
source-sink pair, vi the number of vertices and mi the number of edges. The capacity of edge e ∈ Ei
will be denoted by cie .

3.1     Overview
As mentioned in Section 1, we need a bijection between the graph tensor on G1 and G2 and bipar-
tite graphs. We represent the copies of G1 by numbered nodes on the left side of the bipartite graph
(say B) and copies of G2 by nodes on the right side of B. We add an edge (i, j) in B when an edge
in the i-th copy of G1 got replaced by the j-th copy of G2 aligned at a specific source-sink pair. But
this definition of bipartite graph B loses information about which specific edge was replaced with
which specific source-sink pair. Thus, we consider a variant of bipartite graphs: colored bipartite
graphs, which have two colors associated with each edge. We will use the first color to represent
the edge that got replaced in a copy of G1 and the other to represent the source-sink pair of G2 that
replaced that edge. Thus, edges of B get colored from the set [m1 ] × [k2 ]. Note that each vertex on


                                                       7
the left side has degree m1 and that on right hand side has degree k2 . The formal description of
colored bipartite graphs and graph tensor based on this idea is given in Subsection 3.2.
    As discussed in Section 1, we can avoid “cheating” paths by increasing the number of hops that
a dashed path (Figure 3) needs to take to come back to the same copy of G1 . Our first requirement
would be for the colored bipartite graph B to have high girth. Lemma D.1 states the existence
of nearly optimal sized high girth bipartite graphs and Subsection 3.2.2 shows how to construct
specific colored bipartite graphs (as in Subsection 3.2) of high girth.
    Is having a high girth B sufficient for the number of hops to be large? No. When G2 has
two sources at the same vertex, the end points (on source side) of the edges in copies of G1 that
these two source-sink pairs replaced will collapse on the same vertex implying that we can move
between these copies of G1 instantly without traveling along any edge in the tensored graph. But,
we would have travelled two consecutive edges in B. To remedy this, we condition on the graph
G2 to have all sources and sinks lying on distinct vertices. Note that the length of the cheating
paths is defined with respect to the weights of edges in a dual solution. Thus, we cannot just
transfer the source/sinks to leaves at the corresponding vertex through infinite capacity edges as
they would always get weight 0 in the dual. In Subsection 3.2.1, we present a way to modify graph
G2 to satisfy the above condition.
    The multicommodity flow rate for the tensored graph is upper bounded by constructing a dual
solution for it based on dual solutions for graphs G1 and G2 . In Subsection 3.2.3, we show the dual
construction and prove that the gap of the tensored graph is the xproduct of the previous gaps
given appropriate girth.
    The last subsection of this section contains the details of repeated tensoring to get Theorem 1.1.

3.2     Graph Tensor
Definition 3.1. Colored Bipartite Graph: We define Bn1 ,n2 ,d1 ,d2 ,g,q1 ,q2 to be the set of bipartite graphs
(V1 , V2 , E) with girth g, |V1 | = n1 , |V2 | = n2 , such that degree of each vertex in V1 and V2 is d1 and
d2 respectively and each edge is given a color le in [q1 ] × [q2 ]. Note that n1 d1 = n2 d2 .
Definition 3.2. T ( G1 , G2 , B) is defined to be the graph tensor on directed graphs G1 and G2 based
on the colored bipartite graph B.
      For T ( G1 , G2 , B) to be defined, we need B to satisfy the following properties:
   1. B ∈ Bn1 ,n2 ,m1 ,k2 ,g,m1 ,k2 for some n1 , g ∈ {1, 2, ...}.
           • G1 has m1 edges and G2 has k2 source-sink pairs. Therefore the degrees of each node on
             left and right side should be m1 and k2 , respectively.
           • As mentioned in Subsection 3.1, edges must be colored in the set [m1 ] × [k2 ].
   2. ∀v ∈ V2 , the set Bv = {be | e is incident to v and le = ( ae , be )} is the complete set [k2 ]. We
      want each source-sink pair of a copy of G2 to replace some edge in a copy of G1 .
   3. ∀u ∈ V1 , the set Au = { ae |e is incident to u and le = ( ae , be )} is the complete set [m1 ]. This
      ensures that each edge in a copy of G1 is replaced.
   4. ∀v ∈ V2 , the set Av = { ae | e is incident to v and le = ( ae , be )} has cardinality 1. To define
      capacities in the new tensored graph naturally, we want that each source-sink pairs in a copy
      of G2 replaces some unique edge in the corresponding copies of G1 .

                                                             8
   5. ∀u ∈ V1 , the set Bu = {be | e is incident to u and le = ( ae , be )} has cardinality 1. This ensures
      that each edges in a copy of G1 is replaced by the same source-sink pair in different copies
      of G2 .
We construct the graph T ( G1 , G2 , B) as follows:

   • Enumerate the n1 nodes in V1 ( B) and n2 nodes in V2 ( B): u(1) , u(2) , ..., u(n1 ) and v(1) , .., v(n2 )
     respectively.
                                            (1)     (2)       (m )
   • Enumerate all the edges in G1 : eG1 , eG1 , ..., eG1 1 .
   • Create n1 copies of G1 (vertices and source-sink pairs) and n2 copies of G2 (vertices and
                                                                   ( j)
     edges). Represent the jth copy of graph Gi , i ∈ {1, 2} by Gi . Let u(i) ∈ V1 ( B) represent the
     i-th copy of G1 and v(i) ∈ V2 ( B) represent the i-th copy of G2 .
   • For every edge e = (u(i) , v( j) ) colored ( p, k ), merge the vertices aG(i) and skG( j) , and tkG( j)
                                                                                       1          2           2
                                             ( p)
        and bG(i) in T ( G1 , G2 , B). Here, e (i) = ( aG(i) , bG(i) ) is the pth edge in the i-th copy of G1 and
                1                            G1           1          1

        (skG( j) , tkG( j) ) is the kth source-sink pair of the jth copy of G2 . Informally, we are replacing
            2       2
        each edge in a copy of G1 by a copy of G2 with end points aligned with the kth source-sink
        pair. Set the capacity of every edge e0 in this jth copy of G2 to be c1e( p) c2e0 . This can be done
                                                                                     G1
        consistently due to Property (4).
   • Make all the edges undirected.

   We define a tensor on directed graphs to allow for composition of network coding solutions of
G1 and G2 . The direction of an edge in G1 tells us how to align the source-sink pair of G2 on that
edge. An example of a tensor is the graph in Figure 3.

3.2.1    Standard Forms and Graph Extensions
Without loss of generality, we assume that for the graph G, all the demands di , i ∈ [| I ( G )|] are
equal. Otherwise, we can just divide the demands into small demands of size x such that x divides
all the initial rational demands. As discussed in Subsection 3.1, we want all sources and sinks to
lie on distinct vertices. For all the dual solutions D that we mention, we assume that D does
not contain any zero weight edges. This is justified by Lemma 2.2 and the fact that new duals
constructed while tensoring, which will be defined later, don’t create zero weight edges. We say a
graph-dual pair (G, D) is in standard form when all the assumptions above are satisfied.
     We now present a construction whose goal is to make all si , ti , i ∈ [k ] lie on distinct vertices.
Definition 3.3. Given a graph G = (V, E) with all demands being equal to d, and a dual solution
D with zNC G
         (D)
             ≥ 1 + ε, ∀α, 0 < α < ε, construct a new graph Gα such that all si , ti , i ∈ [k] lie on
                                                                         NC               +ε
distinct vertices and Gα has a dual solution Dα ( G ) with z( Dα (GGα )) being at least 11+ α . Gα is defined
as the α-Extension of G given D. z( D ) is the objective value of dual solution D.
   Here, we just move the sources/sinks at a vertex to the leaves of the new edges added at this
vertex while keeping edge capacities and dual weights in check. The detailed description of Gα
and Dα ( G ) is given in Section C of the Appendix.

                                                          9
3.2.2    Colored Bipartite Graph Construction
We need small, colored bipartite graphs for every degree and girth to define the graph tensor on
any two graphs with gaps. We construct such graphs using biregular bipartite graphs with high
girth. The following lemma states the existence of nearly-optimal sized colored bipartite graphs.

Lemma 3.4. ∀r, s, g ≥ 3, there exists a colored bipartite graph Crsg ∈ Bn1 ,n2 ,r,s,2g,r,s with n1 , n2 ≤
(9rs) g+3 .
Proof. We defer the detailed construction and proof of the next lemma to Section D of the Ap-
pendix.

3.2.3    Gap Amplification
We are given G1 and G2 in standard form with Gi , i ∈ [2] having gap (1 + ε i ). Let Ni be the optimal
network coding solution for Gi , i ∈ [2]. Construct a directed graph G10 from G1 by replacing each
(undirected) edge e = (u, v) ∈ E( G1 ) of capacity c1e with 2 directed edges (u, v) and (v, u) of
capacities c1eu and c1ev respectively. Here, c1eu and c1ev are the capacities of edge e used by N1 in the
defined directions. Note that c1eu + c1ev ≤ c1e . Without loss of generality, assume c1eu + c1ev = c1e ,
as we can always increase one of the capacities without changing the network coding solution
to get the equality. Similarly, construct G20 from G2 based on N2 . G10 and G20 has m10 = 2m1 and
m20 = 2m2 edges respectively.

Definition 3.5. Tensor(G1 , G2 , D1 , D2 ) is defined as T ( G10 , G20 , B0 ), where B0 = Cm10 k2 g , 2g = w2l12wl12 .
Here, l1 and l2 are the maximum dual distances between any source-sink pair in the dual solutions
D1 of G1 and D2 of G2 respectively. w1 > 0 and w2 > 0 are the minimum edge weights in the dual
D1 and D2 respectively.

    Define Dual( G1 , G2 , D1 , D2 ) to be the specific dual solution for Tensor(G1 , G2 , D1 , D2 ) that would
be constructed in proof of Lemma 3.8.
                                                                                                V ( B0 )  V ( B0 )
    All the demands in the graph Tensor(G1 , G2 , D1 , D2 ) are equal to d1qd2 where q = 1k2 = 2m1 .
Here, di is the demand of each commodity in graph Gi , i ∈ [2]. We use such a scaling to have a
simple description of Dual( G1 , G2 , D1 , D2 ) in terms of D1 and D2 .
    We prove the gap amplification part of Theorem 1.2 next. The details of how size grows are in
the next subsection.

Theorem 3.6. Given graphs G1 and G2 in standard form and dual solutions D1 and D2 respectively, such
        NCG
that z( D )i ≥ 1 + ε i , i ∈ [2], G = Tensor( G1 , G2 , D1 , D2 ) has a dual solution D = Dual( G1 , G2 , D1 , D2 )
          i

such that zNC G
            (D)
                ≥ (1 + ε 1 )(1 + ε 2 ).

    In the next two lemmas, we lower bound the network coding rate and upper bound the mul-
ticommodity flow rate of G.

Lemma 3.7. The coding rate for G is at least r1 r2 (1 + ε 1 )(1 + ε 2 )q where r1 and r2 are objective values of
dual solutions D1 and D2 respectively.

Proof Sketch. The proof follows from composing the optimal network coding solutions of G1 and
G2 . The details are given in Section E of the Appendix.

                                                         10
Lemma 3.8. D has objective value at most r1 r2 q where r1 and r2 are the objective values of dual solutions
D1 and D2 respectively.

Proof Sketch. G = T ( G10 , G20 , B0 ) where variables are as defined in Definition 3.5. For every edge
e ∈ E( G ), e is the undirected version of an edge in a copy of G20 (of say e2 in G20 ) and this copy of G20
must have replaced a unique edge (say e1 ∈ E( G10 )) in different copies of G10 . Edges e1 and e2 are
directed edges but have undirected counterparts in G1 and G2 . Let w1e1 and w2e2 be the weights
given to the counterpart edges of e1 and e2 in dual solutions D1 and D2 respectively. Give weight
we = w1e1 w2e2 to edge e in D. Note that ∀e, we > 0 if w1e1 , w2e2 > 0∀e1 , e2 . Thus, non-zero dual
solutions D1 and D2 give a non-zero dual solution D to graph G. We still need to show that D is
a valid dual solution for G. Since B0 has girth at least w2l12wl12 and G2 is in standard form, the dotted
paths (as in Figure 3) are the shortest paths with respect to dual D. We can then write the distances
between source-sink pairs in G in terms of the distance of this source-sink pair in G1 w.r.t. D1 and
the distance of the source-sink pair in G2 that replaced edges in this copy of G1 w.r.t. D2 . This
allows us to easily show the satisfiability of the distance constraint for D when demands are as
specified in Definition 3.5.
     The detailed proof is given in Section E of the Appendix. There we also show z( D ) = nk21 z( D1 )z( D2 ) =
qr1 r2 .

Proof. of Theorem 3.6: It follows from just dividing the lower bound on the network coding rate
of G and the upper bound on the objective value of D obtained in Lemma 3.7 and Lemma 3.8.

   In the next subsection, we show how to repeatedly apply this construction. Note that, we can
only apply the tensor construction on graphs in standard form. The following lemma allows us to
tensor the new graph obtained with itself.

Lemma 3.9. Given G1 and G2 in standard form, Tensor( G1 , G2 , D1 , D2 ) is also in standard form.

Proof. We defer the proof of this lemma to Section E of the Appendix.

3.2.4    Iterative Tensoring
In the next two statements size refers to the number of vertices in the graph Ai . The calculation of
the size involves calculating the required girth at each iteration and the size of the colored bipartite
graph used to tensor at each iteration.

Theorem 3.10. Given a graph A = (V, E) with gap (1 + ε), we can construct a sequence of graphs
                                               i                           2i + 1
Ai = (Vi , Ei ) with gap at least (1 + 2ε )2 , size at most (3cm )(4c1 )             where cm and c1 are absolute constants.
                                                                    1+ ε
Proof. We defer the proof to Section F of the Appendix. Let α = 1+   ε/2 − 1. The proof first considers
the α-Extension of A to start the recursion with a graph in standard form, then recursively defines
pairs of tensored graphs and duals ( Ai , Di ) such that the gap increases geometrically.
                                                                                                                log(gap)
Proof. of Theorem 1.1: Now, we calculate an expression for the gap in terms of size. log(1+ε/2) ≥
        log log(size)−log log 3cm
2i ≥            log(16c21 )
                                  .   Thus, we get a sequence of graphs with gap at least Ω((log(size))c2 )
                                                                                    log(1+ε/2)
where c2 is an absolute positive constant less than 1 equal to                       log(16c21 )
                                                                                                 .



                                                          11
4     Limits of the Construction
4.1   Sparsity Squares
In this subsection, we show that the construction we present can not be used “as is” to prove the Li
and Li conjecture. The requirement for the underlying bipartite graph to have a high girth seems
to heavily contribute to the size of the graph in the next iteration. Can we do better in terms of
size to yield a gap of ω (log | G |) by choosing a smaller bipartite graph at every iteration while
still having a clever upper bound on the multicommodity flow in the new graph? The answer is
no. Theorem 4.1 states that for every colored bipartite graph B, the tensor of G1 and G2 with B
as basis has sparsity of at least the product of the sparsities of G1 and G2 when the demands are
all 1 in all the graphs. With the appropriate demands, this means that the sparsity grows exactly
like the coding rate as in Lemma 3.7. Thus, for any iterative tensoring procedure that starts with
a graph G with NC/MCF gap and repeatedly tensors the graph at the ith iteration (Gi ) with itself
or with G based on a colored bipartite graph Bi will end up with a graph G 0 with ω (log | G 0 |) gap.
Hence we can start with a graph H with a gap between the flow rate and the sparsity and apply
this procedure to get a graph H 0 with ω (log | H 0 |) gap between the flow rate and the sparsity,
contradicting the bounds from [8]. This means that through iterative tensoring, if we were able to
prove the conjecture, we would also prove the statement that there exists no graphs with sparsity-
multicommodity flow rate gap which is clearly false.

Theorem 4.1. For any G1 , G2 , B for which G = T ( G10 , G20 , B) is defined (G10 and G20 are directed graphs
obtained from G1 and G2 by directing each edge arbitrary in two directions such that new capacities add up
to the previous),
                             Sparsity( G ) ≥ Sparsity( G1 ) · Sparsity( G2 ).
when the demands of G1 , G2 and G are all scaled to 1.

Proof. We defer the proof to Section G in the Appendix.


References
 [1] M. Adler, N. J. A. Harvey, K. Jain, R. Kleinberg, and A. Rasala Lehman. 2006. On the Capacity
     of Information Networks. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
     Discrete Algorithm (SODA ’06). Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia,
     PA, USA, 241–250.

 [2] R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin. 1993. Network Flows: Theory, Algorithms, and
     Applications. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA.

 [3] C. Fragouli and E. Soljanin. 2007. Network Coding Applications. Found. Trends Netw. 2, 2
     (Jan. 2007), 135–269.

 [4] Z. Furedi, F. Lazebnik, A. Seress, V. A. Ustimenko, and A. J Woldar. 1995. Graphs of pre-
     scribed girth and bi-degree. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B 64, 2 (1995), 228–239.

 [5] N. J. A. Harvey, R. Kleinberg, and A. Rasala Lehman. 2004. Comparing Network Coding
     with Multicommodity Flow for the k-pairs Communication Problem. (2004).


                                                     12
 [6] K. Jain, V. V. Vazirani, and G. Yuval. 2006. On the Capacity of Multiple Unicast Sessions in
     Undirected Graphs. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 14, SI (June 2006), 2805–2809.

 [7] G. Kramer and S. A. Savari. 2006. Edge-Cut Bounds on Network Coding Rates. J. Netw. Syst.
     Manage. 14, 1 (March 2006), 49–67.

 [8] T. Leighton and S. Rao. 1999. Multicommodity Max-flow Min-cut Theorems and Their Use
     in Designing Approximation Algorithms. J. ACM 46, 6 (Nov. 1999), 787–832.

 [9] Z. Li and B. Li. 2004. Network Coding in Undirected Networks. (2004).

[10] Z. Li, B. Li, D. Jiang, and L. C. Lau. 2005. On achieving optimal throughput with network cod-
     ing. In INFOCOM 2005. 24th Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications
     Societies, 13-17 March 2005, Miami, FL, USA. 2184–2194.

[11] M. Medard and A. Sprintson. 2012. Network Coding: Fundamentals and Applications. Elsevier.

[12] R. W. Yeung. 2008. Information theory and network coding. Springer Science & Business Media.

[13] R. W. Yeung, S.-Y. R. Li, N. Cai, and Z. Zhang. 2005. Network Coding Theory: Single Sources.
     Commun. Inf. Theory 2, 4 (Sept. 2005), 241–329.



A     Definition of Network Coding
Let M(i ) be the set of all messages si wants to send, and let M = Πi M(i ). For every v ∈ V, let
In(v) ⊆ E denote the set of edges incident to e.

Definition A.1. A network coding solution for a graph G specifies for each edge directed e ∈ E an
alphabet Γ(e) and a function f e : M → Γ(e) specifying the symbol transmitted on edge e. This
must satisfy the following two conditions:

    • Correctness: each sink node receives the message from its corresponding source, i.e. f T (i) =
      f S (i ) .

    • Causality: every message transmitted on edge e is computable from information received at
      its tail vertex at a time prior to the message’s transmission.

Definition A.2. A causal computation of a network consists of

    • A sequence of edges e1 , ..., eT where each edge can appear multiple times.

    • A sequence of alphabets Λ1 , ..., Λ T .

    • A sequence of coding functions ρ1 , ..., ρ T , which in turn satisfy

        1. For each function ρt such that et = (u, v) is not a source edge, the value of ρt is uniquely
           determined by the values of the functions in the set {ρ x : x < t, et ∈ In(u)}.
        2. For each edge e, the Cartesian product of the alphabets in the set {Λi : ei = e} is equal
           to Γ(e).

                                                    13
        3. For each edge e, the set of coding functions {ρi : ei = e} together define the coding
           function f e specified by the network coding solution.

    At this point we are equipped with the tools needed to define the network coding rate, the
information-theoretic equivalent of the flow rate.

Definition A.3. A network coding solution for a graph G achieves a rate r if there exists a constant
b ≥ 0 such that

    • H (S(i )) ≥ r · di · b for each commodity i

    • for each edge e ∈ E, H (~e) + H (e~) ≤ c(e) · b,

where by H (~e) we denote the entropy of edge ~e. The coding rate is defined to be the supremum of
the rates of all network coding solutions.


B    Multicommodity Flows
The standard LP formulation for concurrent multicommodity flow problems is written below. It
has a variable for every path p ∈ Pi , where Pi is the set of all paths between si and ti . We want to
find the largest rate λ that can be concurrently sent between all source-sink pairs subject to the path
variables being non-negative and not exceeding the capacity of any edge over all commodities.

                                 maximize                        λ
                                 subject to     ∑ f ( p) ≥ λdi        ∀i ∈ [ k ]
                                                p∈ Pi

                                               ∑ f ( p) ≤ c(e)         ∀e ∈ E                       (5)
                                              p:e∈ p

                                                         f ( p) ≥ 0         ∀p
                                                             λ≥0

Proof. of Lemma 2.2: We contract all the edges with zero weight in the dual. We need to show
that the gap does not decrease. Removing a zero dual variable from a multicommodity solution
cannot improve the flow rate, since the distances and the dual objective remains the same. We
can use the same coding solution for the new graph with the exception that we now compose the
encoding on the edges that were contracted. This shows that the flow rate does not increase and
the coding rate does not decrease, proving that their ratio does not decrease.


C    Standard Form
This section gives the detailed description of Gα and Dα ( G ). Let k v be the number of sources and
sinks at vertex v ∈ V ( G ). In the graph Gα , add k v edges (leaves) at v with capacity z( D )d(1 + ε)
and shift all the sources or sinks at v to the unique endpoints of these leaves. As each source sends
≥ z( D )d(1 + ε) amount of information in an optimal network coding solution and can still send
z( D )d(1 + ε), the network coding rate doesn’t decrease below z( D )(1 + ε). We construct Dα ( G ) as
follows:


                                                        14
Figure 4: (2,3) Bi-regular bipartite graph with               Figure 5: Intermediate graph when one set of
girth 4.                                                      colors have been assigned.


    1. For each edge originally in G, assign the same weights as in D.

    2. Give weight kd(1α+ε) to the new edges.

Distances in the dual don’t decrease, so Dα ( G ) is a valid solution. Since we added k new edges,
                                                                           NCG           +ε
z( Dα ( G )) = kz( D )d(1 + ε) kd(1α+ε) + z( D ) = z( D )(1 + α). Thus, z( Dα ( G ))
                                                                                     ≥ 11+ α.


D     Colored Bipartite Graph Construction
In this section, we give a construction for a colored bipartite graph CB in Bn1 ,n2 ,r,s,2g,r,s ∀r, s, g ≥ 3
with n1 , n2 ≤ rs(9rs) g+2 . We start with (r, s) biregular bipartite graph with girth at least 2g.
Lemma D.1. [4] ∀r, s, g ≥ 3, there exists a (r, s) bi-regular bipartite graph with girth at least 2g and
having at most n = (9rs) g+2 vertices.
    This lemma follows from Theorem E in [4].

Proof. of Lemma 3.4.: Let B(r, s, g) be a graph satisfying the above property. For simplicity, denote
B(r, s, g) by just B = (V1 , V2 , E). Denote the coloring for every edge e by ( ae , be ). First we construct
an intermediate graph H in Bn10 ,n20 ,r,s,2g,1,s (n10 = s|V1 |, n20 = s|V2 |) as follows:
                                                                                (1)     (s)
    1. Enumerate all the edges incident to a vertex v ∈ V2 as ev , ..., ev .
                                                                                      (1)     (1)       (s)    (s)
    2. Add s copies of V to graph H. Enumerate these copies as (V1 , V2 ), ..., (V1 , V2 ).
               ( j)                                                      (i )
    3. ∀v j ∈ V2 , j ∈ [s], ∀i ∈ [s], corresponding to edge ev = (u, v) ∈ E( B), add an edge e from v j
                                [( j+i −2)mod s]+1
       to u[( j+i−2mod s)+1] ∈ V1                    (copy of u in [( j + i − 2)mod s] + 1-th copy of V1 ). Set
                                                                  ( j)
       be = [( j + i − 2)mod s] + 1. Therefore, ∀u j ∈ V1 , edges e0 incident at u j have be0 = j (same
       color).
                      ( j)                                 (i )                                     (( j+i −2mod s)+1
For a vertex v ∈ V2 , the edge corresponding to ev comes from a vertex in V1                     . Thus,
all edges incident to v have distinct colors.
    We still need to show that the girth of H is at least 2g. For this, we show that a cycle C of length
c in H implies a cycle of length ≤ c in B. As all the edges incident to a vertex in H correspond to
different edges in B, when we project back C to a cycle C 0 in B, no two consecutive edges in C 0 are
the same implying C 0 has no cycle of length 2. Thus, C 0 must have a cycle of length 3 ≤ c0 ≤ c. B
has girth at least 2g, so the girth of H cannot be smaller.

                                                         15
Figure 6: Final colored bipartite graph with girth 4.




                         16
   Now, we repeat the process for H = ( H1 , H2 ) to get graph CB with H1 playing the role of V2
and H2 playing the role of V1 in the above algorithm. This time we assign ae ∈ [r ] and make r
copies of H. We can see that as was the case for be , each vertex in a copy of H1 gets r distinct ae
values and each vertex in a copy of H2 gets the same ae depending on which copy it belongs to.
The girth doesn’t decrease on going from H to CB giving us the result we claim.

    An example of a colored bipartite graph in B12,18,3,2,4,3,2 is given in Figure 6. We start with K2,3
as in Figure 4 with girth 4. Then, we construct the intermediate graph in B4,6,3,2,4,1,2 as shown in
Figure 5. The color of the edge depends on the copy it is incident to on the lower side. For a vertex
on the upper side, we send edges to correct vertices in distinct copies cyclically.


E         Gap Amplification Proofs
Proof. of Lemma 3.7: Graph G1 has a network coding rate of at least r1 (1 + ε 1 ) and hence each
source sends r1 (1 + ε 1 )d1 amount of information to its corresponding sink, and similarly for G2 .
This is true even for the directed graphs G10 and G20 by definition. While constructing T ( G10 , G20 , B0 ),
we aligned the source-sink pair in the same direction as the directed edge. This allows us to
compose the network coding solutions (N2 over N1 ) to get the information sent from each source
in G to be at least r1 r2 (1 + ε 1 )(1 + ε 2 )d1 d2 . This is due to the fact that as we are replacing edges in
G10 by a source-sink pair of a copy of G20 , the effective capacity seen by the replaced edge (e) with
                                                                                            r1 r2 (1+ε 1 )(1+ε 2 )d1 d2
capacity c1e is now c1e r2 (1 + ε 2 )d2 . Thus, the coding rate for graph G is at least (demand          in graph G) =
r1 r2 (1+ε 1 )(1+ε 2 )d1 d2 q
            d1 d2             = r1 r2 (1 + ε 1 )(1 + ε 2 )q.

Proof. of Lemma 3.8: Here, we prove that D is indeed a valid dual solution. B0 has n1 = k2 q nodes
on the left side. Let l1 (si , ti ) denote the shortest distance between i-th source-sink pair with respect
to dual D1 . Let l2 (si , ti ) denote the shortest distance between i-th source-sink pair with respect to
dual D2 .
     Let G10u and G20u be the undirected version of the graphs G10 and G20 respectively. G10u and G20u
are graphs G1 and G2 where each edge is divided into 2 edges with capacities adding up to the
previous one. Construct dual solutions D10 and D20 for G10u and G20u such that each divided edge
still gets the same weight as in dual solutions D1 and D2 . The distances between source-sink pairs
                                                                       (y) (y)
remain the same. In G, calculate the shortest distance i.e. l (si , ti ) between source-sink pair
    (y)     (y)
(si , ti ) which corresponds to the i-th source-sink pair (si , ti ) in the y-th copy of G10u (finally, we
make the graph undirected). In this copy of G10u , assume that we replaced each edge with the jy -th
source-sink pair of G20u (this is unique due to Property (2) in Definition 3.2). Therefore, according
          (y) (y)                                                                                            (y)
to D, l (si , ti ) ≤ l1 (si , ti )l2 (s jy , t jy ) (these correspond to dotted paths). Any other path from si
      (y)
to ti involves traversing to another copy of G10u through a copy of G20u that replaced edges in
this copy of G10u . This transition from a copy of G10u to another copy of G10u in G corresponds to
two consecutive edges in the bipartite graph B0 . Any such path in G having no loops would thus
have to make at least g of these transitions to revert back to the original copy of G10u containing
the source. Here, the girth of graph B0 is at least 2g. Each transition involves crossing at least one
edge (in a copy of G20 ) with weight at least w1 w2 in D because G2 , being in standard form, has all
sources and sinks lying on distinct vertices and vertices of a copy of G10 connect only to the vertices
of a copy of G20 carrying a unique source or sink. Thus, such a path would have distance at least


                                                               17
gw1 w2 = wl21 lw1 2 w1 w2 ≥ l1 l2 using l1 , l2 , w1 , w2 from Definition 3.5. The cheating paths have distance
                             (y)   (y)
at least l1 l2 implying l (si , ti ) = l1 (si , ti )l2 (s jy , t jy ). The left hand side of the distance constraint
                                         (y)     (y)
in LP 4 becomes ∑ik=1 ,n1,y1 =1 d1qd2 l (si , ti ), where the first expression in the summand is the demand
of source-sink pairs in G.

         k1 ,n1                          k1 ,n1
                d1 d2 ( y ) ( y )               d1 d2                           d 1 d 2 n1                k1
          ∑ q i i    l ( s , t    ) =     ∑ q 1 i i 2 jy jy
                                                      l ( s , t ) l ( s , t ) =
                                                                                  q y∑
                                                                                           l 2 jy jy ∑ l1 ( si , ti )
                                                                                              ( s , t )
       i =1,y=1                       i =1,y=1                                          =1              i =1
                                                                   !                                 !
                                           k2                               k1
                            1 n                                                                              n1
                           = · 1
                            q k2          ∑ d 2 l2 ( s j , t j )            ∑ d 1 l1 ( s i , t i )       ≥
                                                                                                             qk2
                                                                                                                 =1
                                          j =1                          i =1

     The second to last equality follows from the fact that there are total n1 copies of G10 , jy is fixed for
fixed y-th copy of G10 and each l2 (s j , t j ) (j ∈ [k2 ]) is thus counted nk21 time. The last inequality follows
from D10 and D20 being valid dual solutions of G10u and G20u respectively (distance constraints).
     The value of z( D10 ) for graph G10u is r1 . D10 assigns the same dual weights as that of D1 for
the divided edges and is a valid dual solution for G10 , and similarly for D20 . We can see from the
construction of D and the edge capacities that z( D ) = nk21 z( D10 )z( D20 ) = qr1 r2 . D is a function of
G1 , G2 , D1 , D2 .

Proof. of Lemma 3.9: Demands are equal for all source-sink pairs in G =Tensor(G1 , G2 , D1 , D2 ) by
definition. We need to prove that all sources and sinks in G still lie on distinct vertices. We don’t
add any new source-sink pairs and thus, each source-sink pair lies on distinct vertices on a copy
of G10 . While constructing T ( G10 , G20 , B0 ), we merge a vertex v in a copy of G10 with a source or a sink
vertex of a copy of G20 and since each vertex contains a unique source or sink of G20 , no two vertices
from different copies of G10 are merged together. This implies that all sources and sinks still lie on
distinct vertices of G.


F    Proof of Theorem 3.10
Proof. Using Lemma 2.2, we can assume that graph A has an optimal dual solution D with all
dual variables being non-zero. It is without loss of generality that A has equal demands for all
source-sink pairs. Define A∗ to be the α-Extension of A given D and D ∗ = Dα ( A) (1 + α = 1+      1+ ε
                                                                                                    ε/2 ).
        ∗
Let A have cn vertices, cm edges and ck source-sink pairs having cd demand each. Without loss
of generality we can assume that cm ≥ ck , cn as otherwise we can just divide some edges into
multiple edges with reduced capacities. Let l be the largest distance between any source-sink pair
in the dual D ∗ and w > 0 be the minimum weight of an edge in dual D ∗ . We also know that
NC A∗       +ε
z( D∗ )
        ≥ 11+         ε
              α = 1 + 2 . As the objective value of any dual solution is at least the flow rate, we get
that A∗ has a gap of at least (1 + 2ε ). A∗ is in standard form. Ai is defined iteratively as follows:




                                                                       18
  A0 = A∗ , D0 = D ∗ , ε 0 = 2ε .

  For i ≥ 1:

  ε i is such that (1 + ε i ) = (1 + ε i−1 )2 .

  Di =Dual( Ai−1 , Ai−1 , Di−1 , Di−1 ).

 Ai =Tensor( Ai−1 , Ai−1 , Di−1 , Di−1 ).
Note that ∀i, Ai is in standard form using Lemma 3.9 and thus iterative tensoring is valid. Through
                                              NC A                                             NC A
Theorem 3.6, we know that if z( D i−1) ≥ (1 + ε i−1 ), then z( D )i ≥ (1 + ε i−1 )2 = 1 + ε i . As zNC  A∗
                                                                                                     ( D∗ )
                                                                                                            =
                                                 i −1                                                i
                NC A                          i
1 + 2ε , we get z( D )i ≥ 1 + ε i = (1 + ε/2)2 ∀i by induction. The objective value of any dual solution
                    i
is at least the flow rate implying that the gap between coding and flow rate for Ai is at least
          i
(1 + 2ε )2 .
    To see how the size of Ai grows, we first calculate the required girth (2gi ) at each iteration.
From the construction of Di = Dual( Ai−1 , Ai−1 , Di−1 , Di−1 ) in the proof of Lemma 3.8 we see that
                                                                         i          i
wi = wi2−1 , li ≤ li2−1 . By induction, we have that for all i, wi = w2 and li ≤ l 2 , where l and w
                                                                                                                                      i −1
                                                                                                                           l2      ( l 2 )2          l 2i
are as defined in Subsection 3.2.4 From Definition 3.5, we have that gi = wi2−1 ≤                                                       2 i −1 2 = ( w ) .
                                                                                                                            i −1   (w         )
                         i
Therefore, gi ≤ ( wl )2 ∀i ≥ 1. Let c = wl ≥ 1.
   Now, we establish an upper bound on the size of the graph. Recall Ai is the T ( Ai0−1 , Ai0−1 , Bi )
where Bi = Cmi0−1 ki−1 gi and mi0−1 = 2mi−1 . Ai0−1 is the directed graph constructed according to the
optimal network coding solution of Ai−1 . Let n1i = |Vi ( Bi )|, n2i = |V2 ( Bi )|. From Lemma 3.4,
                                                        2i
n1i ≤ (9mi−1 k i−1 ) gi +3 ≤ (9mi−1 k i−1 )c +3 .
    Note that mi = kni−1i1 m Ai0−1 m Ai0−1 = kni−1i1 (4m2i−1 ) and k i = n1i k i−1 . Each edge in Ai0−1 is replaced
by a copy of Ai0−1 and each copy is counted k i−1 times implying vi ≤ 2mi−1 vi−1 kni−1i1 .
    Moreover, mkii = 4( mkii−−11 )2 . By induction, k i ≤ mi as ck ≤ cm . Likewise, we get that mvii = 2 mvii−−11 ≥
1∀i.
                                                                                       2i                    2i
mi ≤ 4ni (m2i−1 ) ≤ 4m2i−1 (9mi−1 k i−1 ) gi +3 ≤ (9m2i−1 ) gi +4 = (3mi−1 )2c +8 ≤ (3mi−1 )2(c+1) +8 ≤
                2i
(3mi−1 )4(c+1) ∀i ≥ 1 (c ≥ 1).
   Let c1 = c + 1.
                                2i + 1
Claim F.1. mi ≤ (3cm )(4c1 )             .
                                                                                                 2
Proof. For i = 0, the right hand side evaluates to (3cm )(4c1 ) ≥ cm , which is equal to the left hand
side. Now we assume that the statement is true for i − 1 and prove for i where i ≥ 1. mi ≤
                                                                                  i       i
           2i                  2i        2i                  2i   2i   2i   (4c )2 4c21                        2i + 1       i                i +1
(3mi−1 )4c1 ≤ (3(3cm )(4c1 ) )4c1 = 3(4c1 ) 4c1 +4c1 cm 1                                     ≤ (3cm )(4c1 )            as 42 +1 + 4 ≤ 42           ∀i ≥ 1.
                                                                                                           2i + 1
    We have vi ≤ mi . Thus, the size of graph Ai is at most (3cm )(4c1 )                                            .


G     Proof of Theorem 4.1
Proof. Think of G1 and G2 as undirected G10 and G20 ; their sparsity remains the same. Let H be the
set of edges on the cut that achieves the sparsest cut on G separating n source-sink pairs. Consider


                                                                            19
partitioning this set into sets Hi = {e1i , e2i , ..., ehi i } according to which copy of G2 (or equivalently
G20 ), the edge belongs to in G. Hi denotes the edges belonging to the i-th copy of G2 , | Hi | = hi .
                               (2)
Note that | H | = ∑i hi . Let ni be the number of source and sink pairs that Hi separates in the i-th
copy of G2 . These cuts have capacity ∑e∈ Hi c2e in G2 . By construction, each of these source-sink
pairs would have replaced an edge in some copy of G1 (or equivalently undirected G10 ). Assume
                 (2)
the k-th (k ∈ [ni ]) source-sink pair replaced edge ei in the jik -th copy of G1 (All source-sink pairs
replace the same edge). Mark this edge in the jik -th copy of G1 (which has now been replaced in
                                  (2)
G). The i-th copy of G2 makes ni marks. Let Fj be the set of all such marked edges in the j-th
                                 (1)
copy of G1 . Let Fj cut n j            source-sink pairs in G1 . Any source-sink pair that gets cut in G by H
                                                                                         (1)
must be cut in G1 under Fj by construction. Therefore, ∑ j n j ≥ n. It is not an equality because
there could be a source-sink pair that gets cut by Fj but not by H in G, due to paths that travel
from the source to other copies of G1 through connecting copies of G2 and come back at the sink.
The theorem follows from the following inequalities:

                                                                       ∑e∈ Hi c2e
          ∑ ce = ∑ c1e ∑ c2e = ∑ ni c1e
                                                         (2)
                             i                                     i       (2)
          e∈ H         i         e∈ Hi             i                     ni
                                                                                                    !
                 ≥∑                                                                 ∑
                            (2)                                                            (2)
                           ni c1ei Sparsity( G2 ) = Sparsity( G2 )                        ni c1ei
                       i                                                             i
                                                                                                                     (6)
                                                                                                   (1) ∑e∈ Fj 1e
                                                                                                             c
                 = Sparsity( G2 ) ∑ ∑ c1e  = Sparsity( G2 ) ∑ n j                                      (1)
                                                                                                                   
                                               j e∈ Fj                                         j        nj
                                                              !
                                            ∑
                                                        (1)
                 ≥ Sparsity( G2 )                      nj         Sparsity( G1 ) ≥ n (Sparsity( G1 ) · Sparsity( G2 ))
                                               j

    The first equality follows from the definition of edge capacities in G in terms of edge capacities
                                  (2)
in G1 and G2 . Since Hi cuts ni source-sink pairs in a copy of G2 , the first inequality follows
from the Sparsity( G2 ) being the smallest ratio for all the cuts. The first equality on the third line
follows from the fact that an edge belongs to Fj only when the corresponding source-sink pair
that replaced this edge in G1 is cut by the cut corresponding to that copy of G2 and i-th copy of
G2 result in exactly ni such edges distributed amongst Fj s. Therefore, ∑e∈nH e ≥ Sparsity( G1 ) ·
                        (2)                                                        c

Sparsity( G2 ) =⇒ Sparsity( G ) ≥ Sparsity( G1 ) · Sparsity( G2 ).




                                                                           20
